==PAGE:1==
Shedding the Viper Skin
A Native Back End for Automated Rust Verification
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Shedding the Viper Skin
A Native Back End for Automated Rust Verification
Master’s Thesis
June, 2023
By
Jakub Janaszkiewicz, DTU
Supervisor
Dr. Christoph Matheja, DTU
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the area of program verification.
Jakub Janaszkiewicz ­ s191925
Signature
Date
ii
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Static program verification is a technique used to automatically check the correctness of
a program without executing it, providing strong guarantees about the absence of errors
and vulnerabilities. Prusti is an automated verifier that extends the Rust compiler and
enables developers to annotate their programs with formal specifications. It also checks
for absence of a variety of potential errors such as reachable panic statements, integer
overflows, and memory safety violations. Currently, Prusti has two back ends written in
Scala which are dependent on the Viper verification architecture and utilize permission­
based reasoning.
In this thesis we propose a new back end for Prusti written in Rust and targeting the
SMT­LIB language to address the performance shortcomings of existing back ends. This
enables Prusti to use any modern SMT solver, rather than being tied to a specific one. We
focus on comparing the performance and completeness of two popular SMT solvers, Z3
and CVC5. We also evaluate the performance benefits from using Rust as an implemen­
tation language and decoupling from Viper. We specifically evaluate the extent to which
the reasoning about permissions in Viper is redundant due to the guarantees provided by
the Rust type system. Through this project, we hope to contribute to the broader research
community by developing a more efficient and scalable back end for Prusti, and by pro­
viding insights into the trade­offs and strengths of different SMT solvers when applied to
the problem of program verification.
Shedding the Viper Skin
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
My sincere gratitude goes to my thesis supervisor, Dr. Christoph Matheja. His continuous
guidance and valuable insights significantly contributed to the development of this thesis.
I deeply appreciate his commitment and support throughout this journey.
iv
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives and scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background and related work
5
2.1
Static program verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Permission­based reasoning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Overview of Prusti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Viper verification infrastructure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
SMT solvers: Z3 and CVC5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Evaluating permission­based reasoning in Viper
17
3.1
Overview of Viper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Permission­based reasoning in Viper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Guarantees provided by Rust’s type system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
Formal verification of Rust’s ownership model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Heap­independent type encoding in Prusti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Design and implementation
27
4.1
Original verification process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
New verification process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Verification methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Implementation of the verification pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.5
Optimization module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5
Evaluation
51
5.1
Test coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.2
Performance case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Conclusion
61
6.1
Summary of contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.2
Limitations and future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Bibliography
63
A Source code of case studies for performance evaluation
67
Shedding the Viper Skin
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
We begin by laying out the motivations and context for the work that forms the backbone
of this thesis. Our focus is on static program verification of Rust code and the challenges
encountered with the existing tool Prusti. This provides the context and the drive behind
our proposed solution. We then outline the core goals of the project, giving a quick glimpse
into its direction and intended outcomes. Lastly, we provide an overview of the thesis
structure, briefly introducing each subsequent chapter to guide the reader’s understanding
of our approach, implementation, and evaluations.
1.1
Background and motivation
Static program verification is a powerful technique that allows developers to check the
correctness of a program without executing it. By providing strong guarantees about the
absence of errors and vulnerabilities, a static program verifier can significantly improve
software reliability and security. An example of such a tool is Prusti [1] – an extension of
the Rust compiler which enables developers to annotate their programs with formal spec­
ifications. Prusti can prove the absence of a variety of potential errors, such as reachable
panic statements, integer overflows, and memory safety violations, making it a valuable
tool for the Rust programming community.
The current implementation of Prusti relies on two back ends written in Scala [2], both
of which are dependent on the Viper verification architecture [3] and utilize permission­
based reasoning. While these back ends have proven effective in many cases, they also
exhibit performance and completeness shortcomings that limit the overall efficiency and
applicability of Prusti. Furthermore, the reliance on the Viper architecture ties Prusti to
a specific verification infrastructure, which may not be ideal for all use cases and could
hinder its adoption by the broader Rust community.
The Rust programming language has seen a surge in popularity due to its focus on safety
and performance. By leveraging Rust’s strong type system and memory safety guaran­
tees, it is possible to develop a new back end for Prusti that addresses the limitations of
the existing back ends, while also providing additional benefits such as improved perfor­
mance and scalability.
In this thesis, we propose a new back end for Prusti written in Rust and targeting the
SMT­LIB language. By switching to Rust as an implementation language and decoupling
from the Viper verification architecture, we aim to improve the performance and com­
pleteness of Prusti. Furthermore, targeting the SMT­LIB language will enable Prusti to
use any modern SMT solver, rather than being tied to a specific one, thus expanding its
applicability.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed back end, we focus on comparing the
performance and completeness of two popular SMT solvers, Z3 and CVC5. Additionally,
we evaluate the extent to which the reasoning about permissions in Viper is redundant
due to the guarantees provided by the Rust type system. Through this project, we hope to
contribute to the broader research community by developing a more efficient and scalable
back end for Prusti and providing insights into the trade­offs and strengths of different SMT
solvers when applied to the problem of program verification.
Shedding the Viper Skin
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Objectives and scope
The goal of this thesis is to develop a new verification back end for Prusti that does not rely
on the Viper verification infrastructure. The verifier will leverage the assumptions guaran­
teed by the Rust type system to avoid reasoning about memory safety, and instead focus
on verification of functional correctness of Rust functions.
The core goals for this project are as follows:
C1 Research prior work on Rust verification
A review of existing work on verification of Rust programs will help establish the
current state of the art, and as such a baseline for the expected performance and
feature completeness. This will help us make informed decisions when designing a
new verification methodology. In particular, this goal includes a review of the existing
Prusti codebase and back ends.
C2 Identify case studies for evaluation
A few example programs will be selected to evaluate the benefits (if any) regarding
performance and completeness of the new verification back end for Prusti.
C3 Justify the soundness of omitting permission reasoning
The core assumption behind this project is that the analysis performed by the Rust
compiler, and in particular, the borrow checker, is enough to ensure memory safety
of programs that are passed to Prusti. As such, we can omit generating the core
memory proof in Prusti itself. Work needs to be done to define the exact scope to
which this statement is true, i.e. which safety guarantees are provided by Rust itself.
This might include references to previous work by the RustBelt [4] team on formal
verification of Rust core.
C4 Design a verification methodology for a safe1 fragment of Rust code
The Rust code is provided to any Prusti back end in a form of a low­level Control Flow
Graph (CFG) with assertions already embedded. A sound methodology for embed­
ding into SMT solver code must be derived for each construct in this representation.
The CFG would be reduced to not include an explicit memory safety proof, instead
focusing on functional correctness, manual assertions, reachable panic statements,
overflows etc. At the same time, the verification approach should not lose complete­
ness, e.g. by dropping all non­aliasing information.
C5 Implement the verification back end
The implementation will be based on generating SMT­LIB code from CFGs of Rust
procedures. Rust data types will be embedded to corresponding sorts in the SMT
solver, with accompanying theories for the well­formedness of these types. The
generated code will be verified by selected SMT solvers (Z3, CVC5 etc.).
C6 Optimize generated SMT code
An optimization module for the SMT code generator will be implemented, to reduce
the work performed by the SMT solver, which is where we expect the majority of
time spent on verification to be allocated.
1Prusti does not support unsafe code blocks as of June 23, 2023
2
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:11==
C7 Evaluate the solution
We will evaluate the results of the project in the context of performance and com­
pleteness, taking into consideration the existing back ends and the choice of SMT
solvers (in particular, Z3 and CVC5). We will reflect on the project results, formulate
key insights, and indicate areas for further development.
1.3
Thesis outline
The following chapters of this thesis are structured as follows:
Chapter 2. Background and Related Work
This chapter outlines approaches to static verification of Rust code, focusing on Prusti
in particular. It follows with a discussion of the technology stack underlying Prusti, i.e.
the Viper verification infrastructure and the Z3 SMT solver. The objective is to frame the
context and facilitate an understanding of the essential concepts, methodologies, and
terminologies employed in the project.
Chapter 3. Evaluating Permission­Based Reasoning in Viper
This chapter presents how Viper, which the existing Prusti back ends are based on, han­
dles reasoning about heap­dependent programs. We contrast this with the guarantees
that Rust’s type system and borrow checker provide, and argue that Viper’s core memory
safety proofs can be omitted entirely when verifying safe Rust programs. We relate to
works on formal verification of Rust’s type system and ownership model to raise confi­
dence in this approach.
Chapter 4. Design and Implementation of the New Back End
This chapter discusses the original verification pipeline used by Prusti, before addressing
its shortcomings and the subsequent revisions that led to the development of the improved
back end. We introduce out verification methodology and give an in­depth view of the
implementation. In particular, we explain how the tool encodes verification conditions to
SMT­LIB code, and present the design of the optimization module for assertions.
Chapter 5 Evaluation
This chapter compares the new back end’s performance and completeness against the
existing Viper­based approach. The robustness of the new tool is scrutinized by using the
Prusti project’s test suite to help identify the strengths and potential weaknesses of the
new back end. The performance of the Prusti verifier is also evaluated on selected case
studies, to highlight in which cases the user might prefer one back end or SMT solver over
the others.
Chapter 6. Conclusion and Future Work
The final chapter concludes the thesis by summarizing the project’s key findings and con­
tributions. It also discusses potential areas for future research and development.
Shedding the Viper Skin
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:13==
2
Background and related work
In this chapter we will briefly outline static verification approaches and Prusti in particular,
followed by a discussion of the technology stack underlying Prusti, i.e. Viper and Z3. The
objective is to frame the context and facilitate an understanding of the essential concepts,
methodologies, and terminologies employed in our project.
2.1
Static program verification
Static program verification is an automated technique used in software engineering to en­
sure the correctness and reliability of software systems. It involves analyzing the source
code of a program without actually executing it to prove the absence of potential errors,
vulnerabilities, and deviations from the specified behavior. The primary goal of static pro­
gram verification is to provide guarantees about the safety and correctness of a program,
thus improving its overall quality and reducing the likelihood of runtime failures.
There are several approaches to static program verification, including:
• Type systems: Type systems [5] provide a set of rules to ensure that programs are
well­formed and adhere to specific constraints. They are designed to prevent errors
such as uninitialized variables, null pointer dereferencing, and type mismatches.
A well­designed type system can offer strong safety guarantees without requiring
additional runtime checks. Although Rust’s type system is already considered to be
rather expressive, more complex type systems have been introduced on top of it.
An example of that is Flux [6] by Lehmann et al., which adds logical refinements
(liquid types) to Rust.
• Data flow analysis: Data flow analysis [7] involves examining the flow of informa­
tion within a program to identify potential errors or inefficiencies. It can check for,
among others, unreachable code, infinite loops, and improper use of variables. Data
flow analysis typically operates at the level of control flow graphs, which represent
the flow of control between different parts of a program. Such analysis techniques
have been used e.g. in SafeDrop [8] – a static path­sensitive data­flow analysis
approach to detecting invalid memory deallocation in Rust.
• Model checking: Model checking [9] is a formal verification technique that system­
atically explores the state space of a program or a finite abstraction thereof to check
if it satisfies a given property. Model checking can be used to verify a wide range of
properties, including safety, liveness, and fairness. The technique can be applied to
both software and hardware systems, but may suffer from the state explosion prob­
lem, which makes it infeasible for large­scale systems. Model checking has been
used to reason about dynamic trait objects in Rust as part of the Kani project [10].
It is also a core technique used in the CRUST verifier [11] to check memory safety
of unsafe library code.
• Abstract interpretation: Abstract interpretation [12] is a technique that involves
approximating the behavior of a program using abstract domains. The abstract
domains represent sets of concrete states, and abstract interpretation computes
over­approximations of the program’s behavior using these sets. Abstract interpre­
tation can be used to prove properties about a program, such as the absence of
runtime errors or the convergence of loops, but may result in false positives due to
Shedding the Viper Skin
5
==PAGE:14==
over­approximation. Balasubramanian et al. [13] show how information flow control
– analysis of whether a program leaks sensitive data through unauthorized chan­
nels – can be achieved in Rust by formulating it as the problem of verification of an
abstract interpretation of the program.
• Deductive verification: Deductive verification [14] is a formal technique that in­
volves proving the correctness of a program by establishing logical implications be­
tween its preconditions, postconditions, and loop invariants. Automated deductive
verification typically relies on theorem provers or automated solvers, such as SMT
solvers, to prove the generated verification conditions. This approach can provide
strong guarantees about the correctness of a program, but may require significant
manual effort in writing specifications or proof­specific annotations. This is the ap­
proach represented by Prusti, but also other tools such as Creusot [15].
Static program verification techniques can be employed at various stages of the software
development life cycle, from design and implementation to testing and maintenance. The
choice of a specific verification technique depends on the properties to be verified, the
complexity of the program, and the desired level of automation.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest [16, 15, 17] in combining static program
verification techniques with programming languages that offer strong safety guarantees,
such as Rust. By leveraging the inherent safety features of such languages, it is pos­
sible to develop more efficient and scalable verification tools that can provide stronger
guarantees about the correctness and reliability of software systems.
2.1.1
Hoare­style verification
At the heart of Prusti’s verification methodology is Hoare­style verification [18], a well­
established method in the realm of program correctness that forms the theoretical foun­
dation of many modern program verification tools. Named after its developer Tony Hoare,
this approach fundamentally relies on the concept of ”Hoare triples”:
{P} C {Q}
In this notation, P, C, and Q respectively represent the pre­condition, the command (or
program code), and the post­condition. The entire expression, or Hoare triple, articulates
the following: If the pre­condition P holds true before the execution of command C, then
the post­condition Q will hold true after the execution of C, assuming C terminates. This is
known as partial correctness, as opposed to total correctness which refers to also proving
that C does indeed terminate.
1
#[requires(x < 0)]
2
#[ensures(result > 0)]
3
fn negate(x: i32) -> i32 {
4
-x
5
}
Listing 1: A simple Rust function annotated with Prusti specifications
To see how one can apply Hoare­style verification principles to Rust code, consider the
function negate defined in Listing 1, which negates a negative integer. It has a precon­
dition, defined by the #[requires] attribute (part of Prusti’s library of annotations), stat­
6
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:15==
ing that the input x must be less than zero. It also has a postcondition, defined by the
#[ensures] attribute, stating that the result must be greater than zero.
We can express this function as the following Hoare triple:
{x < 0}
result := negate(x)
{result > 0}
This Hoare triple reads: ”If the precondition is true before the execution of negate, and if
the execution of negate terminates, then the postcondition will be true.”.
To verify this Hoare triple, we have to check if the postcondition holds for the given com­
mand under the precondition. If the command negate(x) is executed with a negative
integer (i.e., x < 0), it will return a positive integer – by the semantics of the unary minus
operator in Rust – and thus, the postcondition result > 0 is satisfied.
While this example may seem trivial and can be verified manually, in general, the process
of proving Hoare triples can be complex and requires the use of sound inference rules
[18]. These rules allow us to reason about the correctness of a piece of code by breaking
it down into smaller, more manageable parts, and proving the correctness of each part.
However, manually applying these rules to a large codebase can be a daunting task. Tools
like Viper [3] help formulate and automate inference rules of Hoare­style logics for real­life
applications.
2.2
Permission­based reasoning
Permission­based reasoning is a conceptual framework used in program verification to
manage and control access to resources, such as memory locations in a heap. The fun­
damental idea is to associate each resource with a permission, which is a value between
0 and 1. A permission of 1 means full access (read/write) to the resource, while a permis­
sion of 0 means no access. Permissions can be fractional to represent read­only access.
A comprehensive discussion of permissions is found in [19].
The key aspect of permission­based reasoning is that permissions can be transferred
between different parts of a program, such as between a caller and a callee in a function
call. This transfer of permissions is used to reason about which parts of a program can
access which resources at any given point in time, enabling modular reasoning about
program behavior.
In the context of program verification, this framework provides a systematic way to reason
about the effects of a program on its state. By associating permissions with resources and
transferring these permissions during function calls, we can keep track of which parts of
the program state each function can affect. This allows us to reason about each function
in isolation, making the verification process more manageable.
Moreover, permission­based reasoning helps in dealing with aliasing, a common source
of bugs in programs. Aliasing occurs when two or more pointers refer to the same memory
location. By requiring that a function obtains the necessary permissions before accessing
a resource, we can ensure that no other part of the program can access the same resource
at the same time, thus avoiding potential conflicts.
Finally, the concept of fractional permissions allows us to model read­only access to re­
sources. This is particularly useful in multi­threaded programs, where multiple threads
may need to read from the same resource concurrently. By splitting a full permission
Shedding the Viper Skin
7
==PAGE:16==
into multiple fractional permissions, we can allow multiple readers while ensuring that no
thread can modify the resource until it has obtained the full permission.
2.3
Overview of Prusti
Prusti[1] is an automated verifier for Rust programs that focuses on verifying functional
correctness for primarily safe Rust code. The tool integrates with the Rust compiler and
leverages the Viper verification infrastructure [3] to provide a powerful and robust verifica­
tion experience for developers. The main goal of Prusti is to ensure that Rust programs
adhere to specified contracts and invariants, which helps developers catch errors and
prevent undesired behavior at an early stage.
Specification language
One of the key features of Prusti is its intuitive and expressive specification language.
Users can write contracts and invariants using Rust expressions, making it easy to learn
and adopt the tool in existing projects. Prusti supports a wide range of specification con­
structs, such as preconditions, postconditions, loop invariants, and data type invariants.
These constructs enable developers to precisely express the desired behavior of their
programs and rely on Prusti to verify their correctness. The assertion language is a su­
perset of Rust syntax, with additional verification­specific constructs, such as quantifiers
(forall, exists) and old­expressions.
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
#[pure]
4
#[terminates]
5
#[ensures (result >= a && result >= b)]
6
#[ensures (result == a || result == b)]
7
fn max(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32 {
8
if a < b {
9
b
10
} else {
11
a
12
}
13
}
Listing 2: A simple example of a Rust function with Prusti specification
Listing 2 demonstrates a simple example of a Rust function with a Prusti specification. The
function max takes two i32 integers as arguments and returns the maximum of the two.
The Prusti specification includes several annotations, such as #[pure], #[terminates],
and #[ensures]. The #[ensures] annotations describe postconditions of the function.
In this case, the postconditions ensure that the result of the function is greater than or
equal to both input arguments and that the result is either equal to the first or the second
argument. Prusti checks partial correctness, which indicates that if the program termi­
nates, it will produce the correct output. It is important to distinguish this property from
total correctness, which is a stronger guarantee that not only will the program produce the
correct result if it terminates, but it will always terminate. The #[terminates] attribute in
Prusti’s specification language is directly associated with the concept of total correctness.
By using this annotation, a function is explicitly declared to always terminate, a statement
that Prusti validates along with other elements of the function’s specification. Finally, the
#[pure] annotation indicates that the function has no side effects. This allows it to be
8
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:17==
used in other specifications. This example illustrates how Prusti’s specification language
can be used to precisely express the expected behavior of a Rust function, allowing the
tool to verify its correctness according to the specified contract.
Verification methodology
Rust source code
MIR
VIR
Viper
Silicon
Carbon
Boogie
Z3
rustc
Prusti front end
Prusti back ends
Figure 2.1: Prusti verification pipeline
Prusti’s verification methodology involves encoding Rust programs and their specifica­
tions into Viper [3], a verification language that supports a range of program reasoning
techniques such as separation logic (and thus permission­based reasoning) and symbolic
execution. Prusti automates Hoare­style verification by translating Rust code and its as­
sociated specifications into a Viper representation, which is then verified using the Viper
verification infrastructure. The Viper infrastructure provides a reusable, extensible, and
maintainable foundation that allows Prusti to evolve and improve over time.
Figure 2.1 presents an overview of Prusti’s approach to verification. It is deeply inter­
twined with the Rust compiler’s type checking pass, after which Prusti extracts the com­
piler’s Control Flow Graph (CFG) representation, also known as the Mid­level Intermediate
Representation (MIR), along with type and borrow­checker information. This data forms
Shedding the Viper Skin
9
==PAGE:18==
the basis for constructing the corresponding Viper program. The translation from MIR to
Viper Intermediate Language (VIR) and then to Viper is done by the Prusti front end. The
core proof and user specifications are encoded to Viper and checked automatically by
one of the Viper back ends (see: subsection 2.4.2), shielding users from the complexity
of the underlying logic.
Verification results are then translated back from Viper to Rust and reported using the
Rust compiler’s error reporting mechanisms. This allows Prusti to provide feedback to
the user in the context of Rust expressions, making it more accessible to programmers
who may not be familiar with the intricacies of formal verification.
In addition to proving user specifications, Prusti can optionally check for the absence of
panics and overflows, further enhancing the robustness of the verified Rust code. The tool
currently supports an expressive subset of safe Rust, including heap­allocated data, Box
types, shared and mutable borrows, traits, generics, and common use cases of lifetime
parameters to functions.
To support external libraries, Prusti provides a #[trusted] annotation. This allows func­
tions to be equipped with contracts used by callers but not checked against the function’s
implementation, providing a degree of flexibility in the verification process.
Flexibility and incremental adoption
Prusti offers a flexible trade­off between the level of annotations required and the guar­
antees provided by the tool. Users can choose to provide minimal annotations for a basic
level of verification or opt for more detailed specifications to obtain stronger guarantees.
This flexibility supports incremental adoption of the tool in large­scale projects, allowing
developers to focus on the most critical parts of their codebase first and gradually expand
the coverage of the verification as needed.
The effectiveness of Prusti’s approach has been demonstrated on a test suite of more
than 300 correct and incorrect Rust programs, annotated with expected verification errors
to ensure accurate modeling of Rust’s semantics. The tool has also been evaluated on
all functions from the top 500 Rust crates that fall within its supported language subset,
verifying the absence of overflows and richer functional correctness properties of existing
implementations of well­known algorithms. This evaluation has shown that Prusti can
generate sufficient annotations to automate the core proofs in Viper, demonstrating its
potential for widespread application in the Rust community.
2.4
Viper verification infrastructure
Viper [3] is a verification infrastructure that serves as an intermediate layer between high­
level program verification tools and low­level theorem provers or SMT solvers. Its primary
goal is to provide a reusable and extensible platform for developing permission­based
verification techniques and tools, such as Prusti. Viper is designed to support a wide
range of language features and permission­based verification techniques, making it a
versatile choice for building front­ends for various source languages. Figure 2.2 shows
an overview of the infrastructure.
2.4.1
Permission model
Viper offers several important features that make it suitable for use as an intermediate
verification language.
Viper’s flexible permission model is a key feature that enables the encoding of permission­
based reasoning techniques. This model is integrated into Viper’s intermediate language,
10
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: Viper verification infrastructure
Source: https://www.pm.inf.ethz.ch/research/viper.html
which is designed to express a wide range of language features and verification tech­
niques.
The permission model in Viper is based on the concept of fractional permissions, a com­
mon approach in separation logic. Fractional permissions allow shared read access to
data while ensuring exclusive write access. This is achieved by associating a permission
value with each accessed location. The permission value is a fraction between 0 and 1,
where 1 represents full (exclusive) access, and a value less than 1 represents partial
(shared) access. This model allows for fine­grained control over access rights, which is
crucial for reasoning about concurrent programs.
Viper’s permission model also supports the concept of ”permission transfer”. This means
that permissions can be transferred between different parts of a program, allowing for
dynamic changes in access rights. This is particularly useful for reasoning about programs
that involve complex patterns of resource ownership.
In addition to basic permissions, Viper supports more advanced specification features
such as magic wands and quantified permissions. Magic wands (also known as ”sep­
aration implications”) are a powerful tool for specifying and reasoning about code that
manipulates shared data structures. Quantified permissions allow for the specification
and verification of properties that hold for all elements in a data structure, such as an
array or a linked list.
The flexibility of Viper’s permission model is further enhanced by the support for user­
defined predicates and functions. This allows users to define their own abstractions and
reasoning techniques, which can then be integrated into the verification process.
Additionally, Viper supports custom domains for encoding algebraic data types and pro­
vides a mechanism for specifying axioms and functions related to these domains. This
feature allows users to define their own mathematical theories and structures within the
Viper language, thereby extending its expressiveness and applicability. For instance,
users can define a custom domain to represent a specific data structure, such as a tree
Shedding the Viper Skin
11
==PAGE:20==
or a graph, and then specify axioms and functions that describe the properties and op­
erations of this data structure. These custom domains can be used to encode complex
data types and structures from the source language, enabling more precise and compre­
hensive verification.
2.4.2
Viper verifiers
Viper includes two back­end verifiers that provide different verification approaches.
The verifier based on Verification Condition Generation (VCG), Carbon [3], encodes Viper
programs into Boogie [20], an intermediate verification language. Carbon significantly
reduces the size and verification time of the generated Boogie programs compared to the
Chalice/Boogie infrastructure. It has been designed to be expressive enough to capture
a wide variety of languages and verification techniques out of the box, without requiring
front­end developers to descend into the back­end(s).
The Symbolic Execution verifier, Silicon [21] is based on Smallfoot­style symbolic exe­
cution and is particularly suited for reasoning about programs that use quantified permis­
sions. It processes the symbolic execution graph bottom­up, axiomatizing and checking
the validity of functions in a dependency­based order. Silicon implements an approach
called function axiom triggering, which involves declaring a limited and an unlimited func­
tion symbol per axiomatized function. Recursive invocations of a function are translated
to the limited symbol, while the function definitional axiom relates the unlimited function to
the function body. This mechanism prevents the solver from unrolling the axiom arbitrarily
deeply, thus avoiding matching loops.
Both verifiers have their strengths, and depending on the input program and required ver­
ification techniques, one may be more suitable than the other. Silicon’s performance has
been evaluated against Carbon, showing that Silicon is generally faster [3, 21]. The veri­
fier’s performance remains stable even when verification failures are manually seeded into
the tests. Furthermore, Silicon’s completeness has been evaluated, demonstrating that it
performs well with respect to incompleteness, requiring only a few additional annotations
in a small number of programs.
2.4.3
Usage of Viper as an intermediate verification language
Viper has been successfully used as an intermediate verification language for several
front­ends, including the Java and OpenCL front­ends developed in the VerCors [22]
project and the Chalice/Viper front­end [23]. Other examples include the Gobra [24] ver­
ifier for Go, Nagini [25] for Python, and of course Prusti [1] for Rust. The expressive
power and flexibility of the Viper language enable encoding a wide variety of verification
techniques and language features.
2.4.4
Integration with Prusti
Prusti leverages the Viper verification infrastructure to provide a powerful and robust ver­
ification experience for Rust developers. Prusti translates Rust code and its associated
specifications into a Viper representation, which is then verified using the Viper verification
infrastructure. The Viper infrastructure enables Prusti to efficiently reason about Rust pro­
grams with complex invariants and shared mutable data structures while benefiting from
the reusable and extensible nature of the Viper platform. An example of an encoding of
In conclusion, Viper is a powerful intermediate verification infrastructure designed for
permission­based verification techniques. Its expressive language, flexible permission
model, and advanced specification features make it an ideal choice for developing veri­
fication tools like Prusti. The Viper verification infrastructure provides a solid foundation
12
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:21==
that allows Prusti to evolve and improve over time, ensuring a seamless and robust veri­
fication experience for Rust developers.
2.5
SMT solvers: Z3 and CVC5
Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) [26] solvers are computational tools that address the
satisfiability problem for logical formulas with respect to combinations of background theo­
ries expressed in classical first­order logic with equality. These theories often encapsulate
mathematical constructs that are typically used in computer science and automated rea­
soning, such as the theory of integers, reals, arrays, lists, and bit vectors, among others.
The basic problem that SMT aims to solve can be stated as follows: given a logical formula
in conjunctive normal form (CNF), where the formula is written in the language of some
theory (or theories), is there an interpretation of the variables in the formula such that
the formula evaluates to true? If such an interpretation exists, we say that the formula is
satisfiable; otherwise, it is unsatisfiable. The interpretation that makes the formula true is
often referred to as a model.
A key strength of SMT is its ability to reason about combinations of theories. This is crucial,
as many practical problems involve constraints from multiple theories. For instance, a
problem may involve both arithmetic constraints (e.g., x + y > z) and array constraints
(e.g., the array A after writing x at index y is different from the original array).
SMT solvers play a crucial role in the process of program verification. In essence, pro­
gram verification often boils down to checking the validity of logical formulas, represent­
ing properties of the program, across different mathematical theories. These formulas
encapsulate the behavior and expected outcome of the program or its components. In
the context of program verification, the satisfiability problem becomes a quest for finding
a model that matches the program’s specification, while demonstrating the correctness of
the implementation. By automating this task, SMT solvers provide a powerful, efficient,
and scalable means of performing static program verification, which significantly eases
the burden of software reliability and security checks.
A more comprehensive overview of the SMT­LIB 2.6 – a standard for specifying SMT
problems in a programming language accepted by modern SMT solvers – will be given in
section 4.3. In this section, we provide a background on two SMT solvers we will rely on
throughout this project – Z3 [27] and CVC5 [28].
2.5.1
Z3
Z3 [27] is an efficient SMT solver developed by Microsoft Research. It is designed to solve
a wide range of problems, particularly those that arise in software verification and software
analysis. Z3 supports a variety of theories, including linear arithmetic, bit vectors, arrays,
and uninterpreted functions, among others.
Z3 offers several important features that contribute to its popularity and effectiveness:
• Efficiency and performance: Z3 is designed to be efficient and high­performing,
making it suitable for solving complex problems in various application domains.
• Modularity: Z3 integrates a modern DPLL­based SAT solver, a core theory solver
that handles equalities and uninterpreted functions, and satellite solvers for arith­
metic, arrays, etc. This modular architecture allows for easy integration of new
theories and efficient combination of existing solvers.
• Flexible input formats: Z3 accepts input in multiple formats, including the SMT­LIB
Shedding the Viper Skin
13
==PAGE:22==
standard format, the Simplify format, and a low­level native format. It also provides
an API for procedural calls in ANSI C, .NET, and OCaml.
• Incremental solving: Z3 uses novel algorithms for quantifier instantiation and the­
ory combination. It also supports incremental solving, which allows users to add
and remove constraints incrementally during the solving process.
• Model generation: Z3 is capable of generating models when a given formula is
found to be satisfiable. These models can be helpful in understanding the specific
values of variables that make the formula satisfiable or in generating counterexam­
ples for verification tasks.
Z3 has been successfully used in numerous verification tools and applications, including
static analyzers, model checkers, and program verifiers. It is used in tools like Boogie,
Why3, and Viper among others. In the context of program verification, Z3 is often used
to discharge verification conditions generated by these tools. The efficient and scalable
nature of Z3 makes it particularly well­suited for handling large and complex verification
tasks. In the Silicon verifier, the Z3 solver is used as an underlying SMT solver to handle
proof obligations (via a Scala API).
2.5.2
CVC5
CVC5 [28] is a state­of­the­art SMT solver developed jointly by Stanford University and
the University of Iowa. It is a descendant of the CVC, CVC Lite, CVC3, and CVC4 solvers
and is designed to be efficient, scalable, and robust. Like Z3, CVC5 supports incremental
solving and model generation.
CVC5 offers several important features that contribute to its effectiveness and usability:
• Efficiency and performance: CVC5 is designed with a focus on performance and
scalability, making it suitable for solving large and complex problems in various ap­
plication domains.
• Support for extended theories: While CVC5 supports a wide range of commonly
used background theories, enabling it to handle a diverse set of problems arising
from different application domains, the users can also utilize non­standard ones that
describe e.g. bags, separation logic or strings.
• Flexible input formats: Like Z3, CVC5 accepts input in multiple formats, includ­
ing the SMT­LIB standard format and a C++ API. This flexibility makes it easy to
integrate CVC5 into various tools and workflows.
CVC5 has been successfully used in a variety of verification tools and applications, such
as model checkers, static analyzers, and program verifiers [29]. In the context of program
verification, CVC5 is often used to discharge verification conditions generated by various
tools, providing an efficient and scalable solution for proving the correctness of software
systems.
2.5.3
Summary
Both Z3 and CVC5 are state­of­the­art SMT solvers with a wide range of features and
support for multiple theories. While they share many similarities, some performance and
completeness differences can influence the choice of solver for specific verification tasks.
For example, Barbosa et al. [28] showed that CVC5 frequently solves significantly more
non­incremental SMT­LIB benchmarks than Z3 when comparing across the same divi­
sions used for SMT­COMP 2021.
14
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:23==
In summary, both Z3 and CVC5 are powerful and versatile SMT solvers that have been
widely used in various verification tasks. The choice between the two solvers often de­
pends on the specific requirements of the verification problem, the toolchain being used,
and the performance characteristics of each solver for the given task.
Shedding the Viper Skin
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:25==
3
Evaluating permission­based reasoning
in Viper
In this chapter we will take a look at how Viper, which the existing Prusti back ends are
based on, handles reasoning about heap­dependent programs. We will contrast this with
the guarantees that Rust’s type system and borrow checker give us, and argue that Viper’s
core memory safety proofs can be omitted entirely when verifying safe Rust programs. In
the context of Rust, ”safe” refers to a specific subset of the language that is guaranteed by
the compiler to be free from undefined behavior, data races, and a variety of other types
of bugs that are common in systems programming. We will discuss these guarantees in
detail in section 3.3.
3.1
Overview of Viper
Viper is an intermediate verification language that has been designed by drawing inspi­
ration from several existing languages, notably Boogie [30], Chalice [31], and Dafny [32].
Viper is an imperative language that includes a built­in notion of program heap and per­
missions to memory locations, which means that front ends do not need to encode these
concepts. This simplifies the development of front ends that use permission­based spec­
ifications and facilitates the development of efficient and accurate back ends. Viper’s
assertion language is based on implicit dynamic frames [33], which provide accessibility
predicates in the form of acc(e1.f, e2), indicating an e2 ∈[0, 1] fractional permission to
the memory location identified by e1.f.
Viper enables modular verification by allowing the declaration of methods and heap­
dependent functions with pre­ and postconditions. Each method and function is verified
independently with respect to its specification. When we say that a method is verified,
we mean that it has been proven to meet its specification under all possible executions.
Verification involves proving that if the preconditions are true before the method is called,
then the postconditions will be true after the method has completed, regardless of the
specific inputs or the state of the program when the method is called.
Besides methods and functions, the language permits the declaration of recursive pred­
icates to specify heap­implemented data structures, custom first­order theories and do­
mains. These domains enable front ends to create their own mathematical vocabulary to
encode algebraic data types or preserve type system information. Unlike some other lan­
guages, Viper does not have a concept of classes – methods, functions, and predicates
do not take implicit receiver arguments. Instead, they must be declared explicitly, making
Viper suitable for encoding procedural and object­oriented languages.
In Viper, there is a distinction between the instance or application of a predicate or func­
tion and the corresponding body. That is, it utilizes isorecursive semantics [34]. This
approach prevents non­terminating SMT solver queries. However, to achieve this, addi­
tional annotations are required to direct the verifier accordingly. To exchange a predicate
instance for its body and vice versa, unfold and fold statements are used. In addition,
unfolding expressions carry out a temporary unfold within the nested expression’s scope.
Similar annotations are required by other verifiers such as VeriFast [35]. Viper’s verifiers,
on the other hand, use a technique developed by Heule et al. [36] to link the (un)rolling
of functions to the (un)folding of predicates, avoiding the need for similar annotations for
(un)rolling function definitions.
Shedding the Viper Skin
17
==PAGE:26==
1
field next: Ref
2
field elem: Int
3
4
predicate list(this: Ref) {
5
acc(this.elem) && acc(this.next)
6
&& (this.next != null ==> list(this.next))
7
}
8
9
method head(this: Ref) returns (res: Int)
10
requires list(this)
11
ensures
list(this)
12
{
13
unfold list(this)
14
res := this.elem
15
fold list(this)
16
}
Listing 3: An example of isorecursive semantics in Viper
An example of this is shown in Listing 3. We define a linked list predicate on line 4 as
follows: this is a reference to a linked list, if and only if we have access to this.elem
and this.next and, recursively, this.next is also a list (if it’s present). We then define the
head method, which has a precondition stating that the argument this has to be a list
(line 10). We add a postcondition that this property is preserved after the method finishes
(line 11). In the method body, we first need to exchange the instance of the predicate for
its body by unfolding it. Only then do we have access to the this.elem field, which we
can assign to the return value. Finally, we fold the predicate back on line 15. Attempting
to access this.elem after this line would result in a verification failure – acc(this.elem)
is now ”locked” inside the predicate instance.
The Viper language allows the encoding of a broad spectrum of imperative source lan­
guages that may have different type systems and distinct notions of objects and classes.
To achieve this, Viper supports object references and globally declared fields that can
be accessed from each object, but it doesn’t have any concept of classes, inheritance,
or sub­typing. If necessary, these ideas must be encoded via custom domains. In such
encoding, the front end that generates the Viper program must ensure that fields are ac­
cessed solely from the appropriate objects.
3.2
Permission­based reasoning in Viper
Consider the C program displayed in Listing 4. This program outlines a structure called
wrapper that houses a singular integer field value. We define a function inc that incre­
ments the value of a specified wrapper by one. Further, we declare a client function that
creates two structures, initializing their values to 0 and 1, respectively. It then uses inc to
increment the first one’s value and confirms, via a runtime assertion, that the two wrappers
carry the same value.
In order to statically prove that the assertion passes, the client must determine that invok­
ing inc(w1) does indeed raise w1.value by 1. Moreover, the client must ensure that the
invocation does not alter w2.value. The latter concept is known as framing [37], which
implies that the client must be able to maintain the knowledge that w2.value remains at
18
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:27==
1
typedef struct {
2
int* value;
3
} wrapper;
4
5
void inc(wrapper* w) {
6
w->value = w->value + 1;
7
};
8
9
void client() {
10
wrapper* w1 = malloc(sizeof(wrapper));
11
wrapper* w2 = malloc(sizeof(wrapper));
12
13
w1->value = 0;
14
w2->value = 1;
15
16
inc(w1);
17
18
assert(w1->value == w2->value);
19
};
Listing 4: An example of modular verification of a C program with potentially aliasing
pointers
1 throughout the invocation of inc(w1), as long as w2 is not relevant. This necessitates
reasoning about aliasing between w1 and w2 (and everything they can potentially reach).
In this specific program, w1 and w2 cannot be aliases as they each point to a unique, newly
allocated object (as per definition of malloc). Inferring and maintaining such aliasing re­
lationships is a major challenge when reasoning about heap­manipulating programs [38].
Permissions are an acknowledged formalism to facilitate reasoning about framing. Each
heap location has a unique permission for its access, and a method that must access a lo­
cation must obtain the required permission, possibly from its caller. Methods can demand
permissions through specific assertions in their preconditions, allowing callers to ascertain
which heap locations a method call might access. When a method is invoked, the caller
conceptually transfers all necessary permissions to the callee, and upon completion, the
callee transfers permissions back to the caller (via its postcondition). The permissions are
represented by a real number between 0 (no access) and 1 (full read/write permissions).
To facilitate distinguishing between read and write permissions, read­only permissions
are represented with fractions in this range. This means, in any scope where a read/write
permission (acc(x.f, 1)) or a read­only permission (acc(x.f, p), p ∈(0, 1)) to a heap
location is present, new read­only permissions can be granted by arbitrarily dividing the
existing one. This is especially useful when modeling read­only (non­mutable) references.
The encoding of the example code from Listing 4 is presented in Listing 5. The globally
declared field value corresponds to the singular field of the wrapper structure. The pre­
condition for the function inc highlights that the function requires the permission to the
location w.value, denoted by the accessibility predicate acc(w.value). The first post­
condition affirms that this permission will be returned to the caller, which will allow it to
read the modified value. The subsequent postcondition verifies that inc truly increments
the value of w.value by one unit: the old­expression old(e) represents the value of e
Shedding the Viper Skin
19
==PAGE:28==
1
field value: Int
2
3
method inc(w: Ref)
4
requires acc(w.value)
5
ensures acc(w.value)
6
ensures w.value == old(w.value) + 1
7
{
8
w.value := w.value + 1
9
}
10
11
method client() {
12
var w1: Ref
13
var w2: Ref
14
15
w1 := new(value)
16
w2 := new(value)
17
18
assert acc(w1.value)
19
assert acc(w2.value)
20
21
w1.value := 0
22
w2.value := 1
23
24
inc(w1)
25
assert w1.value == w2.value
26
}
Listing 5: The functions from Listing 4 encoded to Viper
in the state before the function was executed. Old­expressions affect heap dereferences
(in Viper this means access to fields, like w.value), but not local variables (like c itself).
Even though they are part of postconditions, they are evaluated in the same state as pre­
conditions (before the execution of the method), as opposed to other expressions in the
postcondition, which refer to the state after the method has finished.
In the client method, we set up two local variables, w1 and w2, and give them new unique
references. The new keyword grants full permission to the value field for both these new
references in the method’s context, a fact we can assert on lines 18­19. After assigning
values 0 and 1 to the new heap locations, w1.value and w2.value – a step that’s possible
because we got the necessary permissions from the previous new commands – we invoke
inc(w1).
From a verification standpoint, this call first exhales inc’s precondition and then inhales
the postcondition. Exhaling and inhaling are the permission­aware equivalents of as­
serting and assuming assertions. Exhaling an assertion involves making sure that all
permissions that need to be handed over to the callee (in this instance, acc(w1.value))
are available, and ensuring that all pure assertions are true. Similarly, inhaling an as­
sertion involves adding permissions (in this case, to acc(w1.value)) and assumptions
(in this case, w1.value == 1) to the verification state. Finding a suitable distribution of
permissions guarantees that there are no illegal memory accesses, i.e. the program is
20
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:29==
memory­safe. It is important to highlight that manually added inhale statements must
be justified. If at any time we attain more permission to some heap location than 1, the
verification state becomes unsound, as we could split it into an exclusive permission and
then some.
3.3
Guarantees provided by Rust’s type system
Rust, unlike C, offers strong static memory­safety guarantees through its type system and
borrow checker. The Rust compiler enforces these guarantees at compile time, eliminat­
ing many common programming errors such as null pointer dereferencing, double frees,
or data races. Most importantly for our purpose, Rust’s type system and borrow checker
make the reasoning about aliasing, which is required in the Viper encoding of the C pro­
gram, unnecessary. In this section, we will revisit the example from the previous section,
this time written in Rust, and discuss how Rust’s type system and borrow checker elimi­
nate the need for explicit permission­based reasoning in the Viper encoding.
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
struct Wrapper {
4
value: i32,
5
}
6
7
#[ensures(w.value == old(w.value) + 1)]
8
fn inc(w: &mut Wrapper) {
9
w.value += 1;
10
}
11
12
fn client() {
13
let mut w1 = Wrapper { value: 0 };
14
let w2 = Wrapper { value: 1 };
15
16
inc(&mut w1);
17
18
assert!(w1.value == w2.value);
19
}
Listing 6: A Rust program equivalent to the C example in Listing 4
Listing 6 shows a Rust equivalent of the C program from Listing 4. Once again, we have a
Wrapper structure with an integer field, value. The semantics of inc and client functions
are the same as in the previous two examples, except that instead of raw pointers to
memory, in Rust uses (mutable) references.
Rust’s type system and borrow checker ensure at compile time that there is either exactly
one mutable reference (&mut) or any number of immutable references (&) to a particular
piece of data in a particular scope. This is known as borrowing. The inc function, for
example, takes a mutable reference to a Wrapper as its argument, signifying that it has
exclusive access to that Wrapper for the duration of its execution. As a result, no other
code can simultaneously mutate or even read the same Wrapper.
In the client function, when inc is called with &mut w1, the Rust compiler checks that
no other references to w1 exist for the duration of the inc call. This effectively guarantees
Shedding the Viper Skin
21
==PAGE:30==
that inc can’t affect c2’s value – there’s no need to reason about aliasing as in the C
code. Hence, the Rust compiler can guarantee the assertion about w2.value remaining
1 during the inc call without the need for any runtime checks.
Another mechanism that Rust provides is lifetime analysis. Its purpose is to prevent use­
after­free bugs by ensuring that references to data do not outlive the data they refer to.
This is done by associating a ”lifetime” with each reference, representing the scope within
which the reference is valid. The borrow checker verifies the validity of these lifetimes.
It makes sure that the lifetime of any reference does not exceed the lifetime of the data
it refers to. In most cases, Rust can infer lifetimes automatically (like in Listing 6), but in
complex situations, programmers may need to specify them explicitly.
In the context of Rust, the permission­based reasoning paradigm is implicitly embedded
within the language’s type system and borrow checker. The concept of borrowing in Rust
can be seen as a form of permission management. When a function borrows a mutable
reference to a data structure, it is essentially being granted a permission of 1 (full access)
to that structure for the duration of its execution. Conversely, when a function borrows
an immutable reference, it is being granted a fractional permission, allowing read­only
access. This system of borrowing ensures that at any given time, either one mutable
reference or any number of immutable references to a particular piece of data can ex­
ist, effectively preventing data races and aliasing issues. Therefore, when verifying Rust
programs, the need for explicit permission­based reasoning in the Viper encoding is sig­
nificantly reduced, as many of the memory safety properties that required complex Viper
permissions in the C program are ensured by the Rust compiler itself. This simplifies the
verification process and allows for more efficient and straightforward formal verification of
Rust programs.
In conclusion, Rust’s type system and borrow checker provide the static guarantee that
aliasing, and subsequently data races, can’t occur. This allows us to omit the encoding
of permission­based reasoning about aliasing in Viper for Rust programs, significantly
simplifying the verification process. The memory safety properties that required complex
Viper permissions in the C program are ensured by the Rust compiler, reducing the com­
plexity of the Viper encoding and potentially enabling more efficient and straightforward
formal verification of Rust programs.
3.4
Formal verification of Rust’s ownership model
The effectiveness of Rust’s safety guarantees is fundamentally dependent on two aspects:
the correctness of the Rust compiler’s implementation and the soundness of its ownership
model, type system, and borrow checker. Formal verification becomes essential to ensure
that the compiler adheres strictly to the rules and constraints of the ownership model and
that the model itself is sound. Throughout this thesis, we are only concerned about the
official compiler for Rust, rustc [39], although it’s worth noting that the language has
matured to the point where third­party compilers, such as mrustc [40], have been created.
Several efforts have been made towards the formal verification of Rust’s ownership model,
among which the RustBelt project [4] is notable. The project aimed to provide a formal and
machine­checked account of Rust’s extensible approach to safe systems programming
and how to prove it sound. The project achieved this by giving the first formal safety proof
for a language representing a realistic subset of Rust, called λRust. This proof was based
on a semantic approach that combines ideas from separation logic, concurrent program
logics, and step­indexed logical relations. The proof shows that well­typed Rust programs
do not exhibit certain kinds of undefined behavior, such as null pointer dereferencing or
22
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:31==
data races. Additionally, the project developed several tools and techniques for reasoning
about Rust programs, including a type­preserving translation from Rust to an intermediate
language called Iris [41], which can be used to reason about low­level details of program
execution.
The verification work conducted by RustBelt’s researchers resulted in uncovering and
fixing a bug in Rust’s standard library [42], indicating that their Rust model was realistic
enough to be useful. However, this work has also highlighted the complexity of Rust
verification due to the presence of unsafe code and the reliance on compiler intrinsic
functions, which are beyond the Rust type system’s purview.
Another significant contribution to the formal verification of Rust’s ownership model has
been presented by in a paper by Pearce [43]. The author introduces a lightweight formal­
ism that captures the two­phase type checking process in Rust, focusing on the concepts
of reference lifetimes and borrowing. This formalism is designed to enforce ”type and
borrow safety,” ensuring that programs will not attempt to dereference dangling pointers.
The formalism captures many aspects of Rust, including copy­ and move­semantics, mu­
table borrowing, reborrowing, partial moves, and lifetimes, while remaining sufficiently
lightweight to be easily understood.
In addition to the theoretical contributions, the author provides a soundness proof to verify
the key claims of the calculus. He also provides a reference implementation in Java, which
is used to model check the calculus using over 500 billion input programs. This practical
verification effort extended to fuzz testing the Rust compiler against 2 billion programs, re­
sulting in the discovery of one confirmed compiler bug and several other potential issues.
This work not only contributes to the formal understanding of Rust’s ownership model but
also provides practical insights into the robustness of the Rust compiler’s implementation.
The Patina project [44], led by researchers at the University of Washington, also con­
tributes significantly to the formal verification of Rust’s ownership model. In their work,
the researchers present a formal semantics model called Patina, which captures the key
features of Rust’s memory management. The project focuses on Rust’s unique pointers,
which are responsible for deallocating heap memory, and presents a three­layer model
that ensures no uninitialized data is ever used and no leaks are created when deallocating
memory. The authors use this model to prove the soudness of some core operations and
justify the conjecture that the model, as a whole, is sound. This work further strengthens
the confidence in the soundness of Rust’s ownership model.
The results from these verification efforts have been instrumental in understanding and
validating the guarantees provided by Rust’s ownership model. They provide a high de­
gree of confidence in the soundness of the Rust type system and its ability to prevent
common programming errors such as data races or null pointer dereferencing. However,
they also highlight the challenges in verifying unsafe code and the reliance on compiler
intrinsics, underlining the need for continued research and verification efforts. Neverthe­
less, since Prusti and its back ends do not aim to verify unsafe code, we consider these
guarantees sufficient to justify omitting permission­based reasoning for memory safety in
the development of the new verification back end.
3.5
Heap­independent type encoding in Prusti
By default, Prusti encodes Rust types into Viper by using Ref objects and access predi­
cates. An encoding of the example from Listing 6 would be very similar to the one shown
for the equivalent C code. This encoding heavily relies on the heap component of the
Viper program state to model parts of Rust’s ownership system through permissions. We
Shedding the Viper Skin
23
==PAGE:32==
now explain an alternative encoding that does not use permissions but instead attempts
to encode heap­based data structures as a mathematical data structure. An alternative
encoding, called the snapshot­based encoding, models each Rust type as a Viper do­
main – a new type with its associated methods and axioms. To be specific, each type T
is encoded into the following parts:
1. The domain type Snap$T, which represents the Rust type T. Snap$T instances can
be seen as encoded values that represent a Rust value of type T.
2. For each variant of T, a constructor function cons$T. These functions takes all the
values that constitute a Rust value of type T and return the corresponding encoded
value of type Snap$T.
3. Axioms to ensure that each Rust value of type T is associated with a unique en­
coded value of type Snap$T, and vice versa. In other words, there is a one­to­one
correspondence between instances of the Rust type and their snapshot encoding.
4. A snapshot function to convert the heap­based encoding of a Rust value of type T
into a heap­independent representation of type Snap$T.
In the context of Viper, permissions and snapshots represent two different strategies for
encoding and reasoning about data structures. To recall, access predicates provide a
way to reason about heap­dependent programs by associating permissions with memory
locations. This allows us to reason about aliasing and framing, and to ensure that methods
have the necessary permissions to access and modify the data they need. However, this
approach can be complex, it requires explicit reasoning about permissions, and is tied to
the internal model of program heap in Viper.
On the other hand, the snapshot­based encoding provides a more abstract and math­
ematical way of representing data structures. Instead of reasoning about permissions
and memory locations, we model each Rust type as a Viper domain, a new type with
its associated methods and axioms. This encoding does not rely on the heap model or
permissions, but instead represents data structures as mathematical objects. In this way,
the snapshot­based encoding provides a more abstract and potentially simpler way of
reasoning about data structures, at the cost of a more complex encoding process.
Syntax for defining domains is a part of the Viper specification language. An example
encoding of a simple structure type is presented in Listing 7.
Prusti allows for selecting this encoding, as opposed to the heap­dependent one, via a
configuration flag. At the time of writing this report, this option is considered experimental,
and not every feature of the Rust language has been implemented, but the encoding is
stable enough to warrant building a new back­end that will take advantage of an encoding
that does not utilize an explicit heap.
24
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:33==
1
struct SomeStruct {
2
a: i32,
3
b: i32,
4
}
1
domain Snap$SomeStruct {
2
3
// constructor
4
function cons$SomeStruct(a: Int, b: Int): Snap$SomeStruct
5
6
// injectivity axiom
7
axiom Snap$SomeStruct$injectivity {
8
forall a1: Int, b1: Int, a2: Int, b2: Int ::
9
cons$SomeStruct(a1, b1) == cons$SomeStruct(a2, b2) ==>
10
a1 == a2 && b1 == b2
11
}
12
13
}
Listing 7: An encoding of a simple Rust type to a Viper domain
Shedding the Viper Skin
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:35==
4
Design and implementation
In this chapter, we will describe the design and implementation details of the new back
end. To adhere to the naming convention of the existing Viper back ends being named
after chemical elements, we chose to go with the name ”Lithium”, as it being the light­
est metal on the periodic table reflects the focus on performance. Figure 4.1 shows an
overview of the Prusti architecture after introducing the new back end. There are several
changes compared to the original architecture for Prusti described in section 2.3. Since
we are not going to utilize the Viper verification language, we skip the encoding from VIR
to Viper completely. The responsibility of Lithium will therefore be to translate the VIR
AST directly into proof obligations that can be expressed in the SMT­LIB 2.6 language.
The assertions will be incrementally verified by the SMT solver of choice. Z3 and CVC5
support is implemented as part of the thesis project, but the design of the new back end
facilitates adding support for other SMT solvers.
We illustrate the original process outlined in section 4.1, before addressing its shortcom­
ings and the subsequent revisions that led to the development of the improved back end,
as discussed in section 4.2. Following that, we introduce our verification methodology in
section 4.3 before delving into the implementation details in section 4.4. In particular, we
provide insight into our process for achieving compliance with the SMT­LIB 2.6 standard
in the generation of SMT code, which is detailed in subsection 4.4.1. Finally, we explain
the implementation of the optimization module featured in section 4.5 and give a summary
of the chapter in section 4.6.
4.1
Original verification process
Prusti is divided into two processes: the Prusti driver and the Prusti verification server.
The workflow using the default Viper encoding is presented in Figure 4.2.
Prusti utilizes a complete instance of the Rust compiler for program representations and
analysis results, as shown in the second column. In order to ensure type­checking of
Prusti­specific specification features, similar to regular Rust expressions, and to handle
error reporting, Prusti employs a technique called specification embedding. This process,
illustrated in the top­left section, makes use of existing Rust features with analogous type­
checking rules. For example, quantifiers (forall, exists) are embedded as Rust closures.
Prusti utilizes rustc to map the program sources and embedded specifications to rustc’s
Mid­Level Representation (MIR), as commonly done in standard compilation. It then con­
ducts its own analyses, as presented in the third column, assembling all necessary infor­
mation to generate a Viper program in the last column. This Viper program is subsequently
sent to another Prusti component that performs verification through a Viper wrapper. If
verification fails, Prusti maps the Viper errors back to user­readable Rust errors reported
via the compiler API.
The encoding from MIR to Viper has an intermediate step, where the encoding to the
Viper Intermediate Representation (VIR) is used in order to facilitate emitting Viper code
in later steps. Listing 8 shows the root structure of the VIR AST. As depicted, the root
structure of the VIR AST illustrates how the top­level members of a VIR encoding directly
map to features of the Viper language, such as domains and procedures. Following this,
the driver can opt between local and server­side processing as the primary modes of
handling verification requests.
Shedding the Viper Skin
27
==PAGE:36==
Rust source code
MIR
VIR
Viper
Silicon
Carbon
Boogie
Z3
Lithium
CVC5
Prusti driver
Prusti server
Figure 4.1: Updated Prusti verification pipeline
When a server address is configured, the Prusti driver will prefer server­side process­
ing. Under this scenario, each verification request – which includes the VIR program and
back­end configuration data – is dispatched to the Prusti server for processing via the
HTTP protocol. This approach incurs the overhead of serializing the VIR code to either
JSON or binary representations when sent to the verification server, and a subsequent
deserialization of the received verification results. However, it provides the advantage of
enabling the server, potentially located on a more powerful remote machine, to serve mul­
tiple clients. Moreover, it allows the server to keep the JVM running persistently, thereby
distributing the cost over multiple uses of the Viper back­ends.
Conversely, local processing is utilized when no server address is configured. In such a
case, the driver spawns an instance of the JVM and carries out the verification process
locally. Since the driver and the server utilize the same code base, the driver invokes
the same method the server would have employed. This approach eliminates the need
for network data transfer and serialization, but it has an impact on performance as each
28
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.2: Overview of Prusti’s encoding process to Viper (source: [1])
1
pub struct Program {
2
pub name: String,
3
pub check_mode: CheckMode,
4
pub domains: Vec<DomainDecl>,
5
pub predicates: Vec<PredicateDecl>,
6
pub functions: Vec<FunctionDecl>,
7
pub methods: Vec<MethodDecl>,
8
pub procedures: Vec<ProcedureDecl>,
9
}
Listing 8: Main VIR structure
verification request necessitates spawning a new JVM instance, an operation known to
have a high overhead.
A hybrid approach is employed by the Prusti extension for the popular code editor Visual
Studio Code. By default, the extension will spawn an instance of the Prusti server as a
separate process on the developer’s machine and keep it running during a development
session. This amortizes the cost of multiple verification tasks by keeping a persistent JVM
instance while trivializing the network latency.
The processing of a verification request, locally or otherwise, follows the following route:
a Viper program is emitted based on the received VIR encoding. Then, it is dispatched to
a Viper verifier, either Silicon or Carbon. These will invoke an SMT solver to dispatch the
proof obligations and produce a verification result.
4.2
New verification process
We can identify a number of issues with the current Prusti verification pipeline which relies
on Viper as a verification back­end:
Shedding the Viper Skin
29
==PAGE:38==
1. Since the Viper verifiers are written in Scala and are executed on the JVM, their
runtime performance compared to equivalent Rust code is slower. This also com­
plicates the architecture as communication between the Prusti driver/server and the
Viper back ends has to be done over Java Native Interface (JNI) – a foreign function
interface for programs running on the JVM.
2. Network latency, serialization, and deserialization costs, especially for large pro­
grams, can slow down the verification process in case on server­side processing.
3. Viper’s design as a fully­fledged, general­purpose verification language introduces
unnecessary complexity and redundancy in reasoning (see: section 3.3). As a re­
sult, this slows down the pipeline due to the extra overhead of having to translate
Rust to Viper and then to SMT.
With these limitations in mind, we propose the Lithium back end. The main design goals
are as follows:
1. Native Rust implementation – implementing the back end in Rust, as part of the ex­
isting Prusti codebase, provides several benefits. The back end can still be invoked
directly by the Prusti driver, or via the Prusti server, but since the native implementa­
tion can operate directly on the VIR data structures, the architecture can potentially
be simplified by removing the need for a separate Prusti server process for personal
use cases.
2. Direct encoding to SMT – Bypassing Viper allows us to provide a more streamlined
and efficient verification pipeline. Compliance with the SMT­LIB 2.6 standard allows
for any modern SMT solver to be used. Outputting the SMT­LIB code in the form of
text files makes it easy to debug the implementation.
3. Avoiding permission­based reasoning – leveraging the snapshot­based encoding of
Rust types and removing the core memory­safety proof lets us significantly remove
the cost of verification, while preserving guarantees assured by Rust’s type system
and borrow checker.
4. Support for floating­point arithmetic – taking advantage of the FloatingPoint the­
ory defined in the SMT­LIB 2.6 standard, we can implement an encoding of Rust
expressions that deal with floating­point arithmetic (f32, f64) to bit­vectors. Viper
has a Real type which models real numbers, but such encoding cannot represent
infinite or not­a­number (NaN) values.
4.3
Verification methodology
The verification methodology employed in Lithium is rooted in Hoare­style verification.
Recall from subsection 2.1.1 that this approach is based on the concept of Hoare triples,
which are of the form {P}C{Q}, where P is a precondition, C is a command or program
statement, and Q is a postcondition. The semantics of a Hoare triple is such that if the
precondition P holds before the execution of the command C, and if the execution of C
terminates, then the postcondition Q will hold afterwards. In the context of our verifier,
the entire procedure to be verified is the command in a Hoare triple, and its pre­ and
postconditions are specified by the user in annotations.
The body of each procedure to be verified is represented as a control­flow graph (CFG).
Each node in the CFG corresponds to a basic block of code, and the edges represent con­
trol flow between these blocks. The verifier performs a depth­first search (DFS) traversal
30
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:39==
of the CFG, exploring all possible paths through the program. Each path from the start­
ing block to the exit block represents a single execution path through the procedure, with
respect to its branching points.
As the verifier traverses the CFG, it encounters various program statements, in particular
assumptions and assertions. The former might be literal invocations of the prusti_assume!
macro, or be derived from program statements. These assumptions, together with the
method preconditions and the background predicate (SMT theories in scope), set the con­
text for generating verification conditions (VCs). Each encountered assertion forms a VC
that needs to be checked. For each VC, the verifier generates a corresponding SMT­LIB
command (a validity check), which is then passed to an SMT solver for verification.
A procedure is deemed to have been verified correctly if all associated verification condi­
tions (VCs) are found to be valid. This implies that no assertion fails along any execution
trace of the procedure. In other words, the Hoare triple {P}C{Q} for the procedure is
validated – the postconditions Q hold true after the execution of the command C under
the assumed preconditions P. This successful verification provides a robust assurance
of the correctness of the procedure under consideration.
To summarize, this methodology, by exploring all possible execution paths through the
program and verifying all associated VCs, provides a robust framework for program verifi­
cation. Leveraging the principles of Hoare­style verification and the capabilities of modern
SMT solvers, it offers an efficient approach to verifying the correctness of Rust programs.
4.4
Implementation of the verification pipeline
The ultimate goal of the verification pipeline is to encode the user­provided specifications
and other assertions about code behavior (e.g. bounds checking for integer types) to SMT­
LIB 2.6. With the snapshot­based encoding enabled, the intermediate representation that
Prusti makes available to its back ends consists of the following (see: Listing 8):
1. A list of domains, each with a name, a list of associated functions and axioms
2. A list of method specifications in the scope – their names and associated pre­ and
postconditions
3. A list of procedures to verify, each with a name, a list of local variables and a control­
flow graph of the body.
The default verification pipeline emits Viper code from this IR, which is then processed by
one of the Viper back ends. However, since Viper uses Z3 under the hood, it is possible to
streamline the process by going straight to the SMT solver. In this section, we will propose
an encoding from this low­level IR to SMT clauses.
4.4.1
Compliance with the SMT­LIB 2.6 standard
The SMT­LIB language, as defined in the SMT­LIB standard [26], is a rich and expressive
language designed for the specification and manipulation of Satisfiability Modulo Theo­
ries (SMT) problems. It has several key features that make it suitable for this purpose – a
well­defined syntax, formal semantics, support for multiple theories and extensibility. The
syntax of the SMT­LIB language is based on s­expressions (symbolic expressions), which
are widely used in Lisp­like languages. An s­expression is either a symbol, a numeral, a
string, or a sequence of s­expressions enclosed in parentheses. Scripts are used to in­
teract with SMT solvers. A script is a sequence of commands, which are a specific kind of
s­expression. An example of a script in the SMT­LIB language is shown in Listing 9. This
script sets the logic to be used to be one of unquantified formulas built over a signature
Shedding the Viper Skin
31
==PAGE:40==
of uninterpreted (i.e., free) sort and function symbols. It then declares a function f and a
variable x, asserts that f(x) = x, and checks for satisfiability.
1
(set-logic QF_UF)
2
(declare-fun f (Int) Int)
3
(declare-fun x () Int)
4
(assert (= (f x) x))
5
(check-sat)
Listing 9: An example of an SMT­LIB script
In order to encode the Rust data types and VIR domains to SMT­LIB code, we need a way
to define our own data types, called sorts in the context of Satisfiability Modulo Theories.
A sort is a type or a category of objects. It is analogous to data types in programming
languages. For instance, in the SMT­LIB language, Int and Bool are built­in sorts repre­
senting integers and Booleans, respectively. Users can also define their own sorts using
the declare-sort command, as demonstrated in Listing 10.
The declaration of a sort does not specify any properties or behaviors of the objects of that
sort. In other words, a sort is uninterpreted: it is a mere label that distinguishes objects
of one sort from objects of another sort. This is a key feature of SMT, which allows it to
reason about a wide range of problems in a theory­agnostic way.
However, for many applications, it is necessary to specify certain properties or behaviors
of the objects of a sort. This is where axioms come in. An axiom is a statement that is
assumed to be true without proof. In the context of SMT, axioms are used to define the
semantics of sorts and functions.
For example, if we declare a sort Person and a function parent that takes a Person and
returns a Person, we can use axioms to specify that every person is distinct from their
parent, and that the parent of a person’s child is distinct from the child of a person’s
parent. These axioms give meaning to the Person sort and the parent function, allowing
us to reason about persons and parent­child relationships in a meaningful way.
Sorts and axioms are fundamental concepts in SMT. Sorts categorize objects, while ax­
ioms specify their properties and behaviors. Together, they form a background predicate,
a logical statement assumed to be true within a particular problem domain. This back­
ground predicate provides the necessary context for evaluating assertions in an SMT
script. When an assertion is made, it is evaluated against this backdrop, with the SMT
solver using the sorts and axioms to determine its truth or falsity.
The SMT­LIB format necessitates that types, predicates, and assertions are expressed in
a sequential order. Specifically, both sorts (or types) and functions must be declared prior
to their use within a file. Adhering to this standard, the Lithium back end generates SMT
scripts in the following structured format:
1. The script initiates with a solver­specific preamble, which sets the configuration flags
to control solver­specific features. Although the SMT­LIB standard prescribes the
use of the (set-option <name> <value>) command to set options, the specific
options vary between solver implementations. The project includes preambles for
Z3 and CVC5, but it can be readily extended to support other SMT solvers.
2. Subsequently, all sorts used in the snapshot­based encoding of Rust types are de­
32
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:41==
1
; Define a new sort
2
(declare-sort Person 0)
3
4
; Define functions for the new sort
5
(declare-fun parent (Person) Person)
6
(declare-fun child (Person) Person)
7
8
; Add axioms
9
(assert (forall ((x Person)) (distinct x (parent x))))
10
(assert (forall ((x Person)) (distinct x (child x))))
11
(assert (forall ((x Person)) (=> (distinct x (parent (child x)))
12
(distinct x (child (parent x))))))
13
14
; Declare concrete instances of Person
15
(declare-const alice Person)
16
(declare-const bob Person)
17
18
; Specify relationships
19
(assert (= (parent alice) bob))
20
(assert (= (child bob) alice))
21
22
; Check satisfiability
23
(check-sat)
Listing 10: An example of an SMT­LIB script using sorts
clared, along with some auxiliary sorts generated by Prusti.
3. If required, custom theories for sets and sequences are incorporated at this stage.
4. Following the declaration of sorts, the corresponding function definitions are intro­
duced.
5. Axioms which describe the behavior of these functions are then declared.
6. Finally, with all the requisite sorts and axioms established, the verification code for
the Rust procedures is generated.
This structured approach ensures compliance with the SMT­LIB standard and facilitates
the generation of valid SMT scripts. The sequential structure of the SMT­LIB scripts,
as generated by the Lithium back end, is particularly advantageous when leveraging the
incremental processing capabilities of SMT solvers such as Z3 or CVC5. Incremental
processing allows the solver to process the script in stages, maintaining the state of the
solver between stages. This means that the solver can build upon the results of previ­
ous stages, rather than starting from scratch for each new command. In the context of
the Lithium­generated scripts, this means that once the sorts and functions have been de­
clared and the axioms have been defined, these declarations and definitions are available
for all subsequent stages of processing. This can lead to efficiency gains, particularly for
large scripts where the complexity of the problem space mandates extensive exploration.
Furthermore, the solver can provide intermediate results or feedback after each stage,
which can be useful for debugging or for understanding the progress of the solver.
Shedding the Viper Skin
33
==PAGE:42==
4.4.2
Encoding domains
As mentioned in section 4.4, Prusti performs the encoding of Rust types to Viper domains,
which are part of the VIR. The process of transcribing Viper domains to SMT is rather un­
complicated. Every domain is transcribed as a new sort, the corresponding functions are
SMT functions that interact with the instances of that sort, and the axioms are incorporated
as assertions in the global scope.
1
struct SomeStruct {
2
a: i32,
3
b: i32,
4
}
Listing 11: A simple Rust wrapper over two 32­bit signed integers
An example encoding of a domain for a simple record type exhibited in Listing 11 is demon­
strated in Listing 12. To define the SMT sort that corresponds to the SomeStruct domain
(type), we use the declare-sort command. Then, we define functions required to con­
struct (create instances of) and deconstruct (access fields of) an instance of the sort. The
constructor is a function that takes two integer snapshots (Snap$I32 is a sort correspond­
ing to the i32 type in Rust) and returns a snapshot of SomeStruct. The two destructor
functions take a snapshot of the structure and return the integer snapshot corresponding
to one of the fields.
It is worth pointing out that at this point, these functions have no interpretation or con­
straints to them aside from the type signature. It is the axioms defined afterwards that
define the behavior of these functions with respect to each other. The axiom on line 12
ensures injectivity of the constructor function, and by extension assures structural equality
of Snap$SomeStruct instances. The other axiom gives meaning to the destructor func­
tions in terms of the constructor one.
Primitive types
The elementary types accessible in the lower IR are enumerated in the Type enum, as
shown in Listing 13. Compound types like Set, Seq (mathematical sequence), MultiSet,
and Map (dictionary) are parameterized according to their element type, or in the case of
maps, key and value types. A domain is differentiated by its unique identifier.
The Perm and Ref types are not available in the snapshot­based encoding. The former,
signifying a Viper permission between 0 and 1, is not used in this encoding due to lack of
explicit heap reasoning. The latter only would correspond to Ref­typed values in Viper,
but in the snapshot encoding references to values are also encoded as snapshots.
With this in mind, we choose the following encoding from IR types to SMT­LIB sorts:
Int Although each integer type in Rust is encoded as a distinct snapshot domain, for in­
stance, Snap$I32 for i32 (signed 32­bit numbers), all of them encapsulate the stan­
dard integer type Int defined in the Ints theory (a part of SMT­LIB standard). Ev­
ery snapshot sort is complemented by a suitable validity axiom assuring the bounds
arising from (un)signedness and bit representation are honored.
Bool Booleans are represented with a simple Snap$Bool domain encapsulating the Bool
sort.
BitVector Bit vectors serve as an alternate encoding for Rust integer types. To verify programs
that include bitwise operations, it is beneficial to portray integers not as numbers, but
34
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:43==
1
; type (sort) declaration
2
(declare-sort Snap$SomeStruct 0)
3
4
; constructor function
5
(declare-fun constructor$SomeStruct (Snap$I32 Snap$I32) Snap$SomeStruct)
6
7
; destructor functions
8
(declare-fun destructor$SomeStruct$a (Snap$SomeStruct) Snap$I32)
9
(declare-fun destructor$SomeStruct$b (Snap$SomeStruct) Snap$I32)
10
11
; injectivity axiom
12
(assert (forall ((a1 Snap$I32) (b1 Snap$I32) (a2 Snap$I32) (b2 Snap$I32))
13
(=> (= (constructor$SomeStruct a1 b1)
14
(constructor$SomeStruct a2 b2))
15
(and (= a1 a2) (= b1 b2)))))
16
17
; destructor axiom
18
(assert (forall ((a Snap$I32) (b Snap$I32) (s Snap$SomeStruct))
19
(=> (= s (constructor$SomeStruct a b))
20
(and (= a (destructor$SomeStruct$a s))
21
(= b (destructor$SomeStruct$b s))))))
Listing 12: The domain encoding to SMT­LIB code for the Rust structure defined in List­
ing 11
as sequences of bits. The SMT­LIB standard includes the FixedSizeBitVectors
theory for this purpose. Nevertheless, at the time of writing this report, support for
encoding bitwise operations to low­level IR is not established.
Float The SMT­LIB standard establishes a theory named FloatingPoint based on the
IEEE standard 754­2008 for floating­point arithmetic. The theory employs bit vec­
tors for internal representation, facilitating sound verification of Rust code incorpo­
rating floating­point numbers. Using the Real sort to model unbounded real numbers
would not satisfactorily capture the complexities of floating­point arithmetic, such as
not­a­number (NaN) and infinite values.
Containers If the operations in the emitted SMT code use containers (e.g. Sets), a custom
theory for the type will be emitted at the beginning of the SMT file. Since the SMT­
LIB 2.6 standard does not support generic sorts (parametrized by other sorts), we
need to emit a monomorphized copy of the theory for each type. For example,
emitting a theory for sets of (snapshots of) i32 and i64 integers would amount to
emitting (declare-sort Set<Snap$I32> 0) with all corresponding function defini­
tions and axioms, and another declaration – (declare-sort Set<Snap$I64> 0) –
and the same functions and axioms, the only difference being the sort (Snap$I64
vs. Snap$I32) they operate on.
4.4.3
Encoding procedures
VIR represents procedures as a control flow graph (CFG) composed of basic blocks. A
basic block represents a continuous sequence of program instructions that have a single
entry point and a single exit point, meaning that if the first instruction of the block is exe­
cuted, all subsequent instructions within the block are guaranteed to execute sequentially,
Shedding the Viper Skin
35
==PAGE:44==
1
pub enum Type {
2
Int,
3
Bool,
4
Perm,
5
Float(Float),
6
BitVector(BitVector),
7
Seq(Seq),
8
Set(Set),
9
MultiSet(MultiSet),
10
Map(Map),
11
Ref,
12
Domain(Domain),
13
}
14
15
pub enum Float {
16
F32,
17
F64,
18
}
19
20
pub enum BitVector {
21
Signed(BitVectorSize),
22
Unsigned(BitVectorSize),
23
}
24
25
pub enum BitVectorSize {
26
BV8,
27
BV16,
28
BV32,
29
BV64,
30
BV128,
31
}
Listing 13: Types available in low­level IR
without any control flow jumps in­between. The structure of the CFG in VIR is presented
in Listing 14.
The BasicBlock struct includes a label, a list of statements, and a successor field. The
Label is a unique identifier for the block. The statements field is a list of program in­
structions in the block. Execution of these instructions is assumed to be sequential. The
successor field indicates the control flow transfer that happens at the end of the block.
This can be one of three types: Return, Goto, and GotoSwitch.
• Return implies that the control returns to the caller function after the execution of
this block.
• Goto indicates a transfer of control to a specific basic block, denoted by its label.
• GotoSwitch allows for a switch­case like structure, transferring control to different
basic blocks depending on the evaluation of an expression.
36
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:45==
1
pub struct BasicBlock {
2
pub label: Label,
3
pub statements: Vec<Statement>,
4
pub successor: Successor,
5
}
6
7
pub struct Label {
8
pub name: String,
9
}
10
11
pub enum Successor {
12
Return,
13
Goto(Label),
14
GotoSwitch(Vec<(Expression, Label)>),
15
}
Listing 14: Types used to represent basic blocks in VIR
Verification of a single procedure, as implemented in the Lithium back end, involves the
following steps:
1. Find the entry­point of the procedure – the basic block with no predecessor.
2. Identify execution paths through the procedure by traversing the CFG depth­first
3. Emit SMT­LIB code for each execution path and pass it to the solver
4.4.4
Tracing execution paths
The Rust MIR (Mid­level Intermediate Representation) control flow graph (CFG) is con­
structed in such a way that each node represents a basic block of code, encompassing
a sequential execution of operations, and edges depict the control flow between these
blocks. Notably, these control flows can loop back to previous nodes, representing a the
capacity to model loops in the program.
To remove loops from the MIR CFG, the VIR­encoding step in Prusti performs a traversal
of the MIR CFG in a topological order and replaces each loop with a new basic block that
contains a sequence of statements that simulate the loop. The loop condition is evaluated
at the beginning of the new basic block, and if the condition is true, control is transferred
to the first block in the loop body. If the condition is false, control is transferred to the block
following the loop.
This process effectively flattens the MIR CFG by removing loops and replacing them with
sequences of basic blocks that simulate the loop behavior. The resulting VIR program
CFG does not have loops, but instead has a sequence of basic blocks that correspond to
the flattened loop body.
The VIR program CFG has the following property: every path from the starting block to
the exit block represents a single execution path through the procedure, with respect to its
branching points (in particular, loops). Therefore, in order to verify assertions along every
path a program execution may take, we perform a depth­first traversal through the VIR
control­flow graph and emit SMT­LIB code for each basic block. In order to avoid code
repetition, we take advantage of the assertion stack.
Shedding the Viper Skin
37
==PAGE:46==
Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers, operating in compliance with the SMT­LIB
standard [45], function on a stack­based framework that manipulates a collection of as­
sertions. This stack infrastructure facilitates the methodical, hierarchical representation
and manipulation of logical assertions. Two integral commands, namely push and pop,
characterize this hierarchical system.
According to the SMT­LIB standard, the push command introduces a new level atop the
existing stack of assertions. This operation constructs a contextual checkpoint, wherein
subsequent assertions are appended to this level, leaving prior stack levels unmodified.
This establishes a form of scoped assertion management, creating a logical segregation
between different sets of assertions.
In contrast, the pop command removes of the most recent stack level. This process clears
all assertions appended subsequent to the corresponding push command, essentially re­
verting the state of the SMT solver to the checkpoint created by the push. This operation
provides an effective mechanism for discarding a set of assertions, enabling the explo­
ration of divergent, potentially conflicting, logical paths.
This mechanism is crucial for efficient SMT code generation when considering different
code paths during a DFS traversal of a VIR CFG. We will illustrate the process with an
example of a simple Rust function depicted in Listing 15, which accepts an integer and
returns a Boolean, indicating whether the integer is even. A VIR control­flow graph gener­
ated for this function by Prusti is presented in Figure 4.3. The graph has been simplified
for the sake of readability, as the generated data structure contains many more com­
ments, helper statements and code related to lifetime analysis, that are not relevant to
the example.
1
#[pure]
2
#[terminates]
3
fn is_even(x: i32) -> bool {
4
if x % 2 == 0 {
5
assert!(x % 2 == 0);
6
true
7
} else {
8
assert!(x % 2 != 0);
9
false
10
}
11
}
Listing 15: A pure Rust function checking if a number is even
38
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:47==
end_label
statement
exit
label_bb0
statement
copy _4 ←_1
assign _5 := EqCmp(Constant(2), Constant(0))
// Rust assertion: attempt to calculate
// the remainder with a divisor of zero
assert Not(_5)
label_bb1
statement
assign _6 := EqCmp(Constant(2), Constant(-1))
assign _7 := EqCmp(Copy(_4), Constant(-2147483648))
assign _8 := And(Move(_6), Move(_7))
// Rust assertion: attempt to calculate
// the remainder with overflow
assert Not(_8)
Not(_5)
resume_panic_label
statement
leak-all
true
label_bb2
statement
assign _3 := Mod(Move(_4), Constant(2))
assign _2 := EqCmp(Move(_3), Constant(0))
Not(_8)
true
label_bb10
statement
assign _22 := Mod(Move(_23), Constant(2))
assign _21 := NeCmp(Move(_22), Constant(0))
assign _20 := Not(Move(_21))
label_bb11
statement
// Rust panic - const
// "assertion failed: x % 2 != 0"
assert false
true
label_bb12
statement
write_place _0 := false
Not(_20)
return_label
statement
label_bb3
statement
copy _13 ←_1
assign _14 := EqCmp(Constant(2), Constant(0))
// Rust assertion: attempt to calculate
// the remainder with a divisor of zero
assert Not(_14)
true
label_bb8
statement
copy _23 ←_1
assign _24 := EqCmp(Constant(2), Constant(0))
// Rust assertion: attempt to calculate
// the remainder with a divisor of zero
assert Not(_24)
Not(_2)
label_bb4
statement
assign _15 := EqCmp(Constant(2), Constant(-1))
assign _16 := EqCmp(Copy(_13), Constant(-2147483648))
assign _17 := And(Move(_15), Move(_16))
// Rust assertion: attempt to calculate
// the remainder with overflow
assert Not(_17)
Not(_14)
true
label_bb5
statement
assign _12 := Mod(Move(_13), Constant(2))
assign _11 := EqCmp(Move(_12), Constant(0))
assign _10 := Not(Move(_11))
Not(_17)
true
label_bb6
statement
// Rust panic - const
// "assertion failed: x % 2 == 0"
assert false
true
label_bb7
statement
write_place _0 := true
Not(_10)
label_bb9
statement
assign _25 := EqCmp(Constant(2), Constant(-1))
assign _26 := EqCmp(Copy(_23), Constant(-2147483648))
assign _27 := And(Move(_25), Move(_26))
// Rust assertion: attempt to calculate
// the remainder with overflow
assert Not(_27)
Not(_24)
true
Not(_27)
true
start_label
statement
ghost-assign termination_var$1 := __builtin__NewInt(1)
Figure 4.3: VIR CFG of the is_even procedure from Listing 15
Starting at the start_label node, we find the ghost-assign statement, which assigns
an integer 1 to a termination variable, which is used in proofs for termination conditions.
In particular, the #[terminates] annotation requires a termination counter to be present.
In this case, the function terminates trivially due to lack of loops and recursion.
The nodelabel_bb0 node denotes the beginning of the function, where it copies the input
parameter (_1, which corresponds to ”x”) into _4. Subsequently, it checks whether the
modulo argument (in this case literal 2) is zero, and asserts this is not the case to avoid a
division by zero error. This is a prerequisite to the computation ”x % 2”.
From there the control flow may proceed to the label_bb1 node if the assertion is true,
or resume_panic_label otherwise. Unannotated edges indicate a Goto terminator, and
annotated ones – a GotoSwitch. In particular, a ”true” case indicates a branch taken when
all other branches are false. If the branch to resume_panic_label is taken, this means
Shedding the Viper Skin
39
==PAGE:48==
the assertion must have failed, and a verification error will be reported. The leak-all
clears verifier state and indicates the end of the unwinding path after a failure.
Continuing along the happy path, the label_bb1 node handles potential overflow issues
with the modulo operation by checking if the input parameter _4 is equal to −2147483648,
the lowest possible value of an 32­bit integer, when the divisor is −1. An assertion is then
made that this overflow scenario does not occur (assert Not(_8)).
Finally, the label_bb2 block calculates the expression ”x % 2 == 0” and branches depend­
ing on the result. The sub­trees under nodes label_bb3 and label_bb8 correspond to the
two branches of the if­statement. From there the control flow and verification assertions
are similar in both cases. The same arithmetic validity checks are performed to calculate
the ”x % 2 == 0” condition again, this time for instances of the assert! macro. After divi­
sion by zero and overflow are ruled out in the respective branches, the assertion condition
is calculated and saved in variables _10 and _20, respectively. The assert! macro is
not compiled down to an inline assertion, instead the code branches to a block containing
an assert false statement. Otherwise, if the assertions passed, the control would flow
into blocks label_bb7 or label_bb12, which write the return value of the function and
continue to the end of the CFG.
4.4.5
Emitting SMT code from traces
In this subsection we will describe how the SMT code is emitted for assertions found along
the paths traced through the program. First, we will discuss the methodology behind
embedding the statements present in the VIR AST, and we will follow with an overview of
how code emitted for basic blocks is nested to take advantage of incremental processing.
First, we introduce the FolStatement structure which acts as the final intermediate rep­
resentation before emitting SMT code, shown in Listing 16. This structure is used to
represent the first­order logic statements, referred to as FOL statements from this point
forward, that are eventually translated to SMT­LIB format.
1
pub enum FolStatement {
2
Comment(String),
3
Assume(Expression),
4
Assert {
5
expression: Expression,
6
reason: Option<Position>,
7
},
8
}
Listing 16: FOL statement structure
The FolStatement enumeration contains three variants: Comment, Assume, and Assert.
Comment is used to capture comments in the input VIR program. Assume and Assert are
used to represent assumptions and assertions in the input program, respectively, and
both hold an Expression that corresponds to the assumption or assertion in question.
The Assert variant additionally holds an optional reason field, which may contain the po­
sition of an annotation or some other statement that is a reason for emitting the assertion.
This field is only set when the position of the ”reason” is different from the position of
the assertion. For example, when verifying a method call, all assertions generated due
to checking method preconditions will have this field point back to the declaration of the
method. On the other hand, inline assert! macro calls have the field set to None, as the
location of the assertion and the reason for it (itself) are the same. An example of how this
40
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:49==
is used when reporting errors is presented in Listing 17. In this case, the failing assert!
macro for a trivially false expression (0 == 1) is reported on line 5. Conversely, a failure
to verify the precondition of the negate method on line 10 points back to line 3 where the
annotation specifying the precondition is located.
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
#[requires(x >= 0)] // reason for assertion
4
fn negate(x: i32) -> i32 {
5
assert!(0 == 1);
6
return x * -1;
7
}
8
9
fn main() {
10
negate(-3); // position of assertion
11
}
1
error: [Prusti: verification error] the asserted expression might not hold
2
--> src/main.rs:5:5
3
|
4
5 |
assert!(0 == 1);
5
|
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
6
|
7
= note: this error originates in the macro `assert`
8
9
error: [Prusti: verification error] precondition might not hold.
10
--> src/main.rs:10:5
11
|
12
10 |
negate(-3); // position of assertion
13
|
^^^^^^^^^^
14
|
15
note: the failing assertion is here
16
--> src/main.rs:3:12
17
|
18
3
| #[requires(x >= 0)] // reason for assertion
19
|
^^^^^^
Listing 17: Example of reporting reasons for assertion failure
VIR statements are shown in Listing 18. We only show the parts of the Statement enum
that are relevant to Lithium. The translation process to FOL statements is largely a case­
by­case mapping from the VIR Statement variants to the FolStatement variants, with
some additional logic for more complex statements such as method calls.
• Assume and Inhale statements are translated to FolStatement::Assume. The ex­
pression in the original statement is cloned into the resulting FolStatement.
• Assert and Exhale statements are translated to FolStatement::Assert. These
translations involve a comparison between the positions of the failure and the rea­
son for the assertion. If the positions differ, the reason is included in the resulting
FolStatement.
• Assign statements are translated into an equality comparison encapsulated in a
FolStatement::Assume.
Shedding the Viper Skin
41
==PAGE:50==
1
pub enum Statement {
2
Assume(Assume),
3
Assert(Assert),
4
Inhale(Inhale),
5
Exhale(Exhale),
6
Conditional(Conditional),
7
Assign(Assign),
8
MethodCall(MethodCall),
9
Comment(Comment),
10
}
11
12
pub struct Conditional {
13
pub guard: Expression,
14
pub then_branch: Vec<Statement>,
15
pub else_branch: Vec<Statement>,
16
pub position: Position,
17
}
18
19
pub struct MethodCall {
20
pub method_name: String,
21
pub arguments: Vec<Expression>,
22
pub targets: Vec<Expression>,
23
pub position: Position,
24
}
Listing 18: Types of statements present in the VIR AST
• Comment statements are directly mapped to FolStatement::Comment
Conditional statements correspond to an if­else statement in which both if­ and else­
blocks do not contain any branching control flow, and therefore, the if­else statement
itself does not need to be encoded as basic blocks at the CFG level. The statements in
conditionals can only be assert/assume and inhale/exhale. Their encoding to a list of FOL
statements proceeds as follows. For every conditional of the form:
if (guard) {
assert(expr1)
assume(expr2)
...
} else {
assert(expr3)
assume(expr4)
...
}
we can generate the equivalent list of FOL statements:
assert(guard ==> expr1)
assume(guard ==> expr2)
...
assert(!guard ==> expr3)
assume(!guard ==> expr4)
...
42
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:51==
The assertions and assumptions are dependent on the value of the guard expression via
an implication.
The MethodCall statements in our context represent invocations of methods that may
have preconditions and postconditions associated with them. The verification process for
these method calls involves two steps: initially, we assert the preconditions of the method,
and subsequently, we assume its postconditions. This is implemented by substituting the
parameters in the method’s preconditions and postconditions with the specific arguments
provided in the method call, effectively ”instantiating” the method with the specific values
used in the call.
However, if a method argument is mutable, we must discard all prior knowledge about it,
a process known as ”havocking”. This is necessary because the invoked method has the
potential to modify the value of such an argument in an unpredictable manner, rendering
any previous knowledge about its value obsolete post the method call. In the verification
process, this is achieved by generating a new snapshot for the variable passed as a
mutable reference, thereby erasing all prior knowledge about it. This is because any
assumptions or assertions are expressed in terms of the snapshot representing this value
prior to the method call.
A simple example of Rust code that illustrates this scenario is presented in Listing 19.
We define three integer variables x, y, and z, each with a value less than three. We then
invoke the test_havoc method which accepts these as its parameters – first one by value,
the second by read­only reference, and the third by mutable reference. We then assert
that each of the three variables are less than three – a property that held for each at the
time of declaration. As expected, this property still holds for x and y, but can no longer
be inferred for z. Since the test_havoc method does not have any post­conditions that
would assure the value was unchanged (or at least, that it preserved the less­than­three
property), after the invocation all information about z is lost.
1
fn test_havoc(_x: i32, _y: &i32, _z: &mut i32) {}
2
3
fn main() {
4
let (x, y, mut z) = (0, 1, 2);
5
test_havoc(x, &y, &mut z);
6
assert!(x < 3);
7
assert!(y < 3);
8
assert!(z < 3);
9
}
1
error: [Prusti: verification error] the asserted expression might not hold
2
--> src/main.rs:7:5
3
|
4
7 |
assert!(x < 3);
5
|
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
6
|
7
= note: this error originates in the macro `assert`
Listing 19: An example of havocking mutable arguments to methods
4.4.6
Emitting SMT code for FOL statements
Once VIR statements have been simplified into FOL statements – assertions, assump­
tions, and comments – we can then convert these into SMT­LIB format, which can then be
Shedding the Viper Skin
43
==PAGE:52==
processed by an SMT solver of choice. This conversion process is structured as follows:
When we encounter an Assume statement, it is translated directly into the SMT­LIB for­
mat as (assert expression). As such, the assumed expression becomes part of the
background predicate going forward.
For Assert statements, instead of directly asserting them, we encode them as a validity
check. This entails emitting an assert command in SMT­LIB with the expression being
negated, followed by a (check-sat) command, which performs a satisfiability test. By
checking the negated expression for satisfiability, we effectively check the original ex­
pression for validity. This is rooted in the principles of logical reasoning – an assertion
is valid if and only if its negation is not satisfiable. If we cannot find a model (or a set
of variable assignments) where the negated expression is true, it means that the original
expression must be true in all models, and hence it is valid. This is a standard method in
the SMT­solving domain.
As per our chosen methodology, the method preconditions together with the background
predicate correspond to the precondition P in the Hoare triple. The Assume statements en­
countered across the program update this context for subsequent verification conditions,
one for each Assert statement. The final assertions along any path through the program
correspond to the postcondition Q in the Hoare triple for the method being verified.
This approach leverages the incremental nature of SMT solvers and exploits the push­pop
mechanism to verify multiple verification conditions along a path in the program. Since
each validation check is performed in a new stack frame, we can isolate the verification of
each condition, ensuring that the assumptions made in one check do not affect the others.
Furthermore, the use of the push­pop mechanism allows us to efficiently backtrack and
explore different paths through the program, which is essential for handling branching
control flow structures.
Listing 20 gives an example of this process for a generic expression, represented as
<expression>. Each validation check is performed in a new stack frame (which is created
by the push command and destroyed by the pop command). For traceability and error
reporting, the locations and reasons for each assertion are printed, allowing the back­end
process to report errors accurately if they arise. If the assertion was valid, we can again
assume the same expression in the parent frame, to add the knowledge gained from the
assertion to the current verification scope (line 6).
1
(push)
2
(assert (not <expression>))
3
(echo "position: 153, reason: 156")
4
(check-sat)
5
(pop)
6
(assert <expression>) ; assumed after assert in parent frame
Listing 20: SMT code emitted for an Assert statement
In addition to the translation of assertions and assumptions, any comments present in
the original VIR statements are also encoded into the SMT­LIB code. This is done using
the ; <comment> syntax, where <comment> stands for the text of the comment. This is
done mostly to provide helpful context and annotations within the SMT­LIB code, making
it easier to understand and debug.
44
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:53==
4.4.7
Integrated overview
We can now show how the entire verification pipeline comes together, from Rust source
code to emitted SMT­LIB code. Listing 21 shows a simplified preview of the SMT code
emitted for the is_even function first defined in Listing 15. To maintain brevity, the example
has been streamlined to include only the initial few basic blocks, while the full code would
extend beyond 1300 lines.
The listing begins with the preamble and domain encodings which incorporate sort defini­
tions, corresponding functions, and axioms dictating their behavior. As an example, the
Snap$I32 sort, corresponding to the i32 integer type in Rust, has a few functions – a con­
structor, a destructor, and a validity function. The constructor injectivity axiom at line 14
gives meaning to the constructor and destructor functions. Further, the validity axiom on
line 17 stipulates that a valid i32 snapshot’s value must be contained between i32::MIN
(−231) and i32::MAX (231 −1).
Subsequent to line 21, we begin the encoding of the is_even procedure. First, the con­
stants used withing the scope of the procedure are declared (lines 23 .. 25). Owing to
the predetermined code traversal path, these constants can be declared in advance. In
addition, the SMT­LIB 2.6 standard necessitates the declaration of all constants before
they are employed.
The SMT code corresponding to the first basic block (see: Figure 4.3), start_label, is
contained on lines 26 through 32. Here, we assume that the _1$snapshot$0 constant,
corresponding to the input parameter to the function, is a valid 32­bit integer. The termi­
nation variable, necessitated by the #[terminates] annotation, is also assumed to hold
a value of 1. Given that the successor of the start_label involves an unconditional jump
to the label_bb0 block, the emission of a (push) command is not required. Therefore,
we can directly advance to the generation of code for the next block.
Starting on line 34, we emit the code for the first statement in the label_bb0 block – the
copying (assignment) of the value _1 to _4. This is followed by the equality comparison of
2 and 0, stemming from the need to assert that the right­hand side of a modulo operation
(x % 2) is not zero. The result is saved to the _5$snapshot$1 constant, of type Snap$Bool.
Finally, we emit the assertion that its value is false (we require the operand to not be equal
to zero) on line 43. The double negation stems from the fact that the assertions are emitted
as validity checks.
At this point, the code can branch to basic blocks label_bb1 and resume_panic_label,
so we emit a (push) command to keep the state for one sub­tree separate from the other.
Emitting code for the label_bb1 block also requires us to assume the branch precondition
(line 51), which coincides with the assertion we just checked at the end of the previous
block. Once the SMT code for all execution paths are emitted, we (pop) the context from
the stack, and emit the code for the other branch – resume_panic_label.
All comments present throughout the listing are generated by Prusti to aid debugging and
explainability of the emitted code.
4.5
Optimization module
We introduce a method to simplify expressions that will be emitted in the SMT code.
This simplification leverages an optimization procedure which focuses on Boolean and
comparison operations. The presented algorithm follows a recursive descent approach,
breaking down complex expressions and progressively simplifying them based on logical
identities and tautologies.
Shedding the Viper Skin
45
==PAGE:54==
1
; ===== Static preamble =====
2
(set-info :smt-lib-version 2.6) ; ...
3
; ===== Sort definitions =====
4
(declare-sort Snap$Bool 0)
5
(declare-sort Snap$I32 0)
6
(declare-sort Snap$I64 0) ; ...
7
; ===== Function definitions =====
8
(declare-fun constructor$Snap$I32$ (Int) Snap$I32)
9
(declare-fun destructor$Snap$I32$$value (Snap$I32) Int)
10
(declare-fun valid$Snap$I32 (Snap$I32) Bool) ; ...
11
; ===== Axioms =====
12
(assert (forall ((value Int)) ; Snap$I32 constructor injectivity
13
(=
(destructor$Snap$I32$$value (constructor$Snap$I32$ value))
14
value)))
15
(assert (forall ((value Int)) ; Snap$I32 validity
16
(= (valid$Snap$I32 (constructor$Snap$I32$ value))
17
(and (<= (- 2147483648) value) (<= value 2147483647)))) ; ...
18
;===== Procedure specification =====
19
(push)
20
(declare-const _1$snapshot$0 Snap$I32)
21
(declare-const _5$snapshot$1 Snap$Bool)
22
(declare-const termination_var$1$snapshot$1 Snap$I64) ; ...
23
; Basic block: label start_label
24
; Allocate the parameters.
25
(assert (valid$Snap$I32 _1$snapshot$0))
26
; Assume functional preconditions.
27
(assert (= termination_var$1$snapshot$1
28
(constructor$Snap$Unbounded$ (destructor$Snap$I64$$value
29
(constructor$Snap$I64$ 1)))))
30
; Basic block: label label_bb0
31
; bb0[3] _4 = _1
32
(assert (= _4$snapshot$1 _1$snapshot$0))
33
; bb0[4] _5 = Eq(const 2_i32, const 0_i32)
34
(assert (= _5$snapshot$1 (constructor$Snap$Bool$EqCmp_I32
35
(constructor$Snap$I32$ 2) (constructor$Snap$I32$ 0))))
36
(assert (valid$Snap$Bool _5$snapshot$1))
37
; bb0[5] assert(!move _5, "attempt to calculate the remainder of `{}`
38
; with a divisor of zero", _4) -> [success: bb1, unwind: bb14]
39
; Rust assertion: attempt to calculate the remainder with a divisor of zero
40
(push)
41
(assert (not (not (destructor$Snap$Bool$$value _5$snapshot$1))))
42
(echo "position: 52")
43
(check-sat)
44
(pop)
; assumed after assert:
45
(assert (not (destructor$Snap$Bool$$value _5$snapshot$1)))
46
; Basic block: label label_bb1
47
(push)
48
; Branch precond:
49
(assert (not (destructor$Snap$Bool$$value _5$snapshot$1)))
50
; ... SMT code for block BB1 and descendants ...
51
(pop)
52
; Basic block: label resume_panic_label
53
(push) ; ...
Listing 21: A simplified overview of the SMT­LIB output of the Lithium verifier for the Rust
function from Listing 15
46
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:55==
One may argue that modern SMT solvers already contain simplification engines [27] which
are tuned for performance, yet despite their presence, the inclusion of an expression
simplification module in the verifier can be justified on several grounds:
Firstly, the simplification process can significantly reduce the size of the SMT scripts that
are emitted to a file. This reduction in file size can lead to a decrease in disk I/O opera­
tions, which can be a bottleneck in the overall verification process. Moreover, while mod­
ern SMT solvers are highly optimized, they still have to spend computational resources on
parsing and processing the SMT scripts. By simplifying the SMT scripts, we can reduce
the amount of work that the SMT solver has to do, potentially leading to faster verification
times. As such, we argue that performing these transformations on an in­memory repre­
sentation of the SMT assumptions/assertions before emitting them to the file should yield
performance benefits across the entire pipeline. We did not benchmark whether this is
true, doing so could be a potential direction for future work on the verifier.
Secondly, the simplification process can make the SMT scripts easier to read and debug.
By removing trivial assertions and applying rewrite rules based on Boolean tautologies,
the simplification process can produce SMT scripts that are more concise and easier to
understand. This has proven particularly beneficial during the development and debug­
ging of the verifier, where manual inspection of the SMT scripts has often been necessary.
In conclusion, while the inclusion of an expression simplification module in the verifier
may seem redundant given the capabilities of modern SMT solvers, there are compelling
reasons to include such a module.
To detail the method, we formulate an optimized class, Optimizer, which implements an
ExpressionFolder trait. This trait implements a general visitor pattern in Rust for VIR
expressions, ensuring that the Optimizer can fold (in­place replace) various parts of the
expression AST based on different operator types: binary, unary, quantifier, conditional
etc.
4.5.1
Binary expressions
The simplification rules for binary operations are expressed as follows:
BinaryOpKind::EqCmp:
a == a →true
(4.1)
BinaryOpKind::NeCmp:
a ̸= a →false
(4.2)
BinaryOpKind::And:
true ∧a →a
(4.3)
BinaryOpKind::And:
a ∧true →a
(4.4)
BinaryOpKind::And:
false ∧a →false
(4.5)
BinaryOpKind::And:
a ∧false →false
(4.6)
BinaryOpKind::Or:
true ∨a →true
(4.7)
BinaryOpKind::Or:
a ∨true →true
(4.8)
BinaryOpKind::Or:
false ∨a →a
(4.9)
BinaryOpKind::Or:
a ∨false →a
(4.10)
BinaryOpKind::Implies:
true =⇒a →a
(4.11)
BinaryOpKind::Implies:
a =⇒false →¬a
(4.12)
BinaryOpKind::Implies:
false =⇒a →true
(4.13)
BinaryOpKind::Implies:
a =⇒true →true
(4.14)
Shedding the Viper Skin
47
==PAGE:56==
Since we are operating on AST structures, we can only compare expressions structurally.
We do not evaluate (interpret) them. For example, the rule for simplifying logical impli­
cation depicted in Equation 4.12 will only be applied, if the right­hand side operand is
structurally equal to a constant of type Bool with value of ”true”. A complex expression
that evaluates to ”true”, for example ”true ∧true”, would not match this rule. However,
since the application of simplification rules is performed from the bottom up, such expres­
sion would first itself be simplified by rule 4.3.
4.5.2
Unary expressions
The unary operation simplification rules operate similarly to binary operation rules but
work with a single operand. These rules are as follows:
UnaryOpKind::Not:
¬true →false
(4.15)
UnaryOpKind::Not:
¬false →true
(4.16)
UnaryOpKind::Not:
¬¬a →a
(4.17)
In the case of numerical negation, the rule analogous to Equation 4.17, namely −(−a) →
a, can introduce overflow errors. Consider an example using a 32­bit integer.
In Rust, the i32 type spans from −231 to 231 −1. The negative lower bound, −231 (or
i32::MIN), does not have a corresponding positive value within the i32 range. Thus, if
we attempt to negate i32::MIN, the operation would overflow, leading to an undefined or
erroneous result.
Now, consider an expression −(−i32::MIN). Following the rule ¬¬a →a, the optimiza­
tion module would simplify this expression to i32::MIN. However, this simplified form
would not capture the intermediate overflow that occurs when i32::MIN is negated for
the first time.
As a result, the simplification rules need to take the properties and constraints of the data
types into account. For the unary negation of integers, due to the potential for overflow,
we avoid simplifying double negations to maintain the correctness of the code.
4.5.3
Quantifiers
Quantifiers in an expression allow us to express properties about every element (universal
quantification) or about at least one element (existential quantification) in a domain. The
rules for simplifying quantifiers are slightly more nuanced than those for binary and unary
operations, as they require careful consideration of the underlying logical semantics.
The universal quantifier ∀a : A.P(a) states that for all elements a in the set A, the pred­
icate P(a) is true. Thus, when the predicate is a tautology (i.e., always true), the entire
quantified expression becomes a tautology. This leads to our first simplification rule:
QuantifierKind::ForAll:
(∀a : A.true) →true
(4.18)
Similarly, the existential quantifier ∃a : A.P(a) states that there exists at least one element
a in the set A for which the predicate P(a) is true. Consequently, when the predicate is a
contradiction (i.e., always false), the entire quantified expression becomes a contradiction:
QuantifierKind::Exists:
(∃a : A.false) →false
(4.19)
48
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:57==
However, one might be tempted to introduce analogous rules for ∀a : A.false and ∃a :
A.true, as they seem intuitively correct. Yet, this would be erroneous. A statement of the
form ∀a : A.false asserts that all elements in the set A satisfy a predicate that is always
false, which, while seeming paradoxical, is vacuously true in classical logic if A is empty.
On the other hand, ∃a : A.true claims that there exists an element in the set A for which
a tautological predicate is true. While this seems trivially true, in the case where the set
A is empty, no such element exists, rendering the statement false. Therefore, for these
cases, the expressions are left unsimplified in our optimization procedure, maintaining the
correctness of the AST transformation.
One may argue that this is irrelevant, as quantifiers in our system operate on Rust types
encoded into VIR domains. Therefore, since Rust types always have at least one in­
habitant, our universe of discourse, corresponding to the domain of the variable in the
quantified expression, is never empty. As such, vacuous truths when quantifying over
snapshot­encoded Rust types are not possible.
4.5.4
Conditional expressions
In Rust, the semantics of the if X then A else B expression follow the evaluation of
the condition X, where if it evaluates to ”true”, expression A is evaluated and its result is
returned; otherwise, if X evaluates to ”false”, expression B is evaluated and its result is
returned. The corresponding expression in VIR is called the conditional expression, and
its simplification rules are as follows:
ConditionalOp:
(if true then a else b) →a
(4.20)
ConditionalOp:
(if false then a else b) →b
(4.21)
ConditionalOp:
(if c then true else false) →c
(4.22)
ConditionalOp:
(if c then false else true) →¬c
(4.23)
In the rules 4.22 and 4.23 we take advantage of the fact that both the type of the condition
and the branches is Boolean. In such case, an expression ”if X then true else false” is
trivially reducible to the condition itself.
4.5.5
Evaluation example
Note that in every case, simplification occurs based on the structural equivalence of ex­
pressions, not on their semantic or runtime equivalence. If an expression is syntactically
identical to the left side of a rule, it will be replaced with the right side of the rule. We
apply these rules recursively to the expression tree, starting from the leaves and work­
ing towards the root. This ”bottom­up” approach ensures that nested expressions are
simplified to the greatest extent possible.
For example, consider the following expression:
(true ∧(true ∧false)) ∨false
Applying our rules from the leaves towards the root, we first simplify true ∧false using
Equation 4.3 to obtain false. The expression now becomes:
(true ∧false) ∨false
Shedding the Viper Skin
49
==PAGE:58==
Next, applying Equation 4.3 again, we simplify true∧false to obtain false. The expression
now becomes:
false ∨false
Finally, using Equation 4.9, we simplify the expression to its final form:
false
The primary objective of these operations is to find a minimal, yet logically equivalent rep­
resentation of the original expression. This optimization method increases the efficiency
of the overall verification process by allowing us to reduce the size of the output SMT file.
In particular, we can omit emitting assumptions and assertions if they would simplify to a
trivial (assert true).
4.6
Summary
In this chapter, we explored the design and implementation of the Lithium back end. We
revisited the original implementation that leveraged the Viper verification infrastructure,
identifying its limitations and the need for a more efficient and streamlined approach, and
introduced a new methodology inspired by Hoare­style verification. This methodology,
which involves a depth­first traversal of the VIR control­flow graph, allows us to system­
atically generate and verify proof obligations for each possible execution path of the pro­
gram. This approach ensures comprehensive coverage of the verification process.
We then delved into the details of the encoding process from VIR to SMT­LIB 2.6 scripts,
shedding light on the complex mechanisms that underpin the verification process. We
also introduced an optimization module, a component that improves the efficiency of the
verification process and aids in debugging of the emitted SMT code.
In conclusion, the Lithium back end offers a step forward in the ongoing effort to verify Rust
programs. By building upon the original implementation and introducing a new verification
methodology, it contributes to the evolving landscape of Rust program verification. The
detailed account of its implementation provides a basis for future refinements and offers
a starting point for further investigation into program verification.
50
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:59==
5
Evaluation
This chapter provides an empirical evaluation of Prusti’s Lithium back end, comparing it
against the previously implemented Viper back ends. In the initial section, we discuss
the extent of test coverage, highlighting areas where Lithium demonstrates proficiency
and those where improvement is necessary. This is followed by an exploration of several
performance case studies, which give a practical outlook on Lithium’s capabilities.
5.1
Test coverage
In this section, we present an analysis of the test coverage provided by the Lithium back
end in comparison to Silicon. A comprehensive test coverage is paramount in validating
the robustness and reliability of any software tool, including a verifier like Prusti. Through
these tests we seek to evaluate whether our new back end matches the capabilities of Sil­
icon. We have considered an expansive suite of tests, ranging from fundamental aspects
like basic syntax verification and overflow checks, to more complex scenarios involving
contract specifications, trait implementations, and advanced type models.
Our test suite is conceptually partitioned into three categories: UI, PASS, and FAIL. The
UI category focuses on ensuring the text written to the standard output (and standard
error) by the tool, does not change for specified examples, compared to pre­recorded
responses. This set of tests provides a crucial understanding of the consistency in error
reporting and message delivery between the two back ends. The PASS tests encompass
examples of Rust code that should be correctly verified as valid by Prusti, i.e. no verifica­
tion errors reported anywhere in the file. Finally, the FAIL category includes Rust source
code files known to produce verification errors, and Prusti should ideally pinpoint these
errors at the specified positions. We present the number of tests that have passed and
failed for each category in Table 5.1. Note that for the FAIL category the test is counted
as ”passed” if the verification fails.
A significant portion of this test suite is inherited from the ongoing development of the
Prusti codebase. This approach ensures that our evaluation is grounded in a well­established
and continuously evolving testing environment, enhancing the credibility of our results.
Out of the total tests, we have authored 9 in the PASS category and 11 in the FAIL cat­
egory over the course of the development of the Lithium back end, to assess its feature
coverage. The remaining tests are part of the Prusti project’s existing suite, which has
been developed and refined by numerous contributors over time. This ensures that our
evaluation is not only thorough but also unbiased and representative of real­world use
cases.
Category
Passed
Failed
Coverage
PASS
172
111
60.8%
FAIL
103
22
82,4%
UI
53
11
82.8%
Table 5.1: Test results for UI, PASS, and FAIL categories
5.1.1
PASS category
The experimental results from the PASS category yielded 172 tests passing and 111 fail­
ing, giving a 60.8% pass rate. Although this initial performance may appear to be unsat­
isfactory, there is a substantive reason for this outcome. The Lithium back end relies on
Shedding the Viper Skin
51
==PAGE:60==
the VIR­encoded Rust code, produced by the snapshot­based encoding implemented in
Prusti. Given the novelty of this encoding, it has not yet been thoroughly expanded to
support more complex Rust constructs.
These findings highlight the fact that a large portion of the encoding from Rust code to the
Viper Intermediate Representation (VIR) remains unimplemented. This is the primary fac­
tor behind the number of failed tests, as the absence of necessary encodings obstructs
comprehensive verification of Rust constructs. We attribute this limitation to the Prusti
maintainers’ focus on foundational features, which has led to a temporary underdevelop­
ment of more sophisticated snapshot­based encodings. Out of the failing tests, 69 are
due to panics in the encoding layer.
A non­exhaustive list of Rust language features that are not yet implemented in the Rust­
to­VIR encoding layer include:
1. bitwise operators for integer arithmetic
2. explicit casts, e.g. let x: i32 = 5_u32 as i32;
3. iterators
4. arrays, array indexing
5. Box<T> and reference­counting pointers (Rc<T>, Arc<T>).
6. closures
7. old­expressions in Prusti specifications
With the expansion of this encoding layer, we expect the robustness of the Lithium back
end to substantially improve. Manual inspection reveals the other 42 tests fail for a variety
of reasons, but what all have in common is using some high­level feature for which the
encoding may be buggy. Some test cases that use slices, arrays, closures, generics etc.
may not panic immediately, but rather be partially and/or incorrectly embedded to VIR.
For this reason, it is unclear which features of Rust are fully supported, and achieving full
feature­parity with the Viper­based back ends will require a case­by­case analysis.
5.1.2
FAIL category
As seen in Table 5.1, the FAIL category exhibits a coverage of 82,4%, meaning that many
tests yielded the expected result: a failure in verification. We do not include tests that failed
verification due to a panic (unimplemented feature). Despite our anticipation of failure, 22
tests did not lead to any reported errors. We took a closer look at these exceptions to
comprehend the reason behind this unexpected behavior:
1. One test had code that is actually expected to verify correctly, which it does under
Lithium, but fails when examined by Silicon. This disparity is due to an implementa­
tion detail in how loop invariants are encoded to Viper in the heap­based encoding,
which prevents passing constants to functions inside a loop. This bizarre restriction
is not enforced in Lithium.
2. Three test cases unexpectedly pass due to the utilization of old­expressions in speci­
fications. There is a known bug in the snapshot­based encoding for old­expressions,
causing a state of unsoundness where everything verifies, even when it shouldn’t.
3. The remaining test cases revolve around language features or specifications with
experimental support in Prusti, including pledges [46] and generics. Even though
52
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:61==
support for such features can be considered tentative, it’s worth noting that their suc­
cessful implementation is essential to match the feature set of heap­based encoding
and Silicon.
The interpretation of the FAIL category results underscores the need for further develop­
ment and refinement in Prusti. In particular, it points towards areas requiring attention,
such as fixing known bugs, enhancing the snapshot­based encoding, and implementing
experimental language features. Doing so will aid in raising the verification success rate,
thereby improving the overall robustness and reliability of the verifier.
5.1.3
UI category
The UI category tests focus on ensuring that the text written to the standard output (and
standard error) by Prusti does not change for specified examples when compared to pre­
recorded responses. From the results, it can be observed that most of the UI tests passed
successfully, indicating a high degree of consistency in error reporting and message de­
livery between the Lithium and Silicon back ends. However, a few tests fail, suggesting
discrepancies between the current output and the expected responses.
Ignoring tests that fail due to unsupported features mentioned in subsection 5.1.1, in all
of the other failing cases the reported error still points to the correct statement that is
the reason for failure, e.g. an assert! macro, or a post­condition annotation. It is the
concrete sub­expressions that are sometimes different to what Silicon would report. For
example, in the test case ui/calls.rs, shown in Listing 22, our back end reports that
the expression in the post­condition might be false by highlighting the entire expression.
Silicon, on the other hand, would only highlight the line containing result == 3. It would
be worthwhile to adjust the error reporting in Lithium to support such fine­grained error
reporting. This can likely be achieved by keeping track of sub­expression positions while
propagating constants in the optimization module.
5.2
Performance case studies
In this section, we will conduct a performance analysis by evaluating several Rust source
files. The hyperfine command­line benchmarking tool [47] is employed for this analysis,
allowing us to reliably measure the time consumed by each execution. We will focus our
evaluation on three combinations of back ends:
• Lithium paired with Z3
• Lithium paired with CVC5
• The default Viper back end with Silicon as the Viper verifier
Through this comparison, our aim is to assess the the overall efficiency of the Lithium back
end in various scenarios, as well as perhaps find some cases where one SMT solver might
be better than the other when applied to the program verification task.
5.2.1
Test setup and methodology
The hyperfine program executes a provided command repeatedly, measuring execution
times and calculating mean and standard deviation of the readings. The number of ex­
ecutions varies between 10 and 30, and the tool will adjust that number based on how
much time it takes to complete a single run. To reduce the risk of outliers on first access
to tested files due to disk caching, we can use the --warmup 1 parameter to always run
the verifier once before commencing a benchmark.
For all testing and evaluation, we used the following versions of software:
Shedding the Viper Skin
53
==PAGE:62==
1. CVC5 version 1.0.4
2. Z3 version 4.8.7
3. Hyperfine version 1.17.0
4. Release build of Prusti
The tests were conducted using a MacBook Pro (Model MacBookPro18,3) equipped with
an Apple M1 Pro CPU. The tests were performed on a macOS 13.4 (build 22F66) oper­
ating system with kernel version 22.5.0. The system demonstrated stable performance
throughout the testing phase, ensuring reliable execution of the code.
The short guide to the commands used to recreate the benchmarks by running hyperfine
on our test cases are detailed below:
Viper (Silicon)
Initiate the prusti-server without caching enabled, otherwise every verification attempt
after the first would just return the cached result immediately:
$ PRUSTI_ENABLE_CACHE=false target/release/prusti-server
In a separate terminal, invoke hyperfine:
$ hyperfine --warmup=1 'target/release/prusti-rustc \
--edition=2021\
FILE.rs\
-Pcheck_overflows=false\
-Pviper_backend=Silicon\
-Pserver_address=localhost:PORT'
Lithium + Z3
Invoke hyperfine with the Lithium back end and Z3 (selected by default):
$ hyperfine --warmup=1 'target/release/prusti-rustc \
--edition=2021\
FILE.rs\
-Pcheck_overflows=false\
-Pviper_backend=Lithium'
Lithium + CVC5
Invoke hyperfine with Lithium and select CVC5 via an environmental variable (the name
Z3_EXE was kept for backwards­compatibility):
$ Z3_EXE=$(which cvc5) hyperfine --warmup=1 \
'target/release/prusti-rustc \
--edition=2021\
FILE.rs\
-Pcheck_overflows=false\
-Pviper_backend=Lithium'
5.2.2
Case studies
The performance characteristics of different back ends are illustrated through six selected
Rust source code examples, included in Appendix A, which can be described as follows:
Trivial: This file, encompassing a main function with a single assert!(true) statement,
serves as a minimal example to measure the constant overhead associated with a
verification task.
54
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:63==
While: This example features a function with a while loop that includes a body invariant.
The function performs a simple count up to a constant N from an integer argument
i ≤N, providing a non­trivial scenario for evaluation.
Ackermann: The Ackermann function [48] is implemented three times in this file, each one equiv­
alent to the others. One version is a #[pure] function, while the others are annotated
with specifications asserting their equivalence to the pure implementation.
Floating: This file includes definitions for four functions that verify whether a 32/64­bit floating­
point number is infinite/NaN. It also encompasses assertions that check edge­cases
for floating­point numbers’ behavior, applicable to both concrete values and quanti­
fied arbitrary f32 and f64 variables. With a total of 35 assertions dealing solely with
floating­point arithmetic, this test case seeks to assess the performance of floating­
point verification via bit­vector encoding, a common feature across all back ends.
Euclid: This file executes the well­known Euclidean algorithm for calculating the greatest
common divisor (gcd) of two positive integers. The gcd function implements the
algorithm recursively and is accompanied by several lemmas that provide auxiliary
logic for the algorithm’s correctness. The function itself is annotated with a post­
condition asserting that the returned value divides both arguments, and is at least
as large as any other divisor of the arguments. The main function, euclid, uses
loop invariants enforcing the preservation of the gcd over iterations. This test case is
instrumental in gauging the performance of back ends dealing with loops, recursion,
and quantified specifications.
Bisect: This file presents a binary search algorithm on a discretized monotonically increas­
ing function, with an intent to locate the argument x such that f(x) == target. The
specifics of the function, represented with a struct, are abstracted away. The main
routine bisect initiates binary search, dividing the domain [low, high) in half (mid =
(low + high) / 2) at each iteration and adjusting the search boundaries accord­
ing to the value of the function at mid. The purpose of this test case is to expose the
known arithmetic overflow bug that occurs when calculating the midpoint of a large
range, a bug reminiscent of a historic one in Java’s standard library [49].
The results are presented in table Table 5.2.
Test case
Lithium Z3
Lithium CVC5
Silicon
Trivial
102.5 ms ± 1.5 ms
96.7 ms ± 1.5 ms
439.5 ms ± 2.8 ms
While
140.5 ms ± 1.3 ms
143.3 ms ± 1.4 ms
944.4 ms ± 7.5 ms
Ackermann
246.6 ms ± 4.4 ms
403.7 ms ± 6.8 ms
2.270 s ± 0.024 s
Euclid
timeout
910.0 ms ± 17.5 ms
9.571 s ± 5.945 s
Floating
14.391 s ± 0.106 s
2.157 s ± 0.056 s
12.031 s ± 0.316 s
Bisect
187.0 ms ± 4.3 ms
10.332 s ± 0.016 s
1.408 s ± 0.085 s
Table 5.2: Benchmark results for selected case studies
Analyzing the benchmark results, it is evident that the performance of the back ends varies
considerably depending on the specific test case. This illustrates the fact that different
back ends may excel in handling specific computational scenarios while potentially lagging
in others.
For example, both Lithium back ends (Z3 and CVC5) outperform Silicon in handling the
’Trivial’ and ’While’ scenarios, indicating their better efficiency in dealing with simple op­
erations and loop structures. The native back end is about 4x faster than the one based
Shedding the Viper Skin
55
==PAGE:64==
on Viper in the ’Trivial’ scenario, showing the inherent advantage of writing the verifier in
Rust – lower overhead due to language choice. In the ’While’ example, both modes are
almost an order of magnitude faster than Silicon.
Lithium Z3 outperforms Lithium CVC5 in the ’Ackermann’ test case, taking approximately
39% less time to perform the verification. While the exact internal workings of each solver
differ and contribute to this discrepancy, it’s possible that Lithium Z3’s optimization mech­
anisms, inference rules, or heuristics are better suited for handling recursion, allowing it
to process and prove the equivalency between the three implementations of the Acker­
mann function more efficiently. This suggests that Lithium Z3 could be more favorable
when verifying programs with heavy use of recursion and function equivalency, at least
under conditions similar to those of the ’Ackermann’ test case. On the other hand, both
Lithium Z3 and Lithium CVC5 significantly outperform Silicon, again by almost an order
of magnitude.
It’s noteworthy that Lithium with Z3 does not produce a result for the ’Euclid’ case. This
is due to a timeout – the verification of this example does not finish in the default timeout
window and is therefore declared a verification failure. There are other examples of code
that times out under one SMT solver, but does not for the other. To give an opposing
example, an assertion of the form assert!(m * c - m * d == m * (c - d)); for any
32­bit signed integers x, m, d times out when using CVC5, but verifies with Z3. As such,
we cannot draw any conclusions from ’Euclid’ except that Lithium with CVC5 appears an
order of magnitude faster than Silicon when handling recursive algorithms and quantified
specifications.
When it comes to the ’Floating’ test case, Lithium with CVC5 manages to significantly
outperform the other two, suggesting a more optimized approach to dealing with floating­
point arithmetic when opting for the CVC5 SMT solver. It’s worth noting that Z3 and CVC5
are completely different SMT solvers with their own unique implementation details and
optimization strategies. Therefore, even though they receive the same input, the internal
strategies used to process and solve the problems may differ significantly. In the case of
the ’Floating’ test case, the Viper back end actually fails to verify two of the assertions,
denoted in Listing 23. Curiously, their 32­bit equivalents verify just fine. This suggests
an implementation bug in the Viper­based back end. Performance­wise, both the original
test case and one where the failing assertions were commented out verify in virtually the
same amount of time (12.068 s ± 0.294 s vs. 12.031 s ± 0.316 s).
In the ’Bisect’ test case, the performance of the back ends varies most dramatically. Here,
Lithium Z3 shows a considerably shorter execution time compared to the other two. In
particular, the majority of the 10 seconds CVC5 takes to verify this test case is spent on
asserting that there is no overflow when calculating the midpoint of the binary search.
This corresponds to the :tlimit-per configuration parameter set in the SMT preamble
for CVC5 – 10 second timeout on each assertion. CVC5 cannot prove or disprove the as­
sertion within the time limit, and thus the result is unknown. In the current implementation,
however, the unknown results are treated the same as sat, meaning that an assertion has
failed. This is why the Lithium back end takes almost exactly 10 seconds to verify this file.
Changing the parameter changes the time it takes to report failure at this assertion.
5.2.3
Conclusion
In conclusion, the optimal choice of back end and SMT solver for Prusti depends on the
specifics of the code being verified. Our results suggest that, in the current state of the
software, Lithium with Z3 is the most well­rounded choice, as it outperforms or equals the
alternatives in most test cases when it comes to speed of verification. However, it’s crucial
56
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:65==
to consider each particular use case, as different code constructs and specifications can
favor different solvers. Moreover, we must also consider that most of the advanced Rust
features implemented by Silicon are not yet supported by Lithium due to missing snapshot­
based encoding for them, as evident from section 5.1. Therefore, Silicon remains the
safest choice as long as these features are unimplemented. For simpler Rust code that
does not use such features, Lithium with Z3 would be the fastest, with the possibility to
switch to CVC5 for tasks regarding floating­point arithmetic. With both being faster by an
order of magnitude than Silicon, a hybrid approach where the Prusti tool allows for quick
switching between SMT solvers and/or using both at the same time, might be a good
direction for future work.
However, these insights should be further verified with more comprehensive benchmarks,
considering a wider array of test scenarios and involving a larger dataset. The back ends’
performance should also be evaluated in relation to their cost­effectiveness, maintenance
requirements, and compatibility with different hardware and software environments.
Shedding the Viper Skin
57
==PAGE:66==
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
#[ensures(
4
5
true && (true ==>
6
7
result == 3
// test that we get correct span information
8
)
9
10
&& (true || false)
11
12
)
13
14
]
15
fn test_max3() -> i32 {
16
15
17
}
1
error: [Prusti: verification error] postcondition might not hold.
2
--> src/main.rs:5:5
3
|
4
5
| /
true && (true ==>
5
6
| |
6
7
| |
result == 3
// test that we get correct span information
7
8
| |
)
8
9
| |
9
10 | |
&& (true || false)
10
| |______________________^
11
|
12
note: the error originates here
13
--> src/main.rs:15:1
14
|
15
15 | / fn test_max3() -> i32 {
16
16 | |
15
17
17 | | }
18
| |_^
Listing 22: An example of Rust code for which the expression span reported by Lithium
is sub­optimal
58
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:67==
1
#[pure]
2
#[terminates]
3
fn is_infinite_64(f: f64) -> bool {
4
f == f64::INFINITY || f == f64::NEG_INFINITY
5
}
6
7
fn test_inf_32_is_inf() {
8
let a = 1.0f32 / 0.0f32;
9
assert!(is_infinite_32(a)); // verifies
10
}
11
12
fn test_inf_64_is_inf() {
13
let a = 1.0f64 / 0.0f64;
14
assert!(is_infinite_64(a)); // fails with Viper
15
}
16
17
fn test_neg_inf_32_is_inf() {
18
let a = -1.0f32 / 0.0f32;
19
assert!(is_infinite_32(a)); // verifies
20
}
21
22
fn test_neg_inf_64_is_inf() {
23
let a = -1.0f64 / 0.0f64;
24
assert!(is_infinite_64(a)); // fails with Viper
25
}
Listing 23: Failing assertions
Shedding the Viper Skin
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:69==
6
Conclusion
In this final chapter, we reflect on the outcome of this thesis, summarizing the key contri­
butions and achievements in relation to the core goals outlined in the introductory chapter.
We revisit each goal, discussing how it was addressed and the impact it had on the overall
project. Following this, we acknowledge the limitations of the current work and propose
potential directions for future work. This chapter serves to encapsulate the essence of
this thesis, providing an overview of what has been accomplished and what lies ahead in
the quest for efficient and reliable verification of Rust programs.
6.1
Summary of contributions
This thesis has made several contributions towards the goal of improving the efficiency of
the Prusti verifier for Rust programs. The primary contribution is the development of a new
back end, Lithium, which directly leverages SMT solvers, bypassing the need for the Viper
verification infrastructure (C5). This approach simplifies the verification pipeline, reduces
potential translation errors, and enhances the reliability of the verification process.
In the process of achieving this, we conducted a review of existing work on verification
of Rust programs (C1), which helped assess the current state of the art and provided a
baseline for our work. We also identified several case studies for evaluation (C2), which
were instrumental in demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed back end.
A significant part of this work involved justifying the soundness of omitting permission
reasoning (C3). We showed that the analysis performed by the Rust compiler, particularly
the borrow checker, is sufficient to ensure memory safety of programs passed to Prusti.
This allowed us to focus on the verification of functional correctness of Rust functions.
We designed a verification methodology for a safe fragment of Rust code (C4). This
methodology, rooted in Hoare­style verification, leverages the control­flow graph (CFGs)
representation of Rust procedures. The verifier traverses the CFG to generate verification
conditions which are then translated to SMT­LIB commands. Assumptions along each
path form the background predicate for the verified assertions. This approach provides a
sound basis for the Lithium back end.
To improve the efficiency of the verification process, we implemented an optimization
module (C6) that simplifies the emitted assumptions and assertions based on Boolean
logic identities and tautologies. This module reduces the size of the output SMT file,
thereby improving the performance of the verification process, as well as readability and
ease of debugging of emitted SMT scripts.
Finally, we conducted an extensive evaluation of the Lithium back end (C7), demonstrating
its proficiency in handling a wide range of test cases, hindered only by the state of the
snapshot­based encoding we base our work on. The results of this evaluation provide a
robust foundation for future enhancements to the Lithium back end.
6.2
Limitations and future work
Despite the advancements made in this work, there are several limitations that present
opportunities for future development:
Support for complex Rust features: One of the primary limitations is the lack of support
for more complex Rust features, such as closures and arrays, in the snapshot­based en­
Shedding the Viper Skin
61
==PAGE:70==
coding layer. Future work should focus on implementing the missing encodings, thereby
broadening the scope of Rust programs that can be verified using Lithium.
Integration with Other SMT Solvers: This thesis focused on the use of Z3 and CVC5
as the SMT solvers. However, there are many other SMT solvers available, each with its
own strengths and weaknesses. The adoption of the SMT­LIB standard by Lithium makes
adding support for other solvers trivial, and future work could explore such integrations
to further expand its applicability and performance. One could even consider a heuristic
engine for choosing the best SMT solver available for a given verification task, based on
the input program, e.g. opting for CVC5 for programs with lots of floating­point arithmetic.
Formal Verification of Lithium: While this thesis has shown that Lithium is effective in
verifying a wide range of test cases, a formal proof of its correctness has not been con­
ducted. Future work could focus on formally verifying the soundness of the methodology
behind Lithium, providing stronger guarantees about its reliability.
Support for unsafe code: Currently, Lithium does not support the verification of unsafe
Rust code. Given that unsafe code is a critical part of many Rust programs, future work
could explore ways to extend the verifier to handle unsafe code blocks.
62
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Vytautas Astrauskas et al. “The Prusti Project: Formal Verification for Rust”. In:
NFM. Vol. 13260. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2022, pp. 88–108.
[2]
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL). The Scala Programming Lan­
guage. Accessed: 2023­06­23. URL: https://www.scala-lang.org/.
[3]
Peter Müller, Malte Schwerhoff, and Alexander J. Summers. “Viper: A Verification In­
frastructure for Permission­Based Reasoning”. In: VMCAI. Vol. 9583. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 2016, pp. 41–62.
[4]
Ralf Jung et al. “RustBelt: securing the foundations of the rust programming lan­
guage”. In: Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2.POPL (2018), 66:1–66:34.
[5]
Luca Cardelli. “Type Systems”. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 28.1 (1996), pp. 263–264.
[6]
Nico Lehmann et al. “Flux: Liquid Types for Rust”. In: CoRR abs/2207.04034 (2022).
[7]
Uday P. Khedker, Amitabha Sanyal, and Bageshri Sathe. Data Flow Analysis ­ The­
ory and Practice. CRC Press, 2009.
[8]
Mohan Cui et al. “SafeDrop: Detecting Memory Deallocation Bugs of Rust Programs
via Static Data­Flow Analysis”. In: CoRR abs/2103.15420 (2021).
[9]
Edmund M. Clarke et al. Model checking, 2nd Edition. MIT Press, 2018.
[10]
Alexa VanHattum et al. “Verifying Dynamic Trait Objects in Rust”. In: ICSE (SEIP).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 321–330.
[11]
John Toman, Stuart Pernsteiner, and Emina Torlak. “Crust: A Bounded Verifier for
Rust (N)”. In: ASE. IEEE Computer Society, 2015, pp. 75–80.
[12]
Patrick Cousot. “Formal Verification by Abstract Interpretation”. In: NASA Formal
Methods. Vol. 7226. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2012, pp. 3–7.
[13]
Abhiram Balasubramanian et al. “System Programming in Rust: Beyond Safety”.
In: ACM SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 51.1 (2017), pp. 94–99.
[14]
Jean­Christophe Filliâtre. “Deductive software verification”. In: Int. J. Softw. Tools
Technol. Transf. 13.5 (2011), pp. 397–403.
[15]
Xavier Denis, Jacques­Henri Jourdan, and Claude Marché. “Creusot: A Foundry for
the Deductive Verification of Rust Programs”. In: ICFEM. Vol. 13478. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 2022, pp. 90–105.
[16]
Son Ho and Jonathan Protzenko. “Aeneas: Rust verification by functional transla­
tion”. In: Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 6.ICFP (2022), pp. 711–741.
[17]
Yusuke Matsushita, Takeshi Tsukada, and Naoki Kobayashi. “RustHorn: CHC­based
Verification for Rust Programs”. In: ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 43.4 (2021),
15:1–15:54.
[18]
C. A. R. Hoare. “An Axiomatic Basis for Computer Programming”. In: Commun.
ACM 12.10 (1969), pp. 576–580.
[19]
John Boyland. “Checking Interference with Fractional Permissions”. In: SAS. Vol. 2694.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2003, pp. 55–72.
[20]
K. Rustan M. Leino. “This Is Boogie 2”. Accessed: 2023­06­23. June 2008. URL:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/this-is-boogie-2-2/.
[21]
Malte Schwerhoff. “Advancing Automated, Permission­Based Program Verification
Using Symbolic Execution”. PhD thesis. ETH Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland, 2016.
[22]
FMT ­ University of Twente. The VerCors Verifier. Accessed: 2023­05­28. URL:
https://vercors.ewi.utwente.nl/publications/.
[23]
Viper Project. chalice2silver. Accessed: 2023­05­28. 2014. URL: https://github.
com/viperproject/chalice2silver.
Shedding the Viper Skin
63
==PAGE:72==
[24]
Felix A. Wolf et al. “Gobra: Modular Specification and Verification of Go Programs”.
In: CAV (1). Vol. 12759. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2021, pp. 367–
379.
[25]
Marco Eilers and Peter Müller. “Nagini: A Static Verifier for Python”. In: CAV (1).
Vol. 10981. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2018, pp. 596–603.
[26]
Leonardo Mendonça de Moura and Nikolaj S. Bjørner. “Satisfiability Modulo The­
ories: An Appetizer”. In: SBMF. Vol. 5902. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, 2009, pp. 23–36.
[27]
Leonardo Mendonça de Moura and Nikolaj S. Bjørner. “Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver”.
In: TACAS. Vol. 4963. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2008, pp. 337–
340.
[28]
Haniel Barbosa et al. “cvc5: A Versatile and Industrial­Strength SMT Solver”. In:
TACAS (1). Vol. 13243. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2022, pp. 415–
442.
[29]
Stanford University and University of Iowa. Projects Using CVC5. Accessed: 2023­
06­23. URL: https://cvc5.github.io/third-party-applications.html.
[30]
Michael Barnett et al. “Boogie: A Modular Reusable Verifier for Object­Oriented Pro­
grams”. In: FMCO. Vol. 4111. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2005,
pp. 364–387.
[31]
K. Rustan M. Leino and Peter Müller. “A Basis for Verifying Multi­threaded Pro­
grams”. In: ESOP. Vol. 5502. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2009,
pp. 378–393.
[32]
K. Rustan M. Leino. “Dafny: An Automatic Program Verifier for Functional Correct­
ness”. In: LPAR (Dakar). Vol. 6355. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer,
2010, pp. 348–370.
[33]
Jan Smans, Bart Jacobs, and Frank Piessens. “Implicit Dynamic Frames: Combin­
ing Dynamic Frames and Separation Logic”. In: ECOOP. Vol. 5653. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 2009, pp. 148–172.
[34]
Alexander J. Summers and Sophia Drossopoulou. “A Formal Semantics for Isore­
cursive and Equirecursive State Abstractions”. In: ECOOP. Vol. 7920. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 2013, pp. 129–153.
[35]
Bart Jacobs et al. “VeriFast: A Powerful, Sound, Predictable, Fast Verifier for C and
Java”. In: NASA Formal Methods. Vol. 6617. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, 2011, pp. 41–55.
[36]
Stefan Heule et al. “Verification Condition Generation for Permission Logics with Ab­
stract Predicates and Abstraction Functions”. In: ECOOP. Vol. 7920. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 2013, pp. 451–476.
[37]
Samin S. Ishtiaq and Peter W. O’Hearn. “BI as an Assertion Language for Mutable
Data Structures”. In: POPL. ACM, 2001, pp. 14–26.
[38]
Peter W. O’Hearn. “Separation logic”. In: Commun. ACM 62.2 (2019), pp. 86–95.
[39]
Rust Programming Language. Accessed: 2023­06­23. URL: https : / / www . rust -
lang.org.
[40]
John Hodge. Mutabah’s Rust Compiler. Accessed: 2023­06­23. URL: https://github.
com/thepowersgang/mrustc.
[41]
Logic and Aarhus University Semantics Group Computer Science. Iris Project. Ac­
cessed: 2023­05­12. URL: https://iris-project.org.
[42]
Ralf Jung. MutexGuard<Cell<i32>> must not be Sync. Accessed: 2023­05­12. URL:
https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/41622.
[43]
David J. Pearce. “A Lightweight Formalism for Reference Lifetimes and Borrowing
in Rust”. In: ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 43.1 (2021), 3:1–3:73.
64
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:73==
[44]
Eric C. Reed. Patina: A Formalization of the Rust Programming Language. Tech.
Rep. Accessed: 2023­06­23. University of Washington, 2015. URL: https://dada.
cs.washington.edu/research/tr/2015/03/UW-CSE-15-03-02.pdf.
[45]
Clark Barrett, Pascal Fontaine, and Cesare Tinelli. The SMT­LIB Standard: Version
2.6. Tech. rep. Available at www.SMT-LIB.org. Department of Computer Science,
The University of Iowa, 2017.
[46]
Prusti Development Team. Pledges ­ Prusti User Guide. Accessed: 2023­06­19.
2023. URL: https://viperproject.github.io/prusti-dev/user-guide/verify/pledge.html.
[47]
David Peter. Hyperfine: A Command­line Benchmarking Tool. Accessed: 2023­06­
19. 2023. URL: https://github.com/sharkdp/hyperfine.
[48]
Wilhelm Ackermann. “Zum hilbertschen aufbau der reellen zahlen”. In: Mathema­
tische Annalen 99.1 (1928), pp. 118–133.
[49]
Joshua Bloch. Extra, Extra ­ Read All About It: Nearly All Binary Searches and
Mergesorts are Broken. Accessed: 2023­06­23. 2006. URL: https://ai.googleblog.
com/2006/06/extra-extra-read-all-about-it-nearly.html.
Shedding the Viper Skin
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:75==
A
Source code of case studies for
performance evaluation
1
fn main() {
2
assert!(true);
3
}
Listing A.1: Trivial
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
const N: i32 = 10;
4
5
#[requires(i <= N)]
6
#[ensures(result == N)]
7
fn test(i: i32) -> i32 {
8
let mut ret = i;
9
while ret < N {
10
body_invariant!(ret < N);
11
ret += 1;
12
}
13
ret
14
}
15
16
fn main() {
17
assert!(test(3) == N);
18
}
Listing A.2: While
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
#[pure]
4
#[terminates(trusted)]
5
#[requires(0 <= m && 0 <= n)]
6
#[ensures(result >= 0)]
7
fn ack_pure(m: i64, n: i64) -> i64 {
8
if m == 0 {
9
n + 1
10
} else if n == 0 {
11
ack_pure(m - 1, 1)
12
} else {
13
ack_pure(m - 1, ack_pure(m, n - 1))
14
}
15
}
16
17
#[requires(0 <= m && 0 <= n)]
18
#[ensures(result == ack_pure(m, n))]
19
#[ensures(result >= 0)]
20
fn ack1(m: i64, n: i64) -> i64 {
21
if m == 0 {
22
n + 1
23
} else if n == 0 {
24
ack1(m - 1, 1)
25
} else {
26
ack1(m - 1, ack1(m, n - 1))
27
}
28
}
Shedding the Viper Skin
67
==PAGE:76==
29
30
#[requires(0 <= m && 0 <= n)]
31
#[ensures(result == ack_pure(m, n))]
32
#[ensures(result >= 0)]
33
fn ack2(m: i64, n: i64) -> i64 {
34
match (m, n) {
35
(0, n) => n + 1,
36
(m, 0) => ack2(m - 1, 1),
37
(m, n) => ack2(m - 1, ack2(m, n - 1)),
38
}
39
}
40
41
#[trusted]
42
fn print_i64(a: i64) {
43
println!("{}", a); // 125
44
}
45
46
fn main() {
47
let a1 = ack1(3, 4);
48
let a2 = ack2(3, 4);
49
assert!(a1 == a2);
50
print_i64(a1);
51
}
Listing A.3: Ackermann
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
#[pure]
4
#[terminates]
5
fn is_nan_32(f: f32) -> bool {
6
f != f
7
}
8
9
#[pure]
10
#[terminates]
11
fn is_nan_64(f: f64) -> bool {
12
f != f
13
}
14
15
#[pure]
16
#[terminates]
17
fn is_infinite_32(f: f32) -> bool {
18
f == f32::INFINITY || f == f32::NEG_INFINITY
19
}
20
21
#[pure]
22
#[terminates]
23
fn is_infinite_64(f: f64) -> bool {
24
f == f64::INFINITY || f == f64::NEG_INFINITY
25
}
26
27
fn test_nan_32_is_nan() {
28
let a = 0.0f32 / 0.0f32;
29
assert!(is_nan_32(a));
30
}
31
32
fn test_nan_32_is_inf() {
33
let a = 0.0f32 / 0.0f32;
34
assert!(!is_infinite_32(a));
35
}
36
68
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:77==
37
fn test_nan_64_is_nan() {
38
let a = 0.0f64 / 0.0f64;
39
assert!(is_nan_64(a));
40
}
41
42
fn test_nan_64_is_inf() {
43
let a = 0.0f64 / 0.0f64;
44
assert!(!is_infinite_64(a));
45
}
46
47
fn test_inf_32_is_inf() {
48
let a = 1.0f32 / 0.0f32;
49
assert!(is_infinite_32(a));
50
}
51
52
fn test_inf_32_is_nan() {
53
let a = 1.0f32 / 0.0f32;
54
assert!(!is_nan_32(a));
55
}
56
57
fn test_inf_64_is_inf() {
58
let a = 1.0f64 / 0.0f64;
59
assert!(is_infinite_64(a));
60
}
61
62
fn test_inf_64_is_nan() {
63
let a = 1.0f64 / 0.0f64;
64
assert!(!is_nan_64(a));
65
}
66
67
fn test_neg_inf_32_is_inf() {
68
let a = -1.0f32 / 0.0f32;
69
assert!(is_infinite_32(a));
70
}
71
72
fn test_neg_inf_32_is_nan() {
73
let a = -1.0f32 / 0.0f32;
74
assert!(!is_nan_32(a));
75
}
76
77
fn test_neg_inf_64_is_inf() {
78
let a = -1.0f64 / 0.0f64;
79
assert!(is_infinite_64(a));
80
}
81
82
fn test_neg_inf_64_is_nan() {
83
let a = -1.0f64 / 0.0f64;
84
assert!(!is_nan_64(a));
85
}
86
87
// THEORY OF INFINITY
88
89
#[requires(is_nan_32(f))]
90
#[ensures(!is_infinite_32(f))]
91
fn axiom1(f: f32) {}
92
93
#[requires(is_infinite_32(f))]
94
#[ensures(!is_nan_32(f))]
95
fn axiom2(f: f32) {}
96
97
#[requires(is_infinite_32(f))]
98
#[ensures(is_infinite_32(f + 1_f32))]
Shedding the Viper Skin
69
==PAGE:78==
99
fn axiom3(f: f32) {}
100
101
#[requires(is_infinite_32(f))]
102
#[ensures(is_infinite_32(f - 1_f32))]
103
fn axiom4(f: f32) {}
104
105
#[requires(is_infinite_32(f))]
106
#[ensures(is_infinite_32(f * 2_f32))]
107
fn axiom5(f: f32) {}
108
109
#[requires(is_infinite_32(f))]
110
#[ensures(is_infinite_32(f / 2_f32))]
111
fn axiom6(f: f32) {}
112
113
// THEORY OF NAN
114
115
#[requires(is_infinite_32(f))]
116
#[ensures(!is_nan_32(f))]
117
fn axiom7(f: f32) {}
118
119
#[requires(is_nan_32(f))]
120
#[ensures(is_nan_32(f + 1_f32))]
121
fn axiom8(f: f32) {}
122
123
#[requires(is_nan_32(f))]
124
#[ensures(is_nan_32(f - 1_f32))]
125
fn axiom9(f: f32) {}
126
127
#[requires(is_nan_32(f))]
128
#[ensures(is_nan_32(f * 2_f32))]
129
fn axiom10(f: f32) {}
130
131
#[requires(is_nan_32(f))]
132
#[ensures(is_nan_32(f / 2_f32))]
133
fn axiom11(f: f32) {}
134
135
#[ensures(is_nan_32(f32::NAN))]
136
fn axiom12() {}
137
138
fn main() {}
Listing A.4: Floating
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
macro_rules! divides_prop {
4
($x:expr, $y:expr, $z:expr) => {
5
$z >= 0 && $x * $z == $y
6
};
7
}
8
9
#[pure]
10
#[terminates]
11
#[trusted]
12
#[requires(x > 0 && y > 0)]
13
#[ensures(x <= y)]
14
fn divides(x: i32, y: i32) -> bool {
15
unimplemented!()
16
}
17
18
#[pure]
19
#[terminates]
70
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:79==
20
#[trusted]
21
#[requires(x > 0 && y > 0)]
22
#[ensures(result >= 1)]
23
#[ensures(divides(result, x))]
24
#[ensures(divides(result, y))]
25
#[ensures(forall(|z: i32| z >= 1 && divides(z, x) && divides(z, y) ==> z <= result))]
26
fn gcd(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
27
if x > y {
28
gcd(x - y, y)
29
} else if x < y {
30
gcd(x, y - x)
31
} else {
32
x
33
}
34
}
35
36
#[trusted]
37
#[requires(x > 0 && y > 0)]
38
#[requires(divides_prop!(x, y, z))]
39
#[ensures(divides(x, y))]
40
fn lemma_show_divides(x: i32, y: i32, z: i32) {}
41
42
#[trusted]
43
#[requires(x > 0 && y > 0)]
44
#[requires(divides(x, y))]
45
#[ensures(divides_prop!(x, y, result))]
46
fn lemma_divides(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
47
unimplemented!()
48
}
49
50
#[requires(x > 0 && y > 0)]
51
#[ensures(gcd(x + y, y) == gcd(x, y))]
52
fn lemma_gcd(x: i32, y: i32) {
53
lemma_gcd_lower(x, y);
54
lemma_gcd_upper(x, y);
55
}
56
57
#[requires(x > 0 && y > 0)]
58
#[ensures(gcd(x + y, y) >= gcd(x, y))]
59
fn lemma_gcd_upper(x: i32, y: i32) {
60
let z: i32 = x + y;
61
let m: i32 = gcd(z, y);
62
let n: i32 = gcd(y, x);
63
64
let c: i32 = lemma_divides(n, y);
65
let d: i32 = lemma_divides(n, x);
66
67
lemma_show_divides(n, z, c + d);
68
}
69
70
#[requires(x > 0 && y > 0)]
71
#[ensures(gcd(x + y, y) <= gcd(x, y))]
72
fn lemma_gcd_lower(x: i32, y: i32) {
73
let z: i32 = x + y;
74
let m: i32 = gcd(z, y);
75
76
let c: i32 = lemma_divides(m, z);
77
let d: i32 = lemma_divides(m, y);
78
79
lemma_show_divides(m, x, c - d);
80
}
81
Shedding the Viper Skin
71
==PAGE:80==
82
#[requires(x > 0)]
83
#[ensures(gcd(x, x) == x)]
84
fn lemma_gcd_idempotent(x: i32) {
85
lemma_show_divides(x, x, 1);
86
}
87
88
#[requires(n > 0 && m > 0)]
89
#[ensures(result == gcd(n, m))]
90
fn euclid(n: i32, m: i32) -> i32 {
91
let mut a: i32 = n;
92
let mut b: i32 = m;
93
94
while a != b {
95
body_invariant!(a > 0 && b > 0);
96
body_invariant!(gcd(a, b) == gcd(n, m));
97
98
if a > b {
99
a -= b;
100
lemma_gcd(a, b);
101
} else {
102
b -= a;
103
lemma_gcd(b, a);
104
}
105
}
106
107
lemma_gcd_idempotent(a);
108
109
a
110
}
111
112
fn main() {}
Listing A.5: Euclid
1
use prusti_contracts::*;
2
3
/// A monotonically increasing discrete function, with domain [0, domain_size)
4
struct Function;
5
6
impl Function {
7
#[pure]
8
#[trusted] // abstract, actual implementation doesn't matter
9
fn domain_size(&self) -> usize {
10
42
11
}
12
13
#[pure]
14
#[trusted]
15
#[requires(x < self.domain_size())]
16
fn eval(&self, x: usize) -> i32 {
17
x as i32
18
}
19
}
20
21
/// Find the `x` s.t. `f(x) == target`
22
#[ensures(if let Some(x) = result { f.eval(x) == target } else { true })]
23
fn bisect(f: &Function, target: i32) -> Option<usize> {
24
let mut low = 0;
25
let mut high = f.domain_size();
26
assert!(high == f.domain_size());
27
while low < high {
28
body_invariant!(low < high && high <= f.domain_size());
72
Shedding the Viper Skin
==PAGE:81==
29
let mid = (low + high) / 2; //~ ERROR attempt to add with overflow
30
let mid_val = f.eval(mid);
31
if mid_val < target {
32
low = mid + 1;
33
} else if mid_val > target {
34
high = mid;
35
} else {
36
return Some(mid);
37
}
38
}
39
None
40
}
41
42
fn main() {}
Listing A.6: Bisect
Shedding the Viper Skin
73
==PAGE:82==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
