==PAGE:1==
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
Thesis
June, 2023
By
Rasmus Porse Bjørneskov & Anders Ellekilde­Pedersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over ten months at DTU Compute, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering (Computer Science and
Engineering, Computer Security).
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of information systems and comput­
ers.
Rasmus Porse Bjørneskov ­ s193383
Signature
Date
Anders Ellekilde­Pedersen ­ s007648
Signature
Date
ii
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
21-06-2023
21-06-2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The maritime industry has witnessed a notable shift towards a greater adoption of Oper­
ational Technology (OT) systems. These digital systems play a crucial role in monitoring,
controlling, and automating various physical processes within ships, but also open the
vessel up to significant cybersecurity risk. While research on the cybersecurity of OT
systems, in general, is extensive, the specific OT environment within maritime vessels
remains relatively understudied. There is a lack of comprehensive knowledge regarding
the specific threats, challenges, and potential solutions in this niche area.
To thoroughly investigate the current state of OT security in maritime vessels, our study
employed a dual methodology consisting of a structured literature review and in­depth
interviews. Through this key threats, approaches, and technologies pertaining to securing
the OT landscape in maritime vessels was identified as well as insights into the perceived
challenges and prevailing industry approaches. By combining these two methods, this
study offers a holistic understanding of OT security in maritime vessels, encompassing
perspectives from both academia and industry.
The findings reveal discrepancies between what is perceived as a risk in the maritime
industry and where academia currently focuses on OT cybersecurity. The overlap be­
tween IT and OT technologies poses challenges in managing threats, particularly due to
organizational responsibility splits. Additionally, there is a delay in security awareness
and the adoption of cybersecurity measures in relation to the rapid adoption of advanced
technologies in the maritime sector. Despite the maritime industry’s high level of gov­
ernance and risk management practices, there is a lack of targeted research support in
improving the more complex system landscape and addressing specific challenges faced
by vessel­borne OT systems.
This study highlights the need for improved knowledge sharing and collaboration between
academia and the industry to enhance cybersecurity practices in maritime OT systems.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Rasmus Porse Bjørneskov & Anders Ellekilde­Pedersen,
Computer Security Students, DTU
We would like to extend our thanks and appreciation to the following people:
Nicola Dragoni, Professor, Head of Section at DTU Compute
Supervisor and teacher, for fantastic help and direction in this thesis.
The subject matter experts, Anonymized, but invaluable.
For participating in interviews on short notice, giving us incredible insights into the domain.
Dr. Kristen Kuhn & Dr. Swantje Westpfahl
For their insights into the transitional area between academia and industry in the maritime
domain.
Merete Ellekilde­Pedersen & Signe Mie Højland Olsen
For being amazing partners and for accepting us in this writing process
Finally a large thanks goes to Annette Ellekilde, Mother­in­law,
For her limitless support and assistance with the practical matters behind the scenes when
writing a thesis while having multiple kids at home.
iv
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:7==
Table of Individual Contributions
Section
Rasmus
Anders
1 Introduction
50%
50%
1.1 The Context of Ship OT
25%
75%
1.2 Problem
50%
50%
1.3 Contribution of this Thesis
40%
60%
1.4 Thesis Structure
50%
50%
2 Related Reviews
25%
75%
2.1 Maritime OT Security
25%
75%
2.2 Summary
40%
60%
3 Methodology
75%
25%
3.1 Literature Review
75%
25%
3.2 Interviews
75%
25%
4 Literature Review
75%
25%
4.1 Cybersecurity Threats
25%
75%
4.2 Process ­Governance & Risk
25%
75%
4.3 People ­ The Human Factor
75%
25%
4.4 Technology ­ Technical Approaches
60%
40%
4.5 Summary
25%
75%
5 Interviews
40%
60%
5.1 Interviewees
25%
75%
5.2 Threats
75%
25%
5.3 Challenges
25%
75%
5.4 Approaches
75%
25%
5.5 Summary
25%
75%
6 Discussion
40%
60%
6.1 Academia vs. Industry vs. Reality
75%
25%
6.2 IT is not OT
25%
75%
6.3 OT is like IT
75%
25%
6.4 Everything is Harder at Sea
25%
75%
6.5 The Future is Now
75%
25%
7. Conclusion
25%
75%
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Individual Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Context of Ship OT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Contribution of This Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Related Reviews
11
2.1
Maritime OT Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Literature Reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Literature Review
29
4.1
Cybersecurity threats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
Process ­ Governance & Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
People ­ The human factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Technology ­ Technical Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5
Interviews
59
5.1
Interviewees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.2
Threats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.3
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.4
Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6
Discussion
79
6.1
Academia vs. Industry vs. Reality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
6.2
IT is not OT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
6.3
OT is like IT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6.4
Everything is Harder at Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
6.5
The Future is now
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
7
Conclusion
88
Bibliography
91
A Appendix
105
A.1 Main Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.2 Interview Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A.3 Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
vi
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:9==
A.4 Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
vii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
The maritime industry faces an increasingly complex cybersecurity challenge requiring a
mature security posture in its information technology (IT) and operational technology (OT)
environments. As these areas experience increasing attacks and the boundaries between
the two, become entangled, addressing the unique constraints and risks associated with
securing the operational world of industrial control systems (ICS) is crucial. However,
while there are similarities in operating systems (OS), network connections, architectures,
and cybersecurity risks between IT and OT, they are not directly interchangeable.
Maritime companies have traditionally placed great emphasis on protecting their data and
the IT environments responsible for its storage and transmission. However, the cyberse­
curity aspect of their OT environment has not received the same level of attention. One
reason for this discrepancy is that, until recently, OT systems, particularly those onboard
vessels, remained isolated from wider IT networks, hence in practice safeguarded by an
air gap. Yet, with the growing interconnectedness of industry assets and infrastructure,
this air gap is gradually diminishing. Consequently, the attack surface is expanding, in­
troducing potentially vulnerable protocols, interfaces, and communication channels [1].
Research conducted by DiRenzo, Goward, and Roberts in 2015 emphasized the need for
heightened awareness of cyber threats in the maritime industry. Their study, titled ”The
little­known challenge of maritime cyber security”[2], highlighted the industry’s vulnerability
and its lag behind other sectors in addressing cyber threats. Similarly, a survey from 2019
titled ”Third­Party Risk to the Nth Degree,”[3] revealed, that nearly half of the surveyed
companies across various industries experienced a security breach related to a third party
(i.e. a vendor or a subcontractor), with only a small fraction of breaches discovered by
the responsible third party. This poses a major industry challenge as shipping companies
often rely on numerous third­party vendors with limited security controls but significant
potential for physical, economic, or environmental damages.
Academic and commercial studies, as well as the increased attention from maritime clas­
sification societies and the International Maritime Organization (IMO), further validate the
need for cybersecurity improvements in the maritime industry. For instance, a 2022 re­
port by Thetius titled ”The great disconnect”[4] highlighted the significant gap between
understanding cyber threats, the potential cost of failure, and the actual implementation
of security measures in maritime organizations. At the same time, national and commer­
cial threat intelligence and reporting indicate an increased threat towards maritime OT
systems.[5, 6]
In a 2021 article by Progoulakis et al.[7] the authors identified several crucial conclusions
on the security of cyber­physical systems (CPS). Firstly, they found that OT systems are
often less prioritized than IT systems in terms of security within the maritime industry, indi­
cating a need for enhanced cybersecurity measures. They also suggested that leveraging
methods and models from outside the industry, such as the Bow Tie Analysis, could be in­
strumental in improving cyber defence. Additionally, the authors highlighted the potential
benefits of integrating cyber and physical security policies to mitigate threats effectively.
In this thesis, we will explore the convergence of technology and maritime operations, as­
sess existing security methodologies, and highlight best­practice approaches to enhance
cybersecurity in maritime OT systems, with a focus on vessels. By doing so, we aim
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
1
==PAGE:11==
to contribute to the overall resilience and safety of the maritime industry in the face of
evolving cyber threats.
1.1
The Context of Ship OT
According to multiple sources OT systems are best understood as the hardware and soft­
ware responsible for directly monitoring and controlling physical devices and processes
onboard a ship [8, 9, 10]. These systems are an essential component of the vessel and
need to operate independently from its IT systems. However, they can be connected to
the IT network for purposes such as performance monitoring and remote support. While IT
systems primarily handle data as information, OT systems primarily utilize data to oversee
and regulate physical processes. Figure 1.1 shows services and technologies that may
be used in a ship divided into rough categories. The only categories in the figure which
are strictly not related to the OT systems are the ”Crew Network” and the ”Ship Network”,
but even these may be used as points of attack that may allow traversing across to OT
systems if the network topology allows for it.
Figure 1.1: A ship and its technologies from [11].
There are many terms used interchangeably to describe the concept of OT in various in­
dustries. Some examples are Industrial Control Systems (ICS)[12], Cyber­Physical Sys­
tems (CPS)[13], and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)[14], but the over­
arching concept of integrated technology for controlling and monitoring operational pro­
cesses remains consistent. Unless a discussed paper is specifically choosing a different
term we will be using the term ”OT” throughout this paper.
OT systems include navigation, bridge systems, cargo handling, propulsion and engine
control, power management, communication, and other critical components (in table 1.2
is a list of other common vessel OT systems). These systems integrate information tech­
nology with the physical aspects of maritime operations, using data to manage and reg­
ulate various functions. However, they differ from traditional IT systems in terms of their
2
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.2: Examples of OT Systems Used in Maritime Operations. Adapted from [15]
mission, threats, and impact. Safety, environmental protection, process availability, and
vessel operations are therefore key considerations in maritime OT systems.
1.1.1
Industry Actors
The maritime industry is highly regulated and with an inherent culture of safety and se­
curity. This culture also leads to a very diverse set of actors driving the challenges of
modern security. In figure 1.3 is a general overview of the main actors and their primary
roles in securing vessel OT.
Governmental actors:
• National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)[16]: A U.S. government
agency, is responsible for developing cybersecurity standards and best practices.
NIST’s cybersecurity framework provides a comprehensive approach to managing
and mitigating cybersecurity risks. It offers guidelines, methodologies, and tools to
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
3
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Overview of industry roles and actors. Adapted from [11]
enhance the security of information systems and critical infrastructure.
• Maritime Authorities: National or regional maritime administrations (e.g. Danish
Maritime Authority (DMA)[17] or United States Coast Guard (USCG)[18]) oversee
and enforce maritime regulations and policies within their jurisdictions. Maritime ad­
ministrations play a vital role in enforcing cybersecurity regulations for OT systems
within their jurisdictions. They conduct audits, inspections, and assessments to en­
sure compliance and support the development of maritime OT security frameworks.
• Cybersecurity agencies: Agencies established by governments (e.g. Danish CFCS[19],
U.K. NCSC[20]) to protect national cyber­infrastructure, and develop cybersecurity
policies and strategies. They work with public and private stakeholders to manage
cyber risks, respond to incidents, and enhance cybersecurity across critical sectors,
including maritime. These agencies collaborate internationally to exchange best
practices and coordinate efforts in combating cyber threats.
• NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD COE)[21]: A hub
of expertise and collaboration for addressing cybersecurity challenges. It facilitates
cooperation among NATO members and partners, focusing on policy, research, and
training in cyber defense. The CCD COE contributes to global cybersecurity stan­
dards and promotes a coordinated response to cyber threats in the maritime domain.
Non­governmental actors:
• Baltic and International Maritime Council (BIMCO)[22]: BIMCO is a globally rec­
ognized organization serving as a leading international association for ship owners,
operators, brokers, and other stakeholders in the maritime industry. BIMCO con­
tributes to maritime OT security by developing industry best practices and contrac­
tual clauses that address cybersecurity concerns.
• Industry Associations (e.g. Danish Maritime[23] and Danish Shipping[24]):
Bring together maritime companies, suppliers, service providers, and research in­
stitutions. Industry associations and groups focused on maritime OT security facil­
itate knowledge exchange, collaboration, and research among companies, organi­
zations, and experts. They promote the development of standards, guidelines, and
technologies that enhance the cybersecurity of OT systems in the maritime sector.
• Classification Societies: Classification societies (such as Lloyd’s Register[25] and
DNV[26]) are independent organizations that assess and certify the compliance of
ships and maritime assets with specific standards and regulations related to safety,
4
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:14==
construction, and maintenance. 12 of the major classification societies are united in
International Association of Classification Societies (IACS)[27]. They all work to
establish guidelines and rules for the design, construction, and operation of secure
OT systems, conducting assessments and certifications to verify compliance with
cybersecurity standards and mitigate risks.
• Ship Owners: Shipping companies, including vessel operators and owners (such
as Maersk Line[28], Maersk Supply Service[29], and Esvagt[30]), are naturally sig­
nificant actors in the maritime industry. They are responsible for ships’ operation,
management, and commercial activities, transporting goods and passengers across
global trade routes. Shipping companies hold significant responsibility for ensuring
the cybersecurity of their OT systems. They invest in secure technology infras­
tructure, implement robust security controls, and promote a cybersecurity culture
within their organizations. Shipping companies collaborate with other stakeholders
to share information and respond effectively to cyber incidents affecting maritime
OT systems.
• International Organization for Standardization (ISO)[31]: As an international
standard­setting body, ISO develops a wide range of standards, including those
related to cybersecurity. ISO standards provide guidance on various aspects of cy­
bersecurity, such as risk management, security controls, and incident response ­
most notedly the ISO 27xxx­series of standards on information security. The stan­
dards are widely recognized and adopted globally, helping establish effective cyber­
security practices.
International actors:
• EU Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA)[32]: The EU plays a significant role in
shaping the maritime sector within its member states. ENISA actively promotes
cybersecurity in the maritime domain through various initiatives and regulations. It
emphasizes the protection of critical infrastructure and encourages collaboration
among member states to enhance cybersecurity capabilities and resilience.
• International Maritime Organization (IMO)[33]: The agency within the United Na­
tions responsible for developing and maintaining international regulations and stan­
dards for the safety, security, and environmental performance of international ship­
ping. The IMO plays a crucial role in setting global standards and regulations for
maritime OT security. It develops guidelines and recommendations to enhance the
cybersecurity of OT systems on ships, promoting a secure and resilient naval infras­
tructure.
Actors across government, non­government, and international affiliation:
• Maritime Training and Education Centers (e.g. Maritime and Polytechnic Col­
lege[34]): Provide education, training, and certification programs for seafarers,
maritime professionals, and personnel working in the maritime industry. They are
crucial in educating and training future maritime professionals and providing a qual­
ified workforce.
• Research Institutions: Maritime research groups and universities undertake scien­
tific research and development activities focused on various aspects of the maritime
industry (e.g. Cyber­SHIP Lab at Plymouth University[35]). They are all crucial in
advancing knowledge and understanding of maritime OT security. They conduct re­
search, analysis, and policy development on emerging cyber threats, vulnerabilities,
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
5
==PAGE:15==
and countermeasures for OT systems, contributing to the evolution of best practices
and effective security strategies.
These actors collectively contribute to governing and strengthening the cybersecurity of
the maritime industry, promoting awareness, collaboration, and the adoption of best prac­
tices. Their roles and responsibilities encompass regulatory frameworks, industry guid­
ance, education and training, technology development, and fostering a culture of cyber­
security within the maritime sector, but the amount of standards, regulations, and support
also leads to a complex industry which needs to be navigated with great care. The involve­
ment of multiple agencies can lead to overlapping or conflicting requirements, making it
challenging to establish a cohesive regulatory framework that addresses all cybersecurity
concerns effectively.
1.1.2
Threat Actors
The maritime industry operates within a complex and interconnected ecosystem, making
it susceptible to various threat actors. These actors have varying degrees of capability,
intent, and opportunity, but all pose a risk to vessel OT security. Understanding the differ­
ent types of threat actors is crucial for effectively addressing and mitigating cyber threats
in the maritime sector. Recently DNV published a research paper listing seven different
classes of threat actors [1]:
• Hacktivists: Hacktivists are politically motivated hackers using hacking as a form
of civil disobedience to promote a political agenda or social change [36].
• Foreign powers and state­sponsored actors: Also known as Advanced Persis­
tent Threats (APTs) are state­sponsored hacker groups or large corporations that
employ their resources for espionage (industrial or military), to cause denial, or de­
struction of assets. The intent of an APT is often to achieve strategic political or
economic gain, typically at an advanced level of sophistication and with long­term
planning [37].
• Criminals: Cybercriminals are individuals or teams of people who use technology to
commit malicious activities on digital systems or networks with the intention of steal­
ing sensitive company information or personal data, or holding systems hostage for
ransom to generate profit [38]. A subset of cyber criminals, pirates, are defined
by the UN as individuals who engage in robbery or illegal violence at sea or on the
shores of the sea [39]. In the scope of this thesis, pirates would be cyber­facilitated
activities aimed at physically acquiring valuables, including taking possession of an
entire ship using techniques such as tracking potential targets through AIS.
• Terrorists: These threat actors aim to promote a political agenda or social change.
They utilize technological means to create events that generate publicity or cause
”spectacular damage” in support of their cause [40].
• Malicious insiders or former insiders:(e.g., employees or partners) Referring to
individuals with authorized access to the ship and/or its systems who pose a threat
due to incompetence, negligence, or ill intent. This category includes dissatisfied
crew members who may cause harm to the system, as well as external personnel
such as dock workers and technicians [41].
• Vandals or script kiddies: Low­skill hackers who heavily rely on online toolkits
[42].
• Competitors: Industry competitors may venture into cyberattacks to access sen­
sitive or classified data or intellectual property (IP) for economic gain, competitive
6
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:16==
advantage or political reasons [43].
1.1.3
Types of Threats
As there are many attackers, targets, systems, and ships, there are also many ways for
the cyber adversary to attack ­ and a selaction of examples can be found in figure 1.4
Figure 1.4: Examples of attack types adapted from DNV [44]
To analyze the threats it is helpful to categorize them and a popular method for this is the
STRIDE model. The STRIDE (an acronym for its threat types) model provides a structured
approach to identifying and categorizing security threats [45]. Below are brief descriptions
of the different STRIDE threats with examples of potential maritime attacks:
(Identity) Spoofing ­ Impersonating another user or entity:
• AIS Spoofing ­ a technique where false or manipulated information is broadcast to
deceive or manipulate the AIS signals of a vessel.
• GPS/GNSS Spoofing ­ the generation of false GPS signals leading to inaccurate
positioning or navigation information ­ potentially grounding a vessel.
• Both spoofing attacks is done using radio signals.
Tampering ­ Modifying or altering data in transit or at rest.
• Manipulating sensor information from the ECS or ICS.
• Changing operational limitations to crane operations or load controllers.
Repudiation ­ Denying responsibility for actions or transactions.
• Obscuring the origin of an activation signal.
Information Disclosure ­ Accidental or unauthorized exposure of information.
• Eavesdropping (i.e. spying) on data streams such as position or navigation infor­
mation shared by radio or unsecured protocols.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
7
==PAGE:17==
• Release of OT operational information.
Denial of Service ­ Overwhelming a system with excessive traffic.
• Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS).
• Jamming a radio, GPS, or IoT signal. Leaving the corresponding system crippled.
This is generally a type of attack based on radio signals (i.e. an over­the­air attack)
• Exploiting vulnerabilities in OT protocols to disrupt services i.e. making engine sys­
tems stop or leaving controls locked out.
Elevation of Privilege ­ Gaining higher access rights or privileges than authorized.
• Remotely accessing OT systems to operate or disable them.
• The 2022 attack on Viasat satelite services is an example of a hacker gaining access
to administration of satelite modems[46] disabling vessel­connectivity (which is then
an example of 5. Denial of Service).
All vulnerabilities in an OT system can be targeted by a threat such as malware, signals
interference, or data leaking, and all threats may be mapped to one of the six types of
threats from the STRIDE model ­ see figure 2.2.
1.2
Problem
Despite intense efforts and multiple strategies to address cybersecurity over the past
decades, the focus on cybersecurity in vessel­borne OT systems remains inadequate.
This thesis aims to address this problem by describing the unique challenges faced by
maritime OT systems and identifying current methodologies used in the maritime industry
for securing OT systems. This is done through a thorough review of academic papers,
industry white papers, as well as other available sources covering the research area of
security in vessel­borne OT systems. This thesis leverages insights from academia, in­
dustry professionals, and industry organizations. All the information gathered is utilized
to answer the following research questions:
• How has the threatscape for the maritime industry changed over the last decade,
and what effect has this had on the threats to vessel OT?
• What are the current approaches to OT protection, and what challenges still exist
or go unanswered?
By doing so, we aim to contribute to the understanding of the overall resilience and security
of the maritime industry in the face of evolving cyber threats.
1.3
Contribution of This Thesis
In order to demonstrate uniqueness of this thesis in relation to the existing research, table
1.1 lists a head­to­head comparison to similar reviews, discussed in section 2. In compar­
ison to these reviews, this thesis stands out by focusing on vessel OT systems. Further
uniqueness comes from conducting interviews with industry experts, directly asking them
about the state of cybersecurity in maritime OT systems, instead of relying solely on pa­
pers. Schwarz et al. [47] also includes an interview with SME’s in the industry, however,
they focus on past cyber incidents only. In conclusion, our thesis distinguishes itself by
focusing specifically on vessel OT rather than general IT and bringing in both academic
and industry knowledge. Furthermore, this thesis delves into the challenges of near­future
8
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:18==
Ref.
Main Contribution
This Thesis
[48]
Examines risk assessment and evaluation
methods reported in literature, but discusses
only navigation and bridge systems.
Considers further OT systems including tech­
nical monitoring and a few new risk as­
sessment methods such as MaCRA (section
4.2.3).
[49]
Focuses generically on cyber threats towards
the maritime industry and makes only general
conclusions.
Discusses OT technology specifically and
highlight relevant technological implementa­
tions ( section 4.4)
[50]
Examines
specific
emerging
technologies
with a security focus. Not specifically vessel
OT­focused.
Complements this by focusing specifically on
OT systems embedded in seagoing vessels.
[51]
Focuses on the IoT­reliant paradigm of IoS. It
reviews the state of the art for emerging appli­
cations of IoS and provides a detailed account
of its architecture and unique characteristics.
Presents a wider range of OT technologies,
while maintaining a focus on challenges and
solutions.
[52]
A survey of different cyber security guidelines
and their relevance
Our thesis extends this by conducting inter­
views with subject matter experts and incor­
porating their insights into the analysis.
[53]
A survey of cyberattacks covering the decade
2010­2020.
Further analyses and identifies challenges
and unanswered questions in the field of mar­
itime cybersecurity.
[47]
Lists and discusses maritime cyberattacks in
the period 2001­2021 focusing solely on at­
tacks.
Builds upon this survey by providing addi­
tional analysis and identifying challenges and
unanswered questions.
[54]
investigates cyber risk perception using rec­
ognized psychological models. Focuses on
the human factor.
discusses rules, regulation, risk manage­
ment, and technologies.
[55]
Cyber­security frameworks and classification
of recent cyber­attacks at vessels and ports.
Very focused on the attacks.
A two­way approach (review/interview) to
identifying
threats,
challenges,
and
ap­
proaches to securing vessel OT.
[15]
Study of the cybersecurity landscape in the
maritime sector. It has a great mapping of OT
systems and vulnerabilities with suggestions
for mitigation.
Brings in industry­side knowledge by inter­
viewing SME and including whitepapers. Also
covers relevant industry standards and legis­
lation for a more all­round approach.
[56]
Risk assessment methods and cyber risk dis­
cussions for IoT­enabled systems in ships.
focus on security providing a comprehensive
analysis of challenges and vulnerabilities in
vessel OT.
Table 1.1: Comparison of contributions
technologies such as AI and autonomous vessels as they have become more relevant
over the last two years.
From Table 1.1, it is evident that the included papers cover various intriguing security
aspects. Among them, this paper stands out with its distinct approach of interviews and
literature review as well as its novel contribution to maritime vessel OT security.
1.4
Thesis Structure
In chapter 2 we analyze comparable reviews to cover the development in general terms
as well as demonstrate the uniqueness of our thesis as a whole.
The methodology we use is explained in chapter 3 respectively the literature review is
described in detail in section 3.1 and the methodology for the interviews in section 3.2.
The chapter also covers the practical process of selecting literature sources for our review.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
9
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 4 consists of the actual review and the main contribution of this thesis; dividing
the sources into multiple themes to structure the consolidated information and discussing
contributions to the research field.
The information digest from the interviews and the many interesting opinions of our SME’s
can be found in chapter 5 broken down to the threats and challenges that maritime OT
security is facing as well as the approaches recommended or used by the interviewees.
chapter 6 provides an in­depth analysis of the findings from the literature review and in­
terviews, highlighting their implications.
Finally chapter 7 contains the conclusions of this thesis and establishes the answers to
our research questions.
10
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:20==
2
Related Reviews
In the following section, reviews that touch some areas of security in maritime OT systems
are discussed, in order to provide an understanding of earlier development in the area.
The 11 reviews listed in table 2.1 represent all the reviews that were identified as part
of the general search for papers for this thesis (see section 3.1.4). The aim is to give a
thorough summary of what has come before in terms of security trends for ship­borne OT,
both to lend direction to this thesis and validate its uniqueness.
Year
General Description
Ref.
2017
A survey of maritime cyber security risk assessment approaches
and frameworks. Thorough coverage of attack trees and
risk governance. Covers both maritime and other research areas.
[48]
2019
A comprehensive survey of cybersecurity risks in the maritime
industry. Analyzes risk factors such as weak security infrastructure,
human error, and cyber­physical systems. Discusses the
importance of risk assessment and management.
[49]
2019
An overview of emerging or growing technologies in the
maritime industry; functions, benefits, and security issues.
[50]
2020
Survey of research on the interconnected ”Internet of Ships”
also covering the security concerns and challenges.
[51]
2021
A survey of different cyber security guidelines and their relevance
to the US Maritime Transportation System.
[52]
2021
A comprehensive survey of cyberattacks covering the decade
2010­2020.
[53]
2021
Lists and discusses maritime cyberattacks in the period
2001­2021.
[47]
2021
An approach to investigate cyber risk perception using recognized
psychological models. Review of state­of­the­art for modelling
of maritime risk perception.
[54]
2022
Classification of cyber attacks and OT components, Digitization
and interconnected systems. Special focus given to GNSS
systems.
[55]
2022
Survey of the increasing cyber threat on the maritime industry.
Extensive summary of OT systems, their vulnerabilities, and
examples of attacks.
[15]
2022
Risk assessement methods and cyber risk discussions for IoT­
enabled systems in ships.
[56]
Table 2.1: List of reviews considered
2.1
Maritime OT Security
The last decade of the maritime industry has seen an increase in awareness of cyber se­
curity risks in relation to IT systems, and lately, OT systems have also received increasing
awareness [4, 10].
While the industry awareness ten years ago can best be described as relaxed when a
review on maritime cybersecurity awareness states: ”The shipping industry is an industry
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
11
==PAGE:21==
wherein people have gotten used to being part of an almost “invisible” industry. [...] rea­
sonable to assume that the industry would also be relatively “invisible” in relation to cyber
threats as other sectors would appear much more appealing” [57].
The number of identified reviews is rather limited which is another indicator of how the
understanding of the area has changed. The security of ship­borne OT has become in­
creasingly important in recent years due to the volume of technology in maritime oper­
ations, but also due to OT systems now having enough common IT infrastructure to be
vulnerable to standard malware. The higher volume of interconnected OT systems itself
also increases the number of vulnerabilities present in ships. However, before 2017 very
little had been written specifically on maritime cyber security and even less specifically on
OT. In fact, the title of an academic paper from 2015 alludes to the scarcity of maritime
cyber security research and knowledge at the time – “The little­known challenge of mar­
itime cyber security” [2]. or as stated by one paper: “at this point, although the gravity
of the issue has drawn people’s attentions, not much research related to maritime and
port cybersecurity has been done” [48]. In fact, as recently as 2017 there was no major
research focused on the issues of maritime cybersecurity and the ways to address the
cybersecurity problem. There was a recognition of maritime cybersecurity concerns, but
few made an effort to investigate the matter because there had been no major accidents
to underline the relevance of the research area [48]. A crucial point to note is that while
the individual systems on ships might not be deemed complex using conventional stan­
dards, the interconnected systems, also known as ”system of systems”, are significantly
complex. This complexity arises from the merging of IT and OT, which is distinct to the
contemporary maritime setting. [50]
Figure 2.1: Number of cyber incidents from 2000 to 2021 by Schwarz et al.[47].
At the beginning of this century, cyber attacks in the maritime sector were mainly aimed
at maritime IT infrastructure such as ports and shipping companies. Security analysis of
GPS vulnerabilities was undertaken by government agencies in 2001, but the first reported
attack on a shipborne OT system is likely the case of GPS jamming in South Korea in 2010
[47, 58] Figure 2.1 shows the number of reported incidents increase over the years 2001­
2021.Figure 2.1 shows a definite rising trend in the number of maritime cyberattacks in
the last 10 years not leaving much doubt as to the growth of the threat towards vessel IT
– and by association OT.
12
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:22==
2.1.1
Technological Development
The increasing use of technology in ships has led to a rise of cybersecurity threats, includ­
ing malware attacks, data breaches, and theft of sensitive information. In 2017 “generic”
OT systems could be considered limited to these[48]:
• ECDIS (Electronic Chart Display and Information System)
• AIS (Automatic Identification System)
• Radar/ARPA (Radio Direction and Ranging) (Automatic Radar Plotting Aid)
• Compass (Gyro, Fluxgate, GPS and others)
• Steering (Computerized Automatic Steering System)
• VDR (Voyage Data Recorder –”Black Box”)
• GMDSS (Global Maritime Distress and Safety System)
• IDS (Intrusion Detection System)
Almost every single later survey covered in this section either expands the list or adds
complexities such as interconnectedness while Zhang et al. argue that only AIS, Radar,
Compass and Steering are critical [48]. The later Ashraf et al. offers a shorter list of OT
systems leaving out radar, compass, and steering – systems that in the former paper were
considered the more critical [56].
2 years later Tam et al. adds communications, sensors/monitoring, propulsion, cargo
management, and mooring/anchoring to the “generic” ship OT systems and introduces the
notion of a “system of systems” (SoS). SoS is used as a descriptor for the many systems
that were becoming interconnected to a degree where complexity is its own challenge to
security. As ships traverse the waters of the world they must securely interact with differ­
ent regions, crews, technologies, laws, and policies [50]. Tam et al. continue to discuss
cybersecurity perspectives of the emerging technologies of 2019: Blockchains, Remote
operations, IoT, and Autonomy [50]. In 2020 Aslam et al. introduces the Internet of Ships
(IoS) and introduces the possibilities of interconnected ships and maritime infrastructure.
In the IoS paradigm, IoT technologies consolidate interconnected smart devices to sense,
communicate, and process all data and information available on a maritime vessel. IoS is
delivering everything from improved route planning and preemptive maintenance to en­
ergy optimization and automatic berthing [51]. The developments described by Tam et al.
[50] and Aslam et al.[51] are further built on by modern interconnectedness with Industry
4.0 relying on IoT, SCADA, and other real­time networked technologies as discussed by
Ashraf[56]. Also in 2022 Ben Farah et al. discuss the Internet of Things (IoT), Big Data
and Artificial Intelligence as drivers for maritime changes in the digitization of infrastruc­
ture and following that necessitating improving cyber security posture. Despite this Ben
Farah still pushes AIS, GNSS, and RADAR as primary critical systems. Ben Farah is
also the first of our selected surveys to bring power management systems, cargo man­
agement systems, communications systems, and alarm/PLC systems into the on­vessel
technologies to consider. Most noteworthy sensor systems related to the engine control
functions are being described under the heading of “electro­mechanical” systems. Ben
Farah thoroughly describes the OT systems of a modern vessel and classifying them as
either “communications”, “power and electronic”, or “services and management”. Finally
Ben Farah suggests the introduction of a “universal security protocol” for maritime solu­
tions [55] . Akpan et al. describe the multiple examples of experiments with autonomous
vessels bringing the maritime into a scenario of vessels that are exclusively populated by
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
13
==PAGE:23==
“a fleet” of sensors and OT systems interconnected to feed information to the ship­borne
AI. No matter the level of automation, the reality presented by Akpan is one of highly
critical OT systems [15].
According to Ashraf et al. there has been a significant shift in the maritime sector from
traditional mechanical systems to more advanced electromechanical and digital systems,
within the last 10 years. Consequently, the industry has adapted its operations to include
modern industrial control systems that have undergone significant changes. Moreover,
there has been a move towards utilizing semi­automatic and automatic control systems,
as well as automated harbors, satellite communication, and navigation systems.[56]
2.1.2
Risk assessement and management
Shipping companies have started to implement risk assessment and management pro­
cesses to identify and mitigate the potential impact of cybersecurity threats on their op­
erations. Before 2017, little research had been done on maritime risk assessment and
management. To address this gap, researchers such as Zhang have looked to risk man­
agement trends from other domains, such as cyber­physical, industrial control systems
(ICS), and OT systems [48]. While much of this research from 2017 could be applied
to maritime cybersecurity and OT risk management, adaptation was still considered for
future works. The compromise of modern ship­borne IoS devices have far ranging risks
since the networked devices potentially have physical effectors that may kill or injure crew
members[51]. Therefore, strict cybersecurity measures and a low tolerance for unwar­
ranted access are necessary to address the criticality and hazard potential of these in­
tegrated devices. The complexity of interconnected systems and the threat environment
makes cyber risk management in the maritime sector costly and challenging [53]. How­
ever, recent policies from the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the Baltic and
International Maritime Council (BIMCO) have introduced guidelines for cybersecurity that
require maritime cyber risk management frameworks such as identification, protection,
detection, response, and recovery, similar to those in the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) [56].
Ashraf also notes the usefulness of frameworks such as DREAD, STRIDE, and MITIGATE
in mitigating threats to maritime OT systems, while Ben Farah adds the MAINFRAME
framework to the list of risk frameworks [56, 55]. Figure 2.2 illustrates how vulnerabilities of
the OT systems from figure 1.2 can be mapped to STRIDE threats to show the connection
between systems, vulnerabilities, and effects in a ship.
2.1.3
Implementation of security systems
Shipping companies have invested in security systems such as firewalls, intrusion detec­
tion and prevention systems, and encryption technologies to protect their networks and
data. Chang et al. points to a major problem in outdated security approaches and re­
liance on well­established but insufficient firewalls and anti­virus solutions that may not
stop an advanced adversary. This, Chang states may be connected to the long con­
struction time and lifespan of maritime vessels whose security designs may be operating
beyond their useful lifespan without upgrades. However following the NotPetya­incident
in 2017, Chang notes, more sources recommended introducing information security man­
agement systems quoting the identify, protect, detect, respond and recover of the NIST­
framework [49]. Even IoT widely integrated into the systems of vessels as described by
Aslam[51] much could be improved in terms of standardized cybersecurity. Literal fleets
of interconnected vessels have been built on emerging IoT technologies and still different
vendors and shipping companies limit the emergence of a secure networked environment
to handle data traffic. The necessity of a secure, geo­distributed network environment for
14
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.2: OT systems, STRIDE­model threats, and possible consequences. Adapted
from Akpan et al. [15]
IoS remains to be developed in service of these new solutions. As previously mentioned
Meland et al. describe the problem of vessels being built for a lifespan of 2­3 decades,
with usually very little being done during this time to update or keep security measures
in a relevant state – due to the lack of incentives for security expenditure [53]. Akpan
et al. discuss the adoption of both countermeasures, in­depth defence, and resilience
towards cybersecurity threats. The security is provided by real­time security health sta­
tus monitoring of ships’ systems. A system based on blockchain is proposed to provide
the relevantly robust security features needed. Stronger security protocols with the intro­
duction of Navigation Message Authentication to prevent spoofing, but also a system of
electronic antennae to distinguish GPS spoofed signals from actual signals. A full PKI ar­
chitecture (using IMO as root CA) is suggested to mitigate most remaining security threats
[15].
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
15
==PAGE:25==
2.1.4
Collaboration and information sharing
Reported incidents are limited to critical infrastructure companies complying with legal re­
porting obligations, and these companies do not have additional internal reporting rules.
Unpublished cyber incidents from other companies have been discovered, with fear of
image loss and economic damage cited as the main reasons for not reporting. While
some companies participate in threat information sharing (TIS) platforms and have found
them useful in the past, others are hesitant to join due to their inability to contribute their
own incidents or distrust of other platform participants.[47] The industry’s capacity to con­
duct systematic analyses and learn from others is hampered, thereby impeding the im­
provement of its cybersecurity practices. As a result, knowledge and comprehension of
evolving events and threats are fragmented and somewhat inaccessible, underscoring the
need to enhance the sharing of threat intelligence related to attack attempts, incidents,
techniques, and actors [53]. Schwarz et al. note that a large dark figure of unreported
incidents exists, which is counter­productive to attack prevention. The reported number
is estimated to be less than 10% of actual incidents. Reporting is only done if required
by law (critical infrastructure companies). TIS platforms exist but the format is still up for
debate [47]. Ashraf et al. address the problem of disparate security policies and prac­
tices which complicates risk assessment comparisons. This problem is not only present
among different corporations, but also from country to country there are a huge variety of
processes. This is somewhat attributed to a lack of training and expertise [56].
2.1.5
Compliance with regulations
Following the terrorist attack on 9­11 2001, the International Ship and Port Facility Secu­
rity Code (ISPS) was introduced in 2004. After the ISPS a number of maritime and port
security regulations were introduced such as Customs Trade Partnership Against Terror­
ism and Container Security Initiative none of which directly addresses cybersecurity. In
fact, a lack of development is noted in the area of cybersecurity legislation is noted by
Zhang et al. [48] Up til 2017 Ashraf et al. discuss how the recent policies from IMO and
BIMCO guidelines have improved cybersecurity postures overall, but also points to short­
falls in their effectiveness [56] . Ben Farah et al. indicate that security plans protecting
the maritime supply chain coordinated strategically with international maritime bodies are
a necessity and discuss the introduction of the IMO codes of ISM and ISPS [55].
2.1.6
Awareness and training
The earlier surveys give only limited focus to the human perspective of OT security and
when considered it’s mostly in the form of acknowledgement that while a well­trained
crew is an asset in the prevention of incidents, human error is still the major contributor
to cyber incidents[50] Chang et al. dives into the lack of training and expertise in cyber­
security, in terms of unintentional actions by the untrained crew and failures attributed to
the crew in need of rest, but also the well­known example of opening malicious emails
and websites. Suggest mitigation by training the vessel crews to a higher standard of
cybersecurity understanding – exemplified by the IMO STCW and ISM codes which from
2021 establishes requirements for awareness training of vessel crews. Finally, they sug­
gest that maritime organizations should focus on establishing a cybersecurity climate to
mirror the safety climate drilled into many maritime organizations to establish an over­
all security consciousness in the crews [49]. The lack of digital culture, awareness and,
training of crews, budget, and qualified people is also a problem addressed by Meland et
al.[53]. Later interviews done by Ashraf et al. support the findings of the former paper.
The interviews with crew members indicated that the majority of people attached to OT
systems onboard have a medium or low level of knowledge. Despite the installed security
systems on the ships, the crew members are not well trained to operate the sophisticated
16
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:26==
programs [56]. Larsen et al. stresses that cyber risk perception is crucial for mitigating
risks in IT and OT systems, but there are no relevant studies in the maritime industry,
according to the survey of Larsen et al. of existing research. Larsen suggests using psy­
chometric methods to understand cyber risk perception in the industry and recommends
further research and tailored education programs for employees to improve their under­
standing of cyber risks and incident handling [54]. In 2022 Ben Farah shines a light on
the continued absence of appropriate security training which increases the probability of
a cyber breach while allowing for much less sophisticated attack types to be successfully
executed [55]. A discussion which carries at least back to the 2014 CyberKeel whitepaper
[57]. Akpan et al. states that “the human factor remains challenging with a complex inter­
connected ecosystem such as the one that exists in the maritime sector. Ships, ports, and
third­parties are often operating with rotating crews with different levels of cybersecurity
understanding, who may not be fully familiar with the safe operation of the related sys­
tems and established cyber hygiene practices.” and follows up by establishing that the
lack of cybersecurity culture must be mitigated by the use of cyber training, education,
and certification [15].
2.2
Summary
• Threats: The increasing use of OT systems in shipping has led to the rise of cy­
bersecurity threats, including malware attacks, data breaches, and theft of sensitive
information.
• Risk assessment: Shipping companies have started to implement risk assessment
and management processes to identify and mitigate the potential impact of cyber­
security threats on their operations.
• Implementation of security systems: Shipping companies have invested in se­
curity systems such as firewalls, intrusion detection and prevention systems, and
encryption technologies to protect their networks and data but this has happened
as a reaction to threat developments rather than as a proactive measure.
• Collaboration and information sharing: The shipping industry has recognized the
need for collaboration and information sharing to address common security chal­
lenges and has established information sharing. The reported number of incidents
is estimated to be less than 10% of actual incidents which complicates risk assess­
ments.
• Compliance with regulations: Shipping companies have been increasingly re­
quired to comply with various regulations and standards, such as the International
Maritime Organization’s (IMO) International Safety Management (ISM) Code, which
sets out requirements for the secure operation of ships’ IT and OT systems.
• Awareness and training: The maritime sector is critical infrastructure and an al­
most “perfect storm” of interconnected complex systems with little to no cyberse­
curity built in and handled by crews with precious little understanding or training in
cybersecurity methodology.
There is a definite trend of growing maturity in the industry’s understanding of the critical­
ity of maritime cybersecurity when going through the reviews chronologically, but also a
sense of policies and corporate security being the drivers whereas solutions to security
regarding technology and people seem to be lagging behind. Specifically, OT seems to
be almost entirely ignored as a separate subject of security research up to around 2020
despite it having been critical to maritime operations for at least two decades. Many se­
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
17
==PAGE:27==
curity challenges remain unresolved, especially within the increasing use of autonomous
and semi­autonomous vessels.
18
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:28==
3
Methodology
The lack of reviews specifically focused on cybersecurity in vessel­based OT systems as
demonstrated in section 1.3, combined with the substantial quantity and breadth of col­
lected papers in the area, underscores the need for a comprehensive literature review.
By undertaking this endeavour, we seek to contribute to the scholarly discourse surround­
ing cybersecurity in the maritime industry and advance our understanding of the unique
challenges and approaches related to OT systems on board vessels.
3.1
Literature Reviews
To ensure our literature review is coherent, complete, and valuable to the thesis, we use
the structured 8­step approach to academic literature reviews described by Okoli et al.
[59] as a starting point.
Okoli et al. have recently revisited this approach with a slight reordering of the items [60],
however we have preferred the former model, as we find the quality appraisal before data
extraction better for efficiency, workflow, and logical communication with the reader of the
review. Other sources for conducting literature review has appraisal before and after data
extraction, which we will keep in mind for our review. We also take inspiration from Petti­
crew & Roberts [61] and Kitchenham & Charters [62], who has both been recommended
to us and appear in Okoli et al.’s citations. Petticrew & Roberts goes into deep theory
about the use of and methodologies for literature reviews, though focused on social sci­
ences. Kitchenham & Charters also goes into much detail but is also focused on how to
take the sizeable theoretical foundation existing in the works for the social sciences for
literature reviews and use those theories and best practices in software engineering. As
such, we will use and quote these sources for our methodological toolbox for comporting
a literature review and use them to expand the 8­step structure from Okoli et al.
The structure suggested by Kitchenham & Charters is a 13­stepped guideline divided into
three sections Of these steps, some are not considered mandatory, as some are only rele­
vant for commercial reviews, and some change depending on decisions regarding quality
assurance procedures. Further, some are about motivation, which we shall elaborate on
a bit in this section, and otherwise, have already elaborated on in our Introduction. Oth­
erwise we will use all relevant items on the list, as inspiration for adaptation of the Okoli
et al. list. To be as concise and targeted our needs for this thesis.[62]
Just as the list from Kitchenham & Charters gives a structure, Petticrew & Roberts also has
a list of steps for conducting the literature review. They actually include both an overview
list of 7 steps and then a more comprehensive list of 12 steps, including more details
for each step. It further includes two questions to ask oneself before doing a literature
review, namely: 1. ”Is a systematic review actually needed?” and 2. ”Do you have the
resources?”
During the initial gathering of information for our thesis, we identified a gap in the consol­
idated overview of cybersecurity in vessel OT. Consequently, we adjusted the aim of our
thesis to conduct a systematic literature review, which serves as our main contribution to
the research area. This confirms question 1. The second question was harder to answer,
at least in the sense that Petticrew & Roberts portray. As they explain, conducting a full
expansive systematic literature review can be costly in both time, money, and energy.
They reference the work of Elaine Allen and Ingram Olkin, ”Estimating time to conduct a
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
19
==PAGE:29==
meta­analysis from number of citations retrieved” from 1999, in which the authors look at
the time to conduct a literature review. They also consider the influence of the number
of references used in the review plus how the time spent is distributed across different
tasks. They say the median time for a literature review is 1,100 hours. To this, Petticrew
& Roberts explain that: ”This median figure of 1,110 hours represents about 29 weeks,
full time – that is, about 7 months (excluding holidays)”. Using this as context, we do
not have the resources, at least concerning the time needed, as seven months full­time
working on this, theoretically supported by more people than just the two of us, would
be outside the scope of possibilities for our thesis. We, however, find that it should be
possible to limit and structure our area of interest to a point where we still fulfil the need
for systematic literature in the areas of concern for our thesis but in a scope that is doable
with the time and resources available to us. Having answered the two questions posed
positively, we have verified that we are ready to look at conducting a structured literature
review, according to Petticrew & Roberts guidelines with the mentioned addenda. Using
their 12­step list as further inspiration for adaptation, we will consider steps like a critical
appraisal, that is, a second appraisal after data extraction, As such, we end up with the
eight steps we will use, based on Okoli et al. but with inspiration added from Petticrew &
Roberts and Kitchenham & Charters. It looks like the following:
1. Purpose of the literature review
2. Protocol and Training
(a) Developing a review protocol
i. Background
ii. Research questions
iii. Search strategies
iv. Selection criteria and procedures
v. Quality assessment checklist and procedure
vi. Data extraction strategy
vii. Synthesis strategy
viii. Dissemination strategy
ix. Project Timetable
(b) Training
(c) Evaluating the review protocol
3. Searching the literature
4. Practical screening
5. Quality appraisal
6. Data extraction & critical appraisal
7. Synthesis of studies
8. Writing the review
(a) Dissemination strategy (In our case, hand­in of thesis)
20
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:30==
(b) Formatting review
(c) Evaluating final review (In our case, examination of thesis)
Having the structure to follow for conducting our structured literature review, next natural
step is understand and use it.
3.1.1
Purpose of the literature review
According to Okoli et al. ”The first step in any review requires the reviewer to clearly iden­
tify the purpose and intended goals of the review. This is necessary for the review to be
explicit to its readers.” [59] Likewise, Kitchenham & Charters also start their list by iden­
tifying a need for a review. In their guidelines, they list different reasons for performing a
systematic literature review, amongst them are: ”To summarise the existing evidence...”
and ”To identify any gaps in current research...” or as they describe later in their guide­
lines ”The need for a systematic review arises from the requirement of researchers to
summarise all existing information about some phenomenon in a thorough and unbiased
manner” [62]. Our previous section in methodology that answered the two questions from
[61] for relevance of interview, as well as the problem and research question section 1.2
of our thesis, showcase the purpose of our literature review.
3.1.2
Protocol and Training
Developing a review protocol
Developing the review protocol might be the most important step of the process following
the purpose. The purpose gives the review meaning and grants a goal, whereas the pro­
tocol gives form and structure to that purpose by generating a framework for the process.
To create the protocol, we will follow the steps below from Kitchenham & Charters [62],
integrated into our 8­step plan:
1. Background ­ During the initial phase of our research on cybersecurity in vessel
OT, in consultation with our thesis advisor, it became apparent that the quantity and
breadth of the collected papers merited a more comprehensive literature review.
Consequently, we revised the primary objective and contribution of our thesis to fo­
cus on conducting a structured and systematic review of the existing literature on
vessel OT security in the maritime industry, based upon the guidelines and method­
ologies found in in Okoli et al. [60], Petticrew & Roberts [61] and Kitchenham &
Charters [62]. This purpose of what we have described in 1.2. Overall it can be
summarized in our own more specified phrasing of a reason mentioned in Kitchen­
ham & Charters: “To summarise the existing evidence concerning vessel OT and
the security challenges it faces”. [62]
2. Research questions ­ For us, it is the research questions of our thesis, we wish to
answer, and as such, it is also the focus for our literature review. A note in order to
keep as good scientific practice as possible – our initial research into the maritime
industry, was based on an interest for third party vendors and supply chain risk
management when it came to vessel OT cyber security. As such, this might have
affected us subconsciously while conducting our literature search, though we have
tried our best to remain objective, as well as treat is as any other relevant theme
within our thesis.
3. Search strategies ­ This is where a strategy is defined for searching through the
literature for potentially relevant sources of knowledge. As Kithcenham & Charters
explain, this step will include resources and search terms to be used. We have de­
cided to use two databases in which to do our searches, the one will be DTU Findit,
the other Google Scholar. The reason we went with these two and only these two
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
21
==PAGE:31==
is that Google Scholar in itself is quite extensive, and DTU Findit gets us data from
many other databases, which we would normally have added to our list, (Scopus,
IEEE, Springer, Elsevier, MDPI, Sage, TransNav, IOP, Emerald amongst others),
so we can use it as a ”catch­all” tool, giving us the same results but with a bit less
work doing the searches. In addition, we wanted to get an understanding of the
topic, as well as a deeper look into state of the art. Therefore we have decided also
to look into industry white papers and add relevant results to the review. To ensure
a comprehensive literature review, we supplemented our research by including rel­
evant industry papers obtained through newsletters, industry contacts, and various
online sources such as Google and Linkedin. This approach allowed us to incorpo­
rate both industry­specific insights and a wide range of scholarly resources in our
study.
Search Terms Databases
Search Terms White Papers
”cyber & security & maritime”
”maritime cyber security” & ”operational technology”
”cyber & security & maritime & ot”
”cyber threats” & maritime & ship & vessels & risk & ”operational technology”
”cyber & security & maritime & ships & vessels & ot”
”cyber security” maritime & survey & ”operational technology”
”cyber & security & maritime & survey”
”cyber security” maritime & review & ”operational technology”
”cyber & security & maritime & review”
Table 3.1: Search Terms
The search terms we have decided on, in order to both get us topic specific papers,
as well as the ones with a broader perspective of the topic, that might contain im­
portant information to help us answer our research questions as well are shown in
table 3.1
4. Selection criteria and procedures ­ The selection criteria are the guidelines for which
papers found using the search strategy to include and exclude from the review.
Inclusion criteria will most often be topological, based on the research questions. In
comparison, exclusion criteria will often be more practical and quality based. The
procedures being designed will concern themselves with how to use the criteria
and how to evaluate a paper based on the criteria, as well as protocol for handling
disagreements between evaluators of papers. For our procedure we have set up
the following 4 Steps:
(a) Go through the titles and remove any that obviously was a hit coming from a
”false positive” when being added to the list of relevant literature
(b) Start downloading all the papers on the list while excluding all papers that
shouldn’t be on our list of papers due to exclusion criteria. Exceptions can
be made for papers older than 2017 if they seem of critical importance for us to
better understand the area being reviewed. Though they will not be included
in the review, they might be relevant for our overall understanding and making
of our thesis.
(c) Read through the abstracts, and if needed conclusions, to only keep papers
relevant based on our inclusion criteria, as well as remove any not complying
with our exclusion criteria, that we might have missed earlier.
(d) Through the process keep 3 lists, one with the papers to include, and one with
the papers we exclude, either for not adhering to the inclusion criteria or for
matching our exclusion criteria. Finally, keep a list of papers that we are not
including, but where we are uncertain about the exclusion because it might
be relevant if the direction of the thesis changes, or if it was difficult to judge
22
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:32==
whether or not it was within inclusion criteria.
The list of inclusion criteria (IC), which must all be present in a given paper for its
inclusion in the review:
• IC1 ­ paper covers maritime vessels (ships)
• IC2 ­ paper covers maritime operational technology
• IC3 ­ paper covers maritime cybersecurity and/or risk management
Exclusion criteria (EC), a single one of which will disqualify a paper from the review:
• EC1 ­ paper is not available in English
• EC2 ­ paper is not freely available (e.g. hidden behind paywalls, and not ac­
cessible through DTU Findit)
• EC3 ­ paper is older than 2015
In the last step of the procedure we have mentioned keeping lists, one for good
ones, which we call the ”green list”, one for exclusions we call the ”red list”, and
one for exclusions we are uncertain about we are calling the ”yellow list”. We have
decided to have the yellow list, in order to halt our work on the review if we end up
with something we are uncertain about. This could both be due to only one of us
having gone over the paper and wanting the input of the other. Alternatively, it can
be because we both are uncertain, and in that case, we find it better to focus our
energy on the next relevant paper on the green list, and then if time permits, or the
topic changes sufficiently while working on our thesis and the review, we can go
back and look at the yellow list, to see if certain papers have become relevant.
5. Quality assessment checklist and procedure ­ This point is one of the more difficult
to both define and conduct. The purpose is to assess the quality of research of the
papers that have been included after criteria filtering. Petticrew & Roberts, take a
nuanced approach, where quality assessment is not necessarily a include/exclude
criteria but something to be aware of and weigh when using the papers. They do
however warn against using papers of too poor quality. Where that line is drawn and
how it is assessed will often be a question of personal judgment both while designing
the quality assessment procedure and while using it for the assessment of papers.
As our methodology sources mention, this is a difficult step, and as we also had
some uncertainty going in, as well as difficulty defining our procedure. As we shall
define shortly, we decided to let us lead by our strategy for data extraction. As such
what we settled on quality assessment­wise, was as long as a paper is relevant to
based on our selection criteria, we want to initially include it, though we will give it
a quality score for our own use. This is done, as even though a paper might be of
poor quality we can still gain an understanding of what areas of research are being
looked into as part of a larger “meta­analysis” of the domain. Of course, there is
a limit, we do not wish to include completely bogus research and fake data on the
grounds we just thought it was a badly written or poor­quality paper. As such the
way we intend to do a quality assessment is to look at the following:
• Where is it published (Does it seems like a legitimate scientific journal / confer­
ence paper)
• Is the paper peer reviewed?
• Is political/monetary interest obvious or clearly stated, or is it tried hidden?
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
23
==PAGE:33==
As long as the paper is published from a trustworthy source, being properly peer
reviewed and in that way lives up to minimum for scientific practice we shall include
it. In the same way we will include papers even though they might have a monetary
or political agenda, as long as it is not being done in a way trying to conceal it and
the ways it could have affected results. E.g. a lot of industry white papers will of
course have a focus from the company publishing it, as they believe or at least want
to sell the idea that their products are the best. Though that might not be the focus
of the paper, we will stay aware that it has been published with a monetary purpose
in some way, but that doesn’t mean the data, the knowledge about threats and ways
to combat them are not relevant. As an example, one of the papers we found ended
up including a lot of not very subtle political pro­Russia propaganda, and as such
the finding and conclusions of the paper has been disregarded. However we still
included it in our sources, as we find it interesting what themes or topics are being
researched in Russia with their perspective, and as such, might be relevant for our
data analysis.
6. Data extraction strategy ­ This step is used to design ways to extract data from the
included papers to answer the research questions. We have chosen to make a large
outlining table in excel for our data extraction. For each paper we add a row, and
then use the columns to quantify different data. We keep a column for work com­
ments to ourselves regarding the paper. The remaining columns can be divided
into three categories. First category is the information about the papers that are
practical, but not about the content. That is, name of the paper, author/company of
paper, published year and number of pages. The second category are our themes.
As we will talk on when going into synthesis, we will use a thematic approach to
data analysis, and as such, we have build our table to support this approach as best
possible. We had a handful of expected themes when starting our literature review,
and then, as we read more and gained a deeper insight into the domain, we added
themes the literature revealed along the way. The final category of columns, we
define as thematic support. These are columns for data we find interesting or rele­
vant, but are not an identified theme. This can be specific keywords, frameworks,
concepts, or something as crucial as the quality of the paper. This way we have a
complete overview of the most relevant aspects of data in each paper, to facilitate
our synthesis.
7. Synthesis strategy ­ This strategy was developed to condense the knowledge from
all the review papers to help answer our research questions. This can be done in
several ways, from meta­analysis, as both Kitchenham & Charters as well as Pet­
ticrew & Roberts’s mentions. Narrative handling of the results of the data or use of
graphical aides of quantitative data for the synthesis are also suggested. According
to [61], [60] and [62] the synthesis is complex, difficult and often a very interpretive or
biased exercise. This leads to the need to be so as concise as possible about syn­
thesis steps taken. For us we chose to mix quantitative and qualitative approaches,
to widen our analysis and thereby the understanding we can extract from the data.
Furthermore, as we mentioned under data extraction, we have made an effort to
tabulate data from our sources in an excel document, helping us draw conclusions
and compare data more readily, witch were a recommendation found in Petticrew
& Roberts. Based on that, we have chosen to take a thematic analysis approach
to the literature review, for two reasons. One we believed it to be the best way to
gain understanding of the domain, and two, it helped us in our approach to the in­
terviews, and thereby our possibility for comparison, and bringing them together in
24
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:34==
our discussion. This strategy should be apparent in the literature review proper.
8. Dissemination strategy ­ Relevant as no one should be writing a literature review
in a void, without purpose. So it is the strategy to get the review to the people it
was meant for. For us this is straight forward, as our dissemination strategy is to
hand in our thesis, and one could a bit superficial argue that our examination will be
our peer­review. Based on the examination, further dissemination strategy can be
designed with our thesis advisor, if publication is sought.
9. Project Timetable ­ Kitchenham & Charters include this, and we find it a valid idea
to have as part of the protocol development. Having a timetable for the project to
avoid getting hung up on and behind schedule due to minor details is a valuable pro­
cess. However, one should be open to changes due to unforeseen situations. We
have needed to adjust our timetable repeatedly along the way, to meet unforeseen
challenges, but without an overall timetable we could adjust from, we would believe
hand­in would not have been possible on time.
Training & Evaluation
Post review protocol development, is training followed by evaluation. This is to make sure,
especially on a multi­person project, that the review is done in a consistent and cohesive
way, and doesn’t become volatile due different approaches to the protocol. As Okoli et
al. write”The initial protocol can only be called a draft until after training is completed, for
the training process will doubtlessly reveal problems that will need to be corrected before
the final protocol is completed.” After training comes evaluation, as just as with training,
this can lead to the need for revision of the protocol, until it arrives at a better and final
state. We familiarized us with the protocol by going through it together. Also we did the
initial sorting of found sources together, and discussed the use of the protocol, until we
were in agreement in how to rate and how to extract data from papers as well as gauge
what data was relevant. Finally we have flagged new themes, doubts, papers containing
plagiarism or propaganda for each other to discuss and use for continuous evaluation of
our protocol.
3.1.3
Searching the literature
The first step after developing the protocol, is to get started using it, and initiate the litera­
ture search. Initially relevant academic papers on security surrounding maritime OT were
identified by using Google Scholar and DTU Findit. Table 3.2 lists the keywords used as
well as the number of papers found. Thereafter only papers more recent than 2015 were
selected to best represent the most present developments within the field. The Google
algorithms were then used to present the most relevant search results up front. The re­
sults from the DTU Findit database was found to be overlapping with Google Scholar for
the majority of relevant papers. Following this rigorous selection process, we identified
173 academic papers that underwent further screening for their suitability and alignment
with our research objectives.
Search Term
Google Scholar
DTU Findit
”cyber & security & maritime”
45.800
307
”cyber & security & maritime & ot”
1.780
8
”cyber & security & maritime & ships & vessels & ot”
21.000
3
”cyber & security & maritime & survey”
22.500
15
”cyber & security & maritime & review”
35.500
43
Table 3.2: Search Terms & # of results for academic search engines
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
25
==PAGE:35==
Further, a search for relevant industry papers was done through Google’s general search
engine. The method was similar, but due to the overwhelming amount of ”hits” the search
queries had to be refined more ­ in table 3.3 an overview of the searches performed can be
seen. A few industry papers were included directly from conferences, relevant newsletters
and online sources such as Google and Linkedin to ensure comprehensiveness for a total
of 297 initial sources.
Search Term
Google
”maritime cyber security” & ”operational technology”
2.520
”cyber threats” & maritime & ship & vessels & risk & ”operational technology”
5.930
”cyber security” maritime & survey & ”operational technology”
6.090
”cyber security” maritime & review & ”operational technology”
15.200
Table 3.3: Search Terms & # of results for white papers through Google
3.1.4
Practical screening
The subsequent step, in accordance with the established protocol, involves conducting a
practical screening of the literature obtained during the search process. This screening
procedure utilizes predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria to streamline the identified
literature. As outlined in our protocol, we made the deliberate decision to retain papers
of varying quality, although we assessed and graded their respective quality to assign
more weight to reliable and authoritative sources, while also retaining others for a meta­
analytical perspective.
To execute the screening process effectively, we implemented a two­round approach
based on our selection criteria. Initially, papers were assessed based on the abstract,
introduction, and conclusion sections. Subsequently, the remaining papers underwent a
thorough read­through. These screening rounds significantly reduced the number of pa­
pers, resulting in a final selection of 150 papers that served as the primary source material
for our literature review.(See appendix A.1 for full list)
3.1.5
Quality appraisal
As seen in our primary methodology sources, quality appraisal often can be very difficult,
as evaluating the quality of a study can be challenging. However, we have tried to fol­
low best practices from Kitchenham & Charters as well as possible when judging quality,
including considering each papers methodology, publisher etc.
3.1.6
Steps 6 through 8
The final steps of the literature review is to extract data, synthesize data and writing the
review. The methodological choices made for this, has been explained in our protocol,
and as such, following steps 6­8 of our protocol results in the literature review written in
4.
3.2
Interviews
To enhance our understanding of the subject matter and broaden the insights gained from
the literature review, a series of interviews were conducted with Subject Matter Experts
(SMEs) who possess expertise in the field. These interviews were instrumental in provid­
ing a diverse range of perspectives on the cybersecurity challenges encountered within
the maritime industry, specifically concerning OT employed on board vessels. By engag­
ing with these experts, we were able to obtain valuable insights and enrich our research
with real­world experiences and practical knowledge. As highlighted by Rowley et al. con­
ducting interviews serves as a valuable method when: ”The research objectives revolve
26
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:36==
around gaining insights into experiences, opinions, attitudes, values, and processes”[63].
By incorporating interviews into our study, we aim to go beyond the existing literature and
acquire more perspectives on the cybersecurity challenges faced by the maritime indus­
try, specifically pertaining to operational technology on vessels. This approach enables
us to add an additional dimension of understanding to our thesis, enriching the overall
analysis and contributing to a more comprehensive examination of the topic.
Interviews can roughly be divided into three categories: Structured, semi­structured and
unstructured.[64] Structured interviews use predefined questions in a way that just as well
could have been a survey send out to people, and will primarily be used for quantitative
data collection. Opposite stands the unstructured interview, that will often start with a
single open ended opening question, from which the interviewer will build upon based on
the answer from the interviewee. This enables a researcher to research an area without
preconceived ideas or expectations but is also very demanding and challenging to conduct
. The semi­structured interview is in between, for which the idea is to have predefined
questions and ideas for the research, but the questions will be open­ended with room to
follow up, and go deeper into an area, depending on the answers one gets. We have
chosen to go with the semi­structured approach, in order to ensure we get consistent
data from our questions, but still with room to expand our knowledge with as extensive
amounts of data as possible. We have decided to include a handful of questions that
would fit in a structured interview, to get some basic data, and further ensure consistency.
Those questions we define as ”hard”, as they are more quantitative hard facts, whereas
the questions for the rest of the interview we have categorized as ”soft, as they will be
more open­ended and qualitative in design. The reason we decided to go with the semi­
structured interview approach and including the more open­ended ”soft” questions is to
utilize the fact that interviews can change as you learn, thereby making it possible to
ask follow up questions and go deeper into the area of expertise of the interviewee as
explained by Decarlo et al. [65].
The interviews were conducted with the purpose of achieving a comprehensive under­
standing of the context surrounding cybersecurity in maritime OT systems. The ”soft”
questions utilized in the interviews were broad in nature, encompassing topics such as
threats, challenges, and approaches that are commonly deployed in the industry, driven
by requirements, necessity, or practical effectiveness.
These ”soft” questions were organized into broader categories that aligned with our information­
seeking objectives. These categories included:
• Past and Future Perceptions: This category aimed to explore trends and develop­
ments in the industry, considering both historical perspectives and future outlooks.
• Interconnectedness: The focus of this category was to gain an understanding of the
integration between IT and OT, as well as any relevant technological advancements.
• Risk Perception and Awareness: This category aimed to assess the level of under­
standing and preparedness within organizations regarding cybersecurity risks.
• 3rd Party Risk Management: This category explored the management of risks as­
sociated with third­party vendors and the overall handling of cybersecurity both in­
ternally and externally.
The general interview guide can be found in appendix A.2. The intention behind these
question categories was to provide a framework for the interviews while allowing flexibility
to adapt to the individual strengths and expertise of each interviewee. This approach
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
27
==PAGE:37==
ensured that the interviews provided a wealth of information by capitalizing on the unique
insights and perspectives of each participant.
The interviews have been conducted in Microsoft Teams and have been recorded and
transcribed. The recordings will be kept secure in accordance with good practices to
comply with GDPR. Once the thesis has been defended, all recordings will be deleted. As
some interview participants have requested anonymization, we have decided to anonymize
all. Therefore it has further been decided not to include transcriptions in the appendix but
the content of each interview can be discussed upon request without breaching anonymiza­
tion. Storage time of the encrypted transcriptions will extend in case the content of the
thesis will be published, however, any interviewee may request deletion of their transcript
at any time.
The data from the interviews have been analyzed according to [63] where it’s explained
how to handle data analysis, and it says with luck it can be boiled down to two com­
ponents ”organizing the data set” and “presenting and writing up the data”. The author
further explains that ”there is an assumption that you will be conducting thematic analy­
sis.” Therefore we have decided to follow this standard. This also intertwines well with
a thematic­inspired approach to our data synthesis in our review, which will lend itself to
a natural convergence in our discussion. The methodology used for the thematic analy­
sis will be the guidelines from Braun & Clarke [66], and Decarlo et al. [65]. In order to
have an extensive and thorough approach to the interview, we have chosen to combine
both deductive and inductive thematic pattern identification. In the deductive approach,
you base your analysis on your preexisting theoretical knowledge and groundwork and
will look for predefined themes in the data, which will often also have helped inform and
design the questions for the interview, and will often focus on analysis based on the same
themes as the one predefined by the questions. In contrast to the inductive approach, we
as researchers try to free ourselves of predefined themes to code the data. In this way,
you let the entire range of data guide your analysis, wherever it takes you [66]. For us, we
mainly use the deductive approach, as we had already identified themes from the litera­
ture review when conducting the interviews, but stayed open for the inductive approach,
both having it in mind when conducting the interviews and then of course while analyzing
the interview data, letting us find new themes, we didn’t anticipate from our first analysis
of our literature.
28
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:38==
4
Literature Review
By conducting a comprehensive literature review, this chapter provides insights into the
evolving landscape of maritime OT cybersecurity. It identifies key challenges, trends, and
potential strategies to enhance security practices within the maritime industry.
This chapter employs the ”People, Process, Technology” approach to cybersecurity [67]
which has the following focus areas:
• Process: The examination of governance, risk, and compliance, including regulatory
frameworks and supply chain management.
• People: The exploration of the human factor, encompassing awareness, training,
and safety culture.
• Technology: Addressing technical approaches and challenges related to security
solutions, autonomy, and AI in vessels.
The ”People, Process, Technology” approach has been chosen for framing the insights
gained from the literature. This is done to emphasize the significance of individuals, orga­
nizational processes, and technological solutions in achieving cybersecurity goals. In this
context, proper training and awareness of cyber threats are crucial for personnel, while
robust security policies, guidelines, and risk management processes play a vital role in
ensuring effective cybersecurity. Employing suitable technologies and software further
enhances system safety.
Figure 4.1: Distribution of sources in People, Process and Technology
To assess the coverage of these aspects in the literature Figure 4.1 illustrates the dis­
tribution of sources focusing on Process, People, and Technology as well as those with
content overlapping between areas. It reveals a substantial emphasis on processes and
technology, while the people aspect is relatively underrepresented. Additionally, some
sources addressed all aspects simultaneously not changing the chart. Finally 12 out of
our 150 sources concerned themselves with aspects outside these categories, and are
not included in the chart. The following sections of this chapter will delve into each aspect
of the approach to explore the extent of coverage in the literature. First, however, we
have to understand the threatscape.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
29
==PAGE:39==
4.1
Cybersecurity threats
The maritime industry has experienced a rise in cybersecurity threats in recent years,
driven by increased technology usage. According to Tam et al., cybercrime went from
not being considered a top 10 risk in 2013 to becoming the second­highest risk in 2018
[50]. Chang et al. highlights 10 major cyberattacks between 2001 and 2018, with only
two directly targeting vessel OT. These included a remote attack on a floating oil rig’s
stabilization system in the Gulf of Mexico in 2013 and the spoofing or jamming of GPS
systems in South Korea [49]. Meland et al. identified 46 cyber incidents in the maritime
sector from 2010 to 2020, of which eight affected vessel OT systems, with half being
attributed to spoofing or jamming of GNSS systems [53].
Chang et al. suggests that the main threats to vessel cybersecurity are hacktivism and
malicious websites [49]. Aslam et al. lists several attack types specific to IoT­connected
vessels, including route control attack, route maintenance attack, flooding attack, sink­
hole attack, eavesdropping, and wormhole [51]. While widely discussed it is still relatively
few cases of cyberattacks against vessel­borne OT systems. Meland et al. lists 46 cy­
berattacks in the maritime sector between 2010 and 2020 and from these attacks only 8
affects OT systems on ships and half of these are likely caused by spoofing or jamming
of the ships’ GNSS­systems. While the industry has not seen the most cyberattacks and
less so for OT – when cyberattack strikes the cost is high [53]. Meland et al. also offers
an interesting threat profile of the maritime sector, which is a relatively small industry with
limited capacity for systematic analysis. The vessels themselves are ”complex sailing vil­
lages” with systems for both communication and industrial control, yet they are built for a
lifespan of 25­30 years with very little control over how software is added, updated, and
connected across IT and OT environments. The competitive maritime market leaves lit­
tle financial appetite for investing in cybersecurity, and the industry is being regulated by
international organizations that focus on minimum technical requirements [53].
Figure 4.2: Cyber incidents by threat category from Schwarz et al.[47]
Schwarz et al. have identified 90 cyber incidents in the maritime industry up to 2021 and
by mapping these by year in figure 4.2 it is clear that the threat landscape is increas­
ing. Seven of these incidents were OT­related and involved spoofing or jamming of GPS
systems, while one was related to a security researcher compromising VSAT satellite
connections using data from the Shodan search engine. According to the same study,
the NotPetya attack in 2017 is still regarded as the worst­case scenario [47]. Ben Farah
et al. discusses the threats towards autonomous, remotely operated, and autonomously
operated vessels, all of which offer a new set of threats that must be addressed from a
30
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:40==
cybersecurity perspective [55]. Akpan et al. add to the existing notion of spoofing attacks
being well documented. The 2022 paper also finds multiple examples of vessels that have
had OT systems compromised by malware, including ECDIS and engine control systems.
Further, the paper summarizes the state of research on the area of vessel OT security
with this: Cyber­enabled ships are among the most critical infrastructures that already
rely heavily on digital services, and malicious disruption of their operations can lead to fi­
nancial and environmental damage or even endanger human safety. However, maritime
cybersecurity has not been deeply investigated[15]. Ashraf et al. offer a comprehensive
analysis of possible attack methods for a range of standard OT equipment supported by
examples from the literature that are likely valid up till the present day. But for Ashraf, the
most relevant examples are from spoofing or jamming of systems such as GNSS, AIS,
NAVTEX and GMDSS. Cases of onboard IoT, ICS, or other cyber­physical systems being
directly attacked are mostly missing [56].
4.2
Process ­ Governance & Risk
The protection of any organization’s network is a matter of delivering consistent, mea­
surable, and relevant solutions in accordance with relevant legislation in the given area
of industry. In the context of maritime organizations, Governance, Risk, and Compli­
ance (GRC[68]) play a vital role in cyber security risk management for vessel OT. It en­
compasses establishing robust governance structures and processes that promote trans­
parency, accountability, and ethical conduct in maritime operations. Risk management
focuses on identifying and mitigating risks associated with maritime activities, such as
vessel operations, safety, security, environmental impact, and regulatory compliance.
Compliance involves adhering to maritime laws, regulations, and industry standards to
ensure safe and lawful operations. By implementing a comprehensive GRC framework,
the individual maritime organization can enhance their governance practices, manage
risks effectively, and ensure compliance with maritime regulations, ultimately fostering
safe and sustainable maritime operations. In the following, the processes encompassed
within GRC as it applies to maritime OT systems, are covered by addressing:
• Governance
• Guidelines and Standards
• Risk Management
• Supply Chain Cyber Risk Management (SCCRM)
When considering the responsibilities depicted in Figure 1.3, it is important to understand
which actors are accountable for specific tasks. While shipping companies bear the in­
dividual responsibilities for SCCRM (Supply Chain Cyber Risk Management) and risk
management, these responsibilities are typically mandated as part of governance and
guidelines.
4.2.1
Governance
A few key organizations govern the maritime cybersecurity domain through regulations:
• IMO
• ENISA
• IACS
These regulations encompass governance principles by establishing guidelines and stan­
dards, and they also address compliance requirements to ensure adherence to the spec­
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
31
==PAGE:41==
ified security measures within the maritime industry. The organizations are described in
Section 1.1.1.
IMO
IMO’s Resolution on Maritime cyber risk management in Safety Management Systems
is established by IMO related to the facilitation of maritime traffic and compliance with
security requirements. It provides governance directives and promotes compliance with
security measures to ensure smooth and secure international maritime operations [69].
Further, IMO is responsible for the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
(SOLAS) and the International Safety Management (ISM) code [70] which with their gen­
eral safety focus constitutes the groundwork for the later cyber provisions.
ENISA
The Network and Information Security Directive (NIS2) by ENISA provides governance
and compliance guidelines for enhancing the cybersecurity posture of critical infrastruc­
ture sectors, including the maritime industry. It outlines requirements for managing cyber­
security risks, incident reporting, and cooperation among EU member states. It entered
into effect on January 16th 2023, and EU member states now have 16 months, until Oc­
tober 17th 2024, to transpose its measures into national law.[71] Consequently shipping
companies in the EU are presently working to become compliant.
IACS
IACS provides Unified Requirements (URs) various aspects of maritime operations. UR
E26 and E27 specifically focus on the cyber­resilience and cyber­security of vessels and
their systems. These requirements serve as governance measures and provide com­
pliance guidelines for ensuring the safety and security of maritime assets against cyber
threats. UR E26 and E27 will be mandatory for classed ships and offshore installations
contracted for construction on or after 1 January 2024 [72, 73]. Despite being strictly an
association of classification societies, the IACS holds a significant position within the mar­
itime industry. Its URs (i.e. standards) carry substantial regulatory weight. This recog­
nition underscores the central role that IACS plays in shaping and influencing industry
practices and ensuring compliance with established norms.
4.2.2
Guidelines and Standards
Guidelines and standards in maritime cyber security provide frameworks and best prac­
tices to enhance cyber resilience within the shipping industry. They offer guidance on
risk assessment, protection of infrastructure, and cyber incident response planning. By
adhering to guidelines and standards, the maritime industry can improve cyber security
measures, mitigate vulnerabilities, and effectively respond to cyber incidents, while ensur­
ing compliance with legislation and industry requirements. Apart from the major guidelines
discussed below most (if not all) class societies have published their own guidelines for
cybersecurity as discussed by Drazovich et al. [52], but outside the scope of this thesis.
The Guidelines on Cyber Security Onboard Ships
The Guidelines on Cyber Security Onboard Ships guidelines [9] are created and supported
by several maritime organizations such as BIMCO [22], INTERTANKO [74], and INTER­
CARGO [75]. In terms of relevance, they are by far the most influential set of guidelines
as they are referred to or discussed in 26 of the 150 sources considered for this thesis1.
The guidelines explain the importance of managing cyber risks in a shipping context and
provide guidance on conducting risk assessments. They highlight the need to evaluate
likelihood, threats, impact, and vulnerabilities when assessing cyber risks. Additionally,
the guidelines offer advice on responding to and recovering from cyber incidents.
1IMO was quoted 42 times, but for a mix of legislation and cyber guidelines.
32
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:42==
The guidelines take into account the NIST CSF[76] as well as the IMO resolution MSC.428(98)
on Maritime Cyber Risk Management in Safety Management Systems[69]. Accordingly,
the guidelines help to ensure compliance in the industry when followed.
Guidelines on Maritime Cyber Risk Management
The IMO MSC­FAL.1/Circ.3/Rev.2 Guidelines on Maritime Cyber Risk Management[8] are
created by the Maritime Safety Committee (MSC) and provide high­level recommenda­
tions to safeguard shipping from current and emerging cyber threats and vulnerabilities.
The Guidelines include functional elements that support effective cyber risk management.
It promotes effective cyber risk management to prevent safety and security impacts re­
sulting from the exposure or exploitation of vulnerabilities in IT and OT systems.
IACS Recommendation on cyber resilience
IACS Recommendation 166 is a guideline provided by IACS to enhance the cyber re­
silience of vessels and their systems. It emphasizes a proactive and systematic approach
to addressing cyber risks in the maritime industry. The recommendation provides guid­
ance on risk identification, implementing security measures, and establishing effective
incident response procedures. The focus is on safeguarding critical systems and data,
ensuring secure communication, and maintaining operational continuity in the face of cy­
ber threats. By adhering to the recommendations, maritime organizations can strengthen
their cyber resilience, reduce vulnerabilities, and improve overall security. IACS Rec 166
serves as a valuable resource for industry stakeholders, helping them navigate the com­
plex landscape of maritime cyber risks and implement proactive measures to mitigate
potential cyberattacks.
4.2.3
Risk Management
For shipowners and their OT systems, a risk management framework is at least strongly
encouraged through the IMO resolution MSC428(98) [69] or required through a classifi­
cation society. Ideally, the framework focuses on addressing the unique risks associated
with OT systems in the maritime industry, such as vessel navigation, communication,
propulsion, and cargo management. It involves identifying potential vulnerabilities in OT
systems, assessing their potential impact on maritime operations and safety, and imple­
menting measures to mitigate these risks. Most papers on maritime OT security discuss
some form of cyber risk management frameworks and while there exist a number of gen­
eralized frameworks such as ISO 27001[67] and NIST CSF[76], both OT­specific (i.e. IEC
62443[77]) and maritime­specific (i.e. MaCRA[78]) frameworks exist and are discussed
in multiple papers [79, 80, 81, 82, 13, 83]. In figure 4.3 an account of the most cited
frameworks in the source materials (i.e. an indication of their relevance to maritime OT
security).
The NIST, ISO, and MaCRA frameworks stand out as the more widely used frameworks
by a solid margin. By adopting an OT­specific risk management framework, maritime or­
ganizations can enhance the security and reliability of their OT systems, safeguard critical
operations, protect against cyber threats, and ensure the safe and efficient functioning of
their vessels. The following sections review the top three individual cyber security risk
management frameworks and discuss usage in maritime OT security literature.
ISO27001
The ISO 27001 standard follows a risk­based approach, focusing on the identification,
assessment, and treatment of information security risks within an organization. It provides
a framework for establishing, implementing, maintaining, and continuously improving an
information security management system (ISMS)[31]. The standard contains a set of
security controls divided into controls covering people, processes, technology. Further
key elements of the ISO 27001 standard include:
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
33
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.3: Cyber security risk management frameworks identified in the 150 source pa­
pers ­ by citations.
• Risk assessment and treatment: Assess and manage information security risks
by identifying assets, assessing vulnerabilities, and determining the impact and like­
lihood of threats. Implement appropriate controls and safeguards to mitigate or man­
age identified risks.
• Information security policies: Establish information security policies defining ob­
jectives, scope, and responsibilities within the organization.
• Management commitment: Ensure management engagement in providing lead­
ership, resources, and support for information security initiatives.
• Documentation and controls: Maintain documented procedures, policies, and
controls to ensure the effective implementation and operation of the ISMS.
• Continual improvement: Regularly monitor, review, and enhance information se­
curity practices to adapt to evolving threats and changes in the business environ­
ment.
While 27001 remains a highly profiled Risk Management standard it is not explicitly dis­
cussed in the main sources for this thesis, since the framework is breaking exclusion crite­
ria EC2 (see Section 3.1 for discussion of literature selection), by being behind a paywall
[67]. However, in 2018 DMA performed an analysis of the industry’s risks and vulnerabili­
ties which concluded that public authorities, generally applied the ISO 27001 standard for
cybersecurity, whereas private­sector players took a broader approach to cyber security,
seeking inspiration from ISO 27001, as well as specific technologies and other security­
related branches such as physical security [84]. ISO 27001 remains one of the major
recommended ISMS frameworks in European countries (e.g.the UK[85], NL[86]).
NIST
The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF), is a widely recognized and widely used frame­
work for improving cybersecurity risk management in organizations [16]. The CSF pro­
34
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:44==
vides a flexible and voluntary approach to cybersecurity that can be applied to organiza­
tions of all sizes and across various sectors. It is characterized by the five core functions
[76]:
• Identifying the risks and quantifying vulnerabilities.
• Protecting by implementing safeguards and controls.
• Detecting by continuously monitoring systems and performing threat assessments.
• Responding by developing incident response plans, conducting drills and exer­
cises, and establishing communication channels for reporting
• Recovering by having prepared for restoring normal operations after a cybersecu­
rity incident, including recovery plans and post­incident analysis,
The NIST framework and its usability in the maritime context are heavily discussed. Mul­
tiple papers identify shortcomings, such as the lack of specificity to the unique aspects of
the maritime environment and the absence of guidance on incorporating cybersecurity in
the system design process as discussed by Drazovich et al.[52]. Tam et al. highlights that
the NIST IT risk framework assumes static physical and network security, which does not
apply to systems on moving ships, suggesting the need to combine the NIST frameworks
to cover both physical and cyber risks [87].
In terms of control designs, Progoulakis et al. emphasize the complexities introduced
by cyber­physical systems in maritime OT, where physical reactions and preventing dis­
astrous outcomes are crucial. They note that the NIST CSF and other industry­neutral
cybersecurity standards do not adequately address these risk dimensions but suggest
that periodic evaluation of controls’ effectiveness and applicability can enhance maritime
cyber security[7].
Erstad et al. critique the NIST framework for its focus on cyber security and limited consid­
eration of cyber resilience as an ongoing process involving learning and evolution. They
argue that cyber resilience should be integrated into risk assessment and management,
proposing that the NIST framework should incorporate stronger resilience principles [88].
Potamos et al. mention the NIST Cybersecurity Framework as a guide for designing the
proposed Maritime Cyber Threats Detection Framework. They acknowledge its useful­
ness in managing cybersecurity risks and utilize it to inform the design of their framework
for enhancing human skills and systems’ cyber threat detection capabilities in the maritime
domain [89].
In summary, the NIST Framework for serves as a valuable starting point for implementing
cybersecurity measures in the maritime sector. However, it requires customization and
additional resources to address the unique challenges of the maritime environment and
incorporate cyber­physical systems and resilience principles effectively. Combining NIST
frameworks and periodically evaluating controls’ effectiveness can enhance maritime cy­
ber security.
Maritime Cyber­Risk Assessment
The Maritime Cyber­Risk Assessment (MaCRA) framework is a model­based risk assess­
ment framework for assessing cyber­risk in the maritime sector developed by Tam and
Jones in 2019 [90]. It considers a combination of cyber and maritime factors to compre­
hensively present maritime cyber­risks and better inform those in the maritime community
when making cyber­security decisions. The framework aims to support a range of industry
actors in increasing overall global maritime cyber­security.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
35
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.4: MaCRA risk mapping [90].
The framework uses a three­dimensional model from the attacker’s point of view, to de­
termine whether the outcome of an attack is desirable enough to invest the necessary
resources:
• Reward for a successful exploit
• System vulnerabilities and their impacts
• Ease­of­Exploit
The MaCRA framework must correctly model the types of hackers and their motivations
to fully understand this aspect of the cyber­attacker psyche.
Figure 4.5: Threat Triangle modelled to Venn­Diagram of threats. From [91].
The MaCRA framework can be populated with real­world data and used to assess cyber­
risk­specific autonomous ships (see section 4.4.3). The framework maps well with the
threat triangle of security management of intent­opportunity­capability as seen in figure
4.5. In this figure the Reward incentivises the attacker’s Intent, the Ease­of­exploit corre­
36
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:46==
sponds to the attacker’s Capability, and the system Vulnerability facilitates the Opportunity
of an attack.
An example of the vulnerability evaluation of the navigation system in MaCRA is displayed
in figure 4.6 for comparison to autonomous vessels as shown in figure 4.10 ­ note the
presence of NAVTEX, ECDIS, and radionavigation, which are all crew­served systems
not used by autonomous vessels.
Figure 4.6: Effects­Systems­Technology mapped for the navigation system in a crewed
vessel. From [90]
According to Enoch et al. the risk assessment model was developed to evaluate secu­
rity risks in ships and autonomous ships. It considers criteria such as vulnerabilities and
their effects, ease of vulnerability exploitation, and reward metrics. While MaCRA can as­
sess individual vessel system vulnerabilities, it currently lacks the ability to chain multiple
system vulnerabilities to a target system [83].
Tam and Jones recognize that the framework is a relatively new approach for assessing
cyber risks in the maritime sector. It aims to measure dynamic risks that evolve with
technology advancements and ship travel. However, the framework is still in the early
stages of development, and there is a lack of widespread data to fully populate the model.
It also does not assess static risks as thoroughly as other established methods for risk
assessment in manufacturing plants, processes, and supply chains [87].
To improve the MaCRA framework, Tam et al. propose to extract cyber and real­world
training ship data from CyberMAR. This would provide valuable insights and increase
the validity of cyber­risk assessments. Additionally, incorporating data from cyber range
training exercises would offer more system­level and human reaction statistics, enhancing
the repeatability and confidence of experiments [92].
In summary, MaCRA considers vulnerabilities, exploitability, and rewards but currently
lacks the ability to chain multiple system vulnerabilities. The framework is still in develop­
ment, and more data is needed to fully populate and enhance its capabilities.
ISA/IEC 62443
The ISA/IEC 62443 is an OT­specific series of standards developed by the International
Society of Automation (ISA [93]) and approved by the International Electrotechnical Com­
mission (IEC [94]). Specifically tailored for industrial automation and control systems se­
curity. The standards address the entire lifecycle of systems, including risk assessment
and management. While still focusing exclusively on OT systems (although not specifi­
cally maritime) it divides the tasks risk management process (calling it a Cyber Security
Management System, CSMS) into the following categories:
1. Risk analysis
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
37
==PAGE:47==
2. Addressing risk with the CSMS
3. Monitoring and improving the CSMS
The standards do carry some resemblance to the ISO standards but are widely considered
more simple to implement and much more relevant to the context of OT systems.
Even though designed for OT systems security IEC 62443 Bolbot et al. concludes that
”the approach is not suitably “marinised” ” [13]. This does not prevent it from being utilized
for many purposes in several different classification societies’ guidelines (e.g. [9, 95]).
An industry survey from the related Oil and offshore industry showed some usage, but
still just 35% of participants claimed compliance with the IEC standard [80].
Evidently one of the standards most relevant to OT systems is only seeing limited use in
the context of maritime OT security.
4.2.4
Supply Chain Cyber Risk Management
The maritime industry heavily relies on complex logistics and extensive supply chains
to ensure the smooth operation of vessels. However, with the integration of technol­
ogy and connectivity into these supply chains, cybersecurity challenges have emerged.
Supply chain cyber risk management (SCCRM) has become paramount to safeguarding
operations and minimizing the potential cascading effects of cyber attacks ­ the primary
challenges are identified by Kalogeraki et al. [96]:
• Supply chains are vulnerable to cyber and physical attacks due to their complexity
and cross­sectoral nature.
• The use of ICT systems in supply chains increases the risk of cyberattacks, which
can have far­reaching consequences spilling over into OT systems.
• Attackers use advanced techniques and tools to initiate targeted attacks and exploit
vulnerabilities in interconnected OT systems.
• Close cooperation and information sharing among supply chain operators are crucial
to timely reveal and mitigate cyberattacks.
According to Karamperidis et al., the maritime industry is part of a complex supply chain
undergoing major digitalization. The objective of this digital transformation is to enhance
the overall performance of the supply chain. All the while, shipping enterprises are cur­
rently enabling offsite access to onboard systems for third­party service providers and
vendors for purposes of software upgrades, performance monitoring, and maintenance.
These two closely linked activities significantly expand the vulnerability of the entire in­
dustry. It is not an implausible scenario that a crucial cloud service provider or a satellite
communications service provider could be disrupted or completely terminated as a result
of a cyber security breach. The study of Karamperidis et al was based on workshops with
industry practitioners and further pointed to less mature or under­developed risk percep­
tion in Western industry stakeholders [97].
The NotPetya malware attack in 2017 serves as a prominent example of the significance
of supply chain cyber risk management. It exploited vulnerabilities in a minor third­party
application, resulting in widespread disruption and significant financial losses [98]. The
case serves to highlight the need for stringent vetting and continuous monitoring of third­
party applications and services.
Svilicic et al. present a case highlighting the risks associated with third­party applications
in the maritime industry. The research paper explores the cyber threats that arise from
38
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:48==
Year
Ref.
Title
2017
[100]
MITIGATE*: An innovative cyber­security maritime supply chain risk
management system
2017
[101]
Recommender systems meeting security: From product recommenda­
tion to cyber­attack prediction
2018
[14]
A novel risk assessment methodology for SCADA maritime logistics en­
vironments
2019
[102]
MITIGATE: a dynamic supply chain cyber risk assessment methodology
2019
[99]
Raising awareness on cyber security of ecdis
2019
[103]
An Impact­Wave Analogy for Managing Cyber Risks in Supply Chains
2020
[104]
Challenges and Issues in Risk Assessment in Modern Maritime Sys­
tems
2021
[97]
Maritime cyber security: A global challenge tackled through distinct re­
gional approaches
2021
[105]
CR CyberMar as a solution path towards cybersecurity soundness in
maritime logistics domain
Table 4.1: List of papers from source materials discussing challenges or solutions to the
SCCRM
inadequate updating and setup of these applications. Through their study, they identified
16 vulnerabilities linked to third­party services running on the ECDIS, including a web
server application and a remote desktop control application. These services, although
not necessary for the expected performance of the ship’s ECDIS, pose significant risks.
Exploiting these vulnerabilities could lead to ECDIS crashes, unauthorized remote code
execution, and unauthorized access. The study identified high and medium vulnerabil­
ities resulting from the omission of certain services on the ECDIS, potentially enabling
unauthorized remote code execution and unauthorized remote access. The paper sug­
gests potential solutions, including updating the operating system with security patches
and implementing adequate setup measures such as disabling or blocking vulnerable ser­
vices [99]. This research underscores the importance of addressing third­party risks and
implementing robust security measures to safeguard maritime systems.
SCRRM plays a crucial role in safeguarding the maritime industry from cyber threats.
However, from 150 sources, just nine explore the subject in detail ­ they are listed in Table
4.1.
Approaches to SCCRM
Several approaches and methodologies have been proposed in academic papers to ad­
dress this challenge and enhance the resilience of supply chains in the maritime industry.
Duzha et al. introduce MITIGATE, a comprehensive risk assessment approach designed
for the maritime supply chain. The MITIGATE framework, being compliant with ISO stan­
dards, takes into account various perspectives, such as technical and policy­compliancy
perspectives, in order to evaluate risk. It is designed to handle cyber threats within the
maritime supply chain and considers interdependencies and cascading effects that may
arise within an information infrastructure. The services offered by the framework are di­
verse and include collaborative risk management, advanced simulation and visualization
of cyber­attacks, open intelligence services, as well as compliance with security standards
that are specific to the maritime sector. Further, it has been validated through real­life
maritime scenarios and data, it is an approach for identifying, classifying, assessing, and
mitigating risks that impact the IT infrastructures of organizations that are involved in dy­
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
39
==PAGE:49==
namic supply chains. It integrates several activities, such as asset identification, impact
and threat analysis, and identification of countermeasures, in order to deliver an efficient
and effective risk management strategy. [100]. The framework further offers guidance to
supply chain operators on assessing and managing security issues associated with Sup­
ply Chain Services [102, 96]. A study by Papastergiou et al. supplies the studies of the
MITIGATE framework with further data for consolidating its value in risk management of
the IT supply chain [104], which in turn could be assumed to benefit the OT supply chain
as well.
To manage supply chain cyber risks effectively, a taxonomy and framework are proposed
by Guerra and Estay. The taxonomy comprises twelve themes that gather different ap­
proaches found in the literature. This framework aids in the structured management of
supply chain cyber risks, considering the advantages of increased connectivity and sys­
tems integration while addressing the associated vulnerabilities as well as assisting the
understanding of other proposed solutions from the research area [103].
Canepa et al. discuss the introduction of the CyberMar simulation platform which is in­
tended to up­skill seafarers on cybersecurity. Due to its design and integration, it is sug­
gested to be able to teach the participants to be able to identify cyber­incidents much
more effectively. The authors of the paper pose that the platform can also train in the
understanding and management of supply chain­related incidents [105].
In addition to these methodologies and frameworks, industry organizations such as BIMCO
have developed specific measures to address cyber risks in maritime contracts [106].
BIMCO’s Cyber Security Clause provides a mechanism for allocating responsibilities, li­
abilities, and obligations related to cyber security in contractual agreements. It raises
awareness of the risks, ensures the implementation of procedures and systems to mini­
mize cyber incidents, and establishes provisions for mitigating and resolving the effects
of incidents while promoting cooperation between involved parties.
Polatidis et al.
suggests the use of Recommender systems to analyze attack paths
through supply chains as a means to enable likely attack vector predictions and promote
the planning of properly prepared preventive measures [101].
By employing these approaches and integrating them into the maritime industry’s risk
management practices, stakeholders can enhance the security of OT systems, mitigate
some third­party risks, and promote a more resilient and secure maritime supply chain.
The relatively low number of papers addressing the complex challenge directly might war­
rant further studies.
4.3
People ­ The human factor
4.3.1
Awareness
Within the maritime sector, there is a long history of good risk awareness when it comes
to safety, probably because it is an industry that has existed and developed alongside
our society for millennia. And we have to think about sailing, shipping and the maritime
industry in general, from a global and international perspective, as “Maritime operations,
by nature, have been international and sometimes global for centuries”[7]
But as Kessler explains, referencing Sam Chambers’ short article from Maritime CEO Fo­
rum in 2018, the industry is between 30 and 500 years behind in terms of technology [81].
Through the rise in development speed for and increased use of modern technologies,
the maritime industry has had a late start and severe lack of awareness when it comes
40
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:50==
to cyber risks. As more systems are connected to the internet on board vessels, includ­
ing systems essential to power, cargo management, or navigation, the awareness of the
cyber risks it introduces is not properly dispersed through the organizations in the indus­
try. As Canepa et al. says: ”Insufficient knowledge of security procedures and the lack
of security awareness is a rather common problem that is further exacerbated by quick
changing of technological scenarios.” [107]
Kanwal et al. include ”training and awareness” and ”human factor” as two of their six crit­
ical dimensions impacting cyber security preparedness [108]. These aspects are central
to handling and improving cyber security on board vessels in the future. We divide them
into their own subsections, to differentiate between the need for awareness of the threat
and the challenges that entail, and the training needed to raise the awareness.
The severe lack of awareness in the industry is made clear by Mraković & Vojinović saying:
“it often happens that the crew onboard, with minimum or no knowledge about this matter,
inadvertently perform some tasks, frequently resulting in the system being exposed and
open to attack.” [109]
According to Kanwal et al. it has been seen during incidents in the last decade, that
the skill and training to respond with the correct measures to cyber threats , is lacking
for a large part of the workforce in the industry. This hinders the minimization of risk,
and complicates the management of the issues. The fact that awareness is central is
emphasized by IMO which stated that for good and effective maritime cyber management
to be possible, raising the awareness of cyber security risks in the industry is urgently
needed. Kanwal et al. also refer a survey showing that he largest challenge for security
and individual awareness was found to be the standards of training for the personnel [108]
This lack of awareness has for a long time been present in many aspects of the indus­
try. As Progoulakis et al. points out, “The majority of available standards, policies, and
directives focus primarily on the IT side of systems and operations and fail to tackle the
interoperability and threats to OT systems and components in the maritime sector” [7].
As such, this indicates that it is not only the crew of vessels, or on­shore personnel that
lacks awareness. It is propagated throughout the industry, and the awareness and un­
derstanding as such need to be improved for all stakeholders.
Mraković & Vojinović points out, the interconnectedness of different aspect of the indus­
try(vessels, port facilities offices etc.), as well as the evolution of protection, tech use,
and threatscape development ­ all of which occurring in tandem opens for a much more
complex system of systems. Potentially leading to severe consequences of a potential
attack [109]. This perspective showcase the need for awareness not just on the vessel
regarding which risks the vessel may encounter, but also throughout the business or orga­
nization. In the words of Mraković & Vojinović: “Awareness is a necessity in all business
aspects – if there is no awareness among employees at the company headquarters, then
all awareness onboard ship will not have a great impact” [109].
Another concern with awareness that Canepa et al. articulate is the fact that skills amongst
the employees related to security are developing in a slower pace, than the pace the cyber
threats increase. This results in the awareness and cyber security skill gap widening,
instead of being closed[107]
As seen pointed out from several sources, there is a lack of awareness in the industry,
which will only slowly be raised to a high level through thorough training and an conscious
effort to do so. The training is therefore central, both for personnel on­ and off­shore, in
order to prepare for, and hopefully increase the number of avoided, cyber assaults. [108,
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
41
==PAGE:51==
107, 92, 7] This especially is true since it has been found that the high chance of low
awareness among sailors, caused by lack of proper training in the industry, leads it to be
one of the most critical identified cyber threats.[108]
The training developed need to include the importance of the physical protection of IT
and OT assets, and it needs to be brought to the attention of asset owners, operators and
integrators, until it is part of their conscious sphere of thought when considering these
topics [7]. In a survey published in 2019, researching the risk connected with the training
in the industry, it was seen that the standards of training were the biggest problem in the
maritime industry(74.6%) and that though 60.7% of participant responded they had no
cyber security training, 75% thought it would be useful for their daily tasks” [92].
Progoulakis et al. sums up the importance of awareness in the following words: “Finally,
the improvement in communication among stakeholders, the increase in operational and
technical cyber and physical security resiliency, and the increase in operational cyber
security awareness would be further increased for maritime assets by the convergence of
the distinct physical and cyber security functions as well as onshore­ and offshore­based
cyber infrastructure of maritime companies and asset owners.”[7]
4.3.2
The human error
Increasing awareness is essential according to Progoulakis et al., but may still be inad­
equate due to human error, as it is the user of a system that needs to perform training
and act with the correct measures in the case of a cyber attack. The human element is
therefore central for a successful response to such attacks, but also cause of cause of
potential mistakes [7]. The human factor can be seen as responsible for certain risk when
it comes to maritime OT security on vessels. Many of these systems can be seen as
socio­technical systems, in the context and manner that people and technology interact,
and in this confluence area substantial risk may rise[7]. The human factor is one of the six
critical dimensions related to cybersecurity preparedness presented by Kanwal et al. who
describes that between 80 and 90 % of maritime accidents are in some way caused by
a human factor. Humans are often seen as the most vulnerable link in cybersecurity and
that the lacking awareness of people can lead to human errors happening. Referencing
IBM, they explain that: “According to an IBM report, 95% of cyber security breaches are
caused by human error and may result in unauthorised access through a secure door or
barrier, the so­called ‘tailgating’ (IBM 2014)“ [108].
When a human being reacts in an insecure manner, it may be intentional for instance a
disgruntled employee wanting to get back at the workplace company. However often, it
could simply be unintentional with an employee reacting to a phishing email by mistake.
Progoulakis et al. describes this in the context of maritime OT by the insider threat as both
port operator or vessel crew, that acts either intentionally or unintentionally in an insecure
manner, allowing attackers to penetrate the security barriers [7]. Kanwal et al, elaborates
that insecure ways crew can act, without harmful intent for breaching security barriers, are
activities such as going to dodgy homepages, or following bad links, disabling the firewalls
carelessly, or simply using personal devices on shipboard systems [108]. In fact according
to Mraković & Vojinović.: “It is very common for the whole systems to get infected onboard
ship by using infected USB drives” [109]. Therefore the need for improving the awareness
of people in order for them to know how to act in a secure manner thereby lowering the
risks is paramount for maritime OT security.
Kanwal et al. explain that trust is part of human behaviour that causes concern in rela­
tion to security. Social engineering is an ongoing challenge also in the maritime industry
when it comes to access to safety or security­critical systems [108]. As explained by Pro­
42
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:52==
goulakis et al.:“The physical dimension presents unique vulnerability characteristics, as
threat actors can take actions that are initially physical intrusions with an ultimate goal of a
cyber breach.” [7]. As such the physical aspect and the potential for unauthorized physi­
cal access to systems, may lead to cyber access to systems that should be protected by
proper security procedures on the vessel. An attacker might use this access to gain more
data which can lead to further risk and propagation of the problem. As such this is another
aspect, marking the human factor as critical as well as a potential threat vector in relation
to maritime cyber security. [7] The lack of awareness, increased complexity and insecure
behaviour may lead to basic negligence when it comes to proper security measures, as
well as non­compliance with guidelines or regulations. It is therefore essential to remem­
ber just how important the human factor is for OT security. As Canepa et al. express:
“As people are generally considered the weakest link in a computer system, professional
training is now becoming a necessity, not only for raising the users’ awareness but also
for training the technical staff to operate the various protection mechanisms that must be
acquired (e.g., cryptographic protocols, intrusion detection/prevention systems, machine
learning and artificially intelligent modules, digital forensics, etc.)“ [107].
4.3.3
Security & safety culture
Though we as humans can make mistakes we do not exists or operate in a void. The
way we act, react and respond to things around us will often be affected if not controlled
by the environment in which we exist. Therefore, in the case of OT on board vessels, it
is central to understand these awareness challenges in the perspective of organizational
structure.
Traditional maritime safety risks, such as piracy or equipment failure have been largely
mitigated by proper preparations and mitigation measures. Comparatively cyber risks, as
we have shown, are still not at the level of awareness needed in the industry, and though
one could argue that it is a problem of the individual employee or company for that sake, it
showcases a deeper problem with the culture and the cultural expectations to cyber secu­
rity and cyber hygiene existing in the organizations in the industry. This is emphasized by
Kanwal et al. in the following: “To change the behavior of both offshore staff and onboard
crew, shipping companies need to do much more than annual training. A solution could
be to foster a cybersecurity culture that includes an effective engagement with sound and
robust cybersecurity best practices. A refresher training should also be carried out at
regular intervals by shipping companies to cater for the dynamic environment, change in
requirements, new personnel etc. (DNV­GL 2016).” [108]
In many places knowledge and responsibilities are pillared, where safety based on OT
comes from one place, and cyber security is the responsibility of the IT departments. As
more OT systems incorporate more connected technology, the cybersecurity related to
this has often just been included as the responsibility of the IT department, that in many
cases lacks the necessary insight and “engineering background” of these OT systems.
Explaining this pillaring of knowledge is done by Progoulakis et al. this way: “This seg­
mentation of duties includes the segmentation of security (cyber and physical) operational
policies and procedures that basically lead to “siloed” security functions and, in turn, to
hindered collaboration and of interconnected cyber–physical assets and processes and
the reduced capacity to tackle complex security threats (physical, cyber, or hybrid)” [7].
Therefore, focusing on the overarching concept of changing the culture we see that there
is a need for improved training, that keeps this cultural concept in mind. The training
methods being developed to raise awareness, need to be tailored differently, to the cor­
responding actors in the community. It should be fitted, depending on the different roles
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
43
==PAGE:53==
employees fill in the organizations, that way ensuring strong skill and security awareness,
especially for the systems, in which they will come into contact. One framework with this
purpose in mind, which we will expand on later is Cyber­MAR. Canepa et al. showcase
that some of the first results from their training “demonstrate the willingness on the part of
the participants to increase knowledge and awareness on security in a sector that is expe­
riencing a process of digitization in all operational aspects, which is further exacerbated
by the rapid technological scenarios” [107].
Canepa et al. further explain, how it is the responsibility of the maritime organizations to
train their workforce properly on the basis of role and level of responsibility. This further
indicates that the way to think about training security skills has to be propagated through­
out the organizations and be diffused through all roles of employment as a change to the
security culture [107]. According to Progoulakis et al. it is only through the allocation of
adequate resources and a commitment from management to realizing an improved secu­
rity awareness, based on a holistic view from all stakeholders to the process will have a
chance of really changing the culture for cyber security in the maritime organizations [7].
Or as expressed by Mraković & Vojinović: “it should start at the top of the company with
implementation of cyber security procedures through the SMS. That is the most impor­
tant precondition for the future plan development, education and training of seafarers, as
well as for creating appropriate conditions for successful protection against attacks and
threats” [109].
4.3.4
Training and the Skill Gap
As reported by Canepa et al. a major challenge regarding training is the complexity of
the OT systems as described earlier the more vulnerabilities found in these complex sys­
tems, the more complex and difficult it becomes to prepare for the threatscape. This
directly affects awareness negatively and increases the difficulty of training the personnel
to achieve the required skills to handle cyber incidents. As previously described this com­
plexity also leads to the need for specialized knowledge and skills, in order to effectively
protect and defend the systems for which one is responsible. This requires custom and
targeted training for each role and responsibility level within the organization [107].
Mraković & Vojinović split training into two forms. One is targeted at cyber security profes­
sionals and is used in order to keep their knowledge and skills up to date, with the newest
knowledge of rising threats and other security issues not seen before. Thereby they con­
vey awareness, as well as keep the defence levels of their organizations as high as pos­
sible. The other form of training, from which a large proportion of awareness will arise, is
the training of personnel on risks, procedures, levels of authorization, risk response etc.,
which applies to everyone from business managers, to shipwrights to regular crew on the
vessels [109]. As stated by Tam et al. such will need to be trained to a minimum level
of understanding and awareness, to avoid as many threats as possible, as well as know
how to handle, or who to contact, in case of a cybersecurity incident. “Conducting training
programs for both requires dedicated computing infrastructure to simulate and execute
effective scenarios for both sets of trainees. To this end, a cyber range (CR) provides an
environment for just that. “[92]. The concept of CR will be discussed later in this thesis.
Mraković & Vojinović write that online training provided by well­known companies, or even
classification societies is a way to ensure the training of personnel, however, this requires
someone to manage the training, handle cyber assessment in the organization, and im­
plement relevant changes. It is suggested to introduce a CYSO (Cyber Security Officer),
though whoever is appointed CYSO, will have to have the right skill­set and training back­
ground to be able to handle that workload correctly [109]. For OT vessel cyber security
44
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:54==
specifically, Progoulakis et al. suggest making sure there is an onboard expert for the
vessels, “as the likelihood of an intentional or unintentional cyber breach scenario from
an external (i.e., criminal) or internal (i.e., vessel crew member) threat still ranked high”
[7]
Canepa et al. explain that due to the need for training of existing personnel as well as for
future employees, there is a need for existing cyber security professionals with the best
possible education and training within the area, to cover all the security gaps until more
people are trained. With the continued digital development of vessels and OT systems,
this becomes increasingly challenging. Therefore the sooner a new group of personnel
are trained to the required standards, the better, as this will help close the gaps currently
existing in the industry [107].
According to Kanawal et al. training must be performed regularly, and be updated as
new knowledge becomes available, in order to keep awareness high. In order to keep
cyber security skills for mitigating threats at a high readiness level, this skill training and
awareness gain should happen in conjunction with existing cyber security solutions, in­
cluding two­factor authentication, complex password reinforcement accompanied by a
strong password manager, good understanding of firewalls, antivirus software, spam fil­
ters etc. [108]. Finally, according to Progoulakis et al. a focus on both IT and OT including
specialized personnel on board is essential to keep a vessel secure [7].
4.3.5
Addressing the Problem and Future Prospects
In order to address the challenges with awareness and training, three things in literature
have become apparent:
1. A need for a comprehensive approach, ideally with collaboration across the sector.
2. The industry stakeholders have to tailor training to cater a better awareness and
increased cyber security skills of the personnel. Further such educational programs
must continuously be updated to remain relevant.
3. The above should happen in a way, that fosters a better cyber security culture that
entails continuous learning, and hopefully also a more open or accepting approach
to knowledge sharing within maritime OT systems.
Cyber ranges is one of the suggested strategies for ensuring awareness and training. It
is named in the same way as gun ranges, where, instead of being a place for learning
and practicing how to handle and shooting a gun, cyber ranges exists for people to come
and learn and practice how to handle cyber incidents. Cyber ranges is described Tam
et al. whom reveals that: “the maritime sector has yet to take advantage of the available
cyber­range technology to assess cyberrisks and create appropriate training to meet those
risks.” [92]
Canepa et al. describe the Cyber­MAR project, which focuses on creating a federated
Cyber Range (CR Cyber­MAR) for hyperrealistic simulation and emulation of maritime
systems. The project aims to facilitate real­time simulation of cyber­attacks and malicious
attempts on interconnected systems onboard ships or on land. The authors emphasize
the need for extensive training and propose the use of the CyTrONE3490 cyber security
framework as a basis for the project. They advocate for a balance between physical sys­
tems, emulations, and simulations to provide realistic scenarios and the flexibility to adapt
to industry and technological advancements. Additionally, the project aims to develop tar­
geted training exercises tailored to participants’ roles and requirements within the range
[107].
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
45
==PAGE:55==
The combination of real world systems, emulations and simulations is supported by Tam
et al. who indicated that real word systems are better suited for identifying attack vulner­
abilities, where simulations and emulation lends themselves better for scalability as well
as repeatable training programs. As such, the holistic approach combining them all in
a hybrid solution, would hopefully take advantages of each options strong suits, for an
overall better training program. [92]
Another approach to the awareness challenge, comes from Kanwal et al. They explain
how threats can roughly be defined in three groups, internal, external and colluded. We
have touched on internal and external earlier in the thesis. Colluded threat is a combina­
tion of internal and external threat actors, acting in tandem. Mentioning these here, is for
the awareness that these are some of the background training will have to prepare people
for. “Overall, crew awareness and readiness can constitute the primary barrier against
any kind of cyberattack guided on ships (Alcaide and Llave 2020).” [108]. A couple of
source shows how another barrier that can be implemented, with stronger efficiency if
there is proper understanding and awareness in the industry, is monitoring of critical op­
erational parameters. This would be possible as there would be personnel with the proper
understanding and skill level to handle the situation if suspicious deviations are observed
[7, 108].
Kanwal et al. propose a collaborative approach to enhance personnel training in the mar­
itime sector. They suggest industry sharing data with maritime universities in exchange
for high­standard cyber training courses. This training would benefit both students and
industry professionals, addressing the need for improved cyber security awareness. Addi­
tionally, the authors recommend that certification be provided by governments or relevant
maritime organizations to further incentivize seafarers and students in pursuing the train­
ing [108].
4.4
Technology ­ Technical Approaches
In order to explore the challenges and threats in the maritime OT domain, as well as
potential solutions and future developments, the literature has been extensively reviewed.
The following areas have been researched:
• Networking, IoT and increasing connectivity
• Examples of solutions
• Autonomous vessels
• AI
During the review of the papers, statistical data on the OT systems discussed was com­
piled. This data provides an overview of the frequency and extent to which different OT
systems were addressed in the literature. The resulting data is presented in Figure 4.7,
providing valuable insights into the topics covered in the literature.
4.4.1
Networking, IoT, and Increasing Connectivity
29 our sources (≈20%), mentions the rise in interconnected networks, as well as the
general lack of proper separation of networks as a large vulnerability facing the indus­
try when it comes to vessel OT systems. Likewise the interconnectivity increase caused
by the use of IoT devices on vessels and in the industry is also a factor 37 (≈25%) of
our sources either mentions, or focus on, as a challenge for security today. For every
system onboard the vessel being connected to a network, and potentially to the internet,
46
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.7: Number of times a given OT system was mentioned in the literature sources.
the higher the attack surface becomes. In the same way, the better the internet connec­
tion becomes and the larger the bandwidth, the larger the attack surface also becomes.
Bergmann delves deeper into this, and explain that these electronically connected de­
vices, and the data they gather, help crew on the bridge to make decisions, and as the
complexity of handling ship rises, so does the dependence on these systems to assist in
these aspects. The importance of these systems is recognised by amongst others IMO,
that on this background has started the e­Navigation project. There are many benefits to
these systems, both for the mariner on the bridge, as well as the shipping companies, as
the access to both real­time and static data, will raise the situational awareness on the
bridge, as well as increase shipping efficiency, saving on cost for the company [110].
The gathering of data from sensors and other IoT devices on board need to be interlinked
for the automation of data exchange, in order to have a more efficient operation. In addi­
tion the large amounts of data that can be gathered, it needs to be analyzed and presented
to the mariner in a way that improves situational awareness and makes for a safer and
more efficient decision making and ship operation. This situation introduced the concept
of ”Big Data” on vessels, and some of the data gathered may even be used to automate
some of the decisions in regards to running and steering the ship, which we will covered
later. Though this increased connection of devices and gathering of data can improve
situational awareness and shipping efficiency, it comes with an increased risk for vulner­
abilities that can be exploited in cyber­attacks. Bergmann suggest a software updating
regime, in order to mitigate risk towards the ICT systems, as a minimum requirement for
improving the cybersecurity [110].
Kavallieratos et al. provides another perspective on increased connectedness, use of IoT
and Big Data, by covering the concept of having a vessel either fully autonomous or re­
motely controlled, while relying on all the interconnected cyber­physical systems on board
for operation – defined as a cyberenabled ship (C­ES). The authors further elaborates on
the trend in industries with leveraging technologies as IoT, AI and ”Big Data” for improved
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
47
==PAGE:57==
efficiency in companies, increasing connectivity and automation, which is coined into the
phrase ”Industry 4.0”. Since a similar development, as we just have seen, is happening
in the maritime industry, also on board vessels, this has led to this increased use of IoT
and raise in connectivity in the industry, to be called ”Shipping 4.0”. Kavallieratos et al.
thereafter focus on how all these connected systems includes vulnerabilities, and that we
should be aware of the risks this includes, as well as suggest a method to identify the se­
curity requirement for systems on board the vessels. This method is tested on what they
identify as the 3 most vulnerable systems on board a vessel in this context, the ECDIS,
the AIS and the GMDSS, and use it, to elicit the security requirements for these system
[111].
4.4.2
Examples of Solutions
Several suggested solutions for the security challenges the maritime OT domain is facing
can be found in literature as highlighted below.
GNSS
Explored by Dagdilelis et al. the requirements for safe navigation is for the navigator
of a vessel to be able to validate heading and own position, at least according to IMO.
The process of correctly detecting cyber­physical attacks against GNSS, AIS, or other
navigational systems, automatically, becomes increasingly relevant as vessels becomes
more and more autonomous. Likewise does the general resilience against said attacks.
Several solutions has been proposed over time, from analysis of signals electromagnetic
characteristics, to fusion with an IMU, over sensor­fusion to multi­sensor navigation sys­
tems.
Dagdilelis et al. focus on resilient position and heading estimation, as well as real time
monitoring. The idea is to have an auxiliary positioning system, that does not use GNSS,
but instead radar and ENC data to estimate pose of ship, and thereafter use this to detect
if navigational sources is under attack, both to warn the navigator, as well as adjust for it,
and not include a compromised source in the navigational data used. The auxiliary system
is using two stages for positioning, one is a shoreline feature extraction and evaluation.
The other refines the positional guess with landmark triangulation. The idea then is to
use algorithms to compare GNSS with the auxiliary system. Both systems then helps
with position and heading data, witch helps create a robust system, resilient to spoofing
[112].
Another approach to avoid GNSS spoofing, is the development of an improved algo­
rithm for spoofing detection seen in [113]. Here the author presents an algorithm that
can be used now, as the systems exists, without changing the core GNSS. Initial test
looks promising, and when further tested, it can help bring the industry to more robust
and secure state when it comes to mitigating GNSS spoofing.
AIS
According to Goudossis & Katsikas, the purpose of AIS is to improve the safety of life at
sea, and the efficiency of navigation. It facilitates the automatic exchange of continuous
data between vessels, as well as between vessels and coastal authorities, by both send­
ing defined data at specific intervals, as well as receiving data from other AIS in range.
Goudossis & Katsikas looks into some of the threats that can come from the lack of en­
cryption and authentication of data in AIS, such as VIP tracking, gathering of financial
intel, pirates being able to track ships, as well as send false information to use the col­
lision avoidance to affect course of their target. They suggest using a modified version
of Identity Based Cryptography(IBC) they call maritime IBC (mIBC), which should be a
maritime, certificate­less IBC, with a suggesting for proper supporting architecture and in­
frastructure. The idea is to be able both to encrypt data in AIS, as well as pseudonymize
48
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:58==
with a simpler infrastructure support than what is used in normal public key infrastruc­
ture (for encryption), and only have legitimate actors be able to decrypt the data for use.
This can be used as an alternative to turning off AIS in unsafe sea, as turning off AIS will
worsen safety at sea, but is often the practice currently when sailing in areas with higher
levels of piracy. The authors are aware, and mentions there are challenges then, in how
to determine who are legitimate actors that should be able to decrypt data, as well as if
only used in unsafe seas, who define what areas this concerns [114].
INS
According to Oruc et al. there has been a lack of testbeds targeted at INS, even though
INS is an important part of navigation at sea. Similar to other navigation systems INS suf­
fers from cybersecurity vulnerabilities. Several systems has been developed to facilitate
improvement of cybersecurity of vessels, but as these systems need to be integrated into
systems already existing on the vessels, they also need to be tested in a proper test envi­
ronment, before being introduced. Therefore Oruc et al. argues that ”in addition to using a
testbed for verification and validation purposes of the INS, the same testbed, augmented
with cybersecurity testing functionality, can be used to analyze the cybersecurity of the
INS.” They are therefore looking at a technical solution, to test and improve the cyberse­
curity related to INS, by using properly designed and produced testbeds. Their approach
to handling this, is initially to compile a list of ”INS constituents, with all components and
their interactions presented, along with associated international rules, regulations and
standards” and based on that as well as existing literature, ”propose an architecture for a
Cyber­Physical Range, i.e., a cybersecurity­enabled testbed for the INS” [115].
NMEA
As seen earlier, the industry is facing a rising connectivity on board vessels as well as in­
creased use of sensors and other IoT devices. Amro et al. presents how NMEA (National
Marine Electronics Association) have made a series of standards, based on a defined
selection of specifications for communication between electronic systems in the maritime
industry. Amro et al. then use an analytical perspective in order look at the NMEA mes­
sages of interconnected devices focusing on NMEA0183. They create their approach
and analytical methods, with other and future version of NMEA messages taken into ac­
count, and therefore their method can be considered a representative technique to handle
NMEA messages, and the technical aspect of improving security when it comes to NMEA
messages. The NMEA messages is seen having a lack of encryption, authentication and
validation, opening them for several possible cyber­attacks. The approach of the authors
is to develop a method for analyzing possible NMEA message anomalies, and the re­
lationship between cyber­attacks and cause and effect seen expressed by these in the
messages. Their research has lead to a new approach to anomaly detection in the NMEA
messages, that can be used to mitigate some of the attacks they are vulnerable to. There
is still improvement to be done, but the method show promise against several known
cyber­attacks [116].
VDR
Hopcraft et al. explains how VDR (Voyage Data Recorder) is an important technical sys­
tem on board many vessels and often compared with the black box on an airplane. It
stores data, such as location, heading, and environmental factors with a timestamp, at
predetermined intervals throughout the day, and has been central in the investigation of
several severe maritime incidents. It is important to note that some of the recording infor­
mation could be personal for persons on board the ship, and as such, a data breach on
the VDR could also be a violation of GDPR in certain situations. Hopcraft et al. describe
this in detail and provide insight into where they see the vulnerabilities of the VDR, as
well as suggestions to how to improve security. A main focus is the USB access that
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
49
==PAGE:59==
exists, and if proper security measures are not taken, this may lead to the possibility of
internal attacks and manipulation of the data in the VDR, e.g. as a way for crew to cover
up operational errors, or a disgruntled employee to hide trace of malicious actions . This
is a problem, as part of IMO resolution MSC.333(90) includes that VDR should be tamper
resistant. According to Hopcraft et al. beside vulnerabilities from USB connection to the
VDR, remote attacks may also take place, which can access, modify or delete data in the
VDR. To improve the situation, the authors discuss several solutions, amongst them im­
proved regulation, changes that allow companies to make access through standard USB
harder, encryption of data, watermarking or hashing of data, to ensure integrity and oth­
ers. In conclusion they find that there is still a way to go, but that the focus on VDR, as
well as implementation of some of their suggestions, many based on proper IT security,
would be a good first step on the way to improve VDR security [117].
4.4.3
Autonomous Vessels
The increasing adoption of autonomous vessels in the maritime industry presents new
challenges with regards to securing their OT systems. Autonomous vessels heavily rely
on advanced automation and integration of various systems, making them vulnerable to
cyber threats. The reduced human presence on board shifts the reliance on technology,
creating potential entry points for unauthorized access or disruption.
The unique considerations and vulnerabilities of autonomous vessels, highlighting the
need to understand the intersection of maritime operations, autonomous technology, and
cybersecurity is described below. Safeguarding the security of these vessels is crucial to
maintain the safety, reliability, and integrity of maritime operations, as cyberattacks target­
ing autonomous vessels may lead to physical damage, service disruption, environmental
hazards, and risks to human lives.
Some relevant examples of major autonomous vessel projects are:
• Yara Birkeland (YARA): An electric, autonomous container vessel being developed
by Yara and Kongsberg to transport fertilizer products in Norway ­ its intended launch
was in 2022.[118]
• GreenHopper is an autonomous project involving DTU, FORCE Technology, and
DMA. It aims to develop autonomous technology for Danish shipping. GreenHopper
launched in 2022 as Denmark’s first autonomous harbour bus prototype, using AI
algorithms to navigate safely across the Limfjord.[119]
• Milliampere 2 Automated Passenger Ship (APS) was launched in 2022 by Norwe­
gian University of Science and Technology to trial an autonomous passenger ferry in
Trondheim. The project aimed to revitalize public transport using urban waterways
with self­navigating ferries. [120]
• Mayflower Autonomous Ship (MAS): A project by IBM and ProMare to develop a fully
autonomous ship to commemorate the 400th anniversary of the original Mayflower
voyage in 2020.[121]
• Advanced Autonomous Waterborne Applications (AAWA): A research project led by
Rolls­Royce aimed at developing technology for autonomous ships and exploring
their potential benefits.[122]
• Maritime Unmanned Navigation through Intelligence (MUNIN): A European research
project focused on developing technology and regulations for the deployment of au­
tonomous ships ­ the project ended in 2015.[123]
50
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.2 provides an overview of papers considered to cover the theme of autonomous
vessel OT security. The table references the relevant paper, what autonomous vessel
projects they have delivered security research towards, as well as what framework they
use for risk mangement analysis.
Ref.
Autonomous Projects
Automation
Frameworks
[124]
[118, 121, 122]
Degree 4
MaCRA
[125]
Generic, USV
Degree 3­4
STPA
[126]
Generic, USV
Degree 3­4
None
[127]
Generic
None
None
[128]
Generic
Degree 4
STRIDE
[129]
[120]
Degree 4
PHA, SSM
[130]
Generic
None
MCDM, BWM
[131]
Generic
All
NIST
[116]
[120]
Degree 4
STRIDE
[132]
[120]
Degree 4
Threat­Informed Defense­in­Depth
[133]
None
None
NIST, Defense­in­Depth
[134]
[135]
Degree 4
NIST
[136]
None
None
NIST, Defense­in­Depth
[137]
[119]
Degree 4
None
Table 4.2: List of central papers on cyber security in autonomous vessels and their primary
characteristics.
Technologies
Autonomous vessels necessitate distinct sets of sensors and aids for obstacle detection,
unlike their traditionally crewed counterparts. The increased quantity of OT systems high­
lights the heightened importance of cybersecurity in autonomous vessels. Wang et al. list
22 separate OT systems necessary for operating an autonomous vessel among these
are collision avoidance, fault diagnosis, LiDAR system, and edge computing, but also
systems already used by crewed vessels such as ECDIS and AIS [138].
Levels of Autonomy
The level of autonomy in the vessel will be a deciding factor in how to approach the cyber
security of the vessels’ OT systems. A larger crew means more hands to address inci­
dents and intervene when automation is compromised or fails, but since multiple sources
address the limited cyber security skills available in crews the move to shore­based secu­
rity and control centers may actually improve OT security in vessels. IMO Maritime Safety
Committee (MSC) has issued a roadmap to create a Maritime Autonomous Surface Ship
(MASS) code by the end of 2024. Initially, the working papers define four different degrees
of autonomy[139]:
• Degree 1 (Ship with automated processes and decision support): Seafarers are on
board to operate and control shipboard systems and functions. Some operations
may be automated but with seafarers on board ready to take control.
• Degree 2 (Remotely controlled ship with seafarers onboard): The ship is controlled
and operated from another location. Seafarers are available onboard to take control
and operate the shipboard systems and functions.
• Degree 3 (Remotely controlled ship without seafarers onboard): The ship is con­
trolled and operated from another location. There are no seafarers on board.
• Degree 4 (Fully autonomous ship): The ship operating system can make decisions
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
51
==PAGE:61==
and determine actions by itself.
The levels of autonomy identified by MSC is not unlike the ones formerly defined by the
MUNIN initiative (see figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8: Transition from manned to autonomous ships by level of autonomy.[123]
Threats
Autonomous vessels present unique systems and face distinct challenges. In the context
of discussing the security vulnerabilities of unmanned ships, which include remotely con­
trolled boats and autonomous vessels, the paper by Silverajan et al.[127] explores the
relationship between the systems of autonomous vessels and the types of attacks they
are susceptible to. Figure 4.9 illustrates an adaptation of the original figure presented in
the paper.
Figure 4.9: Attacks versus Surfaces. Adapted from [127]
It is worth noting that Silverajan et al. did not consider Vessel­to­Land Communication
vulnerable to Signal Jamming. In general the study focuses on more traditional attack
types. On the other hand, a study by CCD COE[131] identifies multiple threats from
attacks more targeted towards OT­intensive autonomous vessels. These threats include:
52
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:62==
• disrupting RF signals,
• deceiving or degrading sensors,
• intercepting or modifying communications,
• damaging OT systems (i.e. protocols, components),
• disruption of IT
• compromising AI used for autonomous operations,
• compromising supply chains,
• providing physical access,
• and damaging the Shore Control Center.
A thorough analysis of the threatscape against autonomous vessels is done by Kavallier­
atos et al. Using the STRIDE­model of threats2 to analyse potential threats towards a
generic autonomous vessel the most critically vulnerable systems are identified as Navi­
gation System, Human Machine Interface, AIS, and GMDSS.[128] The same paper also
makes a solid job of identifying the systems of an autonomous vessel building on the
works of BIMCO and MUNIN. [9, 123]
Risk Management in Autonomous Vessels
Efforts to enhance risk assessment in autonomous vessels have made significant progress.
These endeavours involve quantifying risks associated with different attack scenarios and
testing the usability of different risk management frameworks.
In a 2020 paper, Amro et al. laid the groundwork for the AutoFerry project [135] by con­
ducting extensive research on stakeholder mapping and identifying secure connection
requirements for autonomous vessels. While the paper focused on implementation as­
pects, it also highlighted avenues for future research [134].
Amro et al. conducted a comprehensive analysis of the Milliampere2 Autonomous Power
System (APS) using the Six­Step­Model. This analysis encompassed APS functions,
structure, failures, cyber attacks, and countermeasures. It emphasized the critical role of
the connectivity manager in system functions and its vulnerability to cyber threats, which
could lead to system failures [129].
Mahbub et al. performed a thorough analysis of a generic autonomous vessel and identi­
fied navigational systems as the most susceptible to cyber threats among the three most
critical OT systems. This finding underscored the need for redundant and cyber­safe com­
munication devices and protocols to ensure their reliability. On the other hand, propulsion
control systems were found to be the least vulnerable among the autonomous ship sys­
tems. While the study did not extensively explore shore control centers and associated
equipment, they were identified as potentially vulnerable to multidimensional cyber threats
[130].
Amro et al. proposed the Threat­Informed Defense­in­Depth approach for managing cy­
ber risks in autonomous passenger ships. This novel approach enhances the traditional
Defense­in­Depth strategy by incorporating elements from the Threat­Informed Defense
strategy. It consists of four stages aligned with the ISO 15288:2015 risk management pro­
cess: planning, managing risk profile, analyzing risks and risk treatment, and monitoring
[132].
2Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation Information disclosure, Denial of service, Elevation of privileges
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
53
==PAGE:63==
Tam et al. expanded on the MaCRA model to delve deeper into the understanding of
future cyber risks associated with autonomous ships. Their research extended the appli­
cation of MaCRA, which was previously used for modeling traditional ships. The study
contributed to the security of autonomous vessels by implementing the MaCRA frame­
work to assess the cyber­risk profiles of autonomous ships. The paper examined three
near­future ship examples, each at different stages of autonomy and designed for different
purposes (e.g., IBM’s Mayflower, Rolls­Royce’s AAWA, Kongsberg’s Yara). The aim was
to anticipate significant risks and vulnerabilities in the future of autonomous ships based
on these diverse projects and the current cyber­maritime risk landscape. The authors
created a mapping of effects on systems using a given technology to identify potential
attacks by expected attackers [124].
Figure 4.10 illustrates the MaCRA Effects­Systems­Technology mapping in autonomous
vessels [124] with a few noticeable differences from the .
Figure 4.10: MaCRA Effects­Systems­Technology mapping in autonomous vessels [124].
The MaCRA approach has proven suitable for autonomous vessels, as evidenced by its
adoption in subsequent papers [79, 140].
Addressing the Threats
The protection of autonomous shipping requires a multifaceted approach, as suggested
by Mahbub Tusher[130]. This approach combines technical guidelines, policies, industrial
best practices, risk management, and behavioral and cultural aspects of shipping to en­
sure a safe and secure adoption of autonomous shipping. Merely relying on compliance­
based actions is deemed insufficient, and a comprehensive strategy is recommended.
In terms of enhancing the security posture of unmanned ships, Silverajan et al. highlights
various IT security methods that can be employed. Proper engineering and subnetting
of the Ship Area Network are essential to limit exposure of vital operations to non­critical
nodes. Network partitioning techniques help minimize broadcast traffic. Keeping endpoint
54
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:64==
protection and firewall rules up to date is crucial for virus and malware detection, prevent­
ing both remote and local malicious traffic. Encrypted links and VPNs can be utilized
to protect communication links between the ship and shore, thereby preventing eaves­
dropping attacks. Additionally, the system design itself can contribute to defence against
certain attacks. Sensor fusion, such as combining inertial navigation systems with GPS,
can help detect faulty GPS data and mitigate GPS spoofing [127]. This solution aligns
with the suggestions put forth by Dagdilelis et al.[141].
The importance of security­by­design is emphasized in both Silverajan et al and the report
by CCDCOE[131]. Throughout the conceptualization, design, and construction phases,
security considerations should be integrated [127].
This recommendation aligns with
the upcoming implementation of the IACS Unified Requirements for Cyber­Resilient ves­
sels[72].
As early as 2018 Omitola et al. made a study on unmanned surface vessels (USVs), while
using an older definition of automation levels the term USV still refers to a lower level of
automated vessel, at least partly remote controlled. The contribution of the paper was the
use of systems­theoretic process analysis (STPA) to provide a systematic analysis of the
attack surfaces and the impact of cyber attacks against the navigational aspects of the
USVs. This approach worked to address concerns about control failure and loss of GNSS
[125]. A different approach to the STPA analysis, STPA­SynSS, is suggested by Zhou et
al. STPA and variations is covered in [142]. Merino et al.[126] also worked with USVs, but
focused on implementing an architecture with five separated levels for the management
and control of fleets of USVs. This architecture increased the security by defining roles
and by limiting information exchanges.
Amro et al.[116] proposes a systematic approach for analyzing navigational NMEA mes­
sages to detect anomalies and potential malicious causes, providing a solution for ma­
nipulation and spoofing attacks towards sensor data. A later paper presented by Amro
et al.[133] proposes a testbed that integrates virtual and physical components to eval­
uate and analyze communication and cybersecurity aspects of autonomous passenger
ships. The paper also outlines an approach for replicating the target system of analysis.
This testbed can serve as a valuable tool for testing and improving security measures in
maritime scenarios.
Dittmann & Blanke[136] addresses international regulations and presents the implemen­
tation of GreenHopper, which demonstrates a system design that can meet the require­
ments for safe behaviour in foreseeable events. The solution includes mechanisms to
handle abnormal behaviours, support resilience to unexpected events, and provide inter­
nal defence against cyber­attacks. The unique component Middleware acts as an overar­
ching unit ensuring overall security and safety goals while preventing modules from con­
straining one another. This exemplifies a security­by­design approach for autonomous
vessels.
Dittman[137] approaches cybersecurity from a purely safety consideration discussing the
onboard artificial intelligence’s ability to encapsulate abnormal behaviours and the capac­
ity to request human aid if the autonomous system cannot manage a problem.
4.4.4
AI
An area of the technical challenges facing the industry, as well as possible solutions to
challenges, from a cyber security perspective, is the use of AI. Machine learning and the
use of AI has expanded rapidly the last decade and several aspects of general cyber
security is concerned with using AI as a tool. Looking at society at large, we have within
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
55
==PAGE:65==
the last year, seen how AI’s as ChatGPT and Lensa.ai have caused major disruption in
media and many people’s daily life. However, though we focus on the specific area of
cyber security concerning OT systems on vessels, we would expect a decent amount of
papers to mention them in some form, if not actually being about the use of AI. But as
can be seen in 4.11 only 20, out of our 150 sources, mentions them at all. Of those only
7 went into further detail than a mere sidenote.
Figure 4.11: AI Representation in the source material.
Liu et al. is looking at it in a context, not of how to use AI for security, but how to add some
more layers of security to AI, when used as a tool for shipping. They focus on making a
computational efficient model, for it to be able to run locally on vessels, on the data they
have from their IoT devices and other local systems. In order to preserve the privacy of
the data, instead of sending all the data to a globally available model for training, the will
have a model training on local data locally, and then only exchange model parameters
with the global model, running on shore. This way, you can have an improving global
model, based on the data of each vessel, but without putting that data at risk. [143]
Lim et al. also includes AI and machine learning from a context of technological advance­
ment, that have a large impact on operational workflow, but not in a context of security
when it comes to AI, neither as an attack nor defence tool [144]. Alop goes a step further,
and talks about the risks involved in overly relying on AI in operational circumstances on
a vessel. As such it goes a step closer to security but is still considering AI from an op­
erational perspective, and indicate that people should remember that AI is a tool, and as
such should be used and appreciated as such, but that actual decision­making in unfore­
seen situations cannot be left 100% to AI [145]. Cho et al. identify attacks on AI and the
machine learning models often used rather extensively in autonomous ships as one of 9
distinctive threat categories. As such, this is another example of AI not being used for
neither security nor attack, but as a complex system that can be vulnerable to attacks.
This in such a relevant position that in 2020, the MITRE corporations took the initiative to
start the ATLAS(Adversarial Threat Landscape for Artificial Intelligence Systems) project,
helping to raise awareness and for researchers to understand and handle the threatscape
related to machine learning [131].
56
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:66==
Covering using and training AI for improving cyber security, is done by Tam et al. Though
the article is centered around the development and use of cyber ranges, the authors
do point out and discuss that the training developed would not only have to be given to
people, but that artificial intelligence could also be trained there. They further mention that
AI, trained with the training models they develop in turn, could help making even better
scenarios as well as identify vulnerabilities in the system faster, leading AI to help as a
tool in this sense [92]. AI is also mentioned as a tool for security by Laso et al. presenting
parts of the ISOLA project framework, that is being developed to handle threat detection
on cruise ships. Here they go through different technical aspects of passenger tracking,
network security etc. And though they don’t go into detail they mention that “AI algorithms
for dynamic detection of vulnerabilities will operate as the main security mechanism of
ISOLA” [146]. Finally both Hyra and DNV also briefly touch upon the threat AI can be,
when used as a tool in the hand of our adversaries, and explain that it can help develop
attacks way faster than has so far been possible [147, 1].
It’s clear that AI holds enormous potential for both development and disruption, also when
it comes to the maritime industry. Clearly from an operational perspective, but also po­
tentially from a security perspective. That there were no more papers from our source
material focusing on AI as a tool for cyber security defensive strategies, or as a part of the
future threatscape, which we believe to be a hole that needs covering, also when it comes
to cyber security for OT systems on vessels. We would therefore argue that the area of
how AI can be used both as a tool for our adversaries, and the threat this might pose, as
well as the potential it holds to help protect and secure our cyber systems should be one
of the next areas of focus for research. Hopefully, that can prepare the maritime sector,
so it doesn’t wake up one day, with a lot of trouble they are unprepared for because the
future suddenly was at the door.
4.5
Summary
• Governance and Guidelines: There is a robust framework of regulation and rec­
ommendation within maritime OT security, established by key organizations and
actors within the industry. This provides governance directives, compliance mea­
sures, and best practices for managing cyber risks, protecting infrastructure, and
responding to incidents.
• Risk Management: There are many frameworks available for risk management.
Using an appropriate risk management framework can help maritime organizations
enhance the security and reliability of their OT systems. Customization and adap­
tation of these frameworks to the specific challenges and requirements of the mar­
itime industry are essential for effective risk management. There are ”favoured”
frameworks despite not all being ”marinised” [13]. Significant portions of academic
literature are devoted to risk management.
• Supply Chain Risk Management: The maritime industry faces challenges due to
technology integration and connectivity in supply chains. Improved cooperation and
information sharing among supply chain operators and improved risk perception are
primary challenges. Addressing third­party vulnerabilities necessitates vetting and
monitoring of vendors. Nonetheless there are relatively few papers on the subject.
• People: Security skills and understanding is in high demand in maritime OT opera­
tion. Low training and awareness within crews weaken vessel preparedness and the
ability to prevent or respond to cyber incidents. Specialized training and education
of all levels of the crew, as well as dedicated CySOs, are recommended.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
57
==PAGE:67==
• Technology: Increased interconnectivity and the use of IoT devices on vessels
pose significant cybersecurity challenges. Several technical solutions have been
proposed to address cybersecurity challenges in individual OT systems. Testbeds
and cybersecurity­enabled test environments are suggested for evaluating and im­
proving the cybersecurity of systems. Two areas see particular focus: Security in
autonomous vessel systems has seen significant discussion in multiple papers and
practical implementations, while the use of AI in maritime cybersecurity remains a
relatively underexplored area.
• Autonomous machines: Various studies have been conducted on risk manage­
ment, security implementations, and related considerations due to the prevalence of
practical autonomous projects. Governing bodies are also addressing this domain
accordingly.
• Inherent complexities: While the industry has established robust organizations,
regulations, and best practices it may create some ”process”­complexity when many
actors implement their own individual recommendations. Similar complexities ex­
ist within the technological aspects through interconnectedness and systems­of­
systems.
58
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:68==
5
Interviews
To connect our literature review to the context of the maritime industry, we interviewed
nine persons with different perspectives on and positions related to maritime security and
vessel OT systems. All interviews were carried out virtually via Teams­recordings, and
auto­transcriptions exist but have been withheld for general anonymization upon request
by some interview subjects. About half of the interviews were conducted in Danish, and all
quotations were translated into English for this thesis. In the following sections, quotation
marks and italicized typesetting indicate the interviewee’s direct wording.
As defined in our methodology, we employed a comprehensive approach, primarily relying
on deductive analysis supplemented by elements of inductive analysis, particularly the
thematic approach, for conducting our interviews. We guided the interview process with a
predetermined set of themes, such as Risk Perception and Management and Third Party
Security. However, we remained receptive and open to any additional themes from the
data, including unexpected insights related to AI.
To effectively organize the findings from our interviews, we categorized the obtained in­
sights into three overarching areas:
1. insights regarding threats.
2. vessel OT security challenges.
3. approaches to vessel OT security.
By structuring our analysis this way, we aim to provide a comprehensive understanding
of the critical findings, enabling a more insightful exploration of the interview results.
5.1
Interviewees
The individuals included in our interviews represent a diverse range of roles within ship­
ping companies, industry organizations, and universities, all of whom possess profes­
sional experience in the field of OT security and the maritime industry. The selection of
interviewees was carefully conducted based on simple criteria:
• Individuals with diverse roles in the industry ad Figure 1.3.
• Professional aptitude within security.
• Leveraged our professional network to identify experts who could provide valuable
insights into the topic.
The distribution of roles and organizational affiliations of the interviewed individuals is
presented in Table 5.1.
5.2
Threats
During the interview, we gained valuable insights concerning threats in Maritime Vessel
OT security. In our first interview, we learned that I1 did not perceive a particular threat
against the maritime sector compared to other industries. Not that the threats don’t exist,
but at least according to I1 as well as I4, they are not more significant than in other sectors,
though they may be different due to the uniqueness of the area, Such differences between
IT and OT will be further discussed under ”Challenges” in section 5.3
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
59
==PAGE:69==
Interview
Organization
Position (role)
I1
Maritime Authority
Head of Cyber Security
I2
Shipping Company
Head of IT
I3
Shipping Company
Information Security Manager
I4
Industry Association
Head of Safety & Security
I5
University
Research Fellow
I6
Industry Association
Head of Security
I7
Shipping Company
Cyber Security Officer
I8
University
Institute Director
I9
Shipping Company
Cyber Security Expert
Table 5.1: List of organizations and roles of the interview subjects.
5.2.1
Worst­case scenarios for single attack compromising a vessel OT
system
During the interviews, the first threat­related topic was the worst­case scenarios. Accord­
ing to I2, the worst­case scenario for a single attack on an OT system would reveal and
hit an industry­wide vulnerability. Such a vulnerability could rapidly propagate and com­
promise everyone, which would mean a high possibility that the people responsible for
fixing the vulnerability would be very overburdened. In turn, this could lead to consider­
able delays in recuperating and returning to functional operations, which in the end would
be at least a substantial economic cost worldwide if not even worse consequences would
come from it.
For a single attack on a vessel OT system, I4 Initially pointed out that any system with
moving parts would be the worst case, as that could threaten the life and limb of human
beings on board the vessel. Otherwise, though it depends on the type of ship, something
with compromised cargo pumps that start spilling oil into the ocean could be a worst­case
scenario because of the environmental impact. Finally, from a larger perspective, some­
thing that uses vulnerability to cause trouble between nation­states or terrorism would be
the worst­case scenario. However, as we haven’t seen anything to this degree, I4 deems
it unlikely. The most likely risk, in the opinion of I4, is ransomware attacks targeted at IT
systems that infect OT systems as collateral damage.
I3 regards the worst­case scenarios compromise of positioning systems (specific to the
sector I3 operates in) but also considers the risk of vessel scuttling from an incident af­
fecting the ballast system or power outages due to a compromised PMS.
When asked about this single attack on an OT system, I5 refers to BIMCO and mentions
severe damage in the form of life­threatening harm or death to persons and its impact
on ships’ functionality and ability to operate. Expanding on this, I5 gives the example of
stranding a ship in an international shipping lane, as the Suez Canal, as a worst­case
example, and comes back to mention the worst case will be on people and the impact
the incidents will have on humans. Furthermore, like I2, I5 mentions cascading impact,
as many of these systems are part of a more extensive network, so a single incident can
cause a domino effect of adverse effects such as delays and backups, to try to recover
and get back to operational conditions.
For I1 blocking a canal or compromising an OT system that brings the vessel to be a dan­
ger to maritime safety is considered the worst­case scenario, again focusing on people’s
lives, followed by a significant impact with ripple effects that can affect both people’s lives
and the world economy.
60
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:70==
I9 follows the trend of considering blocked critical infrastructure, by mentioning the ground­
ing a ship in a canal or port as an example of a worst­case scenario causing global or
wide­spread financial damages rather than environmental or reputational damage.
I6 points out that in the end, the essential part of this is the safety of people, and as such
worst case will be something that compromises maritime safety. More concretely, I6 then
explains that it varies a lot, depending on the kind of shipping company and the vessel
that is under attack. If it was a drilling ship, it could be an OT compromise that resulted in
an environmental catastrophe, which might be different for a cruise ship.
The environmental impact is also brought up by I7, which suggests an oil spill if a com­
promised steering system results in a ship being sailed into an oil rig. This disaster is
an example of the worst case with a compromised OT system from an attack. Though
gaining control of the steering of ships through cyber­attacks is not yet possible, it may
be in the (near) future.
Finally, going for the imaginary worst­case scenario by compromising a vessel OT system,
I8 propose compromising the steering of a nuclear submarine and sailing it into a large
city port with all the terrifying consequences and impacts this will have.
Seeing those being the worst­case scenarios the interviewees thought of first, as worst­
case scenarios for a single attack compromising an OT system on a vessel, it is clear
there are some repeating patterns. First, all nine interviewees considered the impact it
would have on people, and in the worst case, human lives, either directly or through ripple
effects.
The two prominent themes in the patterns are environmental disasters, mainly focused
on oil spills. And the logistic consequences of blocking a canal or central port with a focus
on the cascading impact it would have, as part of a more extensive logistic system, both
on people and the world economy.
Finally, there is the doomsday scenario of a nuclear submarine being compromised, and
though it might be a bit of an unlikely situation and, as such, not the most relevant to risk
analysis, It does encompass the other themes mentioned, human lives, environmental
disaster, and cascading effects further affecting human lives and crippling the logistic
system and through that the economy.
5.2.2
Threat Environment
The threat environment for the maritime industry has changed over the last decade, but
what effect has this had on the threats to vessel OT? Having gone through the worst­case
scenarios to get an understanding of what our subject matter experts consider the central
parts to protect and the reason for us to care about security, we next examined how the
threat landscape has developed over the last 5­7 years, to understand what we have been
facing, working on and are facing today.
As a starting point for the developments over the last 5­7 years, the obvious choice is the
2017 NotPetya attack that severely infected Maersk systems. Every interviewee either
mentions or goes into more detail about the attack and sets it, if not as the reason for the
introduction of the IMO guidelines[8], then at least as a triggering factor for both increased
legislation and an overall improvement in security and awareness about the threats and
challenges facing the industry. Several even express it as a wake­up call for the industry,
prompting management to prioritize it and try to avoid becoming the next learning tale for
others.
Looking beyond the state and industry­wide measures that have happened since 2017
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
61
==PAGE:71==
as a response to the changing threatscape, we see that there are other changes in the
industry that show a development that also affects the threatscape. Especially IoT and
its industrial application are the focus of most of the interviewees. Whether it is sensors
for measuring oil consumption and getting that data back to a shore office or temperature
sensors for containers so a shipping company and its customers can continuously monitor
it, IoT is on the rise in the industry. One interviewee expressed this as ”Trying to play catch
up” since the industry got a late start on cybersecurity, and new technology like IoT is
developing and being integrated fast, making it a continuing struggle to do this catch­up.
A significant challenge with the IoT devices onboard vessels is the added interconnectivity,
which is a move away from the separation of networks, and adds additional complexity
and potential for security gaps. As both I2, I3 & I4 say, this is an increase on the attack
surface, making security harder. Another technological development that could be a giant
leap forward but also increase the attack surface many­fold is increased bandwidth on the
connections on vessels; both I1, I2, I7 & I9 mentions this, and the potential of for instance
Starlink satellite internet.
I1 states that there is still only a very few cyber incidents on board vessels, and from these,
OT is a rarity ­ usually GNSS spoofing or jamming and similar temporary problems. One
could make a comparison of GNSS attacks and DDoS attacks ­ both are pretty limited in
time and space (depending on the attackers’ resources and capability), and so far, neither
has been demonstrated to have significant persistent effects. Since 2018 I1 knows of
just two isolated cases of vessel OT cyber incidents with potential impact on navigation
and vessel safety, neither stated being specifically targeting OT systems on the vessels.
So even though none of the interviewees express knowledge about Vessel OT targeted
security incidents so far, and only attacks where it has been hit as collateral, all these
technological developments that have been mentioned have the potential to change that,
which might be one of the largest changes to the threatscape since 2017, and one that
I2 & I5 specifically mentions as the key takeaway of our interview, as a point to be aware
of. I2 further expanded on this and expressed a wish to forego all the potential benefits of
these new systems than accept the vulnerabilities they might introduce. This, however,
seems to be a point that will have to be conceded to either customer or management
demands, which means it will need to be a focal point in order to ensure this happens
securely, which we will come back to again when looking at the challenges facing Vessel
OT security.
One thing that might be an even larger change to the threatscape than the technological
development is the geopolitical landscape and the changes that have happened since
the Russian invasion of Ukraine. I8 argues that the war in Ukraine has changed the
threatscape, forcing industries to make sure mitigation and counter­measures were put in
place ­ not least because insurance does not cover acts of war. Before Russia invaded
Ukraine, IT security was the priority in information, intellectual property, and data ­ now
physical destruction and OT is ”taking the front seat”. This change is partly focused on
the OT systems as they might enable physical destruction as a credible threat.
So, to sum up, the threatscape challenging us today, we can base it on the following
characterization from I3 on the OT threat environment with these points:
• The big actors (APT/nation­state actors) are very difficult to mitigate even for com­
panies with relatively capable security organizations, as the difference in resources
is considerable.
• The Ukraine/Russia situation, there have been rounds of attacks against the energy
sector, and though it doesn’t lower the difficulty mitigating attacks from a nation­
62
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:72==
state actor, as I8 expand on, it has become increasingly necessary as organization
updates their risk matrix, and need to protect themselves against an act of war,
simply to be on the safe side.
• Malware is starting to have (not sophisticated, but functional) OT functionalities built
in. Coupled with the expanding technological development mentioned above, this
might enable new forms of attacks as the attack surface expands together with the
capabilities of our adversaries.
• Security company Dragos identified an advanced OT tool set in 2022[148]
finally, the nature of OT on vessels, the nature of vessels themselves, and their expected
lifetime vs. the speed of development make it a complex and difficult threatscape to nav­
igate. As I5 points out, the industry is lucky when it comes to vessels, as there are very
clever people developing standards, directives, legislation, and guidelines to follow to im­
prove the OT security aboard vessels, whereas, for instance, ports it is less so.
5.2.3
Vendor Remote Access
A final aspect of threats we wish to expand upon is one of the themes we wanted to handle
from the start of our thesis and, therefore, also got to elaborate on during our interviews.
It is the risk associated with third­party vendors that has some form of remote access to
the vessel in order to support or update their systems or services.
From the interviews, there is a couple of aspects of this area which we will cover.
First, there is a practical aspect of it. I2, among other things, point out that it is, in many
aspects, a niche market producing and selling OT systems to vessels, with a lot of cus­
tomization. This also affects availability and, as such, affects the competition, as there
might be only so many different suppliers for a specific OT system. Furthermore, I2 also
goes into the fact that often there exist old contracts from before cybersecurity was a con­
cern, and therefore, it will usually only be with new or renegotiated contracts that suppliers
are required to concern themselves with cybersecurity as an aspect of their OT product.
This is also an aspect of what I5 goes into, saying that cyber is very young, and a lot
of ships sailing out there are older than the internet. So in 10 or 15 years, a lot of new
vessels will be out there, and we hope they will be built for a purpose and handle security
better.
That said, I2 indicates that since it is a niche market, there also is an expectation that
vendors will have an interest in making sure their systems are safe and not being com­
promised, as that could lead to a much harder and more critical market for them. I4 Indi­
cates that many shipping companies often choose vendors that have been used before,
such that a certain trust level has been building up, though many might still need to do the
proper due diligence of checking their supplier. It is pointed out that there exist guidelines
and help for clauses to add to contracts to try and improve or ascertain the cybersecurity
of suppliers, for instance, from BIMCO. On top of that, I4 mentions that a check one oth­
erwise could make, even if not doing due diligence, would be to see if the supplier at least
has a security certificate. Even then, shipping companies might ”take a chance” with a
new supplier without doing the proper checks if they really need the system and are on
a tight time frame to get it delivered and integrated. I9 points out that in the end, even if
a supplier does not pass security validation for a shipping company, then often, if it is a
product you need, you will work together with the supplier in order to get them to a point
where you can accept them as a supplier and trust enough in their procedures to use their
product. Business benefits may overpower security concerns and risk, as ever it should
be done on a risk­managed approach and security assessed
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
63
==PAGE:73==
Another aspect of the problem with third­party vendors that also falls under practicality
and the need for better security from the supply chain, though in another form, is general
secrecy in the industry. As I8 explain, often ”you will be in very close contact with you
supplier, you sign NDA’s and contracts with them, which leads to you showing them a
lot of your intellectual property. And you let them work on your systems. So even if you
have perfect security, it doesn’t matter if your suppliers do not have proper security.” I8
then goes on to explain that this has also led to us seeing more and more sophisticated
attacks on the supply chain, simply due to the fact that an attacker only has to find the
weakest link to break in.
Another aspect that I5 points out is that when it comes to due diligence, it is more common
than it should be to be skipping corners for vetting third parties. A lot more incidents need
to happen to make people probably scared, and the industry as a whole will take it more
seriously, even though an attack such as NotPetya in 2017 was a supply chain breach.
I5 also points out that often, new contracts on vessels will be sent out for bidding, and
the choice then will fall on the cheapest possibility, which seldom is the best product, and
I5 further compares it to when there was an error on a couple of Boeing planes, and all
airplanes of that type that Boeing had was grounded for an extended period of time. If
something like that happens, it can be devastating for a company, mainly if it is traced
back to a single supplier not handling their cybersecurity probably.
In contrast to this point of picking the cheapest choice, I7 informed us about the knowledge
of shipping companies that turn down third­party vendors due to security concerns and
also know of instances where a more expensive product was chosen in bidding, as it was
also the more secure product. As is pointed out, especially for larger shipping companies,
it will be easier for adversaries to target their supply chain than targeting the companies
themselves, as they often will have a lot larger and better security organization within the
companies than what their suppliers may be able to do. Furthermore, I7 explains that
many large shipping companies will have well­thought­out procedures for vetting third­
party companies. This goes in the same vein as what both I1 and I4 say, that the overall
awareness regarding supply chain vulnerabilities and, thereby also, how to handle that
aspect probably, is relatively high in the industry, and the expectancy is that the larger
companies in the industry, in general, are on the right track for this.
Due to both the difficulty and practicality, both I4 and I8 also mention positively that vetting
of third­party suppliers will be part of the IACS Unified Requirements, especially E27 is
about this. Furthermore, I8 also notes it will be part of the coming cyber resilience act.
A final aspect that I5 talks about is that the technology that defines cutting edge ”keeps
changing and developing, and there is also something to be said about something tried
and true as well.” So there exists this dichotomy between the newest cutting­edge tech­
nology that companies wish to use to be the best and then something that is reliable, true,
tested, and known. So as I5 says, ”Competition is very steep in the industry, at least in the
commercial shipping industry. So they both want the newest best thing, but also want to
make sure they are secure”. This goes in hand with the I8s point that ”We are vulnerable
through the parts we put into our devices. And because no one develops anything from
scratch anymore, everyone uses third­party parts. To understand which parts are critical
and might be a door into your whole system is a very difficult task”. As such, the rising
complexity of systems and systems within systems are also going to affect this industry,
making this area even more complex, as maybe you supplier, use a supplier that uses
a common coding library that everyone uses and expects to be secure, where someone
eventually finds a bug, which will make you vulnerable. An example given by I8 of some­
64
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:74==
thing like this is the Log4J showing this clearly for security people across industries.
Concluding the threat section and the section on third­party security, we will use the words
I8 ”we need to understand that it has become more complicated to understand what is
in there in our products. And all the different parts that act together might act differently
when they act together than they did individually.”
5.3
Challenges
This area will shed light on the obstacles and complexities inherent within the maritime
industry, highlighting the unique challenges that need to be navigated in order to ensure
robust OT security measures. Where the first area on threats looked at the external fac­
tors, this area will look at how the interviewees consider OT a challenge to security due to
its special characteristics. Multiple themes were identified from the interviews, and in the
following sub­sections, we will highlight the internal challenges that are introduced to the
vessels through the implementation of IIoT, SCADA, ICS, and similar types of systems.
For an initial exploration of the topic, interviewees were asked to spontaneously list OT
systems from their knowledge. Similar to the review papers, the mentioned systems were
recorded and visualized in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Number of times a given OT system was mentioned in the interviews.
5.3.1
OT vs. IT
Asking the interviewees about the difference between OT and IT, several unique and
important challenges were brought up.
”People running OT are usually engineers. People running IT are IT nerds.” – I8 on the
difference between OT and IT systems
From a safety perspective, both I1 and I4 emphasized the integration of cybersecurity as
an integrated part of overall maritime safety. I1 offers that as an organization: ”We don’t
see [OT] security as something separate on board ships, we see it in the same way as gen­
eral ship safety, fire safety and so on.” . Where I4 notes that OT cyber incidents are treated
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
65
==PAGE:75==
similarly to mechanical or power failures, with backup procedures and emergency plans
in place to address such threats. Looking at it from a business standpoint, I2 stressed
the worst­case scenario of industry­wide attacks on OT­related systems, which could af­
fect multiple companies or even the entire industry. In such cases, contingency plans
and crisis management from stakeholders across the industry become crucial. However,
when considering a single vessel fault, whether OT­related or mechanical/physical, the
operational consequences are viewed similarly. Fault­isolation procedures are followed,
and if the issue is identified as a vendor or OT problem, it is handed over to IT Security
teams. This perspective is shared by I6, who states that for the ship’s master, regardless
of whether it’s a circuit board failure, cyber incident, or fuel supply disruption, the result
is ultimately the same: ”Like the navigator when you’re standing on the bridge. It doesn’t
really matter. That’s what it’s all about. It’s finding out, ”are you in a dangerous situation?
Risk of grounding or collision?” And then someone else has to find out what the underlying
cause is and then act on it”. At the same time, I6 also stresses that within vessel security,
OT is the unique challenge: ”We must focus on what is unique about shipping, and that
is the ships, the systems on board and the operation, the safe operation of the ships. So
the commercial IT systems, the business systems and networks and everything else [...]
It’s no different from running a shipping company or a bank.” .
A critical aspect to consider is the distinction between IT and OT systems. While safety
and security have always been highly prioritized in vessel OT, cyber has emerged as a
new aspect. The primary goal remains the protection of life, followed by safeguarding the
company’s reputation and placing safety before security. This sentiment is expressed by
I6, who acknowledges that the shipping industry is relatively well­equipped to address the
challenge of OT security, albeit not without flaws. I5 references the BIMCO guidelines[9]
to exemplify the industry’s emphasis on safety, discussing severe damage and changes
in functionality in systems.
I2 pointed out that OT has a direct influence on operations and income, making it crucial
to prioritize life over financial considerations. From a business perspective, OT­related
issues are not perceived as significantly different from mechanical problems, as the impact
on business operations remains a key concern. However, I2 also acknowledges the higher
business robustness to IT incidents, where prolonged system downtime can be managed,
unlike in OT scenarios.
Another aspect highlighted by the interviews is the difference in design and maintenance
between IT and OT systems. While OT systems are designed for longer lifetimes, the lack
of consideration for maintenance and updating poses significant challenges, as noted by
I3. Additionally, I7 emphasized that OT is designed for specific tasks with a focus on
safeguarding human life, whereas IT allows more room for ”mistakes.”
Lastly, I8 drew attention to the mindset of individuals involved in OT and IT. According
to I8, ”The mindset is different in a sense when it comes to security, that IT people value
confidentiality. So if you look at the CIA triad, confidentiality, integrity and then availability,
because it really doesn’t matter if someone can’t write emails for half a day. And for OT
people, it’s the other way around. Availability above all else. Integrity. Yes, I want my
things to do what I’m telling them to do. I don’t want them manipulated.” . This notion
underlines the differing security goals of the security teams protecting OT and IT, respec­
tively. Where IT emphasizes confidentiality and integrity, while OT prioritizes availability
above all else, followed by integrity.
66
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:76==
5.3.2
Risk Perception and Awareness
Understanding the complexity of OT security poses several challenges, as discussed by
the interviewees.
According to I3, there are various factors that make it difficult to grasp the concept of
OT security. Cultural issues within the industry contribute to the challenge, as marine
engineers and other technical crew members are traditionally not trained in cybersecurity.
Furthermore, communicating OT cybersecurity to management proves challenging due
to the lack of historical data on OT threats that top management can relate to. NotPetya
and Colonial Pipeline incidents were mentioned by multiple interviewees as examples,
even though they were IT attacks. These incidents serve as the best cases to describe
the risks to both management and vessel crews.
I5 highlights the perception gap and the reliance on the ”weakest link” in OT security. OT
is not commonly associated with the term ”cyber,” and security measures are often tighter
in ports compared to vessels. Ships are generally not considered high­risk environments.
Even leadership within the industry has room for improvement, as evidenced by the im­
pact of the Maersk compromise by NotPetya in 2017. This incident serves as the catalyst
for risk perception in management, as described by I5: ”kind of a great example in the
worst possible way”. It is worth noting that this incident was an IT­related incident. The
lack of cybersecurity training among executive decision­makers further complicates the
situation. As I5 puts it, the CISO needs to deliver information that executives can under­
stand, such as stocks, finances, reputation, groundings, and personal safety. I5 suggests
that operational people should train upward and emphasizes the importance of explaining
the concept of OT to CEOs by relating it to their peers. Overall, I5 notes ”that security
is not the top priority for shipping operators and the people […] getting that back on the
agenda [is] a challenge”.
Regarding the ability to navigate OT security, I6 poses a rhetorical question: ”Would it
be easier to turn a sailor into an OT/Cyber person or an IT person into a seafarer? Both
paths are feasible, but... Language and understanding is very different”. I6 explains
that cybersecurity is often handled by IT personnel ”with no understanding of port, star­
board, and ship operations”. However, they hold the responsibility, while the technical
department owns the systems and understands the context. The crews, although not
particularly cyber­savvy, are proficient with the machines. The ship security officer may
be assigned cyber responsibilities on board. According to I3, there is a need for tailored
awareness training, to effectively explain cyber risks to the target group, stating: ”You
can’t pull a generic IT cybersecurity awareness course over the head of an engineer or
a tool pusher”. I7 underlined that while cyber security has focus – it is not always drilled
into the ones most affected by it: ”IMO and the cyber security organisation promotes cy­
ber security. Training and information is provided ­ but it is mostly the shore crew who
understand and work with the threat.”
I7 refers to a major challenge in risk perception, being that even organizations who have
experienced major cyber incidents forget the collective lessons learned as employees
who lived through the incident are replaced or moved to other jobs. So both security
organizations and top­level management may ”re­assume” a higher risk appetite.
5.3.3
Communication and Bias
A number of the interviews highlighted discrepancies between the way industry and academia
is discussing OT security, but also how the knowledge is shared between actors.
I5 advised that we become wary of the ”Black swans” that are prevalent in discussions ­
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
67
==PAGE:77==
there is a difference between the conference­friendly ”black swan”­cases: ”that are kind
of ”sexy” to talk about, people find those fun and interesting to debate. A lot of decision­
makers would rather go to talks about that than sit through three days of talks of what is
actually happening, and how to actual prevent them.”. A great example of a ”black swan”
could be the worst­case example of I8 discussing a nuclear submarine with an OT cyber
attack causing critical reactor failure and causing a blow­out in port, which is rather more
flamboyant than the well­documented ”every­day” DDoS and GPS jamming incidents.
Likewise, I4 talks about the abstract ”cyber disaster”, widely discussed a few years ago,
which is now found to be mostly something that has come from the consulting industry.
I9 reminded us that ”academia does have an interesting place in forward thinking, but
also again just be careful to be grounded in reality and the reality of such attacks,” and
kindly reminded that it is important for all actors to ”know their place in the cyber security
ecosystem”. The point I9 wanted to make was that industry has the context and insight
into the operational realities of the situation which could negate or reduce the impact of
some academia proposed cyber attacks.
I6 recounted a brainstorming session with a national cyber authority on possible OT cyber
incidents suggesting ”that remotely operated pumps could be used to pour oil into the sea
or capsizing the ship” something which according to I6 is not entirely realistic. Illustrating
once again that the maritime context is not easily understood without industry knowledge,
and academic prowess does not, by default, translate into realistic maritime cases.
And still, even sharing the relevant knowledge takes work. Not every industry partner
or governing agency enables the timely sharing of information I9 noted that ”Information
exchange and the value of them (if done properly). [...] It is about gathering the actors in
the industry and having a non­disclosure talk on the attacks and vulnerabilities and work­
ing on handling them and improving security in the industry. […] more about information
exchange would be interesting.” . I5 agrees, ”One of the main issues is reporting because
companies don’t really want to show their vulnerabilities.” And why shipping companies
don’t want to show vulnerabilities is explained through the events described by I6: ”And
I know of a shipping company at one point that reported something in, and it wasn’t be­
cause it was something big [...] they did it more like (a) courtesy. And then [...] it became a
big article in Shippingwatch, and they stopped doing it, right? It was something like phish­
ing or something like that, something completely typical” The lack of anonymity from the
reporting company becomes the reason for an unnecessary loss of reputation, making it
hard for the shipping companies to defend the information sharing.
5.3.4
Changes in Technology and Requirements
Vessel OT faces significant security challenges due to the constant evolution of technolo­
gies. This evolution introduces vulnerabilities and risks that must be addressed to ensure
the security and resilience of ship OT systems.
One of the key challenges, according to I2, is the integration of ’smart things’ and in­
creased interconnectivity. Customer demands, government requirements, and the com­
mercial aspect of the business are leading to increased interconnectivity through sensors,
resulting in a larger attack surface.
The future of ship OT is user­focused and centered on increased data demand and con­
nectivity. I5 described it like this: ”Interconnectedness is larger than people think ­ BYOD,
patching and connecting systems ­ to people it just needs to work”. I2 offers the notion
that customers’ demands and needs to stay competitive will often drive changes faster
than laws and regulations. For instance, the maritime industry is working on making the
ships greener, in order to lower their environmental impact due to demands and expecta­
68
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:78==
tions in the general population, which also I5 and i9 point out. Further I9 tells us, that this
happens faster than expected. As such, I2 also guess that customer demand might make
security standards and certifications mandatory for companies in the industry, faster than
legislation will make them required. A final point I5 comes into with this greener energy is
that, since it will be prioritized, it might lead to new systems to consider and vulnerabilities
to be concerned about, but on the other hand, it might lower the risk, from environmental
hacktivist threat actors in the future, as they will prioritize their resources elsewhere.
I4 discussed the integration of AI into ship OT brings benefits and challenges. While I7
noted that the benefits of AI are recognized, security still needs to be addressed. AI has
the potential to facilitate exploitation, thereby enhancing the capabilities of attackers. In
addition, the development of autonomous vessels and the International Maritime Organi­
sation’s (IMO) focus on resilience requirements contribute to security challenges.
I5 remarked that using shore­based control centres requires increased connectivity and
expands the threat surface: ”The move towards autonomous and unmanned vessels
presents a unique challenge. On the one hand, it promises to increase safety by re­
ducing the number of personnel at risk. On the other hand, it poses safety challenges as
there are fewer people to perform safety tasks.”
During the interviews, several of our subject matter experts I1, I4, I5, I6, I7, I8 brought up
autonomous vessels as a transformation in vessel OT, which is already happening. So at
least in the minds of the industry, this is an ongoing challenge.
I1 summarized the challenges in vessel OT security succinctly: ”We see a ”new normal”
within cyber security in vessels and vessel OT systems. We will be constantly challenged ­
AI, autonomous ships, land­based pilots…”. Meanwhile, I5 hoped for future improvement:
”So in 10­15 years a lot of new ships will be out there, and we hope they will be built for
purpose and handle security better”.
5.4
Approaches
Going into the section with approaches, we have split it up into two overarching sections,
each with a handful of subsections that might overlap between the two overarching ones.
The first section provides insight and general knowledge about approaches, viewpoints,
and experiences in mitigating threats or annulling vulnerabilities. The other is insights
more focused on a thought experiment we made with all the interviewees about how they
would build security from scratch if they were responsible for OT security on vessels in a
completely new shipping company that would be started tomorrow. But we will start with
going over the general insight gained about approaches to mitigation from the interviews.
5.4.1
Standards and Legislation
The five interviewees I1, I2, I4, I6, I9 discuss the regulatory changes over the last years
as an approach to handle the security threats towards vessel OT; chief of these is the
introduction of IMO Resolution MSC.428(98). This resolution concerns itself with ”Mar­
itime Cyber Risk Management in Safety Management Systems” [149]. The purpose is
to encourage the relevant stakeholders in the industry to include cyber risk as part of
their security measures by adding it to their risk assessment, as well as implement mea­
sures appropriately in their Safety Management Systems, required to happen before the
first Document of Compliance after the 1st of January 2021. The next step to combat­
ing the changing threatscape and improving cyber security in the industry via regulations,
legislation, and standardization is the IACS Unified Requirements E26 and E27. These
requirements must be followed for all classed ships and offshore installations contracted
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
69
==PAGE:79==
to be constructed from the 1st of January 2024. Those are meant to increase vessel se­
curity for both OT and IT by introducing security by design to newbuilds. Finally, several
interviewees mentioned the NIS and the new NIS2 directives that must be transposed into
national law by the 17th of October, 2024. Though not specifically about vessels and the
maritime sector, it is relevant in this industry, too, as it is an EU directive to improve the
overall cybersecurity of the member states.
The increasing number of advisories, recommendations, compliance requirements, leg­
islation, and directives, within cyber security is an indication of how the threatscape has
changed, with the focus on improved awareness in the industry; this also shows us some
of the improved mitigation factors that have been and are being made on the international
scene. I3 points out that the coming unified requirement from IACS e26 and e27 will not
only help improve the OT security of vessels in the future but can also be used as inspira­
tion to improve existing vessels. When mitigating or protecting against third­party threats
or supply chain attacks, I3 also points out that that is a lot of what E27 from the unified
requirements is about. I2 also says that the new IMO demands from 2019 triggered a
round of OT security additions to the IT security of companies, complying with IMO. For
many, OT has become a part of IT security, though with a significant focus on vessels, as
they are central to operations for shipping companies.
I6 hopes that there will soon be more information about NIS2 from the government if peo­
ple are to implement it before it is required in 2024. I8 also points out that the approaches
to OT security on vessels might further change soon as the cyber resilience act from the
EU comes out. I4 further points out that it is important to follow the rules, regulations, and
guidelines, but the industry is doing a good job of keeping up, handling, and preparing
for the threats. I5 talks about how ”seafarers” have done a good job creating interna­
tional frameworks, for instance, with SOLAS, which is a place where vessels differentiate
themselves from ports quite a lot.
I5 further explores the future of security by talking about the possibility that a lot more
of it might become privatized, as governments might not want to be liable for something
bad happening and might rather outsource it, paying for someone else to shoulder the
blame and react quickly. On top of this, the private sector is often the one developing
new technologies, and as such, they might also have a vested interest in improving the
security aspect. Finally, I8 points out to remember that security and the standards we
use to keep our systems secure are a continuous process, requiring updates regularly to
ensure it is possible to keep mitigating the existing threats.
5.4.2
Risk Management and Communication
I2 explains that in many shipping companies, it is normal to have plans and procedures
for handling or what to do during an incident. Of such procedures, there often will be
a difference between a company or even an industry­wide incident affecting all ships or
an incident affecting a single ship. For example, an industry­wide attack would prompt a
shipping company to use a Crisis Management Plan, with an entire board overseeing and
handling the attack and managing different aspects of it. For a single vessel, an attack
would normally fall under an incident procedure that will take effect, and the relevant and
responsible people from the company will then handle it according to the procedure.
Looking at approaches to mitigate the current threats, I4 also comes with the point that a
lot of the maritime industry today still consists of a lot of ”low­tech” analogue or manual
parts and processes, which helps to make cyber incidents a lot harder, since that form of
attack requires a connection. That is not to say that there are not also highly complex,
modern ships with many connected capabilities that are still very much in the risk zone for
70
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:80==
incidents. An example of highly connected ships would be modern cruise ships, provid­
ing internet and other modern­age technologies and facilities for the customers aboard.
Another example of a vessel that would be in the risk zone, but for its complexity, could
be a modern drilling rig, with all the OT required to operate.
I4 points out, just as I2 did, that most shipping companies will have emergency procedures
for handling incidents, just as they would if, for instance, a power outage on a vessel is
caused by a short circuit and not a cyber security incident. Regularly what to do and
how to react will be the same, but the aftermath and rectification will differ between a
hardware error and a cyber incident. I4 also says that though it seems that the majority
of the industry is doing well and is handling the threatscape well, preparing for the worst,
it is not a reason to rest on the laurels, as it is important to continually update existing
security procedures according to new knowledge and regulations.
I6 also touches upon the point that if you initially have a ”black ship” event, whether a
defective microchip or a cyber incident, it does not change the situation for the person
responsible for the bridge. The first step will still be to assess if the situation is dangerous
with the potential for grounding or collision and then react accordingly. And then later,
it will be someone else responsible for finding the cause behind it and remedying it. So
when it comes to OT systems, the central thing is that they work, and if they stop working,
the cause is fixed, but why this happens is unimportant to the people running the vessel. I6
Also finds that the industry, in general, is doing well at keeping secure, though sometimes
accidents at sea still happen, so it is not fail­proof yet. But as long as there are good
security procedures and people are properly trained to use them, you will be in a good
position as a company. Finally, I6 makes a point about improving cyber hygiene, training,
and awareness, as there, for instance, still a lot that gets hit by phishing in the industry.
Finally, a way to handle and improve security in the industry, which I6 believe would help,
is more knowledge sharing.
I7’s key takeaway is that many suppliers still need to handle their products properly and
either leave vulnerabilities or take too long to patch them when found. Finally, I7 points out
that a huge benefit to the industry would be the improvement of communication between
cyber security experts and OT system experts. In this transition between cyber and OT,
future vulnerabilities must be found and closed. I8 is pointing out that with the insecurities
in the world today due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Risk management and a larger
focus on OT systems are being up­prioritized. A key to improving security overall in this
area is improving communication and understanding between cyber security experts and
engineers understanding OT intimately. I9 Also explains that most shipping companies
will have several procedures for different security incidents, making them ready to respond
efficiently depending on the situation in the incident.
I9 also emphasizes the importance of enhancing security in OT systems on vessels and
in general. They propose that including a mandatory security element in all programming
and computer science education and courses would be beneficial. Furthermore, I9 pro­
motes the notion that academia, being a crucial contributor to societal progress, should
move towards promoting research with more practical applications rather than focusing
on research that creates great headlines.
Another improvement I9 sees as possible as an approach to mitigate many of the threats
in the threat landscape will be to focus more on information exchange in the industry. I6
also touches on risk perception and finds that it is an important thing to focus on and that
it needs to be anchored in the top management to improve security properly. Further, I6
argues that risk willingness is an important aspect since you can sink unlimited amounts
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
71
==PAGE:81==
of money into handling security, so you have to prioritize your resources and use normal
risk management to keep the most critical systems safe and mitigate the largest threats.
5.4.3
Autonomous vessels
Regarding autonomous vessels, I4 talked about how IMO is working on this in the context
of MASS (Maritime Autonomous Surface Ships). And talking about that area, I4 pointed
out that the key to keeping those safe will be that the higher level of autonomy the ship
has, the more central the level of resilience becomes. As such, I4 also points out that this
development will naturally bring new and better security concepts that the industry as a
whole can adapt and adopt. I5 also brings up autonomous vessels and the expectation
that they will help improve keeping people safe as if there are no people aboard, then
there is no one to get hurt by accidents either. However, the importance of cybersecurity
will be even more central, as there will be no one aboard to overtake steering or control
anything manually if there is an incident.
Further approaches, when thinking about the future that I6 touch upon, is the rising de­
mand for connectivity and having good ways to handle this to prevent opening the vessels
up for attacks. This is parallel to the development of MASS, which also will need this. In
addition, certain aspects of existing legislation and guidelines will have to be changed or
updated. For instance, I6 points out that SOLAS requires you always to have someone
responsible on the bridge. But if a ship becomes fully automated, this is no longer possi­
ble. I7 also points out that the more autonomous vessels become, the fewer people are
needed on board, lowering the risk to human life.
5.4.4
Building OT Security from Scratch
As mentioned, one of the questions we posed to our interviewees was: starting a new
shipping company and being responsible for the OT security, how would they approach
it? With this as our main point, and drawing from other parts of the interview, in the context
of building or improving security, we expect to show some insights into what mitigation
tools and methods we have today and how different subject matter experts would priori­
tize them, to explore and expose insight into the importance of different elements of OT
protection.
Compliance
As we also saw earlier, an aspect of mitigation approaches used in the industry is the ex­
isting standards and legislation. As such, it is no surprise that several of our interviewees
looked to this aspect of being made responsible for vessel OT security in a new shipping
company. I1 would start by looking at the IMO requirements and integrating cyber risks
in quality management systems. I3 would use standards for supply chain management,
look at certifications, and use recommended standards, as well as make requirements
based on those for the supplier.
Designing from scratch, I6 will start with security by design, even if it is a cliché phrase.
That is, to think through how the systems on the vessel will work and interact, and then
thinking security into that from the start. This in a way that falls in line with the IACS unified
requirements in effect from 2024. Finally, I6 suggested having good documentation and
using trusted suppliers. Buying products for vessels as a company is a good idea if those
products are security certified besides being approved for shipping. If following those
principles, I6 states that you are on the way to having a good security structure in your
organization.
Asset Management
Another aspect of having good security that several interviewees talks about is having an
overview or creating a mapping of the software and hardware assets on board the vessels.
72
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:82==
I1 points out that it is important to identify the IT and OT assets, especially the ones that
are business­critical and have good asset management. This will help you make informed
decisions when doing your risk assessment and management. I4 would also start with
getting an overview of software and hardware, as well as the general infrastructure and
architecture of the vessel, as a solid starting point for a Risk Assessment if being made
responsible for OT security in a new company. Finally, also, I9 points out that a central
thing to do when building security is to get a good overview of the vessel’s inventory,
including the OT systems.
Procedures and Risk Management
Based on the interviews, a large part of mitigating and protecting the OT systems on
board vessels is having proper risk management based on informed decisions from solid
inventory overview and proper risk assessment. I1 would start with conducting risk and
vulnerability analysis and use this to identify the correct mitigation measures to use. Based
on this, I1 would develop contingency plans and procedures for incidents to be prepared
for a potential breach based on the threat assessment done during the analysis from the
risk management.
I2 should have clear procedures, well­structured response plans, and properly trained per­
sonnel to handle it in this area. In short, including a wish for a clear separation of networks
that we shall return to, I2 would prioritize technical security, well­planned procedures, and
people trained in the right way. For I3, an important part, as we saw in the legislation and
standardization section, is to have proper supply chain management. Though that might
be done or inspired using existing legislation or standards, we repeat it here, as it is an
important step of risk management that I3 would prioritize rather high if responsible for
OT security on vessels. For I4, it would be important to have procedures in place, to keep
the risk assessment up to date continuously as new threats emerge or new systems get
integrated into the vessel. And here, I4 points out it is important to understand that risk
assessment will differ from company to company in the industry. I4 makes the example
that for a large cruise ship, losing an online connection for 24 hours would be a catastro­
phe due to customer expectations. In contrast, a ship sailing coal between Australia and
China would be fine without an internet connection to the crew for a while. So it is central
to understand that there is no common risk assessment for each company in the industry,
and as such, each will have to make its own, according to its context.
Starting from scratch, including a modernized vessel fleet I5, would ensure that the sup­
pliers are in compliance with the legislation that exists, as well as ensure they will take
responsibility for their systems if something happens. Though this could have also been
included under the legislation, we decided to point it out here, as I5 explained, in the con­
text of risk management, and we believe that including supply chain management here
is the thematically most natural choice. This is important, according to I5, to avoid a sit­
uation where you as a company spend months upon months figuring out what is wrong,
to need afterwards to spend months arguing fault and responsibility with a supplier. So
critical first step will be to properly vet suppliers and ensure they have things in hand and
are ready to take responsibility for their systems. It will also improve the speed at which
you can react to and deal with an incident if you can go to a supplier explaining the situ­
ation, and they are ready right away to support, help and patch the system in which the
breach happened. Furthermore, I5 points out that since vessels will often be used for
up to 40 years, or even more, then ensuring the systems are also updated and working
15+ years down the line is incredibly important. Finally, I5 explains that risk perception is
central to sound decision­making in the industry and, therefore essential to be aware of.
Finally, to improve security, it might be good to go back to basics and spend a little less
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
73
==PAGE:83==
time considering black swan events, though they are more ”sexy” to talk about.
Asked how to prioritize building a shipping company from scratch to protect vessel OT
systems, I9 would want to discuss how OT systems will be used. As we are moving into a
more connected world, with many devices passing data around to do business analytics,
etc., keeping OT systems secure by having them disconnected and separated becomes
less and less of an opportunity, according to I9. Instead, we will need to talk about data use
and the movement of data and then use that conversation as a starting point for investing
the proper amount of time and money to make that secure. On top of this discussion,
company management should include a similar discussion with suppliers to get them on
board with the security early on. And from that, have good processes for each part of the
vessel concerning incidents and future updates. All this is seen from the perspective of
having proper risk management based on a proper discussion and assessment of needs
and threats. Further, I9 suggests the need to move vendors away from the notion that:
“delivered = done” and into a through­life security management/support approach.
As we can see, several interviewees mention some form of third­party security or supply
chain management to build up strong security. From an initial look, it makes sense that
security in supply chain management is critical as you open your business and security up
for people outside your organization to make changes to your system. At the same time,
you will have to do it to get the functionality and technology you want/need to handle pres­
sure from the market or update your systems. Furthermore, I9 talked about the necessity,
as though it is a huge industry, many of those systems are rather esoteric, making it more
difficult to be picky about vendors. Furthermore, I9 also talked about this dissonance we
have talked about before, with the longevity of the vessels vs. the speed technology and
security develop with, and this also comes to light with vendors that either are slow to
change, do not want to change to the new ways, or even worse, no longer exists and
therefore security updates become impossible. On the other hand, I1 had some good
points about if the industry takes a hard stance, or if the legislation and standards go that
way, the vendors are normally accepting and quicker to reply, as they do not want to lose
out on customers. So there is a bit of dissonance regarding this and what kind of demands
can pose to suppliers, which we shall discuss further. According to I4, there is general
attention to supply chain risk in the industry. It has been adapted into several guidelines
already. However, due diligence requires resources, and there must be a clear indication
of whether the threat is particularly significant. The general assumption is that this risk is
more or less under control, as people know supply chain management is necessary. A
weak point in the mitigation chain that has been mentioned in other contexts during the
interviews and information sharing is that vendors are reluctant to share breeches and
weaknesses in their systems. There is the suggestion to adopt the” BIMCO Cyber secu­
rity clauses for charter parties” when writing contracts with suppliers, but still, according
to I4, there is no perfect solution.
Segmentation and Access Management
Out of all the interviewees, everyone answered in affirmative to the importance of seg­
menting the networks between IT and OT or even prioritizing it to keep OT systems secure.
This includes proper access management to said systems. The need becomes even more
clear when considering, as we have mentioned before, that so far, the experience in the
industry when it comes to incidents affecting OT onboard vessels is that it is not targeted
at the OT systems. Still, the OT systems are affected as collateral damage. As we shall
see, several of the interviewees mentioned the increased connectivity, bandwidth, and ad­
dition of IoT systems to improve quality of life or efficiency, which will bring large savings
to the shipping companies, as a potential threat, as the attack space will be increased,
74
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:84==
which further adds to the importance of strong and secure separation of networks. This
is to a point where it is part of how they would prioritize building security from scratch.
For I1, the segmentation of networks is a matter of establishing defenses. Segmentation
of networks is a key component, but from there, implement proper access management,
firewalls, methods for making the systems more resilient, and finally, have proper proce­
dures for incident handling, as we also mentioned during the risk management section,
as well as good detection tools. Also, I2 speaks of the separation of networks and logical
separation between IT and OT systems as far as possible. I2 would build security from
scratch and prioritize the separation of networks, with no communication at all between
networks and no communication at all between industrial networks. If it compromises this
security principle, I2 will prioritize this over getting new cool business­relevant features
integrated onboard vessels. A guiding principle is to protect the users from the system
and the systems from the user.
Besides making certain to vet and ensure the security from a supplier aspect, as men­
tioned earlier, another thing I5 would ensure is to avoid redundant duplication of systems
and technology. On top of that, I5 would ensure that only systems that need to share infor­
mation can do it, separate everything else, and make sure that the systems that do have
communication or are sharing data does so in a secure way. One example of this could
be the data diodes used in the military for decades, which are now being sold expensively
and rebranded for secure one­way communication, as mentioned by I3.
A final point I5 comes with is that connectivity is very important to handle properly. From
the point of view of I6, a thing to make certain of when building security would be to
ensure that the user interface and the backend do not affect each other negatively. If
someone messes with the user interface, the backend should still be able to run without
being infected and vice versa. I6 refers to a cyber incident in IT systems, where the
malicious code was created to use the ram and propagate itself through the systems in a
way that made it very hard to shut down. It is an example of how many different aspects
of security you need to consider while protecting your systems and why the separation
of networks is important, as the propagation of such attacks can then be limited by the
network affected. The final interviewee that spoke about this separation of networks in
more detail was I7. When asked about building security from scratch, I7 starts by pointing
out that you will have to balance OT security and the business demands from management
and customers for more connectivity. In order to handle that, it is important to separate
networks in the right way while still granting access to relevant data for relevant actors
based on business decisions. As such, I7 is more accepting of adding systems to a vessel
that increases connectivity, compared to I2, but only so far that it is possible to do it in a
secure way.
A challenge, though, that shows up when asking the shipping companies about this seg­
mentation of networks is that even though they are very aware of the need and are working
on this, there are still some that have not fully separated networks in secure ways, which
seems to be a normal situation in the industry. So some players in the industry have yet
to close this gap fully, coming back to the fact that vessels exist for a very long period
of time, and sometimes it is difficult and complex to change a thing on board after the
vessel has been built. I3 stated that the surrounding infrastructure would be the saving
grace of the vessels’ OT. Parts of the industry has been moving away from the” castle and
moat approach”, especially due to the increasing need for IT/OT convergence, but for OT
systems security, this is still one of the best options. It requires a defensible architecture,
multiple barriers, and tight governance of any communication between OT and IT. Having
a defensible architecture, which includes visibility, will enable a quick response to a cyber
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
75
==PAGE:85==
incident in the OT environment. Further, I3 discussed how secure remote access allows
personnel and third parties to maintain and troubleshoot OT systems remotely, leading
to significant savings by eliminating the need for both on­site cyber security personnel
and travel to vessels for specialists. However, this functionality will also expand the at­
tack surface. I3 also mentions the lack of separated and secure networks in the industry,
as well as yet­to­be­updated systems, as seen by the fact that SHODAN has plenty of
SCADA/IIoT/ICS and other OT systems mapped that are used in the industry.
People, Culture, and Awareness
This is an area that not all interviewees necessarily used much time to speak about when
asked how to build security from scratch. However, all interviewees spoke at some point
about the importance of awareness amongst people in the industry for the challenges of
OT security or about the importance that people play in ensuring the security of the OT
systems on vessels. Finally, several spoke about the security culture or security hygiene
and their hopes to improve it in the industry. When talking about building security in this
context from scratch, I1 actively mentions having awareness training in order to make
sure it is solidly grounded in the company
In the same vein, I3 spoke to the importance of awareness in the context of securing OT
systems and the fact that though awareness has improved in the industry in general, there
might still be a way to go when it comes to OT systems. Further, I3 speaks to the need
to improve the security culture in general in the industry, and we see this as crucial if we
want to be ahead of future threats, as well as keep awareness high enough.
And when it comes to the culture and the people we hope to make more aware and gain a
deeper understanding of the importance of security, I9 wishes that it could be mandatory
for all people studying IT to have a mandatory security curriculum. Finally, when it comes
to building security from scratch, I8 would make sure to hire the right people for the job,
that is to say, the best engineers, the brightest cyber security people, etc., and hire them to
handle and be responsible for running the technical aspects of the company and security
of the vessels. As I8 says: ”Form follows function,” so if you cannot find the people
with the right knowledge to hire, then you will have to train them. Everyone working in
a company I8 would build from the ground up with security in mind and should have a
perfect understanding of cyber security and how to keep the OT systems secure.
Other Security Factors
As seen, there have been five themes that the interviewees have touched on when it
comes to building good security. This section is dedicated to the aspects and points of
building security that fall outside of the aforementioned categories. I3 points out that
since it is a ”niche market” to produce systems for vessels, it still happens more often
than it should in the industry that the systems out there are some old legacy systems or
maybe even a system where the supplier no longer exists, and as such no longer can
be supported. So an important part of building security from scratch for I3 would be to
ensure strong relations with the suppliers and be sure there would be no legacy systems
or out­of­support systems, and then follow that up with good strong lifecycle management
to ensure that the systems stay that way. Other security concepts that are talked about
are patch vulnerabilities and app locking. I7 points out that patching vulnerabilities are
important and that it hopes will be done better, faster, and more often than currently as
a positive side effect of the increasing connectivity and bandwidth onboard vessels. The
next step for I7 would be to look deeper into application security, or app locking, as this
would be an easier way to keep systems safe than the complete separation of networks
and limiting the need to patch updates repeatedly, which each time a patch is needed, it
also introduces a risk of attack.
76
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:86==
I7 also believes it would be good to use the increased bandwidth on board vessels to map
out the security issues and, hopefully, more thoroughly find the vulnerabilities and mitigate
the threats they pose or close them altogether. I7’s philosophy concerning securing sys­
tems this way builds from the idea that in order to run a business, you probably will have
to accept some level of risk. As such, the better data you have to make your risk deci­
sions, the better you will be able to apply your resources in order to protect your systems.
And from that perspective, I7 sees the best approach would be to look into application
lockdown, which would negate a lot of security concerns, even if you have systems that
still run Windows 2000. Finally, I8 would, if building security in a new shipping company
from scratch, start with everything being fully autonomous. There would be a need for
complete security on monitoring, and good intrusion detection, as availability would be
central for the monitoring of vessels. Secure everything concerning steering as number
1, being 100 % secure, to not loose ships, including navigational systems. Next would be
to secure the motor as it needs to be running, but I8 would rather have the motor not run­
ning than losing steering while it is running. The next priority would be all safety systems
as, in the end, the top priority is to keep people safe.
5.5
Summary
Based on the insights gathered from our interviews, the cyber security threat in maritime
OT systems presents a wide range of complex challenges that demand careful consider­
ation. The discussions revolved around both the external threat factors to OT security in
vessels and the inherent systemic challenges that arise due to the nature of OT technol­
ogy and the complexities associated with ships.
Distinguishing between systems
One of the prominent topics explored was the distinction between IT and OT systems. Ex­
perts highlighted the importance of recognizing the cyber­physical aspect inherent in OT
systems, as well as the difficulties associated with updating and securing outdated OT in­
frastructure. These challenges require specialized approaches that take into account the
unique complexities of maritime OT environments. However, due to the highly regulated
area of safety systems of the maritime industry it was also noted that the maritime had
a propensity for safety which carried over to the understanding of the need for security
around OT systems.
Gaps in cyber risk perception
During the interviews, concerns were raised regarding the inadequate training provided
to vessel crews. The lack of comprehensive training programs and awareness initiatives
contributes to a significant gap in risk perception and understanding among both crews
and management personnel. This knowledge gap poses a significant hurdle in imple­
menting effective cyber security controls and responses.
Discerning incidents from physical failures
A recurring theme was the difficulty of discerning OT security incidents from physical fail­
ures. The intertwined nature of cyber and physical systems in maritime environments
makes it challenging to isolate and respond to cyber security threats effectively. This
further highlights the need for specialized expertise in managing OT security incidents.
Collaboration between teams
It was also noted that while the responsibility for handling cyber security typically falls
on IT organizations, technical teams with a deeper understanding of the intricate OT sys­
tems might be better suited to manage security, detection, response, and recovery efforts.
Collaboration and effective communication between IT and technical teams are crucial to
ensuring a comprehensive approach to maritime OT security.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
77
==PAGE:87==
Bias between academia and industry
The interviews shed light on a communication bias that exists between academia and
the maritime industry. The nuanced operations and specific challenges of the maritime
context require a deep understanding of the industry and the day­to­day operations of a
ship. This gap in understanding makes it challenging to bridge the knowledge divide and
effectively address the unique cyber security concerns faced by maritime OT systems.
Lack of incident information sharing
Another key issue identified was the lack of information sharing about cyber security inci­
dents among industry actors, including shipping companies, class societies, and industry
organizations. The absence of a comprehensive incident reporting mechanism hampers
the collective effort to build robust defenses against cyber threats. Enhanced information
sharing and collaboration among stakeholders are necessary to strengthen the overall
cyber security posture of the maritime industry.
Vulnerabilities from evolving technology
The rapidly changing technology in maritime OT systems was discussed extensively. The
industry sees continuous technological advancements driven primarily by business con­
siderations, often prioritizing efficiency and profitability over security concerns. This evolv­
ing landscape brings about increasing interconnectedness, introducing further vulnerabil­
ities and complexities that need to be addressed to maintain a robust security posture. As
was astutely remarked by I5 ”The game doesn’t change, the rules of the games doesn’t
change, but the way people do things change in the game”.
Emerging technologies: opportunities & challenges
The rise of emerging technologies such as AI and the advent of autonomous vessels were
highlighted as potential game­changers in the maritime industry. These advancements
present both opportunities and challenges in terms of cyber security. As vessels become
more autonomous and interconnected, ensuring their resilience against cyber threats be­
comes paramount.
Security by legislation and compliance
To address these challenges, new standards and legislation such as IACS UR26 & UR27
and IMO requirements have been introduced. These frameworks aim to establish guide­
lines and best practices for enhancing cyber security in maritime OT systems. However,
effective risk management remains a complex undertaking, requiring a comprehensive
understanding of the evolving threat landscape and a proactive approach to mitigating
potential risks.
The bare necessities...
Based on the opinions gathered from the interviews, it is clear that the cybersecurity threat
in maritime OT systems demands concerted efforts from industry stakeholders. Adapting
to the changing technology landscapes while ensuring robust risk management practices
is essential to safeguard maritime OT systems from potential cyber threats. Bridging
the knowledge gaps, fostering collaboration, and promoting information sharing are key
elements in developing a resilient cybersecurity framework for the maritime industry
78
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:88==
6
Discussion
6.1
Academia vs. Industry vs. Reality
Our interview (Section Ref. 5.3.3) with industry expert I9 shed light on the relevance of
academia’s role in forward­thinking, but also emphasized the importance of being grounded
in reality. This raises the question of whether academia’s focus becomes skewed when
there is excessive attention given to esoteric attacks, while practical industrial methods
to mitigate such threats exist. Additionally, an overemphasis on black swan events may
divert attention from more prevalent industry challenges. This misalignment prompts us
to consider whether academia sometimes diverges perpendicular to the industry’s trajec­
tory rather than moving in parallel, or if the research focus remains on point with industry
needs.
To illustrate the differing viewpoints, one of our interviewees highlighted the classification
of a DDoS attack as a hacking attack in both industry, academia, and the news. How­
ever, it should be evident that there is a clear distinction between a sophisticated hacking
attack that grants full network access with elevated privileges and a simple DDoS attack.
Although both attacks compromise the CIA triad, the consequences, response, recovery
actions, and overall handling would vary significantly.
In the maritime sector, a similar comparison can be made between a network­based at­
tack like DDoS and a radio­based attack such as GPS jamming. The distinction between
a straightforward jamming attack and a sophisticated APT attack breaching a vessel’s net­
work should be apparent, just as the resulting consequences and required actions would
differ. Furthermore, considering the earlier mention of practical industrial knowledge miti­
gating certain attacks, it can be argued that watchkeeping and lookouts on the bridge, as
mandated by SOLAS requirements, should mitigate jamming and spoofing attacks.
Figure 6.1: Spoofed AIS data [150]
Currently, offensive activities targeting OT systems primarily involve low­complexity tech­
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
79
==PAGE:89==
niques such as jamming and spoofing. A noteworthy incident in maritime OT cybersecu­
rity is the case of Russian­aligned hacktivists who engaged in AIS spoofing in the Black
Sea. This incident involved projecting a manipulated vessel track that formed a distinctive
Z­shape along the Ukrainian coastline, as depicted in Figure 6.1 [150].
The observed AIS spoofing attack highlights the significance of research focus in the
area of AIS security. However, it is important to note that the maritime industry is also
facing potential threats from the increasing availability of OT malware. Although these
malware are not specifically tailored for maritime systems, they still pose a risk due to their
utilization of protocols lacking built­in security measures [148, 151]. Notably, the activities
of threat actor BENTONITE since 2021 have targeted OT systems in the maritime sector
[148]. This development indicates a shift towards more direct targeting of OT systems on
vessels, with attacks becoming increasingly sophisticated beyond the scope of spoofing.
To facilitate a comparison between the perspectives of industry and academia, we have
created figures that illustrate the frequency of different OT systems mentioned during the
interviews in Figure 5.1. The purpose of this exercise was to gauge the initial thoughts of
experts in the field and gain insight into their understanding of the fundamental concepts
and importance of various OT systems in their respective domains. It is important to note
that the sample size is limited, and thus we do not assert any statistical significance or
use it as empirical evidence. However, we find this analysis to be an intriguing starting
point for exploring a comparison with existing literature and initiating further discussion.
We plotted the occurrences of OT systems mentioned in our 150 primary source materials
to facilitate a comparison of the graphs. The original graphs can be observed in Figure
5.1 and Figure 4.7, respectively. In Figure 6.2 a combined view of the most mentioned
systems can be seen.
Figure 6.2: Compared graphs for OT systems mentioned in interviews and source mate­
rials.
It is evident that both in the literature and among the interviewees, the ECDIS holds a
central position in the realm of vessel OT. It is consistently mentioned among the top
three systems in both sources. This indicates that academia is indeed researching an
80
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:90==
area that is highly relevant to the industry.
A notable difference arises when considering the perspectives on the engine system. It
is the most frequently mentioned system and was emphasized as quite a critical system
to safeguard against breaches, based on our discussions with the interviewees. In con­
trast, the literature from academia does not assign the same level of priority to the engine
system, although it recognizes some significance. This disparity may be attributed to the
focus of academic research, which tends to concentrate on systems that are already ex­
tensively studied, whereas industry professionals prioritize systems that directly impact
their operations and safety. Navigation, which remains a central and crucial aspect in the
industry, also garners considerable attention in academia due to the vulnerabilities iden­
tified in related systems. From an industry perspective, engine control remains critical to
safely operate the vessel, and ensure its arrival at the intended destination or port. This
focus on operational reliability and contingency planning may not garner the same level
of interest in academic research, as evidenced by the literature.
A noteworthy observation from the comparison of the graphs is the prominence of the
crane as one of the most frequently mentioned OT systems in our interviews, while it
received little to no mention in the literature. This finding raises an interesting point about
OT systems on vessels. The interviewees did not highlight the crane as the most central
OT system on a vessel, nor did they express significant concerns about its cyber risk
compared to other OT systems. However, the reason for its frequent mention lies in its
visual and relatable nature ­ as well as highly critical equipment for many types of maritime
operation, which makes it a core representation of an OT system. The crane serves as a
tangible example that effectively conveys the importance of OT systems and the need for
improved cybersecurity to management. In fact, I2 shared their experience of using the
crane as an illustrative example in discussions with management, as it resonated visually
and facilitated the explanation of the significance of OT systems and the importance of
enhanced cybersecurity measures.
The discussion of academia versus industry reveals a relatively aligned perspective be­
tween the two. However, it is crucial to maintain awareness and keep track of real­world
vessel OT security incidents. The industry is currently experiencing significant develop­
ments and technological advancements, making it essential to prioritize research areas
accordingly. It is important for academia to focus on practical and useful cases rather
than purely theoretical scenarios that are unlikely to occur. This is particularly crucial
when the industry is in need of assistance in dealing with new attacks, vulnerabilities,
or incidents. Based on the interviews, literature review, and the comparison of data, no
major discrepancies were found.
However, Meland et al. note: ”At the same time, some of the most severe consequences
in any sector can be tied to maritime. This goes to show that these incidents with low fre­
quency and very high impact indicate challenging cyber risks. They are difficult to predict
and prepare for based on history, and in hindsight often considered as black swans” [53]
so while academia tends to place more focus on black swan events, than it would seem
necessary, we believe there should be a balanced approach. An approach where both the
usual and the esoteric cyber threats are identified and analyzed in the research. These
black swan events, although rare, have value in addressing worst­case scenarios and
the need for appropriate safeguards. However, a great emphasis should be put on shar­
ing industry incidents and vulnerabilities to help researchers better understand real­world
challenges and prioritize their efforts. The maritime sector, and its severe consequences
in cyber incidents, require attention to both likely attack vectors and the protection of crit­
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
81
==PAGE:91==
ical systems. By fostering knowledge exchange and awareness, academia and industry
can collaborate to improve security measures, processes, guidelines, standards, and reg­
ulations, while also considering the potential impact of network breaches and maintaining
vigilance towards black swan events.
In the end, understanding maritime OT in academia is not the same as working hands­on
in the industry, though incredibly important ­ and what happens in reality and is expe­
rienced in the industry might be an entirely different set of events than what academia
researched. Therefore, the better communication and cooperation there exists between
Academia and the industry, the stronger the possible security will be. In the end, we can
only try to prepare as best as possible for the unforeseen.
6.2
IT is not OT
In the realm of cybersecurity, both IT and OT play critical roles. While these domains share
some similarities, it is essential to acknowledge the distinctions between them. However,
academia often treats OT security from an IT­centric perspective, potentially overlooking
the unique challenges and requirements of OT systems. This section aims to highlight the
differences between IT and OT security while emphasizing the need for a more tailored
approach in academic research.
Many existing studies discuss OT security using an IT­like framework, often relying on
generic risk management tools like the NIST CSF [76]. However, CSF may not be in­
herently well­equipped for effectively managing OT risks, necessitating adaptations and
specialized expertise. In contrast, frameworks such as MaCRA (Maritime Cyber Risk As­
sessment) and IEC 62443 are more suitable for addressing OT security concerns. It is
worth noting that especially the MaCRA framework is predominantly discussed in localized
research clusters like the work conducted by researchers at the University of Plymouth
focusing on vulnerabilities, threats, and attacks in the maritime sector [50, 152, 124, 90].
While NIST guidelines may see much use in port environments, the complexity of ship
IT/OT systems introduces additional challenges due to frequent changes and updates
[152]. Moreover, although IEC 62443 is a relevant tool for OT security, it lacks adaptation
specific to the maritime environment [13].
Implementing effective risk management in maritime OT systems is a commendable ob­
jective, but it proves challenging in practice. Tailor­made risk management frameworks for
maritime organizations heavily depend on specific industry knowledge and understanding,
yet they have not gained widespread adoption compared to ISO and NIST frameworks.
Despite numerous risk management considerations, they alone cannot solve the practical
challenges posed by maritime OT systems. Complex supply chains and ships designed
to last 30­40 years create an environment in which technology, threat landscapes, and
realities may outpace original intentions. Similarly, protocol improvements and technical
implementations (see section 4.4) can only address some of the issues due to the inherent
complexities of the ship’s system­of­systems.
The threats faced by maritime OT systems are non­stochastic, encompassing intent, ca­
pability, and opportunity factors which rely on partially unknown threat actors, i.e. we can
characterize them. Quantifying the likelihood of these threats poses complications, as
categorizing a threat as low likelihood does not guarantee that it will not materialize within
a short timeframe. Insights from interviews and guidelines provided by experts in the field
can shed light on these challenges as discussed by I3 and I4.
While IT and OT share some commonalities, such as network infrastructure, there are
significant differences between the two domains. The literature on OT security still has
82
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:92==
a long way to go, possibly due to the difficulty of translating concepts from pure IT to
the cyber­physical reality of ships or the relatively varied state of security focus within the
maritime industry (see section 4.2). This highlights the need for improvement and prompts
the suggestion that cybersecurity researchers actively involve themselves by visiting ships
to gain firsthand experience of the realities for which they are developing solutions.
Based on interviews with industry professionals, practical implementations often involve
carving out, isolating, or segmenting OT from IT, even though they coexist within the same
infrastructures (I1, I2, I7). For the same reasons, commercial interests in leveraging OT
and interconnected technologies are often hindered or limited by security organizations’
concerns.
In conclusion, while IT and OT overlap in certain aspects, the distinctions between the two
necessitate a tailored approach to OT security. Academic research should aim to differen­
tiate further between IT­centric perspectives and the cyber­physical realities of maritime
OT systems. By gaining a deeper understanding of the maritime industry’s unique chal­
lenges, researchers can contribute to more effective and practical OT security solutions.
6.3
OT is like IT
Having discussed the importance of understanding that IT and OT are different, we now
flip the coin and explore the similarities between IT and OT. These similarities at best
can be expressed as a double­edged sword. In the right circumstances, with the right
perspective, we can gain understanding from using methods belonging to IT for improv­
ing cyber security for vessel OT systems. A key similarity between IT and OT lies in the
human factor. Human awareness, understanding, and perception play a significant role
in complicating cybersecurity for OT systems. This indicates that OT systems, in general,
are more complex and less well­understood compared to IT systems. Additionally, indi­
viduals who possess an understanding of the challenges may not have the authority or
expertise to effectively address the security issues, creating a skill gap.
The findings from both the literature review and the interviews emphasize the significant
impact of human factors on cybersecurity for vessel OT systems. According to the sources
in section 4.3.2, more than 80% of cyber incidents in the industry can be attributed to
human interaction. This statistic, coupled with the alarming 900% increase in attacks on
the maritime industry leading up to 2020 [153, 97], highlights the central role of the human
factor in the industry’s cybersecurity challenges. However, it is important to recognize that
the human factor can also be part of the solution in addressing these challenges.
Based on the literature, the awareness has increased in the last 5 years though if the
amount of sources in the area is any indication, awareness is still lacking behind. Based
on the statistics in Figure 4.1, the amount of source material focusing on the impact of
people were much less than those looking at technical or processing aspect of security in
the area. As discussed earlier security from the perspective of people can be divided into
two: The general workforce and the security personnel. Several challenges appear when
focusing on the general workforce. The first, obvious, and most common is the lack of
understanding or degree of acceptance of security measures. Often they will be circum­
vented or ignored by people. It’s a problem also seen in IT security, The human factor
in cybersecurity is evident in scenarios where users resort to insecure practices, such
as writing passwords on Post­it notes. Similarly, on vessels, a crew member may install
unvetted software through a USB device to bypass security measures, unintentionally
compromising the system’s cybersecurity
Instead of proposing solutions for these specific examples (different verification processes,
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
83
==PAGE:93==
locking USB access etc.), we suggest looking at the wider picture. As we explored with
several interviewees in section 5.4.4, and as was also apparent in the literature as shown
in section 4.3.3, there should be a larger focus on improving the security culture in the
industry overall to ensure that cyber security is part of everyone’s conscious everyday
life at work. Further there need to be an understanding and a wish to behave securely.
Based on our research, we suggest following solutions:
• Top management to prioritize raising awareness and skill level in their organizations.
Avoiding a situation like NotPetya [98] is central, but the scare is slowly loosing its
teeth here 6 years later.
• Onboard awareness and training procedures targeted at each role in the organi­
zations, with a security­cultural improving design in mind. And train people in the
security aspect most likely to affect their everyday life while increasing there overall
understanding of the importance.
• Understand and ensure the training occur regularly and continuously. The evolv­
ing threatscape needs to be mirrored in the training, and training must be properly
designed in order for it to have the wanted effect. Positive reinforcement learning
should be used, motivating people to be better, increasing the interest and making
it relevant in daily work.
• Use cyber ranges, as they are a strong and underutilized tool as presented in section
4.3.5, and increased use of cyber ranges, can help increase the skill level amongst
the workforce.
In relation to the people responsible for vessel OT cyber security, we reflect back to the
similarities between IT and OT, and the challenges they bring. Often the people respon­
sible for OT and safety, get cybersecurity tacked on as another responsibility. This in
large part is due to the lack of understanding in management, who often find the areas
similar. Vice versa the IT cyber security responsible personnel on shore, can also be­
come responsible for the OT security both ashore an on boards vessels, with the same
reasoning from management. This is caused by IT and OT being similar enough creating
an expectancy of skill for both. When organizations realize the existence of differences
between IT and OT, siloing of knowledge and responsibility may occur, as mentioned in
the interview and elaborated in section 4.3.3. As a consequence one person performs IT
security checks, to ensure everything is ”in order” and another do the same for OT. How­
ever, though there are differences, OT systems on vessels does not necessarily exists
in a void, just as IT doesn’t. These systems can overlap, and especially with all the new
IoT technology, such overlaps might increase. However, who has the skills, know­how
and takes the responsibility for this overlapping area, and its potential security vulnerabil­
ities? The challenge then becomes having a person or a group of people responsible for
an area, lacking part of the necessary skill set and understanding of the domain they are
charged with the security of.
In order to address this, a few suggestions will follow. These suggestions are additions
to the already mentioned ideas for improving training and raising of awareness, including
the use of cyber ranges.
• The security responsible personnel will need training that keeps them updated on
the evolving threatscape.
• They will need training that lets them understanding of the unique challenges of
OT systems on board vessels, as well as the threats coming from cyber security.
84
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:94==
Developing skills in both areas, will enabled them to handle incidents that covers
both areas as well as the area where IT and OT overlaps.
• Develop training camp based on the idea in the interview section 5.4.2 of gather­
ing engineers with expertise in OT, and cyber security experts from the IT domain.
Assist knowledge sharing for them, between domains and use it to build a stronger
common ground from which they can seek out solutions to the challenges facing
vessel OT security.
• Finally there should be developed common language and understanding between
OT experts and IT cyber security experts in order to improve the security in the area,
and assist in making sure the experts skill sets are diversified enough to meet future
challenges.
6.4
Everything is Harder at Sea
In today’s interconnected world, the maritime industry faces unique challenges when it
comes to ensuring robust cybersecurity for its OT systems. Operating at sea adds an­
other layer of complexity to an already intricate landscape. There are various challenges
and practical considerations of implementing maritime OT cybersecurity measures, high­
lighting the inherent complexities and limitations faced by the industry.
Logistics Chains and Third Party Security
As described in Section 4.2.4, the maritime industry heavily relies on intricate logistics
chains and involves multiple third­party vendors in its operations. However, governing
and ensuring the security of these third­party and vendor systems can be arduous. The
specialized nature of maritime systems often means that standardized security measures
and protocols may not apply uniformly across all components. Each system may have
specific vulnerabilities that need to be addressed individually, further complicating the
security landscape.
The maritime industry faces significant challenges when it comes to implementing effec­
tive OT cybersecurity measures at sea. The intricate web of interconnected systems,
limited choices in ”niche” vendors, governance of third­party security, time constraints in
the schedules of vessel operations make vetting security with vendors and bringing tech­
nical assistance on board all contribute to the complexities. Addressing these challenges
requires collaborative efforts between maritime vendors, technical organizations, IT, and
cybersecurity stakeholders to develop tailored solutions that safeguard critical maritime
operations from evolving cyber threats. By recognizing these difficulties and proactively
addressing them, the maritime industry can strengthen its cybersecurity posture and nav­
igate the waters of the digital era with greater resilience. Further studies might be war­
ranted into the strengthening of SCCRM as noted in 4.2.4.
Systems complexity
Maritime OT systems often comprise a network of interconnected systems, commonly
referred to as ”systems of systems.” These systems are highly specialized and cater to
specific functions or operations, making them niche solutions. Consequently, vendors
delivering such systems typically serve a narrow customer segment. This creates a chal­
lenge in terms of available choices, as it may not be feasible to switch vendors easily.
Moreover, the integration of different systems poses challenges due to their inherent
complexities. Unlike traditional plug­and­play scenarios, maritime OT systems require
meticulous planning, customization, and testing to ensure seamless functionality.
Vessel crews are often faced with cybersecurity controls or solutions, which work when
tested ashore, but perform less impressively when the connection is a satellite or a GSM
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
85
==PAGE:95==
EDGE network 5.3. The technology implemented on shore may not seamlessly trans­
late to the maritime environment due to various factors such as environmental conditions,
hardware limitations, and legacy infrastructure. Updating and upgrading ships that were
built to last for several decades adds further complexity, especially when the existing cable
infrastructure is ill­suited for modern connectivity demands. Introducing more connectiv­
ity and data consumption onboard necessitates keeping security measures up to date,
pushing the maritime industry to play catch­up.
6.5
The Future is now
Based on the literature review, it is evident that research is being conducted on various
aspects of securing OT systems on vessels. However, this does not imply that all the
work has been completed. The maritime industry, as highlighted in the literature review
section on awareness (Section 4.3.1), has had a delayed start in terms of security and
is striving to catch up. Although our interviews indicate that the industry, as a whole, is
making progress and actively addressing threats (Section 5.4.1), a closer examination of
the literature and observed attacks suggests that the current level of preparedness may
not be sufficient given the evolving landscape. The industry is keen on being an early
adopter, leveraging new technologies, enhancing connectivity, and embracing the IoT as
part of the shipping 4.0 trend (Section 4.4.1). However, our interviews also revealed the
value placed on well­tested and secure systems, as mentioned in the vendor and remote
access section (Section 5.2.3). This presents a dichotomy within the industry between
established and secure solutions versus new and efficient smart technologies, which may
introduce vulnerabilities and risks.
Moving forward, a cautious approach to incorporating new technology is recommended.
While embracing innovation, it is crucial to prioritize supply chain risk management and
develop a deep understanding of the systems involved, identifying potential vulnerabili­
ties and their consequences if breached. This knowledge should be used to adequately
prepare for potential threats and implement appropriate mitigation measures. Addition­
ally, a key consideration is to segregate networks to the greatest extent possible, while
still ensuring connectivity for essential devices. By striking a balance between leverag­
ing new technology and maintaining robust security measures, the maritime industry can
navigate the complexities and challenges posed by the evolving threat landscape. This
approach requires a proactive mindset, continuous evaluation of security practices, and
a commitment to adapt and respond to emerging risks.
Autonomous Vessels
The future of maritime OT security in autonomous vessels presents unique challenges and
considerations as mentioned in Section 4.4.3. One significant aspect is the larger attack
surface that autonomous vessels possess compared to crewed vessels. This expanded
attack surface is a result of the increased number of sensors, and extensive systems inte­
gration. While these advancements bring benefits in terms of efficiency and performance,
they also introduce vulnerabilities. The complex integration of various systems creates
potential entry points for cyber attacks. Each sensor and interconnected component be­
comes a potential target, increasing the vessel’s overall attack surface.
Autonomous vessels’ heavy reliance on network connectivity for monitoring makes them
vulnerable to cyber attacks. Potentially what was seen in the 2022 Viasat hack that dis­
rupted communication and critical services through compromised VSAT modems [46]
could have led to control loss for an autonomous vessel. However, recovering a discon­
nected autonomous vessel safely is a significant challenge due to their lack of immediate
physical intervention capabilities for navigation and control. Specialized expertise from
86
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:96==
cybersecurity and technical professionals is needed to mitigate the attack, restore net­
work connectivity, and regain control. These complex and time­consuming processes
are further complicated in remote maritime environments. Thus, fail­to­safe designs and
proactive cybersecurity measures are crucial to ensure the safe recovery of autonomous
vessels in the event of a cyber attack.
In traditional ships, the crew members can intervene as a line of defence against cyber
threats. Crew members can observe and respond to suspicious activities, potentially de­
tecting or mitigating cyber incidents more quickly. Their presence on board allows for more
immediate action when faced with a cyber attack, enabling timely response and limiting
damages. The scarcity of cybersecurity­trained personnel onboard is a common hurdle
in both autonomous and crewed vessels. This shortage restricts the ability to detect, re­
spond, and recover from cyber attacks effectively. In the absence of trained personnel,
autonomous vessels may struggle to promptly identify and counter cyber threats. This
delay provides attackers with an extended opportunity to exploit vulnerabilities and cause
substantial disruptions.
Collaborative efforts between maritime stakeholders, technology providers, academia,
and cybersecurity experts contribute to the formulation of standardized protocols and
guidelines (see section 4.4.3) and interviews indicate that the industry is seeing autonomous
vessels as a major shift in the industry and a major future development.
The future of maritime OT security in autonomous vessels necessitates proactive mea­
sures to address the expanded attack surface and the challenges associated with timely
incident response. Industry and academia recognize the inherent vulnerabilities and in­
vest in developing solutions and approaches.
AI
Finally, a noteworthy theme that emerged from our interviews, which has received limited
research attention within the industry, is the application of artificial intelligence (AI). In the
literature review (Section 4.4.4), we demonstrated that AI is predominantly discussed in
the context of utilizing machine learning algorithms to analyze the vast amount of data
gathered from IoT devices on vessels. The focus has primarily been on enhancing oper­
ational efficiency and leveraging data analysis to improve organizational performance.
However, the use of AI as a security tool, both for safeguarding OT systems and as a
potential threat in the hands of adversaries, remains a relatively unexplored area. The in­
terviews conducted in Section 5.3.4 revealed a strong interest among several participants
in understanding the impact of AI on vessel OT security and the industry as a whole. They
emphasized the importance of addressing this topic proactively to avoid relinquishing con­
trol over the future direction of the industry to external entities.
It is evident that AI has the potential to disrupt various domains, but it can also be an
invaluable tool. Therefore, we recommend dedicating more attention to exploring the
utilization of AI as a cybersecurity tool in the maritime industry, particularly to enhance
cybersecurity measures on board vessels. Given the increasing complexity introduced
by IoT systems and the proliferation of autonomous vessels, the development of robust
AI tools to assist and improve cybersecurity practices becomes crucial.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
87
==PAGE:97==
7
Conclusion
Securing OT systems in the maritime industry is a daunting task. Inherent complexities
in technical OT environment, regulations and responsibilities as well as within the people
and culture make it no small task to address cybersecurity in this world­spanning ”niche”
industry begging the questions:
How has the threatscape for the maritime industry changed over the last decade,
and what effect has this had on the threats to vessel OT?
We have shown that the maritime industry has experienced significant increases in its
threatscape over the past decade, both measurably in terms of increased numbers of
reported attacks as well as in terms of the self­imposed larger attack surface. The industry
has become a prime target for malicious actors due to its central role in global trade and
critical infrastructure. Incidents in the maritime sector have increased by 900% in recent
years, encompassing a range of attacks from simple jamming to sophisticated malware
attacks. The rise in incidents serves as a clear indication of the evolving threats faced
by vessel OT systems. Learning the lessons from NotPetya the industry has risen to the
challenge – and despite a difficult threat environment with diverse adversaries from APTs
to script­kiddies the industry has moved away from ignoring the threat to actively working
to address it, however, there is still room for improvement. The industry’s rapid adoption of
new technologies, such as autonomy and IoT, continues to expand the risk and introduces
new possibilities for cyber attacks. The dynamic nature of the cybersecurity landscape
necessitates continuous vigilance as the threat landscape can change rapidly.
What are the current approaches to OT protection, and what challenges still exist
or go unanswered?
Current approaches to OT protection in the maritime industry rely on general cybersecu­
rity and maritime guidelines, incorporating them into existing safety procedures. However,
there is a need to utilize specialized frameworks like the MaCRA framework for OT se­
curity. Balancing the adoption of new technologies with the security of existing systems,
strategies such as supply chain risk management, vulnerability understanding, and net­
work separation with necessary connectivity are important.
It remains a challenge to maintain a properly cyber­skilled workforce. Improving security
education and awareness among the workforce, including targeted training programs tai­
lored to different groups, is crucial. Top management should prioritize cybersecurity and
invest in training initiatives. Collaboration between industry and academia is essential to
address challenges and keep up with evolving threats.
For the available technologies and proposed solutions, there is still not a single solution
to the complexities of the ship environment and the sailing villages of technology that are
shipping today ­ and further new technologies are right around the corner. So far some of
the best­proposed solutions are low­tech and restrained use of architecture to isolate the
vulnerable systems.
Future challenges include protecting and ensuring the security of OT systems as more
IoT devices are integrated. Attention should also be given to emerging trends such as
autonomous vessels to ensure proper security measures. Strengthening the cyber secu­
rity posture of critical maritime operations requires proactive measures and collaborative
solutions.
88
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:98==
Better knowledge sharing between academia and the industry is necessary to enhance
collaboration towards developing better security measures. Research should focus on
likely attack vectors while not ignoring the black swan events to avoid unexpected vulner­
abilities.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
89
==PAGE:99==
90
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:100==
Bibliography
[1]
DNV. “MARITIME CYBER PRIORITY 2023”. In: (Apr. 2023). URL: https://brandcentral.
dnv.com/original/gallery/10651/files/original/5edc9dcb-4dfb-448c-a766-cb065f28a47b.
pdf?utm_campaign=AC_CS_GLOB_23Q2_AUTO_Report-Cyber-Priority-2023-
confirmation-email-2-reports&utm_medium=email&utm_source=Eloqua.
[2]
Joseph Direnzo, Dana A Goward, and Fred S Roberts. “The little­known challenge
of maritime cyber security; The little­known challenge of maritime cyber security”.
In: (2015). DOI: 10.1109/IISA.2015.7388071.
[3]
Third­Party Risk to the Nth Degree Managing the cyber risk of third­party vendors
and their nth­party ecosystem. Tech. rep.
[4]
Nick Chubb, Patrick Finn, and Daniel Ng. THE GREAT DISCONNECT The state of
cyber risk management in the maritime industry CONSULTING. Tech. rep. 2022.
[5]
“Cybertruslen mod søfart og havne”. In: (). URL: www.cfcs.dk..
[6]
Trellix. The Threat Report: Fall 2022 | Trellix. 2022. URL: https://www.trellix.com/
en-us/advanced-research-center/threat-reports/nov-2022.html#nationStateStats.
[7]
Iosif Progoulakis, Paul Rohmeyer, and Nikitas Nikitakos. “Cyber physical systems
security for maritime assets”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 9.12
(Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20771312. DOI: 10.3390/jmse9121384.
[8]
IMO. “GUIDELINES ON MARITIME CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT MSC­FAL 1­
Circ 3”. In: ().
[9]
BIMCO. THE GUIDELINES ON CYBER SECURITY ONBOARD SHIPS. 2021.
URL: https://www.ics-shipping.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/2021-Cyber-
Security-Guidelines.pdf.
[10]
Dragos. “BRIDGING THE IT AND OT CYBERSECURITY DIVIDE”. In: (2019).
URL: https://hub.dragos.com/hubfs/Whitepaper- Downloads/Bridging- the- IT-
OT-Cybersecurity-Divide.pdf.
[11]
William Loomis et al. Raising the colors : signaling for cooperation on maritime
cybersecurity. 2021. ISBN: 9781619771864.
[12]
TREND MICRO. Industrial Control System ­ Definition. URL: https://www.trendmicro.
com/vinfo/us/security/definition/industrial-control-system.
[13]
Victor Bolbot et al. “A novel cyber­risk assessment method for ship systems”. In:
Safety Science 131 (Nov. 2020). ISSN: 18791042. DOI: 10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104908.
[14]
Eleni Maria Kalogeraki et al. “A novel risk assessment methodology for SCADA
maritime logistics environments”. In: Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 8.9 (Aug.
2018). ISSN: 20763417. DOI: 10.3390/app8091477.
[15]
Frank Akpan et al. “Cybersecurity Challenges in the Maritime Sector”. In: Network
2.1 (Mar. 2022), pp. 123–138. DOI: 10.3390/network2010009.
[16]
National Institute of Standards and Technology. URL: https://www.nist.gov/.
[17]
Danish Maritime Authority | dma.dk. URL: https://dma.dk/.
[18]
United States Coast Guard. URL: https://www.uscg.mil/.
[19]
Center for Cybersikkerhed. URL: https://www.cfcs.dk/.
[20]
National Cyber Security Centre ­ NCSC.GOV.UK. URL: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/.
[21]
CCDCOE ­ The NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence is a multi­
national and interdisciplinary hub of cyber defence expertise. URL: https://ccdcoe.
org/.
[22]
BIMCO website. URL: https://www.bimco.org/.
[23]
Velkommen ­ Danske Maritime. URL: https://danskemaritime.dk/en/.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
91
==PAGE:101==
[24]
Forside ­ Danske Rederier. URL: https://www.danishshipping.dk/.
[25]
Lloyd’s Register – classification, training and advisory services. URL: https://www.
lr.org/en/.
[26]
DNV.com ­ When trust matters ­ DNV. URL: https://www.dnv.com/.
[27]
Safer and Cleaner Shipping ­ IACS. URL: https://iacs.org.uk/.
[28]
Maersk | Integrated Container Logistics & Supply Chain Services. URL: https://
www.maersk.com/.
[29]
Home ­ Maersk Supply Service. URL: https://www.maersksupplyservice.com/.
[30]
ESVAGT ­ Safety & Support at Sea. URL: https://esvagt.com/.
[31]
ISO ­ International Organization for Standardization. URL: https://www.iso.org/
home.html.
[32]
ENISA. URL: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/.
[33]
International Maritime Organization. URL: https://www.imo.org/.
[34]
MARTEC ￿Tag din uddannelse på MARTEC. URL: https://www.martec.dk/.
[35]
Cyber­SHIP Lab ­ University of Plymouth. URL: https://www.plymouth.ac.uk/
research/cyber-ship-lab.
[36]
Galina Mikhaylova et al. “THE ”ANONYMOUS” MOVEMENT: HACKTIVISM AS
AN EMERGING FORM OF POLITICAL PARTICIPATION”. In: (2014).
[37]
NIST. CSRC Topics ­ advanced persistent threats | CSRC. URL: https://csrc.nist.
gov/topics/security- and- privacy/risk- management/threats/advanced- persistent-
threats.
[38]
Cybercriminals ­ Definition. URL: https://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/us/security/
definition/cybercriminals.
[39]
UN. “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea”. In: ().
[40]
A G Charvat. “Cyber Terrorism: A New Dimension in Battlespace”. In: (2018).
[41]
Defining Insider Threats | CISA. URL: https : / / www . cisa . gov / topics / physical -
security/insider-threat-mitigation/defining-insider-threats.
[42]
Samuel Chng et al. “Hacker types, motivations and strategies: A comprehensive
framework”. In: Computers in Human Behavior Reports 5 (Mar. 2022), p. 100167.
ISSN: 2451­9588. DOI: 10.1016/J.CHBR.2022.100167.
[43]
What is Cyber Espionage? – CrowdStrike. URL: https://www.crowdstrike.com/
cybersecurity-101/cyberattacks/cyber-espionage/.
[44]
Maritime cyber security ­ DNV. URL: https://www.dnv.com/maritime/insights/
topics/maritime-cyber-security/index.html.
[45]
The STRIDE Threat Model | Microsoft Learn. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-
us/previous-versions/commerce-server/ee823878(v=cs.20)?redirectedfrom=MSDN.
[46]
Viasat incident report on attack against the KA­SA network • The Register. URL:
https://www.theregister.com/2022/03/30/viasat_spills_on_russian_attack/.
[47]
Monina Schwarz, Matthias Marx, and Hannes Federrath. “A Structured Analysis
of Information Security Incidents in the Maritime Sector”. In: (Dec. 2021). URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.06545.
[48]
Yunpeng Zhang, Ben You, and Liang­Chieh Cheng. Review on Cybersecurity Risk
Assessement and Evaluation and Their Approaches on Maritime Transportation.
Tech. rep. 2017. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328018682.
[49]
Chia­Hsun Chang et al. Evaluating cybersecurity risks in the maritime industry: a
literature review. Tech. rep. 2019. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
337404079.
[50]
Kimberly Tam and Kevin Jones. A Cyber­Security Review of Emerging Technology
in the Maritime Industry. Tech. rep. 2019. URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10026.1/
14947.
92
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:102==
[51]
Sheraz Aslam, Michalis P. Michaelides, and Herodotos Herodotou. “Internet of
Ships: A Survey on Architectures, Emerging Applications, and Challenges”. In:
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7.10 (Oct. 2020), pp. 9714–9727. ISSN: 23274662.
DOI: 10.1109/JIOT.2020.2993411.
[52]
Logan Drazovich, Liam Brew, and Susanne Wetzel. “Advancing the state of mar­
itime cybersecurity guidelines to improve the resilience of the maritime transporta­
tion system”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber
Security and Resilience, CSR 2021. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi­
neers Inc., July 2021, pp. 503–509. ISBN: 9781665402859. DOI: 10.1109/CSR51186.
2021.9527922.
[53]
P. H. Meland et al. “A retrospective analysis of maritime cyber security incidents”.
In: TransNav 15.3 (2021), pp. 519–530. ISSN: 20836481. DOI: 10.12716/1001.15.
03.04.
[54]
Marie Haugli Larsen and Mass Soldal Lund. “A Maritime Perspective on Cyber
Risk Perception: A Systematic Literature Review”. In: IEEE Access (2021). ISSN:
21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3122433.
[55]
Mohamed Amine Ben Farah et al. Cyber Security in the Maritime Industry: A Sys­
tematic Survey of Recent Advances and Future Trends. Jan. 2022. DOI: 10.3390/
info13010022.
[56]
Imran Ashraf et al. “A Survey on Cyber Security Threats in IoT­Enabled Maritime
Industry”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2022). ISSN:
15580016. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3164678.
[57]
Lars Q. Jensen. MARITIME CYBER­RISKS. Tech. rep. 2014. URL: www.clearskysec.
com.
[58]
Sang Jeong Lee. “GNSS Vulnerability Issues in Korea”. In: (2013).
[59]
Chitu Okoli and Kira Schabram. “A Guide to Conducting a Systematic Literature
Review of Information Systems Research”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (May 2010).
DOI: 10.2139/SSRN.1954824. URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1954824.
[60]
Chitu Okoli. “A Guide to Conducting a Standalone Systematic Literature Review”.
In: Communications of the Association for Information Systems 37.1 (Nov. 2015),
p. 43. ISSN: 1529­3181. DOI: 10.17705/1CAIS.03743. URL: https://aisel.aisnet.
org/cais/vol37/iss1/43.
[61]
Mark Petticrew and Helen Roberts. Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences A
PRACTICAL GUIDE. Tech. rep. 2006.
[62]
Barbara Kitchenham and Stuart M Charters. Guidelines for performing Systematic
Literature Reviews in Software Engineering. Tech. rep. 2007. URL: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/302924724.
[63]
Jennifer Rowley. “Conducting research interviews”. In: Management Research
Review 35.3­4 (Mar. 2012), pp. 260–271. ISSN: 20408269. DOI: 10.1108/01409171211210154.
[64]
P. Gill et al. “Methods of data collection in qualitative research: Interviews and
focus groups”. In: British Dental Journal 204.6 (Mar. 2008), pp. 291–295. ISSN:
00070610. DOI: 10.1038/bdj.2008.192.
[65]
Matthew Decarlo. Scientific Inquiry in Social Work. Tech. rep. 2018.
[66]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Using thematic analysis in psychology”. In:
Qualitative Research in Psychology 3.2 (2006), pp. 77–101. ISSN: 14780887.
DOI: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
[67]
ISO/IEC 27001 Standard – Information Security Management Systems. URL: https:
//www.iso.org/standard/27001.
[68]
Scott L Mitchell. “GRC360: A framework to help organisations drive principled
performance”. In: International Journal of Disclosure and Governance 2007 4:4
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
93
==PAGE:103==
4.4 (Oct. 2007), pp. 279–296. ISSN: 1746­6539. DOI: 10.1057/PALGRAVE.JDG.
2050066. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/palgrave.jdg.2050066.
[69]
IMO. “Resolution MSC.428(98)”. In: (June 2017). URL: https://wwwcdn.imo.org/
localresources/en/OurWork/Security/Documents/Resolution%20MSC.428(98).pdf.
[70]
The International Safety Management (ISM) Code. URL: https://www.imo.org/
en/ourwork/humanelement/pages/ISMCode.aspx.
[71]
“DIRECTIVE (EU) 2022/2555 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT”. In: ().
[72]
IACS. UR E26 ­ Cyber resilience of ships. Tech. rep. Apr. 2022. URL: https://iacs.
org.uk/publications/unified-requirements/ur-e.
[73]
IACS. Cyber resilience of on­board systems and equipment. Tech. rep. IACS,
2022.
[74]
About Us ­ INTERTANKO. URL: https://www.intertanko.com/about-us/.
[75]
Home ­ Intercargo. URL: https://www.intercargo.org/.
[76]
Cybersecurity Framework | NIST. URL: https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework.
[77]
isa.org. ISA/IEC 62443 Series of Standards ­ ISA. URL: https://www.isa.org/
standards-and-publications/isa-standards/isa-iec-62443-series-of-standards.
[78]
plymouth.ac.uk. MaCRA ­ University of Plymouth. URL: https://www.plymouth.ac.
uk/research/maritime-cyber-threats-research-group/macra.
[79]
Maria Kardakova et al. “Cyber security on sea transport”. In: Advances in Intelligent
Systems and Computing. Vol. 982. Springer Verlag, 2020, pp. 481–490. ISBN:
9783030197551. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-19756-8{\_}46.
[80]
Iosif Progoulakis et al. “Perspectives on Cyber Security for Offshore Oil and Gas
Assets”. In: (2021). DOI: 10.3390/jmse. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/jmse.
[81]
Gary C Kessler. Cybersecurity in the Maritime Domain. Tech. rep. 2019. URL:
https://commons.erau.edu/publication/1318.
[82]
Kimberly Tam and Kevin D. Jones. “Maritime cybersecurity policy: the scope and
impact of evolving technology on international shipping”. In: Journal of Cyber Pol­
icy 3.2 (May 2018), pp. 147–164. ISSN: 2373­8871. DOI: 10.1080/23738871.2018.
1513053.
[83]
Simon Yusuf Enoch, Jang Se Lee, and Dong Seong Kim. “Novel security mod­
els, metrics and security assessment for maritime vessel networks”. In: Computer
Networks 189 (Apr. 2021). ISSN: 13891286. DOI: 10.1016/j.comnet.2021.107934.
[84]
Danish Maritime Agency. “Cyber and Information Security Strategy for the Maritime
Sector”. In: (2019).
[85]
A1 Governance ­ NCSC.GOV.UK. URL: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/caf/
caf-principles-and-guidance/a1-governance.
[86]
NL NCSC. Checklist security of ICS/SCADA systems | Factsheet | National Cyber
Security Centre. URL: https://english.ncsc.nl/publications/factsheets/2019/juni/
01/factsheet-checklist-security-of-ics-scada-systems.
[87]
Kimberly Tam and Keven D. Jones. Situational Awareness: Examining Factors
that Affect Cyber­Risks in the Maritime Sector. Tech. rep. 2019. URL: http://hdl.
handle.net/10026.1/14948.
[88]
E. Erstad, R. Ostnes, and M. S. Lund. “An operational approach to maritime cyber
resilience”. In: TransNav 15.1 (2021), pp. 27–34. ISSN: 20836481. DOI: 10.12716/
1001.15.01.01.
[89]
Georgios Potamos et al. “Maritime Cyber Threats Detection Framework: Building
Capabilities”. In: IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology.
Vol. 650 IFIP. Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH, 2022,
pp. 107–129. ISBN: 9783031081712. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-08172-9{\_}8.
94
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:104==
[90]
Kimberly Tam and Kevin Jones. “MaCRA: a model­based framework for maritime
cyber­risk assessment”. In: WMU Journal of Maritime Affairs 18.1 (Mar. 2019),
pp. 129–163. ISSN: 16541642. DOI: 10.1007/s13437-019-00162-2.
[91]
Risk and threat management ­ InfoSecHelp LLC. URL: https://infosechelp.net/risk-
and-threat-management/.
[92]
Kimberly Tam, Kemedi Moara­Nkwe, and Kevin Jones. “The Use of Cyber Ranges
in the Maritime Context”. In: Maritime Technology and Research 3.1 (July 2020).
DOI: 10.33175/mtr.2021.241410.
[93]
International Society of Automation (ISA). URL: https://www.isa.org/.
[94]
Homepage | IEC. URL: https://iec.ch/homepage.
[95]
DNV­RP­G108 Guideline for the use of IEC 62443 in the oil and gas industry ­
DNV. URL: https://www.dnv.com/cybersecurity/recommended-practices/dnv-rp-
g108-cyber-security-in-the-oil-and-gas-industry-based-on-IEC-62443.html.
[96]
Eleni Maria Kalogeraki et al. “Knowledge management methodology for identify­
ing threats in maritime/logistics supply chains”. In: Knowledge Management Re­
search and Practice 16.4 (Oct. 2018), pp. 508–524. ISSN: 14778246. DOI: 10.
1080/14778238.2018.1486789.
[97]
Stavros Karamperidis, Chronis Kapalidis, and Tim Watson. “Maritime cyber se­
curity: A global challenge tackled through distinct regional approaches”. In: Jour­
nal of Marine Science and Engineering 9.12 (Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20771312. DOI:
10.3390/jmse9121323.
[98]
Andy Greenberg. The Untold Story of NotPetya, the Most Devastating Cyberattack
in History | WIRED. Aug. 2018. URL: https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-
cyberattack-ukraine-russia-code-crashed-the-world/.
[99]
Boris Svilicic et al. “Raising awareness on cyber security of ecdis”. In: TransNav
13.1 (Mar. 2019), pp. 231–236. ISSN: 20836481. DOI: 10.12716/1001.13.01.24.
[100]
Armend Duzha, Panagiotis Gouvas, and Monica Canepa. MITIGATE * : An Innova­
tive Cyber­Security Maritime Supply Chain Risk Management System. Tech. rep.
2017.
[101]
Nikolaos Polatidis et al. “Recommender systems meeting security: From prod­
uct recommendation to cyber­attack prediction”. In: Communications in Computer
and Information Science. Vol. 744. Springer Verlag, 2017, pp. 508–519. ISBN:
9783319651712. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-65172-9{\_}43.
[102]
Stefan Schauer, Nineta Polemi, and Haralambos Mouratidis. “MITIGATE: a dy­
namic supply chain cyber risk assessment methodology”. In: Journal of Trans­
portation Security 12.1­2 (June 2019), pp. 1–35. ISSN: 1938775X. DOI: 10.1007/
s12198-018-0195-z.
[103]
P. J.G. Guerra and D. A. Sepulveda Estay. “An Impact­wave Analogy for Managing
Cyber Risks in Supply Chains”. In: IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Engineering and Engineering Management. Vol. 2019­December. IEEE Computer
Society, Jan. 2019, pp. 61–65. ISBN: 9781538667866. DOI: 10.1109/IEEM.2018.
8607563.
[104]
Spyridon Papastergiou et al. “Challenges and Issues in Risk Assessment in Mod­
ern Maritime Systems”. In: 2021, pp. 129–156. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-41196-
1{\_}7.
[105]
Monica Canepa et al. “CR CyberMar as a solution path towards cybersecurity
soundness in maritime logistics domain”. In: Transactions on Maritime Science
10.1 (Apr. 2021), pp. 147–153. ISSN: 18483313. DOI: 10.7225/toms.v10.n01.011.
[106]
Cyber Security Clause 2019. URL: https://www.bimco.org/contracts-and-clauses/
bimco-clauses/current/cyber-security-clause-2019.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
95
==PAGE:105==
[107]
Monica Canepa et al. “Assessing the effectiveness of cybersecurity training and
raising awareness within the maritime domain”. In: IATED Academy, 2021. ISBN:
9788409276660.
[108]
Kamlesh Kanwal et al. “Maritime cybersecurity: are onboard systems ready?” In:
Maritime Policy and Management (2022). ISSN: 14645254. DOI: 10.1080/03088839.
2022.2124464.
[109]
Ivan Mraković and Ranko Vojinović. “Maritime cyber security analysis – How to
reduce threats?” In: Transactions on Maritime Science 8.1 (Apr. 2019), pp. 132–
139. ISSN: 18483313. DOI: 10.7225/toms.v08.n01.013.
[110]
M. Bergmann. “Software Updating Regime for Ships Necessity for Cyber Security
and Safe Navigation”. In: 2017. URL: https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/
edit/10.1201/9781315099132-37/software-updating-regime-ships-necessity-cyber-
security-safe-navigation-bergmann.
[111]
Georgios Kavallieratos, Vasiliki Diamantopoulou, and Sokratis K. Katsikas. “Ship­
ping 4.0: Security Requirements for the Cyber­Enabled Ship”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Industrial Informatics 16.10 (Oct. 2020), pp. 6617–6625. ISSN: 19410050.
DOI: 10.1109/TII.2020.2976840.
[112]
Dimitrios Dagdilelis et al. “Cyber­resilience for marine navigation by information fu­
sion and change detection”. In: Ocean Engineering 266 (Dec. 2022). ISSN: 00298018.
DOI: 10.1016/J.OCEANENG.2022.112605.
[113]
Mia Filic. “Foundations of GNSS Spoofing Detection and Mitigation with Distributed
GNSS SDR Receiver”. In: TransNav, the International Journal on Marine Naviga­
tion and Safety of Sea Transportation 12.4 (Jan. 2018), pp. 649–656. ISSN: 2083­
6473. DOI: 10.12716/1001.12.04.01.
[114]
Athanassios Goudossis and Sokratis K. Katsikas. “Towards a secure automatic
identification system (AIS)”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Technology (Japan)
24.2 (June 2019), pp. 410–423. ISSN: 09484280. DOI: 10.1007/s00773-018-0561-
3.
[115]
Aybars Oruc, Vasileios Gkioulos, and Sokratis Katsikas. “Towards a Cyber­Physical
Range for the Integrated Navigation System (INS)”. In: Journal of Marine Science
and Engineering 10.1 (Jan. 2022). ISSN: 20771312. DOI: 10.3390/jmse10010107.
[116]
Ahmed Amro et al. “Navigation Data Anomaly Analysis and Detection”. In: Informa­
tion (Switzerland) 13.3 (Mar. 2022). ISSN: 20782489. DOI: 10.3390/info13030104.
[117]
Rory Hopcraft et al. “Raising the Standard of Maritime Voyage Data Recorder Se­
curity”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 11.2 (Feb. 2023). ISSN:
20771312. DOI: 10.3390/jmse11020267.
[118]
Yara Birkeland | The first zero emission, autonomous ship | Yara International.
URL: https://www.yara.com/knowledge-grows/game-changer-for-the-environment/.
[119]
Denmark’s first driverless harbour bus sails using technology from DTU. URL:
https://www.dtu.dk/english/newsarchive/2022/12/dks-foerste-foererloese-faerge.
[120]
NTNU trials world’s first urban autonomous passenger ferry. URL: https://norwegianscitechnews.
com/2022/09/ntnu-trials-worlds-first-urban-autonomous-passenger-ferry/.
[121]
Mayflower Autonomous Ship. URL: https://mas400.com/.
[122]
Rolls­Royce. “Autonomous ships The next step”. In: (2016). URL: www.rolls-royce.
com/marine.
[123]
MUNIN | MUNIN – Maritime Unmanned Navigation through Intelligence in Net­
works. URL: http://www.unmanned-ship.org/munin/.
[124]
Kimberly Tam and Kevin Jones. Cyber­Risk Assessment for Autonomous Ships.
Tech. rep. 2018.
96
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:106==
[125]
Tope Omitola et al. Securing Navigation of Unmanned Maritime Systems. Tech.
rep. 2018. URL: http://www.collisionregs.com/MSN1781.pdf.
[126]
Pedro Merino Laso, David Brosset, and Marie­Annick Giraud. “Secured Architec­
ture for Unmanned Surface Vehicle Fleets Management and Control”. In: 2018
IEEE 16th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, 16th Intl
Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 4th Intl Conf on Big Data Intelli­
gence and Computing and Cyber Science and Technology Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/Cyb
IEEE, Aug. 2018, pp. 373–375. ISBN: 978­1­5386­7518­2. DOI: 10.1109/DASC/
PiCom / DataCom / CyberSciTec . 2018 . 00072. URL: https : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org /
document/8511915/.
[127]
Bilhanan Silverajan, Mert Ocak, and Benjamin Nagel. “Cybersecurity Attacks and
Defences for Unmanned Smart Ships”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications
(GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and
IEEE Smart Data (SmartData). IEEE, July 2018, pp. 15–20. ISBN: 978­1­5386­
7975­3. DOI: 10.1109/Cybermatics{\_}2018.2018.00037. URL: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/8726823/.
[128]
Georgios Kavallieratos, Sokratis Katsikas, and Vasileios Gkioulos. “Cyber­attacks
against the autonomous ship”. In: (2019).
[129]
Ahmed Amro et al. “Impact of cyber risk on the safety of the MilliAmpere2 Au­
tonomous Passenger Ship”. In: (2020).
[130]
Hasan Mahbub Tusher et al. “Cyber security risk assessment in autonomous ship­
ping”. In: Maritime Economics & Logistics (2022), pp. 208–227. DOI: 10.1057/
s41278-022-00214-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1057/s41278-022-00214-0.
[131]
Sungbaek Cho et al. Cybersecurity Considerations in Autonomous Ships. Tech.
rep. Tallin: CCDCOE, 2022. URL: www.ccdcoe.org.
[132]
Ahmed Amro and Vasileios Gkioulos. “Cyber risk management for autonomous
passenger ships using threat­informed defense­in­depth”. In: International Journal
of Information Security 22.1 (Feb. 2023), pp. 249–288. ISSN: 16155270. DOI:
10.1007/S10207- 022- 00638- Y/FIGURES/12. URL: https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s10207-022-00638-y.
[133]
Ahmed Amro and Vasileios Gkioulos. “Communication and Cybersecurity Testbed
for Autonomous Passenger Ship”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (includ­
ing subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinfor­
matics) 13106 LNCS (2022), pp. 5–22. ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-
95484-0{\_}1/TABLES/7. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-
030-95484-0_1.
[134]
Ahmed Amro, Vasileios Gkioulos, and Sokratis Katsikas. “Connect and protect:
Requirements for maritime autonomous surface ship in urban passenger trans­
portation”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11980 LNCS
(2020), pp. 69–85. ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 42048- 2{\_}5/
TABLES/1. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-42048-2_5.
[135]
Autoferry ­ NTNU. URL: https://www.ntnu.edu/autoferry.
[136]
Kjeld Dittmann and Mogens Blanke. “Risikominderung durch das Design von au­
tonomen maritimen Automatisierungssystemen Design von autonomen maritimen
Systemen”. In: At­Automatisierungstechnik 70.5 (May 2022), pp. 469–481. ISSN:
2196677X. DOI: 10.1515/auto-2021-0151.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
97
==PAGE:107==
[137]
Kjeld Dittmann. “Autonomy for Ships: System Thinking and Engineering”. In: (2022).
DOI: 10.23919/SoftCOM55329.2022.9911446. URL: https://doi.org/10.23919/
SoftCOM55329.2022.9911446.
[138]
Jia Wang et al. “A Survey of Technologies for Unmanned Merchant Ships”. In: IEEE
Access 8 (2020), pp. 224461–224486. ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2020.3044040.
[139]
“ANNEX 2 FRAMEWORK FOR THE REGULATORY SCOPING EXERCISE FOR
THE USE OF MARITIME AUTONOMOUS SURFACE SHIPS (MASS)”. In: (). URL:
https://maiif.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/MSC-100_20-Annex-20-1.pdf.
[140]
Ilya S. Shipunov et al. “About the problems of ensuring information security on
unmanned ships”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Conference of Russian Young
Researchers in Electrical and Electronic Engineering, ElConRus 2019 (Feb. 2019),
pp. 339–343. DOI: 10.1109/EICONRUS.2019.8657219.
[141]
Dimitrios Dagdilelis et al. “Cyber­resilience for marine navigation by information
fusion and change detection”. In: Ocean Engineering 266 (Dec. 2022), p. 112605.
ISSN: 0029­8018. DOI: 10.1016/J.OCEANENG.2022.112605.
[142]
Xiang Yu Zhou et al. “A system­theoretic approach to safety and security co­
analysis of autonomous ships”. In: Ocean Engineering 222 (Feb. 2021). ISSN:
00298018. DOI: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2021.108569.
[143]
Wentao Liu et al. “Intrusion Detection for Maritime Transportation Systems With
Batch Federated Aggregation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (2022). ISSN: 15580016. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3181436.
[144]
Jin Hong Lim, Jae Hwan Kim, and Jun Ho Huh. “Recent trends and proposed
response strategies of international standards related to shipbuilding equipment
big data integration platform”. In: Quality and Quantity (2022). ISSN: 15737845.
DOI: 10.1007/s11135-022-01382-0.
[145]
A. Alop. “The main challenges and barriers to the successful “smart shipping””. In:
TransNav 13.3 (Sept. 2019), pp. 521–528. ISSN: 20836481. DOI: 10.12716/1001.
13.03.05.
[146]
Pedro Merino Laso et al. “ISOLA: An Innovative Approach to Cyber Threat Detec­
tion in Cruise Shipping”. In: Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies. Vol. 255.
Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH, 2022, pp. 71–81. DOI:
10.1007/978-981-16-4884-7{\_}7.
[147]
Bartlomiej Hyra. “Analyzing the Attack Surface of Ships ­ Brace yourself cyber
pirates are coming”. PhD thesis. 2019.
[148]
“ICS/OT CYBERSECURITY YEAR IN REVIEW 2022”. In: ().
[149]
IMO. “MARITIME CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT IN SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYS­
TEMS ”. In: (June 2017). URL: https : / / wwwcdn . imo . org / localresources / en /
OurWork/Security/Documents/Resolution%20MSC.428(98).pdf.
[150]
 Remote AIS Spoofing Creates Russian Pro­War Symbol on Black Sea | Defense
Express. URL: https://en.defence-ua.com/news/remote_ais_spoofing_creates_
russian_pro_war_symbol_on_black_sea-6813.html.
[151]
KEN PROSKA et al. COSMICENERGY: New OT Malware Possibly Related To
Russian Emergency Response Exercises | Mandiant. URL: https://www.mandiant.
com/resources/blog/cosmicenergy-ot-malware-russian-response.
[152]
Kimberly Tam and Kevin Jones. Forensic Readiness within the Maritime Sector.
Tech. rep. 2019.
[153]
Michael L. Thomas. “Maritime Hacking Using Land­Based Skills”. In: International
Conference on Cyber Conflict, CYCON. Vol. 2022­May. NATO CCD COE Publi­
cations, 2022, pp. 249–263. DOI: 10.23919/CyCon55549.2022.9811049.
98
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:108==
[154]
R. Sen. “Cyber and Information Threats to Seaports and Ships”. In: Maritime Se­
curity. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 281–302. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-803672-3.00009-1.
[155]
Alexeis Dr Garcia­Perez, Mick Dr Thurlbeck, and Eddie How. Towards cyber se­
curity readiness in the Maritime industry: A knowledge­based approach. Tech. rep.
2017.
[156]
P.E. Rick Scott and Cris Dewitt. Moving Maritime Cyber Security from a Defensive
to a Control Condition. Tech. rep. 2017. URL: http://onepetro.org/SNAMESMC/
proceedings- pdf/SMC17/4- SMC17/D043S013R002/1253733/sname- smc- 2017-
036.pdf/1.
[157]
Hugh Boyes and Roy Isbell. “Code of Practice Cyber Security for Ships”. In: (2017).
URL: www.gov.uk/dft.
[158]
IMO. MSC­FAL.1/Circ.3 ­ GUIDELINES ON MARITIME CYBER RISK MANAGE­
MENT. Tech. rep. 2017.
[159]
Sepúlveda Estay, Daniel Alberto, and Rishikesh Sahay. Work Package 2 Report­
Cyber resilience for the shipping industry. Tech. rep. 2018.
[160]
Andrew R. Lee and Hansford P. Wogan. All at Sea: The Modern Seascape of
Cybersecurity Threats of the Maritime Industry. 2018. ISBN: 9781538648148.
[161]
Joan Mileski, Christopher Clott, and Cassia Bomer Galvao. “Cyberattacks on ships:
a wicked problem approach”. In: Maritime Business Review 3.4 (Dec. 2018), pp. 414–
430. ISSN: 23973765. DOI: 10.1108/MABR-08-2018-0026.
[162]
Thomas Becmeur et al. “A Platform for Raising Awareness on Cyber Security in
a Maritime Context”. In: Proceedings ­ 2017 International Conference on Compu­
tational Science and Computational Intelligence, CSCI 2017. Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers Inc., Dec. 2018, pp. 103–108. ISBN: 9781538626528.
DOI: 10.1109/CSCI.2017.17.
[163]
Olivier Jacq et al. “Detecting and Hunting Cyberthreats in a Maritime Environment:
Specification and Experimentation of a Maritime Cybersecurity Operations Cen­
tre”. In: 2018. ISBN: 9781538670453.
[164]
Mass Soldal Lund et al. “Integrity of integrated navigation systems”. In: 2018 IEEE
Conference on Communications and Network Security, CNS 2018. Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., Aug. 2018. ISBN: 9781538645864. DOI:
10.1109/CNS.2018.8433151.
[165]
David Miranda Silgado. Cyber­attacks: a digital threat reality affecting the maritime
industry. Tech. rep. 2018. URL: https://commons.wmu.se/all_dissertations/663.
[166]
Dietmar P. F. Möller et al. “Securing Maritime Traffic Management(Conference
Paper)”. In: 2018. ISBN: 9781538653982.
[167]
Lauren R. Shapiro et al. “Trojan horse risks in the maritime transportation systems
sector”. In: Journal of Transportation Security 11.3­4 (Dec. 2018), pp. 65–83. ISSN:
1938775X. DOI: 10.1007/s12198-018-0191-3.
[168]
Rory Hopcraft and Keith M. Martin. “Effective maritime cybersecurity regulation–
the case for a cyber code”. In: Journal of the Indian Ocean Region 14.3 (Sept.
2018), pp. 354–366. ISSN: 1948108X. DOI: 10.1080/19480881.2018.1519056.
[169]
Rishikesh Sahay et al. “CyberShip: An SDN­based autonomic attack mitigation
framework for ship systems”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat­
ics). Vol. 11287 LNCS. Springer Verlag, 2018, pp. 191–198. ISBN: 9783030030254.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-03026-1{\_}14.
[170]
N Kala and Mahesh Balakrishnan. “Cyber Preparedness in Maritime Industry”. In:
International Journal of Scientific and Technical Advancements 5.2 (2019), pp. 19–
28. ISSN: 2454­1532.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
99
==PAGE:109==
[171]
Boris Svilicic et al. “Assessing ship cyber risks: a framework and case study of
ECDIS security”. In: WMU Journal of Maritime Affairs 18.3 (Sept. 2019), pp. 509–
520. ISSN: 16541642. DOI: 10.1007/s13437-019-00183-x.
[172]
K Tam, K Forshaw, and KD Jones. “Cyber­SHIP: Developing Next Generation Mar­
itime Cyber Research Capabilities”. In: Institute of Marine Engineering, Science
and Technology (IMarEST), Nov. 2019. DOI: 10.24868/icmet.oman.2019.005.
[173]
M. Lutzhoft et al. “Human­centred maritime autonomy­An ethnography of the fu­
ture”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 1357. 1. Institute of Physics
Publishing, Nov. 2019. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1357/1/012032.
[174]
Boris Svilicic et al. “A study on cyber security threats in a shipboard integrated
navigational system”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 7.10 (Oct.
2019). ISSN: 20771312. DOI: 10.3390/jmse7100364.
[175]
Akash RANA. “Commercial Maritime and Cyber Risk Management”. In: Safety &
Defense 5.1 (Dec. 2019), pp. 46–48. ISSN: 2450­551X. DOI: 10.37105/SD.42.
URL: www.theiet.org/standards.
[176]
Juan Ignacio Alcaide and Ruth Garcia Llave. “Critical infrastructures cybersecurity
and the maritime sector”. In: Transportation Research Procedia. Vol. 45. Elsevier
B.V., 2020, pp. 547–554. DOI: 10.1016/j.trpro.2020.03.058.
[177]
Fred S. Roberts. “From Football to Oil Rigs: Risk Assessment for Combined Cyber
and Physical Attacks”. In: Journal of Benefit­Cost Analysis 10.2 (2019), pp. 251–
273. ISSN: 2194­5888. DOI: 10.1017/bca.2019.15.
[178]
Tope Omitola, Abdolbaghi Rezazadeh, and Michael Butler. “Making (Implicit) secu­
rity requirements explicit for cyber­physical systems: A maritime use case security
analysis”. In: Communications in Computer and Information Science. Vol. 1062.
Springer Verlag, 2019, pp. 75–84. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-27684-3{\_}11.
[179]
Costas Varouxis. Cyber Maritime Security Vulnerabilities. Prospects for EU. Tech.
rep. 2019.
[180]
Stefan Schauer et al. “Detecting Sophisticated Attacks in Maritime Environments
using Hybrid Situational Awareness”. In: 2019. ISBN: 9781728149202.
[181]
Bilhanan Silverajan and Petteri Vistiaho. “Enabling Cybersecurity Incident Report­
ing and Coordinated Handling for Maritime Sector; Enabling Cybersecurity Incident
Reporting and Coordinated Handling for Maritime Sector”. In: 2019 14th Asia Joint
Conference on Information Security (AsiaJCIS) (2019). DOI: 10.1109/AsiaJCIS.
2019.00020.
[182]
Boris Svilicic et al. “Maritime Cyber Risk Management: An Experimental Ship As­
sessment”. In: Journal of Navigation 72.5 (Sept. 2019), pp. 1108–1120. ISSN:
14697785. DOI: 10.1017/S0373463318001157.
[183]
Boris Svilicic et al. “Shipboard ECDIS cyber security: Third­party component threats”.
In: Pomorstvo 33.2 (Dec. 2019), pp. 176–180. ISSN: 13320718. DOI: 10.31217/p.
33.2.7.
[184]
V. Koshevyy and O. Shyshkin. “Standardization of interface for VHF, MF/HF com­
munication using DSC within its integration with INS in the framework of E­navigation
concept”. In: TransNav 13.3 (Sept. 2019), pp. 593–596. ISSN: 20836481. DOI:
10.12716/1001.13.03.15.
[185]
Malik Shahzad Kaleem Awan and Mohammed A.Al Ghamdi. “Understanding the
vulnerabilities in digital components of an integrated bridge system (IBS)”. In: Jour­
nal of Marine Science and Engineering 7.10 (Oct. 2019). ISSN: 20771312. DOI:
10.3390/jmse7100350.
[186]
Rishikesh Sahay et al. “CyberShip­IoT: A dynamic and adaptive SDN­based se­
curity policy enforcement framework for ships”. In: Future Generation Computer
100
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:110==
Systems 100 (Nov. 2019), pp. 736–750. ISSN: 0167739X. DOI: 10.1016/j.future.
2019.05.049.
[187]
Maurantonio Caprolu et al. “Vessels Cybersecurity: Issues, Challenges, and the
Road Ahead”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 58.6 (June 2020), pp. 90–96.
ISSN: 15581896. DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.001.1900632.
[188]
Hanning Zhao and Bilhanan Silverajan. “A Dynamic Visualization Platform for Op­
erational Maritime Cybersecurity”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (includ­
ing subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioin­
formatics). Vol. 12341 LNCS. Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland
GmbH, 2020, pp. 202–208. ISBN: 9783030608156. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 030-
60816-3{\_}23.
[189]
Nelson H. Carreras Guzman et al. “Conceptualizing the key features of cyber­
physical systems in a multi­layered representation for safety and security analy­
sis”. In: Systems Engineering 23.2 (Mar. 2020), pp. 189–210. ISSN: 15206858.
DOI: 10.1002/sys.21509.
[190]
Georgios Kavallieratos, Sokratis Katsikas, and Vasileios Gkioulos. “Modelling Ship­
ping 4.0: A Reference Architecture for the Cyber­Enabled Ship”. In: Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). Vol. 12034 LNAI. Springer, 2020, pp. 202–
217. ISBN: 9783030420574. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-42058-1{\_}17.
[191]
Boris Svilicic et al. “Towards a Cyber Secure Shipboard Radar”. In: Journal of Navi­
gation 73.3 (May 2020), pp. 547–558. ISSN: 14697785. DOI: 10.1017/S0373463319000808.
[192]
Sriharsha Bhat et al. “A Cyber­Physical System for Hydrobatic AUVs: System In­
tegration and Field Demonstration”. In: 2020 IEEE/OES Autonomous Underwater
Vehicles Symposium, AUV 2020. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., Sept. 2020. ISBN: 9781728187570. DOI: 10.1109/AUV50043.2020.9267947.
[193]
Joseph O. Eichenhofer et al. “An In­Depth Security Assessment of Maritime Con­
tainer Terminal Software Systems”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 128050–128067.
ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3008395.
[194]
Boyan Mednikarov, Yuliyan Tsonev, and Andon Lazarov. “Analysis of Cybersecu­
rity Issues in the Maritime Industry”. In: Information & Security: An International
Journal 47.1 (2020), pp. 27–43. ISSN: 08615160. DOI: 10.11610/isij.4702.
[195]
S. Karamperidis. “Building a digital Armour for the Maritime sector against cyber­
attacks”. In: (2020).
[196]
Martti Lehto. “Cyber Security in Aviation, Maritime and Automotive”. In: Compu­
tational Methods in Applied Sciences. Vol. 54. Springer, 2020, pp. 19–32. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-37752-6{\_}2.
[197]
Chris Bronk. “Operation of Transport and Logistics in a Time of (Cyber)Insecurity”.
In: Computational Methods in Applied Sciences. Vol. 54. Springer, 2020, pp. 33–
49. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-37752-6{\_}3.
[198]
Boris Svilicic et al. “Paperless ship navigation: cyber security weaknesses”. In:
Journal of Transportation Security 13.3­4 (Dec. 2020), pp. 203–214. ISSN: 1938775X.
DOI: 10.1007/s12198-020-00222-2.
[199]
Andrej Androjna and Elen Twrdy. CYBER THREATS TO MARITIME CRITICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE. Tech. rep. 2020.
[200]
Daniel A. Sepúlveda Estay et al. “A systematic review of cyber­resilience assess­
ment frameworks”. In: Computers and Security 97 (Oct. 2020). ISSN: 01674048.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2020.101996.
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
101
==PAGE:111==
[201]
Daniel Alberto Sepúlveda Estay. CyberShip Project Cyber resilience for the ship­
ping industry ­ Final Project Report. Tech. rep. 2020. URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/
en/projects/cyber-resilience-for-the-shipping-industry-cybership.
[202]
Daniel Alberto Sepúlveda Estay and Pablo Guerra. “General rights The wave anal­
ogy of cyber­resilience as applied to shipping operations”. In: (2020). DOI: 10.3233/
NICSP200052. URL: https://doi.org/10.3233/NICSP200052.
[203]
Forsvarets Efterretningstjeneste. Trusselsvurdering: Cybertruslen mod skibes op­
erationelle systemer. Tech. rep. URL: www.cfcs.dk.
[204]
C. Hemminghaus, J. Bauer, and E. Padilla. “Brat: A bridge attack tool for cyber se­
curity assessments of maritime systems”. In: TransNav 15.1 (Mar. 2021), pp. 35–
44. ISSN: 20836481. DOI: 10.12716/1001.15.01.02.
[205]
Andrej Androjna and Marko Perkovič. “Impact of spoofing of navigation systems on
maritime situational awareness”. In: Transactions on Maritime Science 10.2 (Oct.
2021), pp. 361–373. ISSN: 18483313. DOI: 10.7225/toms.v10.n02.w08.
[206]
Victoria Knight and Moufida Sadok. Is cyber­security the new lifeboat? An explo­
ration of the employee’s perspective of cyber­security within the cruise ship indus­
try. Tech. rep. 2021.
[207]
Kristen Kuhn, Jeptoo Kipkech, and Siraj Ahmed Shaikh. “Maritime ports and cyber­
security”. In: ICT Solutions and Digitalisation in Ports and Shipping. Institution of
Engineering and Technology, Jan. 2021, pp. 37–68. ISBN: 9781839530869. DOI:
10.1049/pbtr030e{\_}ch2.
[208]
Christian Hemminghaus, Jan Bauer, and Konrad Wolsing. “SIGMAR: Ensuring In­
tegrity and Authenticity of Maritime Systems using Digital Signatures”. In: 2021
International Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications, ISNCC
2021. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2021. ISBN: 9780738113166.
DOI: 10.1109/ISNCC52172.2021.9615738.
[209]
Victor Bolbot et al. “A novel risk assessment process: Application to an autonomous
inland waterways ship”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
Part O: Journal of Risk and Reliability (2021). ISSN: 17480078. DOI: 10.1177/
1748006X211051829.
[210]
T. P. Avanesova et al. “Analysis of cyber­security aspects both ashore and at sea”.
In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science. Vol. 872. 1. IOP
Publishing Ltd, Oct. 2021. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/872/1/012024.
[211]
Kristen Kuhn, Salih Bicakci, and Siraj Ahmed Shaikh. “COVID­19 digitization in
maritime: understanding cyber risks”. In: WMU Journal of Maritime Affairs 20.2
(June 2021), pp. 193–214. ISSN: 16541642. DOI: 10.1007/s13437-021-00235-1.
[212]
Naser Abdel Raheem Al Ali, Anna A. Chebotareva, and Vladimir E. Chebotarev.
“Cyber security in marine transport: Opportunities and legal challenges”. In: Po­
morstvo 35.2 (2021), pp. 248–255. ISSN: 13320718. DOI: 10.31217/p.35.2.7.
[213]
Mário Simões­Marques, Armindo Frias, and Pedro B. Água. “Human Factors Im­
pact in the Security and Safety of the Maritime Domain”. In: Lecture Notes in Net­
works and Systems. Vol. 265. Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland
GmbH, 2021, pp. 28–36. ISBN: 9783030798154. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-79816-
1{\_}4.
[214]
Gary C. Kessler. “The can bus in the maritime environment – technical overview
and cybersecurity vulnerabilities”. In: TransNav 15.3 (Sept. 2021), pp. 531–540.
ISSN: 20836481. DOI: 10.12716/1001.15.03.05.
[215]
Georgios Potamos, Adamantini Peratikou, and Stavros Stavrou. “Towards a mar­
itime cyber range training environment”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE Interna­
tional Conference on Cyber Security and Resilience, CSR 2021. Institute of Electri­
102
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:112==
cal and Electronics Engineers Inc., July 2021, pp. 180–185. ISBN: 9781665402859.
DOI: 10.1109/CSR51186.2021.9527904.
[216]
Thanasis Pseftelis and Gregory Chondrokoukis. A Study about the Role of the
Human Factor in Maritime Cybersecurity. Tech. rep. 2021. URL: http://spoudai.
unipi.gr.
[217]
D Heering, O M Maennel, and A N Venables. “Shortcomings in cybersecurity ed­
ucation for seafarers”. In: (2021). DOI: 10.1201/9781003216582-6.
[218]
Liam Brew, Logan Drazovich, and Susanne Wetzel. “The impact of COVID­19 on
the security and resilience of the maritime transportation system”. In: Proceedings
of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and Resilience, CSR
2021. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., July 2021, pp. 510–517.
ISBN: 9781665402859. DOI: 10.1109/CSR51186.2021.9527935.
[219]
Sazid Rahman et al. “Assessing cyber resilience of additive manufacturing supply
chain leveraging data fusion technique: A model to generate cyber resilience index
of a supply chain”. In: CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 35
(Nov. 2021), pp. 911–928. ISSN: 17555817. DOI: 10.1016/j.cirpj.2021.09.008.
[220]
Vladlen Shapo and Maksym Levinskyi. “Means of Cyber Security Aspects Study­
ing in Maritime Specialists Education”. In: Advances in Intelligent Systems and
Computing. Vol. 1192 AISC. Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland
GmbH, 2021, pp. 389–400. ISBN: 9783030499310. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 030-
49932-7{\_}38.
[221]
Yunja Yoo and Han Seon Park. “Qualitative risk assessment of cybersecurity and
development of vulnerability enhancement plans in consideration of digitalized
ship”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 9.6 (June 2021). ISSN: 20771312.
DOI: 10.3390/jmse9060565.
[222]
Evripidis P. Kechagias et al. “Digital transformation of the maritime industry: A
cybersecurity systemic approach”. In: International Journal of Critical Infrastructure
Protection 37 (July 2022). ISSN: 18745482. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcip.2022.100526.
[223]
Saiful Karim. “Maritime cybersecurity and the IMO legal instruments: Sluggish re­
sponse to an escalating threat?” In: Marine Policy 143 (Sept. 2022). ISSN: 0308597X.
DOI: 10.1016/j.marpol.2022.105138.
[224]
Nikolai Kulev and Frank Sill Torres. “Simulation of the impact of parameter ma­
nipulations due to cyber­attacks and severe electrical faults on Offshore Wind
Farms”. In: Ocean Engineering 260 (Sept. 2022). ISSN: 00298018. DOI: 10.1016/
j.oceaneng.2022.111936.
[225]
Khalid Mahmood et al. “A Provably Secure Mobile User Authentication Scheme for
Big Data Collection in IoT­Enabled Maritime Intelligent Transportation System”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2022). ISSN: 15580016.
DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3177692.
[226]
G. Longo et al. “Attacking (and defending) the Maritime Radar System”. In: (July
2022). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05623.
[227]
O. Onishchenko et al. “Ensuring Cyber Resilience of Ship Information Systems”.
In: TransNav 16.1 (Mar. 2022), pp. 43–50. ISSN: 20836481. DOI: 10.12716/1001.
16.01.04.
[228]
Gabriel A. Weaver et al. “Estimating economic losses from cyber­attacks on ship­
ping ports: An optimization­based approach”. In: Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies 137 (Apr. 2022). ISSN: 0968090X. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.
2021.103423.
[229]
Priyanga Rajaram, Mark Goh, and Jianying Zhou. “Guidelines for cyber risk man­
agement in shipboard operational technology systems”. In: Journal of Physics:
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
103
==PAGE:113==
Conference Series. Vol. 2311. 1. Institute of Physics, 2022. DOI: 10.1088/1742-
6596/2311/1/012002.
[230]
Oleksiy Melnyk et al. “Integrated Ship Cybersecurity Management as a Part of
Maritime Safety and Security System”. In: IJCSNS International Journal of Com­
puter Science and Network Security 22.3 (2022), p. 135. DOI: 10.22937/IJCSNS.
2022.22.3.18. URL: https://doi.org/10.22937/IJCSNS.2022.22.3.18.
[231]
Gabor Visky et al. “Multi­Purpose Cyber Environment for Maritime Sector”. In: In­
ternational Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security 17.1 (Mar. 2022), pp. 349–
357. ISSN: 2048­9870. DOI: 10.34190/iccws.17.1.26.
[232]
K ; Dittmann and M Blanke. “Risk Mitigation by Design of Autonomous Maritime
Automation Systems. Automatisierungstechnik”. In: Citation (2022), pp. 469–481.
DOI: 10.1515/auto-2021-0151. URL: https://doi.org/10.1515/auto-2021-0151.
[233]
Mira Pavlinović, Maja Račić, and Ivan Karin. “Cyber Risks in Maritime Industry
– Case Study of Croatian Seafarers”. In: Lecture Notes in Networks and Sys­
tems. Vol. 319. Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH, 2022,
pp. 108–113. ISBN: 9783030855390. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-85540-6{\_}14.
[234]
Marie Haugli Larsen, Mass Soldal Lund, and Frøy Birte Bjørneseth. “A model of
factors influencing deck officers’ cyber risk perception in offshore operations”. In:
Maritime Transport Research 3 (Jan. 2022). ISSN: 2666822X. DOI: 10.1016/j.
martra.2022.100065.
[235]
Markos Antonopoulos et al. “Design and proof of concept of a prediction engine for
decision support during cyber range attack simulations in the maritime domain”.
In: Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and
Resilience, CSR 2022. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022,
pp. 305–310. ISBN: 9781665499521. DOI: 10.1109/CSR54599.2022.9850280.
104
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:114==
A
Appendix
A.1
Main Sources
Year
Ref
2016
[154]
2017
[110, 155, 101, 100, 156, 48, 157, 158]
2018
[124, 159, 160, 161, 82, 162, 127, 163, 113, 164, 14, 165, 166, 125,
167, 168, 96, 126, 169]
2019
[140, 170, 90, 109, 171, 172, 87, 152, 173, 102, 174, 175, 176, 81, 177,
178, 87, 145, 114, 179, 180, 181, 182, 99, 183, 184, 185, 50, 49, 147,
128, 103, 186, 84]
2020
[129, 92, 13, 51, 187, 188, 189, 79, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 111, 195,
196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203]
2021
[104, 53, 107, 7, 47, 88, 204, 105, 205, 206, 97, 207, 80, 208, 209, 142,
210, 211, 212, 213, 83, 214, 215, 216, 52, 217, 218, 219, 54, 220, 221,
11, 9]
2022
[130, 222, 223, 108, 143, 224, 225, 56, 226, 15, 131, 227, 228, 229,
230, 89, 153, 231, 116, 144, 232, 115, 146, 233, 234, 55, 235, 112, 4,
73, 72, 5]
2023
[1]
Table A.1: Reference table for our main sources sorted by year
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
105
==PAGE:115==
A.2
Interview Guide
A.2.1
Structure of the Interview
General introductions
Introduction to the project:
• Practical information regarding the interview:
– Purpose
– Recording
– Anonymization
– Agreement
• Explain the content of the interview
– Quantitative questions
– Qualitative questions
– Personified questions
• Ask if the SME has any questions
Proceed to interview.
A.2.2
Opening Questions
• Vil du kort beskrive din baggrund? (Rolle og opgaver i nuværende position, na­
tionalitet, ansættelsesland, uddannelse/oplæring, antal års sikkerhedserfaring, an­
tal års erfaring med den maritime sektor)
• Hvad er din relation/tilgang til specifikt OT og den maritime industri? (Hvornår og
hvordan lærte du om / kom du igang med OT sikkerhed ift fartøjer)
A.2.3
Quantitative Questions
• Hvilke OT Sikkerheds/Industri standarder er du foretaler for ift:
• Er din organisation certificeret i nogle af disse?
• Hvor mange medarbejdere er der hos jer, og hvor stor er jeres sikkerhedsorganisa­
tion?
• Hvor meget af jeres fartøjers OT er forbundet/networked/fjernkontrolleret/fjernadgang?
(% eller numerisk)
• hvor mange cyber incidents har du set/raporteret/undgået det sidste år?
• har nogle af disse været direkte/indirekte en trussel for OT systemer?
• Vil du ikke liste så mange OT systemer/assets som du kan?
• Ud af disse systmer, hvilke finder du er de top 3 mest kritiske at beskytte ombord et
farttøj? (højest potentiale for skadelig konsekvens)
• Hvad vurderer du som den værst tænkelige risiko ved et komprimiteret OT system?
(Stranding/oliespild/skader/Ikke virkende udstyr/tab af operationstid/ etc)
• Hvad ser du som den største trussel imod skibsbårne systemers integritet?
• Hvad med ift deres tilgængelighed?
106
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:116==
A.2.4
Qualitative Questions
• Hvordan er sikkerhed organiseret omkring OT in jeres organisation
• Forestil dig et enkelt cyberangreb på et farttøjs OT systemer
– Hvordan ville worst case scenario se ud?
– Hvad ville være den operationelle omkostning?
– Har i en mitigations plan for det scenarie?
• Hvis du havde mulighed for at bygge en maritim virksomhed op fra grunden hvilke
tiltag ville du prioritere i forhold til sikkerhed i OT­systemer?
• Hvordan ser du farttøjs OT sikkerhed differentiere sig fra generel sikkerhed / it
sikkerhed?
– Er der nogle udfordinger og eller muligheder i det?
Past and Future Perception
• Hvordan føler du udviklingen har været de sidste 5 ­ 7 år indenfor skibes OT sikker­
hed? (fx påvirkning af det, introduktionen af cybersikkerhed i IMO’s ISM? )
• Hvordan føler du den udvikling har ændret trusselslandskabet?
• Hvordan synes du trusselslandskabet og eksisterende metoder for mitigation ser ud
i dag?
• Hvad tænker du er de nuværende 5 største udfordringer man står overfor indenfor
området?
• Hvad gør du for at holde dig opdateret ift de udfordringer OT farttøjssikkerhed står
overfor?
• Hvad vil du sige er den bedste måde at håndtere OT fejl/udfald på et fartøj?
• Hvordan tror du fremtiden ser ud, når det kommer til sikkerhedstrusler indenfor OT
fartøjssikkerhed?
• og hvordan tror du så de mitigerende faktorer/metoder kommer til at se ud ?
Interconnectedness
• Betragter du OT risici som en integreret del af IT risici eller styres OT separat?
– Hvordan differentieres IT og OT risici sig i givet fald fra hinanden?
• Hvor stor er det (opfattede) niveau af gensidig sammenkobling mellem IT og OT
systemer? (interconnectedness)
Risk perception and awareness
• Hvordan er cyber risiko opfattelsen i din organisation ­ ledelse, besætning, organi­
sation som helhed?
• Kan du kvantificere risikoapetitten i forhold til OT­systemer i ledelsen? (lav/mellem/høj)
• hvor god synes du awareness er når det kommer til cybersikkerhed om bord på
fartøjerne?
• hvad gør du for at styrke træning, awareness og opfattelse når det kommer til OT
ombord på jeres farttøjer?
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
107
==PAGE:117==
3rd party risk management
• Opfatter du adgang for 3. parts leverandører som en væsentlig sårbarhed? (hvor­
for/hvordan? )
• Har I fravalgt at introducere nye teknologier (fra 3. parts leverandører) grundet den
introducerede risiko? (Hvorfor / hvilken / hvor stor en trussel? )
• Hvordan vurdrer I om I er villige til at bruge en 3. parts leverandør for at sikre, at der
ikke sker sikkerhedsbrud, der kan påvirke OT ombord jeres fartøjer?
• Hvordan håndterer i at give 3. parter adgang? (kunder, leverandører, teknikkere)(værktøjer,computere,ek
drev, lokalt, fjernadgang)
Final
• Er der noget centralt ift OT sikkerhed ombord fartøjer vi ikke har snakket om, som vi
skal tage med os i dag, holde for øje, inkluderer, eller du synes vi skulle have spurgt
om? Ideer eller tanker du synes ville være gode at dele med os i den her kontekst?
A.2.5
Targeted Questions
REMOVED FOR ANONYMIZATION
108
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:118==
A.3
Acronyms
7P Proper Planning and Preparation Prevents Piss Poor Performance
AAWA Advanced Autonomous Waterborne Applications Initiative
AIS Automatic Identification System
APT Advanced Persistent Threat
BYOD Bring Your Own Device
CCTV Closed­circuit television
CPS Cyber­Physical System
CSMS Cyber Security Management System CySO Cyber Security Officer
DOS/DDOS Denial­of­Service/Distributed Denial­of­Service
ECDIS Electronic Chart Display Information System
ECS Engine Control System
GMDSS Global Maritime Distress Safety System
GPS / GNSS Global Positioning System / Global Navigation Satelite System
GRC Governance, Risk, and Compliance
IBS Integrated Bridge System
ICS Industrial Control System
ICT Information and Communication Technologies
IoT Internet of Things
ISMS Information Security Management System IT Information Technology
LiDAR Light Detection And Ranging
MASS Maritime Autonomous Surface Ships
MitM Man­in­the­Middle
MUNIN Maritime Unmanned Navigation through Intelligence in Networks
OS Operating System
OT Operational Technology
PMS Power Management System
Radar Radio Detection And Ranging
SCADA Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition
SCC Ship Control Center
SME Subject Matter Expert
SMS Short Message Service
TIS Threat Information Sharing
VDR Voyage Data Recorder
VSAT Very Small Aperture Transmitter
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
109
==PAGE:119==
A.4
Organizations
BIMCO Baltic and International Maritime Council
BV Bureau Veritas
CCD COE Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence
CFCS Center for Cyber Security (DK)
CISA US CyberSecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
CSA Chamber of Shipping of America
CSF Cybersecurity Framework
DMA Danish Maritime Authority
DNV (formerly) Det Norske Veritas
DTU Technical University of Denmark
ENISA European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
EU European Union
GCHQ Government Communications Headquarters
IACS International Association of Classification Societies
ICS International Chamber of Shipping
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission
IMO International Maritime Organization
INTERCARGO International Association of Dry Cargo Shipowners
InterManager international trade association for the ship management industry
INTERTANKO International Association of Independent Tanker Owners
ISA International Society of Automation
ISO International Organization for Standardization
IUMI International Union of Marine Insurance
LR Lloyd’s Registry
MSC Maritime Safety Committee
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
NKClass Nippon Kaiji Kyokai
OCIMF Oil Companies International Marine Forum
SYBAss SuperYacht Builders ASSociation
UN United Nations
USCG U.S. Coast Guard
WSC World Shipping Council
110
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
==PAGE:120==
Cyber Security Challenges in
Ship Operational Technology
111
==PAGE:121==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
