==PAGE:1==
FashionBOT
Learning to generate new fashion outfits from text
descriptions
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
FashionBOT
Learning to generate new fashion outfits from text descriptions
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Sarah Miguel Cournane
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
http://www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Department
of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Sarah Miguel Cournane - s210291
Signature
Date
ii
FashionBOT
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
holalalla
This thesis presents FashionBOT, a text-guided fashion-generative model. Its main goal was
to simplify the fashion design process. Unlike already existing fashion design software, which
can be complex and might require trained artist to operate them, FashionBOT prioritizes sim-
plicity. It leverages state-of-the-art AI models in order to make the fashion designers work
easier. FashionBOT divides fashion synthesis into two steps: initial step, where an ini-
tial outfit is generated, and edit step, which guides the fashion designer towards a desirable
outcome.
In the initial step, experiments reveal the importance of incorporating conditioning SD for
generating accurate garments. Pose, segmentation for shape information, and canny edges
for patterns were evaluated. To ensure availability of at least one conditioning, a special SD
model is trained to generate the segmentation image based on the prompt. The initial step
relies on a CN-Segmentation model, which incorporates the (provided or generated) segmen-
tation and also canny edge image if provided by user as conditioning.
In the edit step, FashionBOT addresses the main changes made by fashion designers dur-
ing the refinement process, namely pose adjustments, small area modifications, and major
changes. Pose changes are facilitated by CN-Densepose, with default images provided when
densepose images are not available. Major changes are performed using a fine-tuned Pix2Pix
model based on a customized DeepFashion-database. To track changes and retain desired at-
tributes, a memory tracking mechanism inspired by NLP chatbots is implemented.
Although some limitations were identified such as pattern and colour restrictions, Fashion-
BOT’s guidelines of simplicity and edit-flexibility have laid the path for more improvements
to come. Moreover, FashionBOT proves that it can serve as a foundation for diverse applica-
tions, such as fashion retrieval or virtual try one.
FashionBOT
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sarah Miguel Cournane, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
iv
FashionBOT
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Background
7
3.1
Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
BERT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Method
15
4.1
Initial Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Experiments
21
5.1
Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
Experiments : First Step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.5
Experiments : Editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.6
Edit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6
Conclusion and Future Work
53
Bibliography
55
A
User Evaluation
57
B
Results
58
FashionBOT
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
FashionBOT
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
It is well known that that fashion has been here for a long time. Back in the Egyptian and Ro-
man times, people already focused on their appearance. They had specific articles of clothing
that were made to show off a person’s wealth, status or occupation. But Fashion did not stop
there. The aristocrats showed a great deal of interest in fashion during the Renaissance pe-
riod. Henry VII, King of England, spent a great deal of his money on clothing. Also, Marie
Antoinette was accused of never repeating the same dress twice.
Obviously, throughout this long history, Fashion has changed tremendously. Roman’s togas
and Maria Antoinette’s fancy dresses seem so far away. Not just the variety of garments,
colours, fabrics and patterns, but also the technology and manufacturing have been com-
pletely transformed too. Anything can be created, imagination is now the limit... and design-
ers know that.
Although each fashion designer has a different approach, everyone from haute couture to
street-wear follow some general steps when it comes to creating a piece of clothing. Once the
style and budget constraints are settled, the designer starts seeking for inspiration. Sketching
is the next step; minimalistic, flat drawings that try to communicate the technical elements
of the idea (overall length, fit, shape...). From here, choosing fabrics, picking colours, consid-
ering silhouettes... is still part of the designer’s job. Not too long ago, this first picture of the
image only existed in the designers head. Fortunately, specific software tools were developed
to help in this process. Like the classic Adobe Reader, or more design-specific tools such as
Clo 3D or EFI Optitex. They are able to render astonishing realistic 3D images of the idea in
the designer’s head.
Figure 1.1: EFI OPttitex
However, these tools are only in the hands of talented and trained artist. User-friendly would
not be the first word you would use to describe them. Furthermore, these softwares are great
once you have a clear idea in mind of what you want as a final product. Nevertheless, this is
rarely the case. In the early stages of a project, you may have only a vague idea of what you
want, trials and errors are part of the creative process. Moreover, editing with these apps can
be quite time-consuming and require a lot of manual effort.
FashionBOT
1
==PAGE:10==
As a result, the fashion industry could benefit from designer tools that are intuitive and al-
low for quick changes to be made as soon as new ideas come. One potential solution for
automating the design process and reducing the need for human effort is an interactive de-
sign environment powered by AI, joining together the designers’ creativity with the power of
AI.
To bridge the gap, in this thesis, we propose the FashionBot: a framework for the text-driven
controllable human image generation and Interactive Image Editing. Fashionbot will help
designers quickly see how the clothing looks like in a given style, and make changes in a
really intuitively way, helping tremendously in the design process.
2
FashionBOT
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
There are many different fields within the fashion industry that have experienced a signifi-
cant transformation by integrating AI: this includes marketing, where AI is used for consumer
preference analysis and trend predictions, as well as optimizing supply chain management
and resource allocation. As for Fashion images, AI has also been applied to tasks such as
fashion style analysis [1][2], classification, clothing parsing, clothing retrieval... Fashion syn-
thesis, which is where FashionBot lies, also puts together AI and fashion images but with an
additional component: Creativity.
Creativity is considered one of the ultimate challenges for AI. Applying AI to solve problems
in art has attracted a lot of attention recently; writing pop songs [3], imitating styles of great
painters [4][5], or doodling sketches [6] are just a few examples. And Fashion Generation has
not been left behind. Fashion Generation lands on the field of image synthesis, which is one
of the computer vision fields with the most spectacular recent development. The promising
results from deep network architectures such as GAN,[7], or VAE, [8], have helped to get the
growing attention.
These two models have been widely used in Fashion synthesis, for example, fine-grained tex-
ture control was introduce in [9] or an innovative loss for GANs was introduced in [10] to
control both texture and fabric in fashion images. Nevertheless, lately these models have lost
popularity. GAN is said to struggle to capture the full data distribution and it tends to mimic
training samples without expressing much originality. Moreover, VAE’s sample quality is far
from other state-of-the-art models.
Recently, diffusion models,[11], which are built from a hierarchy of denoising autoencoders,
have shown to achieve impressive results in image synthesis [12],[13]. And it did not take
long for these models to be used within the fashion generation field. Text2Human,[14], which
was one of the major inspirations of this work, proposes a two stage image generation pro-
cess. An ensemble of SD with VQVAE form the baseline for this app where they ask the user to
produce the clothing in two steps: first a text prompt describing the segmentation and then
a second prompt with details about the fabric and textures of the clothing.
Despite the primary objective of this model being to create an app that is as user-friendly as
possible, there are two characteristics that makes it slightly harder to use. The first is asking
the user to divide its prompt into two different ones. It would be clearer if there was only just
one prompt as an input and from there the app should understand what parts of the prompt
refer to clothing segmentation and what parts to fabric and patterns. Second, although it
allows to edit, both the segmentation and the final image, when pressing the edit button one
does not know if the liked characteristics will disappear or not.
In order to solve these two problems a smoother text-guided approach should be done and
secondly, the app should keep track of the changes and specially of the attributes of the cloth-
ing that should not be changed. These characteristics bring chat bots to mind, given that the
bot is able to have a human like understanding and have an internal memory in order to have
a correct dialogue.
Upuntilrecently, chatbotsexhibitedlimitationsontasksthatinvolvedvisualreasoning. There-
fore, there could not be use for image synthesis. Nevertheless, a recent paper, [15], proposed
FROMAGe states how they were able to leverage the capabilities of a frozen LLM for multi-
modal (text and image) input and output.
FashionBOT
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Text2Human interface: In order to produce the desired output, the user has pro-
vide first one prompt for the clothing segmentation and then a second prompt for texture and
fabric of clothing.
Leveraging the capabilities of large language models in order for the app to have a human-like
understanding of the instructions and also being able to keep track of changes
FashionBOT will rely in between these two apps. It is main goal will be text-guided clothing
generation strongly inspired in Text2Human’s approach. However, it will also include the
flexibility and the memory track of FROMAGe.
4
FashionBOT
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: FROMAGe: Chatbot that is able to take as input and output both images and text.
However, it is not suitable for synthesis generation.
FashionBOT
5
==PAGE:14==
6
FashionBOT
==PAGE:15==
3
Background
3.1
Diffusion Models
hola
Diffusion models are a new class of state-of-the-art generative models that generate diverse
high-resolution images. They have already attracted a lot of attention in the computer vision
world as they are able to overcome the major limitations other models presented. Unlike
GAN, DM defeats the issues of limited diversity and mode collapse. They also surpass VAEs
which relies heavily on surrogate loss. Plus, they outcome flow model by offering a better
optimal reverse transform. Moreover, industry leaders such as OpenAI, Nvidia and Google
managed to train large-scale DM models creating architectures such as DALLE-2, Imagen and
the full open-source stable diffusion, which futher popularized DM among the community.
The architecture of DM sets it apart from other image generative models, as it can be seen in
figure 3.1. Unlike GAN, VAE or flow models, DM are learned with a fixed procedure and the
latent variable has high dimensionality (same as the original data).
Figure 3.1: Overview of different types of generative models. Image source: Link
There are already several different diffusion-based architectures. to name a few: diffusion
probabilistic models [16], noise-conditioned score network [17], and denoising diffusion
probabilistic models [12]. We will focus on the last one, as it is the most prominent one.
The technical description of DM could be sum up as follows: DM define a Markov chain of
diffusion steps to slowly add random noise to data and then learn to reverse the diffusion
process to construct desired data samples from the noise.
This idea, inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, is rather simple. They take the input
image x0 and gradually add Gaussian noise to it through a series of T steps. This process is
called forward process and its result is that the image is asymptotically transformed to pure
Gaussian noise. Forward process is then followed by, not surprisingly, reverse process, where
FashionBOT
7
==PAGE:16==
a neural network is trained to recover the original data by reversing the noising process.
By being able to model the reverse process, we can generate new data. Figure 3.2 shows
a graphical representation of this process and a brief mathematical explanation of each of
the process follows.
Figure 3.2: The Markov chain of forward (reverse) diffusion process of generating a sample
by slowly adding (removing) noise. Image Source: Link
1. Forward Process
Given a data point sampled from a real data distribution x0 ∼q(x), let us define a for-
ward diffusion process in which we add small amount of Gaussian noise to the sample
in T steps, producing a sequence of noisy samples x1, . . . , xT . The step sizes are con-
trolled by a variance schedule {βt ∈(0, 1)}T
t=1.
q (xt | xt−1) = N
(
xt;
√
1 −βtxt−1, βtI
)
q (x1:T | x0) =
T
∏
t=1
q (xt | xt−1)
The data sample x0 gradually loses its distinguishable features as the step t becomes
larger. Eventually when T →∞, xT is equivalent to an isotropic Gaussian distribution.
2. Reverse Process
If we can reverse the above process and sample from q (xt−1 | xt), we will be able to
recreate the true sample from a Gaussian noise input, xT ∼N(0, I). Note that if βt is
small enough, q (xt−1 | xt) will also be Gaussian. Unfortunately, we cannot easily es-
timate q (xt−1 | xt) because it needs to use the entire dataset and therefore we need
to learn a model pθ to approximate these conditional probabilities in order to run the
reverse diffusion process.
pθ (x0:T ) = p (xT )
T
∏
t=1
pθ (xt−1 | xt)
pθ (xt−1 | xt) = N (xt−1; µθ (xt, t) , ￿θ (xt, t))
The goal of training a diffusion model is to learn the reverse process
Positive:
Beyond cutting-edge image quality, Diffusion Models come with a host of other benefits, in-
cluding not requiring adversarial training. The difficulties of adversarial training are well-
documented; and, in cases where non-adversarial alternatives exist with comparable per-
formance and training efficiency, it is usually best to utilize them. On the topic of training
efficiency, Diffusion Models also have the added benefits of scalability and parallelizability.
8
FashionBOT
==PAGE:17==
While Diffusion Models almost seem to be producing results out of thin air, there are a lot
of careful and interesting mathematical choices and details that provide the foundation for
these results, and best practices are still evolving in the literature.
Drawbacks of diffusion :
The intuition behind this is that the model can correct itself over these small steps and grad-
ually produce a good sample. To some extent, this idea of refining the representation has
already been used in models like alphafold. But it does not come at zero-cost. This iterative
process makes them slow at sampling, at least compared to GANs. So can we use improve this
idea of DM that overcomes the rest of the models architectures but still decrease sampling
time and computational cost? This is where Stable Diffusion comes in.
3.1.1
Stable Diffusion
Latent diffusion models are based on a rather simple idea: instead of applying the diffusion
process directly on a high-dimensional input, we project the input into a smaller latent space
and apply the diffusion there.
There are different types of Stable Diffusion techniques used in AI image generation. A few
popular ones are:
Langevin Diffusion: This technique, also known as stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics, in-
volves adding random noise to the image using stochastic gradient descent. The noise gradu-
ally reduces over time, and the image converges to the final output. Fokker-Planck Diffusion:
This is a continuous-time diffusion process that uses a drift function and a diffusion matrix
to add noise to the image. The diffusion is controlled by the values of these parameters, and
the final output converges to the image without any noise. Markov Chain Monte Carlo: This
technique involves simulating a Markov chain to sample from a probability distribution and
adding noise to the samples. Over time, the noise reduces, and the final image is produced.
Adversarial Diffusion: This method involves using two neural networks, one to generate im-
ages by adding noise and one to discriminate between real and generated images. The noise
generator gradually reduces the amount of noise added to the image until the discriminator
can no longer differentiate between real and generated images.
Stable Diffusion is a system made up of several components and models. It is not one mono-
lithic model.
Aswelookunderthehood, thefirstobservationwecanmakeisthatthere’satext-understanding
component that translates the text information into a numeric representation that captures
the ideas in the text.
We’re starting with a high-level view and we’ll get into more machine learning details later
in this article. However, we can say that this text encoder is a special Transformer language
model (technically: the text encoder of a CLIP model). It takes the input text and outputs a
list of numbers representing each word/token in the text (a vector per token).
That information is then presented to the Image Generator, which is composed of a couple of
components itself.
The image generator goes through two stages:
1- Image information creator
This component is the secret sauce of Stable Diffusion. It’s where a lot of the performance
gain over previous models is achieved.
FashionBOT
9
==PAGE:18==
This component runs for multiple steps to generate image information. This is the steps pa-
rameter in Stable Diffusion interfaces and libraries which often defaults to 50 or 100.
The image information creator works completely in the image information space (or latent
space). We’ll talk more about what that means later in the post. This property makes it faster
thanprevious diffusion models that workedin pixelspace. In technicalterms, this component
is made up of a UNet neural network and a scheduling algorithm.
The word “diffusion” describes what happens in this component. It is the step by step pro-
cessing of information that leads to a high-quality image being generated in the end (by the
next component, the image decoder).
2- Image Decoder
The image decoder paints a picture from the information it got from the information creator.
It runs only once at the end of the process to produce the final pixel image.
With this we come to see the three main components (each with its own neural network) that
make up Stable Diffusion:
ClipText for text encoding. Input: text. Output: 77 token embeddings vectors, each in 768
dimensions.
3.1.2
Stable Diffusion
There are different types of Stable Diffusion techniques used in AI image generation. A few
popular ones are:
Langevin Diffusion: This technique, also known as stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics, in-
volves adding random noise to the image using stochastic gradient descent. The noise gradu-
ally reduces over time, and the image converges to the final output. Fokker-Planck Diffusion:
This is a continuous-time diffusion process that uses a drift function and a diffusion matrix
to add noise to the image. The diffusion is controlled by the values of these parameters, and
the final output converges to the image without any noise. Markov Chain Monte Carlo: This
technique involves simulating a Markov chain to sample from a probability distribution and
adding noise to the samples. Over time, the noise reduces, and the final image is produced.
Adversarial Diffusion: This method involves using two neural networks, one to generate im-
ages by adding noise and one to discriminate between real and generated images. The noise
generator gradually reduces the amount of noise added to the image until the discriminator
can no longer differentiate between real and generated images.
Stable Diffusion is a system made up of several components and models. It is not one mono-
lithic model.
Aswelookunderthehood, thefirstobservationwecanmakeisthatthere’satext-understanding
component that translates the text information into a numeric representation that captures
the ideas in the text.
We’re starting with a high-level view and we’ll get into more machine learning details later
in this article. However, we can say that this text encoder is a special Transformer language
model (technically: the text encoder of a CLIP model). It takes the input text and outputs a
list of numbers representing each word/token in the text (a vector per token).
That information is then presented to the Image Generator, which is composed of a couple of
components itself.
The image generator goes through two stages:
10
FashionBOT
==PAGE:19==
1- Image information creator
This component is the secret sauce of Stable Diffusion. It’s where a lot of the performance
gain over previous models is achieved.
This component runs for multiple steps to generate image information. This is the steps pa-
rameter in Stable Diffusion interfaces and libraries which often defaults to 50 or 100.
The image information creator works completely in the image information space (or latent
space). We’ll talk more about what that means later in the post. This property makes it faster
thanpreviousdiffusion models that workedin pixelspace. In technicalterms, this component
is made up of a UNet neural network and a scheduling algorithm.
The word “diffusion” describes what happens in this component. It is the step by step pro-
cessing of information that leads to a high-quality image being generated in the end (by the
next component, the image decoder).
2- Image Decoder
The image decoder paints a picture from the information it got from the information creator.
It runs only once at the end of the process to produce the final pixel image.
With this we come to see the three main components (each with its own neural network) that
make up Stable Diffusion:
ClipText for text encoding. Input: text. Output: 77 token embeddings vectors, each in 768
dimensions.
UNet + Scheduler to gradually process/diffuse information in the information (latent) space.
Input: text embeddings and a starting multi-dimensional array (structured lists of numbers,
also called a tensor) made up of noise. Output: A processed information array
Autoencoder Decoder that paints the final image using the processed information array. In-
put: The processed information array (dimensions: (4,64,64)) Output: The resulting image
(dimensions: (3, 512, 512) which are (red/green/blue, width, height))
Inpainting
Inpainting
The size of the missing or damaged area can affect the effectiveness of Stable Diffusion In-
painting. The larger the area, the more visible the patch may be, and the longer it may take
to inpaint. Stable Diffusion Inpainting may not work well on very large areas or areas with
complex structures, such as multiple objects or intersecting lines.
Inpainting is a process of restoring or repairing an image by filling in missing or damaged
parts. It is oftenused in image editing and restorationto fix flawsor removeunwantedobjects
from an image. The resulting image looks seamless and natural. Inpainting can be used for
various applications, such as film restoration, photo editing, and digital art.
No matter how good your prompt and model are, it is rare to get the perfect image in one
shot. Inpainting is then an indispensile way to fix small defects. There s a SD model trained
for inpainting. But usually is okay to use the same model you generated the images with for
inpainting.
Stable Diffusion Inpainting is a type of inpainting technique that uses heat diffusion prop-
erties to fill in missing or damaged parts of an image. It works by applying a heat diffusion
process to the image pixels surrounding the missing or damaged area, which createsa smooth
and seamless patch that blends naturally into the rest of the image.
FashionBOT
11
==PAGE:20==
Stable Diffusion Inpainting works by applying a heat diffusion process to the image pixels
surrounding the missing or damaged area. The process involves assigning values to the image
pixels based on their proximity to the missing or damaged area.
The heat equation is then applied to these values, which redistributes the intensity values to
create a seamless patch. The equation is repeated until the image patch is filled in and looks
natural.
The heat equation used in Stable Diffusion Inpainting is mathematically stable, which means
it does not cause any instability or divergence in the image processing. This results in a
smooth and stable image patch.
3.1.3
Control Net
No matter how good your prompt and model are, it is rare to get the perfect image in one
shot. Inpainting is then an indispensile way to fix small defects. There s a SD model trained
for inpainting. But usually is okay to use the same model you generated the images with for
inpainting.
Stable Diffusion Inpainting is a type of inpainting technique that uses heat diffusion prop-
erties to fill in missing or damaged parts of an image. It works by applying a heat diffusion
process to the image pixels surrounding the missing or damaged area, which createsa smooth
and seamless patch that blends naturally into the rest of the image.
Stable Diffusion Inpainting works by applying a heat diffusion process to the image pixels
surrounding the missing or damaged area. The process involves assigning values to the image
pixels based on their proximity to the missing or damaged area.
The heat equation is then applied to these values, which redistributes the intensity values to
create a seamless patch. The equation is repeated until the image patch is filled in and looks
natural.
The heat equation used in Stable Diffusion Inpainting is mathematically stable, which means
it does not cause any instability or divergence in the image processing. This results in a
smooth and stable image patch.
No matter how good your prompt and model are, it is rare to get the perfect image in one
shot. Inpainting is then an indispensile way to fix small defects. There s a SD model trained
for inpainting. But usually is okay to use the same model you generated the images with for
inpainting.
Stable Diffusion Inpainting is a type of inpainting technique that uses heat diffusion prop-
erties to fill in missing or damaged parts of an image. It works by applying a heat diffusion
process to the image pixels surrounding the missing or damaged area, which createsa smooth
and seamless patch that blends naturally into the rest of the image.
Stable Diffusion Inpainting works by applying a heat diffusion process to the image pixels
surrounding the missing or damaged area. The process involves assigning values to the image
pixels based on their proximity to the missing or damaged area.
The heat equation is then applied to these values, which redistributes the intensity values to
create a seamless patch. The equation is repeated until the image patch is filled in and looks
natural.
The heat equation used in Stable Diffusion Inpainting is mathematically stable, which means
it does not cause any instability or divergence in the image processing. This results in a
smooth and stable image patch.
12
FashionBOT
==PAGE:21==
3.2
BERT
BERT is a bi-directional transformer for pre-training over a lot of unlabeled textual data to
learn a language representation that can be used to fine-tune for specific machine learning
tasks. While BERT outperformed the NLP state-of-the-art on several challenging tasks, its
performance improvement could be attributed to the bidirectional transformer, novel pre-
training tasks of Masked Language Model and Next Structure Prediction along with a lot of
data and Google’s compute power.
RoBERTa, or Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach, is an improvement over BERT
developed by Facebook AI. It is trained on a larger corpus of data and has some modifications
to the training process to improve its performance. RoBERTa is widely used in NLP tasks such
as sentiment analysis, text classification, and question answering.
Strengths of RoBERTa:
• High performance on various NLP tasks, with improvements over BERT.
• RoBERTa has been trained on a larger corpus of text data, leading to a better under-
standing of language.
• The modified training process results in improved performance on fine-tuning tasks.
• Good interpretability makes it easier to understand how the model arrived at a partic-
ular conclusion.
3.2.1
RoBerta
FashionBOT
13
==PAGE:22==
14
FashionBOT
==PAGE:23==
4
Method
“Less is more”
— Mies Van der Rohe
Less in the front-end and more in the back-end is the main idea that guided the design of
FashionBOT. Fashion designers should not be limited to how much photoshop knowledge
they have; outfits should be tailored according to their ideas, not to their technical knowledge.
Accurateand userfriendlyarethemaincharacteristicsFashionBOTshouldbedescribedwith.
Fashion should meet simplicity, and FashionBOT should connect this simplicity with the AI
complexity.
Figure 4.1: FashionBOT
To achieve this, more resources and effort has to be allocated in the back-end. FashionBOT
could be defined as a text-guided editing within fashion design and has as key elements SD,
CN, masking, inpainting and NLP.
Althoughitincludesstate-of-the-artAIalgorithms, FashionBOTarchitectureisinspiredhighly
in the traditional methods followed by designers when crafting garments. In order to design
a piece of clothing, there is a first step where the artist draws the initial design he has in his
head into paper. From here, slight changes are done on top of it in order to achieve the fi-
nal result. These two steps also describe FashionBOT’s architecture; the user now instead of
drawing will have to give a description (prompt) as detailed as possible and FashionBOT will
produce a first initial image that follows this description. Then, for further changes, Fashion-
FashionBOT
15
==PAGE:24==
BOT takes as input the latest image produced and changes it accordingly to the prompt given
by the user.
Figure 4.1 can provide a general idea of how the back-end architecture of FashionBOT. Nev-
ertheless, the next two sections explain more in detail how these two steps, named Initial
Step and Image Edit respectively, are implemented.
4.1
Initial Step
“Well begun is half done”
— Aristotle
Although the word initial makes this step seem trivial, this step is highly important. The
better the start, the easier it will be to get to the end. Therefore, the aim of FashionBOT
in this step is to generate a model dressed as accurate as possible to the description, initial
prompt, p0, given by the user.
This challenge relies in the field of image generation. In chapter 2 an intensive research was
done in order to start off with a state-of-the-art model. Due to its remarkable performance
over numerous tasks, SD was the chosen model for this step.
SD focuses on generating images with high quality and diversity, which is what we are looking
for. Diverse experiments, which are described in chapter 5.4.1, have been done in order to
find the best SD model for inference. The chosen model is named SDFT .
Nevertheless, the more control we have over the image generation process, the more likely
we will generate the garment the user wants. To secure finer-grained control over the output
and still keep the high quality and diversity SDFT , a CN was trained on top of SDFT . In 4.2
we can see how the guided generation of CN looks like traditional way of garment design.
Figure 4.2: Initial Step Idea
16
FashionBOT
==PAGE:25==
CN can be conditioned in many different ways. As we are dealing with fashion, the chosen
conditions were densepose, clothing segmentation and canny edges. The dataset used to
train is explained in 5.1.1. In figure 4.1 we can see the different conditionings that are added
as input to the model together with the initial prompt. Several experiments, evaluated in 5.4.1
and discussed in ??, were done. The main goal was to find out which conditioning performed
better or if a combination of them gave more accurate results.
Although conditioning grants more control over the generation process, it also introduces
additional complexity as it would mean that the user has to provide the densepose, segmen-
tation and canny edge of the idea he has in mind. It is highly likely that the user does not have
this. Nonetheless, FashionBOT has taken this problem into account and is able to provide an
initial guess of these conditionings. The way this initial guess is done is different for each of
the models. Due to time constrains, the initial value of the Canny edge image could not be
completed. The other two are solved independently in two different ways:
• Segmentation:
The description prompts of the Multimodal DeepFashion Dataset gave much informa-
tion about the shape of the garments; whereas it was long sleeve, wearing a jacket,
trouser length... Thus, a SD was trained to generate this segmentation images. As input
it takes the prompt description (same as SDFT ), however now the target images are
the original segmentation images. The results of the generated segmentation can be
found in chapter 5.4.1.
• Densepose:
Unlike segmentation, the description prompts do not give information of person’s pose.
Therefore, four default poses are chosen and the user can select which one he wants to
use.
All in all, this initial step consists in a CN conditioned on pose, segmentation and canny
edges and based in a SD previously fine-tuned. The dataset used to describe these models can
befound in 5.1.1, the differentexperiments and evaluationsareexplainedin chapter5.4.1 and
largely discussed in ??. If the model was chosen correctly and inference was perfect, then CN
would output an image that exactly matches our description. But given that fashion design is
a trail and error process, highly likely this initial output, O0 is not precisely what the user is
looking for. Then, the designer would go into the second step, editing.
4.2
Editing
“The world is changing, and so is
Fashion”
Giorgio Armani
If the designer arrives to this part of the app, it means that he is not completely satisfied with
the result. There are some changes that have to be made in the generated output, O0. These
can be summarized into three separated ones, represented in different colours in figure 4.3:
1. Big changes:
The designer is not particularly pleased with the result, so major changes have to be
done. ThedesignerthenwritesthesechangesandFashionBOTusesitsmodeltoachieve
a more accurate result. Pix2Pix takes as input the images generated in the previous step
together with a description given by the designer of the changes he wants to make.
FashionBOT
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.3: Editing Step Idea
The original Multimodal DeepFashion dataset, chapter 5.1, did not provide with the
edit prompts needed to train this model, so our own descriptions were implemented,
creating a new Dataset specifically for clothe-image-editing. The way this was done is
explained in section 5.1.2. Thus, we were able to train two different models for clothe-
editing. The details and evaluation are presented in chapter 5.4.1.
2. Small changes:
This happens when the designer is pretty much satisfied but would like to change some
details. Here, the user will have to mask the zone he would like to change together with
a prompt describing how the new generated image should look like in this part. This
technique is called Inpainting and it is described in chapter 3.
The size of the missing area can affect the effectiveness of Stable Diffusion Inpainting.
The larger the area, the more visible the patch may be. Therefore, this part of the model
is reserved for making only one change at a time.
3. Pose changes:
In these type of changes the designer more than not being satisfied with the result,
may just want to see the model from a different position, i.e., the designer is already
pleased with the front part of the garment but now wants to design the back. Therefore,
FashionBOT should be able to change the models pose.
For this we use the CN that we trained for the Initial step. When studying what
conditions guide better the image generation, one of the trained conditions was dense-
pose. This CN is recycled for this part. It takes as input the image’s label descriptor
(explained at the end of this section) and a new densepose, either the user chose one
of the four available or he provides a new one. The CN-Densepose’s aim is to generate
an image with no changes in the clothing, but with the new desired pose.
18
FashionBOT
==PAGE:27==
As densepose images are not that common, one of the ideas we tried was to extract the
densepose of an image given by the user. In other words, if the user has a normal image
of the new pose he wants, then he provides it to FashionBOT and the app would be
able to extract its densepose. This pose extraction would be done with the Facebook AI
Research model, [18]. However, when trying to implement it, one of the requirements
was that it was only supported for Python 2, which is unavailable in DTU’s clusters. So
this idea was not possible to implement, and that is why the four default denseposes
option was developed.
It goes without saying that here is no constraint regarding the quantity or even the order of
the modifications. As long as the designer is not satisfied, adjustments can be made. After a
change n, its output On will serve as input for change n + 1, i.e., On = In+1
Even though this unlimited amount of changes sounds advantageous, it presents a problem
for FashionBOT. As the number of changes increases, the more likely FashionBOT will forget
what it was originally representing, resulting in memory loss and potentially modifying parts
that the designer was previously satisfied with. This is why we introduce an Multi-task, multi-
labeland multi-class test-processing model, basedin RoBerta, explainedin chapter3. Its main
goal is to keep track of the main clothing attributes updating it with their changes so that in
the consecutive clothing generations only the undesired parts are changed.
Figure 4.4: Updating Image and Label
Let’s examine this part more in detail. As it will be presented in section 5.1, DeepFashion
Multimodal dataset, together with the original image, its conditions and its text garment de-
scription, one can also find the labels of the main clothing attributes. To name a few, we have
sleeve length, fabric, upper-garment pattern... A RoBerta-based text classifier was trained so
that each text description matches its clothing-label.
The initial label vector, l0, is calculated within the Initial Step. l0 is the result of applying
the RoBerta classifier to the initial prompt, p0. During the Edit step, this attribute vector
FashionBOT
19
==PAGE:28==
gets modified together with the image. This can be explained clearer with 4.4. We see that
when it is only densepose that is going to be modified, no changes are made to the label.
So the attribute label remains the same for this type of change. However, in the other two
the label does get modified. To find out what labels have changed, the same RoBerta-based
text-classifier as for p0 is used.
All together, if we are in change n, then input image, In, is changed into On = In+1 accord-
ing to prompt pn. This pn, which is empty for the densepose change, is passed through the
RoBerta-based text-classifier. Its output, lc, reveals what labels have been changed. This way,
ln+1 would be equal to lc for the attributes that have been modified, and for the rest, then it
will have the same value as ln. This labels are then used to create more accurate and straight
to the point clothes descriptions as we will explain in 5.1.2
20
FashionBOT
==PAGE:29==
5
Experiments
5.1
Data
“A woman never has enough shoes”
— Kajal Aggarwal
When it comes to collecting Fashion Data, there are three main challenges that must be con-
sidered:
1. Variations in style
2. Variations in pose
3. Variations in scenarios
Variations in style are easy to see: different patterns, textures and cuttings make the fashion
world so diverse that even us as humans sometimes question were the limit in clothing is,
figure 5.1. There are never enough attributes you can use to describe a garment: is it buttoned
or zip fastened? Symmetric, slim fit? Pockets how many? Shiny leather, furry wool?...
Figure 5.1: Variations in Style
Luckily, datasets with many semantic attributes have been created such as [19],[20],[21].
Figure 5.2, which represents the coat dataset created for paper [22], gives us an idea of how
many details and attributes can be used to describe a piece of clothing.
FashionBOT
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.2: Attributes for describing coats
Variations in poses are the second big challenge for Fashion Data; clothing items are fre-
quently subject to deformation and occlusion. Bounding boxes, segmentations, key point
locations are some of the ideas presented to correctly localize different garments in pictures.
The third challenge addressed refers to the differences between online professional pho-
tos to street photos. It goes without saying that clothing images often exhibit serious vari-
ations when they are taken under different scenarios, such as selfies vs. online shopping
photos [23]; classic what you order vs. what you get, figure 5.3. Cross-domain correspon-
dence datasets, such as [24] [25], have been composed to address this issue.
Figure 5.3: What you order vs. what you get
Collect many attributes, provide the exact location and present clothing in different settings
sum up the main solutions for the three challenges, respectively. As we have seen, for each
challenge, there are several datasets proposed. Nevertheless, what would be even more use-
ful is to have a dataset that puts together all the solutions for the three challenges. And this is
what DeepFashion proposes. With more than 800,000 images, together with their categories
and attributes, plus, same garments in different poses in order to correctly localised clothes
in photos. Furthermore, they present landmarks finer-grained than in previous datasets.
Another important aspect that DeepFashion took into account was that different goals, need
specific types of images. For example, same clothes in different scenarios is highly interesting
for image retrieval, however when it comes to fashion design, the starting point is not a con-
sumer photograph but more a profesional photograph, with cleaner backgrounds and better
lightning. This is why DeepFashion divided their dataset into different subgroups, each one
with the appropriate images fulfill specific goals. The subgroup we will be using in this thesis
is called DeepFashion-Multimodal and it was specifically built for fashion synthesis. Out of
the 800,000 images that DeepFashion presented, 11.484 were selected, 10335 for training
and 1149 for testing. They consist of full body images, aligned, with in-shop clothes and pure
colour backgrounds.
22
FashionBOT
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.4: DeepFashion Multimodal
In figure 5.4 we can see the different elements we have for each image.
1. Densepose: DeepFAshion Multimodal used th emodel proposed in [18] to map all hu-
man pixels of an RGB image to the 3D surface of the human body
2. Human parsing annotations: It was done from scratch with Photoshop and included
24 different semantic labels about:
• Body components: face, hair, skin...
• Clothes: top, outer, skirt, dress, pants...
• Accessories: headwear, eyeglasses, neckwear...
3. Labels: Divided into
• Shape: Including length of upper clothes and lower clothes, the presence of fash-
ion accessories (e.g., hat, glasses, neckwear), and the shapes of the upper clothes’
necklines.
• Texture: Colours and fabrics of the different garments were annotated: floral, pat-
terned, stripes, solid color, leather, furry, knitted, tulle...
4. Key points: 21 different coordinates: 7 for the face, then shoulders, hips, knees and
ankles take two each and the four remaining locate the arms and wrists.
5. Text Description: For each image there is a description of the clothes the model is
wearing. They generally follow the same order: Shape, colour and fabric of each gar-
ment from top to bottom and accessories such as hat, belt or rings at the end.
Both steps, Initial and Edit, share this common database but with some slight changes.
Each database is uploaded to my profile in HuggingFace, Cournane, together with their cor-
responding dataloder implementation. However, this was made private as using DeepFash-
ion Multimodal requires to have a license. Alternatively, we will present in the following two
subsections the changes made in order to adapt it to each of the steps.
5.1.1
FahionBOT Dataset
FashionBOT-Dataset presents barely any changes compared to DeepFashion Multimodal. Ev-
erything was used except for the key points and labels. Also, Canny edges of each image were
calculated. We will state briefly what parts of the dataset were used for each model:
• Initial Step
– SD: Takes as input text description and as output the real image.
FashionBOT
23
==PAGE:32==
– SD-Segmentation: Takes as input text description and as output the segmentation
image.
– CN:Takesasinputtextdescriptiontogetherwithalloroneoftheconditions(dense-
pose, segmentation or Canny edge) and has as output the real image.
– Text-classifier: For the images in the database we do have the labels. However,
when the designer uses FashionBOT he will only provide a text description. The
text classifier implemented extract the label-vector from the description takes as
input the text descriptions To convert text to label, a text classifie
• Edit Step
– Densepose Change: This CN model was trained with the text descriptions together
with the densepose image as input and the real image as target.
– Inpainting: This part only needed the real images and the text descriptions.
5.1.2
FahionBOTedit Dataset
FashionBOTedit Dataset, which was used for the Pix2Pix model in the Edit step, did present
more substantial changes.
This model needs a source image together with an edit prompt to change into the target im-
age. The edit prompt was not available, consequently we had to make it. A graphic represen-
tation of how this has been done can be seen in figure 5.5. We form tuples of images together
with their labels. We randomly form pairs of tuples. We now have a source image together
with the target and their corresponding labels. In order to get the edit prompt we substract
the two labels, which gives us vector Lc. The entries of Lc that are not zero reflect the at-
tributes that have to be changed. These non zero entries go to their corresponding dictionary
that translate it to the label into the characteristic the target image presents.
Figure 5.5: Edit prompt
24
FashionBOT
==PAGE:33==
5.2
Metrics
wow
In many image, tasks, such as image classification, segmentation or object detection, the eval-
uation is pretty straight-forward: compare the predicted output to the actual target. How-
ever, the task of image generation lies in the creative aspect of computer vision. Their algo-
rithms synthesize image data that mimics the distribution of the real image data they were
trained on. In our case, both SD and CN get random noise and convert it into a fake (gen-
erated) image of a person. But, how exactly can the realism of a generated image can be
quantified? How can generative models be evaluated?
There is no particularly right answer, but there are two properties that we would like our
generated images to present:
• Fidelity: We want the genereated set of images to have high quality.
• Diversity: SD and CN should generate images that are inherent in the training dataset.
Thus the chosen metric should evaluate against both properties. Evaluation is very much an
open area in generative models research, plus, SD and CN are pretty new models so there
has been no time to develop specific evaluations for them. The common practice is to use the
inherited evaluation from other generative models in the computer vision field.
Their metrics can be divided into two approaches. First, and not reliable, would be the pixel
distance approach. In this naive distance measure pixel difference is computed. Second is
Feature Distance. In these type of metrics, pre-trained models for image classification are
used. The embedding of the image or of its prompt is used to calculate distance with target
or image distributions.
There are several metrics within Feature Distance. There is no consensus regarding the best
score. Different scores assess various aspects of the image generation process, and it is un-
likely that a single score can cover all aspects. That is why we will use four different quanti-
tative metrics, IS, FID, LPIPS and CLIP, and a final qualitative metric based on human inter-
pretation. An explanation of all these measure will now follow.
5.2.1
Quantitative
hoala guapao
Inception Score
hoala guapao
The Inception score is a popular metric for judging the image outputs of Generative Adversar-
ial Networks (GANs). Most papers about GANs use the IS to show their improvement versus
the prior art as it has been stated to correlated well with human evaluation.
IS takes as input the generated images, passes them through the Inception Network, [26],
and outputs a score. The aim of this measure is to calculate how realistic and diverse the
generated images are and it does it by measuring two things simultaneously:
1. If the images present variety.
2. Whether each image distinctly looks like something.
If both are true, the score will be high. If either or both are false, the score will be low. A higher
score is better. It would mean that our model can generate many different distinct images.
The lowest score possible is zero and, mathematically, the highest possible score is infinity,
although generally in practice an upper limit is set. We will now give a short explanation of
how this metric works; first the idea and then the mathematical implementation.
FashionBOT
25
==PAGE:34==
The IS takes its name from the Inception classifier [26], an image classification network from
Google. It takes the generated images, and returns probability distribution ( a list of likeli-
hood numbers, each between 0.0 and 1.0, that sum to give 1.0) of labels for the image. This
classifier can detect if the image contains one distinct object, or not. If the image contains just
one well-formed thing, then the output of the classifier is a narrow distribution, focussed on
one peak. If the image is a jumble, or contains multiple things, it’s closer to the ‘uniform’
distribution which it’s equally likely to be any of the labels.
By combining the label probability distributions for our generated images and summing their
labeldistributions, wecreateanewlabeldistribution, the“marginal”distribution”. Themarginal
distribution tells us how much variety there is in our generator’s output:
Figure 5.6: KL Divergence between Marginal and Likelihood distribution
In figure ??, we can see the different KL results in different situations. The highest KL diver-
gence is given when each generated image has a distinct label and the overall set of gener-
ated images has a diverse range of labels. Which are exactly two properties Inception Score
is looking for.
To get the final score, we take the exponential of the KL divergence (to make the score grow to
bigger numbers to make it easier to see it improve) and finally take the average of this for all
of our images. And this would give us the Inception Score. Mathematically it can be written
as:
IS(G) = exp
(
Ex∼pgDKL(p(y | x)∥p(y))
)
Which can be sum up in the following steps:
• DKL is the KL divergence.
• p(y | x) is the conditional probability distribution.
• is the marginal probability distribution.
• Ex∼pg is the sum and average of all results.
1. Process the Al-generated images through the image classification network to obtain the
conditional probability distribution p(y | x).
2. Calculate the marginal probability distribution or p(y) .
3. Calculate the KL divergence (between p(y) and p(y | x)).
26
FashionBOT
==PAGE:35==
4. Calculate the sum for classes and calculate an average score for all images.
5. Calculate the average value of all results Ex∼pg and take its exponent (exp).
wowowowowow
Frechet Inception Distance
wowowowowow
FID is another metric used to evaluate the quality of AI-generated images. Introduced in
2017, it is generally prefered over IS. The principal difference between them is the use of real
images real images, referred to as ”ground truth”, for comparison. This allows FID to analyze
real images alongside computer-generated images to better simulate human perception.
The main idea behind this metric can be sum up into:
comparing, with Fréchet Distance, the statistics of the features given by the Inception Net-
work.
To calculate this score real and generated images are given to the Inception v3 classifier. In-
ception gives back the statistics of each group, real and generated. Then these are compared
with Fréchet Distance.
So Fréchet distance named after the mathematician, Maurice Fréchet is a distance metric that
is used to measure the distance between curves figure 5.7a and can be extended to comparing
distributions as well, figure 5.7b.
To explain the concept behind the Fréchet distance, it is quite common to use the following
analogy:
A man is walking a dog on a leash: the man can move on one curve, the dog on
the other; both may vary their speed, but backtracking is not allowed. What is the
length of the shortest leash that is sufficient for traversing both curves? The Fréchet
Distance translates into the least amount of leash that can be given to the dog to
walk all the curves from the beginning to the end.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: Fréchet Distance Illustration
We are more interested at is the Fréchet distance between distributions. There are many
FashionBOT
27
==PAGE:36==
distributions for which the Fréchet distance between them can be analytically solved. Multi-
variate Normal distribution, which is our case, is one of them. The formula is given by:
∥µX −µY ∥2 + Tr
(
ΣX + ΣY −2
√
ΣXΣY
)
(5.1)
where X refers to real image multivariate normal distribution and Y to the generated one.
The statistics up to second order are compared. µ refers to the mean of the embeddings and
Σ to their covariance matrix
The way to interpret FID is the lower the score, the better the quality. Lower score indicate
thatthestatisticsof thesetwogroupsaresimilar, whichmeansthatrealandgeneratedimages
have similar embeddings. A perfect score would be 0.0 indicating that the two groups of
images are identical.
joaskdl
Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity
joaskdl
This metric is easier to understand once we know what Perceptual Similarity actually means.
Perceptual Similarity refers to how similar things are to us based on our senses. For
example, an orange and an apple: we could say that they are similar in form (touch)
as they are both rounded but they different in colour (sight) and clearly in taste.
Scientists and researchers study perceptual similarity to understand how our brains per-
ceive and categorize the world around us. This is important because by understanding how
humans perceive similarity, algorithms and models that mimic human perception can be de-
veloped, enabling machines to recognize and classify objects based on their perceptual fea-
tures.
This Perceptual Similarity is the base for the LPIPS metric, presented in [27]. The aim of this
metric is to calculate the perceptual similarity between the real image and the generated one.
LPIPS is designed to mimic human perception. It works quite differently with respect to IS
and FID. Whereas IS and FID used the embeddings of the images to calculate diversity, LPIPS
uses the activations in the model. It essentially computes the similarity between the deep
features of two image patches for some pre-defined network.
The deep learning community has found that features of the VGG network,[28], has been
remarkably useful as a training loss for image synthesis. So this is the network chosen to
calculate our metric. This network was trained for ImageNet Classification, but it does not
restrict to this dataset’s features, but also works for different deep architectures and levels of
supervision (supervised, self-supervised, or even unsupervised). Actually in the paper this
loss was presented [27], it is stated that perceptual similarity is an emergent property shared
across deep visual representations.
To have a better idea, figure 5.9 was extracted from the original paper, [27]. It gives a graph-
ical idea of how the LPIPS metric works. Several annotations were added to guide the steps
needed to compute this metric:
1. VGG takes as input the target xt and generated xg images.
2. Calculate their embeddings
3. Normalize and substract their activations in the channel dimension
4. Scale by vector w
28
FashionBOT
==PAGE:37==
5. Take the l2 distance
6. Then a small network is trained to calculate the perceptual judgement h from distance
pair (xt, xg).
These steps are mathematically calculated as follows:
Figure 5.8: LPIPS model
Figure 5.9: LPIPS formula
joaskdl
CLIP
joaskdl
So far, the metrics explained focused on the generated image. Up until now, the prompt has
not been yet taken into account.
CLIP-Score comes from the CLIP model that was already presented in chapter of Stable DIf-
fusion. As a short remainder, the model’s weights are trained to maximize the scaled cosine
similarity of truly corresponding image/caption pairs while simultaneously minimizing the
similarity of mismatched image/caption pairs.
WhatwasseenwasthatthesimilaritypredictedbyCLIPbetweenthegeneratedimage-caption
pairs was highly correlated with human judgement. Therefore, CLIP, on top of the many ap-
plications it already had, also turned out to be one of the most common metrics to evaluate
image-generative models. CLIP score became an established method to measure an image’s
proximity to a text.
The steps to follow in order to calculate the score can be sum up into:
1. Prepare text:
• First, Stop-Words were eliminated. This step is optional, however, the descrip-
tions were sometimes too long which ended up in the model cropping the last
sentences. By eliminating non-important words, we made sure that all important
descriptive elements were kept.
FashionBOT
29
==PAGE:38==
• Once the cleaning was done the text had to be tokenized.
2. Calculate embeddings:
Use the CLIP model to create embeddings for both the image and the text. The model
chosen came from OpenAI’s GitHub repository.
3. Cosine Similarity:
Calculate the cosine similarity of the image and text embeddings. This will provide the
CLIP score which will be between +1 and -1.
4. Torchmetrics final step:
Some papers take as final result this value between [−1, 1]. However, torchmetrics,
which was the library used to calculate the different scores, made some changes to this
final value, the clip score was scaled and 0 was set as lower bound and 100 as upper:
ext(CLIPScore(I, C)) = max(100 ∗cos(EI, EC), 0)
5.2.2
Qualitative Measures
hoal
Although quantitative measure are useful, they have some drawbacks too. For instance, the
lack of variety in our images would give low IS to all of our models. Plus 500,000 images are
recommended when evaluating withIS and FID, which far off from our 1000 images. Addi-
tionally, IS, FID and LPIPS are based on pre-trained models that might not capture the fea-
tures we are looking for. Manually inspecting and judging the generated examples from dif-
ferent models is also a common evaluation measure. These shortcomings mean that a quali-
tatively look over your samples is necessary.
Qualitative evaluation is prone to errors, biased by human judgement. On the other side,
quantitative metrics don’t necessarily correspond to image quality. So, usually, a combination
of both qualitative and quantitative evaluations provides a stronger belief when choosing one
model over the other.
The set up for this measure is based on comparison. It is stated that a person, when asked
about the quality of an image, is not sure about how to answer. However, the person finds it
easier if it is comparing the quality between pairs of images.
The images used to compare different models can be found in the Annex.
Now that all metrics have been presented, we will put them in use in the following sections.
5.3
Implementation Details
hoal
While various models are being implemented, each one with their different inputs, architec-
tures and goals, there is one thing they have in common: SD is a common baseline for them.
In FashionBOT SD can be found on its own, also within CN, also playing part of inpainting,
or even generating segmentation when it is not provided.;SD always finds its way to appear.
This is why selecting the correct SD model requires thourough evaluation and consideration.
One of the initial questions was to whether implement SD from scratch or to make use of
transferlearning. “TrainingtheimageAIwasrelativelyinexpensive,” tweetedEmadMostaque,
the mathematician and computer scientist who founded Stability AI, the startup that build up
30
FashionBOT
==PAGE:39==
SD. It took 150,000 GPU hours, 256 A100s, that is 586 hours (24 days) per GPU. Mostaque
says that it equates to a market price of about $600,000.
256 A100s were not available at DTU, so in order to reduce the set up and specially the
price, Transfer Learning was needed. There are many models available to choose from, the
number is increasing every day: MeinaMix being one of the most popular Anime models,
DreamShaper incredible at computer graphic style or Openjourney and its vintage touch are
just one of many examples. Nevertheless, the common practice when it comes to creating
one’s own SD is to build it up on top of either SD v1.5 or SD v2.1.
StabilityAI released the first public checkpoint model, Stable Diffusion v1.4, in August 2022.
In the coming months, they continued to release v1.5, v2.0 v2.1. Within the v1 group, v1.5
released by Runwayml, is said to be slightly better than the original version, but no major
changes were found, just a slight improvement in quality.
Significant changes came with the v2 group. The most important shift that v2 models make
is replacing the text encoder. SD 1 uses OpenAI’s CLIP. While the SD model itself is open-
source, the dataset on which CLIP was trained is not publicly-available. v2 instead uses Open-
CLIP[29], an open-source version of CLIP, which was trained using a known dataset - an aes-
thetic subset of LAION-5B [30] that filters out NSFW images.
As strange as it might seem, most people are quite reticent to move on to newest version, the
2.1 model. v1 models are still preferred. This is due to the unpopular opinion 2.0 version
had. The Stable Diffusion community found that the images looked worse in the 2.0 model,
specially when it came to use power keywords like celebrity names and artist names. The
biggest change that 2.1 makes relative to 2.0 is a modified NSFW filter. v2.0 was trained on
a subset of the LAION dataset which was filtered for inappropriate content using an NSFW
filter, which in turn results in a relatively lowered ability to generate humans. The 2.1 model
has partially addressed these issues, but human-generative wise is still not as good as the v1
group of SD.
Figure 5.10: Principal characteristics of the two most popular SD models
The ”one best model” for all and every case does not exist; the advantages and drawbacks of
each model have to be studied. However, the following advantages from the v1.5 led us to
choose this model:
• Given that v21 was trained with the NSFW filter, it performs slightly worst when it has
to generate people. For landscape and views is said to be better. However, FashionBOT
relies on a 100% model-images, then it makes sense to lean towards v1.5.
• Art and fashion are pretty close, so FashionBOT will benefit from a model trained with
no artist filters.
FashionBOT
31
==PAGE:40==
• It is true that v2.1 handles 768x768 resolution images, higher than the 512x512 that
v1.5 uses. When it comes to fashion, details are important. That’s 589,824 vs 262,144
pixels, i.e. over twice as much space for the AI to work with. But this twice the space
implies more memory, which has been one of the biggest obstacles in the project. Spe-
cially given that we had to train several models and save images for evaluation during
training.
• Nevertheless, the main reason 1.5 was chosen was for the better ControlNet support it
offers, as it was the following step in the project, to try several ControlNet conditions.
Once v1.5 model was decided to be our starting point, the next step would be to set it up. A
really helpful library for this is Hugging face Diffusers, which has guidelines, already trained
models, many examples, and allows to store both datasets and models. In addition, v1.5 has
many hyperparameters to finetune. Some of them will be set to default and others will be
analyzed in to find the best model for inference. Unless stated differently, the following hy-
perparameters are set to:
• Resolution: In most of the experiments is set to 512.
• Learning Rate Schedulers : A constant learning rate set to 1e−5
• Padding: White pad is added to the images to make them squared.
• Batch size: The default value for batch size is 1. However, increasing it slightly, up to
four, speeds up the training rate in
• adam weight decay: Set to default value 1e−2.
• adam beta1: Set to default value 0.9
• adam beta2: Set to default value 0.999
• adam epsilon: Set to default value 1e−8
• fp16 or fp32: This refers to the format will be stored inside the model: fp16 is half-
precision whereas fp32 is full-precision. Given memory restrictions, half precision was
chosen.
• gradient accumulation steps: Set to default value 1
• max grad norm : Set to default value 1
The baseline is settled. Now, the aim of the following section is to find the best combination of
hyperparameters to get the optimal model for inference. There are different strategies that
can be followed in order to choose the subgroup of hyperparameters that suits best; ran-
dom search, bayesian approach or grid search to name some. However, due to memory and
computer limitations the way to find the optimal subset was running controlled experiments,
where all the hyperparameters were constant except for one. The effect this single variable
produced was analyzed and the value with the best results was set as default for the following
experiments. Then a new hyperparameter is chosen, and the process is repeated.
For each experiment, the evaluation is done in the following way: during training, every 200
steps an inference with the current model over the whole test set is made. This way, once the
training is finished we have little more than 1000 images from which calculate the different
metrics. This way not only we choose the most suitable value for the hyperparameter, but
also choosing the best model within its training; avoiding underfitting of overfitting.
32
FashionBOT
==PAGE:41==
FashionBOT’s experiments can be grouped into two groups: the ones related to the initial
step and the ones associated with the editing-process. We will go through them, showing
their evaluation and comparisons. We will use this results to validate our choices in chapter
??.
5.4
Experiments : First Step
hola
The aim of FashionBOT’s first step is to generate a person dressed as accurate as possible to
the initial prompt. Several experiments were made to find which model was more suitable.
The experiments were organize as we can see in figure 5.11. The first two boxes correspond
to the default implementation we ust talked about. The next three boxes refer to SD, evaluat-
ing its padding, resolution and learning rate scheduler. Finally, CN is evaluated with several
different conditions.
Figure 5.11: Hyperparameter selection
5.4.1
SD - Text2Image
SD models generate squared images. Our dataset was formed of rectangular images. So, by
default, SD crops from the centre to convert them into squares and consequently the images
produced, were mainly all cropped, as it can be seen in figure 5.12. As a result, our model had
as target images of the central part of the models, no shoes no head. So, important details
when it comes to fashion design such as type of collar, length of skirts, dresses and trousers
are not taken into account.
Figure 5.12: Pairs of target-generated images. When no padding is done to the dataset, SD
crops the images by the centre leading to together with the generated ones with no padding
done.
Therefore, padding was needed. Three options were tried: constant padding both with 0 and
255 values and also edge padding, where the image is padded with the last value at the edge
of the image. In figure 5.13, different padding values were evaluated.
hoal
FashionBOT
33
==PAGE:42==
Padding
hoal
Figure 5.13: Padding Evaluation
In figure 5.13 we can see the results for the different metrics. Plus the following table sums up the
best scores for each type of padding.
Figure 5.14: Padding Evaluation
Figure 5.14 sums up the best and worst score of each metric. Edge and black paddings are the two
best and two worst while white padding did not outstand in any. It comes clear that we have to set a
priority line within the different metrics according to their relevance.
As it was explained in section 5.2, IS measures both the variety and quality of the images. If the gen-
erated images do not accomplish both, then the result of this score is low. It goes without saying that
the variety in our dataset is not outstanding; maybe we have diversity in clothing but then the images
can be described as a whole body picture. The IS score will then be low, no matter the quality of the
34
FashionBOT
==PAGE:43==
images. Therefore, IS would be the last metric we will take into account when it comes to deciding
which hyperparameter we should choose.
Although CLIP might not be fine-tuned to catch the finer-fashion attributes, it is the only metric that
takes into account the prompt. So it will be one of the important ones. The last two quantitative
measures remaining are FID and LPIPS. These two metrics both take into consideration the generated
and target images. When it comes to choosing between both of them we will go for FID. This metric is
widely used in order to evaluate state-of-the-art image-generative models. But in our case, the LPIPS
did not present high variety. LPIPS can go from 0 to 1, (cosine similarity). As we can see from the
different evaluations LPIPS stays around 0.60 −0.65. Even if we scale it between 1 and 100 to have
a similar range to FID the variety is very low. So, in our case, FID is considered to be more relevant
when it comes to choosing a model.
To conclude this metric evaluation, the order in which we will take into account the different metrics
will be FID, followed by CLIP and then, in order to break a tie LPIPS and IS. Nevertheless, before making
any decisions, a careful examination will be done, taking a sample of generated images to validate our
choices.
After this metric evaluation, the draw between edge and black padding seems to have a winner. Nev-
ertheless, white padding is on all four metrics closer to the best result than to the worst one, so we
cannot discard it just yet.
As we can see in figure 5.15, the background of the images generated with the ”edge” are more likely
to have weird backgrounds, with strange patterns. Whereas the ones generated with white padding,
figure 5.16 seem more realistic.
Figure 5.15: Images generated with edge padding
Therefore, due to being close to the best in the four metrics and having more realistic background
images, white padding was decided to be the best option. From now on, images will be padded with a
FashionBOT
35
==PAGE:44==
white frame.
Figure 5.16: Images generated with white padding
hola
Resolution
hola
Thanks to padding, the cropped image generation problem is solved. Now we would like to
address the resolution of the images. The higher resolution, the more sharpness, definition
and detail. These are attributes that when it comes to fashion design are highly valued. For-
tunately, our dataset contains 1024 squared images (after padding), which offers the desired
properties. However, SD is trained on 512x512 images and its upscaling is said to not be
satisfactory. Specially when it comes to people generation, if SD is asked to generate higher
resolution images it tends to deform bodies, disjoint limbs emerge, new arms appear...
Nevertheless, despite the limitations, we would like to explore the limit of this trade-off. High
definition images is our goal subject to maintaining consistent body images. Maybe 1024 is
too much for SD to upscale without any drawbacks, so we also evaluate 768 to see how the
scores change in between the limits.
36
FashionBOT
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.17: Images generated with different resolution values
FashionBOT
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.18: Resolution Evaluation
By analyzing the metrics in figure 5.18, we see that resolution 512 out-stands in the two main
metrics, CLIP and FID. The differences are significant specially in FID. In no other evaluation
(also including the rest of hyperparameters’ evaluation) this value is so high as for resolu-
tion 768 and 1024. In figure 5.20, we can see some examples. Each letter corresponds to a
different prompt. This way we can evaluate how the three models perform when given the
same input. Attribute wise, they all perform well. Pretty accurate in fabrics, lengths, patterns
and accessories. However, 768 and 1024-resolution images tend to have a more cartoon-like
appearance and body deformations start to appear, for instance 768-B or 1024-A.
Figure 5.19: Resolution Evaluation
38
FashionBOT
==PAGE:47==
Unfortunately, higher resolution is not possible, so 512 was the value set for this hyperpa-
rameter.
Figure 5.20: Images generated with different resolution values
Analysing the training loss, a common pattern seemed to appear: the first initial 20 steps the
variation was notable, followed by a rapid convergence, remaining constant for the rest of the
steps. This could be due to a too small learning rate. This is why, the next hyperparameter
evaluated will relate to the learning rate value.
Figure 5.21: Train Loss
Learning Rate Scheduler
kjsdhf
In general, calculating the best learning rate a priori is practically impossible. The range of
FashionBOT
39
==PAGE:48==
values to consider for the SD’s learning rate is less than 1.0 and greater than 10−6. Our default
value is 10−5 and the train loss is pretty low, so it seems that we are not far off from the real
value. Consequently, instead of modifying the learning rate itself, fine tuning the scheduler
looked like a preferable approach. With batch set to 4, padding to 255 and resolution to 512,
constant, polynomial, linear and cosine were tested.
Figure 5.22: Train Loss
We plot again the training loss just like in figure 5.21 to see if the scheduler made any differ-
ence. We do see that it is lower for the new three compared to constant, the default value but
they also converge rather quickly. Nevertheless, to choose the most appropriate scheduler,
we should analyze the metrics, not the training loss. Scores and best results can be found in
5.23 and 5.24 respectively. We can see no major difference between the different learning
rates. Also by looking at the images, figure 5.25 there is no one scheduler that seems to per-
form way better than the rest. Consequently, as it presented the lowest FID score, polynomial
was chosen as a final value.
Figure 5.25: Evaluation of different learning rate examples.
Hyperparameter tuning of SD ends here, as it seems that other changes may not leed to better
scores. The SD that led to the best metric scores has white padding, 512 resolution input and
a polynomial learning rate scheduler.
40
FashionBOT
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.23: Learning Rate Scheduler Evaluation
Although, SD hyperparameter tuning ends here, the garments generated by it are not always
what we are expecting. Figure 5.26 shows a few of them. Quite often that images are way
to zoomed in, like the first two. Number three is just a collection of garments, that matches
the description but there is no model wearing them. Last would be fine if it were not for the
hanging dresses. These pictures show the need for more control over the image generation.
And this can be achieved by CN. Recently CN has demonstrated superior performance, in
results and score. Therefore we will now see if this is the case for our goal.
Figure 5.26: Need of more control over the image generation
FashionBOT
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.24: Learning Rate Scheduler best results
5.4.2
ControlNet
CN offers various options for conditioning. Within the fashion context, relevant conditioning
would include pose, segmentation for shape information and canny edge for patterns. In this
subsection, these three different conditions will be evaluated separately and then together.
We start with the individual CN conditionings. The order the results will be presented will
be densepose, segmentation and canny edge.
In each graph there are three models:
1. SD-FT: This is a Stable diffusion model, not Control Net. It is trained with resolution
512, white padding and a polynomial learning rate scheduler. It was the SD we trained
earlier that led to the best results. We add it in each of the plots to compare if it actually
makes a difference to add the conditioning of Control Net or not.
2. SD-FT ControlNet: This CN has SD-FT as a baseline. So CN is trained on top of a SD
model that has already been trained on the DeepFashion - dataset.
3. SD 1.5 ControNet: This CN has as baseline the original SD-v1.5. We would like to see if
it makes a difference to use an already DeepFashionMultimodal - trained SD or not.
The following plots will represent each of the conditionings.
42
FashionBOT
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.27: Densepose Evaluation
Figure 5.28: Segmentation Evaluation
FashionBOT
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.29: Canny Evaluation
The main conclusion we can extract is that SD models, perform worse than any other CN, no
matter the conditioning or its baseline SD. If we look at the main metrics, both in FID and
CLIP, the best image score for SD is worse than the lowest scores for the CN. This makes it
clear that conditioning is necessary.
We have now evaluated all conditioning separately. Nonetheless, CN also allows for multiple
conditionings. This can work in two different ways:
• Stack conditioning images one on top of the other, defining what regions should be
affected by each conditioning.
• Create a conditioning chain. The denoising process goes through the three CNs.
The first type cannot be applied in our case as the three conditionings affect the same region.
So we only evaluate the second case. In order to do so, we first train the different condition-
ings separately and then create a pipeline for inference where we first apply the densepose
CN, segmentation goes second and canny last. Figure 5.30 shows the results. Mix condition-
ing, did not improve greatly the scores. This could be due to their sharing information. In
other words, if the canny edges are given then the pose could be more is less guessed from it;
three conditionings do not translate into three times better information. But this plays in our
favour. It is highly unlikely that the designer has all three conditionings at hand when using
FashionBOT. Plus the more information the designer has to provide, the less user-friendly the
app becomes. Therefore we let the user add the canny edges image, as it looks quite similar
to a designer’s sketch.
44
FashionBOT
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.30: Different Control Net Conditionings
Nevertheless, conditionings is a must. So if the user does not provide it, FashionBOt must
come up with the conditiong for better inference. Therefore, a special SD was trained. Same
prompts as the previous SD trained, but this time the target are the segmentation images.
In the legend in figure 5.31 we can see four different models. SD-FT stands for fine tuned
model (with white padding, 512 resolution and polynomial learning rate scheduler) and SD
1.5 stands for the original Stable Diffussion. Generated Segm refers to the SD model trained
to generate segmentation.
FashionBOT
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.31: Generated Segmentation
We can see that although the score from the generative model performs slightly worst than
both CN it still leads to better results than no conditioning at all. We can see some of the
results in the following figure 5.32
46
FashionBOT
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.32: Generated and original Segmentation comparison: Three different prompts
are evaluated. First column represents the original segmentation image. Second shows the
output from our fine-tuned SD. Third is the output of the SD segmentation creator. Last col-
umn represents the image generated with CN conditioned on the original segmentation
With all these experiments we conclude the Initial step.
5.5
Experiments : Editing
5.5.1
Text classifier - Memory track
BERT and RoBERTa have limited ability to perform zero-shot learning and may require more
fine-tuning for new tasks.
In conclusion, GPT-3, BERT, and RoBERTa are state-of-the-art AI models that have revolu-
tionized the field of NLP. Each model has its own strengths and weaknesses, and the choice
of which model to use depends on the specific NLP task and requirements. GPT-3 has the
highest accuracy and performance on various NLP tasks but also has the highest computa-
tional cost and a lack of interpretability. BERT and RoBERTa have good interpretability, but
also have limited ability to perform zero-shot learning and may require more fine-tuning for
new tasks.
Actually, the final hidden representation of the [CLS] token (or <s> token in case of RoBERTa)
is not the pooled output. Applying the feedforward neural network with tanh activation on
this hidden representation actually gives you the pooled output (which is a vector of size 768
in case of the base sized model). Then, after this, a linear layer called out_proj is used to
project the pooled output of size 768 into a vector of size num_labels. So the documentation
is still correct.
For the second question, actually BERT does the same, it is just implemented differently. In
modeling_bert.py, they use the pooled_output of BertModel, and then apply the linear layer
on top of this. This pooled output has already applied the feedforward neural network + tanh
FashionBOT
47
==PAGE:56==
activation on top of the [CLS] token hidden representation, as you can see here. In model-
ing_roberta.py, they implement it differently: they start from the sequence_output (which is
a tensor containing the final hidden representations of all tokens in the sequence), then get
the hidden repr of the <s> token by typing [:,0,:], then apply the feedforward nn + tanh and
finally the linear projection layer.
So your confusion probably comes from the different ways in which this is implemented in
BERT vs RoBERTa, and the meaning of pooled_output. Actually, some people use ”pooled out-
put” to denote the final hidden representation of the [CLS] token, but in HuggingFace trans-
formers, this always refers to the output of a linear layer + tanh on top of this vector.
5.5.2
Densepose Changes
In order to change the person’s pose the idea was to extract the densepose of an image given
by the user. Facebook AI Research model, [18], is the state of the art model when it comes
to pose extraction. However, when trying to implement it, it said thatwas only supported for
Python 2, which is unavailable in DTU’s clusters. So this idea was not possible to implement,
and that is why the four default denseposes option was developed.
Instead, the CN trained for the Initial step will be used. It takes as input the image’s label
descriptor (explained at the end of this section) and a new densepose, either the user chose
one of the four available or he provides a new one. With the vector label, we create the right
prompt, that incorporates all the attributes for clothing generation. The CN-Densepose’s aim
is to generate an image with no changes in the clothing, but with the new desired pose.
Figure 5.33: Default denseposes
5.5.3
Pix2Pix
Due to time constraints, the Pix2Pix model was trained based on the original SD v1.5. A com-
parison between the model trained between the original stable Diffusion vs. our fine tuned
version SD would have been a nice evaluation.
Nevertheless, several experiments we performed. They were divided into three subgroups:
• Fabric
• Accessories
• Length
48
FashionBOT
==PAGE:57==
Within the images, we want to evaluate two different things will be analyzed: does the model
accurately change according to the prompt and also if the model changes the rest of the at-
tributes that do not appear in the prompts.
The figures are organized as follows: In each figure there are two prompts, corresponding to
two different experiments, i.e., the first two lines of images correspond to the first experiment
and the last two to the second. The first column of images represents the generated segmen-
tation for the prompt. This is the output of the SD model we explained for the previous step.
The second column displays the image that results from the Initial Step. From here the
editing process begins. Therefore, the last four columns represent the image resulting from
the underneath edit instruction. In order to also evaluate the memory of FashionBOT the edit
process is done in two different ways.
1. First line: In this line the editing is done always from the original image. For exam-
ple: in the fabric editing figure, 5.34, the first edit prompt is to add a hat, the the original
image should wear a hat. The second edit prompt is to add a belt. then the edited image
should wear a hat but no belt.
2. Second line: Each edit is done to the previous images. Therefore, if in the first edit
we add a hat, for the rest of the edit this hat must stay.
Figure 5.34: Fabric Editing: Two prompts were given
We can see that for fabric conditions Pix2Pix works greatly. Both with single edits and also
with remembering. Surprisingly, in the first experiment, when the two women are generated,
it then performs the edits on both of them. One last detail comes up in the last photograph
of remembering lines (2 and 4). Although the clothing attributes are correct, both women
change to men. This shows that more human specific attributes should be collected in the
memory vector in order to also maintain constant the person.
FashionBOT
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.35: Accessories Editing: Two prompts were given
Figure 5.36: Fabric Edting: Two prompts were given
50
FashionBOT
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.37: No control over colours
5.6
Edit
1. Is the image not changing enough? Your Image CFG weight may be too high. This value
dictates how similar the output should be to the input. It’s possible your edit requires larger
changes from the original image, and your Image CFG weight isn’t allowing that. Alterna-
tively, your Text CFG weight may be too low. This value dictates how much to listen to the
text instruction. The default Image CFG of 1.5 and Text CFG of 7.5 are a good starting point,
but aren’t necessarily optimal for each edit. Try: * Decreasing the Image CFG weight, or *
Increasing the Text CFG weight, or 2. Conversely, is the image changing too much, such that
the details in the original image aren’t preserved? Try: * Increasing the Image CFG weight,
or * Decreasing the Text CFG weight 3. Try generating results with different random seeds
by setting ”Randomize Seed” and running generation multiple times. You can also try setting
”Randomize CFG” to sample new Text CFG and Image CFG values each time. 4. Rephrasing
the instruction sometimes improves results (e.g., ”turn him into a dog” vs. ”make him a dog”
vs. ”as a dog”). 5. Increasing the number of steps sometimes improves results. 6. Do faces
look weird? The Stable Diffusion autoencoder has a hard time with faces that are small in the
image. Try: * Cropping the image so the face takes up a larger portion of the frame.
FashionBOT
51
==PAGE:60==
52
FashionBOT
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusion and Future Work
This thesis presented FashionBOT, a text-guided fashion-generative model. Its main goal was
to simplify the fashion design process. Unlike already existing fashion design software, which
can be complex and might require trained artist to operate them, FashionBOT prioritizes sim-
plicity. It leverages state-of-the-art AI models in order to make the fashion designers work
easier. In order to achieve this FashionBOT is divided into two steps: initial step, that sets up
a good start, and edit step to get the fashion designer to the good end.
When it came to design the architecture of Initial Step, a crucial question was asked: how
much information FashionBOT requires to generate accurate when garments without be-
coming too complex. Experiments showed that relying only on text descriptions was not
enough. However, just adding conditioning SD made a huge difference. CN offers various
options for conditioning. Within the fashion context, relevant conditioning would include
pose, segmentation for shape information and canny edge for patterns. Asking the user for
the three of them would just make it less user-friendly. Moreover, experiments showed that
not all three were necessarily. Therefore densepose was discarded. Canny edges could be
seen as the sketches a fashion designer draws, therefore canny edges is possibly available ad
consequently retained as a conditioning option. Nevertheless, in order to have at least one
conditioning available, a special SD model was trained. This SD takes as input the prompt
and generates the corresponding segmentation image.
All in all, this Initial Step relies on a CN-Segmentation model. This segmentation is either
provided by the user or generated by FashionBOT. If canny edge image is provided, then it
also takes this model into conditioning.
When it came to design edit step, a different question was asked: What are the main changes
done by a designer when refining an idea and how can FashionBOT categorize them. Three
changes was the answer: pose adjustments, small area modifications or major changes. First,
posechangesarecarriedbyCN-Densepose. Asdenseposeimagesarenotlikelytobeprovided
by the user, four different default images are proposed. Major changes are carried out by
a fine-tuned Pix2Pix model, based on our customized DeepFashion-database. This model’s
results were anlayzed for different fabric, shape and accessories conditions. Small changes
were performed by making. A black box was set on the parts of the image that we wanted to
regenerate together with a description prompt. To ensure that desired attributes are retained
during the generation process and to track the changes, a memory tracking mechanism was
implemented, inspired by NLP chatbots. This allows for the retention of the garment’s main
attributes.
Undoubtedly, some limitations appeared when looking at the results. The main ones being
restrictions on patterns and fabric, as well as the lack of control over color. These problems,
when it comes to fashion, present significant drawbacks. While it is true that a more attribute
oriented dataset could lead to better results, we could also make use of AI to solve these
problems. For example, TextureGAN, [9], is a GAN-based model that is able to add the pattern
of a photo the user gives as input and add it to the garment. This is just an example, but there
are many GAN-based and VAE models within the fashion industry that have deeply studied
the control over the latent space. Adapting these ideas and adjust them to a DM framework
would be an interesting path to follow.
But is not just about adapting everything to FashionBOT, FashionBOT can also adapt. All
through the report, FashionBOT has been considered an app for fashion designers. However,
FashionBOT
53
==PAGE:62==
FashionBOT can also be seen as a baseline to many applications. It would be a great tool for
fashion retrieval, where users, instead of scrolling through the shop’s app, could first design
the garment they are looking for and then the app would return the garment in the shop that
looks more like it. It can also easily be changed into a virtual try-on. Here the user would skip
the first initial step, as there is no need for an initial image generation, and start off directly
editing the garments.
In conclusion, FashionBOT’s guidelines of simplicity and edit-flexibility have have laid the
path for more improvements to come. While Prada and Versace might not be fighting over
FashionBOT (yet), it constitutes a baseline from which to go further. Adapt (and be adapted)
to overcome. Just like the two biggest fans of the fashion industry said:
“Best things in life are free. The second
best are very expensive.”
— Coco Chanel
“The third, just a few lines of code away”
— Coco Cournane
54
FashionBOT
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Yihui Ma et al. “Towards Better Understanding the Clothing Fashion Styles: A Multi-
modal Deep Learning Approach”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence 31.1 (Feb. 2017). doi: 10.1609/aaai.v31i1.10509. url: https://ojs.aaai.org/
index.php/AAAI/article/view/10509.
[2]
M. Hadi Kiapour et al. “Hipster wars: Discovering elements of fashion styles”. English.
In: Computer Vision, ECCV 2014 - 13th European Conference, Proceedings. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) PART 1. 13th European Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, ECCV 2014 ; Conference date: 06-09-2014 Through 12-09-2014. Springer Verlag,
2014, pp. 472–488. isbn: 9783319105895. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_31.
[3]
Jean-Pierre Briot, Gaëtan Hadjeres, and François Pachet. “Deep Learning Techniques
for Music Generation - A Survey”. In: CoRR abs/1709.01620 (2017). arXiv: 1709.01620.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.01620.
[4]
Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. “Image Style Transfer Using
Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2016.
[5]
Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur. “A Learned Representa-
tion For Artistic Style”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations. 2017.
url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJO-BuT1g.
[6]
David Ha and Douglas Eck. A Neural Representation of Sketch Drawings. 2017. doi: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1704.03477. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.03477.
[7]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 3 (June 2014). doi: 10.1145/3422622.
[8]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. 2022. arXiv:
1312.6114 [stat.ML].
[9]
Wenqi Xian et al. TextureGAN: Controlling Deep Image Synthesis with Texture Patches.
2018. arXiv: 1706.02823 [cs.CV].
[10]
Othman Sbai et al. DeSIGN: Design Inspiration from Generative Networks. 2018. arXiv:
1804.00921 [cs.LG].
[11]
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein et al. Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium Thermo-
dynamics. 2015. arXiv: 1503.03585 [cs.LG].
[12]
JonathanHo,AjayJain,andPieterAbbeel.DenoisingDiffusionProbabilisticModels.2020.
arXiv: 2006.11239 [cs.LG].
[13]
Yang Song et al. Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equa-
tions. 2021. arXiv: 2011.13456 [cs.LG].
[14]
Yuming Jiang et al. Text2Human: Text-Driven Controllable Human Image Generation.
2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2205.15996. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15996.
[15]
Jing Yu Koh, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. Grounding Language Models to
Images for Multimodal Inputs and Outputs. 2023. arXiv: 2301.13823 [cs.CL].
[16]
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein et al. Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium Thermo-
dynamics. 2015. arXiv: 1503.03585 [cs.LG].
[17]
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data
Distribution. 2020. arXiv: 1907.05600 [cs.LG].
[18]
Riza Alp Güler, Natalia Neverova, and Iasonas Kokkinos. “DensePose: Dense Human
Pose Estimation In The Wild”. In: CoRR abs/1802.00434 (2018). arXiv: 1802.00434.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.00434.
FashionBOT
55
==PAGE:64==
[19]
LukasBossardetal.“ApparelClassificationwithStyle”.In:vol.7727.Nov.2012,pp.321–
335. isbn: 978-3-642-37446-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-37447-0_25.
[20]
Huizhong Chen, Andrew Gallagher, and Bernd Girod. “Describing Clothing by Semantic
Attributes”. In: Oct. 2012, pp. 609–623. isbn: 978-3-642-33711-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
642-33712-3_44.
[21]
Adepeju Opaleye and Adekunle Kolawole. “Describing Clothing bySemantic Attributes:
A Heuristic Approach”. In: June 2021. doi: 10.22624/AIMS/iSTEAMS-2021/V27P8.
[22]
Wei Di et al. “Style Finder : Fine-Grained Clothing Style Recognition and Retrieval”. In:
2013.
[23]
M. Hadi Kiapour et al. “Where to Buy It: Matching Street Clothing Photos in Online
Shops”.In:2015IEEEInternationalConferenceonComputerVision(ICCV).2015,pp.3343–
3351. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.382.
[24]
Junshi Huang et al. “Cross-Domain Image Retrieval with a Dual Attribute-Aware Rank-
ing Network”. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2015,
pp. 1062–1070. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.127.
[25]
“Where to buy it: Matching street clothing photos in online shops”. English (US). In:
2015 International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2015. Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision. 15th IEEE International Conference on
ComputerVision,ICCV2015;Conferencedate:11-12-2015Through18-12-2015.United
States: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 3343–3351. doi: 10.
1109/ICCV.2015.382.
[26]
TimSalimansetal.“ImprovedTechniquesforTrainingGANs”.In:CoRRabs/1606.03498
(2016). arXiv: 1606.03498. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03498.
[27]
Richard Zhang et al. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual
Metric. 2018. arXiv: 1801.03924 [cs.CV].
[28]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-
Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
[29]
Mehdi Cherti et al. Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language-image learning.
2022. arXiv: 2212.07143 [cs.LG].
[30]
Christoph Schuhmann et al. LAION-5B: An open large-scale dataset for training next
generation image-text models. 2022. arXiv: 2210.08402 [cs.CV].
56
FashionBOT
==PAGE:65==
A
User Evaluation
FashionBOT
57
==PAGE:66==
B
Results
58
FashionBOT
==PAGE:67==
FashionBOT
59
==PAGE:68==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like at
this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is there a
difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text
like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an impression of
the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original
language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
http://www.compute.dtu.dk
