==PAGE:1==
Explainability Methods for Natural Language
Processing: A focus on tackling Gender Bias
through Causal Mediation Analysis
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing: A focus on tackling Gen-
der Bias through Causal Mediation Analysis
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Nicolás Ellarby Sánchez
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk/english
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Autonomous
Systems, MSc Autonomous Systems.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Nicolás Ellarby Sánchez - s212781
Signature
Date
ii
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The initial stages of this thesis have been spent on studying the different explainability
methods that exist and what there characteristics are. Some time was spent on research-
ing and understanding how input feature methods, a type of local explainability methods,
work. This phase concentrated on analysing four different input methods together with
the Language Interpretability Tool, an NLP toolbox which supports all four methods and
allows the obtention of saliency maps to better undesrtand the behaviour of these.
This thesis has then focused on attempting to investigate the broad concept of gender bias
pre-trained neural language models by means of Causal Mediation Analysis. Such study
has been largely based on the replication of experiments of the research paper Causal
Mediation Analysis for Interpreting Neural NLP: The Case of Gender Bias as it provides a
framework for obtaining insights into the mechanisms by which gender bias is mediated in
Transformer Language Models. The role of individual neurons and attention heads across
three datasets is studied. Additional experiments are also proposed to analyse the effect
of different languages and how different architectures mediate gender bias.
Experiments show that results are mostly model dependent although they uncover simi-
larities between like-wise architectures. It is also learnt that the change of language from
a gender-neutral to a non gender-neutral language does not have major relevance to how
models capture gender bias. There are also no significant results which might imply that
larger models are better at capturing gender bias. In conclusion, it can be seen that the
effects of gender bias can be broken down into effects that directly stem from the initial
input and effects that occur indirectly through mediators.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Nicolás Ellarby Sánchez, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
Author.
Lars Kai Hansen, Professor, Head of Section, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science
Supervisor
First of all I would like to thank my project supervisor Lars Kai Hansen who has been of
great help throughout the duration of this thesis, supporting me along the way with any
question or problem I have had. Without him this process would have been much harder
and much more heavy-handed. Thank you for your calm and excellent attention at all
times, for your dedication, kindness and passion for the field which has truly inspired me.
Secondly, I would like to thank my whole family for their support throughout these years,
helping me at all times through my toughest times and cheering me on to the finish line.
Finally, I also want to thank my friends, the old ones and the new ones I have made along
the way for having made this journey much more enjoyable.
iv
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Planning & Risk Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
9
2.1
Sentiment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Input Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Gradient Norm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.2
Gradient-dot-Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2.3
Integrated Gradients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2.4
LIME
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Transformers: Architecture and Attention Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
GPT2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.5
BERT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.6
RoBERTa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.7
Causal Mediation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.7.1
Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.7.2
Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.7.2.1
Neuron Interventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.7.2.2
Attention Interventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3
Methods
26
3.1
Language Interpretation Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.1.1
Salience Maps for Text
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Stanford Sentiment Treebank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Winograd Schema-based Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4
Neuron Intervention Templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.5
Causal Mediation Analysis Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5.1
Total Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5.1.1
Standard Error of the Mean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.5.1.2
Correlational Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.5.2
Neuron Intervention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.5.3
Attention Intervention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.5.4
Additional Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.5.4.1
Analysis of non-gender neutral language . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.5.4.2
Creation of new profession dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Results
36
4.1
Total Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.1.1
DistilGPT2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.1.2
Model Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
v
==PAGE:8==
4.1.3
Spanish Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2
Natural Indirect Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2.1
Neuron Indirect Effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2.1.1
DistilGPT2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2.1.2
Model Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2.1.3
Spanish Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.2.2
Attention Head Indirect Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.2.2.1
DistilGPT2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.2.2.2
Model Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Conclusions
51
Bibliography
55
A Appendix. Additional Attention Results
57
A.1 Indirect Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Direct Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
vi
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that focuses
on the interaction between computers and humans using natural language. The goal of
NLP is to enable machines to understand, interpret, and generate human language in a
way that is both accurate and useful. However, understanding our language is one of
the main challenges in NLP due to the complexity and variability of it. For this reason,
NLP researchers use a wide range of applications by applying techniques which involve a
combination of machine learning, deep learning, rule-based systems, computer science,
and linguistics to analyse and understand natural language.
Thanks to the large amounts of text data, NLP is a field in which a lot of progress is being
made at a very high pace. However, there are still many challenges to be addressed, such
as handling idiomatic expressions, understanding context and implicit meaning, dealing
with the diversity and complexity of human languages and even understand the process
by which they come to conclusions.
1.1
Motivation
Regarding the last challenge mentioned, NLP models are often referred to as black boxes
because the internal workings of many advanced NLP models can be difficult to under-
stand and interpret. These models are trained on large amounts of data, and the rela-
tionships between input and output are complex and non-linear. For example, in neural
networks, the internal representations and computations that are performed on the input
data are often high-dimensional and abstract, making it difficult to understand how the
model arrived at a particular decision or prediction. Additionally, the models are trained
to understand human language and it is hard to interpret the meaning of the internal rep-
resentations, hence the term black-box.
This lack of explainability and interpretability of NLP models makes it an active area of
research, where a lot of work goes into developing methods to make these models more
transparent and understandable.
The terms mentioned before: explainability and interpretability are not the same even
though they are closely related and can overlap in some cases. Interpretability aims to
make the inner workings of a model more transparent and understandable to humans.
Methods in this category can include techniques such as visualization of the model’s
decision boundary, model simplification, and feature attribution. Explainability, on the
other hand, which will be the focus of this project, aims to provide a clear and transpar-
ent justification for a model’s predictions by understanding and interpreting the reasoning
behind the decisions made. This includes understanding how the model arrived at a par-
ticular output or prediction, as well as being able to identify any biases or limitations in
the model’s performance. Methods in this category will provide insight into the model’s
decision-making process and highlight the areas that are most important for the model’s
prediction.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in developing methods for making
natural language processing models more explainable and making sure these models
perform well in real-world applications. This is an important area of research for various
reasons:
1. Trust and transparency: When NLP models are used in real-world scenarios, it is
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
1
==PAGE:10==
important for users to trust and understand the decisions made by the model. Ex-
plainability can increase trust by providing insight into how the model arrived at its
predictions and identifying any potential biases.
2. Compliance and regulation: Some industries, such as finance and healthcare, have
strict regulations in place that require models to be transparent and explainable in
order to protect sensitive information.
3. Improving performance: Explainability can also be used to identify any limitations or
errors in the model’s performance, which can then be used to improve the model.
4. Human-in-the-loop: Many NLP applications are designed to be used in collaboration
with humans. Explainability allows humans to understand the reasoning behind the
model’s decisions and also to provide feedback which can be used to improve the
model.
5. Fairness and ethics: Explainability can help identify and mitigate biases in NLP mod-
els, which can be especially important in applications that involve sensitive topics
or populations.
Explainability is important in many fields, however, NLP has been chosen as the field to
study due to some unique characteristics that makes explainability in this field particularly
important. The fact that NLP models often deal with sensitive and personal information,
such as text and speech, which can be difficult to interpret and understand together with
the fact that many NLP models tend to be complex due to the structure of the language
and the amount of data available, it makes explainability an excellent aid to help make
these models more transparent and easier to understand and work with.
Finally, another reason explainability could be extremely useful in the near future is the fact
that nowadays, Deep Learning (DL) models and Machine Learning (ML) are very good
in terms of finding patterns and correlations in data. Still, they are not good at explaining
how these are connected or causality; understanding the relationship between the input
data and the model’s prediction and how changes in the input data can affect the model’s
prediction. For this reason, as of now, the more data there is, the higher the chances are
to obtain a better performing model. However, since explainability and the amount of data
used to train a model does not follow a direct correlation, maybe if models are designed
to be more explainable, the exploration of the concept of explainability may lead to a shift
in direction, resulting in the development of models that are both more efficient in terms
of data consumption and more cost-effective.
One concrete area of interest for researching explainability methods in NLP is gender
bias. Gender bias is a problem that is already widespread in our society and therefore
has also managed to penetrate many machine learning models. Gender bias can be
present when translating between gender neutral languages and non gender neutral lan-
guages, in stereotypes or in occupations. For this reason, this project will focus on apply-
ing different explainability methods to try identifying and addressing gender bias present
in occupations. The overall objective is to try and gain insights into the underlying factors
that contribute to gender bias which will then allow to take the corresponding steps to mit-
igate them. By providing explanations from different methods, it will help look at whether
there is a common problem that many methods at different levels can answer.
1.2
State of the Art
The field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) has made tremendous progress in recent
years, allowing for the development of advanced language-based applications such as
2
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:11==
machine translation, sentiment analysis, and question-answering systems. However, as
NLP models become increasingly complex and sophisticated, it becomes more challeng-
ing to understand their underlying decision-making processes. This lack of explainability
and transparency can create a barrier to the adoption of NLP technologies in various sen-
sitive domains. The well known scientific disseminator, Been Kim, whose recent years
have been spent on trying to help humans communicate with complex machine learning
models argues in one of her talks, that the ultimate reason for researching explainability
methods is by fixing the value alignment problem. By this, she means that the goal to
achieve is to align AI with our values so that there is no disconnect between the intentions
and the results.
Due to the increasing complexity in this field, there has been a quick response and an ever-
growing interest in developing techniques for making these models more explainable.
Here, an overview of the current state of knowledge in the field of explainability will be
provided with a special interest in the NLP domain, focusing on recent developments
and trends in this rapidly evolving area of research. As Been Kim also mentions, there
are many explainability languages (methods) to be developed depending on the goal we
want to achieve. This goal, changes the aspect of the language that needs to be precise,
and, how good the language is will be evaluated depending on how well it achieves the
goal.
In NLP, explainability can be divided into two categories [1]: intrinsic and post-hoc explain-
ability. Intrinsic refers to models that are designed to be explainable by nature. These
models are typically simpler and easier to understand, and they often rely on a limited
number of parameters or simple decision rules. On the other hand, post-hoc explainabil-
ity models are complex models that are not explainable by nature, but they can be made
explainable through post-hoc methods. These models are typically more accurate and
powerful, but they can be difficult to understand. For the purpose of this research project,
only post-hoc explainability methods will be studied.
Post-hoc methods are valuable in many sectors where models may need to be explained
retroactively due to their inherent ability to explain the model after training hence not af-
fecting the model’s performance. However, these are often criticised for providing false
explanations, and it has been questioned if it is reasonable to expect models, that were
not designed to be explained, to be explained anyway. For this reason, how to validate
explanations is therefore very important and needs to be carefully studied in detail.
In general, there is no consensus on how to measure explainability and interpretability,
since these are by definition about explaining the model to humans, and these explana-
tions are often qualitative making it not clear how to quantitatively evaluate and compare
such methods. As no consensus has been reached regarding this, different authors de-
cide how to evaluate their methods.
As described by “Post-hoc interpretability for neural nlp: A survey” [1], post-hoc explain-
ability can further be divided into three methods: local explanation methods, class expla-
nation methods and global explanation methods. Local methods focus on understanding
the reasoning behind a specific prediction or decision made by a model. These methods
provide information about how the model arrived at its output for a specific input. Class
explanation methods is an underrepresented middle ground between local and global ex-
planations which attempts to explain the model, in terms of an abstraction of the input,
called a concept. Global methods, on the other hand, aim to provide a more general un-
derstanding of how a model works and what types of inputs it is most likely to perform well
or poorly on. These methods may provide information about the model’s overall perfor-
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
3
==PAGE:12==
mance, such as its accuracy on different types of inputs, or they may provide information
about the model’s internal structure, such as the weights of its neurons.
Local explainability methods are probably the most common in most research problems.
Reasons for this can be that they are normally easier to use and can be easier to under-
stand since they directly work with the input features of the model which are always known
and are often meaningful to humans. Even though local methods work at a higher level of
abstraction, knowing which words are the most important, can be a powerful explanation
method. These methods as mentioned can directly focus on the input features and their
importance but can also focus on adversarial examples; inputs that cause a model to pro-
duce a wrong prediction, or by trying to find similar examples in the training dataset that
look like the input example. As seen, local methods vary in form, and can provide strong
explanations for any problem in question. Another advantage that local methods have
is that they can easily be visualized through techniques such as saliency maps which,
for input methods for example, will show which words have greater importance to the
model. Nowadays, there are also many tools which try to simplify the visualization and
understanding process of NLP models. Examples of these are AllenNLP and The Lan-
guage Interpretability Tool (LIT). The LIT as mentioned in “The Language Interpretability
Tool: Extensible, Interactive Visualizations and Analysis for NLP Models” [2], is a toolkit
and browser-based user interface (UI) for NLP model understanding. LIT supports lo-
cal explanations— including salience maps, attention, and rich visualizations of model
predictions—as well as aggregate analysis—including metrics, embedding spaces, and
flexible slicing—and allows users to seamlessly hop between them to test local hypothe-
ses and validate them over a dataset. The paper [2] explains in detail the functionalities of
the tool as well a s mentioning the case studies for which it has been tested such as senti-
ment analysis and gender bias in coreference. For the case study of gender bias which is
specifically interesting for this project, a coreference model trained on OntoNotes and the
Winogender dataset are loaded. Each Winogender example has a pronoun and two can-
didate referents, one a occupation term like (“technician”) and one an “other participant”
(like “customer”). The model predicts coreference probabilities for each candidate and
through the different features provided by the toolkit, the model’s sensitivity to pronouns
by comparing two examples side-by-side can be explored as well as selecting datapoints
where the occupation term is associated with a high proportion of male or female workers.
As seen above, local methods provide quite strong explanations and there are already
many tools which provide clarity and help with visualizations of these, however, they
sometimes fall short in more complex problems and definitely fail to explain what goes on
inside the model. For this reason, there is a growing interest in concept and global meth-
ods. A concept method that is growing in strength within explainability methods is Testing
with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV). In the paper “Interpretability Beyond Feature
Attribution: Quantitative Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV)” [3], the already
mentioned researcher Been Kim introduces this technique which provide an interpretation
of a neural net’s internal state in terms of human-friendly concepts to address the prob-
lem of other methods operating on low-level features rather than high-level concepts. The
key idea is to view the high-dimensional internal state of a neural net as an aid, not an
obstacle. Testing with CAVs (TCAV), uses directional derivatives to quantify the degree to
which a user-defined concept is important to a classification result for example how sen-
sitive a prediction of zebra is to the presence of stripes. The paper explains how in order
to achieve interpretability, there are two options: (1) restrict ourselves to inherently inter-
pretable models or (2) post-process the models in way that yields insights. While option
1 offers simplicity as the explanation is embedded in the model, there is an growing need
4
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:13==
for methods that can be applied without retraining or modifying the network. One of many
challenges of option 2 is to ensure that the explanation correctly reflects the model’s com-
plex internals. TCAV is a global perturbation method, as it perturbs data points towards
a human-relatable concept to generate explanations as input, and check the network’s
output for validation.
Most of the primary work regarding TCAV is focused in the field of computer vision how-
ever there is starting to be more and more work within the NLP domain. One example of
this is the research paper “Improving Generalizability in Implicitly Abusive Language De-
tection with Concept Activation Vectors” [4], which proposes an interpretability technique,
based on the Testing Concept Activation Vector (TCAV) method from computer vision, to
quantify the sensitivity of a trained model to the human-defined concepts of explicit and
implicit abusive language, and use that to explain the generalizability of the model on
new data, in this case, COVID-related anti-Asian hate speech. This very recent research
project, is a great example and serves as a baseline for future projects where TCAV is to
be applied to NLP related projects.
Regarding the topic of research – gender bias, there are many papers on evaluating and
trying to assess this problem. Most research papers focus on demonstrating that most
systems are gender bias and shedding further light on the phenomenon of machine bias.
Some go one step further such as: “Gender Bias in Coreference Resolution: Evaluation
and Debiasing Methods” [5] and demonstrate that a data-augmentation approach that,
in combination with existing word-embedding debiasing techniques, removes the bias
without significantly affecting the performance. However, there are not many that try to
approach this problem by applying explainability methods. One of the few research pa-
pers, “Investigating Gender Bias in Language Models Using Causal Mediation Analysis”
[6], proposes a methodology grounded in the theory of causal mediation analysis for in-
terpreting which parts of a model are causally implicated in its behaviour applied to the
analysis of gender bias in pre-trained transformer language models. The paper proposes
an adaption of causal mediation analysis [7] for analysing the mechanisms by which infor-
mation flows from input to output through different model components. Mediation analysis
relies on measuring the change in an output following a counterfactual intervention in an
intermediate variable, or mediator enabling the study of how biased predictions arise from
different model components. Through such interventions, one can measure the degree
to which inputs influence outputs directly (direct effect), or indirectly through the mediator
(indirect effect). For this case, the mediator can be any model component that is wished
to study, such as neurons or attention heads.
Causal mediation analysis is a statistical technique used to explore the relationship be-
tween an independent variable (the cause), a dependent variable (the effect), and a me-
diator variable (a third variable that explains the relationship between the cause and the
effect). The goal of causal mediation analysis is to determine whether the relationship be-
tween the cause and the effect is direct (i.e., the cause has a direct effect on the effect) or
indirect (i.e., the cause has an effect on the mediator variable, which in turn has an effect
on the effect). Causal mediation analysis can be considered a part of explainability meth-
ods as it explains the relationship between variables and the mechanisms by which one
variable affects another providing insights into the factors that are driving the predictions
or decisions made by a model, which is a key aspect of explainability.
This section has tried to provide the reader with a global idea of how explainability methods
are divided into different groups depending on their area of application and provide an
overview of the latest research areas within this field regarding the most common and
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
5
==PAGE:14==
rapid-growing methods trying to keep a close link to NLP and more specifically gender-
bias.
1.3
Objectives
This project will try to replicate the Investigating Gender Bias in Language Models Using
Causal Mediation Analysis experiment, but also adding an extra element. As seen above,
most projects aim to apply an explanation method to a case study in question in order to
search for the answers to the questions they pose. However, why not apply several at the
same time? Why not apply methods at different levels to see whether they all manage to
provide similar results in answering the same questions? We will therefore try to replicate
the project mentioned above and then try to adapt it with TCAV following the Improving
Generalizability in Implicitly Abusive Language Detection with Concept Activation Vectors
project as well as also applying local methods to support the results in a simple and visual
way. The application of three of the most researched methods in actuality together with an
important real world problem to solve such as gender bias will provide a different approach
to explainability in NLP. Trying to tackle the gender bias issue in language models can
be very beneficial and significantly impact how people perceive and interact with each
other and the world around them. Language models are used to create chatbots, voice
assistants, translation software, and many other applications that rely on natural language
processing. If these models contain gender bias, they may perpetuate stereotypes and
discrimination, which can lead to unequal treatment and opportunities for different groups
of people. For example, if a language model consistently associates certain professions
with a particular gender, it can influence hiring decisions, educational choices, and even
self-perception. If a voice assistant consistently responds to gender-based requests in a
biased manner, it can reinforce harmful attitudes and reinforce gender stereotypes. For
this reason, through the analysis of this project, a hiring manager, for example, might be
able to reproduce this analysis on his models and be able to identify and visualize what
the model is paying more attention to and therefore be able to take this information into
consideration throughout the hiring process. By following the steps mentioned throughout
this report and the application of the LIT, it will be possible to tackle the problem of gender
bias in ones model.
1.4
Planning & Risk Management
Figure 1.1: Project Plan and Time Management.
The Gantt diagram, Figure 1.1, serves as a guideline for the next months of work in order
to make sure everything is going as planned. Of course many things can go wrong such
6
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:15==
as sickness, getting stuck or not being to continue as planned and for this reason buffer
times have been added at the end of main tasks so that there is always some extra time
to be on top of things. The fact that the report will be written at the same time as work is
being done will mean there will be more time throughout the last month for things to spill
into if the project is not finished.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:17==
2
Theory
2.1
Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment Analysis (SA) is the computational study of people’s opinions, attitudes and
emotions toward an entity. The entity can represent individuals, events or topics which
are most likely to be covered by reviews. Sentiment Analysis identifies the sentiment ex-
pressed in a text then analyzes it. Therefore, the target of SA is to find opinions, identify
the sentiments they express, and then classify their polarity. As explained in “Sentiment
analysis algorithms and applications: A survey” [8], Sentiment Analysis can be considered
a classification task with three main classification levels: document-level, sentence-level,
and aspect-level. Document-level SA aims to classify an opinion document as express-
ing a positive or negative opinion or sentiment, sentence-level aims to do the same but
with sentences instead of documents and aspect-level aims to classify the sentiment with
respect to the specific aspects of entities. Overall, Sentiment Analysis is a powerful tool
for understanding how people feel about a particular topic, and it can be used to inform
decision-making in a wide range of fields.
Sentiment Analysis is one of the most common NLP tasks because it has a wide range of
applications and is relatively easy to implement compared to some other NLP tasks as well
as the fact that it can be performed using a variety of techniques, from rule-based systems
to machine learning algorithms. This means that it can be tailored to suit different types
of data and different levels of accuracy requirements. In addition, Sentiment Analysis is
often used as a building block for more complex NLP tasks such as identifying relevant
sections of text for more detailed analysis, or to help train machine learning models for
other tasks such as text classification or named entity recognition. Even though Sentiment
Analysis may seem like an easy task, however, there are many challenges that can hinder
a model’s ability to accurately analyse a phrase’s sentiment. Linguistic anomalies such
as negation, sarcasm, and using negative terms in a positive way are especially difficult
for NLP models to handle.
Due to the versatility provided by this field, it has been used to carry out initial tests and
obtain initial results with the aim of demonstrating how the methods proposed in the fol-
lowing section work.
2.2
Input Methods
Input feature methods are a type of local explainability methods, where the goal is to de-
termine how important an input feature is for a given prediction [9], [10]. For this research
study case, input features represent words, sub-words, or characters. An input feature
explanation of the input x, is represented as:
E(x, c) : I →Rd , where I is the input domain and and d is the input dimensionality [1].
It is important to note that input feature explanations can only explain one scalar, meaning
one class at one timestep and the selected class is either the most likely class or the true-
label class, denoted with c which can be set as desired.
Throughout this project, up to four different input methods will be studied: Gradient Norm
[11], Gradient-dot-Input [12], Integrated Gradients [13] and LIME [14]. All methods cal-
culate salience, but there are subtle differences in their approaches towards calculating
a salience score for each token. Grad L2 Norm only produces absolute salience scores
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
9
==PAGE:18==
while other methods like Grad ∙Input (and also Integrated Gradients and LIME) produce
signed values, leading to an improved interpretation of whether a token has positive or
negative influence on the prediction.
2.2.1
Gradient Norm
As explained in LIT’s Salience Maps for Text tutorial [2], Gradient Norm [11] is a simple
method, in which salience scores are proportional to the L2 norm of the gradient. The
score for a token i would be
E Gradient-Norm (xi, c) = ||∇xip(c|xi; θ)||2
(2.1)
where p(c|x; θ) is the model’s probability output. The equation essentially explains that
the conditional expectation of the variable c given a specific value of x and the model
parameters θ is proportional to the magnitude of the gradient of the conditional probability
p(c|x; θ) with respect to x, measured using the L2 norm.
As will be seen in the next subsection, another approach is to use the dot product [10].
The L2 norm is used instead of the dot product in this case to measure the magnitude of
the gradient vector, instead of just the direction. This allows to capture both the direction
and the magnitude of the gradient, which can be useful in certain applications.
While NLP features are often discrete, it is still possible to take the gradient with regard
to the one-hot-encoding by treating it as continuous. Although, because the one-hot-
encoding has shape x ∈IV ×T , where V is the vocabulary size and T is the input length, it
is necessary to reduce away the vocabulary dimension (by using an L2-norm for example)
such E(x) ∈RT .
In order to get some first visual results and a better understanding of how this method and
the next to come work, LIT’s (Section 3.1) Salience Maps for Text Tutorial was followed.
This demo allows the user to use their GUI to learn how to use their salience maps module
and counterfactual generators to analyze the behavior of sst2-tiny model on Stanford’s
Sentiment Treebank dataset (Section 3.2) for a positive or negative classification task.
Three sentences where chosen from the dataset; one with a clear positive sentiment, one
with a clear negative sentiment and one which is dubious for the model.
In order to help clarify the results, it is worth mentioning that LIT uses different color
scales to represent signed and unsigned salience scores. Methods that produce un-
signed salience values, such as Grad L2 Norm, use a purple scale where darker colors
indicate greater salience, whereas the other methods use a red-to-green scale, with red
denoting negative scores and green denoting positive.
10
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: Visualization of applying Gradient Norm to analyse a BERT-based sst2-tiny
model on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset. Class label 0 means negative sen-
timent whilst class label 1 means positive sentiment and T is true label and P predicted
label.
Figure 2.1 shows which words are the most important for the prediction. As can be seen
in the second sentence, the word fail has a high salience score showing that this word is
highly important for predicting the overall sentiment of the phrase. In order to better un-
derstand how this method works, the sentences are slightly modified by adding negations
or removing certain words. As can be seen in Figure 2.2, these modifications show how
some words gain or lose importance for predicting the sentiment such as not, lives up and
unlikable.
Figure 2.2: Visualization of applying Gradient Norm to analyse a BERT-based sst2-tiny
model on three slightly modified sentences from the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2.2
Gradient-dot-Input
As mentioned above, another option is to consider the scale of x too, hence, salience
scores are proportional to the dot product of the input embeddings and their gradients [9]
E Gradient · Input(x, c) = x ⊙∇xp(c|x; θ).
(2.2)
The dot product between x and the equivalent part from Equation 2.1 again represents
that the conditional expectation of c given a specific value of x is proportional to the dot
product of x and the gradient of the conditional probability p(c|x; θ) with respect to x.
The dot product between x and the gradient vector measures the projection of the gradient
vector onto the direction of x capturing the rate of change of p(c|x; θ) in the direction of x
[12].
Compared to grad-norm, this method gives directional scores where a positive score can
be interpreted as that token having a positive influence on the prediction ˆy, while a nega-
tive score suggests that the prediction would be stronger if that token was removed. On
the other hand, a counter-argument is that x does not directly relate to the model, and this
can therefore result in a less faithful explanation.
Figure 2.3: Visualization of applying Gradient-dot-Input to analyse a BERT-based sst2-
tiny model on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset. Because sst2-tiny does not have
a LSTM architecture, we shouldn’t rely too much on Grad-dot-Input. As seen on the
examples, this method performs poorly compared to others.
Once again, the sentences are modified and the results are shown (Figure 2.4). Again,
this method does not provide good results as the model does not have an LSTM archi-
tecture.
12
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: Visualization of applying Gradient-dot-Input to analyse a BERT-based sst2-
tiny model on three slightly modified sentences from the Stanford Sentiment Treebank
dataset.
2.2.3
Integrated Gradients
A more reliable technique for calculating feature contribution is called integrated gradients,
which is based on integrating gradients along a path in the embedded space. Although
this approach necessitates more complex model instrumentation, it typically yields results
that are superior to those of grad-norm and grad-dot-input.
The main motivations for Integrated Gradient, according to [13], are sensitivity and com-
pleteness. Sensitivity states that the feature that changed should receive a non-zero attri-
bution if a combination of x and baseline b (typically an empty sequence) occurs where the
logit outputs of f(x; θ) and f(b; θ) are different. To put it another way, a feature should
be regarded as essential in deciding the output if changing it results in a difference in
the model’s predictions, and the attribution score should reflect this importance. To be
complete, each token’s relevance ratings must add up to the model output in relation to
baseline b guaranteeing that no relevant token is overlooked in the attribution process by
ensuring that the sum of the relevance ratings assigned to each token in the actual in-
put equals the difference between the model’s output for the actual input and its baseline
input.
E Integrated-Gradient (x, c) = (x −b) ⊙1
k
k
∑
i=1
∇˜xif (˜xi; θ)c ,
˜xi = b + i
k(x −b)
(2.3)
where f(x; θ) is the model logits.
This equation represents the importance of individual elements of the input vector x in
predicting the class c, based on the gradient of the model logits f(x, θ) with respect to a
set of perturbed inputs ˜x. To better understand Equation 2.3, lets break it up to understand
its components:
• The term (x - b) represents the difference between the input x and a baseline b,
which is typically set to a fixed value such as the mean of the training set inputs.
This baseline is used to provide a reference point for measuring the importance of
individual input features.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
13
==PAGE:22==
• k is the number of steps in the integration path from the baseline b to the input x.
• ˜xi is the i-th step in the integration path defined as ˜xi = b + i
k(x −b).
• The term 1
k
∑k
i=1 ∇˜xif (˜xi; θ)c represents the average gradient of the model logits
f(˜x; θ) with respect to a set of perturbed inputs ˜x, where each perturbed input is
generated by adding a fraction i
k of the difference between x and b to the baseline
b. The subscript c denotes that we are interested in the gradient with respect to the
predicted class c.
• The gradient of the model logits evaluated at each point along the integration path
∇˜xif (˜xi; θ)c with respect to a set of perturbed inputs ˜x represents the rate of change
of the model’s predicted probability of each class with respect to changes in a set of
inputs that have been perturbed from the original input x. In other words, it indicates
how sensitive the model’s prediction is to small changes in the input.
Each element of the resulting vector represents the importance of the corresponding el-
ement in x, with positive values indicating that the corresponding element has a positive
impact on the probability of c, and negative values indicating a negative impact.
For all gradient-based techniques, gradient saturation could be a concern [9], [10]. In
essence, if the model learning reaches saturation for a given token, its gradient decreases
to zero and it appears to have no salience. While this is going on, certain tokens really
have a salience value of 0, as they have no impact on the predictions. Furthermore, it
is difficult to determine if a token that interests us is truly irrelevant or if we are merely
experiencing the consequences of gradient saturation.
By including embeddings into
gradients, IG solves the gradient saturation issue. In a continuous embedding space,
tokens can be represented as vectors in addition to being the discrete building blocks
of text sequences. The average salience over a collection of local gradients calculated
by interpolating between the token’s embedding vectors and a baseline is how IG calcu-
lates per-token salience (typically the zero vector). The cost-benefit trade-off is that IG
requires more work to determine the optimal number of interpolation steps, with the num-
ber of steps directly correlated with runtime. Also, more data is needed, which the model
might or might not be able to supply.
Figure 2.5: Visualization of applying Integrated Gradients to analyse a BERT-based sst2-
tiny model on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset. Results resemble to those from
Gradient Norm.
14
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:23==
Results for the three modified sentences can be seen in Figure 2.6. The first modified
phrase is a good example of how this method works and what should really happen. The
word not has a negative score meaning that the score would be higher if not for this word
however it does not affect the final prediction which is completely correct.
Figure 2.6: Visualization of applying Integrated Gradients to analyse a BERT-based sst2-
tiny model on three slightly modified sentences from the Stanford Sentiment Treebank
dataset.
2.2.4
LIME
Unlike gradient-based methods, LIME is a black-box technique that doesn’t require any
access to model internals [14]. It works by generating a set of perturbed inputs ˆx - gener-
ally, by dropping out or masking tokens or sampling nearby observations - and training a
local linear model to reconstruct the original model’s predictions p(c|ˆx). The weights w of
this linear model are treated as the salience values representing the importance measure,
since larger parameters would mean a greater effect on the output.
E LIME (x, c) = argmin
w
1
k
k
∑
i=1
(p (c | ˜xi; θ) log (q (˜xi)) + (1 −p (c | ˜xi; θ)) log (1 −q (˜xi)) + λ∥w∥1
(2.4)
where q(˜x) = σ(wˆx)
As explained, LIME seeks to approximate the complex model with a simpler one that
can explain the prediction made by the complex model for a specific instance. Therefore
the equation represents the objective function that needs to be minimized to obtain the
simpler model. Even so, as done previously, the equation will be broken up in order to
gain a better understanding of what is actually going on.
• argmin
w
represents the argument that minimizes the error function. It tries to find the
values of the parameters w that minimize the error function.
• The term ∑k
i=1(p (c | ˜xi; θ) log (q (˜xi)) + (1 −p (c | ˜xi; θ)) log (1 −q (˜xi)) represents
the loss function that calculates the difference between the probability predicted by
the simpler model q(˜xi) and the actual probability predicted by the complex model
p (c | ˜xi; θ) for the sampled instances ˜x. A simpler model is penalized by this binary
cross-entropy loss function if it predicts a different probability from the complicated
model.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
15
==PAGE:24==
• λ∥w∥1 represents the regularization term that prevents overfitting of the simpler
model. The regularization term is the L1 norm of the parameters w.
The disadvantage of LIME is that it requires multiple model assessments, making it slower
to compute than gradient-based techniques. LIME can also be noisy on longer inputs
because there are more tokens to eliminate. You can add more samples to make up for
the loss.
The way the input is analyzed by the gradient-based approaches and LIME is another
interesting difference. While LIME divides the text into words at whitespaces (Figure
2.7), gradient based approaches use the model’s tokenizer, which breaks down words
into smaller components.
Figure 2.7: Visualization of applying LIME to analyse a BERT-based sst2-tiny model on
the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset. As can be seen, LIME splits the input sentence
based on whitespace and punctuation characters unlike the other methods.
Same as with Integrated Gradients, we can see good results from LIME on the modi-
fied sentences (Figure 2.8) with the word not obtaining a negative score and the word
unlikable gaining importance in the sentiment prediction.
Figure 2.8: Visualization of applying LIME to analyse a BERT-based sst2-tiny model on
three slightly modified sentences from the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset.
16
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:25==
2.3
Transformers: Architecture and Attention Mechanism
Most of the work in this project depends on a class of neural network language models
called Transformers [15]. Transformers are a kind of neural network architecture made
to handle sequential input, such as text written in natural language. The text tokens that
make up the input to the Transformer model (input embeddings) are first transformed into
dense vector representations called embeddings. These embeddings, which are learned
during training, capture the semantic meaning of each token. It also involves multi-head
self-attention layers which allow the model to attend to different parts of the input sequence
and capture long-range dependencies between tokens. The outputs of these are then
passed through a series of feedforward layers, which apply non-linear transformations to
the input embeddings to generate more complex representations. The model also uses
an encoder-decoder architecture to generate output sequences, making it useful for tasks
like machine translation. The encoder processes the input sequence and generates a
sequence of hidden states, which are then used by the decoder to generate the output
sequence.
Figure 2.9: The transformer - model architecture [15].
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
17
==PAGE:26==
Transformers’ essential building block is the attention mechanism. It allows the model
to weigh the importance of different input elements (such as words or tokens) when pro-
cessing the entire sequence. By recording the connections and dependencies between
various elements of the input sequence, the attention mechanism aids the model’s ability
to concentrate on pertinent information. The attention mechanism operates through self-
attention. It determines the degree of similarity between a query, key, and value vectors
in order to compute attention scores. The values are then weighted based on these at-
tention scores to create the context vector for each input element. All input positions are
simultaneously subjected to the self-attention process, allowing for effective modeling of
long-range relationships (Figure 2.10).
Figure 2.10: Multi-Head Attention - Several attention layers running in parallel [15].
The exact details of how all these components work and the calculations that take place
are beyond the scope of this thesis, but it suffices to understand that “weights”, or settings
of the neurons and attention heads determine the behavior of the Transformer.
2.4
GPT2
In 2018, OpenAI introduced the first of many new very powerful GPT (Generative Pre-
Trained Transformer) models [16] which can perform various NLP tasks without any su-
pervised learning. Before the first kind of GPT models (GPT1), most NLP models were
trained for particular tasks using supervised learning. Drawbacks with supervised learn-
ing is that the models require a significant amount of labeled data, which is frequently
difficult to find, in order to master a specific task and that they are unable to generalize
to tasks for which they were not specifically taught. GPT1 proposed learning a gener-
ative language model using unlabeled data and then fine-tuning the model by providing
examples of specific downstream tasks.
Throughout this project GPT2 [17] is used which presents a significance improvement
over GPT1 in terms of many aspects such as: greater model size; 1.5 billion parameters
compared to 117 million and it was trained on a much larger and diverse dataset. More
importantly, GPT1 was trained to predict the following word in a sentence whilst GPT2 was
trained to do the same but not only based on the preceding words but also on additional
context such as the topic of the text. The model uses internally a mask-mechanism to
make sure the predictions for the token i only uses the inputs from 1 to i but not the future
18
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:27==
tokens [17].
Nevertheless, all GPT models share the same fundamental architecture with some vari-
ations. All models are based on the decoder block of the transformer architecture [15]
further explained in Section 2.3. Even so, GPT2 has more layers than GPT1, allowing
it to model more complex relationships between words and generate more diverse and
natural-sounding text as well as using a technique called “layer normalization” to improve
the stability and performance of the model during training, which was not used in GPT1.
2.5
BERT
BERT is another model architecture which widely used throughout the project. The sst2-
tiny model used with the input methods, is already a fine-tuned version of bert-tiny (one
of the smaller pre-trained BERT variants) on the SST-2 dataset.
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) [18] is a pre-trained
deep learning model for natural language processing (NLP) tasks.
Its architecture is
based on a neural network known as the transformer model (Section 2.3), which performs
particularly well with sequential input, such as text. The encoder part of the transformer
architecture is the fundamental unit of the BERT design. The feed-forward layer and
the self-attention layer are the two layers that make up the transformer block. While the
feed-forward layer applies a non-linear transformation to the self-attention layer’s output,
the self-attention layer enables the model to weigh the relative relevance of various input
sequence segments when creating the output. A modified form of the transformer ar-
chitecture known as the “multi-layer bidirectional transformer encoder” is used by BERT.
BERT employs a bidirectional encoder, which means it can process the input sequence
in both ways. This is the main distinction between this architecture and the original trans-
former. As a result, the model is better able to represent the contextual links between
words in the input sentence than a unidirectional model.
Figure 2.11: Differences in pre-training model architectures. BERT uses a bidirectional
Transformer. GPT uses a left-to-right Transformer [18].
In addition to the transformer blocks, BERT is a masked language model, which means
that during training, some of the input text’s tokens are randomly masked out. The model
is then trained to anticipate the tokens that have been masked based on the context in
which they occur. As a masked language model, BERT’s ability to capture the contex-
tual links between words in a sentence is one of its main features. The model learns to
discover patterns and associations between words that are not explicitly expressed in the
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
19
==PAGE:28==
text by being trained on a large corpus of text. As a result, it may produce extremely
precise predictions for the tokens that are being hidden, even when those contexts are
complicated or unclear.
BERT may also be used for the task of next sentence prediction, which trains the model to
determine if a particular sentence will be followed by another one in a text. BERT is highly
suited for this task since it can record contextual interactions between words. When the
model is being trained, it is given pairs of sentences and asked to predict whether the
second sentence comes after the first.
Overall, the pre-trained BERT model is perfectly suited to being finetuned with just one
additional output layer to create state-of-the-art models for a wide range of tasks without
substantial task specific architecture modifications.
2.6
RoBERTa
RoBERTa (Robustly optimized BERT approach) [19] is a state-of-the-art language model
built on the success of BERT and further enhances its capabilities. Although the under-
lying concepts of RoBERTa and BERT are similar, there are some important distinctions
between them. For example, RoBERTa was trained on a substantially bigger corpus,
which lengthens the training process but results in better language comprehension.
Given that both models are built on the transformer design, RoBERTa’s architecture is
quite similar to BERT’s. However, to increase its performance, RoBERTa makes a few
adjustments and additions. RoBERTa does not include the “next sentence prediction” task
during pre-training. By removing this task, RoBERTa focuses solely on masked language
modeling, allowing it to concentrate on learning contextual information without relying on
sentence order. Another key difference is in the way these two models tokenize; BERT
employs “token-level” training, where it masks individual tokens and predicts them in iso-
lation whereas RoBERTa introduces a dynamic masking strategy where multiple tokens
are masked together allowing RoBERTa to capture longer-range dependencies and en-
courages the model to learn more robust representations by considering a wider context.
Even though RoBERTa is overall superior to BERT, it is worth noting that such superiority
depends on the specific task, dataset, and evaluation metrics.
2.7
Causal Mediation Analysis
Machine Learning based projects focus on predicting outcomes and try to find correlations
in data rather than understanding causality. Deep Learning (DL) has placed an exces-
sive emphasis on correlation without causation therefore data doesn’t provide an answer
when the issue diverges from highly specific circumstances. In reality, a lot of the real-
world data we use to train AI models is not produced in the same manner. In other words,
deep learning is effective at identifying patterns in data, but it cannot explain how those
patterns are related. This is highlited in Judea Pearl’s and Dana Mackenzie’s The Book
of Why. The New Science of Cause and Effect [20] which explains the main limitations
of current machine learning solutions and the causal inference challenge. They note that
the hype that big data will solve many of the big challenges faced is misplaced. However,
establishing causality is not always straightforward. There may be confounding variables
that affect both the cause and the effect, making it difficult to determine whether one di-
rectly caused the other. Additionally, in some cases, the relationship between cause and
effect may be bidirectional, meaning that the effect could also cause the cause. There-
fore, researchers must carefully design studies and use appropriate statistical methods
to determine causality.
20
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:29==
It is now clear where the problem with DL systems lie. However, it is now important to
better define the term Causal Inference. Causality refers to the relationship between an
event (the cause) and a second event (the effect), where the second event is a conse-
quence of the first. In other words, causality describes how one thing leads to another. In
many use cases, correlation may suffice. However, causal inference would enable us to
go one step further and figure out what would happen if we decide to change some of the
underlying assumptions in our model.
To address these issues, methods like Causal mediation analysis, a branch of causal
inference, that specializes in comprehending the mechanisms through which a specific
exposure or course of treatment affects a result is used. To put it another way, causal
mediation analysis analyses the mechanisms by which information flows from input to
output through different model components. This is done through an adaption of the
paper [7] by measuring the change in an output following a counterfactual intervention in
an intermediate variable, or mediator. Through such interventions, one can measure the
degree to which inputs influence outputs directly (direct effect), or indirectly through the
mediator (indirect effect). This mediator can be any model component that is wished to
study such as neurons or attention heads.
An example can be seen below where it is known that patients admitted to hospital on
weekends experience higher rates of mortality than patients admitted on weekdays and
they want to examine whether the effect of there being procedure delays may have an
indirect effect on higher chances of death.
Figure 2.12: Mediation Analysis diagram depicting the relationship between independent
(x), dependent (y), and mediator (z) variables [21].
As this project aims to tackle the gender bias issue in language models, the reasoning
behind [6], [22] which measures the direct and indirect effects of targeted intervention,
to pinpoint how gender bias propagates through different parts of pre-trained LMs will
be explained. To better understand all these terms, a typical example of gender bias
in LMs is used where given a prompt u: “The nurse said that ”, a LM will generate a
continuation and a biased model would assign a higher likelihood to she than to he, such
that pθ(she|u) > pθ(he|u) where she is the stereotypical candidate, while he is the anti-
stereotypical candidate, reflecting a bias in society that associates nurses with women
more frequently than men.
The paper defines the relative probabilities assigned to the candidates can be thought of
as a measure of gender bias in the model as:
y(u) = pθ(anti −stereotypical|u)
pθ(stereotypical|u)
.
(2.5)
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
21
==PAGE:30==
The prediction is stereotypical if y(u) < 1, and anti-stereotypical if y(u) > 1. A completely
impartial model would have a y(u) = 1 value and would not favor either the stereotypical
or the anti-stereotypical situation.
2.7.1
Effects
There are three concepts related to causal inference in statistical analysis. These three
which will be studied are the Total Effect (TE), the Natural Direct Effect (NDE) and
the Natural Indirect Effect (NIE) [22]. All three of these concepts are concerned with
understanding the relationship between an exposure (or treatment) and an outcome, while
controlling for other factors that may influence the outcome. They all aim to quantify the
effect of the exposure on the outcome, while accounting for other factors that may be
associated with both the exposure and the outcome.
The total effect represents the overall effect of the exposure on the outcome, without
considering any intermediary factors that may mediate the relationship between the ex-
posure and the outcome. Regarding the project, applying causal mediation analysis en-
tails performing interventions on the input text and assessing the impact on the gender
bias measure specified above (Equation 2.7), which is treated as the response variable.
For this analysis, a collection of example sentences, like the one above, will serve as the
population of units. Under the intervention do(x = x), the value that y reaches in the unit
u = u is defined as yx(u). The proportionate difference between the degree of prejudice
under a gendered reading and under an ambiguous reading is the unit-level total effect.
TE(set-gender, null ; y, u) = yset-gender (u) −ynull (u)
ynull (u)
= yset-gender (u)
ynull (u)
−1.
(2.6)
For the example given before, this results in:
pθ( he | The man said that )
pθ( she | The man said that )/ pθ( he | The nurse said that )
pθ( she | The nurse said that ) −1.
(2.7)
In order to measure the causal role of a specific mediator or intermediary variables z which
lie between x and y, the direct and indirect effects of intervening in the model relative to z
are measured. The natural direct effect measures how much an intervention x changes
an outcome variable y directly without passing through the mediator of interest z. NDE is
determined by the bias that results from genderizing all units u, such as converting nurse
to man, but maintaining the original value of each unit’s z:
NDE( set-gender, null; y) = Eu
[
yset-gender ,znull (u)(u)/ynull (u) −1
]
.
(2.8)
On the other hand, the natural indirect effect, quantifies how much the intervention x
changes y indirectly, through z. This is done by setting z to its value under the intervention
x, while maintaining everything else’s original value. NIE is defined as the difference in
bias when unit u is left unchanged, but z is set to the value it would have under a gendered
reading:
NIE( set-gender, null; y) = Eu
[
ynull ,zset-gender (u)(u)/ynull (u) −1
]
.
(2.9)
22
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:31==
What makes the type of indirect effect we are interested in the natural indirect effect is
setting z to the value it would attain under a genderized reading rather than setting it to a
default value like 0 is what makes this a Natural Direct Effect as mentioned in [23].
Figure 2.13: The do-operation is x = set−gender, which changes u from nurse to man in
this example. The total effect measures the change in y resulting from the intervention;
the direct effect measures the change in y resulting from performing the intervention
while holding a mediator z fixed; the indirect effect measures the change caused by
setting z to its value under the intervention, while holding u fixed [6].
Figure 2.14 is created as a connecting bridge between the explanations of figure 2.12 and
figure 2.13. Figure 2.12 is now portrayed in the form of a neural network where it is clear
that the direct effect is obtained from input to output (green arrow) without passing through
a mediator z whilst a possible indirect effect (red arrow) is obtained by passing through
such mediators. As stated in [6], “each neuron in a neural network may be considered to
be analogous to z – the neuron is influenced by the input and, in turn, affects the model
output; however, there also exist direct pathways from the input to the output that do not
pass through the neuron. We can thus decouple model components from the rest of the
model by framing them as intermediaries in the causal path from inputs to outputs”. This
is portrayed in Figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14: Mediation Analysis diagram depicting the relationship between independent
(x), dependent (y), and mediator (z) variables. The direct effect is represented with a
green arrow and a possible indirect effect is portrayed in red.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
23
==PAGE:32==
2.7.2
Interventions
Throughout the project, two different intervention experiments are carried out. These
experiments are with mediators at the neuron level and at the attention level [22].
2.7.2.1
Neuron Interventions
Neuron interventions aims to understand the role of individual neurons in mediating gen-
der bias by assigning z to each neuron in the language model. It is common to think of
each neuron in a neural network as being analogous to a procedure delay (see Figure
2.12); each neuron influences the input and affects the output of the model, but there are
also direct pathways from the input to the output that do not go through the neuron. Thus,
we can decouple model components by framing them as intermediaries in the causal
path connecting inputs to outputs. In order to examine the anti-stereotypical direction and
gauge the effectiveness of gender-neutral intervention, a person is chosen as the target
of change. The project uses a dataset made up of templates that instantiate profession
phrases to investigate this. The mediator is the representation that corresponds to the
profession word, and the effect of intervening on specific neurons is investigated.
2.7.2.2
Attention Interventions
Attention interventions focuses on studying the behaviour of attention weights that define
relationships between words. To understand the role of attention mechanisms, attention
heads αl,h are used as mediators. Two datasets for evaluating gender bias in pronoun
resolution are in line with the method: Winobias and Winogender (further explained in
Section 3.3). Each head’s NDE and NIE are calculated by making adjustments to the
attention weights. The experiments focus on the effect of attention from the last word
(she or he) to the rest of the sentence.
In an example where the prompt u is The nurse examined the farmer for injuries because
she, the bias measure is computed as y(u) = pθ( was screaming | u)/pθ( was caring |
u) where in a stereotypical reading the pronoun she refers to the nurse, implying the
continuation was caring and the anti-stereotypical reading links she to the farmer, this
time implying the continuation was screaming. The bias measure is computed as y(u) =
pθ( was screaming | u)/pθ( was caring | u) for an example where the prompt u is The
nurse examined the farmer for injuries because she, and where the pronoun she is linked
to the farmer in the anti-stereotypical reading (suggesting that the continuation is scream-
ing) while the pronoun she is linked to the nurse in the stereotypical reading. Finding out
if she paid more attention to the word nurse or farmer is done through the analysis of
attention weights which can also assist in forecasting how the phrase will continue.
24
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:33==
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
25
==PAGE:34==
3
Methods
3.1
Language Interpretation Tool
The Learning Interpretability Tool (LIT) [2] is a visual, interactive ML model-understanding
tool that supports text, image, and tabular data. LIT is built to help answer questions such
as:
1. How does the model make its predictions?
2. Which features of the data have the greatest impact on the model’s predictions?
3. Are there any biases in the model’s predictions?
4. Can the model’s predictions be trusted?
5. Are there any outliers or anomalies in the data that are affecting the model’s perfor-
mance?
6. How can the model’s performance be improved?
7. Are there any areas of the data where the model is particularly strong or weak?
8. How can the model’s predictions be visualized and interpreted?
LIT also supports a variety of debugging workflows including features such as local ex-
planations via salience maps and attention, counterfactual generation, aggregate analysis
including slicing and visualization of embedding spaces, high extensibility to new model
types compatible to multiple frameworks such as TensorFlow and PyTorch.
3.1.1
Salience Maps for Text
In Section 2, the input methods supported by LIT have been explained in detail. As
explained, all methods are different and are sensitive to factors that do not contribute
to a model’s prediction. People tend to use methods they believe they know incorrectly
and also, the model’s architecture may have a direct impact on the utility of the different
methods. Due to such limitations, finding which is the most correct method to use may
be difficult at times. For this reason, LIT offers some guidance by providing some ideas
about which method might be the most appropriate.
26
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.1: Flow chart to help decide which input method to use.
As seen in Figure 3.1, if the model used does not output gradients, then LIME is the only
option. On the other hand, if the model does output gradients, there are three options to
choose from. Grad L2 Norm and Grad Input are fast to compute but can suffer gradient
saturation. Integrated Gradients addresses this issue but on the other hand requires that
the model outputs gradients and embeddings which comes at a higher computational cost.
In any case, it is worth remembering that this idea-process flow should only be used as
additional help and that any good investigative process will try multiple methods and will
try to find commonalities, patterns and contrasts between them.
3.2
Stanford Sentiment Treebank
The Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST) [24] is the first corpus with fully labeled parse
trees (an ordered, rooted tree that represents the syntactic structure of a string according
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
27
==PAGE:36==
to some context-free grammar) that allows for a complete analysis of the compositional
effects of sentiment in language. The corpus is based on the dataset introduced by [25]
and consists of 11,855 single sentences extracted from movie reviews. It was parsed
with the Stanford parser and includes a total of 215,154 unique phrases from those parse
trees, each annotated by 3 human judges.
Each complete sentence is annotated with a float label that indicates its level of positive
sentiment from 0.0 to 1.0. However, it can be transformed into a binary sentiment classi-
fication task by rounding each label to 0 or 1. This binary classification dataset is referred
to as SST-2.
SST is frequently used as one of several key benchmark datasets to test new language
models like BERT and ELMo since it is the dataset for sentiment analysis and because it
consistently performs well on a range of linguistic tasks.
3.3
Winograd Schema-based Datasets
The two main datasets used throughout this project are the WinoBias and WinoGender
datasets. Both of these are inspired by Winograd Schemas [26]. A Winograd schema is
a pair of sentences that differ in only one or two words and that contain an ambiguity that is
resolved in opposite ways in the two sentences and requires the use of world knowledge
and reasoning for its resolution. An example would be:
The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because they [feared/advocated]
violence.
If the word is feared, then they presumably refers to the city council; if it is advocated then
they presumably refers to the demonstrators.
Taking this into account, the Winogender dataset [27] is formed by minimal pairs of sen-
tences that differ only by the gender of one pronoun in the sentence, designed to test
for the presence of gender bias in automated coreference resolution systems. Each sen-
tence template has three mentions: an occupation, a participant, and a pronoun (where
pronoun is coreferent with either occupation or pronoun). There are 120 templates (60
occupations, two templates per occupation). An example of these can be seen below:
1. The nurse notified the patient that...
• her shift would be ending in an hour.
• his shift would be ending in an hour.
• their shift would be ending in an hour.
2. The nurse notified the patient that...
• her blood would be drawn in an hour.
• his blood would be drawn in an hour.
• their blood would be drawn in an hour.
Therefore, fully instantiated, the templates generate a total of 720 different sentences. An
important note on these schemas, as carefully stated in the paper [27]; “As a diagnostic
test of gender bias, we view the schemas as having high positive predictive value and low
negative predictive value; that is, they may demonstrate the presence of gender bias in a
system, but not prove its absence.”
28
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:37==
On the other hand, the Winobias Dataset [28] was explicitly created to analyse different
resolution systems to understand gender bias issues lying in such systems. This was done
by observing how the system differs when providing the same sentence to the system but
only changing the gender of the pronoun in the sentence.
The corpus contains a total of 3,160 sentences for 4 different subsets: type1-pro, type1-
anti, type2-pro and type2-anti. The pro subsets contain sentences that reinforce gender
stereotypes whereas the anti subsets contain “anti-stereotypical” sentences. At the same
time, type1 subsets contain sentences for which world knowledge is necessary to resolve
the co-references, and type2 subsets require only the syntactic information present in the
sentence to resolve them.
Figure 3.2: Pairs of gender balanced co-reference tests in the WinoBias dataset. Male
and female entities are marked in blue and orange, respectively. Systems must be able
to make correct linking predictions in pro-stereotypical scenarios (solid purple lines) and
anti-stereotypical scenarios (dashed purple lines) equally well to pass the test [28].
As the paper mentions, there are differences between both datasets. As already known,
Winogender schemas include gender-neutral pronouns, are syntactically diverse, and are
human-validated; WinoBias includes sentences resolvable from syntax alone; a Winogen-
der schema has one occupational mention and one “other participant” mention; WinoBias
has two occupational mentions. Both datasets include statistics from the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) to assess the gender stereotypicality of the referenced occupations.
Winogender additionally includes gender estimates from text [29] (Bergsma), which are
also included in the analysis. The use of both datasets for future evaluations has been
encouraged.
3.4
Neuron Intervention Templates
When running neuron intervention examples, a dataset consisting of a list of templates and
professions is used. An augmented list of templates used in the paper [30] is used. These
templates consist on a set of sentences of the type: “The [occupation] [verb] because”,
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
29
==PAGE:38==
where the verb depends on the specific template and occupation is substituted by a variety
of different professions obtained from [31]. These professions are accompanied by a set
of two ratings from -1 to 1 for definitionality and stereotypicality where -1 is female and 1 is
male. An example would be, actress is definitionally female whilst nurse is stereotypically
female.
3.5
Causal Mediation Analysis Experiments
To perform the different experiments mentioned in the paper [6], [22], it is first neces-
sary to run all the experiments to create some analysis CSV files. For each template in
the dataset 3.4, four different analysis files are obtained depending on the intervention
type which can be one of: man_direct, man_indirect, woman_direct and woman_indirect.
For each template, there is a base string for all the different professions inserted into the
template and two modified strings where the ambiguous profession is replaced gender-
specific words: man and woman. Based on this, six different baseline probabilities are
calculated; these are the probabilities for two different candidates he and she on the three
different strings mentioned above. These base probabilities are obtained by selecting the
last logit from the sequence and using softmax to convert these into probabilities. It is
important to note that these base probabilities are the same in all four generated files
for a same template. Next, the probabilities for each candidate after the intervention are
calculated. These will depend on the intervention type; if the type is direct, then each
neuron in the model is intervened on one by one and it’s value is fixed to the base rep-
resentation. In other words, the change in y resulting from the intervention (substituitng
the professioin for man or woman) is measured by holding each neuron fixed. If the inter-
vention type is indirect, then each neuron is set to the value under the intervention (man
modified string representation if man_indirect and woman modified string representation
if woman_indirect). In other words, the change caused by setting z to its value under the
intervention, while holding u fixed is measured. Figure 2.13 can help better understand
these interventions.
3.5.1
Total Effects
Once these probabilities have been obtained for all templates and all intervention types,
an analysis is conducted on how often the model correctly uses the gendered pronouns
“he” and “she” in contexts where they would be expected based on the gender of the
profession being discussed. This is done by calculating the Total Effects based on some
of these probabilities obtained previously. The specific metrics being calculated include:
• The mean total effect of the model for female and male professions, where the total
effect is defined as the ratio of the probability of the model using he to the probability
of the model using she. This is calculated separately for cases where the model
is presented with male or female pronouns and professions. Mean total effect of
the model means that filtering is done based on the model direction; this is, if the
base_ratios (he/she and she/he) > 1 then it is filtering only for those rows where the
base probability of she is greater than the base probability of he and vv. In other
words it keeps those instances where the professions are known to be female or
male.
• The mean total effect of the model for female and male professions, filtered by the
degree to which those professions are associated with gender stereotypes as de-
termined by the pre-defined measurement of stereotypicality accompanying each
profession. Again, this filters out the instances where the profession is known to be
male or female.
30
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:39==
Basically, these two metrics aim to assess how accurately the model is able to use gen-
dered pronouns in different contexts and measure the effect of substituting the word man
for a female profession and the word woman for a male profession. By obtaining these
measurements in two different ways helps see whether there is a big change in the results
obtained.
3.5.1.1
Standard Error of the Mean
Additionally, in order to obtain more sense from the results and obtain more valuable
information from the data, the Standard Error of the Mean (SEM) was calculated [32].
The Standard Error of the Mean is a type of measure of variability. These are statistical
tools used to describe the amount of variation or diversity within a set of data which can
help gain insights into the distribution of the data, identify potential outliers, and make
inferences about the characteristics of the population from which the data were sampled.
The Standard Error of the Mean together with the Standard Deviation (SD) [32] are the
two variability measurements that are related to the mean and have the ability to provide
information about the precision of a measurement. The SD is a measure of the variability
or spread of a set of data points. It explains how much the data deviates from the mean
value whilst the SDM measures the variability of sample means explaining how much the
sample means are likely to vary from the population mean. The key difference between
the two and the reason for which the SEM was chosen is that the SD is a measure of the
variability within a single sample, whereas the SEM is a measure of the variability of the
sample means allowing to determine the significance of differences between two or more
sample means and determine if they are statistically different from one another.(different
results obtained for the Total Effect) as well as being useful in assessing the precision of
the estimate of the population mean where a smaller SEM indicates that the sample mean
is a more precise estimate of the population mean and there being more uncertainty in
the estimate of the population mean in the contrary case.
The SEM is calculated as follows:
SEM = SD
√n
(3.1)
where SD is the standard deviation of the sample calculated as:
SD =
√∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)2
n −1
,
(3.2)
n is the sample size and ¯x is the mean of the samples.
3.5.1.2
Correlational Value
Once the Total Effects have been calculated, a plot of the mean total effect of the model
for each profession versus the profession’s bias (as measured by the “stereotypical” and
“definitional” metrics in the pre-defined professions file). The plot shows the natural loga-
rithm of the total effect size in order to transform the data to better fit a linear model and
to visualize the relationship on a more interpretable scale. This plot is obtained in order to
see whether there is any correlation between the model’s bias and the total effect of the
model on different professions. This is useful because it allows to identify which profes-
sions the model is most biased against, and whether there are any patterns in the model’s
bias that can be addressed.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
31
==PAGE:40==
Both Pearson’s correlation value [33] and the significance level (p-value) [34] are also
calculated and printed out. The linear link between two variables is measured by the
correlation coefficient. Its values vary from -1 to 1, with a value of -1 denoting perfect
negative correlation (as one variable rises, the other falls), a value of 1 denoting perfect
positive correlation (as one rises, the other rises), and a value of 0 denoting no connection.
Pearson’s correlation coefficient is calculated as:
r =
∑(x −mx) (y −my)
√∑(x −mx)2 ∑(y −my)2
(3.3)
where mx is the mean of the vector x and my is the mean of the vector y.
The p-value, on the other hand, which serves as an uncertainty measure, evaluates the
strength of the evidence refuting the null hypothesis, which holds that there is no correla-
tion between the two variables. In the event that there were really no correlation between
the variables, it shows the likelihood of finding a correlation even stronger than the one in
the data, or even more extreme. A p-value of less than 0.05 is frequently used as a cutoff
for statistical significance, indicating that the null hypothesis should be rejected in favor of
the alternative hypothesis that there is a non-zero correlation between the variables since
there is strong evidence to the contrary.
Additionally, the Confidence Interval is also obtained [35]. The confidence interval pro-
vides a range of values within which the true correlation coefficient is likely to fall. It
indicates the precision of the estimate and is typically reported with a specified level of
confidence, such as 95% or 99%. In order to obtain the confidence interval, the Fischer
Z Transformation for Pearson’s correlation value (r) is calculated as follows:
z = 0.5 × ln((1 + r)
(1 −r)).
(3.4)
Next, the standard error (SE) for the Fisher Z-transformed correlation coefficient is ob-
tained:
SE =
1
√n −3
(3.5)
which is then used to find the upper and lower limits of the confidence interval such as:
CI = z ± (SE × critical_value)
(3.6)
where the critical value depends on the desired level of confidence which can be looked
up in a standard normal distribution table.
3.5.2
Neuron Intervention
Two different experiments are ran with the neuron intervention results obtained in the
previous analysis CSV files. These results are the probabilities for each candidate for the
four different intervention types. In order to recall how these probabilities were obtained
go back to Section 3.5.
Firstly, the aggregate effects of gendered interventions for each neuron are calculated
and then stored in a file. These effects are calculated by iterating through all the analysis
files and calculating the the odds ratio for each neuron of indirect and direct effect for the
32
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:41==
two candidates based on their probabilities as well as the Total Effect through the addition
of the direct and indirect odds ratio (calculated as in Equation 2.6). Then, the results are
grouped by layer and neuron and the mean of the odds ratios for each neuron over all the
words is taken.
Next, a plot of the per-layer effects of the top neurons for the model is obtained. To
do so, the indirect effect is picked in order to investigate the contributions of individual
model components as mediators in gender bias. It is interesting to determine which model
components mediate most by measuring the indirect effects of model components on the
output of the model. The plot takes in the average indirect effect of the top 10% of neurons
in each layer is taken. The plot shows the layer index on the x-axis and the indirect effect
of the top neurons on the y-axis. The model is represented by a line and the shaded area
around the line represents the standard deviation. Once again, this shaded are can be
swapped by the Standard Error of the Mean.
3.5.3
Attention Intervention
For the attention experiments the two mentioned Winograd Schema-based Datasets [3.3]
are used. For Winobias, both the test and dev sets are used but only Type1 examples
are considered. Whereas each Winobias example includes two occupations of opposite
stereotypicality, each Winogender example includes one occupation and a participant, for
which no gender statistics are provided. For consistency with the Winobias analysis, we
make the simplifying assumption that the gender stereotypicality of the participant is the
opposite of that of the occupation.
For each dataset four analysis files are obtained: two for the dev and test Winobias
datasets and two for the Winogender dataset using either the Bergsma or BLS statistics.
These files are obtained by performing attention interventions on the respective datasets.
These interventions are obtained by masking out the gendered word in each example of
the dataset and replacing it with its counterpart for the opposite gender. The total, direct,
and indirect effects of each intervention on the model’s attention weights are then stored
in the mentioned json files.
Once the analysis files a variety of different plots are obtained in order to better analyse
the obtained results. First, a set of figures for analysing the effects of attention mecha-
nisms in neural network models are obtained. Specifically, visualizations of the direct and
indirect effects of attention on model performance are obtained. These are shown as a
combination of heat maps and bar plots head and layer-level effects. The heat map visu-
alizes the mean direct and indirect effects of attention on each head in each layer of the
model whilst the bar plot shows the mean direct and indirect effects of attention on each
layer of the model. Last, a summary figure for the various effects for attention intervention
is obtained. The bar chart shows the total effect, the model’s indirect and direct effects
of concurrent intervention on all heads and the sum of the indirect effects of independent
interventions.
3.5.4
Additional Experiments
The very complete paper “Investigating Gender Bias in Language Models Using Causal
Mediation Analysis” [6], provides with some really interesting results which seem like gen-
eral to investigating gender bias in language models. However, two different experiments
are proposed which aim to put on point these results and critique them by trying to find
situations where these results may not be the norm and can provide a false reality in
analysing gender bias.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
33
==PAGE:42==
3.5.4.1
Analysis of non-gender neutral language
In order to contrast the global results obtained from the research paper, a sub-experiment
is designed in order to test whether gender bias in language models can be understood in
the same way. This experiment will reproduce the same tests as done previously but with
a non neutral language such as Spanish. In Spanish, the word the is substituted by el or
la which would be equivalent to him and she in English. It is interesting to see what the
output of this experiment in order to contrast these results as with Spanish, it is obvious
to know whether the occupation in context is male or female. To carry out the experiment
all professions and templates are translated into Spanish and each template is duplicated
one starting with the word el and the second one with the word la.
3.5.4.2
Creation of new profession dataset
The second experiment also aims to set up a parallel test that could expose certain weak-
nesses in the main results. For this experiment, the templates are left the same but the
professions dataset is modified. A set of professions is chosen where each profession
has its corresponding male, female and gender neutral form. An example of this is po-
liceman, policewoman and police officer respectively. The focus of this experiment is to
analyse the results when all the professions are used and compare these to the results
obtained when all the definitionally male and female professions are filtered out (such as
policeman and policewoman) and only the gender neutral professions are used (police
officer).
34
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:43==
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
35
==PAGE:44==
4
Results
4.1
Total Effects
Methods of causal mediation are used throughout the whole project in order to run ex-
periments and investigate a number of effects on different model components. Before
describing the results from the mediation analysis, we begin by giving insights of the mea-
sured Total Effects by calculating the difference in probabilities of replacing the ambiguous
profession with an anti-stereotypical gender-specific word.
The Total Effect is defined as the effect of changing some independent variable X on some
dependent variable Y. In the conducted experiment, it is interesting to analyse how models
capture gender bias. To measure this, we first identify modifications to the prompt fed to
the model as the independent variable, and the output probabilities of two candidates (he
or she) as the dependent variable. We can then obtain the total effect by comparing the
model prediction probabilities the two candidates when preceded by a profession to the
probabilities when preceded with the anti-stereotypical gender-specific word (woman or
man). For better understand see Section 2.7.1.
4.1.1
DistilGPT2
The first experiment that was carried out was using ditilgpt2 model. Since the aim of
this first experiment is to try and reproduce the results of the paper [6] and since this is
meant to be used with any of the GPT2 models, distilgpt2 was chosen as it is not one of
the largest in architecture and will therefore be less computationally expensive to run the
experiment.
As mentioned previously the Total Effects are calculated in two different ways: based on
the model direction and filtered by measure of definitionality. The results can be seen in
Table 4.1 together with the measurement of uncertainty the Standard Error of the Mean
(see segment 3.5.1.1).
DistilGPT2 Total Effects
female job →man
(model)
male job →woman
(model)
female job →man
(def.)
male job →woman
(def.)
64.72 ± 2.00
42.18 ± 4.74
72.24 ± 2.31
19.24 ± 2.27
Combined TE: 63.17
Combined TE: 62.57
Table 4.1: Total Effects obtained in two different ways with DistilGPT2 model.
What can be observed from the results is that there is a big effect in intervening with
the word man for female professions and this effect is not as prominent in the alternate
case. These results suggest that there may be a greater inclination in the language to
assume gender in professions mostly represented by the female gender, such as a nurse
or librarian. Another interesting thing to note is that no matter how the effects have been
calculated, the results (as shown by the combined effects) are very similar.
Next, the same experiment is conducted but this time a previous filtering of the data is
done where results for too sterotypical professions (as obtained by the external measure-
ments) and results where the candidate proabilities are too different to the rest (in other
36
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:45==
words, considered outliers) are removed from Total effect calculations. the results are as
following:
DistilGPT2 Filtered Total Effects
female job →man
(model)
male job →woman
(model)
female job →man
(def.)
male job →female
(def.)
59.25 ± 1.92
25.82 ± 2.84
66.68 ± 2.27
11.32 ± 1.20
Combined TE: 57.24
Combined TE: 56.08
Table 4.2: Total Effects obtained in two different ways with DistilGPT2 on the filtered data.
Once again, the same conclusions can be extracted where the combined total effects are
similar and intervening on female professions has a greater impact than intervening on
prominent male professions. It is also good to see that even though the very clear cases
with highly stereotypical professions have been removed, the model captures gender bias
in a very similar way as without the filtered data revealing that the model goes beyond than
the superficiality of focusing only on the professions. As well, the fact that the results are
not that far apart is good news as it shows that the model is not too sensitive to outliers.
Additionally, a plot is obtained showing the relationship between profession biases and
their total effects (Figure 4.1). The total effect is plotted using the natural logarithm as
it transforms the scale of the total effect by compressing the scale and better visualize
the relationship since the total effect values vary over several orders of magnitude. The
Pearson correlation coefficient is obtained and both the p-value and confidence interval
are calculated as uncertainty measures of it.
Figure 4.1: Correlation plot between profession biases and their total effects.
The Pearson correlation coefficient for the plot above is 0.60 (95% confidence interval [CI]:
0.56 to 0.63). Where a value of of 1 implies total correlation, a value of 0.60 proves that
there is a moderately strong positive linear relationship between the two variables being
studied. It suggests that there is a tendency for professions which are stereotypically and
definitionally male to also have higher total effects. In other words, they are more likely
to be associated with a positive or negative impact in the model’s predictions. However,
it is important to note that this correlation does not necessarily imply causation, and there
could be other factors that influence the relationship between profession biases and their
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
37
==PAGE:46==
total effects. The p-value is very small, almost zero, therefore it is considered as smaller
than one divided by the number of samples which is often used as a threshold to determine
statistical significance:
p-value ≈0 →p-value < 1
n <
1
1352
(4.1)
where n is the number of samples. A p-value of 0 (or very close to 0) indicates strong
evidence against the null hypothesis. In this case, the null hypothesis would state that
there is no correlation between the two variables indicating that the observed correlation
coefficient is unlikely to have occurred by chance.
Overall, the obtained measures indicate a statistically significant and moderately strong
positive correlation between the variables, with a high degree of confidence in the esti-
mated range for the population correlation coefficient.
4.1.2
Model Comparison
Next, the same is done but for different model architectures; more concretely for a BERT-
based model and for a RoBERTa-based one. The two models are bert-base-uncased and
roberta-base. The point of performing the same experiment on two more different models
is to add a new scope of comparison. By doing this, it will be possible to see and maybe
understand how different model architectures capture gender bias. At the same time it
might also show whether this gender bias experiment is specific to GPT2 models or it can
be generalised to any other architecture. The Total Effects in Table 4.3 only show those
obtained based on the model direction and for the unfiltered data.
Model Comparsion
bert-base-uncased
roberta-base
female job →man
(model)
male job →woman
(model)
female job →man
(model)
male job →female
(model)
3.02 ± 0.14
2.09 ± 0.22
5.99 ± 0.17
4.66 ± 0.25
Combined TE: 2.77
Combined TE: 6.25
Table 4.3: Total Effects based on model direction for the models bert-base-uncased and
roberta-base.
As seen in Table 4.3, the total effects are much lower with these two models. This can be
due to several different reasons such as differences in the training data used for training
these language models or differences in the pre-processing stage of the data. RoBERTa
and BERT models tokenize the input text differently than GPT2, which could affect the
representation of gender in the text and the identification of gender bias. Also, a huge as-
pect to take into consideration is the dissimilarity in architectures; BERT and RoBERTa are
trained using a masked language modeling objective, which involves predicting missing
words in the input text, while GPT2 is trained using an autoregressive language modeling
objective, which involves predicting the next word in the input text. This can lead to major
differences in the representation of gender and the identification of gender bias.
38
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:47==
(a) Correlation plot with bert-base-uncased.
(b) Correlation plot with roberta-base.
Figure 4.2: Correlation between profession biases and total effects for model comparison.
The Pearson correlation coefficients for Figures 4.2 are 0.24 (95% confidence interval
[CI]: 0.18 to 0.29, p-value <
1
1105) and 0.31 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.26 to 0.38,
p-value <
1
938) for the BERT and RoBERTa models respectively. What can be seen is
that with these two models in comparison to GPT2-based models, the correlation values
are much lower showing that there is no direct link between the profession bias and the
effects they have on the model’s predictions. At the same time it is good to see that there is
constancy with the results obtained; just like with the total effect results, these two models
present lower numeric results to those from distilGPT2 but at the same time are similar
between them two confirming that these two architectures work in a more similar way to
that of GPT2.
4.1.3
Spanish Experiment
As mentioned in Section 3.5.4, two different experiments have been designed in order
to test the generality of the gender bias experiment and whether it can be transferred to
different domains, such as using another language or another dataset, and at the same
time observe similar results. Out of the two additional experiments raised, only one has
been conducted. The first experiment raised aimed to change the professions dataset
but due to difficulties with the tokenizer with recognising and adding new professions to
its vocabulary, it was decided to set aside and focus on the second experiment proposed.
The second experiment which was successfully carried out, tries to replicate the same
results as the main experiment but in a non gender neutral language such as Spanish.
In order to run the experiment, a model pre-trained in different languages was chosen:
bert-base-multilingual-cased. The Total Effects obtained can be seen in Table 4.4.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
39
==PAGE:48==
Spanish Experiment with bert-base-multilingual-cased
female job →man
(model)
male job →woman
(model)
female job →man
(def.)
male job →female
(def.)
3.11 ± 0.11
-0.39 ± 0.01
3.51 ± 0.13
0.08 ± 0.05
Combined TE: 1.36
Combined TE: 2.93
Table 4.4: Total Effects obtained in two different ways with bert-base-multilingual-cased
on Spanish dataset.
From these results, two main points can be extracted. Firstly, the results obtained are very
similar to those obtained with bert-base-uncased in english. Since both these models are
BERT-based, it makes sense that the results are similar. Also, it shows that the initial
experiment can be generalised to other languages. Second, it is interesting to observe
that the main differences in results appear when changing male jobs for woman. Both of
these results have slightly decreased to the point where one has become negative.
Once again, the correlation plot between profession biases and total effects is obtained
(see Figure 4.3). Pearson’s correlation coefficient is 0.30 (95% confidence interval [CI]:
0.25 to 0.36, p-value <
1
1056), again, very similar to that one obtained with bert-base-
uncased on the English dataset.
Figure 4.3: Correlation plot between profession biases and their total effects for Spanish
experiment.
4.2
Natural Indirect Effects
Once the total effects of changing the prompt have been analysed, the indirect effects
are studied in order to investigate the contributions of individual model components as
mediators. It is of particular interest to determine which model components are more
“sensitive” to gender bias by measuring the indirect effects of model components on the
output of the model.
The type of indirect effect we are interested in is called the natural indirect effect because
the mediator is set to the value it would take in a counterfactual scenario, rather than
setting it to a default value like 0. To formalize this, the natural indirect effect is the change
in effect when a prompt u is unchanged, but a model component z is set to the value
it would have taken if the intervention had occurred. This allows the evaluation of the
40
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:49==
contribution of specific parts or regions of a model. Throughout this section, individual
neurons and attention heads are studied.
4.2.1
Neuron Indirect Effects
First, the Indirect Effects for the neuron intervention experiments are obtained and anal-
ysed. We aim to obtain similar results to those in [6] where the neuron NIEs will peak
in the first layers of the models. Nevertheless, since GPT-2 always process input left-to-
right unlike BERT and RoBERTa, we expect some different indirect effect results between
these structures.
4.2.1.1
DistilGPT2
For the base case experiment with distilgpt2, the per-layer indirect effects of the top 10%
of neurons is plotted (Figure 4.4). The shaded area fills the region between the upper and
lower bounds calculated as the mean plus-minus the standard error of the mean. It can
be seen that the word embeddings (layer 0) and the first hidden layer have the strongest
effects. However, a small increase in effect within the fourth hidden layer is observed and
then is close to zero in the final layers. This may indicate that the vast majority of the
indirect effect observed for trained models is due to what is learned, rather than chance
[23]. A higher NIE in the word embeddings and early layers suggests that changes in these
lower-level features have a stronger influence on the model’s predictions or behavior. As
the layers progress towards the final layers, the NIE decreasing or approaching 0 indicates
that changes in those layers have less impact on the model’s behavior also suggesting that
the observed indirect effects are not due to random chance or noise in the model, instead,
indicating that the model has learned meaningful representations and dependencies in the
lower layers, which significantly contribute to the model’s behavior.
Figure 4.4: Indirect effects of top 10% neurons in distilgpt2 for neuron interventions on
the professions dataset.
4.2.1.2
Model Comparison
The results obtained with distilgpt2, are now contrasted with two other models in order
to make sure that the results are not model specific and can be extrapolated to other
architectures. Regarding the BERT architecture, Figure 4.5, what immediately catches
the eye is that the effects are much more evenly distributed across layers and that there
are no significant peaks. However, as with distilgpt2, the effects approach zero in the final
layers.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
41
==PAGE:50==
An even distribution of NIE across layers suggests that the model’s predictions are in-
fluenced by a balanced combination of lower-level and higher-level representations. It
can also suggest that the model’s predictions are relatively robust to neuron interventions
in any layer or even that multiple layers may capture similar or overlapping information,
leading to similar impact on the model’s behavior.
Figure 4.5: Indirect effects of top 10% neurons in bert-base-uncased for neuron interven-
tions on the professions dataset.
The plot obtained for the RoBERTa based model, which can be seen in Figure 4.6, is more
similar to that of BERT rather than GPT2 as the effects are also more evenly distributed
between layers slowly decreasing approaching zero. However, it can be seen that with
the RoBERTa model, there are two slight peaks; one in the first two hidden layers and a
second the last layers just before completely dropping to zero in the final layer.
Figure 4.6: Indirect effects of top 10% neurons in roberta-base for neuron interventions
on the professions dataset.
42
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:51==
It is also important to state that the effects in the RoBERTa-based model are overall slightly
greater than in BERT. This can be due because RoBERTa is a larger model which can
provide it with increased capacity to capture and model complex linguistic patterns and
dependencies. This together with the fact that it was trained on a larger corpus, using
improved training techniques with different preprocessing and tokenization procedures
may all contribute to it. Overall, since they both are architecturally very similar, it makes
sense that both plots are very similar with only slight differences between them.
4.2.1.3
Spanish Experiment
Finally, neuron intervention is applied to the Spanish experiment. As the Spanish experi-
ment is carried out with a multilingual BERT-based model, it is interesting to see whether
similar patterns can be observed between both BERT-like models or whether the fact that
the language has changed means that the graph will show a different behaviour.
Figure 4.7 exhibits a behaviour similar to that of BERT and RoBERTa models in the En-
glish experiment. The effects are more evenly distributed across layers with a decreasing
slope. Just like with BERT, there is a slight peak in the fourth hidden layer and another al-
most insignificant in the eighth layer. However, as with roberta, the effects obtain slightly
larger values and show a more prominent downward slope than in BERT.
Figure 4.7: Indirect effects of top 10% neurons in roberta-base-multilingual-cased for neu-
ron interventions on the Spanish professions dataset experiment.
4.2.2
Attention Head Indirect Effects
Finally, the Indirect Effects in attention heads are studied. This is done in order to have a
new dimension as to which layers capture gender bias and whether the results for neuron
interventions can be compared to those from attention head interventions. This compar-
ison might confirm that gender bias is captured in certain layers of the model or it might
only show that interventions on neurons and attention heads show completely different
results.
4.2.2.1
DistilGPT2
Figure 4.8 shows the indirect effects for each head in distilgpt2 on Winobias dev set. The
plot was also obtained for the test set and Winogender dataset but for comparison reasons
these will be omitted in this section. The heatmap shows interventions on each head
individually. A small number of heads, concentrated in the middle layers of the model,
have much higher indirect effects than others. The bar chart shows indirect effects when
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
43
==PAGE:52==
intervening on all heads in a single layer concurrently. Consistent with the head-level
heatmap, the effects are concentrated in the middle layers. The middle layers are likely
responsible for capturing more complex or abstract features, combining information from
multiple attention heads, and integrating contextual information from both preceding and
subsequent layers. It is also interesting to see how the second attention head in the third
layer has a particular high effect. For additional visualizations of indirect effects as well
as direct effects see the Appendix.
Figure 4.8: Indirect effects in distilgpt2 on Winobias dev set for heads (heatmap) and
layers (barchart).
Additionally, another barchart is created in order to compare the indirect effects of con-
current intervention on all heads (NIE-all) to summing the effects of independent interven-
tions (NIE-sum). As can be seen in Figure 4.9, the difference is fairly small, indicating
that heads operate primarily in an independent and complementary manner, capturing
different aspects of gender bias. Also, it is interesting to observe that since the concur-
rent indirect effect is larger than the direct effect, this indicates that most of the effect is
mediated through the attention heads, in other words, most of the effect or influence of
the input on the output is being channeled through these.
Figure 4.9: Effects of intervening on all heads concurrently (all) vs. independently and
summing (sum) in distilgpt2 evaluated on Winobias.
Research paper [7] claims that in linear models, the linear total effect decomposes to
direct and indirect effects. In this case, the model being dealt with is highly non-linear
44
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:53==
therefore such decomposition cannot be guaranteed. Figure 4.9 shows such approximate
decomposition for concurrent interventions where TE ≈NDE-all + NIE-all.
4.2.2.2
Model Comparison
Once again the same is done for the other two models used throughout the project. Fig-
ure 4.10 shows the indirect effects for each head on the Winobias dev set for bert-base-
uncased and roberta-base. These results show a level of disagreement with those ob-
tained for distilgpt2. The first thing that catches the eye for the bert-base-uncased heat
map (top) is the amount of negative effects present in multiple attention heads. This can
mean that the presence or activation of such attention heads is associated with a reduction
or suppression of the overall effect. This could imply that the attention head is attending
to irrelevant or distracting information, causing interference or noise in the processing.
Alternatively, it could also indicate that the attention head is actively suppressing certain
features or information in the input intentionally serving to filter out irrelevant or distracting
elements and focus only on the most relevant aspects. Unlike distilgpt2, a large number
of heads show relevant levels of positive and negative effects mostly concentrated in the
middle to last layers. It is interesting to see that layer eight presents the most negative
effect. Regarding roberta-base’s heatmap (down), it shows similarities with both mod-
els; distilgpt2 and bert-base-uncased. The similarities with distilgpt2 is that the effects in
the attention heads are predominantly positive. However, the effects are more spread
out across layers with the effects being concentrated in most layers except those in the
middle.
Figure 4.11 reveals that the indirect effects of concurrent intervention on all attention
heads is much larger than the sum of the effects observed in independent interventions
for bert-base-uncased suggesting that the heads operate interactively. The combined
efforts result in a greater impact than the sum of their individual effects in independent
interventions.
Figure 4.11: Effects of intervening on all heads concurrently (all) vs. independently and
summing (sum) in bert-base-uncased evaluated on Winobias.
However, with roberta-base (Figure 4.12), the indirect effects of concurrent intervention
on all attention heads in a model are much lower than the sum of the effects of indepen-
dent interventions suggesting that the heads may not operate primarily in an independent
and complementary manner. This difference between to very similar architectures is very
surprising since we would expect the sum of the effects of independent interventions in
RoBERTa to be higher approximating it more to the results obtained with the other archi-
tectures.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) Indirect effects for bert-base-uncased.
(b) Indirect effects for roberta-base.
Figure 4.10:
Model comparison of indirect effects on Winobias dev set for heads
(heatmap) and layers (barchart).
46
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.12: Effects of intervening on all heads concurrently (all) vs. independently and
summing (sum) in roberta-base evaluated on Winobias.
The fact that the concurrent indirect effect is larger than the direct effect in both models
once again suggests that most of the effect is mediated through the attention heads just
like with distilgpt2.
4.3
Discussion
Throughout this section a lot of results have been put forward. Regarding the Total Effects,
it is firstly seen that the model DistilGPT2 is quite robust to method variations and filtering.
Evidence for this claim can be seen with the total effects obtained through two different
methods with and without previously filtering out highly definitional and stereotypical sam-
ples. These are very similar in value with no striking differences. Across architectures,
the Total Effects are much smaller for BERT and RoBERTa-based models. It seems that
with these architecturally larger models, parametrization and model depth do not correlate
well with total effects. It is difficult to explain why this is but it is only natural to think that
this might have to do with the great differences between them in training. When the same
experiment was done in Spanish with a multilingual BERT-based model, it was seen that
the model’s behaviour is similar to that of BERT in English. It is positive to see that two
architecturally similar models behave in the same way, but, then there is always a ques-
tion of why there is no significance change in results when the language is swapped for
a non gender neutral one. The drop in total effects of these models is also accompanied
by a decrease in correlation between the profession biases and their total effects. Low
positive correlations between the external gender bias and the log-total effect, ranging
between 0.24 and 0.31 were found for the BERT and RoBERTa models. For distilGPT2,
a high positive correlational value of 0.60 was obtained indicating that the model captures
the expected biases.
As explained previously, the Natural Indirect Effects are analysed in order to investigate
the contributions of individual model components. In the neuron intervention experiments,
the indirect effects of the top 10% of neurons in each layer are analysed. With distil-
GPT2, the word embeddings (layer 0) and the first hidden layer have the strongest effects.
Comparing with the other models, even though the initial layers are always the ones that
present the most effect, a general trend seems to be one of roughly gradual decrease to 0
where the effects are generally more evenly distributed across all layers. This characteris-
tic may mean that larger and deeper language models may be able to learn more abstract
and higher-level representations of the input as they may capture complex syntactic and
semantic relationships between words and phrases. Overall, it suggests that structural
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
47
==PAGE:56==
knowledge is more concentrated in fewer neurons with stronger inflectional preferences in
smaller models, whereas it is more distributed across neurons in larger models. Another
characteristic common within all models is that the effects in the last layer is always zero
meaning that the last layer has no indirect effect on the model’s behaviour or predictions
as it plays a more direct and deterministic role in making predictions, reducing the indirect
effects observed. When performing the Spanish experiment with a BERT model, no other
conclusive results were obtained. Although the slope of the curve is steeper (such as seen
with distilGPT2), the numerical values of the effects in each layer are much more similar
to those obtained with BERT and RoBERTa once again confirming that similar models
present similar behaviours regardless of the language in use. Another observation is that
the standard error of the mean is considerably higher with distilGPT2 although there is no
compelling theory to explain such differences.
Regarding the attention experiments, distilGPT2 was found to have a small number of
heads, concentrated in the middle layers of the model, with much higher indirect effects
than others. Consistent with the results obtained, it was also seen that the majority of ef-
fects are also concentrated in the middle layers. It was also learnt that since the difference
of indirect effects of concurrent intervention on all heads to summing the effects of inde-
pendent interventions is fairly small, then this means that the heads operate primarily in
an independent and complementary manner. All results obtained with other architectures
are completely different to each other. BERT manifests a completely different behaviour
with most attention heads across all layers showing both positive and negative effects.
These negative effects can mean that there is a lot of irrelevant or distracting information
which the head is attending to or that it is actively trying to suppress certain features or
information. Effects are seen in most layers of the model except in the initial ones. On
the other hand, RoBERTa shows that a much lower number of attention heads present
such high values of indirect effect although these are found to be in most layers except
the middle ones (completely opposite to distilGPT2).
The paper [36] found out that the representation of input speech features initially deviates
from the input, but as the model goes deeper, the representations become more similar to
the input, as if reconstructing it. It is the middle layers where the representations deviate
the most meaning that it is here where the most abstract representations are found possi-
bly being a reason why distilGPT2 shows higher effects in these. As for the other models,
the concentration of effects in the first layers suggests that the model relies heavily on the
lower-level features and patterns captured by the initial layers. The attention heads in the
first layers often capture more basic and local relationships in the input sequence. They
tend to focus on low-level features, such as individual words or sub-word units, and their
interactions. On the other hand, the attention heads in the final layers are responsible for
capturing more task-specific and contextually rich information. They have access to the
aggregated representations from the preceding layers and can integrate and refine the
learned features to make more informed predictions. This concentration of effects in the
final layers could indicate that the model leverages higher-level reasoning, abstraction,
and contextual understanding to generate its output.
Also, with BERT the indirect effects of concurrent intervention on all heads was much
greater than the sum of the effects of independent interventions (suggesting that the
heads operate interactively) whereas RoBERTa provided exactly opposite results. Due
to all these differences in observed results, especially within BERT and RoBERTa where
there should have been certain similarities as within previous experiments, it is difficult to
analyse and provide satisfactory explanations on what exactly is going on and how the
different architectures are responsible for such behaviours.
48
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:57==
Nevertheless, there are some important questions worth diving into no matter if they can
be answered or not. These questions are all related to the concepts of sparsity and syn-
ergism. These questions are: Where in the model are gender bias effects captured? Are
the effects mediated by only a few model components or distributed across the model?
Do components work independently or jointly? These are not easy questions to answer
and most cannot be answered solely on the results obtained as a much deeper and thor-
ough investigation is needed. However, the project has provided some results which can
help have an initial glimpse at such questions. Both neuron and attention intervention
experiments look into where in the model gender bias is captured through the analysis
of the natural indirect effects. For distilGPT2, attention intervention results showed that
middle layers had much larger effects whereas for neuron intervention, initial layers have
the strongest effects even though there is a small increase in effect within the intermedi-
ate layers. This contrast in results already shows that such question can’t be so easily
answered. Other architectures showed that effects are not only mediated by a few model
components as the indirect effects were evenly distributed across layers in both sets of
experiments and that in the case of BERT, many attention heads showed strong effects.
The attention intervention experiment also showed that for some architectures the atten-
tion heads operate interactively whilst for others, the heads operate primarily in an inde-
pendent and complementary manner. Once again this does not provide any conclusive
explanation on whether different components work together in capturing gender bias.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:59==
5
Conclusions
Throughout this thesis, an attempt has been made to investigate the broad concept of
gender bias by means of Causal Mediation Analysis. Such study has been largely based
on the replication of experiments of the research paper “Causal Mediation Analysis for
Interpreting Neural NLP: The Case of Gender Bias” [22]. The application of this frame-
work provides several insights into the mechanisms by which gender bias is mediated in
Transformer Language Models. The causality literature frequently concentrates on the
presumptions necessary for identifying mediation effects from observed data. Because
each unit’s outcome is only observed after a single intervention, determining causality
from observational data is difficult. This project takes advantage of the fact that the result
of the same unit (for example, a sentence) may be seen under any intervention given
a trained model to examine the structure of NLP models using the language of causal
mediation. As a result, causal effects can be calculated in a fairly straightforward way.
Throughout this method, different models and their behaviour has been studied by among
other things, locating the neurons and attention heads within the model that contribute to
the predictions. Such analysis tries to also provide a better understanding of the internal
mechanisms of transformer models and how differences in architectures are reflected on
the results. Additionally, this thesis contributes a novel experiment in which a non gender
neutral language is utilized with the aim of achieving a new dimension in the analysis of
gender bias through the comparison of grammatically different languages.
Throughout this large and complex experiment, certain aspects of how different models
work have been analysed as well as trying to answer several crucial questions. The main
experiment was carried out with distilGPT2 but was also carried out in parallel with two
other models (one BERT-based and the other RoBERTa-based). Different models were
used in order to question the results obtained by GPT2 and to find out whether such
results can be extrapolated to other models and they can be considered as global results
in the causal mediation analysis of gender bias regardless of the architecture in use. In
the case that these results are not global and vary depending on the model, it is important
to try to find out what are the similarities and differences between them and what may be
the factors that make the results vary from one architecture to another. At the same time,
attempts have been made to answer crucial questions independent of the model in use.
Where in the model are gender bias effects captured and are these mediated by only
a few model components or distributed across the model? Do such components work
independently or jointly?
Throughout the project, some results have been obtained that may help to clarify all these
questions, although much more research is needed to get to the bottom of them. How-
ever, the experiments conducted have helped, first, to confirm that the results are model
dependent although there are many similarities between similar architectures such as
BERT and RoBERTa can be seen. One of the most surprising findings was that architec-
turally larger models does not correlate well with total effects. Another interesting finding
that was observed throughout the total effect and neuron intervention experiments is that
BERT and RoBERTa models tend to show similar results between them and yet quite
different results to those of GPT2. However, when analysing the indirect effects on the
attention head interventions, all models were completely different from one another with
no similarities between BERT and RoBERTa. It is these cases that generate more doubts
and questions and regrettably there are times like this when no satisfactory explanation
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
51
==PAGE:60==
can be given for the results in question. It was also surprising to see that when using a
BERT-type model with the Spanish dataset, the results were quite similar to the BERT
model in English implying that the change of language is not that relevant to how gen-
der bias is captured. These findings make one wonder how it is possible that changing
from a gender-neutral language to a non-neutral one is so little reflected in the results.
At the same time, the different intervention experiments helped show in which layers the
indirect effects are captured for each model. With the neuron intervention experiments
it could be observed that all models followed a common trace in which the initial layers
tend to capture more effect and gradually decrease to zero in the last layer. Still, BERT
and RoBERTa showed a similar trend where the effects are generally more evenly dis-
tributed across all layers possibly meaning that larger and deeper language models may
be able to learn more abstract and higher-level representations of the input. Finally, even
though attention head intervention experiments managed to show which attention heads
and which layers captured the most indirect effects, it was difficult to find any conclusive
explanations on these since results between models were completely different. It can
only be said that unlike the other models, BERT showed a higher level of heads operating
interactively since the indirect effects of concurrent intervention on all heads was much
greater than the sum of the effects of independent interventions.
Even though Causal Mediation Analysis constitutes a major part of this thesis, it is a very
small part of the wider concept Explainability in Natural Language Processing. The initial
stages of this project were spent on studying the different explainability methods that could
be used for this project and their characteristics. Some time was also spent on research-
ing and understanding how input feature methods, a type of local explainability methods
work. Local explainability methods are the most commonly used in most research prob-
lems because of their simplicity to use and to understand as they work at a higher level
of abstraction. This project focused on four different types of input methods: Gradient
Norm, Gradient-dot-Input, Integrated Gradients and LIME. The functioning of these was
studied with the help of the toolkit LIT; The Language Interpretability Tool, which supports
the mentioned local methods and allows to easily visualize them through saliency maps
by showing which words have greater importance to the model when making its predic-
tion. The methods were used with a BERT-based model on a sentiment analysis dataset
made up of movie reviews. An experiment was performed were a set of sentences were
analysed and compared to the same after undergoing certain interventions such as re-
moving or negating certain words. The experiment observes how the importance of each
word in the sentence changes after the intervention and whether these make sense with
the model’s prediction and the true sentiment of the sentence. Results showed that even
though all methods worked well and saliency map results made sense with the model’s
predictions, there are different traits of operation between them. For example, Integrated
Gradients shows that it gives more importance to one word than to the rest and that these
words are ones that carry a very clear positive or negative sentiment. On the other hand,
the other methods tend to focus on a larger set of words without giving so much impor-
tance to only one. Another characteristic that was observed is that Gradient Norm and
Gradient-dot-Input give a lot of importance to the negating of a word.
Although this thesis serves as an initial approach towards a better understanding of ex-
plainability methods and more concretely Causal Mediation Analysis in NLP, there is still
a long way to go. As is normal in any research project in which new experiments are
carried out, sometimes more questions arise than answers have been found. What is
important is to be aware of these and try to think of ways or experiments that may be
useful to answer them. Regarding this thesis it can be extended in many ways. First,
52
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:61==
it would be good to run the Spanish experiment with a GPT2 based model as well as
carrying out the additional experiment mentioned in Section 3.5.4. Additionally, for the
attention head experiments, it would be very useful to find a way to visualize which words
the different attention heads are focusing the most on. The LIT would be very useful for
this and for obtain some more visual graphics to get a better understanding of what is
going on. Implementing the experiment proposed in paper [2] would be also interesting
as it manages to include the Winobias dataset into the toolkit. By doing this, apart from
obtaining more visualizations it would also be possible to apply the input feature methods
mentioned in Section 2.2. This would add a new scope to the project, where the same
models and datasets are analysed through different explainability methods. Ideally, the
research paper “Improving Generalizability in Implicitly Abusive Language Detection with
Concept Activation Vectors” [4] can also applied to the case study of gender bias. Since
the LIT also supports TCAV, even more visuals would be obtained.
In the end, the problem of gender bias in Large Language Models would be studied by
applying different explainability methods at different levels; input feature methods as local
methods, TCAV as a concept method and through Causal Mediation Analysis, a different
statistical technique which can also be considered as an explainability method. Undoubt-
edly, if all of the above is done, most of the questions posed in this project would be
answered and it would also serve as a groundbreaking work which will raise awareness
of the possibilities of combining different explainability methods to better understand these
models known as “black boxes” evermore present in our lives.
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Andreas Madsen, Siva Reddy, and Sarath Chandar. “Post-hoc interpretability for
neural nlp: A survey”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 55.8 (2022), pp. 1–42.
[2]
Ian Tenney et al. The Language Interpretability Tool: Extensible, Interactive Visu-
alizations and Analysis for NLP Models. 2020. URL: https : / / www . aclweb . org /
anthology/2020.emnlp-demos.15.
[3]
Been Kim et al. “Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with
concept activation vectors (tcav)”. In: International conference on machine learning.
PMLR. 2018, pp. 2668–2677.
[4]
Isar Nejadgholi, Kathleen C Fraser, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. “Improving general-
izability in implicitly abusive language detection with concept activation vectors”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02261 (2022).
[5]
Jieyu Zhao et al. “Gender bias in coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing
methods”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06876 (2018).
[6]
Jesse Vig et al. “Investigating gender bias in language models using causal medi-
ation analysis”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020),
pp. 12388–12401.
[7]
Judea Pearl. “Direct and indirect effects”. In: Probabilistic and causal inference: The
works of Judea Pearl. 2022, pp. 373–392.
[8]
Walaa Medhat, Ahmed Hassan, and Hoda Korashy. “Sentiment analysis algorithms
and applications: A survey”. In: Ain Shams engineering journal 5.4 (2014), pp. 1093–
1113.
[9]
Ian E Nielsen et al. “Robust explainability: A tutorial on gradient-based attribution
methods for deep neural networks”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 39.4
(2022), pp. 73–84.
[10]
Julius Adebayo et al. “Sanity checks for saliency maps”. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 31 (2018).
[11]
Nina Poerner, Benjamin Roth, and Hinrich Schütze. “Evaluating neural network ex-
planation methods using hybrid documents and morphological agreement”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.06422 (2018).
[12]
Avanti Shrikumar et al. “Not just a black box: Learning important features through
propagating activation differences”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.01713 (2016).
[13]
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. “Axiomatic attribution for deep net-
works”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2017, pp. 3319–
3328.
[14]
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “” Why should i trust
you?” Explaining the predictions of any classifier”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.
[15]
Vaswani Ashish. “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems 30 (2017), p. I.
[16]
Alec Radford et al. “Improving language understanding by generative pre-training”.
In: (2018).
[17]
Alec Radford et al. “Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners”. In:
(2019).
[18]
Jacob Devlin et al. “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
55
==PAGE:64==
[19]
Yinhan Liu et al. “Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.11692 (2019).
[20]
Lisa R Goldberg. The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect: by Judea
Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, Basic Books (2018). ISBN: 978-0465097609. 2019.
[21]
Lauren Lapointe-Shaw et al. “Mediation analysis with a time-to-event outcome: a
review of use and reporting in healthcare research”. In: BMC medical research
methodology 18.1 (2018), pp. 1–12.
[22]
Jesse Vig et al. “Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp: The case of
gender bias”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12265 (2020).
[23]
Matthew Finlayson. “Causal Mediation Analysis Reveals Syntactic Agreement Mech-
anisms in Neural Language Models”. PhD thesis. 2021.
[24]
Richard Socher et al. “Recursive Deep Models for Semantic Compositionality Over
a Sentiment Treebank”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Seattle, Washington, USA: Association for
Computational Linguistics, Oct. 2013, pp. 1631–1642. URL: https://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/D13-1170.
[25]
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. “Thumbs Up? Sentiment Clas-
sification Using Machine Learning Techniques”. In: Proceedings of EMNLP. 2002,
pp. 79–86.
[26]
Hector J Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgenstern. “The Winograd schema
challenge.” In: KR 2012 (2012), 13th.
[27]
Rachel Rudinger et al. “Gender bias in coreference resolution”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.09301 (2018).
[28]
Jieyu Zhao et al. “Gender Bias in Coreference Resolution: Evaluation and Debiasing
Methods”. In: CoRR abs/1804.06876 (2018). arXiv: 1804.06876. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1804.06876.
[29]
Shane Bergsma and Dekang Lin. “Bootstrapping path-based pronoun resolution”.
In: Proceedings of the 21st international conference on computational linguistics
and 44th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics. 2006,
pp. 33–40.
[30]
Kaiji Lu et al. “Gender bias in neural natural language processing”. In: Logic, Lan-
guage, and Security: Essays Dedicated to Andre Scedrov on the Occasion of His
65th Birthday (2020), pp. 189–202.
[31]
Tolga Bolukbasi et al. “Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker?
debiasing word embeddings”. In: Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems 29 (2016).
[32]
Dong Kyu Lee, Junyong In, and Sangseok Lee. “Standard deviation and standard
error of the mean”. In: Korean journal of anesthesiology 68.3 (2015), pp. 220–223.
[33]
Israel Cohen et al. “Pearson correlation coefficient”. In: Noise reduction in speech
processing (2009), pp. 1–4.
[34]
Tukur Dahiru. “P-value, a true test of statistical significance? A cautionary note”. In:
Annals of Ibadan postgraduate medicine 6.1 (2008), pp. 21–26.
[35]
Ana-Maria Simundic et al. “Confidence interval”. In: Biochemia Medica 18.2 (2008),
pp. 154–161.
[36]
Ankita Pasad, Ju-Chieh Chou, and Karen Livescu. “Layer-wise analysis of a self-
supervised speech representation model”. In: 2021 IEEE Automatic Speech Recog-
nition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU). IEEE. 2021, pp. 914–921.
56
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix. Additional Attention Results
A.1
Indirect Effects
Figure A.1: Indirect effects in distilgpt2 (top), bert-base-uncased (bottom-left) and roberta-
base (bottom-right) on Winobias test set for heads (heatmap) and layers (barchart).
Figure A.2: Indirect effects in distilgpt2 (top), bert-base-uncased (bottom-left) and roberta-
base (bottom-right) on Winogender with bergsma statistics for heads (heatmap) and lay-
ers (barchart).
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.3: Indirect effects in distilgpt2 (top), bert-base-uncased (bottom-left) and roberta-
base (bottom-right) on Winogender with bls statistics for heads (heatmap) and layers (bar-
chart).
A.2
Direct Effects
Figure A.4: Direct effects in distilgpt2 (top), bert-base-uncased (bottom-left) and roberta-
base (bottom-right) on Winobias test set for heads (heatmap) and layers (barchart).
58
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.5: Direct effects in distilgpt2 (top), bert-base-uncased (bottom-left) and roberta-
base (bottom-right) on Winobias test set for heads (heatmap) and layers (barchart).
Figure A.6: Direct effects in distilgpt2 (top), bert-base-uncased (bottom-left) and roberta-
base (bottom-right) on Winogender with bergsma statistics for heads (heatmap) and lay-
ers (barchart).
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.7: Direct effects in distilgpt2 (top), bert-base-uncased (bottom-left) and roberta-
base (bottom-right) on Winogender with bls statistics for heads (heatmap) and layers (bar-
chart).
60
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:69==
Explainability Methods for Natural Language Processing
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk/english
