==PAGE:1==
A method for Design of Disassembly of pre­
cast concrete building
Hydraulic loading and geometric limitations on
prestressed hollow core slabs
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This study constitutes the Master thesis of Magnus Døvle Andrews, submitted to the De­
partment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The thesis was prepared in the period 23.01.2023 to 23.06.2023 at the Department of
Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU and is
credited for 30 ECTS points. It is submitted as partial fulfilment for the degree Master in
Science in Civil Engineering.
This project was supervised by Professor Philip Skov Halding.
Magnus Døvle Andrews ­ s212568
Signature
Date
Acknowledgements
Philip Skov Halding, Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering.
I want to express my immense gratitude to Professor Philip S. Halding for his invaluable
guidance and support during the entire project. His enthusiasm and expertise on the
subject have been an incredible source of inspiration. He has always been approachable
and willing to answer any questions, regardless of the topic.
Jamie Andrews, Advisor CCS, Family.
I would thank my father and the rest of my family for their feedback and emotional support.
ii
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores a disassembly method for precast concrete slabs executed with a
wet joint connection. Concrete elements are the largest contributor to CO2 emissions,
with 8% of global emissions. To increase sustainability, reused concrete elements can be
adapted to new projects and lower the environmental impact. The aim is to disassemble
the elements with a non­destructive method to reuse the prefabricated element directly.
Precast concrete construction has traditionally been considered permanent with wet joint
connections, making disassembly difficult and costly. However, the increasing focus on
sustainability and the circular economy has increased interest in designing for disassem­
bly in precast concrete construction. Precast concrete is a favourable material given its
structural reliability, geometric properties and construction applications. This research
aims to further develop and investigate the crucial sections in dissembling wet­jointed
prefabricated concrete slabs while applying a hydraulic loading force.
A comprehensive examination of current disassembly techniques and a thorough analysis
of the structural elements under varying loading scenarios were carried out during the re­
search process. This analysis was focused on determining the overall capacity of the slab
and identifying any design limitations. The calculations included an evaluation of the ele­
ments’ global diagonal and flexural shear capacity and the local capacity for single­point
loads such as punching and crushing failure. A Finite Element Analysis was conducted
from different loading scenarios to better understand the force distribution. Loading uti­
lized by a flat jack is chosen as optimal given limited spacing, while the circular shape of
the jack is based on the found jacks available on the market.
The key finding of this study is that the disassembly method is feasible with certain issues
and alternations. The slab geometry is weak regarding the loading direction compared to
the joint capacity. The geometry is fragile to concentrated loads where punching resis­
tance is limited. The shear capacity is limited given the Eurocode design approach, but
extensive testing and modelling are suggested to indicate if the element has increased
capacity.
The research has given new insights into related problems, and solution approaches to
the method. Method limitations are imminent as long wet joints in existing buildings are
too strong to separate without creating local damage to the element.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Existing building methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Design of Disassembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Disassembly approaches on structural joints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Requirement for reuse of prefabricated concrete slabs . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Disassembly method ­Hydraulic Jacks
16
3.1
Disassembly procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
Dismantling equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Materials properties and calculation procedure
25
4.1
Material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Separation force ­ joint resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Hydraulic loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Shear resistance and displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.5
Flexural cracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.6
Local failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.7
Autodesk Inventor: Finite element analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Results
50
5.1
Resistance force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2
Element shear resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.3
Central cracking load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.4
Punching Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.5
Load comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.6
FEM­Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.7
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
v
==PAGE:6==
6
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
73
A Appendix
76
A.1 Mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.2 Flat Jacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
A.3 Hydro demolition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.4 Joint resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
A.5 Required jacks ­ combined support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.6 Finite element models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
vi
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Concrete is one of the world’s most consumed materials [1]. In concrete, 10 to 15 %
consists of cement, which is a huge contributor to global greenhouse gas emissions. Ce­
ment alone contributes to around 8% of the global CO2 emissions [2]. This has been the
foundation towards investigations connected towards prolonging the concrete lifespan,
adapting to low­carbon cement, performing LCA analysis and developing good design
choices related to material selection, material reuse, and design for disassembly. Active
design choices are important for a circular economy and a lower carbon footprint. Con­
crete as a building material benefits society with a solid, robust infrastructure, durability
and cheap construction costs. However, climate emissions are becoming more impor­
tant with the increasing global temperature. An approach to increase the sustainability of
concrete elements is to prolong their lifetime. This thesis elaborates on one method for
disassembly design on prefabricated concrete slabs. The method uses hydraulic jacks
as a disassembly tool to dismantle decks and slabs for reuse. It considers traditional
building methods and can be applied to existing and new building solutions. A previous
paper has concluded the method is feasible with certain simplifications [3], but it requires
elaboration and specified research to ensure a non­destructive disassembly. The method
should involve planning, coordinating, and implementing methods for removing a precast
concrete element efficiently, safely, and economically viable.
Precast concrete slabs are widely used in residential buildings and industry. The ap­
plication of the element is versatile and flexible and has been standardized over time.
Standardization has simplified the assembly methods and completion time while saving
financial costs [4]. It has secured high structural durability and reliability but with a higher
environmental impact compared to other construction materials, where the chemical pro­
cess of cement stands for 60% of the total emissions [5]. Considering the environmental
impact of concrete, it has long durability and with an increased life span, concrete can
become more sustainable if reuse can be considered.
Out of the concrete elements with high reuse potential, prefabricated concrete slabs have
the highest potential for reuse [6]. Especially related to slabs deriving from office buildings
in low residential houses with exposure classes X0 and XC1­4. The potential is linked to
production and service application but depends on several factors. A significant upside
is the assembly method is well integrated with details specifically targeted for lifting and
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
1
==PAGE:8==
quick assembly. The method can be reversed and adapted to disassembling with well­
integrated assembly methods. The main problem is separating the existing wet joints with
a non­destructive method.
Material failure mechanics is one of the governing factors while developing a general dis­
assembly method. Traditionally the assembling systems have focused on wet joint con­
nections using concrete or mortar as a binding material. This particular building method
requires a long disassembly time, often leading to the building being demolished. De­
molished buildings can be recycled into concrete aggregate [7]. However, it should be
the final step in the element’s life cycle. Multiple papers are documenting and testing
concrete elements for longer service periods which can increase the application of sec­
ondhand elements [8]. Secondhand elements require investigation and testing to ensure
serviceability, where the first step is to ensure safe separation.
Research Problem:
The related problem to non­destructive separation is load appli­
cation. How shall the hydraulic jack apply stresses safely, and what are the jack’s limi­
tations? Future development is researching disassembly methods for prefabricated ele­
ments using dry connections [9]. However, exciting building methods use wet joints with
a hybrid connection between prefabricated elements and cast in situ concrete. Hybrid
connections combine reinforcement and concrete to create robust structures. Robust
structures are designed for durability, and the goal is non­destructive but efficient disas­
sembly. The jacking method applies forces directly on the concrete elements to create
failure in the adhesive binding between them. The method is based on the existing rein­
forcement being disconnected, and the only resisting elements are the mortar failure and
concrete tensile strength.
Research aim
The thesis aims to evaluate the direct loading sequence of the hydraulic
jack. Applying the principles in the disassembly method and checking the prefabricated
concrete slab capacity and limitation in combination with the wet joint connection. It should
identify the loading limitations and address fragile areas. The aim is to identify and evalu­
ate critical sections to prevent local and global damages during dismantling. Also, ensure
element integrity for further usage of prefabricated concrete slabs. This thesis focuses
on the force applied and load transfer in the concrete element to ensure non­destructive
2
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:9==
deconstruction. The thesis is not researching joint fracture but approaching the slab’s
reactions to concentrated loads.
Research Objectives
The first objective of this study is to identify the specifications re­
lated to the procedure of removing prefabricated slabs from a wet joint connection. Sec­
ondly, apply design calculations from the Eurocode to define the element’s capacity.
Research questions
The research question this thesis addresses are firstly, can pre­
cast concrete slabs be disassembled safely using hydraulic jacks as a separator? Sec­
ondly, what structural limitations exist within the elements’ resistance to hydraulic point
loads? The thesis is divided into four main chapters. Chapter three contains the literature
review. Chapter four describes the disassembly method, and chapters five and six are
the calculation procedure with result and discussion.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
3
==PAGE:10==
4
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
The theory section looks into the building method, previous disassembly methods and
criteria regarding reuse where sustainable development is part of the end goal.
2.1
Existing building methods
For decades, the construction industry has utilized prefabricated slabs, which offer a stan­
dardized and efficient building method that reduces construction time and cost and pro­
vides a robust structural design. The Eurocode design includes features that ensure a 50
to 100­year service period, with specific loading designs for one­way slabs in office and
apartment buildings. These elements are prefabricated, and with correct removal, they
can be reused [6]. Structural connections are commonly made using wet joints, which
create a solid and durable monolithic connection. While this type of connection is excel­
lent for structural stability, disassembling it can be challenging. When disassembling, it’s
essential to separate the multiple elements that make up a single unit one at a time. Wet
connections often include reinforcement ties to handle horizontal loads. Reinforcement,
along with concrete, provides both strong compressive and tensile properties. Mortar is
the commonly used adhesive material and comes in various qualities.
The construction industry uses standardized prefabricated slabs, but there are subtle de­
sign differences among providers. Information regarding production specifications and
providers can impact the capacity during disassembly. Hollow core slabs (HCS) are a
popular choice, with tendons typically placed at the bottom and pure concrete at the top
to create a reverse moment that counteracts natural deflection. The slabs are often sup­
ported with robust reinforcement, depending on the loading, and were widely adopted
starting in the early 1970s with the introduction of standardized precast elements. To
ensure accuracy, experimental data before 1970 should not be used.
One of the key benefits of one­way hollow core slabs is their ease of installation. The
slabs can be quickly and efficiently laid out on site, and their lightweight design means
that they can be transported and lifted into place with minimal effort. Additionally, their
precast design ensures that the slabs are manufactured to precise specifications, which
helps to minimize on­site errors and waste. Assembly guides can be reworked for dis­
assembly since element­wise separation is possible. NS 3682 [10] indicates criteria for
reuse. However, it does not specify any method for disassembly.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
5
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Design of Disassembly
Disassembly is becoming a more important consideration in the design of concrete slabs
since it allows for the reuse or recycling of resources, lower waste, and can enable more
environmentally friendly building approaches. Part of the design process for disassembly
includes planning for the ultimate removal and separation of the slab’s component parts,
such as concrete and steel reinforcement. The size, shape, and design of the slab, as
well as the use of modular components, connections that make it simple to deconstruct
the structure, and recyclable or reused materials, must all be carefully considered.
The existing elements in the traditional built environment follow the linear model from
Cradle to Grave. A sustainable approach is to follow the building model based on a circu­
lar economy method called Cradle to Cradle. Both models are shown in figure 2.1. The
right model indicates the several steps in which resources are reused or recycled. For
the disassembly method, the main goal is to adopt the second loop, which is recycling the
building components. In general, designers employ the concept of disassembly to easier
extract materials or components while dismantling [11]. Direct reuse of building materials
is limited, but they can be recycled with the cost of energy, adding CO2 emissions to the
LCA calculations.
Figure 2.1: Linear and circular product life cycle [9]
6
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:13==
To reuse precast concrete slabs, a successful disassembly method can allow the follow­
ing:
1. Simplifying the dismantling process
2. Reducing the deconstruction time and cost
3. Allowing recovery of components and materials
4. Reduce the carbon footprint of concrete elements
Design for disassembly contributes towards a circular economy and sustainable develop­
ment. Within elemental disassembly, there are two main disassembly methods.
• Active disassembly
• Embedded disassembly design
Active disassembly
A process known as active disassembly involves the mass dis­
mantling of items in a cost­effective, non­destructive manner. To prevent direct contact
between the labour and the product, it uses the principle of active joints and triggers [12].
Active disassembly must follow certain design criteria.
1. The structures of Active Disassembly must not negatively affect the product’s per­
formance, as users are concerned only about the product’s performance.
2. Accidental triggering of the product during normal operation must be avoided to
prevent decreasing the product’s reliability
3. The Active Disassembly structures must be as simple as possible and easy to sep­
arate.
Given the adhesive joint between the reinforcement and the mortar in the typical construc­
tion design, the active disassembly method is not preferred as it is not easy to separate
and requires heavy machinery. Active Disassembly can be adapted with bolts and screws
in future buildings. Reinforcement in joints can be adapted to active disassembly by de­
signing joints with dual screw threads. Accessing the reinforcement is still a challenge,
but it limits cutting time.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
7
==PAGE:14==
Embedded disassembly design:
A disassembly mechanism is incorporated into a
product using a ”disassembly embedded design.” The mechanism might be triggered to
begin the disassembly process manually, thermally, electrically, or under the effect of
electromagnetism.
For instance, snap­fit connections can be built into the product and activated from a cen­
tral location, causing the snap­fits to fall out of their locked positions. In this situation, the
disassembly procedure can be started by applying mechanical force to the actuation part
[13].
The disassembly method can be a combination of the approaches. Individual elements
can be parts and sections that come apart in different manners. However, the combined
solution distinguishes if the method is a good solution.
2.3
Disassembly approaches on structural joints
A literature study of a selection of joints has been studied for their load­transferring possi­
bilities and energy dissipation regarding their disassembly design. The level of complexity
varies on the usage and loading. Loading cases for slabs are mainly one or two­directional
slabs designed for certain load cases with uniform loading. Multiple research papers have
been published on disassembly connections. These papers are not specifically targeted
at concrete slabs. However, the connection principles are adaptable and can be used for
inspiration. Through the investigation, it distinguishes between dry and wet joints. The
majority of cases are related to dry­jointed connections. Joints are, in general, challenged
with design issues [14] related to:
• Bending plus axial force
• Shear force, torsion and punching shear
• Fatigue
• Deflection and crack width limitation
Table 2.1 gives an overview of the research. It characterizes connection type, joint type,
and design for disassembly plausibility. The element application is diverse, and the most
promising papers are slab related. Overall the joints’ disassembly design are interesting
regarding load dissipation, and the connections can be an inspiration source.
8
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:15==
Building
Element
Connection type
Joint Type
DFD plausible
Ref
Slabs
Blade connection
Wet
Not specified, but fea­
sible with low mortar
strengths
[15]
Slab
Classic reinforce­
ment connection
Wet
Yes,
with
hydraulic
jacks
[3]
Slabs
Lego
inspired
connection
Dry
Yes
[16]
Slabs
Saw
tooth
con­
nection
Dry
Yes, but mortar appli­
cation is still needed
[17]
Beam to
column
End plate beam­
column joint
Dry
Yes.
However the
beam was damaged
during disconnection
[18]
Beam to
Beam
Beam
to
beam
joint
Dry
Yes
[19]
Slab and
Beam
Steel
plate
bolt
connection
Dry
Yes
[17]
Column and
Beam
Steel pin connec­
tion
Dry
Yes
[17], [20]
Table 2.1: DFD joint overview
2.3.1
Dry Joints
A dry joint is a construction term describing the connection between two elements. The
connection consists of interlocked materials mechanically tightened. An examination of
the studied joint in Table 2.1 indicates the most common dry joints are bolted connections
or steel joints. The connections are found in steel, timber and concrete construction.
Advantages with dry joints are related to construction time, repair cost and building pro­
cesses. The joints are structurally reliable but are more exposed to air and fluids because
of limited sealing. Structural protection such as coating, paint and other maintenance
products contribute to protection but have higher exposure overall.
Figure 2.2: Selection of dry connection, [17]
Figure 2.2 shows a selection of dry disassembly joints. The common trait with the joints
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
9
==PAGE:16==
is exposure to local punching shear forces and robustness assessment for larger con­
struction. The design choices are plausible for disassembly but are more fragile towards
movement and corrosion. The connections can have reduced structural integrity and load
capacity for total stability. Dry connections remove the approach of an external mechani­
cal force to separate elements. It ensures a nondestructive and quicker disassembly but
introduces other structural problems related to robustness and seismic capacity.
2.3.2
Wet joints
Wet joints are when two building materials are joined using a wet substance. In prefab­
ricated construction, the wet substance is often mortar or concrete, which hardens over
time and creates a monolithic element. Wet joints are considered the traditional way of
construction, with multiple residential buildings from the 70th until today designed with
certain connections 2.3a. The process is optimized with low construction time related to
the standardization of precast elements and structural connections.
(a) Hybrid connection [9]
(b) Wet joint
Figure 2.3: Wet slab connections
Concrete and mortar are well­suited adhesive binding materials but create complications
for disassembly. Actual cases of disassembly methods regarding wet joints are limited,
require heavy equipment, and are time­consuming. Dismantling tools are elaborated on
in section 3.2. However, the task of disassembly is managing time, non­destructive meth­
ods, and quality assurance for future reuse. The general problem with the wet connection
is the separation between the adhesive material and the building element. The bond is
heterogeneous with reinforced steel which complicates the separation. The wet joint has
good structural properties, which have succeeded as a design choice. Regarding previ­
ous studies in Table, 2.1 separation with hydraulic jacking is promising. Wet joints have
been commonly used since 1970, and completing a nondestructive method with wet joints
10
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:17==
can give sustainable benefits.
The disassembly method applying hydraulic jacks is targeted at the wet joint connection.
Dry joint adaptations could be a design choice for longitudinal reinforcement and sectional
elements with lower­acting stresses. Compared with time and cost, dry joints require
less work and are quicker to dismantle. But for structural properties, the wet joint is and
has been favourable for centuries. Therefore the impact of a wet joint solution could be
beneficial to adapt the traditional building system to become more sustainable.
2.4
Reuse
The task of reusing elements requires many hours of mapping the elements. The process
can be simplified with a digital twin, but the building needs to be checked and mapped
in cases without a model. Any form of documentation and implementation practices is
important to have. DTU Sutain, Danish standard, and Lendager, with the support of In­
novation Fonden and Realdania, have developed a publication on Structural Reuse [21].
The publication addresses the potential of prestressed concrete to be reused. The poten­
tial depends on the classification, functional requirements and testing results.
2.4.1
Grouping and pre­classification
Concrete elements can be pre­classified according to the level of information available.
Declaration of exposure class, environmental exposure and geometrical properties can
be grouped for testing Appropriate groups can be:
• Elements of the same section (size and reinforcement)
• Same structural function
• Elements from same production (company, cement type etc,)
• Same exposure conditions
• Identical detailing (lengths, connections, treatment etc,)
By grouping elements, it creates an easier environment for commercializing reusable
products. The futuristic aim is to equalize second­hand elements to virgin elements.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
11
==PAGE:18==
2.4.2
Functional requirements
The functional parameters are essential information. The disassembly method depends
on the compressing and yielding strength of the material to determine the disassembly
approach. Elements can be redesigned to the guidelines in the Eurocodes shown in Ta­
ble 2.2. The checklist in Table 2.3 describes the necessary documentation for a project
to determine if a hollow core element is suitable for reuse. Methods of requiring the doc­
umentation are not specified, but the design manual, building style and producers can
identify many features. Visual controls and non­destructive testing are helpful tools to
determine the necessary properties.
Property
To be de­
clared?
Standards// Procedure
Compressing strength (concrete)
Yes
DS/EN 13369, DS/EN 206,
DS/EN 1992­1­1
Ultimate tensile strength
Yes
DS/EN 10080, DS/EN 1992­
1­1
Tensile yield strength (steel)
Yes
DS/EN 10080, DS/EN 1992­
1­1
Geometry and Tolerances
Yes
DS/EN13369, DS/EN 1992­
1­1
Conditions for durability
Yes
Req. dependant on intended
conditions­ DS/EN 206
Connections / Detailing
Yes
DS/EN 13369
Reaction to fire
Yes ­ if nec­
essary
Concrete with < 1% organic
compounds can be consid­
ered Class A1 without fur­
ther testing.
(DS/EN 13369
Clause 4.3.4.4)
Dangerous substances
Yes
Additionally for Prestressed
Ultimate
tensile
strength
(Pre­
stressed steel)
Yes
DS/EN 10318
Tensile 0.1% proof strength
Yes
DS/EN 10318
Considerations for Durability ­ (XC Classes)
Water/cement ratio // Cement con­
tent (Strength)
Yes
DS/EN206
Cover to reinforcement
Yes
DS/EN 206
Table 2.2: Properties to be declared.[21]
12
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:19==
From Documents
Need to have
Nice to have
Full building
Building age + Location
X
Structural system/ Form of construction
X
AS­built drawing/records
X
Drawings/records of modification
X
Structural calculations
X
Dismantling sequence
X
Environmental Screening/Mapping
X
Individual members
Element ’Function’ (Beam, column, etc)
X
Member location
X
Member individual identification
X
Section sizes and length
X
Fabrication drawings/records
X
Treatments/coating
X
Connection details
X
Table 2.3: Checklist [21]
2.4.3
Responsibility and testing
Within the industry, the design suggestion in Eurocode is a source of structural reliabil­
ity. However, the structural design is based on virgin products and not reused products.
Design principles are universal, but determining the used element’s material parameters
and reliability is challenging. Reliability is also a question of responsibility. Who is re­
sponsible for ensuring the quality of the used elements? There are no set guidelines for
this question. It creates uncertainty and restricted adaption to the industry. There are
several testing methods to identify the structural qualities. Reliable reused products can
be developed by grouping and sorting the elements after classifications. Data and statis­
tics on testing data should be applied and open­sourced to create a quicker adaptation.
Non­destructive testing is still required for all reused elements. A selection of elements
extracted should also surpass destructive tests to ensure element classification.
High­quality products can be reused, but responsibility and quality insurance are the main
challenges. Who takes responsibility and ensures valid testing? These administrative
questions need to be solved before society can apply these elements. Some large stake­
holders are pushing boundaries by implementing reused elements [22]. However, this is
their own initiative, where the testing and documentation are done internally within the
project. Norway has developed a standard for the reuse of concrete elements. It speci­
fies the requirements and checklist for the slab quality. The publication can be used as
inspiration for a future Danish Standard.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
13
==PAGE:20==
2.5
Requirement for reuse of prefabricated concrete slabs
A Norwegian Standard has guidelines for dismantling, processing and assessing the el­
ements’ condition, [10]. To reuse structural elements, geometry and material properties
need to be documented. The level of element information governs the disassembly pro­
cess and category of reuse. Certain levels of information are required.
• The condition of the prefabricated concrete slabs must be carefully assessed before
reuse. Any cracks or damage to the slabs must be repaired before they are reused
to ensure their structural integrity.
• The dimensions and specifications of the prefabricated concrete slabs must be com­
patible with the new application. The slabs must meet the load­bearing requirements
and other design specifications of the new structure.
• The transportation and handling of the prefabricated concrete slabs must be care­
fully planned and executed to avoid damage. The slabs must be lifted and trans­
ported using appropriate equipment and techniques to prevent cracking or other
damage
• The assembly manager, who dismantles the hollow core slabs for reuse, must have
competence corresponding to the requirements for concrete element fitter in DS­EN
13670+NA.
General requirements are being developed to ensure security and reliability regarding
dismantling, transport and storage application. The documentation provided by the NS
36892 specifies a condition report should contain the main key points related to structural
performance and integrity:
• Carbonization depth
• Containment of chloride
• Alkali reactivity
• Concrete compression strength
• Fatigue on Hollow core slabs
Slabs types that are in the same production line can be assumed equal with certain criteria:
• Elements from the same building part of the same building level
• Elements delivered from the same producer or factory and are produced within six
months.
The Norwegian standard gives guides to ensure quality in on­site operations. Testing and
quality controls correspond with the Eurocode design manual and the national annex.
14
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:21==
2.5.1
Standardization
Standardization has led to faster and more advanced buildings in cities. However, com­
plexity arises due to differences in subcontractor and product qualities, which affects as­
sembly and design [23]. Disassembly can also pose a challenge due to design complex­
ity. To address this, the initial design choices are well­documented through digital twins
and Building Information Modelling Software. It is important to note that site execution
may differ from the drawings and original plans. In such cases, the disassembly method
should be flexible enough to accommodate element complexities, material properties and
execution errors.
Slabs and geometric can be grouped after the qualities and properties. The publication on
Structural reuse [21] has a recommendation for a classification system that characterizes
the element based on testing parameters that decide the reuse class. Testing varies
between comprehensive, streamlined and minor testing. Resulting in classes going from
A to C.
Figure 2.4: Classification suggestion DTU Reuse [21]
With extensive classification, the slabs can easily be applied in ongoing projects. The
information linked to reuse is with the intention that the disassembly is successful with
limited damages.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
15
==PAGE:22==
3
Disassembly method ­Hydraulic Jacks
The method chosen for further investigation is based on a previous thesis researching
the feasible disassembly section. This previous thesis investigated disassembly using
hydraulic jacking [3]. The principal uses hydraulic pressure jacks to achieve horizontal and
vertical separation. The previous research has concluded that it is feasible to separate
wet connections with certain specifications:
• The compression strength of the binding adhesive material is reduced but strong
enough to withstand the acting horizontal design forces.
• Tension and robustness reinforcement are assumed to be cut with an angle grinder
or diamond saw.
• The result output force to separate HCS180 was found to be 2455 kN.
• Horizontal dismantling is a safer option regarding the element and adjacent ele­
ments.
• Mortar resistance compression strength of 16 MPa.
The investigation was a case­based study on a specific building, where horizontal and
vertical disassembly using hydraulic jacks was suggested. The disassembly method for
this research is based on horizontal disassembly. The method is shown in section 3.1. It
is presented as a step­by­step process for on­site disassembly. Testing and classification
can be executed later. However, damages and related issues can be detected and re­
ported during the demolition. Each step describes the process with the necessary actions
and information for on­site disassembly.
3.1
Disassembly procedure
Step 1: Remove overlying elements and interior:
The first step for an on­site disas­
sembly is to find the element information and create a safe workspace. All information
available on the element is beneficial. Depending on the building year and executed ser­
vice, the information can determine if the elements are suited for reuse. This can also be
done before the process on site. However, old buildings might have poor documentation,
and visual controls help indicate the section. If it is difficult to access the slab, everything
above and around the element must be removed. Crucial elements for structural stability
must not be tampered with, and the removal should be as much as possible to require
access to the element. All overlying walls, interiors and elements that restrict access and
16
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:23==
transportation must be removed. A disassembly strategy should be in place before the
process starts, which indicates the disassembly direction, transportation, and storage.
To start the process, underlying rooms and spaces must be evacuated and disassembly
equipment must be present. Safety is essential while working with heavy elements and
forces, and safety features are required based on the situation.
Step 2: Access concrete elements and visual controls:
Next, it is essential to vi­
sually inspect the structural components for any defects and assess their integrity. This
inspection aims to identify nearby defects, measure chloride exposure, and provide an
overall evaluation of the elements. The condition of these components determines if re­
moval can begin and if they can be recycled. A non­destructive disassembly method
is used if the slab is suitable for reuse. However, destructive forces are necessary for
removal if the elements show damage threatening their structural integrity.
Step 1: Remove 
interior,
Step 2: Access 
concrete elements
Inspect the HCS 
elements.
Check for cracks, 
flacking, exposed 
reinforcement and 
other issues that might 
damage the slab. 
For safety check the 
dimensions and 
material quality.
Detach and remove all 
overlying elements:
No existing structure or 
element that can interfere 
with the slab should remain.
Inspect all elements for local 
damages and possible  
fractures that can hinder the 
disassembly. 
Walls
Furniture and interoir
Columns
Local damage
Unconnected side
Element information, 
HCS320, 6 L12,5
XC1 , 6 meter slab
Design for Disassembly: 
Precast concrete slabs
04, 02
Civil 
Engineering DTU
s212568
June 19, 2023
Magnus Døvle 
Andrews
Figure 3.1: Step one and two of disassembly procedure
Step 3: Prepare openings and detach connected reinforcement:
Before beginning
the demolition process, it’s essential to prepare the element and mortar connections by
cutting and treating them to create access holes and disconnect necessary reinforcement.
The number of access points needed depends on the size of the slab and the required
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
17
==PAGE:24==
separation force. Chapter 3.2 outlines various concrete dismantling equipment that can
be used to create hydraulic instalment areas and cutting points for the longitudinal rein­
forcement. The number of access areas and openings required will vary based on the
Hollow core slab type and length, concrete and mortar strength, and joint details. The
preparation process can be considered continuous throughout the demolition process.
This will save execution time.
Step 4­Hydraulic loading: To achieve proper loading distribution, placing and installing
hydraulic jacks with the appropriate settings is important. Failure to do so can result in tor­
sion, twisting, or uneven loading, which may lead to the locking of elements or increased
exposure. The force required for separation depends on factors such as element type,
support conditions, and failure criteria for joint mortar. Hydraulic loading is the most crucial
step combined with the preparations. The tuning of the jacks combined with the prepa­
rations generates, in theory, a uniform force distributed towards the supports to create a
brittle failure in the mortar.
Step 4: Prepare Hydraulic Jacks
Step 3: Create access points
Disconnect 
edge 
Create access 
point using 
concrete cutting 
tools. Example 
Hydro demolition
Remove 
reinforcement 
with an angle 
grinder. 
Tune the jack to 
right separation 
pressure. 
Check placement 
and conection to 
the element
Correct measurement
for Jack access
Fully connected to
 the surface
Aligned correctly
Design for Disassembly: 
Precast concrete slabs
04, 03
Civil 
Engineering DTU
s212568
June 19, 2023
Magnus Døvle 
Andrews
Figure 3.2: Step three and four of disassembly procedure
Step 5: This involves a hydraulic jack separation process that applies compression pres­
sure to facilitate disassembly. This pressure creates tensile and shear failure in the con­
necting mortar, requiring careful tuning to match the failure mechanics of the active el­
18
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:25==
ements. The basic assumption is that the mortar capacity is lower than the hollow core
element. Applying a certain force can theoretically move the element and split the joint,
creating space to remove the element. The separation is the step where the previous
information and preparations are correct. If the elements separate without cracks and
larger damage, the disassembly is close to complete.
Step 6: Removing the element: Once the separation process is complete, the last step
involves removing and transporting the element. The element is currently positioned atop
the connecting walls and beams. The separation crack is entirely disconnected but can
still create frictional resistance. Lifting straps can be attached to transport the elements
out, and cranes can be utilized. The friction resistance is expected to be low due to mini­
mal connection points. Still, it’s essential to remain vigilant for any shelves or areas that
may cause resistance due to failure mechanisms. Visual checks should be conducted to
ensure safe removal. The removed slab is placed on­site in storage before being trans­
ported to a testing facility or permanent storage and distribution centre.
Step 5: Slab separation
Step 6: Secure and lift
Secure the slabs 
and remove the 
element to a area 
for testing and 
loading. 
Repeat steps 3-6 
until the whole 
floor is removed
Store and transport 
components
Lifting equipment.
By crane or mobile unit
Activate the 
Hydarulic Jack
Ensure safety 
measures are in 
place.
Possible failure:
Crushed edge
Flexural and shear 
crack
Uneven 
displacement
Design for Disassembly: 
Precast concrete slabs
04, 04
Civil 
Engineering DTU
s212568
June 19, 2023
Magnus Døvle 
Andrews
Figure 3.3: Step five and six of disassembly procedure
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
19
==PAGE:26==
3.1.1
Section of interest
In the disassembly process, the stress that requires the most planning is the separation.
The force required to ensure splitting in the structural mortar and not the element needs to
be optimized and characterized. The thesis will research deeper the loading requirements
and structural limitations for a loading scenario. It is a theoretical approach. However,
further investigations need to be done through lab testing and numerical modelling.
3.2
Dismantling equipment
Various tools are available for wet connections that can precisely remove concrete sec­
tions. These tools are related to non­destructive deconstruction methods and are neces­
sary to make room for hydraulic jacks. Due to the limited space between elements and
mortar concrete connection, precision cuts are required, often measuring in millimetres.
Geometric limitations and jack dimensions result in various cuts and concrete alternation.
Therefore the dismantling equipment should be flexible with precision and sizes. Tools
used in the disassembly process are required to have cutting adaptations to suggested
dimensions.
• Width: 100­400 mm
• Depth: 50­200 mm
• Height : 100­400 mm
The section dimensions are based on the general sizes of the Hydraulic Flat jacks and
the limited mortar sections between Hollow core slab elements. Different technologies for
dismantling are now discussed.
3.2.1
Flat Jacks
Flat jacks are pressure chambers that use hydraulic force to expand and create com­
pression force, allowing objects to be lifted for maintenance and repair purposes. These
powerful tools can handle heavy objects and have many applications. In construction and
civil engineering projects, hydraulic flat jacks are commonly used to lift heavy structures
like buildings, bridges, and large machinery. They are also used for lifting vehicles, heavy
equipment, and industrial machinery during maintenance and repair work.
A hydraulic flat jack typically consists of a flat, circular metal plate with a mounted hydraulic
cylinder and pump system. When the pump is activated, hydraulic fluid is pumped into
the cylinder, causing the piston to move and the plate to create pressure. While hydraulic
20
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:27==
jacks can come in various shapes, the circular shape shown in Figure 3.4 is the most
commonly used for restoration, but the jack can be adapted to the disassembly method.
Rectangular hydraulic jacks would be an option, but after some online investigation, the
found sizes with fitting size dimensions resulted in jacks with a circular cross­section.
100
175
Maximum Capacity:
  
60 tons
Maximum Stroke:
 25mm
Maximum Pressure:  150 bar
Fluid Requirement:
 
1.6 Lts
Jack Weight:
  
20.0 Kgs
225
Steel
Thrust Plates
270
32
Input
Fitting
Isolation
Valve
HYDRA-CAPSULE
DESCRIPTION:
DRAWING No.
   
FJ-27 Flat-Jack
Xara / FJ-27 / 2007-A
FJ27 Flat Jack
HEAVY  DUTY  JACKING  SYSTEMS
Figure 3.4: FJ­27 Flat jack [24]
Jack code
Capacity (tons)
Closed H [mm]
Outside D [mm]
Thrust D [mm]
FJ­12
8
28
120
75
FJ­15
15
29
150
105
FJ­17
20
29
170
125
FJ­19
25
30
190
145
FJ­22
40
30
220
175
FJ­25
50
30
250
205
FJ­27
60
31
270
225
FJ­30
80
32
300
254
FJ­35
100
34
350
304
Table 3.1: Flat jack sizes
Hydra Capsule [24] is one producer of Flat Jack. Their Jacks are listed in Table 3.1 and
have a working range up to 75% of 150 bar. It equals compression stresses up to 11.2
MPa. Knowing the mechanical limitations of the hydraulic flat jack, the application of this
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
21
==PAGE:28==
device needs to be investigated. The main sections of the investigation are installation
and loading applications.
3.2.2
Hydro­demolition
Hydro­demolition is a modern innovative technique that removes concrete, grout, and as­
phalt. This process involves using high­pressure water that can precisely infiltrate the
material’s pores, breaking apart the targeted surface. The pressure of the water can be
adjusted to reach up to 1500 bar, allowing it to remove concrete at a predetermined level
selectively. This means only the material that needs to be removed is targeted, while the
rest of the construction remains intact.
Conjet [25], the company producing robots for this process, argue that there will be no
microcracks or damage to the remaining construction. This is because the water creates
overpressure in the pores of the concrete, which breaks it apart in a controlled man­
ner. The result is a rough surface ideal for restoration purposes, such as applying new
concrete or accessing the underlying reinforcement. In summary, hydro­demolition is a
highly efficient and precise method for removing concrete, grout, and asphalt. It allows for
selective removal of material without causing damage to the surrounding construction 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Reinforcement access using Hydrodemolition
22
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:29==
Various construction projects utilise the technology, including bridges, parking decks, tun­
nels, and warehouses. Its primary focus is on restoration, which can also aid in decon­
struction. The application selectively removes mortar and concrete along joints and pro­
vides access to reinforced areas using an angle grinder to disconnect the longitudinal re­
inforcement. Additionally, it can partially remove a section to reduce the required jacking
force. The advantages of automated concrete removal over manual labour are numerous.
These include worker safety and health, selective and non­selective removal, improved
efficiency (25 times faster than mechanical jackhammers), non­destructive removal, and
automated precision.
Possible Automated concrete removal (ACR) products suitable for slabs are Robot­101­
Nalta and Robot­327­front in Figure 3.6a and 3.6b. Selectively the smaller robot has more
access points in close proximity. It is easier to set up as it requires less equipment. The
consequence is efficiency with removal. The larger machines reach a larger surface area
but have limitations with access points. Regardless both are available options for disas­
sembly, where the primary usage is to remove connected reinforcement. It can be argued
that the technique could be used to disassemble the whole slab, but this depends on the
execution time and cost efficiency.
(a) Robot­101­Nalta
(b) Robot­327­front
Figure 3.6: Conjet ACR machines [25]
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
23
==PAGE:30==
3.2.3
Diamond saw blades
Considering the type of material to be cut, the depth of the cut, and the kind of saw being
used, one can choose from a variety of diamond saw blade types. The following cate­
gories of diamond saw blades are frequently used to cut concrete:
• Dry Cutting Blades: These blades are made to cut concrete without the usage of
water. They are often used to cut tiny areas or in locations without easy access to
water. Due to the softer bond on dry cutting blades, they might wear down faster
and produce more heat. They work best for shallow cuts, and they are less durable
than wet cutting blades in terms of tooth wear.
• Wet Cutting Blades: To keep the blade from overheating and to keep it cool, these
blades are made to be used with water. Blades used for wet cutting have a stronger
bond, enabling them to last longer and make deeper cuts. They tend to emit less
dust and are most effective when cutting bigger portions of concrete.
• Turbo Blades: With their serrated rim, these blades enable quicker cutting and more
cooling. Turbo blades are frequently used for demolition work and operate best
when cutting through reinforced concrete.
• Continuous Rim Blades: These blades feature a smooth, serrated­free rim and work
best for making accurate cuts in concrete. Compared to other kinds of diamond
blades, continuous rim blades produce less dust and last longer.
When cutting through hard materials, the performance of diamond saw blades can be
influenced by various factors, such as the depth of the cut, the type of saw being used,
and the speed of the blade. Despite the noise, vibration, and dust produced by diamond
saw blades, they remain an accurate, efficient option for cutting through thin concrete
sections. However, the noise and dust can be disruptive when cutting small sections, and
joint reinforcement removal can be performed in any way that meets proper installation
standards, as per the contractor’s discretion.
24
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:31==
4
Materials properties and calculation
procedure
To enable non­destructive disassembly there are several factors to investigate. In this
chapter, the loading limitations are to be discovered by looking at element constriction
within the elastic domain. Elastic properties from the Eurocodes ([26] [27] [28]) are used
as design values with suppliers’ geometric design. It is a conservative approach regard­
less of the long service periods. Elastic design results in no permanent deformations or
damages. The expected serviceability and quality of the slabs are not being considered
in this section and is therefore assumed that the elements are of high quality and within
their designed life span.
The research is based on a case study, which uses a selection of hollow core slabs from
a specific producer. This limits the geometric variations. If the method proves valid, it can
be adapted to other elements and producers within the market. The methods are scalable
but consideration of the National annex and geometric and material differences must be
accounted for. The specific case study is looking at slabs produced by Spæncom [29].
The choice of the producer is random but with chosen to the given information level on
their web page. Different slab sizes are applied with concentrated point loads to find a
non­destructive working range. The methods for determining load limitations are based
on analytical lower bond methods applying the linear elastic material properties. The
calculations are based on known element geometry, but assumptions are done about the
pre­stressing tendon and unknown factors which can be regarded as local details and
product secrets. It results in smaller changes in maximal tolerance levels, but by loading
on the weak axis the same failure scenarios can occur.
• Shear failure: Shear failure happen close to the supports given the external loading.
• Cracking failure: Cracking failure can occur in the centre regions on the beam
given high moments.
• Concrete splitting: Happens in areas with limited reinforcement or concrete tensile
strength. Edges are particularly exposed.
• Crushing failure: Happens with concentrated load. Depending on the jack size
and placement.
• Punching failure: Happens in areas without reinforcement, where the resistance
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
25
==PAGE:32==
of the element relies on the concrete tensile strength.
All failure calculations are based on the scenario:
• All longitudinal reinforcement along the joint is disconnected.
• Demolition tools are utilized by access limitations and to a degree of nondestructive
method.
• The remaining resistance is mortar on concrete and mortar on mortar connection.
• Remaining reinforcement in the joint has no structural resistance strength.
4.1
Material properties
4.1.1
Prefabricated concrete
The hollow core slabs are made out of prefabricated concrete. Concrete is a mixture of
cement, sand, gravel, or crushed stone, mixed with water. The mixture of cement and
water creates an adhesive binding material. For prestressed hollow core elements, the
concrete compression strength is targeted to be 55 MPa after 28 hardening days. Cement
and concrete will continue hardening after 28 days. Specifying the exact element strength
is not necessary. In the case of disassembly, the hardening process is based on a 40­
50 year period, and for calculation purposes, 55 MPa is the design threshold for non­
destructive design. The values are conservative if the elements can withhold the active
stresses with the combined strength after 28 days. Design material properties are listed
in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Joint cross­section from Spæncom [29]
fck [MPa]
fctk05 [MPa]
fctk95 [MPa]
fcm [MPa]
E [GPa]
55
3.0
5.5
4.2
38
Table 4.1: Hollow core concrete properties
26
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:33==
• fck
Concrete characteristic cylinder compression strength
• fctk05
Concrete 5% fractile tensile strength
• fctk95
Concrete 95% fractile tensile strength
• fcm
Mean value of concrete cylinder compression strength
• E
Youngs Modulus of Concrete
• γc
1.55: Partial factor for compressing strength of plain concrete
• γc
1.6: Partial factor of tensile concrete strength
4.1.2
Mortar
Mortar is a binding material that is used for masonry and concrete buildings. It is normally
a filling material based on the water ratio. Compression strength properties vary from
45 MPa down to 2.5 MPa. Construction practices commonly use mortar compression
strengths between 35 ­ 45 MPa [30]. This increases the building’s robustness but creates
a harder mold to disassembly. Initially, future construction could use a reduced mortar
strength to reduce the required force for disassembly [3]. The selection of filling mortar
depends on the acting load, fire design criteria and noise requirements. The mortar is used
as a binding material and is not considered part of the structural frame but is important
for joint features. The range of mortar strengths is listed. Selectively the main interest
strengths to consider are 16 MPa which has future building purposes, and 40­45 MPa
given existing structures
Strength classes of concrete [MPa]
fck
4.6
12
16
20
25
30
35
40
45
fctk05
0.8
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.5
2.7
fctk95
1.5
2.0
2.5
2.9
3.3
3.8
4.2
4.6
4.9
Table 4.2: En/DA Eurocode concrete/mortar characteristic strength [28]
• fck
Mortar characteristic cylinder compression strength
• fctk05
Mortar 5% fractile tensile strength
• fctk95
Mortar 95% fractile tensile strength
• γc
1.5: Mortar reduction factor for compressing strength
• γc
1.5: Tensile reduction factor strength of mortar
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
27
==PAGE:34==
4.1.3
Steel tendon
Hollowcore slabs have a variety of prestressed tendons. The positioning and size depend
on the acting bending moment. Selectively defining a general case for the longitudinal
tendon prestressing force is project dependent. For this thesis, it is assumed six steel
tendons with a cross­section of L12.5. The jacking stresses are assumed at 100kN each
with the 1% proof steel tensile strength fp01 of 1634 MPa. These values are selected for
one scenario for the prestressed steel tendons and given in Table 4.3. The designed steel
strength is calculated from equation 4.1.
fpd = fp01
γs
(4.1)
Tendon
fp01 [MPa]
fpd
Ap [mm2]
Fp[kN]
Ep[GPA]
L12.5
1634
1361
93
100
210
Table 4.3: Tendon properties
• fp01
0.1 % proof stress of prestressed steel
• fpd
Design value proof stress of prestressing steel
• γs
1.2: Partial factor prestressed tendon
• Ap
Area of prestressed steel tendon
• Ep
Youngs Modulus prestressed steel tendon
• np
Number of prestressed steel tendons
4.1.4
Geometric properties ­ deep beam
The loading occurs on the slab’s side, where the height is the acting surface area. Given
the depth­to­hight ratio ( d
h > 0.25), the slab can be assumed to act as a deep beam. The
structural design of the Hollow core slab has strong properties to withstand deflection and
bending around the shown X­axis 4.2. Loading on the Y­axis is limited by design choices
and the prestressed tendon.
28
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2: Deep beam geometric and loading example
HCS
Hole height[mm]
Hole width [mm]
Cover top [mm]
Cover depth bottom [mm]
Cover side [mm]
180
100
100
45
35
23
220
146
146
40
33
23
270
195
195
40
35
33
320
248
178
40
32
31
400
324
180
40
36
40
Table 4.4: HCS covering the distance in mm
By assuming a deep beam approach the geometric parameters of the slab are a direct
factor on the elements’ resistance. The moment of inertia and the concrete cross section
is found by subtracting the area contribution of the holes. The concrete cross­section is
found by equation 4.2.
Ac = w ∗H −noval · Aoval
(4.2)
Aoval = a · b · π
(4.3)
Moment of inertia is calculated using equation 4.5.
Iy = 1
12 · h · w3 −Ioval · noval
(4.4)
Ioval = π ∗a ∗b3
4
(4.5)
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
29
==PAGE:36==
The static moment S is found in the lower section.
S = Ac
2 · h
2 + Ap · (dp
2 + dp)
(4.6)
It is important to distinguish between internal and external forces. The jacking loading act
externally while the pre­stressed tendon creates compression force on the cross­section.
The compression force contributes to increased tensile strength. The steel tendon creates
internal stresses σcp. Local stresses along the cross­section Ac can be more specified,
but to simplify the approach the internal resulting stresses from the steel tendon are a
unified stress over the total cross­section. It is calculated by equation 4.7
σcp =
FpEc · np
AcEc + ApEp · np
(4.7)
Six tendons applying a total force of 600kN create unified axial compression stress shown
in Table 4.5.
Slab
HCS180
HCS220
HCS270
HCS320
HCS400
σcp [MPa]
3.8
3.6
3.3
2.8
2.3
Table 4.5: Compressive stresses at the concrete cross section
Axial compression is a parameter that can change by number of tendons and the hollow
core geometry. Therefore, localizing the design choices before disassembly is important
as it can increase or reduce the tensile capacity.
4.1.5
Support conditions
In the slabs’ normal use case, the support condition is often simply supported. While for
disassembly, the support condition in the load direction is the mortar joint. Depending on
the placement and quality of the mortar, the ability to withstand forces increases linearly
with the cross­sectional area connected to the element. As an adhesive material, Mortar
binds the HCS element to the building sides. Combined with reinforcement, the element
would be fixed to the sides. However, disconnecting the reinforcement removes some
moment capacity from the joint. The reduced capacity can indicate that the element acts
as a hinged system. Characterising the full mechanical properties of the support systems
without testing can be difficult. Mortar, as a brittle material, is normally not designed
to withstand bending. However, with combined support in both directions, the support
conditions can be assumed a capacity in between a hinged and a fixed support system.
30
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:37==
Support placement during disassembly is also a critical feature for failure. Loading gets
distributed to the supports, where loading distance and support placement determine the
failure patterns. Removing sections with hydro demolition creates reduced support resis­
tance and the size and location of the demolitions are crucial for the slabs’ behaviour. The
research is limited to three different support conditions.
• Side supported system
• Longitudinal supported system
• Combined supported system
Resistance capacity is calculated in section 4.2 where the combined capacity is a sum­
mation of the longitudinal and side­supported system.
4.2
Separation force ­ joint resistance
Before locating the element capacity, the joint resistance defines the required application
force necessary. The Hollow Core Slab is connected along the edges with a concrete­
on­mortar connection and a mortar­on­mortar connection. This concerns the element
geometry and the hollow extrusions in the cross­section. An assumption made for wet
joint failure is that the shear failure in mortar is weaker than the concrete of the HCS
element. When applying point loads, the mortar material fractures along the joint from the
exceeded force. To calculate the total fracture force, the elastic mortar properties with the
95% fractile are applied to find the tensile and shear resistance. Table 4.2 show the related
mortar strengths. A previous thesis [3] used a compression strength of 16 MPa while the
industry has been applying strengths of 40­45 MPa. Finding the resistance strength at
different capacities can define the disassembly force for new and existing buildings. An
important note is that the shear failure differs between mortar­on­mortar connections and
mortar­on­concrete, given the grain sizes.
The calculation approach uses an HCS element width of 1.2 meters, while a longitudi­
nal vector L is used to determine the tensile resistance between 1­12 meters. The input
values are created from Spenncons element geometry and densities, where the element
sizes are: HCS180, HCS220, HCS270, HCS320, and HCS400. The aim of this calcula­
tion is to determine the total required jacking force to ensure the separation.
4.2.1
Longitudinal support ­ Tensile resistance
Longitudinal tensile resistance for a mortar on concrete connection is based on the 95%
fractile mortar strength. The fracture will occur in the section between the mortar en
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
31
==PAGE:38==
concrete, where the concrete element will be pulled out from the joint. Disconnected
reinforcement ensures no resistance other than the mortar capacity. The design capacity
of the tensile strength is calculated with the reduction factor γc = 1.5 and αct = 1.
fctd = αct ∗fct95
γc
(4.8)
Asec = L · (H −Atab)
(4.9)
Rt = fctd · Asec
(4.10)
4.2.2
Side resistance ­ Mortar on mortar shear connection
The mortar­on­mortar shear resistance is active on a smaller section with a width of 1.2
meters. The hollow area is inserted with a plastic covering during construction but is filled
with mortar. The area sections of the holes are the section with mortar shear force. Here
the mortar applied shear stresses are expressed with equation 4.11 found in Teknisk Ståbi
sec 5.4.7 [31].
τcp = 1.5 · VEd
Ac
≤fcvd
(4.11)
By rearranging the equation, shear resistance can be determined with the following:
VRdi = VEd
Ac
= fcdv
1.5
(4.12)
fcvd =







(
f2
ctd + σcp · fctd
)0.5 ,
σcp < σc,lim
((
f2
ctd + σcp + fctd
)0.5 −
( σcp−σc,lim
2
)2)0.5
,
σcp ≥σc,lim
(4.13)
Where σc,lim is determined by:
σc,lim = fcd −2 ·
√
fcdt · (fcd + fcdt)
(4.14)
• τcp
:is the applied shear stress on the given cross­sectional area
• VEd
:is the applied shear force on the given cross­sectional area
• Ac
:is the cross­sectional area associated with the applied shear force
• fcvd
:is the regulatory shear strength
32
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:39==
4.2.3
Side resistance ­ Mortar on concrete connection
The mortar shear resistance can be calculated from equation 4.35.
vRdi,a = c · fctd + µ · σn + ρ · fyd · (µ · sin α + cos α) ≤0.5 · v · fcd
(4.15)
If the assumption of no attached reinforcement is present, the shear force only depends
on mortar shear strength and the friction force acting from the slab’s weight. Resulting in
a simplified formula 4.16.
vRdi,a = c · fctd + µ · σn
(4.16)
The mortar designed tensile stresses fctd calculated with the 5% fractile.
fctd = αct · fctk,0.05
γc
(4.17)
The mortar tensile and compression stresses are determined from the equation:
fcd = fck
γc
(4.18)
v = 0.6[1 −fck
250]
(4.19)
• VRdi,a
: is the shear resistance at the mortar­concrete interface
• fctd
: is the design tensile strength of concrete.
• fck
: is the concrete characteristic compressing strength
• fcd
: is the design value for the concrete compressing strength
• fyd
: is the design yield strength for the steel reinforcement
• α
: is the reinforcement angle through the joint
• v
: is the reduction factor for concrete strength
• σn
: is the stress per interface unit area induced by the smallest external
normal force
Type
c
µ
Intended
0.5
0.9
Rough
0.4
0.7
Smooth
0.2
0.6
Very smooth
0.1 ­ 0.025
0.5
Table 4.6: Interface surface type
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
33
==PAGE:40==
The surface type between the slab and underlying walls and beams is assumed to be
smooth. Resulting in µ = 0.6 and c = 0.2. This is an assumption based on the building
practices and should be considered differently with damages or other building methods.
Hydro demolition and other equipment can be used to remove larger parts of the section.
The separation force reduces drastically as the sections of resistance are distributed over
two sections of 1.2 meters. The result is listed in Table 5.1.
4.2.4
Full resistance­ side and longitudinal connection
By combining each individual resistance with the local cross­sectional area. The total
separation force can be found. The material properties of the mortar are dimensional
for separation. Figure 4.3 shows the required separation force for a mortar strength at
16 MPa. The calculation does not include the reduced resistance of the removed sec­
tions jacking areas. The number of jacks and removed mortar depends on the element
limitations. Applying the calculations is a conservative approach.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Length of HCS
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Force in kN
Required force with 16MPa Concrete
HCS180
HCS220
HCS270
HCS320
HCS400
Figure 4.3: Joint resistance with Mortar strength at 16 MPa
34
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:41==
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Length of HCS
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force in kN
104
Required force with 45MPa Concrete
HCS180
HCS220
HCS270
HCS320
HCS400
Figure 4.4: Joint resistance with 45 MPa Mortar
With mortar strengths up to 45 MPa in existing structures. The required jacking force
increases. For all the cases, the resistance can be reduced by removing sections of the
element
4.3
Hydraulic loading
Each element’s resistance depends on the number of jacks to submit the required force.
Concrete, as a brittle material, has limitations on tensile forces but also on spacing. The
geometry of the slabs limit installation. By looking at each slab’s geometry, a jack type
can be suggested for each HCS size.
4.3.1
Loading depth
Looking at the general installation of the jacking system there are some limitations. The
selection of Jack depends on the available spacing between the slab. The maximal mortar
section is described in Table 4.7. Given the precision parameter of the hydro demolition
tool, the safety margin should include an extra spacing of 2­3 mm to ensure fitting. This
indicates the maximum closed height of the jack to be less than the max width but with the
largest surface area possible to limit a punching load. Therefore the geometric range of
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
35
==PAGE:42==
the jack should be between Jack FJ­19 to Jack FJ­38 given the geometry restrictions. The
holes have some limiting dimensions which depend on the Spenncom elements. The el­
ements are not linearly related to one another, and each slab has fabrication alternations.
The properties are listed in Table 4.4 and the values are measured from the suppliers’
DWG file, using Autocad as a measuring tool.
HCS
Max width
Placement depth
Jack size
Jack depth
Jack thrust diameter
Cap
180
40
140
FJ­12
120
75
8
220
40
180
FJ­17
170
125
20
270
42
230
FJ­22
220
175
40
320
42
280
FJ­27
270
225
60
400
42
360
FJ­35
350
304
100
Table 4.7: Geometric constriction
4.3.2
Loading force
The suppliers are recommending a working range of the jacks up to 75% of the total
capacity. The selective jacks are listed with the minimum and maximum thrusting force.
Each jack can thrust to a total of 150 bar. The limiting stress is 11.2 MPa, which gives the
corresponding total jacking force.
Fjack = σjack · Ajack
(4.20)
Jack
A[mm2]
Fmax[kN]
Fj12
4415.62
49.4
Fj17
12265
137.3
Fj22
24040
269.2
Fj27
39740
445.0
Fj32
72546
812.5
Table 4.8: Maximal Jack forcing
Table 4.8 indicates that the larger jack can induce a significant point load. Selecting the
right jack depends on the geometric limitations, load concentration, and magnitude. Ap­
plying the corresponding jack to geometric limitation, the required jack amount can be
estimated in Figure 4.5. This corresponds to the 16 MPa compression strength and the
equivalent jack size in Table 4.7.
36
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.5: Corresponding number of jack to combined resistance
The current situation describes that the corresponding circular jack for the smaller HCS
has low capacity if the length of the element increases. The jack does not take into the
element limitation and is an estimation of the resistance force calculation.
4.4
Shear resistance and displacement
4.4.1
Shear resistance ­ Eurocode 1992­1­1
The concrete section acts as a deep beam when the loading is located along the joint. The
section creates different cracking scenarios where the force limitations can vary on the
elements’ geometry and parameters. The slab has only longitudinal tendons that prevent
bending.
VRd,c =
(0, 18
γc
k (100ρlfck)1/3 + 0, 15σcp
)
bwd
(4.21)
σcp is assumed uniformly on the whole cross­section resulting in.
σcp = Ned
Ac
< 0.2 · fcd
(4.22)
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
37
==PAGE:44==
k = 1 +
√
200
d
(4.23)
• d
:is the depth to the longitudinal reinforcement. For the slab, it equals the
pre­stressed tendons at 600 mm
• σcp
:compression stresses created by the tendons.
The calculation approach is based on a traditional beam. The case with the slab is rein­
forcement located on one side of the cross­section. The depth of reinforcement will act on
parameter d. Symmetrically the depth from the compression zone is half the width, equal
to 600mm.
4.4.2
Shear resistance ­ Eurocode 1168
The shear resistance for uncracked regions due to bending is defined by 4.24. The shear
resistance formula is derived from a Columb Mohr material where the pre­stressed ten­
dons can increase the shear capacity.
VRdc = Ibw(y)
Sc(y)
(√
(fctd)2 + σcp(y)fctd −τcp(y)
)
(4.24)
Since the slab is loaded on the sides, the assumption of unified compressing stress is
applied, and the simplified equation can calculate the shear stress at the centerline of the
cross­section. Symmetric tendon placement around the y­axis sets the moment stresses
equal to zero. The resulting stresses σcp are found by equation 4.7.
VRdc = φIbw
S
√
(fctd)2 + βαℓσcpfctd
(4.25)
The simplified equation introduces some reduction factors. β = 0.9 and φ = 0.8. Without
these factors, the equations mimic the Mohr column shear failure equation 4.26.
V = boI
A · y ·
√
(fctd)2 −σcpfctd
(4.26)
The moment of inertia is calculated using equation 4.28.
I = 1
12 · h · w3 −Ioval · n
(4.27)
Ioval = 3.14 ∗a ∗b3
4
(4.28)
38
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:45==
The static moment S is found in the lower section.
S = Ac
2 · h
2 + Asl · (dp
2 + dp)
(4.29)
The σcp is the compression stresses along the centre line of the cross­section.
σcp =
Fp · Ec
(Ac · Ec + Ap · Ep)
(4.30)
The reduction factor αl calculated from the
αl = lx
lpt2
(4.31)
lpt2 = 1.2 · lpt
(4.32)
lpt = α1α2ϕσpm0
fbpt
(4.33)
fbpt = ηp1η1fctd(t)
(4.34)
• Fp
= 600 kN, steel tendon prestressed force
• αl
= 0.7: reduction factor for the prestressed tendon
• β
= 0.9, reduction factor referred to transmissions length
• φ
= 0.8, reduction factor
• fctd(t)
= 1.31 MPa , reduced tensile capacity, 0.7 · fctd
• ηp1
= 2.7 for indented wires
• η1
= 1, good bond conditions
• α1
= 1, gradual release
• α2
= 0.23, circular cross section
• σpm0
= is the tendon stress right after release
• fbpt
= is the bond strength of anchorage
An assumption of 6 prestressing tendons is taken into account. Amount variations may
occur and the center­line compression force will increase and decrease in proportion to the
number of tendons active. Selectively 6 tendons are utilized to create a similar utilization
length to what the provider recommends. Parameters Ac and S are calculated with the
precaution of the open holes which reduces the shear strength. Applying all parameters
to equation 4.25, find the approximate shear strengths along the sides. End results are
listed in section 4.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
39
==PAGE:46==
4.4.3
Shear resistance approach
Another approach to determining the shear resistance is to assume a joint within the ele­
ment with reinforcement going across. The shear resistance is assumed at any point over
the cross­section, but with an assumption that two vertical forces work in contradictions
to each other. The shear resistance of the assumed joint can determine the elements’
capacity. To fully determine the resistance cracking angle from the load direction decides
the amount of reinforcement active. The shear behaviour is linked to the support condi­
tion. Therefore the calculation is not fully reliable as the shear behaviour for the case is
unknown. However, a calculation can indicate extra shear capacity if the failure lines can
be determined.
Figure 4.6: Top view of the assumed joint shear resistance
Figure 4.6 is a top view of the slab where the yellow section indicates a fictive joint. The
red dots are the placed reinforcement with the grey elements considered as two individ­
ual moving elements. For the calculation, the joint material is assumed equal to the two
moving elements. The surface connection between them is considered rough with a fic­
tion coefficient of 0.9 and the cohesion equal to 0.5. The angle of reinforcement must be
between 45°< α < 90°to consider the reinforcement. Therefore for the shear calculation
40
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:47==
regarding the active reinforcement, the angle between the shear plane and the reinforce­
ment can only be considered if the reinforcement has an angle of 45 °or higher. The joint
shear resistance can be calculated with equation 4.35
vRdi,a = c · fctd + µ · σn + ρ · fyd · (µ · sin α + cos α) ≤0.5 · v · fcd
(4.35)
Closer to the edges the cracking failure for a standardized beam has a low inclination
and can be considered without reinforcement, the steel yielding is removed, and the only
resistance is the concrete tensile stress and the friction created by the compressing ten­
dons. For shear calculations close to the edge the minimum angle of 45°can be utilized
with reinforcement.
Aj = H ·
w
cos(α) −Ahole
(4.36)
The shear resistance force is calculated with a parallel joint cross­section with consider­
ation of the holes. The normal stresses in equation 4.35 define the compressing stress
created by the tendon. The compressing force decays depending on the length of the
element. The degree of prestressing transmission αl is a reduction factor introduced by
Eurocode 1168. Reducing the normal force by a factor αl = 0.7 to compare the shear
capacity in section 4.4.2.
4.5
Flexural cracking
Another failure to calculate is the flexural cracking that can occur with bending. With
a loading scenario of point loads, the maximum moment is accumulated at the beam’s
central point. To counter the tensile stresses in the bottom fibre, a critical bending moment
can be located. The complexity of the support conditions requires some assumptions to
be made. To find the critical moment, the assumption of the support conditions can be
defined as a mean value between a fixed system and a hinged system.
Figure 4.7: Hinged and fixed supports
To define the cracking load, the slab is considered as a tall beam. The parameters are
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
41
==PAGE:48==
the same as in section 4.1.4 where the height = 1200mm and the width = the slab height.
The moment arm is connected to the length of the slabs. A length vector L reaching from
2 to 12 meters defines the length of the beam. To find the critical point load the circuital
moment is calculated with the moment of inertia. The tensile strength of the concrete and
the distance from the centre axis. With a symmetric cross section around the y­axis the
distance from the center­line is 600 mm. Resulting in the critical moment to be:
Mcr = σt · Iy
y
(4.37)
σt = fctd05
(4.38)
The moment of inertia is reduced given the hollow section of the concrete element. Given
by equation 4.39
Iy = b ∗h3
12
−nr · π · a · b3
4
(4.39)
The hinged and fixed connection formula is found in technical tables where the critical
section is the central bending.
Hinged connection:
Mcr =
Pcr ∗L
x ∗(L −x)
(4.40)
Fixed connection:
Mcr = Pcr · (x12 · x22 · 2)
L3
(4.41)
The parameter nr is the number of oval holes in a cross­section. Selectively the holes
are larger, but the assumption of oval holes simplifies the calculation procedure.
HCS
I [mm4]
y
Phing6000[kN]
Pfix6000[kN]
Pmean
180
2.588 · 1010
600
86.2
172.5
126.6
220
3.154 · 1010
600
105.1
210.3
154.3
270
3.854 · 1010
600
128.4
256.8
188.5
320
4.54 · 1010
600
151.3
302.7
220.9
400
5.60 · 1010
600
186.9
373.9
268.6
Table 4.9: Critical cracking force
42
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:49==
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Length of Slab [mm]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Jack forcing [kN]
Fixed versus Hinged HCS180
Hinged
Fixed
Mean
Figure 4.8: Central critical cracking force HCS180
4.6
Local failure
Failure mechanics of point loads are difficult to predict fully. The support conditions make
it hard to derive an analytical model without testing. To achieve a non­destructive dis­
assembly, the elements’ properties decide the behaviour. The amount of longitudinal
reinforcement and the elastic material properties indicate the shear capacity as the slab
is without shear reinforcement. The Mohr­Columb shear failure envelope indicates the
combined effect of normal force perpendicular to the shear surface [32]. The increased
normal force results in linear increased shear strength. The prestressed tendons apply a
normal force to the elements’ edge should give increased shear capacity. However, the
axial behaviour is had to assume. Local splitting can occur and splitting. To account for
this the Eurocode [28] introduces a load reduction factor.
4.6.1
Load reduction
Eurocode section 6.2.2 indicates some design limitations on loads applied on the upper
section of the beam. Point loads placed with a distance between 0.5d and 2d need to add
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
43
==PAGE:50==
a reduction factor β.
β = av
2d
(4.42)
The calculation approach is based on the shear resistance on a beam and should not
exceed the condition in equation 4.43.
Ved = 0.5 · bw · d · v · fcd
(4.43)
Applying the guidelines, the deep beam requires a minimum distance 0.5d from the edge
equal to 300mm. Depending on the loading distance, the shear capacity is reduced with
a β = 1
4.
av = 0.5 · 600mm = 300mm
(4.44)
Following the design choices, the minimum distance for the Jack placement is 300 mm
from the edge. Within 2d = 1200mm from the edge, the loading needs to be reduced.
However, that is for loads close to traditional supports and with alternative support and
no anchorage reinforcement. The reduction factor can be discussed. Nevertheless, Eu­
rocode section 6.2.2 (7) suggests loading close to supports should be modelled with a
strut and tie model.
4.6.2
Strut and tie
The strut and tie method has been investigated as a possible calculation procedure. The
method is overall a good approach to utilize the steel tendon in the existing cross­section.
However multiple assumptions needed to done to generate results. For reliability, the
model is not part of the report. With further testing, the strut and tie model can generate
reliable results. The main areas required assumptions are:
• Geometric extrusions. Given the slab contains holes throughout the hole depth of
the beam the redirection of the load towards the supports is crossing on or several
holes. The load behaviour is unpredictable and unknown without a model or testing.
• Supports. Depending on hydro demolition and concrete cutting the removal of joint
mortar can create uneven support connection. As the element is loaded horizontally
and perpendicular to gravity the tensile zone is not intuitively at the bottom section.
• Activation of reinforcement. The assumption is also required that reinforcement
is activated to withstand the tensile stresses. As the reinforcement is not symmetric
and is placed on the bending side of gravity, the reinforcement can not cover the
whole section.
44
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:51==
The strut and tie model can be utilized with correct assumptions which can be localized
by testing. There are experimental papers on strut and tie modelling approaches on deep
beams with several point loads [33]. It is a traditional setup with vertical bending and a
simply supported system. The experiment can be used as inspiration for a strut and tie
model for hollow core slabs. The slab geometry creates more complexity where the forces
have to be redirected over several extrusions and side­supported edges. The experiment
should also differ between symmetric and unsymmetrical reinforcement placement as well
as uneven support conditions.
The gain of the method is to find the optimized loading levels so the disassembly can
happen with changes. To model multiple point loads, a numerical approach is required to
ensure no local and global damages. This can be considered a future working condition.
4.6.3
Punching shear failure
There is a risk of punching failure depending on the geometry of hollow core elements.
The elements with larger cross­sections increase risk as forces must be redirected around
the inner holes. If concentrated forces are within the hole height, the risk of local failure
towards the hole may occur. The concrete section is not reinforced, which applies to the
tensile failure of the concrete. Eurocode 1168 [34] for pre­stressed elements provides a
resistance equation 4.45 which calculates the elements’ resistance towards point loads.
VRd = beffhfctd
(
1 + 0, 3α σcp
fctd
)
(4.45)
The equation normally considers the total height of the element and loading on the slab’s
cross­sectional height. In this case, the parameter h refers to the element’s width of 1.2
meters. The shear capacity of the whole section is large, but the possibility regarding
shear failure towards the first inner hole is present. By changing the height h to heff and
the full width b to beff, the local resistance can be calculated. The local section has no
reinforcement. Therefore the resistance is determined by the concrete tensile capacity,
and the equation can be simplified 4.46.
VRd = beffhfctd
(4.46)
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.9: Loading and geometry restrictions of punching shear capacity
• σcp
: is the concrete compressing stresses at the centroid of the axis
• beff
:is the effective width according to the web.
• heff
:is the effective height
• σcp
:is the concrete compression strength at the centroid axis
• α
:is a reduction parameter that describes the tendons anchoring
placement
• lx
: is the distance of the section considered from the starting point of the
transmission length
4.6.4
Crushing force
The local crushing force is determined by the equation 4.47. The maximum compressional
area is limited by a height limitation. To be conservative, a minimum design Ac1 area will
find the minimum compressional capacity the element can withstand.
FRdu = Ac0 · fcd ·
√
Ac1/Ac0 ≤3, 0 · fcd · Ac0
(4.47)
The area of crushing can be assumed to follow the same loading geometry as the hydraulic
Jack. To determine the minimum Ac1 the projected area at a distance X into the element
is determined by cover thickness. As the hydraulic jack is circular the increased radius
46
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:53==
close to the outer hole is determined by the increased radius δr .
δr = tan(θ) · Cside
(4.48)
Ac1 = (r + δr)2 ∗π
(4.49)
The angle θ limits the increased cross section by values between 45°and 22.9 °from sec­
tion 6.2.3 [28]. By applying the minimum angle the projected surface area Ac1 can be
found, and the crushing capacity can be determined.
• Ac0
:is loading area
• Ac1
:is maximum design distribution area
4.7
Autodesk Inventor: Finite element analysis
For simulating different loading scenarios, the Finite Element Method­based software Au­
todesk Inventor is used. The connections made to the slab under examination affect the
support conditions of the model. In this particular instance, a 6­meter HCS320 structure
is being assessed under a four­point load loading scenario. Based on the needed sepa­
ration force and taking into account the use of FJ­27 jacks with a thrust diameter of 225
mm2, the total force exerted by the jacks is calculated.
The support conditions are assumed to be fixed on the outward­facing side of the mortar
connection. This configuration effectively immobilizes the mortar, enabling the modelling
of the section between the slab and the joint. The geometric representation of the HCS320
structure is generated from the DWG file provided by the supplier.
To reinforce the structure, six steel tendons, each with a cross­sectional area of 93mm2,
are positioned within the cross­section. The mortar possesses a compression capacity
of 16 MPa and exhibits a thickness of 20 mm. Although the thickness of the mortar may
seem inconsequential, the focus lies on the forces acting between the components and
the resistance of the elements within the sections of interest. Moreover, the section of the
mortar is assumed to be rigidly connected to the remaining building, thereby maintaining
its immobility throughout the analysis.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
47
==PAGE:54==
Autodesk Inventor applies loads uniformly across the entire surface. Consequently, in or­
der to represent the areas where the jacks apply loads, four concrete sections measuring
5 mm in size are created. These sections serve as representations of the loading areas
associated with the jacks. Figure 4.10 depicts the slab prior to the incorporation of support
connections.
Figure 4.10: Inventor model with 4 point loads of 150kN
The HCS320 structure is undergoing analysis to assess the effects of force application
under three distinct support conditions. In the case of the side­supported condition, the
limitations identified in previous calculations regarding jacking are taken into account.
However, for the other support conditions, the loading configuration is handled by adding
the maximal jacking force available. The loading cases for the Inventor models are listed
as follows.
1. Side supports, 4 point loads with 150 kN each
2. Longitudinal top supports. The required force is too large for 4 jacks to handle, but
the maximum loading of 445kN per jack is applied.
3. Combination of top and side supports. Jack loading of 445 kN on each point. Not
enough to ensure splitting.
All models generate a construction mesh 4.11. The geometry is automatically generated
but it takes into account local sections and geometry. Picture 4.11 shows the referring
mesh of the longitudinal support.
48
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.11: Generated mesh with longitudinal supports
To generate a model close to reality the material properties are changed. The model works
with PSI units. To ensure collaboration the elastic compression and tensile capacity are
changed to PSI units. The shear modulus is calculated with equation 4.50
G =
E
2 · (1 + v) = 16.23
(4.50)
Precast concrete properties
• v
0.15: is the chosen Poisson ratio of concrete
• fck
55 MPa =7.977E +03 psi
• fct05
3 MPa =4.32E +02 psi
• E
38 GPa =5.11E +06 psi
• G
16.23 GPa =2.350E +06 psi
Mortar properties:
• v
0.2: is the chosen Poisson ratio of concrete
• fck
16 MPa =2.200E +03 psi
• fct95
2.6 MPa =3.62E +02 psi
• E
29 GPa =4.20E +06 psi
• G
12.08 GPa =1.740E +06 psi
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
49
==PAGE:56==
5
Results
This section presents and discusses the results. The results are presented section by sec­
tion, with a comparison of the different support conditions at the end. The Finite Element
models are presented and commented on after the Eurocode based design calculation.
All HCS are loaded with the individual corresponding jack shown in Table 4.7 to the ge­
ometric limitations of the element. The jack size and placement are not optimized and
the calculations are based on the design calculations from the Eurocode. The theoretical
approach is a good indication of the slabs’ behaviour toward realistic solutions.
5.1
Resistance force
The resisting force is calculated from the material’s elastic properties. Geometry and
the amount of material placed over the cross­section of the joint determine the required
resistance. Various mortar strengths are utilized in the industry and give multiple possible
solutions. To accomplish the separation, the elastic deformation of mortar needs to be
exceeded, and the calculation cases are based on three different capacities 12, 16 and
45 compression strength. The 95% fractile of mortar strength indicates the peak load
where the mortar capacity is the highest before breaking. The resistance is calculated with
several mortar capacities and with different support conditions. Each support condition
results in different loading and failure patterns. Each support condition should be checked
individually.
5.1.1
Side supported resistance
The side­supported scenario is where the loading resembles a traditional beam. The slab
is introduced to shear cracks and flexural cracks depending on the load placement. The
support resistance is determined by the mortar shear strength and a connection surface
with a length of 1.2 meters. The mortar capacity is given in Table 5.1 and shows the
resistance force in kN.
Mortar fck
12 MPa
16 MPa
45 MPa
HCS180
177.6
209.7
435
HCS220
259.6
306.6
636
HCS270
367.6
434.3
900
HCS320
425.6
502.8
1042
HCS400
555.6
656.2
1361
Table 5.1: Side supported resistance in kN
50
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:57==
The resistance encountered in structures with reduced surface area is dependent on the
strength of the mortar used. Typically, mortar connections in existing buildings exhibit
compressive strengths ranging from 30 to 45 MPa. A side­supported system can ensure
separation with a low amount of jacks. The disadvantage is increased preparation time
in the disassembly process. The use of hydro demolition for joint removal offers a sus­
tainable option, although it may be considered inefficient in terms of time consumption for
demolition purposes. Any case of side support can be plausible with the hydraulic jack
separation. This is based on the loading magnitude in table 4.8.
5.1.2
Longitudinal resistance
Longitudinal support on the top section of the element has a resistance purely based on
the mortar tensile stress capacity. The design tensile capacity of the mortar is also based
on the 95% fractile. The joint length is a domination parameter where the resistance
increases linearly to the length. Making incisions will reduce the tensile resistance but for
a conservative approach, the longitudinal resistance capacity is based on the full length
of the joint. The tables indicate the resistance force required at certain slab lengths.
The capacity increases with the mortar quality. If we assume the maximum magnitude
of the force the jacks can generate to 5000kN. Regardless of geometric limitations and
geometry. Purely based along the joint the resistance creates length limitations and is
marked as red in the tables. 5000 kN is represented an approximate value of 6 FJ­32
jack.
Meters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
HCS180
290
580
870
1160
1450
1740
2030
2320
2610
2900
3190
3480
HCS220
374
748
1122
1496
1870
2244
2618
2992
3366
3740
4114
4488
HCS270
470
940
1410
1880
2350
2820
3290
3760
4230
4700
5170
5640
HCS320
576
1152
1728
2304
2880
3456
4032
4608
5184
5760
6336
6912
HCS400
728
1456
2184
2912
3640
4368
5096
5824
6552
7280
8008
8736
Table 5.2: Mortar strength 12 MPa
Meters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
HCS180
362.5
725
1087.5
1450
1812.5
2175
2537.5
2900
3262.5
3625
3987.5
4350
HCS220
467.5
935
1402.5
1870
2337.5
2805
3272.5
3740
4207.5
4675
5142.5
5610
HCS270
587.5
1175
1762.5
2350
2937.5
3525
4112.5
4700
5287.5
5875
6462.5
7050
HCS320
720
1440
2160
2880
3600
4320
5040
5760
6480
7200
7920
8640
HCS400
910
1820
2730
3640
4550
5460
6370
7280
8190
9100
10010
10920
Table 5.3: Mortar capacity of 16 MPa
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
51
==PAGE:58==
Meters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
HCS180
711
1421
2132
2842
3553
4263
4974
5684
6395
7105
7816
8526
HCS220
916
1833
2749
3665
4582
5498
6414
7330
8247
9163
10079
10996
HCS270
1152
2303
3455
4606
5758
6909
8061
9212
10364
11515
12667
13818
HCS320
1411
2822
4234
5645
7056
8467
9878
11290
12701
14112
15523
16934
HCS400
1784
3567
5351
7134
8918
10702
12485
14269
16052
17836
19620
21403
Table 5.4: Mortar strength of 45MPa
With an assumption of a maximal thrust of 5000 kN the longitudinal joint has some length
limitation. To be on the safe side, the future experimental length of a longitudinal joint
should not exceed 6 meters, as the length of the slab limits the number of jacks that can
be placed.
5.1.3
Combined support
The combined support condition is the summation of the result above. Respectively the
longitudinal support is the dominating factor. A fully supported system is the optimal sce­
nario for disassembly. It requires minimum preparation time. However, the resistance
forces calculated with mortar capacities of 16 MPa in Table 5.5 and 45 MPa in Table 5.6
require a huge load generated to ensure separation. To accumulate jacking forces to a
value of 21000 kN requires 25 FJ­32 jacks. Limited placement and element capacity limit
disassembly possibilities.
Required splitting force 16 MPa
Length [m]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
HCS180
572
935
1297
1660
2022
2385
2747
3110
3472
3835
4197
4560
HCS220
774
1242
1709
2177
2644
3112
3579
4047
4514
4982
5449
5917
HCS270
1022
1609
2197
2784
3372
3959
4547
5134
5722
6309
6897
7484
HCS320
1223
1943
2663
3383
4103
4823
5543
6263
6983
7703
8423
9143
HCS400
1566
2476
3386
4296
5206
6116
7026
7936
8846
9756
10666
11576
Table 5.5: Required separation force in [kN]
Mortar strength 45 MPa
Length [m]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
HCS180
1145
1856
2566
3277
3987
4698
5408
6119
6829
7540
8250
8961
HCS220
1552
2469
3385
4301
5218
6134
7050
7967
8883
9799
10715
11632
HCS270
2052
3204
4355
5507
6658
7810
8961
10113
11264
12416
13567
14719
HCS320
2454
3865
5277
6688
8099
9510
10921
12333
13744
15155
16566
17977
HCS400
3145
4928
6712
8495
10279
12063
13846
15630
17413
19197
20981
22764
Table 5.6: Required separation force
52
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.1: Comparison mortar quality for combined support
Figure 5.1 indicates the importance of the joint strength as the slope increases with the
quality. If the design choice allows it, the possibility of using the reduced mortar strength
simplifies the disassembly method. If it can be reduced to a compression strength of 4.6
MPa, The resistance force is drastically reduced. If the reduced compression strength
can withstand the dimensional loads active in the building’s life span. Then a reduced
mortar strength is highly suggested for the disassembly method for a fully supported joint.
Length [m]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
HCS180
439
657
874
1092
1309
1527
1744
1962
2179
2397
2614
2832
HCS220
613
893
1174
1454
1735
2015
2296
2576
2857
3137
3418
3698
HCS270
830
1182
1535
1887
2240
2592
2945
3297
3650
4002
4355
4707
HCS320
985
1417
1849
2281
2713
3145
3577
4009
4441
4873
5305
5737
HCS400
1270
1816
2362
2908
3454
4000
4546
5092
5638
6184
6730
7276
Table 5.7: 4.6 MPa compression strength Mortar
5.2
Element shear resistance
The shear resistance of the slab depends on the loading condition and the element geom­
etry. When loaded as a deep beam, the shear capacity depends on the tendon placement
and the amount. The specified case is based on a calculation with 6 bottom steel tendons
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
53
==PAGE:60==
placed in the bottom half of the cross­section. The design placement makes the slab
great to resist bending. However, in a shear loading case, the geometry and placement
of the steel make it weak and the shear calculation is based on an element without shear
reinforcement. As the element has no stirrups it depends on the combination of shear and
axial force to increase the capacity. The six prestressed steel tendons create a compres­
sion force that increases the element’s resistance to splitting and sliding effects. The axial
force generated is assumed uniform through the whole cross­section but with frictional
and anchorage losses. Assuming a uniform distribution is not conservative, therefore a
reduction factor αl is introduced in Eurocode 1168. It represents the transition force of
the tendon. Eurocode 1992­1­1 [28] limits the compressional force in the tendon to 15%
of the compressional stresses. In the third method assuming a joint the reduction factor
αl should be introduced as the shear capacity depends on the angle of the steel and the
location of the crack in the element. Table 5.8 shows the shear resistance calculated by
the different methods.
Method 1 ­ Eurocode 1992­1­1
Slab size
HCS180
HCS220
HCS270
HCS320
HCS400
Vrd [kN]
122
140.5
161.3
169.6
188
Method 2 ­ Eurocode 1168
Vrd [kN]
441
606
803
927
1158
Method 3 ­Shear resistance Joint
Vrd [kN] 45°
1092
1265
1473
1538
1715
Vrd [kN]
517
527
538
573
612
Method 3 ­Shear resistance Joint [αl]
Vrd 45°
793
922
1078
1149
1306
Vrd
367
377
388
422
461
Table 5.8: Beam calculation ­ Eurocode 1992­1­1
The methods represent different approaches. To determine which methods represent the
deep beam best depends on supporting conditions and where the load is being redirected.
For a conservative view method 1 gives the smallest capacities, but the values are depen­
dent on the effective depth d. Method 2 is the proven calculation given in Eurocode 1168
for prestressed elements and takes into account the geometry and prestressing stresses.
The full equation could be utilized to find the full capacity, but the simplified is a valid
design shear resistance for the element. It should be noted that jack placement close to
the edge, between 300mm to 1200mm requires a reduction factor β applied to the shown
values. From the different methods, the shear resistance is determined from method 2
as it is the defined method for prestressed elements in the Eurocode. Method 1 is to be
54
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:61==
conservative while Method 3 takes the axial force and reinforcement into account, but
without testing the method is not fully reliable given cohesion and frictional assumptions.
5.3
Central cracking load
The cracking load represents flexural cracking failure that can occur as a result of bend­
ing. With a point­loaded system, the maximum bending occurs at the central point over
the beam span, where the moment depends on the distance to the closest support. With
a longitudinal joint present, limited bending will occur before a longitudinal crack has hap­
pened. For the support condition with a longitudinal joint, the assumption of a present
crack is required before the cracking load is active.
The calculation procedure in equation 4.37 finds the critical moment relative to the con­
crete tensile capacity occurring at the bottom concrete fibre. The wet joint decides the
deflection behaviour of the beam. Mortar is a monolithic adhesive material that can resist
low amounts of bending. With disconnected reinforcement, the moment capacity of the
support is reduced. The critical moment can be found by interpolation between a fix and
hinged support. The values in table 5.9 are the mean critical point load at any length
of the beam. The degree of correlation between the supports requires testing to find an
optimal value. To be conservative hinged supports create larger central bending exposed
to equal loading. It can be discussed that the cracking load should be represented from a
hinged system. Table 5.9 indicates the critical cracking load in the elastic field at different
element lengths. The calculation is not considered for the failure load, but for when the
element starts to crack.
Length
1 [m]
2 [m]
3[m]
4[m]
5[m]
6[m]
6[m]
7[m]
8[m]
10[m]
11[m]
12[m]
HCS180
759.8
379.9
253.3
190.0
152.0
126.6
108.5
95.0
84.4
76.0
69.1
63.3
HCS220
926.2
463.1
308.7
231.5
185.2
154.4
132.3
115.8
102.9
92.6
84.2
77.2
HCS270
1131.0
565.5
377.0
282.8
226.2
188.5
161.6
141.4
125.7
113.1
102.8
94.3
HCS320
1325.6
662.8
441.9
331.4
265.1
220.9
189.4
165.7
147.3
132.6
120.5
110.5
HCS400
1611.7
805.8
537.2
402.9
322.3
268.6
230.2
201.5
179.1
161.2
146.5
134.3
Table 5.9: Jacking force at Length x in [kN]
The cracking capacity depends on the moment of inertia. As the beam height is equal for
all cross­section, the width determines the capacity. Increasing the width of the element
is not correlated with the total capacity. Longer elements are more fragile to bending and
the critical moment drops in correlation to the length. Therefore length limitations can be
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
55
==PAGE:62==
introduced to a certain threshold. The hydraulic loading limitations are listed in section
4.3.2 and indicate the maximum pressure the related jack can exceed. The limitation is
related to the jack size. However, central loading on beams over 10 meters long limits the
utilization of the jacks.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Length of Slab [mm]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Jack forcing [kN]
Mean value-Central Jack loading 
HCS180
HCS220
HCS270
HCS320
HCS400
Figure 5.2: Mean jacking force based on flexural cracking capacity
5.4
Punching Failure
The punching resistance does not take into account any support condition. It depends on
the concentration and load geometry. The loading application of the jack increases the
risk of punching failure. Perpendicular reinforcement in the force direction and location of
the tendons can be neglected. Therefore the simplified equation indicates the resisting
force. Different calculation scenario is listed with result in Table 5.10.
1. The case with total height htot and the side capacity bside.
2. Local failure case with beff = hole size and heff = covering thickness
3. Upper and lower Ctop and Cbot
The loading scenario indicates the resistance in a two­dimensional view. Scenario 2 is the
most conservative. It takes the minimum cross­sectional area with beff and represents
56
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:63==
concentrated load within the hole area. If the loading exceeds the values, it can break into
the element. Scenario 1 represents a distributed load over the whole height. It increases
the resistance with a distribution plate in one direction. However, it should be checked for
distribution over a three­dimensional area. Scenario 3 represents the punching resistance
of the full plate. The capacity of the full plate is way larger than the local punching failure.
Vrd cases
HCS180
HCS220
HCS270
HCS320
HCS400
1: Full height h
10.6 kN
12 .7 kN
22.1 kN
23.6 kN
36.8 kN
2: Local failure heff
5.9 kN
8.5 kN
15.9 kN
18.3 kN
29.8 kN
3: Upper and lower section
246 kN
221 kN
223 kN
205 kN
209 kN
Table 5.10: Concentrated point load
The result indicates that the local resistance is too low considering the 5% fractile tensile
strength. The loading can be increased with increased surface area or a distributed load­
ing. A steel plate can be a suggested distribution surface. However, the magnitude of
the loading required for separation limits the jacking area. For further investigation, the
punching load should be assumed distributed or discarded to locate other design issues.
5.4.1
Crushing load
Crushing failure pertains to the structural failure of a member caused by excessive com­
pressive stresses that surpasses the concrete’s load­bearing capacity. When consider­
ing slabs, local crushing failure becomes a plausible scenario. Generally, local loading is
more likely to induce shear failure rather than crushing failure. The local crushing resis­
tance is calculated in a conservative manner, taking into account a limited cover thickness.
The cover thickness is restricted based on hole size, and the corresponding values can
be found in Table 4.4. The compression resistance is derived from a loading geometry
projected at a distance Cside into the cross­section. The projected area determines the
crushing resistance. The augmented surface Ac1 is assumed to have a circular loading
shape, employing a conservatively chosen direction angle of 22.9°. This angle restricts
the compression area Ac1. By utilizing conservative values for geometry, the crushing
capacity of the section shown in Table 5.11 can be determined.
Slab size
HCS180
HCS220
HCS270
HCS320
HCS400
Ac1[mm2]
7 ∗103
16 ∗103
32 ∗103
49 ∗103
89 ∗103
Frd [kN] θ = 22.9
197
502
989
1574
2860
Frd [kN] θ = 45
252
595
1174
1798
3251
Table 5.11: Crushing load
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
57
==PAGE:64==
The results show a clear relationship between the load­crushing capability and the di­
ameter of the jacking thrust. The ability to endure crushing forces grows with increasing
diameter. Geometrical borders do have restrictions, but the presence of a well­selected
angle makes sure that the extended compressional region stays within these limits. The
crushing force can be further increased by using a bigger θ angle. It is clear that the calcu­
lated crushing resistance is significantly greater than the maximum load when compared
to the jack’s loading capacity, as is shown in Figure 4.8. As a result, crushing issues are
not a local problem.
5.5
Load comparison
To compare the elements’ capacity up to a specific case, a 6­meter­long beam is selected.
The geometry and material properties are identical, as specified earlier. Regardless of
the joint strength, the element limitation is constant for each case. Table 5.12 indicates
the element limitation per cross­section. Calculations deepening on the loading geometry
consider the specific jack geometry based on the geometric restriction.
The table differentiates between the single load capacity and element capacity. The sin­
gle load capacity represents the local failure induced by a single load. In contrast, the
element capacity represents failure patterns through the element. From the table and fi­
nite element modelling, the hollow core slab is fragile to local punching failure. The cover
concrete on the sides is so thin that the element can not resist the load. With support
structures, the punching shear capacity can be increased. Out of the local failures punch­
ing shear failure is the worst case. However, concrete edges are fragile to splitting. A
calculation procedure to determine the loading case was conducted but discarded, given
the assumptions about the point load fracture. The temporary results are listed in the
Appendix.
The element capacity is calculated from the design approaches in the Eurocode for a deep
beam without shear reinforcement. The flexural cracking determines the central loading
capacity while the shear capacity determines the total shear force each edge can endure.
The load placement and the required splitting force determine the total capacity for this
specific slab. The capacity can be increased with more reinforcement and changed slab
geometry or the joint resistance can be reduced.
58
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:65==
Slab capacity at 6 meter length
Item
Element capacity
Single load capacity
Slab
Jack
Shear kN
Cracking kN
Punching kN
Crushing kN
HCS180
FJ­12
441
126.6
5.9
197
HCS220
FJ­17
606
154.4
8.5
502
HCS270
FJ­22
803
188.5
15.9
989
HCS320
FJ­27
927
220.9
18.3
1574
HCS400
FJ­35
1158
268.6
29.8
2860
Table 5.12: Slab capacity with corresponding loading jack
5.5.1
Existing buildings
A strong mortar of 45 MPa is used for the joint in the existing buildings. For the 6­meter
long beam, the resistance force generated from the different support conditions is listed
in Table 5.13. Out of the support conditions with a longitudinal section, the joint requires
high loading to break the elastic material capacity successfully. For the given element, the
shear and cracking capacity limits loading capability before cracking occurs. The shear
capacity is close to 10% for the longitudinal support, which is too low even with symmet­
ric loading conditions, which increases the point load capacity to 20% of the required force.
Out of the support conditions, the side­supported element has the best potential. The
shear capacity and cracking load can generate enough separation force. For existing
buildings, the mortar strength limits the disassembly method regarding non­destructive
separation. The side­supported system work given minor sections of mortar concrete
connections, but it is with the assumption that the local punching failure is overcome.
6 meter HCS with 45 MPa mortar
Item
Support conditions
Slab
Jack
Side kN
Top kN
Combined kN
HCS180
FJ­12
435
4974
4698
HCS220
FJ­17
636
5498
6134
HCS270
FJ­22
900
6909
7810
HCS320
FJ­27
1042
8467
9510
HCS400
FJ­35
1361
10702
12063
Table 5.13: Mortar compression capacity 45 MPa.
5.5.2
Reduced mortar strength
The disassembly method has a higher potential for joints with reduced mortar strength.
The resistance forces are listed in Table 5.14 and indicate the resistance is reduced by
half with a compression strength of 16 MPa. If its mortar strength is reduced further,
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
59
==PAGE:66==
the potential grows. The frame for reducing the compression strength is that the mortar
strength can resist the horizontal design load in the service period. For a 6­meter slab,
the resistance force is dominating, but in reality, it is lower due to the removed capacity.
The calculated resistance is reduced by half. This results in a lower force requirement
and excitation on the element. However, the combined and longitudinal support create
sizeable resistance, but the load can easier be distributed with less jacks.
Dimension loading case for 6 meter slab in kN
Item
Support conditions
Slab
Jack
Side kN
Top kN
Combined kN
HCS180
FJ­12
209.7
2175
2385
HCS220
FJ­17
306.6
2805
3112
HCS270
FJ­22
434.3
3525
3959
HCS320
FJ­27
502.8
4320
4823
HCS400
FJ­35
656.2
5460
6116
Table 5.14: Mortar compression capacity 16 MPa
5.6
FEM­Analysis
The FEM analysis in Inventor addresses three types of support conditions for separation.
A general case of a 6­meter beam section is applied with the hollow extrusions of the
slab. The analysis is divided into two loading cases. Each case has four hydraulic jacks
generating pressure to the element.
1. Side support: 150 kN on each jack, reaching a total force of 600kN.
2. Longitudinal and combined support: Because of the larger resistance, the maximum
jacking force of 445 kN is applied to each jack. A total of 1780 kN is applied.
The first principal stresses indicate the larges tensile stresses in the element. Sections
with only concrete can only resist stresses up to 3 MPa, but for non­destructive purposes,
a maximum tensile stress of 1.8 MPa should be tolerated. The third principal stresses in­
dicate the compressional forces where the largest negative value gives the highest com­
pressional force. High­quality concrete allows the design value of 43 MPa before the
elastic capacity is exceeded.
5.6.1
Side support analysis
A side­supported system requires lower jacking forces. However, the system is more ex­
posed to shear tensile cracks. The force redirection can create diagonal tension cracks
resulting from redirecting the point loads. Flexural cracks can occur from the active bend­
ing moment. The analysis results in high tensile stresses close to the edge and the loading
60
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:67==
areas. The maximum is located with a magnitude of 20,45 MPa tensile stresses under the
loading point. The green colour under the point load indicates punching failure. Green
edge sections indicate higher tensile stresses can result in diagonal cracking. Especially
in the top section, which does not contain any reinforcement. The separation starts at
the closes support regarding the loading. The slabs behave as a deep beam, but the
geometric cross­section limits the capacity.
Figure 5.3: Side support condition­ tensile stresses
Figure 5.4: Punching shear failure
The punching failure is expected as the punching capacity of the section is low. The
calculations indicate that the concrete cover is insufficient to redirect the acting stresses,
and some alternative approach is required. Increasing the distribution area lower the
acting stresses. The edge stresses will move along the joint to the corresponding crack
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
61
==PAGE:68==
that occurs. The minimum distance to the point loads should be maintained if possible
without the reduction factor β.
Figure 5.5: Compression stresses over the cross­section
Figure 5.5 indicates the compression forces around the hole under loading. The concrete
compressing capacity of ­43 MPa is larger than acting stresses, resulting in no indication
of crushing forces.
5.6.2
Longitudinal support
The longitudinal supports create low bending moments as a reaction to the short distance
between the load and the supports. The small moments result in minimal flexural cracking.
The bending moment can increase over time as the supports close to the loads start to
crack first, and the bending moment increases. The tensile failure along the joint cracks
when the stresses surpass the tensile capacity of the mortar. Figure 5.6 indicates failure
around the loading areas with the highest tensile stresses on the support mortar.
62
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.6: Tensile stresses longitudinal support
Figure 5.7 shows the loading under a point load. The active tensile stresses are larger
and closer to the support compared to the stresses at the inner hole. The reason can be
dependent on the distance of the support. The stresses around the holes would increase
with larger spacing between the load and the support. The support conditions require less
force redirection, resulting in lower diagonal shear stresses in the element. Still, the effect
of local stresses and compressed loading can create punching shear failure. The colour
of the inner hole indicates tensile stresses larger than 6.6, which create shear failure in
sections without reinforcement. Likewise, as in the side­supported scenario, the punching
shear failure is challenging for the disassembly method.
Figure 5.7: Tensile stresses at the section cut longitudinal support
The previous pictures illustrate a loading case with the maximum force possible for the FJ­
27 Jack with 445kN per jack. The generated force is not strong enough compared to the
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
63
==PAGE:70==
mortar resistance. The number of jack should be increased to model fully. However, the
images show significant tensile stresses at the mortar connections, which indicates split­
ting. The failure mechanics of mortar edge needs to be entirely determined to generate a
clear understanding of the loading sequence.
5.6.3
Combined support
The combined supported slab is a combination of the two other supports. The analysis
indicates tensile splitting of the longitudinal supports before the side mortar. This verifies
that the slab’s behaviour will first endure larger local stresses at the loads before the
stresses get transferred towards the side­supported scenario. The loading case of 1780
kN is insufficient to generate full splitting of the longitudinal joint. The longitudinal supports
limit bending and which indicates local stresses. With increased jack forces, longitudinal
cracks are formed, and the slab will begin to deflect in the side­supported case.
Figure 5.8: Tensile stresses
Figure 5.9 shows the compressive stresses acting on the element. The active stresses
are largest under the loading area, as expected. Higher concentrated loads result in local
failure.
64
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.9: Third principal stresses
All support conditions indicate shear punching failure is active. The point load is too close
to the edge as the tensile stresses for the side­supported slab are high. To encounter local
stresses, a steel distribution plate can be installed, or the outer holes can be filled with
light concrete to increase the local capacity. Support mortar around the corners can be
removed to redirect load further through the element to give larger resistance. A second
analysis is conducted by alternating a distribution plate and filling outer holes to investi­
gate if the local stresses can be reduced.
5.6.4
Filled outer holes
A possible solution to the local shear issues is to fill the outer hollow section with light
concrete or mortar. The added mass will help transfer the load through the element. Both
outer holes require filling as the loading can be a splitting force, or the element is acting
as part of the support element. The Inventor model shown in Figure 5.10 is loaded with
the same lightweight concrete mentioned in section 4.7.
The analysis showed reduced tensile stresses under the loading areas. The first princi­
pal stresses analyses 5.11 show no visible tensile stresses under the loading area. The
previously active shear stresses under the point loads have disappeared. Now the green
colour indicates the maximum tensile stresses are distributed towards the edges. It con­
cludes that a filled outer hole can solve the local failure.
Figure 5.12 shows the compressional forces are distributed diagonally towards the sup­
port. The increased concrete thickness contributes to force flow contained to the upper
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
65
==PAGE:72==
and lower concrete sections. The compression zone is diagonal toward the supports, with
the largest compression stresses active at the back edge. With increased cover thickness,
a strut and tie model can be a good experiment to determine the shear capacity.
Figure 5.10: Filled outer holes with lightweight concrete
Figure 5.11: Tensile stresses
66
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:73==
Figure 5.12: Third principal stresses filled hole analysis
5.6.5
Steel plate
Another solution to the punching shear failure is to install a distribution plate. Limiting
space between the slab and the jack makes it hard to fit these plates in reality, but thin
plates can be installed. The model is checked with a 5 mm thick steel plate. The steel
plate should be in full contact with the concrete to ensure even distribution. Increasing the
size of the distribution plate can result in increased capacity, but the element geometry
still is limited.
According to the analysis shown in Figure 5.14, it appears that there are higher tensile
stresses beneath the load. Tensile stresses at 14,65 MPa result in punching failure. Figure
5.13 indicates the distribution stresses on the steel plate. The issues seem to stem from
the steel plate’s thickness and the loading magnitude. To address this problem, an evenly
distributed load may be a more effective method for the side­supported system. However,
implementing a distribution plate can be more complex than simply filling the outer hole,
especially given the limited installation dimensions.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
67
==PAGE:74==
Figure 5.13: Von mises stresses distribution on the steel plate
Figure 5.14: Tensile stresses at inner hole
68
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:75==
5.7
Discussion
The support conditions and the separation force calculated in section 5.1.1, 5.1.2, and
5.1.3 is within the elastic material properties for brittle material. Exceeding the peak de­
sign load of the 95% fractile is conservative, given the reduced capacity from detaching
the reinforcement and removed support section for the hydraulic jacks. The demolition of
mortar supports will reduce the capacity, but the amount is linked to the number of jacks
applied. Therefore by applying the full elastic resistance as a loading parameter, the sep­
aration force is considered conservative to the real value.
From the three support conditions, the side­supported beam is the scenario that has the
lowest resistance but also creates larger bending moments and shear stresses. The side­
supported beam behaviour is more predictable and comparable to the element capacity
shown in Table 5.12. The longitudinal joint limits bending and diagonal shear, but local
failure around the loading areas can easily occur, given reduced load transition. The load
magnitude indicates the strain the element needs to endure, with an optimized load place­
ment that can be derived with successful testing. Edge placement limitations are a good
recommendation for spacing and should be considered as a dimension between the point
loads.
The theoretical approach to the disassembly method has found some limitations. The
slab geometry restricts loading, given an unfavourable geometry for the chosen loading
direction. The design purpose of the slab is not designed for side loading magnitude. The
geometry is weak for punching shear stresses and has low shear capacity. Therefore
the joint resistance should be reduced, or the elements’ capacity should be increased.
The FEM analysis concluded that a filled outer hole could increase the punching capacity
and should be tested on the other support conditions. Increased shear capacity is related
to the amount of active reinforcement. Slabs with symmetric reinforcement placement
should be considered for further investigation as the diagonal shear cracks can occur on
the top section.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
69
==PAGE:76==
Lower mortar compressive and tensile strengths are a solution for reduced joint strength.
This needs to be implemented into building practices. For existing buildings, the alterna­
tive is to remove larger pieces of the joint to reduce the active resistance. Focus on other
sustainable disassembly equipment like hydro demolition should be addressed further
compared to the efficiency and damage limitation to disassembly. The hydraulic jacks
create cracks in the existing mortar. The splitting behaviour of the joint need also to be
studied, as cracking patterns can result in larger frictional forces.
The disassembly method by Hydraulic Jacks sounds like a simple and efficient system. It
has the potential but relies on the element limitations can be solved. The governing factor
is the shear capacity and geometric punching shear. A level of physical testing is required
to the method to ensure safe disassembly.
Hydro demolition technology is also an exciting area to explore. If the method is reliable
and efficient. The machines can remove all the joints, and the element can easily be dis­
connected. The main point is the non­destructive ability that the hydro demolition method
claims. However, this requires elaboration and testing.
70
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:77==
6
Conclusion
Elaboration of a disassembly method with a wet joint is a complex endeavour when con­
sidering a non­destructive disassembly. The hollow core section has thin concrete sides
with a low amount of longitudinal reinforcement. This results in low shear resistance and
an element fragile to local failures. The assumptions are based on the materials’ elastic
properties and are conservatively reduced. The elements’ capacity is based on a deep
beam behaviour, and the support conditions are calculated from the mortar’s tensile and
shear resistance. Calculations are conservative and based on the capacity formulas from
the Eurocode. Therefore the theoretic approach should be a good indication. However,
the axial compression force assumptions from the steel tendons can be critical and de­
crease or increase the capacity. The following conclusions can be drawn from the study
based on the previous calculations and assumptions.
• Punching shear failure occurs at all support conditions with the current slab ge­
ometry. The concrete thickness between the loading and the hole is too thin to
distribute the load properly. The Eurocode calculations and the FEM model confirm
this. Actions are needed to increase the capacity.
• Shear capacity is otherwise the limiting factor of the element. The amount of re­
inforcement and the transitional axial force generated by the steel can increase the
capacity, but as the cross­section has no stirrups, the element is considered in the
Eurocode, a section without shear reinforcement with low capacity. Physical testing
can verify certain assumptions. The models’ edge loading results indicate critical
tensile stresses and cracks can occur.
• Mortar quality determines the required loading. For future buildings, a reduced
joint capacity simplifies the disassembly process.
• Element length can limit the disassembly possibility regarding the elements’ flexu­
ral crack capacity and shear capacity. Joint resistance increased linearly, and the
slab behaviour can limit hydraulic disassembly on long elements.
• Side­supported conditions result in low resistance. The behaviour is predictable,
and if the local failure can be solved, it can be disassembled by hydraulic jacks
To develop the disassembly method, further research is needed to understand the wet joint
behaviour and develop precise calculations for element capacity and failure mechanics.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
71
==PAGE:78==
6.0.1
Reccomendation for future work
For future studies, there a multiple approaches to consider. The disassembly method
using wet joints requires documentation and testing. The ideal goal would be to find a
loading level of the jack that can ensure separation without considering specified derails
regarding placement. A minimum distance to the edge and a working range per element
length need to be established. To achieve the goal, three main research on disassembly
should be considered.
• Physical testing
• Parametric design on loading and support conditions
• Numerical modelling of the shear resistance and the contribution of the prestressed
tendon.
An experiment can determine how point loading excites the element and find the fail­
ure patterns. It can verify the theoretical assumptions made to the structural behaviour.
There are multiple factors related to the shear capacity of the element and local failure.
An experiment can determine and document the behaviour. It can require some physical
loading limitations, which more advanced numerical models can provide. The experiment
can apply the strut and tie method suggested as a calculation approach from the Eurocode
and took inspiration from a deep beam experiment [33].
Secondly, a parametric structural design model can be linked to a finite element model
where loads can be connected to specific support cases. Parametric design enables
multiple variables to change independently of each other. This can optimize a loading
scenario on selective lengths, loads, supports and failure patterns.
Thirdly enhanced numerical models can help understand the internal contribution of the
prestressed tendon. From the Columb­Mohr failure criteria for brittle materials, the contri­
bution of axial force increased the shear capacity of the element. This research can help
determine minimum loading distances and loading capacities. It also helps determine the
assumptions of the transitional reduction factor αl. Working with a wet joint that creates a
ridged joint creates a safe construction. But solving the implementation of a disassembly
feature to the joint can increase the lifetime and building practice compared to dry joint
construction.
72
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Colin R Gagg. “Cement and concrete as an engineering material: An historic ap­
praisal and case study analysis”. In: (2014). DOI: 10.1016/j.engfailanal.2014.02.004.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2014.02.004.
[2]
Johanna Lehne and Felix Preston. “Making Concrete Change: Innovation in Low­
carbon Cement and Concrete | Chatham House – International Affairs Think Tank”.
In: The Royal Institute of International Affairs (2018), pp. 1–122. URL: https://www.
chathamhouse.org/2018/06/making-concrete-change-innovation-low-carbon-cement-
and-concrete.
[3]
Ghenwa Karim et al. Design For Disassembly of Concrete Elements Using Hy­
draulic Jacking Team members. Tech. rep. 2021. URL: www.byg.dtu.dk.
[4]
6_2_Fordeler.pdf. 2010. URL: https://docs.google.com/viewerng/viewer?url=http:
//betongelementboka.betongelement.no/betongbok/BindA/Del_2/A6/6_2_Fordeler.
pdf.
[5]
Cement carbon dioxide emissions quietly double in 20 years. URL: https://phys.org/
news/2022-06-cement-carbon-dioxide-emissions-quietly.html?fbclid=IwAR1kQJb18HthI4jIv5xXTTozO
X8BTxR3lP2Dse0NyoxbjrDtc0aR6RtPqc.
[6]
Nanda Naber. Reuse of hollow core slabs from office buildings to residential build­
ings. 2012. URL: https://repository.tudelft.nl/islandora/object/uuid%3Aa04416b7-
e8c0-499d-81c7-48c51b5e7fda.
[7]
Akash Rao, Kumar N. Jha, and Sudhir Misra. “Use of aggregates from recycled con­
struction and demolition waste in concrete”. In: Resources, Conservation and Recy­
cling 50.1 (Mar. 2007), pp. 71–81. ISSN: 09213449. DOI: 10.1016/J.RESCONREC.
2006.05.010.
[8]
Janusz Brol, Szymon Dawczyński, and Andrzej Ajdukiewicz. “Reuse of RC and
PC precast members as contribution to sustainable construction”. In: (2013). URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/287333583.
[9]
Wasim Salama. “Design of concrete buildings for disassembly: An explorative re­
view”. In: International Journal of Sustainable Built Environment 6.2 (Dec. 2017),
pp. 617–635. ISSN: 2212­6090. DOI: 10.1016/J.IJSBE.2017.03.005.
[10]
“Hulldekker av betong til ombruk Hollow core slabs for reuse”. In: (2022). ISSN:
3682:2022.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
73
==PAGE:80==
[11]
Hoda Abuzied et al. “A review of advances in design for disassembly with active dis­
assembly applications”. In: Engineering Science and Technology, an International
Journal 23.3 (June 2020), pp. 618–624. ISSN: 22150986. DOI: 10.1016/J.JESTCH.
2019.07.003.
[12]
Hoda Abuzied et al. “A review of advances in design for disassembly with active
disassembly applications”. In: (2019). DOI: 10.1016/j.jestch.2019.07.003. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2019.07.003.
[13]
S. L. Soh, S. K. Ong, and A. Y.C. Nee. “Design for disassembly for remanufacturing:
Methodology and technology”. In: Procedia CIRP 15 (2014), pp. 407–412. ISSN:
22128271. DOI: 10.1016/J.PROCIR.2014.06.053.
[14]
Hubert Bachmann and Alfred Steinle. Precast Concrete Structures. Wiley, Jan.
2012. ISBN: 9783433029602. DOI: 10.1002/9783433600962.
[15]
Philip S. Halding and Kristian D. Hertz. “Design for Disassembly of Super­Light
Concrete Structures”. In: 2021, pp. 49–58. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-76547-7{\_}5.
[16]
Yi Bao and Victor C. Li. “Feasibility study of lego­inspired construction with bendable
concrete”. In: Automation in Construction 113 (May 2020), p. 103161. ISSN: 0926­
5805. DOI: 10.1016/J.AUTCON.2020.103161.
[17]
John Marshall and Jitendra Bothara. DEVELOPMENT OF A DEMOUNTABLE PRE­
CAST CONCRETE FRAME BUILDING SYSTEM FOR SEISMIC REGIONS. Tech.
rep. 2017.
[18]
P. K. Aninthaneni et al. “Nonlinear Cyclic Behaviour of Precast Concrete Frame
Sub­Assemblies With “Dry” End Plate Connection”. In: Structures 14 (June 2018),
pp. 124–136. ISSN: 2352­0124. DOI: 10.1016/J.ISTRUC.2018.03.003.
[19]
Jianzhuang Xiao, Tao Ding, and Qingtian Zhang. “Structural behavior of a new
moment­resisting DfD concrete connection”. In: Engineering Structures 132 (Feb.
2017), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 0141­0296. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENGSTRUCT.2016.11.019.
[20]
Jiri Witzany et al. “A DEMOUNTABLE PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE BUILD­
ING SYSTEM OF MULTI­STORY BUILDINGS”. In: Proceedings of International
Structural Engineering and Construction 2.1 (Nov. 2015). ISSN: 2644­108X. DOI:
10.14455/ISEC.res.2015.138.
[21]
Lisbeth M Ottosen et al. STRUCTURAL REUSE Enabling business by reuse of
basic building components. Tech. rep. 2023. DOI: Ottosen, LisbethM.;Gustafsson,
KarolineFogh;LysgaardVind,Ditte;HagemannSnabe,Kathrine(2023).StructuralReuseMidwayConferencePublica
74
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:81==
TechnicalUniversityofDenmark . Onlineresource . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 11583 / DTU .
23043551.v1.
[22]
“ka13­erfaringsrapport­ombruk­rev1­250120­kl­1211”. In: Efaringsrapport ombruk KA13
(2021). URL: https://entra.no/storage/uploads/article-documents/1_ka13-erfaringsrapport-
ombruk-20012021.pdf.
[23]
Gul Polat. “Factors Affecting the Use of Precast Concrete Systems in the United
States”. In: Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 134.3 (Mar. 2008),
pp. 169–178. ISSN: 0733­9364. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(2008)134:3(169).
[24]
Downloads | Hydra Capsule, UK. URL: https://www.hydra-capsule.com/downloads.
[25]
Concrete removal & repair with Robotic Hydrodemolition | Conjet. URL: https://
www.conjet.com/.
[26]
EN 1990­1: EC0. “EN 1990­1: Eurocode 0 ­ Basis of structural design”. In: EU,
Regulation 305/2011 1990.2002 (2002).
[27]
Eurocode ­ BS EN and Wolfgang Schwind. “BS EN 1991­1­1­1: Eurocode 1 ­ Ac­
tions on structures ­ Part 1­1: General actions ­ Densities, self­weight, imposed
loads for buildings”. In: Bauingenieur 86.JULY­AUGUST (2011). ISSN: 14364867.
[28]
Chanakya Arya. “Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures”. In: Design of Struc­
tural Elements. 2015. DOI: 10.1201/b18121-18.
[29]
Xtrumax huldæk. URL: https://spaencom.dk/betonelementer/daekelementer/xtrumax-
huldaek/.
[30]
Elementfugemørtel | Marlon Tørmørtel A/S. URL: https://marlon.dk/produkter/
kloakrenovering-montage-og-elementmoertel/elementfugemoertel.
[31]
Jensen . Bjarne Chr. Teknisk ståbi. 23. udgave. København: Nyt Teknisk Forlag,
2015, pp. ­436.
[32]
Joseph F. Labuz and Arno Zang. “Mohr–Coulomb Failure Criterion”. In: Rock Me­
chanics and Rock Engineering 45.6 (Nov. 2012), pp. 975–979. ISSN: 0723­2632.
DOI: 10.1007/s00603-012-0281-7.
[33]
R. L. Vollum and L. Fang. “Shear enhancement in RC beams with multiple point
loads”. In: Engineering Structures 80 (Dec. 2014), pp. 389–405. ISSN: 0141­0296.
DOI: 10.1016/J.ENGSTRUCT.2014.09.010.
[34]
DS/EN 1168 +A3: Precast concrete products­Hollow core slabs. Tech. rep. 2011.
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
75
==PAGE:82==
76
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:83==
A
Appendix
A.1
Mortar
 
 Produktinformation 
MARLON Elementfugemørtel 35, 45, 60  
Pumpbar, ekspanderende fuge- og understøbningsmørtel 
Produktbeskrivelse: 
Marlon Elementfugemørtel er 
et færdigblandet ekspande-
rende tørmørtel produkt, der 
på byggepladsen kun skal til-
sættes vand. 
Elementfuge-
mørtel findes i flere variatio-
ner bl.a. som 35, 45 og 60 
MPa., Ligeledes fås varianter-
ne også i en vinterudgave. (se 
separat datablad) Alle typer 
Elementfugemørtel er med sin 
plastiske konsistens pumpbar, 
og kan med fordel blandes i 
en automatisk blandepumpe. 
Produkterne er fremstillet af 
portlandcement, 
ekspande-
rende, 
vedhæftningsforbed-
rende- og plastificerende til-
sætningsstoffer, 
samt 
ovntørret kvartssand med en 
kontrolleret kornkurve. Til-
slagsmaterialet opfylder kra-
vene til miljøklasse E jvnf. DS 
2426. Elementfugemørtel er i 
afbundet tilstand vand- og 
frostbestandig. 
 
Anvendelsesområde: 
Marlon 
Elementfugemørtel 
anvendes til fugning og under 
støbning af præfabrikerede 
betonelementer i såvel vand- 
som lodrette fuger. Samling at 
hjørner, fugning af betonele-
mentdæk og til lign. opgaver.  
 
Blanding: 
Marlon 
Elementfugemørtel 
tilsættes (afhængig af type) 
ca. 3,5-3,9 ltr. koldt vand pr. 
25 kg. tørpulver, efterfulgt af 
effektivt blanding i en egnet 
tvangsblander. Manuel blan-
ding kan gøres med langsomt-
gående 
boremaskine 
påsat 
piskeris eller evt. ved hånd-
blanding. Vandet hældes først 
i baljen, derefter tilsættes  
 
 
tørproduktet, og der blandes 
grundigt til der opnås en god 
bearbejdelig konsistens. Blan-
detiden er min. 5 minutter.  
Alternativt kan der anvendes 
en egnet blandingspumpe.  
Der bør ikke blandes mere 
mørtel end der kan bruges 
inden for ca. 20 min.  
  
Forarbejde: 
For at sikre størst mulig ved-
hæftning til gammelt beton 
skal underlaget være rent for 
cementslam, støv, olie, fedt 
og andre løstsiddende uren-
heder. Den afrensede overfla-
de forvandes, så den har et 
ensartet, mat udseende og er 
svagt sugende for at sikre 
mørtelen tilstrækkelig ved-
hæftning 
 
Efterbehandling: 
Nyudstøbte fuger skal beskyt-
tes mod for hurtig udtørring  
 
 
ved træk, høje temperaturer, 
solbestråling m.m. I varme og 
tørre 
perioder 
eftervandes 
fugen.  
 
Egenskaber: 
Ved oprøring med den anførte 
vandmængde fås en standfast 
mørtel med god vedhæftning 
til 
underlaget. 
Produktet 
fremtræder med en natur grå 
farve, som fremkommer ved 
blanding 
med 
portlandce-
ment.  
 
Begrænsninger: 
Fuge- og understøbningsopga-
ver bør ikke foretages ved 
temperaturer under + 5 ºC. 
Elementfugemørtel tåler ikke 
frost i afbindings- og hærde-
perioden. 
 
 
 
fortsættes… 
  
 
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
77
==PAGE:84==
A.2
Flat Jacks
tel: +44 (0) 1885 490405        www.hydra-capsule.com       email: sales@hydra-capsule.com
FLAT JACKS
PERMANENT FLAT JACKS
TEMPORARY FLAT JACKS
Hydra-Capsule low height flat jacks range from 8 to 1000 tons
in capacity. The ultra compact jack is capable of exerting
extremely high thrust forces. They are normally used by the
civil and construction industry for a multitude of applications,
such as heavy lifting of structures, stressing operations,
transferring existing loads to temporary or permanent
supports and permanently pre-loading operations for 
buildings, steelworks or bridge bearings.
 
All our Hydra-Capsule flat jacks are designed, fully tested
and manufactured in-house within our special facility.
 
flat jack
funnel
flexible
lines
double
acting
pump
flexible
or hard
lines
injection
cylinder
pressure
gauge
Where a permanent force / load is required to a structure,
flat jacks are installed in-situ and inflated using a high
pressure injection system, epoxy resin or cementitious
grout can be precisely injected.
 
This process is primarily implemented whist carrying out
works for pre-loading of structural steelworks or part of
other alterations, such as, underpinning or bridge bearing
replacement operations.
 
The benefits of permanent flat jacks are:
 
            Permanently induced force.
 
            Known and precise load induction.
 
            Balanced loading of multiple sets.
 
            Very low crushing forces, 14 N/mm
 
            Jacks can be pre-cast into concrete blocks.
            
 
2
Hydra-Capsule Ltd provide a full design, in-house
manufacturing for bespoke units and installation
service offered throughout the UK, Ireland and
Europe using our specially trained and qualified
Engineers.
            
 
flat jacks
isolation
valves
manifold
pressure
gauge
flexible
hoses
hand
pump
When flat jacks are required for a temporary duration and
subsequently removed, the operation is normally executed by
inflating the jacks with either water or hydraulic oil.
 
The benefits of temporary flat jacks are:
 
              Used as load cells when connected to pressure transducers
              with calibrated digital readout displays.
 
             Continuous load monitoring and adjustment possible.
 
             Uniform loading of multiple sets.
 
             Ability to transfuse jack fluid from temporary to permanent grout.
              
            
 
100
200
300
0
400
500
600
700
10000
8000
6000
bar
psi
0
1
Figure A.1: Jack applications
78
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:85==
SELECTION CHART
closed
open
CAPACITY
(tons)
CLOSED
HEIGHT
THRUST
DIAMETER
MAXIMUM
STROKE
MAXIMUM
PRESSURE
FLUID
LITRES
WEIGHT
(KGS)
FJ-12
JACK
CODE
8
28
120
75
25
150 bar
0.3
4
FJ-15
15
29
150
105
25
150 bar
0.5
8
FJ-17
20
29
170
125
25
150 bar
0.8
9
FJ-19
25
30
190
145
25
150 bar
1.1
10
FJ-22
40
30
220
175
25
150 bar
1.2
16
FJ-25
50
30
250
205
25
150 bar
1.3
19
FJ-27
60
31
270
225
25
150 bar
1.6
20
FJ-30
80
32
300
254
25
150 bar
1.9
23
FJ-35
100
34
350
304
25
150 bar
2.6
26
FJ-38
130
34
380
334
25
150 bar
3.1
28
FJ-42
160
35
420
373
25
150 bar
3.6
29
FJ-45
180
36
450
403
25
150 bar
4.1
30
FJ-48
210
36
480
433
25
150 bar
4.7
32
FJ-52
265
36
520
473
25
150 bar
5.7
36
FJ-54
280
37
540
493
25
150 bar
5.9
37
FJ-56
300
37
560
512
26
150 bar
6.2
38
FJ-75
600
39
750
700
32
150 bar
12.4
89
FJ-60
345
38
600
553
27
150 bar
7.4
43
FJ-50
235
36
500
453
25
150 bar
5.1
34
OUTSIDE
DIAMETER
from 8 to 1000 tons capacity
FJ-87
FJ-92
FJ-102
760
39
870
820
35
150 bar
16.8
111
870
42
920
895
36
150 bar
18.7
126
1000
55
1020
940
40
150 bar
24.5
172
FJ-69
480
38
690
640
28
150 bar
10.5
67
When selecting a flat jack the ideal working range should be 25% to 75% of the jacks capacity.
TYPE ‘A’
TYPE ‘B’
thrust area
thrust area
2
 
Figure A.2: Jack applications
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
79
==PAGE:86==
tel: +44 (0) 1885 490405        www.hydra-capsule.com       email: sales@hydra-capsule.com
TYPICAL APPLICATIONS
Flat jacks can be set-up in multiple groups to enable
the lifting of very heavy structures, such as, bridges to
change existing defective elastomeric bearings. The 
loads and movements of each group can be precisely
monitored and controlled using our fully synchronised
electronic pumping systems.
 
Flat jacks are ideal for dealing with unwanted foundation
settlements occurring during constriction works or building
alterations. The jacks are initially inflated with water and
then at a later stage after settlement transfused to grout
to make them permanent.
 
Ground Settlement Compensation
 
Lifting Heavy Structures
 
Flat jacks are commonly used for pre-loading new
steelworks to enable the formation of openings within
load bearing walls with zero deflection. The stressing
operation is normally carried-out using grout filled units
and electronic movement sensors to determine the exact
lifting point during loading. The arrangement can also be
used for pre-stressing new strengthening beams fitted
below a weak structure.
 
Pre-Loading of New Steelworks
Using grout filled or transfusion flat jacks to pre-load replacement
bridge bearings provides an effective method of loading individual
bearings to a specific load or deflection. Once installed and loaded
the flat jacks are normally encased within the bearings grout plinth.
 
 
Pre-Loading of Bridge Bearings
Shown below are just a few examples of flat jack applications.
Hydra-Capsule flat jacking systems have been successfully used
on a multitude of major projects worldwide for over 25 years.
 
 
Flat jacks are commonly used for pre-loading horizontal struts
for major ground work projects prior to excavation taking place,
ensuring unwanted settlements or excessive deflections do not
occur. The strut is normally supported by angle brackets, one
end is grouted and the flat jack is placed at the opposite end. 
The grout filled flat jack is then loaded to 90% of the calculated
imposed force thus providing safe excavation.
Excavation Strut Pre-Loading
3
Figure A.3: Jack applications
80
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:87==
100
175
Maximum Capacity:
  
8 tons
Maximum Stroke:
 25mm
Maximum Pressure:  150 bar
Fluid Requirement:
 
0.3 Lts
Jack Weight:
  
4.0 Kgs
75
Steel
Thrust Plates
120
30
Input
Fitting
Isolation
Valve
HEAVY  DUTY  JACKING  SYSTEMS
HYDRA-CAPSULE
DESCRIPTION:
DRAWING No.
   
FJ-12 Flat-Jack
Xara / FJ-12 / 2007-A
FJ12 Flat Jack
Figure A.4: Flat Jack FJ­12
100
175
Maximum Capacity:
  
20 tons
Maximum Stroke:
 25mm
Maximum Pressure:  150 bar
Fluid Requirement:
 
0.8 Lts
Jack Weight:
  
9.0 Kgs
125
Steel
Thrust Plates
170
32
Input
Fitting
Isolation
Valve
HYDRA-CAPSULE
DESCRIPTION:
DRAWING No.
   
FJ-17 Flat-Jack
Xara / FJ-17 / 2007-A
FJ17 Flat Jack
HEAVY  DUTY  JACKING  SYSTEMS
Figure A.5: Flat Jack FJ­17
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
81
==PAGE:88==
HEAVY  DUTY  JACKING  SYSTEMS
100
175
HYDRA-CAPSULE
FJ-22  Flat-Jack
Maximum Capacity:
  
40 tons
Maximum Stroke:
 25mm
Maximum Pressure:  150 bar
Fluid Requirement:
 
1.2 Lts
Jack Weight:
  
16.0 Kgs
175
Steel
Thrust Plates
220
32
Input
Fitting
Isolation
Valve
DESCRIPTION:
DRAWING No.
   
FJ-22 Flat-Jack
Xara / FJ-22 / 2007-A
Figure A.6: Flat Jack FJ­22
100
175
Maximum Capacity:
  
60 tons
Maximum Stroke:
 25mm
Maximum Pressure:  150 bar
Fluid Requirement:
 
1.6 Lts
Jack Weight:
  
20.0 Kgs
225
Steel
Thrust Plates
270
32
Input
Fitting
Isolation
Valve
HYDRA-CAPSULE
DESCRIPTION:
DRAWING No.
   
FJ-27 Flat-Jack
Xara / FJ-27 / 2007-A
FJ27 Flat Jack
HEAVY  DUTY  JACKING  SYSTEMS
Figure A.7: Flat Jack FJ­27
82
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:89==
100
175
Maximum Capacity:
  
100 tons
Maximum Stroke:
 25mm
Maximum Pressure:  150 bar
Fluid Requirement:
 
2.6 Lts
Jack Weight:
  
26.0 Kgs
305
Steel
Thrust Plates
350
32
Input
Fitting
Isolation
Valve
HYDRA-CAPSULE
DESCRIPTION:
DRAWING No.
   
FJ-35 Flat-Jack
Xara / FJ-35 / 2007-A
FJ35 Flat Jack
HEAVY  DUTY  JACKING  SYSTEMS
Figure A.8: Flat Jack FJ­35
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
83
==PAGE:90==
A.3
Hydro demolition
HYDRODEMOLITION
WHAT IS HYDRODEMOLITION?
Hydrodemolition is a concrete removal technology that employs high-pressure water to remove 
damaged concrete, as well as asphalt and grout. This method creates a great bonding surface for 
repair and new coating applications.
Conjet’s concrete hydrodemolition robots use a high-pressure water jet, which travels over the 
concrete surface at a constant speed, taking advantage of the concrete’s permeability to create an 
overpressure that breaks it apart. The automation of the hydrodemolition robots allow operators 
to easily execute both selective and non-selective removals.
THE SUPERIOR METHOD FOR LONG-LASTING, HIGH-QUALITY CONCRETE REPAIRS.
Selective removal is the preferred method when 
only the deteriorated concrete needs to be remo-
ved. Our concrete hydrodemolition robots use 
high-pressure water up to 22,000 psi (1500 bar) to 
selectively remove concrete at a predetermined 
quality level.
Non-selective removal (also known as “hydro-
milling”) is the preferred method when concrete 
needs to be removed to a predetermined depth, 
independent of the quality of the concrete. The 
ACR™ robot uses high-pressure water above 
22,000 psi (1500 bar).
No matter what option you choose, the high-pres-
sure water jet technology will create a rough sur-
face optimal for bonding of new concrete without 
creating any micro-cracks or damage to the 
remaining structure. At the same time, the hydro 
demolition technique leaves the rebar intact and 
cleaned from rust and corrosion.
With Conjet ACR™ robots, you control the end 
result, always ensuring you meet the customer’s 
specifications.
84
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:91==
Hydrodemolition technology removes concrete using water pressure of up to 3000 bar, for 
long-lasting, high quality repairs. It creates no micro-cracks and leaves an ideal bonding surface 
for the fresh concrete.
Our ACR™ robots remove concrete by moving a high-pressure water jet over the surface in a pre-
determined pattern at a predetermined speed until the desired depth is reached. This is repeated 
over the entire surface in order to guarantee the same quality depth over the entire structure.
The remaining surface is free from delaminated or otherwise damaged concrete leaving a perfect 
surface for the new concrete to bond to.
In the process of hydrodemolition, no micro cracks are introduced to the structure. Neither does 
hydrodemolition cut the rebars. If there is corrosion on the rebars, it is removed in the hydrodemo-
lition process.
ADVANTAGES
•	
Does not cause micro-cracks in the remai-
ning structure, which ensures that the repair 
will be long-lasting with a high quality.
•	
Worker health & safety: creates no vibra-
tions, and noise and dust are dramatically 
reduced.
•	
Allows selective and non-selective removal.
•	
Keeps the rebars clean and intact.
•	
Prepares a surface ideal for bonding 
between old and new concrete.
•	
Improved efficiency – more than 25 x faster 
than mechanical jackhammering.
The operator programs the 
robot and monitors the result.
Pressing any of the emergancy stops on 
either the robot, the remote-control box 
or the pump shuts down all applications, 
including the high pressure water.
The high-pressure pump provides 
water flow matching the determi-
ned pressure level defined by the 
nozzle size on the robot.
The robot works according to the set parame-
ters, while communicating with the operator’s 
radio control box and the high pressure pump.
HOW DOES HYDRODEMOLITION WORK?
WHY CHOOSE HYDRODEMOLITION?
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
85
==PAGE:92==
Hydrodemolition equipment enables a versatile, safe, and precise way to repair concrete for a wide 
variety of large-scale, small, and hard-to-reach projects ranging from concrete structure repair 
and removal, to surface repair and many more. Whether you need simple surface preparation or 
a complete concrete excavation and removal, our ACR™ robots can help. Conjet’s hydrodemolition 
equipment is utilized within several industries to help restore and repair structures and infra-
structure such as, but not limited to:
•	
Roads, bridges, and runways
•	
Ports and quays
•	
Parking decks
•	
Canals and locks
•	
Dams, spillways, and turbines
•	
Pillars, piles, and columns
•	
Tunnels, aqueducts, and pipes
•	
Nuclear power plants
•	
Water treatment facilities
•	
Stadiums and warehouses
THE IDEAL AREAS OF APPLICATION FOR 
HYDRODEMOLITION EQUIPMENT
86
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:93==
Repairing a large surface with hydraulic breakers or jack-
hammers is simply ineffective and causes damage to the 
remaining structure, requiring extra work to repair.
Hydraulic breakers or jackhammers do not give the ope-
rator the control needed for optimal and precise concrete 
removal.
One Conjet ACR™ robot can do the work of up to 25 jack-
hammer operators, reducing cost and increasing produc-
tivity and safety. Noise is greatly reduced, and silica dust 
exposure and ”white-fingers syndrome” (caused by vibra-
tions from jackhammers) are completely avoided using 
Conjet ACR™ robots.
SAFETY
The biggest challenge on all work sites where 
concrete is being removed, or even demolished, 
is to secure work and health safety for the ope-
rators. Due to the fact that our hydrodemolition 
ACR™ robots are able to operate from a distan-
ce to the concrete removal location, greatly re-
duces dust and noise pollution, and eliminates 
vibrations, they are among the safest concrete 
removal methods in the industry.
SELECTIVE & NONSELECTIVE REMOVAL
By selecting the proper pressure level and flow, 
selective removal can be achieved. Below a cer-
tain pressure level, the water will not cut the 
aggregate, only the paste bonding the aggrega-
te together. Since the water follows the laws of 
hydraulics: easiest way out, the less competent 
concrete will be removed, and the stronger will 
remain. By increasing pressure, you can also 
achieve nonselective removal whenever you 
need to remove both the aggregate and paste.
SUPERIOR BONDING
Hydrodemolition does not create any mi-
cro-cracks in the remaining structure, which en-
sures that the repair will be long and lasting and 
high quality. It removes all unsound concrete, le-
aving a clean and roughened surface, improving 
the quality and performance of newly applied 
coating.
SUSTAINABLE
Noise and dust pollution as well as vibrations 
are dramatically reduced using hydrodemoli-
tion. It extends the useful life of the structure 
and due to the increased lifespan of structures 
that have been rehabilitated with hydrodemoli-
tion, less maintenance will be necessary in the 
future.
AUTOMATED
Automation leads to efficiency and ease-of-
use. One ACR™ hydrodemolition robot can do 
the work of 20 mechanical jackhammers. Intel-
ligent, wireless communication between ope-
rator, robot and pump enables unified startup 
and emergency shutdown.
OPTIMIZED RESULTS
Hydrodemolition ensures high quality, long-las-
ting repairs by creating a surface ideal for bon-
ding as well as preserves and cleans rebars. This 
results in a longer useful life, lower maintenan-
ce costs for the concrete structure, and reduced 
risk of warranty claims for the contractor.
HYDRODEMOLITION VS. HYDRAULIC 
BREAKERS AND JACKHAMMERS
BENEFITS OF HYDRODEMOLITION
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
87
==PAGE:94==
ACR™ ROBOT 
101 NALTA
The name Nalta, the Northern Swedish word for half 
of half, embodies the goal when Conjet designed 
the Robot 101 Nalta, the smallest and lightest fully 
automated concrete removal and surface preparation 
robot on the market. The Nalta is specifically designed 
to operate where space is limited, such as between 
a building and scaffolding. It can also quickly be 
dismantled into components small and light enough to 
be carried by one person. 
The Nalta allows concrete removal and surface 
preparation in narrow, confined areas inaccessible 
with other methods. The Nalta is remotely operated 
from a distance of up to 164 feet (50 meters) on 
horizontal, vertical or angled surfaces. 
ACR™ ROBOT 101 NALTA
Efficient and portable
OPTIMAL FOR
•	 Bridge bearing foundations
•	 Dam surfaces and spillways
•	 Dry docks and quay docks
•	 Canals
•	 Under water
World’s smallest hydrodemolition robot
Due to the unique design of the Robot 101 Nalta, where no 
electrcial sensors is present at the cutting head, the robot can 
safely be used underwater for repair of bridge foundations and 
similar structures.
The Nalta consists of a cutting head mounted on a feed beam. The 
feed beam features step units that connect to standard scaffolding 
pipes. You also have the ability to design custom pipe framing to 
suit your specific needs. 
ACR™ ROBOT 101 NALTA
FEATURES
•	
Light and compact for narrow and inaccessible 
areas​
•	
No electrical sensors at the cutting head
•	
Operates under water​
•	
Remotely controlled by a handheld remote 
control box to secure the operators and 
bystanders safety
•	
Can be dismantled for transportation and easy 
handling
•	
The stepping frame is built from standard 
scaffolding components
•	
Prepared for Conjet Connect
TECHNICAL DATA
Length per section
990mm (3ft 3in)
Weight per section
8kg (18lb)
Weight lance unit
12kg (26lb)
Weight step unit
9kg (20lb)
Weight hydraulic unit
90kg (198lb)
Maximum reaction force
600N
Power supply
1/3 phase, 50/60 Hz
Maximum water pressure
3000bar
  CE, EMC certified
Conjet AB 
Albybergsringen 118
SE-137 69 Österhaninge
SWEDEN  
+46 (0)8 55 65 22 40
Bridges. Parking Decks. Dams. Tunnels. Piers. If a concrete structure needs repair, 
Conjet has the optimal concrete removal solution for the task. 
For over 35 years, we have led the development of robotic hydrodemolition 
technology – a technology with a proven track record as the most sustainable and 
effective method for concrete removal and other types of surface preparation.
We provide world class training and aftersales support for our partners and 
customers, Team Conjet, to ensure that projects are successfully performed in a 
safe, precise and efficient manner. 
At Conjet, our collective knowledge and expertise has been built into our 
Automated Concrete Removal robots. Safe for the structure, safe for the operator 
and safe for the environment.
We call it ACR™
Conjet Inc.
3400 Int’l Airport Dr., Ste 100
Charlotte, NC 28208
USA
20221101
conjet.com
Figure A.9: Conjet Robot 101 Nalta
88
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:95==
ACR™ ROBOT 
327
ACR™ ROBOT 327
Compact and flexible
Robot 327 is fully automated via the Conjet ONE control system. The robot has been developed to work in 
confined spaces and areas. It passes easily through an opening less than 0,9m (3ft) wide.
Mirrored color display on both 
machine and remote control 
for easy configuration and 
monitoring. 
OPTIMAL FOR
• Parking decks
• Narrow tunnels
• Pipes
The Robot 327 is highly customizable. The different 
variations of tools and arms can be combined to match 
your project’s needs. Apart from the arm and tool 
configurations, the high pressure lance of Robot 327 
can be equipped with either a single oscillating nozzle 
or a double nozzle assembly. Furthermore, a ship 
cleaning and paint removal rotor head can be selected.
FEATURES
•	
Fully automated via the Conjet ONE control system
•	
Track extensions for maximum stability
•	
Track sensors control travel distance
•	
Arm and feed beam can rotate 360°
•	
Removable side-covers enabling optimum reach in corners
•	
Compact feed-beam
•	
Accessory kit makes it very flexible and multi-purpose
•	
Prepared for Conjet Connect
Width - carrier
820-1200mm (2ft 8.3in-3ft 11in)
Cutting width
1600mm (5ft 3in)
Length
2850mm (9ft 4in)
Height
1420mm (4ft 8in)
Cutting height - overhead
2000mm (6ft 7in) / 2850mm(9ft 4in)**
Cutting height - vertical
2400mm (7ft 10in) / 3300mm(10ft 10in)**
Weight / with counterweight
1180kg (2600lb) / 1330kg (2930lb)
Maximum reaction force
1500N*
Power supply
3 phase 380 - 480V, 16A, 50 - 60Hz
3 phase 200V, 32A, 50 - 60Hz
ACR™ ROBOT 327
RANGE
SIZE
ACCESSORIES 
TOOLS
ARMS
820mm
1420mm
2850mm
2020mm
Standard
Arm extension
850mm
Base extension
150-600mm
Feed beam extension
Rotor
Ship cleaning / 
Surface preparation
Tunnel oscillator
CE, EMC certified
*see Operators Manual for detailed instructions
**with extension arm
Conjet AB 
Anläggarvägen 14
SE-136 25 Haninge
SWEDEN  
+46 (0)8 55 65 22 40
Bridges. Parking Decks. Dams. Tunnels. Piers. If a concrete structure needs repair, 
Conjet has the optimal concrete removal solution for the task. 
For over 35 years, we have led the development of robotic hydrodemolition 
technology – a technology with a proven track record as the most sustainable and 
effective method for concrete removal and other types of surface preparation.
We provide world class training and aftersales support for our partners and 
customers, Team Conjet, to ensure that projects are successfully performed in a 
safe, precise and efficient manner. 
At Conjet, our collective knowledge and expertise has been built into our 
Automated Concrete Removal robots. Safe for the structure, safe for the operator 
and safe for the environment.
We call it ACR™
Conjet Inc.
3400 Int’l Airport Dr., Ste 100
Charlotte, NC 28208
USA
www.conjet.com     |     info@conjet.com
20211001
Figure A.10: Conjet Robot 327 Nalta
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
89
==PAGE:96==
A.4
Joint resistance
Figure A.11: Joint resistance 12 MPa Mortar compression strength
Figure A.12: Number of jacks at 6 meter for a HCS320
90
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:97==
A.5
Required jacks ­ combined support
Figure A.13: Required jack 16 MPa combined support
Figure A.14: Required jack 45 MPa combined support
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
91
==PAGE:98==
A.6
Finite element models
A.6.1
Side supported
Figure A.15: Punching shear failure­first principal stress analysis Side supported system
Figure A.16: Strain analysis side supported system
92
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.17: Displacement analysis side supported system
A.6.2
Longitudinal support Analysis
Figure A.18: First principal stress analysis Longitudinal support
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
93
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.19: Third principal stress analysis Longitudinal support
Figure A.20: Displacement analysis longitudinal support
A.6.3
Combined support Analysis
Figure A.21: Third principal stress analysis combined support
94
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.22: Deflection analysis combined support
A.6.4
Filled hole
Figure A.23: Deflection analysis with light concrete filling outer holes
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
95
==PAGE:102==
A.6.5
Steel Plate
Figure A.24: First principal stress analysis with a steel distribution plate
Figure A.25: Third principal stress analysis with a distribution steel plate
96
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.26: Deflection analysis with steel distribution plate
A method for Design of Disassembly of precast concrete building
97
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
