==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE using a 
statistical price model and a stochastic 
process model for wind power generation
Mikael Erik Gustav Nerman
DTU Wind-M-0717
July 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0717
July 2023
Project period:
February - July 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science 
Supervisor(s):
Katherine Dykes
Julian Quick
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Jan Emblesvag
NTNU
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author(s):
Mikael Erik Gustav Nerman
Title:
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE using a 
statistical price model and a stochastic process 
model for wind power generation
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Climate targets adopted by nations and organizations are pushing the green transition of
electricity generation towards more renewable energy sources. As the share of variable
renewable energy (VRE) sources increase, a profitability issue caused by generation de­
valuation for VRE producers is becoming more apparent. This development is causing
a shift in industry from working with the cost­based comparability metric called levelized
cost of electricity (LCOE), towards value­based metrics when designing VRE systems
such as wind turbines and farms. A newly developed cost­based metric called Cost of
Valued Energy (COVE) incorporates value by normalizing the wind capture prices by the
market average price. However, the author questions how value is currently incorporated
and proposes a new value reference. In this work, a new multiple linear regression (MLR)
price model is developed and compared with a previously proposed residual demand price
model for use with the COVE metric. The Irish system between 2019 and 2022 is used as
a case study, and the study shows that the MLR model has a higher correlation to electric­
ity price with an R2 of 0.886 compared to the residual demand model with an R2 of 0.155
for all four years. Comparing prices predicted by the two models using cross­validation
showed that the MLR model had an error distribution with less spread and standard devia­
tion (37.4 compared to 116.0). COVE­LCOE ratios were calculated with mixed results as
the two models performed better for two years each. Bootstrapping was then used to syn­
thetically create more datasets in order to evaluate prediction errors. The results showed
that the MLR model, on average, could predict the correct CLR (1.22) with a standard de­
viation in errors of 0.017 compared to the residual demand model, which overestimated
CLR (1.29) with a standard deviation in errors of 0.041. Further, revenue was calculated
using predicted prices, and the results show that both models were fairly accurate for the
bootstrap dataset, but the MLR model outperformed the residual demand model in indi­
vidual years. Evaluation of observed CLR show that the wind power producers in the Irish
system are subject to significant generation devaluation, with COVE being approximately
20% bigger than LCOE on average between 2019 and 2022.
ii
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to show appreciation to my supervisors Katherine Dykes, Julian Quick,
and Jan Emblemsvåg. Thank you Katherine for supervising me on this interesting topic.
Thank you Julian for taking your time and having lengthy and eye­opening discussions
with me. Without them, this work would have been a struggle. Thank you, Jan for accept­
ing to supervise me on such short notice. Your perspective has been valuable as I have
been exploring this topic.
I would also like to thank Rebekka and Jacob for their friendship and support throughout
this journey. Your willingness to read through this report and provide feedback meant a
lot to me.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory and Literature review
5
2.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Review of metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Case study: Ireland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4
Circumstances affecting the generation and market in 2019­2022 . . . . . . 18
3
Method
21
3.1
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Price model: MLR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Price model: Residual demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
Price prediction through cross­validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5
Bootstrapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.6
COVE/LCOE ratio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.7
Revenue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.8
Method summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Results and discussion
29
4.1
Electricity price correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
MLR model price correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Price prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
COVE­LCOE ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.5
Revenue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.6
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5
Conclusion
53
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Bibliography
55
A Appendix
59
A.1 Electricity price correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.2 Price prediction error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.3 Randomly selected days . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.4 CLR using time­average for normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.5 CLR using day resolution data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
v
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
Term/abbreviation
Definition
API
Application Programming Interface
APS
Announced Pledges Scenario
AR6
Assessment Report 6
CAGR
Compound Annual Growth Rate
CLR
COVE­LCOE Ratio
COVE
Cost Of Valued Energy
DAH
Day­ahead
Eur
Euro
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GW
Gigawatt
I­SEM
Integrated Single Electricity Market
IEA
International Energy Agency
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
kWh
Kilowatt­hour
LACE
Levelized Avoided Cost of Electricity
LRVE
Levelized Revenue and Value of Electricity
LROE
Levelized Revenue Of Energy
LTV
Levelized Tax Value
LVOE
Levelised Value of Energy
LCOE
Levelized Cost Of Electricity
MLR
Multiple Linear Regression
MWh
Megawatt­hour
NPV
Net Present Value
NV
Net Value
NVOE
Net Value of Electricity
RDM
Residual Demand Model
VALCOE
Value­Adjusted Levelized Cost Of Electricity
VIF
Variance Inflation Factor
VF
Value factor
VRE
Variable Renewable Energy
SEMO
Single Electricity Market Operator
SNSP
System Non­Synchronous Penetration
sLCOE
System Levelized Cost Of Electricity
STEPS
Stated Policies Scenario
UK
United Kingdom
vi
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The world is in a race against the clock as the effects of human­induced climate change
become more apparent [1]. The major driver for climate change is global warming which
is fueled by the emissions of Greenhouse Gases (GHG) [2]. All pathways modeled by
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in their report, Assessment Re­
port 6 (AR6), where warming is limited to less than 2°C, involve rapid reductions in GHG
emissions in all sectors [3]. In 2019, according to AR6, the energy sector stood for ap­
proximately 34% of total net anthropogenic GHG emissions where 22% is attributed to
electricity and heat production [3]. In contrast, IEA’s Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS)
forecasts an 80% increase in demand by 2050, which also reflects the need for a more ag­
gressive policy. The same model predicts a 25% increase in global electricity demand by
2030 [4]. This increase is mainly driven by the electrification of cars and the deployment of
heat pumps for space heating and cooling. By 2050, global electricity demand is forecast
by IEA to rise by 150% from 2021 levels under a net zero emissions by 2050 scenario.
IEA’s net zero emission by 2050 scenario aims to describe a cost­effective pathway for the
energy sector which, with a 50% chance, limits the global average temperature increase
to 1.5°C by the year 2100. To meet the increasing electricity demand while still adhering to
climate pledges like the Paris Agreement, added capacity must come from low­emission
sources like wind, solar, hydro, and nuclear power. In 2021 the share of renewables
in the global system was 28%, and IEA forecast the share to be 43% in 2030 accord­
ing to the STEPS model. Here renewables include bioenergy, hydropower, wind power,
solar power, geothermal and ocean technologies. Models that assume policy change
that align with long­term pledges, like IEA’s Announced Pledges Scenario (APS), fore­
cast even faster renewable energy implementation, and APS predicts a share of 49% by
2030. Forecast shares of unabated fossil fuels, renewables, nuclear, and other electricity
sources in 2030 according to the STEPS and APS scenarios can be seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Forecast shares of different energy sources in 2030 using STEPS and APS
scenarios [4]
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
1
==PAGE:9==
Today, almost 100 GW of wind power is installed globally each year, with approximately
94 GW of added capacity in 2021 [5]. However, if net zero by 2050 is to be achieved
according to IEA’s roadmap, then the installation rate needs to more than quadruple to 400
GW of added capacity each year by 2030. In the annual wind report of 2022, The Global
Wind Energy Council (GWEC) projected annual wind installation growth using a projected
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 6.6­7% and compares it to the growth rate
required by the net zero by 2050 scenario. The result, which can be seen in Figure 1.2,
shows that the wind power industry is expanding rapidly, although at a too­slow pace
currently, and global installed capacity is expected to grow by 1.5­3 times by 2030.
Figure 1.2: New global installation of wind power (GW) projected for 2022­2030 using
current growth and compared with required installation according to IEA’s Net Zero by
2050 Roadmap(2021).[5]
The IPCC found that solar and wind energy have the biggest potential contribution to net
emission reduction at a low cost [3]. The costs estimations behind this finding are based
on Levelized Cost Of Energy (LCOE), which is a metric that includes installation, opera­
tions, maintenance, and capital costs per unit of electricity produced, e.g. MWh. LCOE is
commonly used today when designing and comparing Variable Renewable Energy (VRE)
systems [6, 7, 8]. However, LCOE does not include grid integration costs or other system
costs outside of the scope of the facility e.g. a wind farm. Furthermore, LCOE does not
take into consideration the time­varying value of the electricity produced. This issue be­
comes problematic when a system has a high penetration of VRE sources as the value of
produced electricity from VRE sources is lower at a higher market share [9]. This means
that the accuracy of the LCOE metric for comparison between energy technologies is de­
creasing each year as the market share of VREs increase. To address this issue, several
value­based metrics have been suggested by researchers. One of them is the Cost of
Valued Energy (COVE) metric suggested by Simpson et al. [10], which is a simple metric
that includes the time­varying value of electricity.
In summary, electricity systems globally are in a green transition, and the shares of re­
newables are increasing as more and more renewables are deployed each year. New
2
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:10==
tools are developed to make sure that renewables are deployed in an efficient way, and
one such tool is the new metric COVE which is the focus of this report.
1.2
Research questions
This thesis aims to contribute to the research on COVE and its practical uses. To do this,
the following research questions were formulated:
• How can wind power generation be used in conjunction with other easily found data
to, in a simple way, predict electricity prices and better capture value signals than
previously described models?
• Could the current way of defining value in COVE be improved?
• What can be said about the market for VRE sources in the analyzed market case
by analyzing COVE results?
1.3
Thesis outline
This report contains 5 chapters.
Chapter 1: Introduction
outlines the motivation behind this work as well as research questions that the work aims
to find the answers to.
Chapter 2: Theory and literature review
Provides theory that is relevant and gives context to the work to provide a basis to un­
derstand and discuss it. The chapter also provides a review of value metrics as well as
background information on the Irish system, which is used as a case study in this work.
Chapter 3: Method
Describes the methods used for data analysis and calculation of results.
Chapter 4: Results and discussion
All relevant results generated are presented, commented on, and discussed in this chap­
ter. First, data analysis on electricity price correlations is presented. Second, price pre­
diction results for both a residual demand model and a multiple linear regression model
are presented. Third, COVE­LCOE ratio results are presented. Fourth, revenue results
are presented, and lastly, limitations of the work are discussed.
Chapter 5: Conclusion
The last chapter contains a short review of the key findings of this work as well as sug­
gestions for further research.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
3
==PAGE:11==
4
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory and Literature review
In this chapter, relevant theory and concepts are first explained in Section 2.1. Then a
review and comparison of metrics is presented in Section 2.2. In Section 2.3, the system
used as a case study is presented, and lastly, in Section 2.4 external events affecting the
data used in this report are discussed.
2.1
Theory
In this section, relevant theory and concepts are explained.
2.1.1
Cost versus value perspective
Energy technologies can be evaluated and compared by different methods using differ­
ent scopes and perspectives. When it comes to metrics of competitiveness, two common
scopes are cost and value. One difference is that cost­based metrics rarely include value,
while value­based metrics most often include both costs and value, as is the case for the
COVE metric. LCOE is an example of a cost­based metric as it does not include value in
any form. As mentioned earlier, LCOE is the industry standard for comparing energy tech­
nologies. Using LCOE as a design metric has been sensible for a long time when wind
penetration has been low and nearly all wind farms have been subsidized. Therefore,
the value of the generated electricity in each hour has not been relevant for developers
because subsidies have ensured profitability and wind catch prices have not been lower
than the market average [9]. Today as VRE markets mature and VRE technologies have
become cheaper, governing bodies are moving away from feed­in tariffs, the most com­
mon type of subsidy, and there are cases of wind farms being built subsidy­free [11]. This
means that the actual value of the electricity being produced, i.e., the electricity price and
other potential revenue streams, becomes relevant for wind farm developers. Another
case for value is the increasing penetration of non­synchronous VRE technologies in the
power systems that provide less value in the form of system services compared to con­
ventional dispatchable technologies [12].
2.1.2
Cost
The cost perspective in competitive metrics is simply selecting a set of costs to be included
and dividing by produced energy to get cost per energy unit e.g. Euro
MWh. Metrics vary when
it comes to scope and an example of a more comprehensive cost­based metric is System
LCOE (sLCOE) developed by Ueckerdt et al. in 2013 [13]. sLCOE expands LCOE, which
only includes generation costs, by also including integration costs, defined as ”the extra
investment and operational costs of the nonwind part of the power system when wind
power is integrated”. A dis­aggregation of the integration costs can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Some of these costs e.g. full­load hour reduction and backup costs never affect wind
farm developers at all but are actual costs affecting the system as a result of wind power
integration.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Components of integration costs as defined by Ueckerdt et al. [13] Reprinted from
[13] with permission from Elsevier
Integration costs
The characteristics of VRE sources result in indirect costs referred to as ”integration costs”.
Examples are costs for distribution and transmission networks, short­term balancing ser­
vices, reserve capacity, and more cycling and ramping of conventional plants [14]. These
costs are not always born by the investors of e.g. wind farms, instead, they are born
by other generators in the system or the transmission system operator (which in the end
means higher fees for consumers). For wind power, these costs can be aggregated into
three categories connected to three inherent characteristics of wind power: output is fluctu­
ating, output is uncertain, and resources are location­specific. Fluctuating output leads to
”profile costs” which refer to the costs of backup capacity, cycling and ramping of conven­
tional power plants, overproduction costs, and full­load hour reduction. Uncertain output
refers to the uncertainty in production estimation when participating in the day­ahead mar­
ket leading to balancing costs for producers. When sites with good wind resources are
located far away from load centres, the transmission grids need to be strengthened to be
able to transfer the electricity from a wind farm which leads to grid costs. A second more
indirect part of grid costs comes from the situation where grid constraints are enhanced
by connecting a wind farm in a relatively weak part of the grid leading to costs related
to congestion management and re­dispatch of power plants. Integration costs can be
negative, which indicates added value. An example is solar power at low market shares
because its generation has a positive correlation with demand, which is higher during the
day when we are awake, and therefore, participating in the market when prices generally
are high.
2.1.3
Value
Value is a broad term that needs to be defined carefully when used since it can have dif­
ferent meanings when viewed from different perspectives. There are two major perspec­
tives within the power system context: the market perspective and the system perspective.
These two perspectives can be compared to private­economic and socio­economic per­
spectives in economic analysis. The big difference between the two is the scope.
The use of the value term in Section 2.1.1 encompassed a broad interpretation since the
scoping of value varies across the different value­based metrics available. Because of
this, the choice of value­based competitive metrics must be based on the specific values
to be evaluated and compared.
The system perspective on value
The system perspective on value takes on the perspective of a central system planner
and takes every entity in the system into consideration. Adopting this perspective, the
6
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:14==
value assigned to a particular technology is the product of the marginal cost of a service
and the amount of service provided [15]. Investment decisions are made by evaluating
the effect of the investment on the whole system. Conversely, this is not the perspective
used by VRE developers as for instance, they do not experience economic consequences
from full­load hour reduction of other generators in the system. However, the system
perspective does not only value electricity generation but also recognizes the value of
non­energy ancillary services. Ancillary services include all services required to maintain
a functional and stable grid, even during faults such as generators disconnecting from the
grid. Some ancillary services, such as inertia, synchronising power, black­start capability
and reserves, are complex or expensive for VRE generators to provide. While reserves
are possible, they are not economically viable for VREs since it requires curtailment of
available wind power production resulting in less produced and sold electricity. IEA divides
the value generators can have in the power system from a system perspective into three
categories:
• Energy:
Represents the value of the electricity which in a renewable grid is high
for dispatchable units and lower for intermittent sources.
• Flexibility: Flexibility value encompasses flexibility in power output, i.e., the ability
to provide services such as frequency containment reserves, frequency restoration
reserves, and replacement reserves. Services such as synchronous inertia are also
placed in this category [12].
• Capacity:
Capacity value encompasses the ability of a generator to consistently
meet demand and contribute to the overall system adequacy. Intermittent sources
such as wind and solar have a low capacity value while dispatchable sources gen­
erally have a high capacity value.
The market perspective on value
The market perspective on the value of a generator is explicitly focused on the monetary
value and does not evaluate features such as the ability to provide frequency reserves.
However, the potential cash flow from participating in a balancing market is considered
since it brings monetary value. Developers and investors use the market perspective as
their objective is to turn a profit through investing in VRE technologies. In an ideally func­
tioning market, the optimal investment decision would align with both market and system
perspectives. However, achieving this outcome necessitates an open and competitive
market that incentivizes every system value described in Section 2.1.3 while also impos­
ing penalties for any adverse effects, such as a reduction in full load hours for competitors.
One could argue that effects such as full load hour reduction are healthy market signals
in competitive markets, signalling that a new product is more competitive and will replace
the old. However, when it comes to intermittent sources such as VREs, the signal is not
healthy from a system perspective, as the dispatchable generators experiencing full load
hour reduction are still needed in the system when the sun is not shining, and the wind is
not blowing. Since this is not a problem for wind farm developers themselves, the LCOE
metric, which does not include value in any form, has been sufficient when designing wind
farms with a high value from the market perspective, as the objective has been to mini­
mize the cost per produced unit of electricity. However, today as wind power penetration
is increasing, the phenomenon called price cannibalization (explained in Section 2.1.5) is
causing the need for the implementation of metrics that include the market value of the
electricity produced.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
7
==PAGE:15==
2.1.4
Marginal pricing
Most wholesale electricity markets today are based on marginal pricing [16]. In a perfect
marginal pricing market, participators (electricity producers) bid at their marginal cost of
production. The marginal cost includes OPEX and opportunity cost (OC), which is the
potential loss of revenue for not selling the electricity at another time or in another market.
Therefore, OC could include the lost revenue for not participating in ancillary service mar­
kets for dispatchable generators. OC could also include added costs to recover life­cycle
costs, which is relevant for power plants only operating during scarcity situations. During
an electricity market auction, all producers and consumers bid to buy and sell a volume of
electricity at their wanted price. All bids are then sorted into demand and supply curves.
A market clearing price (MCP) is obtained from the intersection of the supply and demand
curves. An illustrative example of how market clearing using marginal pricing works can
be seen in Figure 2.2 where FF is fossil fuel. All participants will buy and sell electricity at
the market clearing price, which is the marginal price of the most expensive bid cleared
in the auction.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the market clearing price under regular circumstances (A) and
scarcity events (B) [16]
2.1.5
Generation devaluation / Price cannibalization
As explained above in Section 2.1.4, bids are ordered by marginal price in most markets
today. Marginal prices for VRE sources like wind and solar are low, which results in their
bids pushing out more expensive bids from thermal generators [16]. This is called the
merit­order effect. Clearing prices are then lower when VRE generation is high, which
leads to lower revenues from the market for VRE producers. An unwanted effect from
this is called the cannibalization effect, where a higher penetration of wind power leads to
lower revenues for wind power producers. The same effect applies to solar power and is
noticeable at lower penetration rates for solar than for wind [9]. This means that building
a wind farm reduces the value of electricity produced by existing wind farms in the same
market area as well as the value of the electricity produced by the wind farm itself as wind
power penetration in the system increases.
Capture price
Capture price is a relevant term in the context of price cannibalization as it describes the
annual average price a generator sells its electricity for. For VRE generators affected by
8
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:16==
price cannibalization, the capture price is lower than the average traded market price as
electricity is generally sold at a lower price. Equation (2.1) shows how capture price can
be calculated.
Capture price (year) =
∑8760
t=1 pt ∗Gt
∑8760
t=1 Gt
(2.1)
Where pt is the price at time t and Gt is the volume of electricity sold at time t.
2.1.6
Price modelling
Calculating value metrics (and cost­based metrics such as LCOE) when designing a wind
farm faces a significant challenge: The requirement for accurate future electricity price
projections. Predicting the future is inherently complex, but it can be facilitated by using
statistical analysis techniques on historical data to create models, thus simplifying the
process. An example of a price model is the residual demand model, hereafter referred
to as RDM, proposed to be used with COVE by Simpson et. al. [10]. The RDM uses
a linear relationship between electricity price and residual demand, which is the demand
that must be met by conventional generators after VRE generation has been subtracted
from the total demand. The linear relationship between residual demand and electricity
price has previously been demonstrated by Von Roon, who found that the relationship had
coefficients of determination of 0.54 and 0.77 in the years 2009 and 2008 for the European
energy exchange [17]. Also, Hirth found that higher residual demand generally coincided
with higher electricity prices [9]. A residual demand model also yielded the best results for
Loth et. al. when they evaluated three different approaches to price modelling for COVE
[18]. The RDM is used as a reference in this report to compare with and evaluate the
price model developed herein.
2.1.7
The problem with the residual demand model
There are problems associated with using residual demand when predicting electricity
prices used to calculate COVE for VRE technologies. The first problem is that residual
demand does not seem to be properly defined since Loth et. al. defined it as all non­
carbon sources while Simpson et. al. defined it as all sources except VREs [18, 10].
The second problem is that the RDM only indirectly considers the prices of fuel used by
conventional generators, and recent years of market distress due to soaring natural gas
prices have shown the vulnerability of electricity markets to natural gas price shocks [19].
A third problem is that the RDM does not consider the potential effects of high and low
demand on electricity prices. The reason for this is that residual demand can be the same
for different scenarios, such as high demand and high VRE production, and medium de­
mand and medium VRE production. This problematization of the residual demand model
is the motivation behind looking into new options of price modelling for COVE.
2.2
Review of metrics
2.2.1
LCOE
Levelized Cost of Electricity, or LCOE, is a metric commonly used in the energy industry to
compare the costs of different energy generation technologies [15, 12]. It represents the
average cost of generating a unit of electricity over the entire lifetime of a power plant. It
includes all the costs involved in generating electricity, such as capital costs and operating
and maintenance costs (O&M). The total lifetime costs are then divided by the total lifetime
electricity production of the power plant to obtain LCOE, e.g. Eur/MWh. The time value of
money can be considered by discounting both the total costs and the produced electricity.
LCOE can be calculated using Equation (2.2).
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
9
==PAGE:17==
LCOE
( Eur
MWh
)
=
Total costs
Total electricity production =
∑costs
∫
g dt
(Euro/MWh)
(2.2)
Where g is the net production of electricity.
On a more detailed level costs can be further divided into Turbine Capital Costs (TCC),
Balance of Station (BOS), Levelized Replacement Cost (LRC) which going forward will
be included in O&M, and opertation and maintenance cost [20].
Turbine capital costs include the costs of all the components of the wind turbines.
Balance of station costs include costs like: foundations, installation, electrical cables
and equipment, permits and site assessment.
Initial Capital Cost (ICC) is the summation of TCC and BOS costs and is the initial in­
vestment of the wind farm.
Fixed Charge Rate (FCR) represents financing costs including financing fees, return on
debt and equity, depreciation, taxes, and insurance.
is the cost of replacing components during the lifetime of the wind farm.
Operation and maintenance costs include the cost of repairing and inspecting turbines
and electrical equipment and the cost of new components.
The LCOE equation can then be written as Equation (2.3).
LCOE =
((ICC ∗FCR) + O&M
AEP
)
(Euro/MWh)
(2.3)
2.2.2
COVE
The Cost of valued energy metric was first proposed by Simpson et al.[10]. It is a simple
cost­based metric that includes value by weighting generation by normalized hourly prices.
COVE was originally designed to replace LCOE as the objective function during a VRE
design process. This way, the value of the electricity generated can be taken into account
during the design of wind farms. This was demonstrated in a master thesis by Szymon
Jozef Wawrzyniak [21], where the optimal layout for a wind farm was found using both
LCOE and COVE. Wawrzyniak found that using the COVE metric as an objective function
yielded slightly different layouts as a result of improving the efficiency of the wind farm
for wind directions which yields higher value generation. COVE can be calculated using
Equation (2.4).
COV E = Annualized Costs (CapEx + O&M)
∫
P
Pavg ∗g
dt
=
∑costs
∫
p ∗g
dt
(Euro/MWh)
(2.4)
Where p is the normalized price, g is generated power, P is the electricity price, and Pavg
is an average used for normalization described in more detail in Section 3.6.1. Electricity
prices p and PM are normalized as proposed by Simpson et al. [10], using the time­
averaged annual price (Pavg), something that is later questioned in Section 3.6.1.
p =
P
Pavg,t
=
P
∫
year Pdt
nyear
(­)
(2.5)
Where P is the electricity price, Pavg,t is the time­averaged price and nyear is the number
of data points. Normalizing prices allows both for comparison between LCOE and COVE
as they then have the same units Euro/MWh, and the capability of replacing LCOE with
COVE where it is used today.
10
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:18==
2.2.3
VALCOE
Value­Adjusted LCOE, or VALCOE, is a metric developed by the IEA for the 2018 World
Energy Outlook report [22]. VALCOE combines the projected levelized cost of electricity
with simulated energy value, flexibility value, and capacity value by technology with the
use of the World Energy Model (WEM). WEM is a large­scale simulation model developed
by the IEA to mimic how energy markets function [23]. All three value streams; flexibil­
ity, energy, and capacity are assessed using WEM and compared to a region­specific
system average. This way, the ability to add more value (or less) to the system can be
evaluated and compared for different technologies. According to the IEA, the metric takes
the perspective of system planners but also aligns with an investor’s perspective in fully
functioning markets as it includes multiple revenue streams [12]. Figure 2.3 shows an illus­
trative example of VALCOE where LCOE is adjusted by considering the value of energy,
capacity, and flexibility.
Figure 2.3: Illustrative example of VALCOE [12]
2.2.4
Levelized Avoided Cost of Electricity: LACE
The levelized cost of avoided electricity is a metric developed by the U.S Energy Informa­
tion Administration, EIA [24]. The EIA describes it as representing the potential revenue
available to the project owner from the sale of energy and generating capacity. LACE can
be seen as the opposite of LCOE as LACE only looks at positive cash flow per generated
unit of electricity, while LCOE only looks at negative cash flows. LACE can be calculated
using Equation (2.6).
LACE =
∑Y
t=1(Pmarg,t ∗hourst) + (cap payment ∗cap credit)
annual generation hours
(Euro/MWh)
(2.6)
Where t is the time period, Y is the number of time periods in the year, Pmarg,i is the
marginal generation price in time period t, hourst are the generation hours in time period
i, cap payment is the value to the system of meeting the reliability reserve margin deter­
mined as the payment required to incentivize the last unit of capacity needed to satisfy
regional reliability reserve requirement, cap credit is the percentage of installed capacity
that can participate in the reliability capacity market, and annual generation hours are the
number of hours in a year that the plant is assumed to operate [24]. LACE assumes that a
plant participates in both energy and capacity markets since both revenues from electric­
ity sales and capacity payments are considered. LACE can be used together with LCOE
to calculate Net Value as explained next in Section 2.2.8
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
11
==PAGE:19==
2.2.5
Levelised Value of Energy: LVOE
Levelised Value of Electricity was first proposed by Heuberger et. al. in 2016 [25]. The
goal was to create a metric to determine the value of a technology to the electricity system.
Heuberger et. al. proposed a complex methodology using a mixed­integer linear program
capable of optimizing system design and operation while also considering security of sup­
ply and environmental limits. In 2021 Mai et. al. simplified the metric to be more similar
to LCOE while still using system value in the form of revenue instead of investment and
operating costs [15]. Mai et. al. argues that the literature on system value is inconsistent
and to be able to use LVOE as a metric for comparison, one must calculate system value
in the exact same way. As explained in Section 2.1.3 there are many services associated
with system value and some of them are hard to put a monetary value on, such as the
provision of inertia in the system. The equation of the simplified form of LVOE presented
by Mai et. al. is shown in Equation (2.7). Which revenues are included in the system
value is left undefined.
LVOE = V
E
(Euro/MWh)
(2.7)
Where V is the discounted system value in Euro and E is the discounted electricity gen­
erated in MWh.
2.2.6
Net Value of Electricity: NVOE
Net Value of Electricity is the difference between LVOE and LCOE given by Equation (2.8)
[15]. As with LVOE, NVOE is presented in different forms in literature. Here it is presented
as it was presented by Mai et. al.[15].
NVOE = LVOE −LCOE
(Euro/MWh)
(2.8)
Where both LVOE and LCOE are calculated for the same technology and period and are
discounted to a base year.
2.2.7
Value factor: VF
Value factor, VF, was first introduced in the literature by Hans Stephenson in 1973 [26].
VF is a metric that compares the price captured by a generator to the price captured by
another by normalizing the price. According to Stephenson, the value of electric energy
is a relative or comparative figure and therefore, he argued that it is not important which
type of generator is designated with the value of 1. This is true when calculating the VF for
different technologies for the sake of comparing them, as long as the definition is used for
all calculations. Stephenson proposed to define the electricity produced from a constant
power source as having the value of 1. A constant­power generator or base load generator
makes a good comparison for VRE’s in a power system with low VRE penetration, where
constant­power base load generators are used. However, the comparison might not be
interesting in a system with high VRE penetration since there are no generators delivering
constant power in those markets. A lower value factor means that the electricity generated
has a lower value compared to the electricity generated from a constant­power generator.
VF can be calculated using Equation (2.9).
VF =
∫
p ∗g
dt
∫
g
dt
(−)
(2.9)
Where p is the normalized price, and g is generated electricity. Value factor can be related
to COVE and LCOE as Equation (2.10) shows. The price is normalized using the time­
averaged price as shown in Equation (2.5).
12
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:20==
The value factor is closely related to COVE, and through COVE also to LCOE as shown
in Equation (2.10) where Equations (2.2), (2.4) and (2.9) is combined. VF and COVE
use the same value comparison if the same normalization is used. Therefore, the same
relation is also true if the demand­weighted average price is used for normalization.
VF
=
LCOE
COVE
=
costs
∫
g
dt
costs
∫
p∗g
dt
=
∫
p ∗g
dt
∫
g
dt
(−)
(2.10)
This relation is true when the same costs and normalization are used.
2.2.8
Net Value: NV
Net Value, NV, is the difference between LCOE and LACE as calculated by Equation (2.11).
Since LACE calculates potential revenues per generated unit of electricity and LCOE
calculates the costs of generating a unit of electricity, NV is the profit (or loss if LCOE >
LACE) from generating that unit of electricity. In essence, developers want to make sure
that LACE is higher than LCOE for a projected power plant to turn a profit.
Net Value = LACE −LCOE
(Euro/MWh)
(2.11)
2.2.9
Levelized Revenue and Value of Electricity: LRVE
Levelized Revenue and Value of Electricity, LRVE, is a metric developed with the intention
to capture the full scope of project revenue and value streams and be globally applicable
[27]. It consists of three individually defined elements as Equation (2.12) shows: levelized
revenue of energy, LROE, levelized tax value, LTV, and levelized infrastructure and de­
velopment value, LIDV.
LRVE = LROE + LTV + LIDV
(Euro/MWh)
(2.12)
Where: LROE captures all possible revenue streams from energy production and capac­
ity provision, LTV captures fiscal support in the form of tax and depreciations, and LIDV
captures the value of infrastructure and development expenditures. LRVE is a compre­
hensive metric due to its wide scope and requires many different data to be calculated. It
is also important for metrics to always be calculated in the same way in order to be compa­
rable. For example: if the data necessary for calculating LIDV is missing, LRVE could still
be calculated with LIDV set to zero. However, that number would not be comparable in a
meaningful way to a value calculated with LIDV included. This is generally a limitation for
metrics requiring many different data points to be calculated. Each constituent of LRVE
can be calculated using Equation (2.13).
Lreal =
∑T
t=1
(
Rt+Vt
(1+r)t
)
∑T
t=1
(
Qt
(1+r)t
)
(Euro/MWh)
(2.13)
Where Lreal is either LROE, LTV, or LIDV, Rt are the total nominal revenues in period t,
Vt total nominal monetized value in period t, Qt is produced electricity in period t, and T
is the time period analysed.
2.2.10
Net Present Value: NPV
Net present value, NPV, is a common financial metric used to evaluate the feasibility and
profitability of projects [28, 29, 30, 31]. NPV includes all cash flows, both negative and
positive, in each year for the entirety of a project’s lifetime, and discounts them using a
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
13
==PAGE:21==
discount factor to obtain the present value of an investment. The project is favourable if
NPV is above zero and not profitable if NPV is below zero. NPV can be calculated using
the formula presented in Equation (2.14)
NPV =
T
∑
t=0
CFt
(1 + r)t
(Euro)
(2.14)
Where CFt is the total cash flow in year t, T is the lifetime of the project, and r is the
discount rate.
2.2.11
Revenue
Revenue is used as a proxy for NPV in this report for comparison with COVE since nega­
tive cash flows such as investment, maintenance, and financial costs, as well as location­
specific cash flows such as taxes, depreciation, and subsidies, are not within the scope
of the report. Revenue is calculated using Equation (2.15).
Revenue =
∫
P ∗g
dt
(Euro)
(2.15)
The value that is baked into the metrics VF and COVE is a comparison of revenue. If
revenue is calculated for a plant and compared to the revenue of the market average
plant using the demand­weighted average price (or a constant power plant through the
time­averaged price), one gets VF as demonstrated in Equation (2.16)
Revenue
Market average revenue
=
∫
P ∗g
dt
∫
Pavg ∗g
dt
=
∫
P
Pavg ∗g
dt
∫
g
dt
=
∫
p ∗g
dt
∫
g
dt
= VF
(2.16)
2.2.12
Comparison of metrics
All metrics reviewed are summarized in Table 2.1. The review of metrics shows that
there is a plethora of metrics that incorporate value. Several are also fairly easy to use,
such as COVE, LACE, VALCOE, and VF. Others are more complex without clear­cut
boundaries, such as LVOE and LRVE. The selection of which metric to use comes down
to which system it is intended to be used in and which parameters are important for the
application of the metric. In a system with low VRE penetration and/or subsidized wind
power, LCOE is the go­to, as value is not important in those cases. In a system with
high VRE penetration and/or subsidy­free wind power, metrics that include value, such
as COVE, VALCOE, or LACE(in combination with LCOE), are necessary to be able to
compare the profitability of different designs or technologies. If a technologies value in
the system perspective also is interesting, then LVOE could be a good choice of metric.
NPV is a well­defined economic metric that includes all costs and revenue streams [28],
but it might be more suitable for feasibility studies. When considering the replacement of
LCOE in the design of VREs, COVE emerges as a promising alternative because of its
simplicity and similarity to LCOE while also being closely related to the well­known value
metric VF. This work focuses on COVE, which from this review, shows the most promise
in replacing LCOE as a metric used in VRE design.
14
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:22==
Metric
Unit
Pros
Cons
Needed data
LCOE
(Euro/MWh) Simple to calculate and
use
Does not include any
form of value
Costs and genera­
tion
COVE
(Euro/MWh) Simple to calculate and
use while also including
value
Only includes the value
connected
to
revenue
from electricity sales
Costs,
generation,
and prices
VALCOE (Euro/MWh) Incorporates the value
of energy, capacity, and
flexibility into LCOE
Only looks at averages
in its current form
Costs,
generation,
and prices
LACE
(Euro/MWh) Simple
Does not include costs
Generation, prices,
and capacity mar­
ket prices
LVOE
(Euro/MWh) Intended to include secu­
rity of supply and envi­
ronmental limits
Complicated and looks
at system value which is
not well defined
Generation, prices,
and all data needed
for the system val­
ues chosen
VF
(­)
Simple to calculate and
understand
It does not include costs
Generation
and
prices
LRVE
(Euro/MWh) Captures all positive rev­
enue streams, globally
applicable
Complex as it includes
many revenue streams
Generation, prices,
and all data needed
for all possible rev­
enue streams
NPV
(Euro)
A well understood metric
in economics, includes fi­
nancial costs
Better suited for feasibil­
ity studies
Costs,
generation,
prices,
discount
rate, and tax and
depreciation
Table 2.1: Summary of metrics reviewed in Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
15
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Case study: Ireland
The Irish power system in 2019 through 2022 is used as a case study in this report. Sev­
eral systems were considered during the selection process, and Ireland was ultimately
chosen for three key reasons. Firstly, the availability of open access generation and price
data. Both a wide range of data on generation and demand and electricity market data is
openly available through the operators of the systems. Secondly, the Irish system has a
high penetration of wind power of around 30% combined with flexible conventional gener­
ators making it an ideal system for wind power when large­scale storage is not available.
This is a system where significant generation devaluation of wind power is expected and
is, therefore, an interesting case for evaluating COVE and wind power. Thirdly, electricity
is traded in a single domestic market which is advantageous for this kind of study as do­
mestic demand and production is more likely to be the main drivers of electricity price in
the market. The fuel mix in the Irish grid in 2022 is presented in Figure 2.4 as a percent­
age of total generated electricity. It can be seen that generation is dominated by wind at
34% of total generated electricity and gas at 50.7%. This suggests that electricity prices
on the market will be strongly affected by the share of wind and gas generation in each
hour. Reported net imports is ­2.1%, meaning 2.1% of the total generated electricity was
exported.
Figure 2.4: Fuel mix in the Irish grid in 2022 [32]
2.3.1
The Irish power system
The transmission grid is operated and managed by the EirGrid Group, which is a state­
owned company. Ireland has committed to national and European sustainability targets
resulting in the EirGrid Group setting targets for renewable electricity generation in a multi­
year program called ”DS3”. Eirgrid reports that the share of renewable electricity was 43%
in 2020, and the current goal is to reach a yearly average of 80% renewable electricity gen­
eration by 2030. The total installed wind capacity was 5877.9 MW at the end of 2022, and
minimum, maximum, and average demand was 2893, 7015, and 4455 MW, respectively.
Data on generation is supplied in quarter­hour resolution on EirGrid’s website [32].
16
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:24==
Dispatch­down
Dispatch­down is the act of turning off or down­regulating VRE production below what is
currently available. The Irish transmission system operator defines two reasons for the
dispatch­down of VRE sources: constraint and curtailment [33].
Constraints
Constraints refer to dispatch­down because of local network constraints and include two
main reasons. The first reason is when generation exceeds the local transmission grid’s
transfer capacity. The second reason is outages due to maintenance, upgrades, or faults.
Constraints were the reason for the 4.4% dispatch­down of VREs in 2021 in the Irish grid
[33].
Curtailment
Curtailment refers to dispatch­down because of four different system­wide reasons, all
related to system stability and security. The first reason is system stability requirements
like synchronous inertia and dynamic and transient stability. The second is operating re­
serve requirements, the third is voltage control requirements, and the fourth is the System
Non­Synchronous Penetration (SNSP) limit.
System Non­Synchronous Penetration limit
Ireland has a limit on how high System Non­Synchronous Penetration (SNSP) is allowed
in the grid in order to keep it stable and secure. Wind and solar are the two non­synchronous
power sources existing in EirGrid, and in order to reach the set goal of 80% renewable
generation by 2030, the SNSP limit must be increased. In the last few years, the SNSP
limit has been increased several times to accommodate more renewable generation. In
2018 the SNSP limit was raised from 50% to 65%, then to 70% in 2021, and most recently
to 75% in March of 2022, [32]. EirGrid has the ambition to continue to raise the limit to
95% in the coming years gradually.
2.3.2
Irish electricity market
Electricity is traded in hourly blocks on the Integrated Single Electricity Market (I­SEM),
which opened in 2018 and is operated by SEMO. I­SEM consists of three markets, as
seen in Figure 2.5; the day­ahead market, the intraday market, and the balancing market.
Most electricity is traded in the day­ahead market based on demand and wind forecasts.
The day­ahead market closes 24 hours before the hour of delivery. After the day­ahead
market is closed, buyers and sellers can adjust their positions in the intraday market up
to one hour before the hour of delivery. When the intraday market is closed, buyers and
sellers can trade in the balancing market if they have committed to producing more than
they are able to or buying more than they can consume. Electricity prices in the day­ahead
market can be seen for the four years (2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022) in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.5: Market structure of I­SEM [34]
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
17
==PAGE:25==
2.3.3
Gas
Around 50% of Ireland’s yearly electricity supply comes from gas power plants, as shown
in Figure 2.4. Gas price’s influence on electricity prices in the Irish market is therefore
investigated as a potential explanatory variable in a price model. The gas supply in Ireland
is split between indigenous production and imports from the United Kingdom (UK) [35].
In January of 2019, 52% were imported and between 2019 and 2022 imports gradually
increased to 75% in January 2022 [36]. Due to the reliance on imports from the UK
for the Irish gas supply, the gas prices in Britain directly influence the prices of gas in
Ireland. Open access data on gas prices in Ireland could not be found by the author.
However, open­access data on system average gas prices were obtained from the On­
the­Day Commodity Market in the UK[37]. The gas prices are provided in pence per kWh
and in daily resolution for the entire four years (2019­2022) investigated in this report.
Figure 2.6 plots gas prices and electricity prices for the period 2019 through 2022.
Figure 2.6: Gas and electricity prices between the years 2019 and 2022
2.4
Circumstances affecting the generation and market in
2019­2022
Short comments on external events affecting price and generation data.
Pandemic
Natural gas prices started rising in 2021 during the economic recovery after the COVID­
pandemic, which increased the global demand for natural gas significantly [38]. As gas
deliveries from Russia (the biggest supplier of gas in Europe) decreased towards the end
of 2021 [38], gas prices in Europe increased even further and explain the spike in prices
seen in Figure 2.6.
War
In February of 2022, war broke out in Europe between Russia and Ukraine. The war
further impacted gas prices and contributed to the volatility seen in gas prices in 2022
[39].
Global stilling 2021
In 2021 a phenomenon known as global stilling occurred [40] where the average global
wind speed was unusually low. This resulted in lower production of electricity from wind
18
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:26==
power in Ireland in 2021 compared to 2020 and 2022, as can be seen in Figure 2.7. Wind
generation in 2021 was lower than in 2019 even though wind power capacity was higher
[32].
Figure 2.7: Total wind power generation in years 2019­2022
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
19
==PAGE:27==
20
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:28==
3
Method
The methodology employed in this study is outlined in this chapter, with the sections ar­
ranged in the chronological order in which the corresponding methods were implemented.
A deeper discussion on price normalization is also delivered in Section 3.6.1. Figure 3.1
shows a workflow diagram outlining the order the work was done and is presented in this
chapter.
Figure 3.1: Method workflow diagram
3.1
Data analysis
Data analysis was used to find which variables that have the strongest influence on elec­
tricity prices in Ireland. Each variable connected to generation was evaluated using scatter
plots and linear regression. Clear trends and linearity were looked for when visually evalu­
ating the scatter plots that would indicate that the variable evaluated affects the electricity
price and does so linearly. The linear regression was evaluated using the coefficient of
determination metric known as R2. An R2 of 0.8 means that there is 80% less variation
around the line than the mean and can be interpreted as 80% of the variation in the data
can be explained by the analyzed relationship. The equation for R2 is shown in equation
Equation (3.1)
R2 = Var(mean) −Var(line)
Var(mean)
(3.1)
Figure 3.2 shows an example scatter plot with linear regression where the wind power
generation variable is evaluated for the year 2019. The R2 of 0.0549 means that the
amount of wind generation by itself is a weak predictor of the variations in price. However,
the decline of the linear regression shows a trend of generally lower prices when wind
power production is higher.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.2: Scatter plot and linear regression between electricity price and wind availability
in Ireland for the years 2019 through 2022.
Downloaded generation data was given in the GMT format with one hour offset during
summer, generally between the end of March and the end of October. Therefore, the
timestamps of the generation data were edited to remove the offset and match the format
in which price data was reported.
3.2
Price model: MLR
This report proposes the use of a new price model based on multiple linear regression,
hereafter called the MLR model, when calculating COVE. The model aims to estimate
electricity prices better while still maintaining usability. The model was developed with
the requirement that wind power generation is one of the variables since its intended use
in this report is to evaluate COVE for wind power. However, wind power generation could
be swapped for another source, such as solar. The proposed model uses multiple lin­
ear regression with three explanatory variables that significantly impact electricity prices
in Ireland: gas price, demand, and wind power availability, to predict the response vari­
able, which is electricity price. These variables were first picked after data analysis as
described in Section 3.1 was done to determine which variables had the strongest cor­
relation to electricity price in the Irish system. In this project, an API called ”statsmodel”
was used in Python to calculate the regression using the ordinary least squares method.
The result is obtained as a constant and coefficients for each explanatory variable as pre­
sented in Equation (3.2). There could be several limitations to a multiple linear regression
model. One is that explanatory variables need to have a linear relationship to the response
variable in order to be useful in the model. The linearity was evaluated as described in
Section 3.1. Another limitation is that MLR assumes that none of the explanatory vari­
ables are correlated with each other. When explanatory variables are highly correlated,
then the regression model suffers from what is called multicollinearity. Multicollinearity
causes the coefficient estimates in a model to become unreliable. Multicollinearity was
checked by calculating Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) for each explanatory variable using
the statsmodel API. A VIF value of 1 indicates no correlation between a variable and any
22
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:30==
other variable, and values between 1 and 5 indicate moderate correlation.
y = α + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3
(3.2)
Where α is a constant that represents the value of y when all explanatory variables (x1−3)
are zero, and β1−3 are the coefficients.
3.2.1
Wind power availability versus generation
Eirgrid provides data on both wind power availability and actual wind power generated.
The difference between the two is the curtailment of wind power generation. Hence, wind
power availability is the sum of power generated and curtailed wind power. In this price
model, the use of wind power availability is proposed in combination with day­ahead elec­
tricity prices as the availability is more likely to be close to the estimated wind power avail­
ability on which the day­ahead prices are based. Wind power availability also indirectly
involves curtailment in the price model since there is a stronger relationship between avail­
ability and curtailment than between generation and curtailment, as shown in Figure 3.3.
The plot shows that, on average, there is a clear trend of higher curtailment when wind
power availability is high. This effect indirectly lowers estimated prices retrieved from the
price model when wind availability, or generation when implemented in the design, is high.
This is proved by Figure 3.4, which shows that prices are low when curtailment is high.
Here a limitation is spotted as none of the relationships shown in Figures 3.3 and 3.4
are linear. This will introduce some nonlinearity to the correlation between wind power
availability and electricity price.
Figure 3.3: Availability (left) and generation (right) versus curtailment in the years 2019
through 2022
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: Wind power curtailment and electricity prices in Ireland 2019­2022
3.3
Price model: Residual demand
In order to evaluate the MLR model, it is compared to the residual demand model previ­
ously used in the literature when calculating COVE [10, 18]. The residual demand model
is explained in Section 2.1.6. In this project, wind and solar availability are used to calcu­
late residual demand as shown in Equation (3.3).
Residual Demand = Total Demand −(Wind Availability + Solar Availability)
(3.3)
3.4
Price prediction through cross­validation
To test the residual demand model and the MLR model, both models were trained on 3 out
of 4 years of available data, and then, using data on gas prices, demand, and wind power
production, the electricity prices were estimated for the left­out year using the models.
The results were evaluated by comparing the predicted prices with the actual prices, as
well as the distribution of errors generated by the two models.
3.5
Bootstrapping
The price models were further analyzed using bootstrapping without replacement in order
to calculate standard errors of prediction of both prices and metrics. Bootstrapping is a
resampling technique which can be used when the sample size is too small. The method
can help give a clearer picture of how accurate the price models are by synthetically creat­
ing a bigger sample size. The bootstrapping was done by randomly selecting 365 unique
dates from the full 4­year dataset to create a 3­year period used to train the models and
a 1­year period which then was used for cross­validation. This process was completed
10.000 times resulting in 10.000 sets of price predictions. One limitation of this method
is that the data sets put together can suffer from seasonality bias. For instance, in the
extreme case that a data set is put together consisting of only summer days from the four
years, then that data will have a seasonal bias with generally lower electricity demand
24
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:32==
(due to less required heating), generation and prices. Therefore, only the average results
obtained using the bootstrap data set are interesting and not the results from a single data
set created through bootstrapping.
3.6
COVE/LCOE ratio
COVE/LCOE ratio, hereafter called CLR, is used in this report to evaluate the difference
in results between the COVE and LCOE metrics, while also not having to include any
costs. By definition, CLR is unit less and shows how much bigger or smaller COVE is
than LCOE which gives an indication of the value of the electricity produced by the unit
compared to the market average. If CLR > 1, the power producer sells electricity for a
lower price than the market average, if CLR < 1, then the power producer earns a higher
revenue per unit of electricity sold than the system average producer. A CLR of 1 would
indicate that the producer represents the system average producer in regard to the catch
price. CLR can be calculated by putting together Equation (2.4) and Equation (2.2) as
shown in Equation (3.4). In this project, CLR is calculated using total wind generation in
the grid to obtain a CLR that generally applies to all wind power producers in the Irish grid.
CLR = COVE
LCOE =
∑costs
∫
p∗gdt
∑costs
∫
gdt
=
∫
gdt
∫
p ∗gdt
(−)
(3.4)
3.6.1
Price Normalization
As shown in Section 2.2.2, a part of the COVE calculation is to normalize the electricity
price. This is done for two reasons: the first is to make COVE comparable with LCOE,
and the second is that the normalization in itself is a value comparison. It can be done
in different ways using different prices as the normalizing price. In two previous papers
on COVE [10, 18], the price is normalized by the time­averaged annual price as seen
in Equation (2.5). In this report, a demand­weighted average is proposed to more ac­
curately compare the captured sell price to the average sell price on the market. The
difference is that the time­averaged annual price is the average hourly price in a particu­
lar year, while the demand­weighted annual price is the average price electricity is sold for
in that year. The formula used to calculate the demand­weighted annual price is shown
in Equation (3.5).
p =
P
Pavg,D
=
P
∫
year P∗Ddt
∫
year Ddt
(−)
(3.5)
Where p is the normalized electricity price, P is the actual electricity price, Pavg,D is the
demand­weighted average electricity price, and D is demand.
To explain the reasoning behind this proposal, one can look at the integral from the de­
nominator in Equation (2.4), also shown in Equation (3.6) .
∫
year
P
Pavg
∗g
dt
(MWh)
(3.6)
If the price is not normalized by removing Pavg as shown in Equation (3.7), then the inte­
gral calculates the power producer’s revenue over a year under the assumption that all
generated electricity is sold.
∫
year
P ∗g
dt
(Euro)
(3.7)
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
25
==PAGE:33==
Remember that power, g, is, in the case of wind farm design, the expected amount of
power generated during each hour calculated using projected wind data. This revenue is
then compared to a market average price, Pavg, as a way of normalizing the price in order
for COVE to have the same unit as LCOE, as shown in Equation (3.6). This can be seen as
value­weighting the generation at time t for every hour. Similarly to the normalization done
for the metric VF explained in Section 2.2.7, the value of the electricity can be compared to
a constant power generator using the time­averaged price as Pavg. However, generators
generating constant power do not exist in power systems such as Eirgrid, where VRE
penetration is high.
Considering that the use of a constant power generator is obsolete, it might be more inter­
esting to define instead a market average generator to be used as a comparison. There­
fore, this study proposes to define the market average generator as a generator whose
capture price is the demand­weighted average price in the market calculated by Equa­
tion (3.5). Using the market average generator as a comparison instead of a constant­
power generator when normalizing the price allows for a direct indication of the compet­
itiveness of a generator in the market. However, one downside of comparing with the
market average is that the market average is affected by the generation make­up in the
market. In the extreme case of wind power meeting 100% of annual demand, the cap­
ture price of the market average generator is equal to the average wind capture price. In
that case, the CLR for a wind farm would be around 1 even though strong generation
devaluation would exist in such a market.
Different value references could be defined and used in different situations. For Instance,
the value comparison between intermittent renewable sources and dispatchable sources
could be exacerbated by excluding renewable generation when calculating the demand­
weighted average. COVE could then be used to compare the value of intermittent renew­
able sources with all other sources on the market instead of the aggregation of all market
participants, which is influenced by the penetration of renewable sources. This could be
used as an argument to exclude renewable sources when calculating the average price.
A counter­argument could be that residual generation in markets with very high penetra­
tion of renewables might change and consist of more flexible generators with low capital
investment costs and high marginal costs. This is called capacity adjustments in an in­
vestment model described by Ueckerdt [13]. This was also shown by Hirth et al. [41],
where the authors show that the full load hours of base load generators drop strongly at
40% VRE penetration, while the utilization of mid and peak load generators increased.
Mid and peak­load generators generally have a higher marginal cost which would drive
the average price up and would skew the result of COVE calculations towards showing a
very low value of renewable generators. This would surely happen in a market such as
the Irish since most residual generation comes from gas turbines.
In summary, the definition of the market average generator to be used as a value refer­
ence should be evaluated and discussed further, and the author of this report hopes that
this section serves as an introduction to the discussion of this topic. However, the evalu­
ation of many different value references will not be conducted in this work apart from the
comparison of CLR calculated using both demand­weighted average and time­averaged
price. The demand­weighted average will, on the other hand, be used for all calculations
where the relevant normalization is done.
26
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:34==
3.7
Revenue
Revenue was calculated using Equation (2.15), as explained in Section 2.2.11, for all sets
of predicted prices and then normalized by the observed value since the absolute value
of the revenue is not interesting for this report. For clarity, the equation for the normalized
revenue is shown in Equation (3.8).
Normalized Revenue = Predicted Revenue
Observed Revenue
(3.8)
3.8
Method summary
In summary, data analysis, price modelling, bootstrapping, price prediction through cross­
validation, and calculation of CLR and revenue were done as described in this chapter to
obtain results that are presented and discussed in the next chapter.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
27
==PAGE:35==
28
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:36==
4
Results and discussion
This chapter presents and discusses the results of each step of the work. Results are
presented and discussed in the order of results from the data analysis in Section 4.1,
price modelling in Section 4.2, price prediction in Section 4.3, CLR results in Section 4.4,
revenue results in Section 4.5, and lastly, a discussion on the limitations of the study in
Section 4.6. Some additional results of this work are presented in the Appendix A. R2
scores are calculated and presented in plots using four digits but discussed using three
digits to increase readability.
4.1
Electricity price correlation
In this section, the results of the data analysis that are relevant to the price models are
presented. The correlation between electricity price and each variable used in the RDM
and MLR are presented in Sections 4.1.1 to 4.1.4. More variables were investigated but
were not included in order to streamline the presentation of results.
4.1.1
Wind availability and wind generation
In Figures 4.1 and 4.2 and Table 4.1, the linear relationship between wind power availabil­
ity and wind power generation and electricity price between 2019 and 2022 is presented.
Figure 4.1 shows a big spread of electricity prices at each level of both wind power avail­
ability and wind power generation. However, the linear regression (the red line) shows
that there is a trend of lower electricity prices at higher levels. Looking at the R2 scores,
one can see that the linear regression using wind power availability has less variability
around the line. This further strengthens the case of using wind power availability instead
of wind power generation in the price model. In Section 3.2.1, a potential limitation was
mentioned as some nonlinearity is expected to be introduced by the non­linear relation­
ship between wind power availability and wind power curtailment. However, this effect
is small, and a 2nd­degree polynomial fit between wind power availability and electricity
price had a R2 score of 0.0556 which is marginally higher than the R2 score of the linear
fit of 0.0549.
Figure 4.1: Linear regression between wind power availability (left) and wind power gen­
eration (right) and electricity price for the years 2019 through 2022.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.2 shows that there is less spread around the lines when linear regression is done
for each year independently. Figures 4.2c and 4.2d shows more spread in prices com­
pared to Figures 4.2a and 4.2b which can be attributed to the external factors described
in Section 2.4. An interesting observation is that the linear regression in Figure 4.2d has
the highest slope, which indicates that wind power availability had the largest impact on
electricity prices in that year compared to the other three years.
(a) 2019
(b) 2020
(c) 2021
(d) 2022
Figure 4.2: Linear regression between wind power availability and electricity price for
independent years in Figures 4.2a to 4.2d.
Table 4.1 shows that the R2 scores, when calculated for each year independently, are
higher than for all years. This means that electricity prices have a stronger correlation to
wind power availability within each year than across the years. As seen in Figure 2.6, there
is a big difference in electricity price between the years, and this shows that wind power
availability is not a significant contributor to that inter­year variability. This phenomenon
is further explored in Section 4.1.5.
Coefficient of determination
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
All years
Wind availability
0.158
0.114
0.057
0.3
0.055
Table 4.1: R2 scores of the linear relationship between wind power availability and elec­
tricity price for each year independently.
30
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:38==
4.1.2
Demand
In Figures 4.3 and 4.4 and Table 4.1, the linear relationship between electricity demand
and electricity price between 2019 and 2022 is presented. The same difference in the
spread can be seen between all years and the individual years in Figures 4.3 and 4.4
as was discussed in Section 4.1.1. However, there is a stronger correlation between
electricity prices and electricity demand with a R2 score of 0.105, as compared to 0.055
for wind power availability and price. Figure 4.3 shows a clear trend of generally higher
prices when demand is higher.
Figure 4.3: Linear regression between electricity demand and electricity price for the years
2019 through 2022.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.4 shows the correlation between electricity price and demand in each year. The
plots show that there is a clear trend of higher electricity prices at higher demand. In
Figures 4.4c and 4.4d, it can be seen that the circumstances affecting the market in 2021
and 2022 weakened the correlation between electricity prices and electricity demand.
(a) 2019
(b) 2020
(c) 2021
(d) 2022
Figure 4.4: Linear regression between electricity demand and electricity price for indepen­
dent years.
Table 4.2 shows the R2 scores of the linear regression shown in Figures 4.3 and 4.4. 2019
and 2020 have the highest scores of the four years at 0.338 and 0.387, respectively.
Coefficient of determination
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
All years
Demand
0.338
0.387
0.165
0.103
0.105
Table 4.2: R2 scores of the linear relationship between electricity demand and electricity
price for each year independently.
4.1.3
Gas price
The linear relationship between gas price and electricity price between 2019 and 2022
is presented in Figure 4.5 and Table 4.3. The original gas price data was in daily res­
olution and was therefore converted to hourly resolution as described in Section 2.3.3.
The left plot in Figure 4.5 shows the relationship between gas price and electricity price
in hourly resolution, and the right plot shows the relationship in daily resolution. There
is more spread in electricity prices in hourly resolution than in the daily resolution due to
two reasons. The first is that daily prices are less variable since they average out the
prices during the day and night when prices are generally high and low, respectively. The
32
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:40==
second is that the hourly gas price data is only correct as a daily average. The method
of converting the gas price data results in 24 electricity price data points per data point of
gas price, creating the vertical streaks seen in the left plot in Figure 4.5. The objective is
to predict prices in hourly resolution, and therefore the hourly gas data is used in the MLR
model. Both plots show a strong correlation between electricity prices and gas prices with
R2 scores of 0.806 and 0.914 for hourly and daily gas prices, respectively.
Figure 4.5: Linear regression between hourly gas price (left), daily gas price (right), and
electricity price for the years 2019 through 2022.
Table 4.3 shows the R2 scores of linear regressions done for each year independently.
Interestingly, the coefficient of determination is higher for the whole data set than when
calculated for each year independently. This indicates that the price of gas was the major
driver for the increases in electricity prices during the four years studied. This also checks
out with what can be seen in Figure 2.6. The R2 scores of the individual years show
that there is a correlation between electricity prices and gas prices, especially during the
turbulent market years of 2021 and 2022.
Coefficient of determination
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
All years
Hourly gas price
0.155
0.185
0.614
0.624
0.806
Daily gas price
0.386
0.448
0.823
0.809
0.914
Table 4.3: R2 scores of the linear relationship between gas price and electricity price for
each year independently.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
33
==PAGE:41==
4.1.4
Residual demand
The linear relationship between residual demand and electricity price between 2019 and
2022 is presented in Figures 4.6 and 4.7 and Table 4.4. When evaluating all years in
Figure 4.6, it can be seen that residual demand has a higher correlation to electricity price
than demand or wind power availability with a R2 score of 0.155. However, that was
expected since residual demand is an aggregation of both demand and VRE availability.
For comparison, the correlation between electricity price and demand and VRE availability
as individual explanatory variables was evaluated using multiple linear regression, and the
results can be seen in Table 4.4.
Figure 4.6: Linear regression between residual demand and electricity price for the years
2019 through 2022.
.
34
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.7 shows the correlation between electricity price and residual demand in each
year. The plots show that there is a clear trend of higher electricity prices at higher residual
demand, and the coefficients of determination in each year are relatively high compared
to those of demand and wind power availability.
(a) 2019
(b) 2020
(c) 2021
(d) 2022
Figure 4.7: Linear regression between residual demand and electricity price for indepen­
dent years.
Table 4.4 show R2 scores between residual demand and MLR using demand and VRE
availability for each year as well as all years. The R2 scores are higher each year for
the relation between electricity price and the MLR. This result shows that while residual
demand is a convenient way of aggregating demand and VRE into one variable, it also
comes at a loss of resolution, which affects the correlation. That is, it makes a difference
for a predictive model to know if residual demand is low because demand is high while
wind production is high or if demand is low while wind production is at mid­capacity.
Coefficient of determination
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
All years
Residual demand
0.487
0.448
0.204
0.430
0.155
MLR: Demand and VRE
0.545
0.573
0.251
0.430
0.178
Table 4.4: R2 scores of the linear relationship between electricity price and residual de­
mand, and multiple linear regression using demand and VRE as variables, for each year
independently.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
35
==PAGE:43==
4.1.5
Normalized price
Price was normalized in two different ways in order to even out the prices between the
years and to spot the correlation between price and wind power availability more easily.
In the left plot of Figure 4.8, the electricity price in each year was normalized by the time­
averaged electricity price for the same year. In the right plot of Figure 4.8, the electricity
price in each hour was normalized by the gas price in the same hour. The R2 scores of the
linear regression in both plots in Figure 4.8 are higher than that of the linear regression
shown in Figure 4.1 at 0.1360 and 0.1666 respectively. Visually the plots also show a
clearer trend with less spread in electricity price and where electricity price is generally
lower at higher wind availability. This shows that the effect of the variables analyzed on
electricity price over longer periods, like the four­year period evaluated in this project, is
weaker if the electricity price during that period is strongly influenced by other external
factors. This explains the difference in R2 scores between the four­year plots and the
single­year scores presented in this section.
Figure 4.8: Comparison of correlation between wind availability and electricity price nor­
malized by yearly average price (left), and wind availability and electricity price normalized
by gas price (right).
36
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:44==
4.2
MLR model price correlation
The MLR model was developed by evaluating and selecting the variables with the strongest
correlation to electricity price in the Irish case. Several combinations of variables were
tested, and the R2 scores for each combination are presented in Table 4.5.
Multiple linear regression: Electricity price
Explanatory variables
R2
SNSP and wind availability
0.125
Demand and wind availability
0.177
Demand and VRE availability
0.178
Demand and SNSP
0.206
SNSP, demand, and wind availability
0.211
Demand and gas price
0.840
Gas price and wind availability
0.842
Gas price, SNSP
0.845
Gas price, demand, and wind availability
0.886
Gas price, SNSP, wind availability
0.942
Table 4.5: R2 scores obtained through multiple linear regression between electricity price
and the presented variables for the years 2019 through 2022.
Table 4.5 shows that every combination with gas price has a significantly higher R2 score
compared to other combinations. This was to be expected after the data analysis, which
showed that the correlation between gas price and electricity price was the highest for
any individual variable at 0.806. The combination of gas price, SNSP and wind availabil­
ity had the highest R2. However, SNSP in itself is an aggregation of total generation,
non­synchronous power (including wind and solar), and imports/exports from DC inter­
connectors. Particularly imports and exports are hard to forecast and rely on data from
another market. Therefore, any combination using SNSP does not fit the goal of a ”sim­
ple” price model as was written in the first research question in Section 1.2. Hence, the
combination of gas price, demand and wind availability, which had the second highest
R2, was ultimately selected as explanatory variables. Their individual correlations to elec­
tricity price are presented in Sections 4.1.1 to 4.1.3. To check for multicollinearity, VIF
values of 1.03, 1.04, and 1.01 were calculated for each explanatory variable, respectively,
which indicate no issues with multicollinearity. Table 4.6 shows the calculated R2 scores
for the multiple linear regressions. The coefficients show that there is a strong correlation
between the explanatory variables and the electricity price with a R2 score of 0.886 when
calculated for all years. The MLR model also manages to have overall high coefficients
when calculated for each year independently, with the lowest one being for 2019 at 0.619.
Coefficient of determination
Year
2019
2020
2021
2022
All years
MLR model
0.619
0.674
0.815
0.826
0.886
Table 4.6: R2 scores of the multiple linear regression between electricity price and the
three chosen explanatory variables: gas price, demand, and wind power availability for
each year independently.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
37
==PAGE:45==
4.2.1
Price correlation comparison
Figure 4.9 shows a comparison of the R2 scores calculated for individual years presented
in Sections 4.1.1 to 4.1.4 and 4.2. The MLR model has the highest R2 scores for all years,
which was expected since it is able to capture more variability in electricity prices by using
more explanatory variables. The R2 score of gas price is low for the years 2019 and 2020
but gets significantly higher in 2021 and 2022. This again confirms the influence of gas
prices on electricity prices during the energy crisis. During 2021, the R2 scores demand,
residual demand, and wind power availability dip as a result of the increased influence of
gas prices on electricity prices. Hence, it is necessary to analyze a market to see which
variables have a greater influence on prices during different circumstances. From these
results, the MLR model is expected to more accurately predict prices compared to the
residual demand since the MLR model has higher R2 in every year analyzed.
Figure 4.9: R2 score comparison over the period 2019 to 2022 using multiple linear re­
gression.
4.3
Price prediction
Price prediction results are analyzed in this section. Prices were predicted using the
proposed MLR model and the RDM using the cross­validation method described in Sec­
tion 3.4. Figures 4.10 to 4.12 are scatter plots with observed prices on the y­axis and
predicted prices on the x­axis. If the predictions were perfect, all dots would line up with
the black line, which represents y = x (or Observed price = Predicted price). The red
lines are linear regressions between the observed and predicted prices. If the average
predicted price at each observed price is equal to the observed price, then the red line
lines up with the black line. If the red line is below the black line, then the model is overpre­
dicting the prices. If the red line is above the black line, then the model is under­predicting
prices. Figure 4.10 compares predicted to observed prices for the years 2019 and 2020.
In Figures 4.10a and 4.10c, it can be seen that the MLR model underestimates electricity
prices less than ≈40 Eur/MWh and overestimates prices above ≈40 Eur/MWh. Fig­
ures 4.10b and 4.10d shows that the RDM overestimates prices in the whole price range.
38
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:46==
(a) MLR prediction 2019
(b) RDM prediction 2019
(c) MLR prediction 2020
(d) RDM prediction 2020
Figure 4.10: Comparison of MLR and RDM predicted prices (x­axis) versus observed
prices (y­axis). The year of 2019 is presented in Figures 4.10a and 4.10b and 2020
in Figures 4.10a and 4.10b. The black line represents y=x, and the red line is a linear
regression between x and y.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.11 compares predicted to observed prices for the years 2021 and 2022. In Fig­
ures 4.11a and 4.11c, it can be seen that the MLR model, on average, manages to predict
prices fairly well. Figures 4.11b and 4.11d shows that the RDM stuggles for the same
years. In both Figures 4.11b and 4.11d the RDM predicts price up to a certain point, ≈
200 Eur/MWh for 2021 and ≈150 Eur/MWh for 2022, which results in underestimation of
prices.
(a) MLR prediction 2021
(b) RDM prediction 2021
(c) MLR prediction 2022
(d) RDM prediction 2022
Figure 4.11: Comparison of MLR and RDM predicted prices (x­axis) versus observed
prices (y­axis). The year of 2021 is presented in Figures 4.11a and 4.11b and 2022 in Fig­
ures 4.11c and 4.11d. The black line represents y=x, and the red line is a linear regression
between x and y.
40
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.12 shows comparisons of predicted and observed prices for all years where all
predicted prices for each model shown in Figures 4.10 and 4.11 have been concatenated
to create four­year sets of predicted prices. The plots show that the MLR model almost
perfectly predicts electricity prices on average in the four­year period. The RDM, however,
has a large spread and, on average, overestimates prices below ≈110 Eur/MWh while
underestimating prices above. An interesting observation is that the MLR model predicts
many hours of negative prices while the RDM rarely predicts negative prices. Negative
prices can affect the results of calculations using the prices since negative prices result in
negative revenue. These results show that the MLR model predicts the electricity prices
in the Irish market for the years 2019 to 2022 with less spread and manages to predict
the high prices observed in 2021 and 2022.
(a) MLR prediction 2019 ­ 2022 concatenated
(b) RDM prediction 2019 ­ 2022 concatenated
Figure 4.12: Predicted prices (x­axis) versus observed prices (y­axis) 2019 ­ 2022
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.13 shows histograms of price prediction errors of each model. The error is calcu­
lated as Error = Predicted−Observed, resulting in a positive error when a model overpre­
dicts the price and a negative error when a model underpredicts the price. The predicted
years have been concatenated to form a data set of all the predicted years. Plots compar­
ing the prediction error for each individual year can be found in Appendix A.2. Over the
four years predicted, the errors of the MLR model are centred around 0 with a standard
deviation of 37.4. The errors of the residual demand model are not centred around 0 with
a standard deviation of 116.0, and it can be seen in the individual year plots that it overes­
timates prices in 2019 and 2020 and underestimates prices in 2022. This shows that the
residual demand model is more sensitive to the difference in prices between the years.
Figure 4.13: Comparison of predicted price error with all predicted years concatenated.
The error distribution of the MLR model is presented in the plot to the left and the RDM in
the plot to the right.
42
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.14 shows predicted and observed electricity prices on one randomly selected
day in each year. More plots of randomly selected days for each year can be found in Ap­
pendix A.3. In the four days displayed in Figure 4.14, the MLR model predicts prices in the
correct range, while the RDM overestimates prices in 2019 and 2020 and underestimates
prices in 2021 and 2022. However, both models fail to predict the sharp movements in
electricity price seen in Figures 4.14c and 4.14d. Meanwhile, both models manage to
predict the spikes in prices seen in Figure 4.14b.
(a) 2019
(b) 2020
(c) 2021
(d) 2022
Figure 4.14: Predicted and observed prices on a randomly selected day in 2019 (a), 2020
(b), 2021 (c) and 2022 (d).
Figures 4.15 and 4.16 were created to analyse whether the failure to predict the price
spikes was due to limitations of the models or external factors. In the plots for 2020­10­27
it can be seen that the electricity price spikes are caused by high demand in conjunction
with drops in wind power availability. Both demand and wind power availability are used
in both models, which explains why both models are able to predict the price spikes. Fig­
ure 4.16 gives a slightly different story for the price spikes seen in 2022­09­15. The first
spike appears to be caused by a significant surge in demand during a period of low wind
availability. In contrast, the second spike occurs despite high wind availability and only a
minor increase in demand. Considering this, it can be inferred that both price spikes can
be partially attributed to surges in demand. However, the question that remains unan­
swered is why none of the price models were able to predict these price spikes. It is
probable that the spike in price is due to some external factor that is not covered by the
models. The conclusion can be drawn that neither model is perfect and will never be able
to capture all variability in electricity prices.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
43
==PAGE:51==
(a) Hourly electricity prices and demand in 2020­
10­27
(b) Hourly electricity prices and wind availability
in 2020­10­27
Figure 4.15: Analysis of electricity price spikes in 2020­10­27. Demand and price is plot­
ted in (a) and wind availability and price in (b)
(a) Hourly electricity prices and demand in 2022­
09­15
(b) Hourly electricity prices and wind availability
in 2022­09­15
Figure 4.16: Analysis of electricity price spikes in 2022­09­15. Demand and price is plot­
ted in (a) and wind availability and price in (b)
4.3.1
Bootstrap price prediction
Figure 4.17 compares predicted and observed prices for the bootstrap dataset. Each plot
contains 87,600,000 hours of predicted prices, which adds to 10,000 years. The results
are visually comparable to those in Figure 4.12. However, the linear regressions (red
lines) between the predicted and observed prices are lined up with the black line and,
therefore, only barely visible. Similarly to in Figure 4.12, the RDM underestimates prices
with a maximum predicted price of ≈240 Eur/MWh while the highest observed price is ≈
700 Eur/MWh. The MLR model nearly predicts the full range of electricity prices, with the
highest predicted price being ≈580 Euro/MWh.
44
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:52==
(a) Price predictions using the MLR model and
bootstrap dataset
(b) Price predictions using the residual demand
model and bootstrap dataset
Figure 4.17: Comparison of the MLR and residual demand models predicted prices ver­
sus observed prices in the bootstrap dataset. Each plot contains 87,600,000 data points
representing 10,000 years of hourly data.
4.3.2
Price prediction discussion
The results presented in Section 4.3 show that the MLR model better predicts prices in
the Irish system for the four years analyzed. This is especially notable in Figure 4.12,
where the prices predicted by the MLR model match the observed prices significantly
better than the residual demand model. Moreover, the error distributions of predicted
price errors presented in Figure 4.13 favour the MLR model as the distribution is centred
around zero and has a smaller spread than that of the RDM.
A reason why the residual demand model fails to accurately predict prices is the bias in
the price data that the model was trained on that can not be explained by demand or
VRE availability. As explained in Section 3.4, the models were trained on three years of
data and then predicted the fourth. For instance, to predict electricity prices in 2022, the
models were trained on data from 2019, 2020, and 2021. As can be seen in Figure 2.6,
the general price levels of those years were much lower than in 2022. This means that
the training data used to predict 2022 is biased towards lower prices which results in the
residual demand model predicting too low prices. The MLR model, however, is able to
see through the bias since it uses gas price as an explanatory variable, and the major
driver for the high electricity prices in the latter years was the gas price (as proven by
Figures 2.6 and 4.5). A conclusion can be drawn that, in a gas­dependent system like
Ireland’s, it is crucial for price predictor models to consider the gas price, and the residual
demand model is, therefore, insufficient in such a system.
4.4
COVE­LCOE ratio
Grid average COVE/LCOE ratio for wind power was calculated using observed and pre­
dicted prices using the methodology described in Section 3.6. The CLR results for each
year and the bootstrap data set are presented in Figure 4.18. Calculating CLR using the
predicted prices from the MLR model overestimates the CLR in the years 2019 and 2020
while underestimating CLR in 2021 and 2022. The RDM predictions overestimate CLR
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
45
==PAGE:53==
for all years but are more accurate for 2019 and 2020. The results based on the bootstrap
dataset are presented as an average of the 10,000 samples with error bars showing the
standard deviation of the error in prediction from the MLR model and RDM. Based on
the bootstrap dataset, the MLR model predicts the correct average CLR with a standard
deviation of error of 0.017, while the RDM overestimates the average CLR by 0.07 with a
standard deviation of error of 0.041. Figure 4.19 was created to analyze the CLR results
further.
Figure 4.18: CLR calculated using observed and predicted prices for both the four­year
dataset and the bootstrap dataset.
Figure 4.19 shows comparisons of average normalized price and normalized wind capture
price using observed and predicted prices. In both cases the prices have been normal­
ized by the demand­weighted average price in each year. As described in Section 3.6.1,
price normalization is used when calculating COVE and looking at the normalized prices
can give insight into the CLR results shown in Figure 4.18. It can be seen in Figure 4.19a
that the yearly average normalized prices of the RDM are close to the observed values,
which stands in contrast to the price prediction results presented in Section 4.3. However,
the difference lies in that the prices presented in Figure 4.19, as well as the prices used
to calculate CLR, are normalized by the demand­weighted average of the same data set.
For instance, in the case of the RDM, overestimated prices in the years 2019 and 2020
are also normalized by an overestimated demand­weighted average. Similarly, underes­
timated prices in 2021 and 2022 are normalized by an underestimated demand­weighted
average. This explains how the yearly normalized prices predicted by the RDM can be
closer to the observed values than the values predicted by the MLR model.
Yearly normalized wind capture prices presented in Figure 4.19b were calculated to help
understand the results in Figure 4.18. A lower average normalized wind capture price
would result in a higher COVE and CLR since the denominator of Equation (2.4), in the
case of wind, represents the normalized revenue of the wind power plant. Hence, a lower
catch price gives lower revenue which results in a smaller denominator and higher COVE
and CLR values. The wind capture prices calculated using the RDM are lower than the
observed values, which reflects what can be seen in the CLR results where the RDM
46
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:54==
overestimates the CLR for all years. The wind capture prices calculated using the MLR
model also reflect the CLR results, and the year 2020 stands out. The wind capture price
was greatly underestimated at 0.67 by the MLR model versus the observed value of 0.84.
This results in the CLR being overestimated by 26%.
(a) Average normalized price comparison. (b) Normalized wind capture price compari­
son.
Figure 4.19: Comparison of average normalized observed and predicted prices in the
period 2019 to 2022.
Figure 4.20 compares the errors when calculating CLR using the prices predicted by the
RDM and MLR models using the bootstrap dataset. The error is calculated as the pre­
dicted CLR subtracted by the observed CLR. A positive error then means overestimation,
a negative error means underestimation, and zero means that the CLR is perfectly pre­
dicted. The standard deviation of the distributions seen in Figure 4.20 are used as error
bars in Figure 4.18. It can be seen that the error of the RDM is centred around ≈0.07,
which is also the average error seen in Figure 4.20. Meanwhile, the errors of the MLR
model predictions are centred around zero with a smaller spread and standard deviation.
Figure 4.20: Comparison of calculated CLR error between the RDM and MLR models
based on the bootstrap dataset.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
47
==PAGE:55==
4.4.1
CLR discussion
The results on CLR are intriguing because one would expect the MLR model to more ac­
curately predict metrics such as COVE since it more accurately predicts electricity prices.
However, that is not the case for the years 2019 and 2020, as seen in Figure 4.18. Al­
though the residual demand model overestimates prices in the same years, it predicts
CLR values closer to the actual observed values and outperforms the MLR model for
those years. The reason why this is possible lies in the normalization of prices used when
calculating COVE, as explained above. The implication of this result is that the price
model used when predicting metrics like COVE does not have to predict electricity prices
in absolute terms accurately. The reason is that bias in predicted prices does not matter
since prices are normalized by the average of the same prices. What is left after normal­
ization is a set of normalized prices that are based on the explanatory variables used in
the model. This is something that should be investigated further.
Calculated observed grid average CLR for wind can be seen in Figure 4.18. The result
shows CLRs of 1.19, 1.19, 1.15, and 1.26 in each respective year. As explained in Sec­
tion 3.6, A CLR over 1 means that electricity is sold at a lower price on average than the
market average generator. If that loss of income is considered as a cost, then a CLR of
1.19 implies that costs are 19% higher than indicated by LCOE. Another and possibly bet­
ter interpretation is that the CLRs indicate significant generation devaluation, especially
in 2022, where CLR was 26% higher than LCOE. CLR is the inverse of the value factor,
as can be seen in Equation (2.10), and the CLR of 2022 represents a value factor of
0.79. Keep in mind that COVE was calculated using the market average generator as
a reference during normalization, while a constant power generator is traditionally used,
as explained in Section 3.6.1. Figure A.23 presents CLR values calculated using the ap­
proach of normalizing by the time­average electricity price. Using this method, the CLR
values for each year are calculated to be 1.13, 1.1, 1.11, and 1.22, respectively. Com­
paring the averages, the use of time­average gave an average CLR of 1.14, while the
demand­weighted average yielded an average of 1.20. Consequently, when normalizing
with the time­average price, the devaluation of generation is calculated to be lower in the
Irish system. This result indicates that the market average generator in the Irish system
sells electricity at a higher average price than a constant power generator would. In con­
clusion, using a constant power generator as a value reference in systems consisting of a
high share of renewables and highly flexible conventional generators, is obsolete. Particu­
larly in today’s context, driven by climate targets, the option when deploying new electricity
generators is not between dispatchable fossil generators or VRE sources. Instead, the
focus lies in of how VRE sources can be deployed in the most efficient way possible.
48
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:56==
4.5
Revenue
Revenue was calculated using the methodology described inSections 2.2.11 and 3.7. The
results are presented in Figures 4.21 and 4.22. Figure 4.21 shows a comparison of calcu­
lated revenues using observed and predicted prices. All revenues have been normalized
by the observed revenue to make the results easier to compare. Here the differences in
price predictions seen in Section 4.3 are also seen as the residual demand model overesti­
mates wind power revenue by 152 and 204% in the years 2019 and 2020, respectively. In
comparison, the MLR model is only overestimating revenue by 12% in 2019 and underes­
timating revenue by 3% in 2020. In 2021 and 2022, the RDM is underestimating revenue
by 27 and 69%, respectively. The reason for this is the underestimation of electricity
prices which was seen in Figures 4.11b and 4.11d. The MLR model is 2% off the mark in
both 2021 and 2022. Using the bootstrap dataset, the RDM underestimates the revenue
on average by 7% with a standard deviation of normalized error of 0.055. By contrast,
the MLR model perfectly estimates the revenue on average with a standard deviation of
normalized error of 0.021.
Figure 4.21: Revenue comparison in each year plus bootstrap dataset, calculated using
observed and predicted prices.
Figure 4.22 compares the errors when calculating revenue using the prices predicted
by the RDM and MLR models using the bootstrap dataset. The error is calculated as the
predicted revenue subtracted by the observed revenue. A positive error then means over­
estimation, a negative error means underestimation, and zero means that the revenue is
perfectly predicted. The standard deviation of the distributions seen in Figure 4.22 are
normalized by the and then used as error bars in Figure 4.21. Similar to Figure 4.20, the
error distributions are centred around the average prediction error seen in Figure 4.21.
The distribution of errors of the MLR model predictions are centred around zero and have
a smaller spread and standard deviation than the distribution of errors from the RDM.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.22: Comparison of calculated revenue error between the RDM and MLR models
based on the bootstrap dataset.
4.5.1
Revenue discussion
The results presented in Section 4.5 shows that the MLR model predicted the yearly rev­
enues significantly more accurately. Unlike the calculation of CLR, Revenue calculation
does not require the normalization of electricity prices. As a result, the outcomes directly
reflect the model’s ability to predict electricity prices accurately. This sensitivity to ac­
curate price prediction could be a disadvantage of using revenue as a design objective
instead of COVE. However, if one is able to predict electricity prices as accurately as the
MLR model in this case, then revenue would be the preferred design metric since it gave
results closest to the observed values.
4.5.2
Bootstrap discussion
Bootstrapping was used to artificially create more data points that could be used for cross­
validation of the models. However, it does not create new unique data points but randomly
samples data points from the existing dataset and creates new constellations of data
points. These new data sets (10,000 data sets) were then used to train the models and
predict electricity prices in the same way as it was done for the original data set. The new
sets of predictions were then used to calculate CLR and revenue, as well as the error of
those results. The strength of this method is that distributions of errors can be analysed,
as can be seen in Figures 4.20 and 4.22. This gives an indication of how big of an error
margin can be expected when using a model. The MLR model showed a significantly
lower spread in the error distribution when predicting both CLR and revenue. The weak­
ness of the bootstrapping method is the fact that no new data points are created. When
the original data set is sampled to generate 10,000 new data sets, and the calculation
results are averaged, as done in the CLR and revenue calculations, bootstrapping essen­
tially becomes a complex approach to obtaining results similar to averaging everything
in the original data set. Nevertheless, the average results obtained through bootstrap­
ping are interesting, particularly considering that the original dataset contains data from
four years marked by extreme market volatility and external pressures as outlined in Sec­
tion 2.4. The bootstrap price prediction results shown in Figure 4.17 further prove that it
is necessary to take gas prices into account when predicting prices in the Irish system.
50
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:58==
4.6
Limitations
This work has three limitations identified by the author. First is the limited data access.
Four years of data is in the context of statistical modelling a small dataset. A bigger
dataset is unavailable for the Irish market since the single electricity market I­SEM started
operating in 2018, limiting available full years to 2019­2022. The results seen for individual
years might not have been as biased if the models had been trained on more years of data.
Open access data on gas prices were also hard to find, and the available data found for
gas prices was only at a daily resolution. Consequently, when predicting hourly electricity
data using day­resolution gas price data, the average prices for the day align within the
expected range. However, the model fails to capture the intraday fluctuations in electricity
prices resulting from movements in gas prices. Figure A.24 in the appendix shows CLR
results using all data averaged to daily resolution. In that case, the MLR model performs
better in 2020 and overestimates CLR by 15.3% instead of 26.0%. In conclusion, limited
access to data was a limitation affecting the results obtained in this report.
The second limitation identified is that this work uses actual data to predict prices. Using
actual historical data to predict historical prices is a good way of evaluating how models
perform while removing the uncertainty of the input data. Under these conditions, the
results in this report show that it would be advantageous to use the MLR model instead of
the residual demand model. However, the result might be different if forecasted data was
used as input to predict future prices. Since the MLR model uses one more variable, it is
subject to more uncertainty through the input data and might, therefore, not be preferable
over the residual demand model when predicting future prices.
The third limitation comes down to the disconnect between DAH prices and generational
data. DAH prices are cleared 24 hours before the electricity is to be sold and are based
on demand and generation forecasts. The generation data used in this work represents
the actual demand and generation in each hour. Therefore, there is a disconnect between
prices and generation. This is particularly true for data on wind availability and generation
since its forecasting is notoriously difficult. This introduces noise in the input to the mod­
els, which could weaken the correlation between both demand and wind generation and
electricity price.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
51
==PAGE:59==
52
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:60==
5
Conclusion
The aim of this work was to contribute to the research of the new metric COVE, which
was designed to be comparable with LCOE while also including the value of electricity
produced. This was done by firstly questioning the value reference used today in both
COVE and value factor. The author of this work argues that using a constant power
generator as a reference when comparing value is obsolete, and the use of the market
average generator, found through the demand­weighted electricity price, is instead pro­
posed. Both methods were compared, and the new value reference gave an average
COVE­LCOE ratio (CLR) of 1.20 compared to 1.14 when using the old value comparison.
Secondly, a new price model was developed and tested, which uses wind power as one
of 3 explanatory variables in a multiple linear regression (MLR) model. The MLR model
was compared to a residual demand price model, which has been proposed to be used in
conjunction with COVE in previous research. The Irish system between 2019 and 2022
was used as a case study, and the new model showed a stronger correlation to electricity
prices with a coefficient of determination for all years of 0.886 compared to 0.155 for the
residual demand model. Both models were evaluated using cross­validation to predict
prices in each year as well as for a larger dataset obtained through bootstrapping. The
MLR model predicted prices more accurately than the residual demand model, with a
standard deviation in prediction error for all years of 37.4 Eur/MWh compared to 116.0
Eur/MWh. Predicted prices were also used to calculate CLR and revenue. Results show
that the residual demand model better predicted CLR in years 2019 and 2020, while the
MLR model better predicted 2021 and 2022. The results from the bootstrap dataset, how­
ever, show that the MLR model, on average, predicted the correct CLR of 1.22 with a
standard deviation in error of 0.017, while the residual demand model predicted a CLR of
1.31 with 0.041 standard deviation in error. The MLR model was also significantly more
accurate when predicting revenue.
Thirdly, evaluation of observed CLR values shows that wind power is subject to significant
generation devaluation in the Irish market, with an average CLR in the four years of 1.2.
5.1
Future work
This study used historical generation and gas price data to predict prices. However, fore­
casts on gas price, generation, and demand must instead be used when implementing
price models to predict future prices. Therefore, it would be valuable to investigate how
much uncertainty is introduced when using forecasts and incorporating more explanatory
variables, as was done with the MLR model, which uses 3 compared to 2 for the residual
demand model.
As discussed in the report, this study argues that the use of a constant power generator
as a value reference is obsolete. However, the use of the market average generator could
also be problematic, as outlined in Section 3.6.1. Therefore future work could look into
what the best reference for value could be in today’s systems with high VRE penetration.
Results on CLR showed that there is more to price prediction for use with COVE than
discussed in this report since the residual demand model was able to predict fairly accu­
rate results even though it was both over and under­predicting prices in the four years
evaluated. Future work should analyze this phenomenon and look into if this could be
used to simplify price models.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
53
==PAGE:61==
54
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
IPCC. “Summary for Policymakers”. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Re­
port of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. by H.­O. Pörtner et al.
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2022. DOI:
10.1017/9781009325844.001.
[2]
Thomas R. Karl and Kevin E. Trenberth. “Modern Global Climate Change”. In: Sci­
ence 302.5651 (2003), pp. 1719–1723. DOI: 10.1126/science.1090228. eprint: https:
//www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1090228. URL: https://www.science.org/
doi/abs/10.1126/science.1090228.
[3]
IPCC. “Summary for Policymakers”. In: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. by P.R. Shukla et al. Cambridge,
UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2022. DOI: 10.1017/
9781009157926.001.
[4]
IEA. World Energy Outlook 2022. Type: doi:https://doi.org/10.1787/3a469970­en.
Paris, 2022. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022.
[5]
Joyce Lee and Feng Zhao. Brussels, Belgium, 2022. URL: https://gwec.net/global-
wind-report-2022/.
[6]
Andrew Clifton, Aaron Smith, and Michael Fields. “Wind Plant Preconstruction En­
ergy Estimates. Current Practice and Opportunities”. In: (Apr. 2016). DOI: 10.2172/
1248798. URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1248798.
[7]
Tyler Stehly and Patrick Duffy. 2021 Cost of Wind Energy Review. 2022. URL: https:
//www.nrel.gov/docs/fy23osti/84774.pdf.
[8]
Matthew Mowers and Trieu Mai. “An evaluation of electricity system technology
competitiveness metrics: The case for profitability”. In: The Electricity Journal 34.4
(2021), p. 106931. ISSN: 1040­6190. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tej.2021.106931.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1040619021000221.
[9]
Lion Hirth. “The market value of variable renewables: The effect of solar wind power
variability on their relative price”. In: Energy Economics 38 (2013), pp. 218–236.
ISSN: 0140­9883. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2013.02.004. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140988313000285.
[10]
Juliet Simpson, Eric Loth, and Katherine Dykes. “Cost of Valued Energy for design
of renewable energy systems”. In: Renewable Energy 153 (2020), pp. 290–300.
ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.01.131. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148120301531.
[11]
Vattenfall. Wind power. Mar. 21, 2023. URL: https://group.vattenfall.com/what-we-
do/our-energy-sources/wind-power.
[12]
IEA. Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2020. 2020. URL: https://www.iea.
org/reports/projected-costs-of-generating-electricity-2020.
[13]
Falko Ueckerdt et al. “System LCOE: What are the costs of variable renewables?”
In: Energy 63 (2013), pp. 61–75. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.energy.2013.10.072. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360544213009390.
[14]
Lion Hirth, Falko Ueckerdt, and Ottmar Edenhofer. Integration Costs and the Value
of Wind Power. Oct. 3, 2013. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2335386. URL:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2335386.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
55
==PAGE:63==
[15]
Trieu Mai, Matthew Mowers, and Kelly Eurek. “Competitiveness Metrics for Elec­
tricity System Technologies”. In: (Feb. 2021). DOI: 10.2172/1765599. URL: https:
//www.osti.gov/biblio/1765599.
[16]
Xavier Garcia­Casals and Emanuele Bianco. Potential limitations of marginal pricing
for a power system based on renewables. 2022.
[17]
Matthias Huber and S von Roon. “Modeling spot market pricing with the residual
load”. In: Enerday: 5th Conference on Energy Economics and Technology, Dresden.
2010.
[18]
Eric Loth et al. “Why we must move beyond LCOE for renewable energy design”.
In: Advances in Applied Energy 8 (2022), p. 100112. ISSN: 2666­7924. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.adapen.2022.100112. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2666792422000300.
[19]
Jorge M. Uribe, Stephania Mosquera­López, and Oscar J. Arenas. “Assessing the
relationship between electricity and natural gas prices in European markets in times
of distress”. In: Energy Policy 166 (2022), p. 113018. ISSN: 0301­4215. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2022.113018. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0301421522002439.
[20]
T. Ashuri et al. “Multidisciplinary design optimization of offshore wind turbines for
minimum levelized cost of energy”. en. In: Renewable Energy 68 (Aug. 2014), pp. 893–
905. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2014.02.045. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148114001360 (visited on 03/16/2023).
[21]
Szymon Jozef Wawrzyniak. “Optimization of wind farm layout design for value­based
and profitability­based objectives”. 2021.
[22]
IEA. World Energy Outlook 2018. 2018. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/world-
energy-outlook-2018.
[23]
IEA. Global Energy and Climate Model. 2022. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/
global-energy-and-climate-model.
[24]
EIA. Levelized Cost of Electricity and Levelized Avoided Cost of Electricity Method­
ology Supplement. In: July 2013. URL: https://www.eia.gov/renewable/workshop/
gencosts/pdf/methodology_supplement.pdf.
[25]
Clara F. Heuberger et al. “Levelised Value of Electricity ­ A Systemic Approach to
Technology Valuation”. In: 26th European Symposium on Computer Aided Process
Engineering. Ed. by Zdravko Kravanja and Miloš Bogataj. Vol. 38. Computer Aided
Chemical Engineering. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 721–726. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-63428-3.50125-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780444634283501259.
[26]
Hans Stephenson. “Valence of Electric Energy”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power
Apparatus and Systems PAS­92.1 (1973), pp. 248–253. DOI: 10.1109/TPAS.1973.
293620.
[27]
Philipp Beiter et al. “Toward global comparability in renewable energy procurement”.
In: Joule 5.6 (2021), pp. 1485–1500. ISSN: 2542­4351. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.joule.2021.04.017. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2542435121002038.
[28]
W Short, D J Packey, and T Holt. “A manual for the economic evaluation of energy
efficiency and renewable energy technologies”. In: (Mar. 1995). DOI: 10.2172/35391.
URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/35391.
[29]
Magdi Ragheb. “Chapter 25 ­ Economics of Wind Power Generation”. In: Wind En­
ergy Engineering. Ed. by Trevor M. Letcher. Academic Press, 2017, pp. 537–555.
ISBN: 978­0­12­809451­8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809451-8.00025-
4. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128094518000254.
56
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:64==
[30]
M. Kapsali and J.K. Kaldellis. “Combining hydro and variable wind power generation
by means of pumped­storage under economically viable terms”. In: Applied Energy
87.11 (2010), pp. 3475–3485. ISSN: 0306­2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2010.05.026. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261910002126.
[31]
Manuel Monjas Barroso and José Balibrea Iniesta. “A valuation of wind power projects
in Germany using real regulatory options”. In: Energy 77 (2014), pp. 422–433. ISSN:
0360­5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.09.027. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544214010834.
[32]
EirGrid Group. EirGrid. May 2023. URL: https://www.eirgridgroup.com/.
[33]
EirGrid and SONI. Annual Renewable Energy Constraint and Curtailment Report
2021. Aug. 2022.
[34]
SEMO. SEMO. May 2023. URL: https://www.sem-o.com/.
[35]
Climate Department of the Environment and Communications. Gas. May 2023. URL:
https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/f1ecf1-gas/.
[36]
seai. Monthly gas supply by stream. May 2023. URL: https://www.seai.ie/blog/
monthly-energy-updates/.
[37]
Office for National Statistics. System Average Price (SAP) of gas. Mar. 2023. URL:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/economicoutputandproductivity/output/datasets/
systemaveragepricesapofgas.
[38]
Péter Kotek et al. “What can the EU do to address the high natural gas prices?” In:
Energy Policy 173 (2023), p. 113312. ISSN: 0301­4215. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.enpol.2022.113312. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0301421522005316.
[39]
Amin Sokhanvar and Elie Bouri. “Commodity price shocks related to the war in
Ukraine and exchange rates of commodity exporters and importers”. In: Borsa Is­
tanbul Review 23.1 (2023), pp. 44–54. ISSN: 2214­8450. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.bir.2022.09.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214845022000667.
[40]
Jim Robbins. “Global ‘Stilling’: Is Climate Change Slowing Down the Wind?” In:
(Sept. 2022).
[41]
Lion Hirth, Falko Ueckerdt, and Ottmar Edenhofer. “Integration costs revisited –
An economic framework for wind and solar variability”. In: Renewable Energy 74
(2015), pp. 925–939. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.
08.065. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148114005357.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
57
==PAGE:65==
58
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:66==
A
Appendix
A.1
Electricity price correlations
Figure A.1: Linear regression between VRE availability and electricity price for the years
2019 through 2022
Figure A.2: Linear regression between SNSP and electricity price for the years 2019
through 2022
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
59
==PAGE:67==
A.2
Price prediction error
Figure A.3: Comparison of predicted price error of the two models year 2019
Figure A.4: Comparison of predicted price error of the two models year 2020
60
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.5: Comparison of predicted price error of the two models year 2021
Figure A.6: Comparison of predicted price error of the two models year 2022
A.3
Randomly selected days
In this section, plots of observed and predicted prices on a randomly selected day in each
quarter in each year are presented.
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.7: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day first quarter of 2019
Figure A.8: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day second quarter of 2019
62
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.9: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day third quarter of 2019
Figure A.10: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day fourth quarter of 2019
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.11: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day first quarter of 2020
Figure A.12: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day second quarter of 2020
64
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.13: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day third quarter of 2020
Figure A.14: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day fourth quarter of 2020
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.15: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day first quarter of 2021
Figure A.16: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day second quarter of 2021
66
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.17: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day third quarter of 2021
Figure A.18: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day fourth quarter of 2021
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
67
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.19: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day first quarter of 2022
Figure A.20: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day second quarter of 2022
68
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.21: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day third quarter of 2022
Figure A.22: Observed price and price prediction using the RDM and MLR model on a
randomly selected day fourth quarter of 2022
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
69
==PAGE:77==
A.4
CLR using time­average for normalization
Figure A.23: CLR calculated using time­average when normalizing
A.5
CLR using day resolution data
Figure A.24: CLR calculated using day resolution data
70
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
==PAGE:78==
Moving beyond LCOE with COVE
71
==PAGE:79==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/organisations/department-of-wind-and-energy-systems
