==PAGE:1==
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise
behaviour in real-life communication
Brug af eye-tracking briller til karakterisering af adfærd i
virkelig kommunikation
Florence Mazzetti
Supervisors:
Eline Borch Petersen (WSA)
Tobias May (DTU)
In fulfilment of my MSc in Engineering Acoustics.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Hypothesis
5
3
Method
7
3.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Statistical analysis method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Voice activity detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Identification of talkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.6
Data processing: calculation of objective variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7
Data excluded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Results
13
4.1
Noise condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Gaze on talker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Fixation duration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Head orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Head movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.6
Distance between interlocutors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.7
Summary of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Discussion
18
6
Conclusion
20
References
21
Appendices
24
A Questionnaire
24
2
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Group conversations are challenging due to the complexity of the acoustic scenario caused
by factors such as the presence of multiple talkers, their relative location and hearing ability.
Still nowadays, hearing aids struggle to effectively help hearing-impaired (HI) listeners in these
cocktail-party scenarios. This study uses eye-tracking glasses to characterise the behaviour
of interlocutors in real-life triadic conversations. More specifically, we studied the effect of
background noise, the relative location of the conversational partners, and hearing status on
gaze and head movement. Eleven triads were tested, each consisting of one HI interlocutor
and two normal hearing (NH) interlocutors. The participants conversed in a canteen during
and outside lunch hours (corresponding respectively to a noisy and a quiet environment) while
their speech was recorded. Multiple conversations of four minutes were recorded where one
interlocutor was wearing eye-tracking glasses. In between conversations, the glasses switched
between the HI subject and one of the NH subjects. It was found that listeners looked at the
talker’s face 62% of the time and that their head was not directly oriented towards the talker
88% of the time. No effect of hearing status was found on gaze and head movement behaviour.
The position of the interlocutors in the beside condition was found to decrease the amount
of gaze on the talker, the fixation duration while listening and the number of directional
reversals compared to the across condition. On the other hand, the head orientation off-axis
of the talker and the variance in horizontal head velocity increased in the beside condition.
This characterisation could be beneficial to know the location of the listener’s attention for
directional hearing aids.
3
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
Following and being part of a group conversation can be challenging. Whether it is due to the
surrounding noise or to the attention required to identify who is talking or will talk next. Hearing
impaired (HI) are the ones who are the most affected by this situation as their reduced hearing
abilities will increase the difficulty of the following the conversation [1]. The following research aims
to address this challenge by investigating behaviour using eye-tracking glasses. This was achieved
by looking at how different behavioural traits such as gaze and head movement change depending
on the complexity of the scene. While the effect of noise and hearing impairment has been studied,
no previous study has taken into account the effect of the interlocutors’ location in relation to each
other. Eye-tracking was used as it is unobtrusive, just like wearing normal glasses [2] and could
therefore easily be implemented in a every day scenario.
In a group conversation, gaze becomes more important for nonverbal communication as multiple
talkers are present, competing for the listener’s attention. Vertegaal et al. [3] found that gaze cues
made turn-taking in group conversation more efficient. Alongside head movement, it can indicate
the end of an utterance and hence the turn for someone else to speak [4–6]. Additionally, the
head orientation tends to be more off-axis from the talker in triadic conversations than dyadic
conversations [5]. One reason could be that it is an optimal head orientation [7] as it allows for an
improved signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [8] due to the addition of binaural cues. Orienting the head
away from the speech source has been found to give a benefit of up to 8 dB [8]. Nevertheless, the
degree of undershooting the target with head orientation [9,10] has been found to not be affected
by noise level [9], but rather by noise type [7], where participants’ head were less directly oriented
towards the speaker in babble noise. The presence of noise does have an effect on how much time
the listener spends looking at specific facial regions [11] as well as the duration of the fixation [12].
At lower SNR levels, fixation duration is longer than at higher SNR levels [12]. Furthermore, it
has been found that in noise, the listener spends more time looking at the talker’s mouth than in
quiet [13]. This is because visual cues improve understanding [14] compared to no visual cues in
noisy conditions. There are other behavioural traits that improve speech understanding in groups,
which include moving closer to the talker [7].
Understanding speech when there are competing sound sources is also dependent on atten-
tion [15]. Spatial attention does not require eye movement, but it does allow for faster and deeper
processing [16]. Eye gaze is still related to auditory attention [17] where listeners tend to follow the
change of speaker [18]. In a group conversation, listeners have been found to look at the talker the
majority of the time (between 50% and 88% according to [5, 9, 13]). As concluded by Kendon et
al. [19] eye contact can serve four purposes: “(1) to provide visual feedback; (2) to regulate the flow
of conversation; (3) to communicate emotions and relationships; and (4) to improve concentration
by restriction of visual input”. Hadley et al [4], also confirmed the social role of eye movement in
triadic conversation, “signalling or influencing dominance, competence, intimacy and liking”.
Hearing impaired (HI) listeners suffer the most in complex situations such as group conversa-
tion [1,20,21]. It has been found that they require an SNR of 4-5 dB higher than normal hearing
4
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:5==
(NH) listeners in order to perform the same [22]. HI have been found to make more complex
head movements [10, 18] when switching attention to a different talker, making their fixation la-
tency longer [10]. It is often assumed that due to their difficulty understanding, HI are better
at lip-reading, however, no difference in this ability has been measured [22]. In order to improve
the experience of HI, hearing aids (HA) have been manufactured with directional microphones.
However, the benefits of such HA have been found to be limited [23] and improve the perception
of the HI by about 20% in comparison to the omni-directional HA [24]. A main reason for this
is that directional HA attenuate surrounding sound to have a specific directional pattern [25], the
directionality function of the HA assumes that the listener wants to listen the area in front of
them which is not necessarily true. The purpose of this study is to therefore investigate whether
information using eye-tracking glasses could be used to obtain information about how different
factors affect how listeners move and orient themselves relative to the speech they are attending
to. This could then be used in the future to amplify the sound more precisely at the location of
the sound source of interest to the listener.
The study described in this paper resembles the one by Lu et al. [9]. Their set up was in an
acoustic chamber, using two confederates as conversational partners. To vary the noise level, they
played a recording of a restaurant during lunch hour, which did not contain any intelligible speech.
Their findings were that noise level, talker, interaction between noise level and talker as well as
group and talker had an effect on the proportion of speaking time of a given talker. Participants
had the tendency to look directly at the confederate but their head orientation undershot their
location. Noise level and interaction between noise level and group affected the proportion of time
where the participant would orient their head within 10° of the current talker. The HI spend
less time looking at the current talker than NH participants and only young NH listeners gaze’s
accuracy was affected by noise level.
The current study will focus on investigating the behaviour in a real-life setting. This implies
that the noise level is broadly encompassed into noisy and quiet environments. The experiment
will take place in a canteen, where lunch hour will correspond to the noisy environment. The
participants will also interact with people they are already acquainted with, which would lead
to a natural group conversation. This study is interested in finding out whether in a realistic
environment, people will display the same kind of behaviour than in more controlled laboratory
environments. Additionally, the influence of the location of the interlocutors on behaviour has not
yet been investigated. This is why two seating configurations will be investigated, one where both
subject sit across from the participant, and one where one of the subject sits beside.
2
Hypothesis
The goal of this study is to characterise the behaviour of people in a group conversation using
eye-tracking glasses by looking at the effect of hearing status (HS), noise environment and seating
configuration. The eye-tracking glasses provide information about the gaze, the head movement
and the overall scene.
5
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:6==
As visual cues improve understanding [14], it would make sense that a listener would look more
at the talker’s face when either the listener is HI or noise is present. While Lu et al. [9] have not
found support for this argument, they did find a trend for the effect of noise in younger people
and a lack of findings may have been related to the small group size. Hence, this hypothesis will
be retested here. Additionally, talkers could help listeners in noise by accentuating their words
through a more extensive use of gestures, which has been found to help for coordination of turn
transitions [26]. Based on this, it could be that participants look more at the body of the participant
in noise compared to in quiet. Hence, the first hypothesis is the following.
1. The gaze of the listener will be the majority of the time on the current talker’s face. [5,9,13]
1.1. The gaze of the listener in a noisy environment will be more on the face of the current
talker compared to in a quiet environment.
1.2. The HI listeners will gaze at the face of the talker more than the NH listeners.
1.3. The gaze of the listener in noise will be more on the body of the current talker than the
gaze of the listener in quiet.
Fixation duration has been found to be longer in noise than in quiet [12]. The reason is that
fixation duration is thought to be linked to cognitive effort [27]. Assuming that HI listeners will
spend more cognitive effort in group conversations than NH listeners, the average fixation duration
while listening for HI is expected to be higher than the one for NH participants. While no previous
study has investigated the effect of relative position of sound source to the listener on fixation
duration, a difference in fixation duration could be expected between the two conditions. The
reason would be that the two talkers are sitting further away from each other, where most of the
time only one interlocutor is within the visual field. This would imply that in order to check the
response of the other listener, the fixation would be interrupted in a different manner based on the
distance between the two other interlocutors.
2. The fixation duration will be longer in a noisy environment than in a quiet environment. [12]
2.1 Position will have an effect on fixation duration while listening.
2.2 HI listeners will have a longer fixation duration than NH listeners.
2.3 Listening effort and fixation duration will be positively correlated.
As previously mentioned, in triadic conversations, the head orientation tends to be more off-
axis [5] as this allows for an improved SNR [7].
As factors such as hearing impairment and
noisy environment make conversations more difficult, the SNR could be improved through head
orientation. Lu et al. [9] found that the head orientation undershoots the location of the talker
and that it is influenced by noise. Additionally, head orientation is a function of the azimuth of the
target [10], meaning head orientation will be further off-axis if the talker is not directly in front of
the listener.
6
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:7==
3. The head orientation will be off-axis the majority of the time during the triadic conversations.
3.1. The head orientation will be further off-axis from the current talker when one interlocu-
tor is sitting beside compared to across from the listener.
3.2. The head orientation will be further off-axis from the current talker when the listener
is HI compared to NH.
3.3. The head orientation will be further off-axis from the current talker when sitting in a
noisy environment compared to a quiet environment.
Brimijoin et al. [10] found that HI’s head movement was more complex than NH in terms of
having smooth head trajectories characterised by abruptly changing velocities and having a higher
amount of directional reversals.
4. HI will make more complex head movements than NH. [10]
A previous observation by Hadley et al. [7] is that participants tend to sit closer together when
in noise compared to in quiet.
5. The subjects will sit closer together in the noisy environment than in the quiet environment.
[7]
3
Method
3.1
Participants
Eleven triads were recruited for the experiment, each consisting of two NH and one HI inter-
locutor. The NH subjects checked their hearing using an online hearing-screening test [28] and the
subjects knew each other prior to the experiment. Eye-tracking data was only recorded from one
of the two NH subjects during the experiment due to design constrictions. The age of the NH used
for the measurement ranged from 25 to 69 years (mean = 44), of which seven were males and four
were females. The age of the HI ranged from 40 to 74 years (mean = 57), of which ten were males
and one was female. All of them were experienced HA users (from four to 32 years, with a mean
of 12 years), who wear their HA for at least eight hours a day. The individual audiograms of the
HI participants can be seen in Figure 1.
3.2
Set up
The three participants were seated at a square table at the canteen of WSA headquarters
in Lynge. Only one participant at a time was wearing the Pupil Invisible eye-tracking glasses
from Pupil Labs. The data recorded by the eye-tracking glasses was a video of the wearer’s view
(including audio), the estimated gaze and the integrated inertial measurement unit (IMU). The
7
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:8==
250
500
1k
2k
4k
6k 8k
Frequency (Hz)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Hearing level (dB HL)
Figure 1: Audiogram of all HI participants. The grey lines reflect both the right and left ear’s
individual audiograms. The black line represents the mean of all the audiograms. The shaded area
are the values within one standard deviation of the mean.
participants were asked to come for two visits, one in a relatively quiet environment (corresponding
to outside of lunch hour) and one in a noisy environment (corresponding to during lunch hour).
There were two distinct seating configurations, where the subject wearing the glasses has the two
other subjects sit either across from them, from hereon denoted as the across condition (A), or
have one sit beside denoted as the beside condition (S) (see Figure 2). All participants wore a
headset microphone (directional DPA 4088) and the HI wore their own HA.
(a) Across condition (A) (b) Beside condition (S)
Figure 2:
Seating configurations used in the experiment (the set up can be mirrored).
The
participant under test (i.e. the one wearing the eye-tracking glasses) is represented by the glasses
symbol. Talker will always be NH while talker 2 and the participant under test will alternate
between NH and HI.
In each visit, a triad would conduct eight four-minute long conversations.
After each con-
versation, the person wearing the glasses is given a questionnaire to fill out (see Appendix A)
and the position was readjusted for the next seating configuration (see 2).
For each position
8
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:9==
(beside/across), wearer (NH/HI) and noise level (quiet/noise), two conversations were conducted.
The questionnaire includes a 14-scale listening effort rating scale (based on an adaptive scaling
method [29]) and a 14-scale rating about how engaged they felt during the conversation. The
order of the four-minute long conversations was balanced for wearer and position using a balanced
Latin square design. At the beginning, the eye-tracking glasses were calibrated for each wearer
using a cross placed on the opposite side of the table. A Brüel & Kjær hand-held analyser was
placed on the table roughly five meters away from the conversation to record the sound level.
3.3
Statistical analysis method
A linear mixed effects model in R (LMER) is used for the analysis of the data, as implemented
in the lme4 package [30]. This model includes both fixed and random effects. Fixed effects are
effects that are consistent across experiments. Random effects are changes caused by individual
differences, in this case this could be differences between participants as well as between groups [31].
The approach for all the conditions by default is to start by looking at the effect of position on
the variable for all of the data using
lmer(variable ~ position + (1|group/person), dat).
The component including group/person corresponds to the added random effect. If the effect
of position is significant, the data was split into the besides and across conditions and analyzed
separately for any effects of HS and noise. If no significance in position is found, the rest of the
analyses will not differentiate the two positions condition. By default, the effect of HS, noise and
their interaction is investigated.
lmer(variable ~ HS + noise + HS:noise + (1|group/person), dat_A)
If a statistically significant result, corresponding to p-values ≤0.05, is found, a post-hoc analysis
is conducted. This is done using the function ls_means from the lmerTest package, which computes
pairwise differences of the least-squares means. The number of degrees of freedom is estimated
using a Satterthwaite method [32].
3.4
Voice activity detection
Voice activity detection (VAD) will be used to determine which subject is talking when. The
VAD was used on the individual microphone recordings. The VAD was performed based on the
method proposed by Kaldi [33] and is an energy-based VAD. In order to mask any cross-talk picked
up by the microphone that could cause non-talker specific speech to be detected as voice activity,
white Gaussian noise was added to the signal using the awgn in Matlab 2022b with a signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) of 10 dB.
9
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:10==
The first step is to clean up the backchanneling in the recordings. Backchanneling [34] here
refers to when someone is responding to the speaker by short verbal or non-verbal sound, to indicate
they are following what the speaker is saying. In our study, it was defined as any voice activity that
was shorter than one second and had no speech in the preceding and following second. Secondly,
the speech content was separated into two categories: clear turn and interactive speech. A clear
turn was defined as the part of a turn when only one subject was talking. Overlapping speech of
200ms were allowed for turn-taking overlap. This criterion was decided upon as most turn-taking
takes place within -100ms to 500ms [35] and the histogram in Figure 2 of [35] shows that still half
of the frequency of turn-taking compared to the peak at 100-200ms, occurs down to -200ms. If
the overlapping speech was only located at the beginning or end of a longer VAD segment, only
the following/previous one second after/before the overlapping speech has ended would be taken
out of the clear turn VAD (see the transitions between clear and interactive VAD in Figure 3). At
last, gaps in VAD, in which no other talker was speaking, shorter than 1s were bridged. Interactive
speech was defined as any speech that did not classify as a clear turn, i.e. more than one talker was
active at the same time. The validity of those criteria was checked visually by plotting different
conversations extract’s sound wave, their corresponding VAD as well as as audio.
Figure 3: Audio extract visualisation of VAD labelling. The three channels correspond to the
audio recorded for each participant. The black line corresponding to the original audio recording,
the blue line to the clear turn and the red line to the interactive speech.
3.5
Identification of talkers
The Pupil lab eye-tracking glasses data was post-processed in Pupil Cloud. Pupil Cloud gives
way to multiple enrichments, one of them being a Face Mapper [36]. This allows for the identi-
fication of faces present in the world camera over time using the face detection algorithm Reti-
naFace [37].
To filter out faces that were not one of the two subjects, faces that were below 50% of the height
10
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:11==
of the largest face in the recording, were discarded for the across condition. For one recording the
criteria had to be adjusted to 45%. For the beside condition, faces below 40% of the height of the
largest face in the recording were discarded. The reason for this difference is that the difference
in head height was larger due to the person sitting beside the wearer being closer to the wearer,
hence bigger on the screen. The two remaining faces were then identified as talker 1 and talker 2
based on their location in each frame, the movement of the wearer between each frame and, for
the beside position, also their height. The criteria were slightly different for each seating position
condition.
For the across condition, the difference in location of two consecutive faces identified by the
face recognition was used to differentiate talkers. The reason for not just using the timestamps is
that both faces were not always present or identified in every time-frame. The horizontal shift in
pixels in the position of the face location that meant a change in talker was identified corresponded
to the median head size of the talkers. Once the changes in talkers were identified based on the
face locations, they were split into talker 1 and 2 based on their relative position to each other,
meaning talker 1 would be the one most on the left of the screen and talker 2 the one most on the
right of the screen.
For the beside condition, a different approach had to be taken as the majority of time only
one talker would be present in the video frame. First, depending on whether the talker beside the
wearer was sitting on their right or left side, the talker would be labeled as talker 1 and 2 based on
the distance of the identified face to the edge of the video frame. If the first face identified did not
fit the criteria, the head height of the face would be used. It was assumed that the talker sitting
beside would have a bigger head height than the one sitting across as the first one will be closer
to the wearer. The relative distance between the current and the following face’s x-coordinate
was then used to identify whether the talker on the screen had changed (a change bigger than 2.5
times the average head width) or stayed the same (a change smaller than 1.5 times the average
head width). If neither of those conditions were met, the head height was used to label talker 1
and 2. A final check of the labelling of talker 1 and talker 2 was done by looking at the resulting
faces identified for the individual talker. The face’s x-coordinate of one talker was compared to the
preceding face’s x-coordinate overall, if the distance was smaller than 1.5 times the average head
width (as previously defined but working backwards), the preceding face was labelled the same
talker as the current face.
When the face was outside the frame, if the duration of the absence of the face was low,
data points would be interpolated. The criteria depended on the position set up, for the across
condition a low absence duration was defined as below 500ms and, for the beside condition it was
defined as below 200ms. The reason for this difference is because head movement is quicker in
the beside condition and, hence, interpolating for it is less accurate. This was automated and
checked by plotting the location of one of the face x-coordinates over time and the visible mistakes
were manually corrected. An estimate of the body location was made using the face coordinates
dimensions.
11
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:12==
3.6
Data processing: calculation of objective variables
First, the gaze, face and body data was resampled to 100 Hz.
This was chosen based on
the sampling rates of the VAD and the video recording. However, the gaze location data was
resampled to 200 Hz as it was assumed that the gaze movement would change at a quicker pace
and the average sampling rate of the gaze was close to 200 Hz.
The first variable was gaze location. A face box and body box using the coordinates of the
face location were used to identify the location of talker 1 and talker 2 in every frame. It was then
identified whether the x-y coordinate of the wearer’s gaze fell into the face or body box coordinates
of the current talker. The percentage of time the wearer gazed at the current talker’s face and
body was computed during clear and interactive turns.
The second variable was fixation duration. Pupil Lab provides the fixation duration with a
start and end timestamps. The start timestamp was also used to identify which fixation occurred
during a clear turn.
Head orientation was calculated by using the video camera data from the eye-tracking glasses.
It was assumed that if the wearer would have their head oriented directly towards the talker, the
location of the talker’s face should be at the centre of the image. Since the face of the talker might
not be oriented directly towards the wearer, the centre of the face might not be exactly at the
centre of the detected face boundaries and therefore not at the centre of the video frame. In order
to account for this, a deviation from the centre was allowed that corresponded to half of the size of
the average head size of that talker. The off-axis head orientation was calculated as the percentage
of time that the face of the current talker was not located at the centre of the video frame was
calculated. Furthermore, to quantify the actual off-axis head position, the raw pixel value of the
position of the centre of the talker’s face relative to the centre of the video frame was used.
The complex head movement was examined by looking at the variation in the velocity of the
head movement and at the number of direction reversals (corresponding to the zero-crossing of the
velocity measurement) on the horizontal plane (around the y-axis).
Lastly, the closeness of talkers was calculated as the median height of the head of the talker
sitting across from the wearer during each conversation was used to estimate whether the partici-
pants were sitting closer together. Meaning, the closer together they sit, the bigger the face should
appear on the world camera.
3.7
Data excluded
For all the analyses related to the speech activity, ten recordings had to be excluded. The
reason being that the audio of the eye-tracking glasses was used to align the headset microphone
recordings with the eye-tracking data, however, the audio was not recorded for ten measurements.
Due to time constraints, no further investigation was done to find an alternative way to align
the data. Another recording was excluded from all analyses due to the fact that the camera was
12
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:13==
obscured by the wearer’s hair, meaning its content could not be used for face recognition.
4
Results
The effect of the three conditions (HS, noise condition and position condition) will be anal-
ysed for each of the objective variables (gaze location, fixation duration, head orientation, head
movement and distance between interlocutors) as discussed in Section 2 and further explained in
Section 3.6.
4.1
Noise condition
The difference in noise condition can be observed in Figure 4. The mean sound level for the
quiet condition is 66 dB SPL with a standard deviation of 4 dB and for the noise condition it is
78 dB SPL with a standard deviation of 3 dB. As can be seen, the quiet condition is not completely
quiet. This is due to the fact that the experiment still took place in a canteen and while it was
outside of lunchtime, some noise is always present with some additional noise from people walking
by or someone cleaning.
Figure 4: Histogram of sound pressure level meter recorded during the conversations. The sound
level meter was placed on a table 5m away from the conversation. The SPL level was averaged
over ten second intervals.
4.2
Gaze on talker
During clear turns, the gaze was on average 65.1% of the time on the face of the talker. The
effect of position was found to be significant (F(1,143)=322, p<0.001) with the post-hoc analysis
showing that in the across condition, the listener’s gaze would be 30% more on the face of the
talker than in the beside condition. This corresponds to 83% of the time for across and 51.3% for
beside.
Similar results were found during interactive turns, where the gaze was on average 59% of the
time on a talker’s face. The effect of position was significant (F(1,143)=309, p<0.001) with a 30%
13
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:14==
increase in the across condition from the beside condition. For the across condition, the average
was 79.3%, and for the beside condition, the average was of 42.8%.
In clear speech, for the across condition, no effect of hearing status (HS), noise or their inter-
action was found (all p’s > 0.2). No significant effect of HS, noise or their interaction was found
(all p’s > 0.1) for beside. No significant effect was found for interactive speech either.
The same analysis was done for the gaze on the body of the talker. In clear speech, a significant
effect of position was found (F(1,142)=37, p<0.001), where a 4% increase was seen in the across
condition. In interactive speech, a significant effect of position was found (F(1,142)=36, p<0.001),
where a 6% increase was seen in the across condition. Otherwise, no significant effect was found
in either speech type for HS, noise and their interaction (all p’s > 0.1).
4.3
Fixation duration
No significant effect of position was found on the overall fixation duration (p=0.6). Looking
at the effect of HS, noise and their interaction on fixation duration for all the data, no significant
effect was found (all p’s > 0.2).
Looking at the fixation duration only while the wearer is listening to clear speech, a signifi-
cant effect of position was found (F(1,142)=27, p<0.001), where the post-hoc analysis showed an
increase of 91ms for the across position compared to the beside position. For the across position,
no significant effect of HS and the interaction between noise and HS was found (all p’s > 0.5),
although a near significant effect was found for noise (F(1,60)=3.6, p = 0.06), where there was a
longer fixation duration in quiet than in noise. Similarly, for the beside condition, no significant
effect of HS and the interaction between noise and HS was found (all p’s > 0.1), but a near signif-
icant effect for noise was found (F(1,56)=3, p = 0.08), where there was a longer fixation duration
in quiet than in noise.
To investigate whether the fixation duration is linked to listening effort, a correlation between
listening effort and fixation duration while listening to clear speech for all conversations was inves-
tigated. No significant correlation was found (correlation coefficient = 0.11, p-value = 0.14).
4.4
Head orientation
It was found that on average 87.3% of the time while listening, the participant would orient
their head off-axis the talker. A significant effect of sitting position was found (F(1,142)=15.6,
p<0.001), where the post-hoc analysis showed that in the beside condition the head was off-axis
9.6% more of the time than for the aside condition. Noise, HS and their interaction were not found
to have a significant effect (p>0.5).
Looking at the orientation of the head with respect to the current talker (see Figure 5), a
significant effect of position was found (F(1,142)=54, p<0.001). The post-hoc analysis showed
that the head orientation was 84 pixels further off-axis from the talker in the beside condition than
14
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:15==
in the across condition. No significant effect of HS, noise and their interaction was found for either
position (p>0.3).
Figure 5: Distance of the talker sitting beside the wearer from the centre of the video frame. Q
and N denoting quiet and noise respectively.
Further investigation was done looking at the effect of the talker’s seating location relative to the
wearer. To do that, only the beside condition was considered as that was where one of the talker’s
was sitting beside the wearer and the other talker across the wearer. The head orientation was
different according to the position of the talker in the beside condition (F(1,137)=470, p<0.001),
where the post-hoc analysis showed that for the beside seated talker, the head orientation deviated
off-axis by 218 pixels compared to the across seated talker. For the beside seated talker, a significant
effect was found for noise (F(1,57)=10, p<0.01) and the interaction of noise and HS (F(1,57)=6.1,
p<0.5). The post-hoc showed that in noise, head orientation was 32 pixels further off-axis than
in quiet. For NH listeners, a noisy environment would lead to a head orientation 56 pixels further
from the centre than in a quiet environment. No significant difference was found for HI listeners
for different noise conditions. In quiet, HI would have a head orientation 54 pixels further off-axis
as NH. No significant effect was found in quiet for the different listeners. No effect of HS was found
(p=0.2). For the across seated talker, no significant results were found (all p’s > 0.4).
4.5
Head movement
For the variation of velocity on the azimuth plane, a significant effect of position was found
(F(1,153)=114, p<0.001), where the post-hoc analysis showed an increase of 468°/s for the beside
condition compared to the across condition (see Figure 6). No significant difference was found for
HS, noise and their interaction in either position (all p’s > 0.5).
For the number of directional reversals on the horizontal plane (around the y-axis), the effect of
position was significant (F(1,153)=29, p<0.001), where the post-hoc analysis showed an increase
in reversals by 128 number in the across condition compared to the beside condition. For the
15
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6: Head movement velocity on the horizontal plane.
beside condition, no significant effect for HS and the interaction between HS and noise was found
(p>0.1), but a near significant effect for noise was found (F(1,64)=3.9, p=0.05). In quiet more
head reversals were observed than in noise. For the across condition, there was no significant effect
of HS, noise and their interaction (p>0.2).
4.6
Distance between interlocutors
Estimating the distance between interlocutors from the size of the face of the subject sitting
across from the participant (talker 2 in Figure 2), no significant effect of position was found (p=0.3).
The effect of noise overall has been found to be significant (F(1,152)=109, p<0.001), where the
post-hoc analysis shows an increase of 29 pixels in the noise condition compared to in the quiet
condition. No significant effect of HS and the interaction between HS and noise was found (p>0.2).
Figure 7: Median head height of each talker for each condition.
16
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:17==
4.7
Summary of findings
Table 1 gives an overview of the results of the statistical analysis.
Variable
Position
HS
Noise
HS:Noise
gaze on face
during clear turn
(%)
S<A
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
gaze on face
during interactive
speech (%)
S<A
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
gaze on body
during clear turn
(%)
S<A
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
fixation duration
(ms)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
fixation duration
during clear turn
(ms)
S<A
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
head orientation
(px from centre)
S>A
Talkerside>Talkeracross
n.s.
Nside>Qside
NHside:Nside>Qside
Qside:HIside>NHside
head velocity
variance (°/s)
S>A
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
head directional
reversals
S<A
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
distance between
interlocutors
n.s.
n.s.
N<Q
n.s.
Table 1: Summary of the result obtained with the statistical analysis for each hypothesis made
in Section 2, where “n.s.” stands for non-significant. The subscript “side” is for the beside seating
talker and the subscript “across” is for the across seating talker. For more details, see the text.
Hypothesis 1 of having the gaze on the face of the current talker the majority of the time has
been confirmed for both clear turns and interactive speech. They both showed a decrease in gaze
on face of the talker during the beside condition. Similarly, the amount of gaze on the body of the
talker can be seen to be more for the across condition than the beside condition, but no effect of
noise was found. No change in the amount of gaze on the face of the talker was found between NH
and HI listeners, quiet and noisy environment and their interaction.
Hypothesis 2 was rejected, no effect in the overall fixation duration was seen for noise. When
listening, fixation duration was found to be longer in the across condition than the beside condition.
No effect of HS was found and no correlation between subjective listening effort rating and fixation
duration was found.
17
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:18==
Hypothesis 3 of having the head orientation off-axis the majority of the time has been confirmed.
The head orientation was further off-axis in the beside condition than in the across condition.
Looking at the overall head orientation for each position condition, no other effect was found.
Further analysis was done comparing the seating position relative to the wearer in the beside
condition. The head orientation was found to be further off-axis from the talker’s face for the
beside seating talker compared to the across seating talker. For the beside seating condition, the
head orientation was found to be further off-axis from the talker in noise compared to quiet. In the
same configuration for normal hearing listeners, the same trend of head orientation being more off-
axis in noise was seen. Additionally, in quiet, hearing impaired listeners had their head orientation
further off-axis from the beside seating talker than NH listeners. For the across seating talker, no
difference of noise, HS nor their interaction was found.
Hypothesis 4 was rejected, while a difference in head movement was seen with position, no
difference was seen for hearing status.
Hypothesis 5 was also confirmed as the face of the subject sitting across from the participant was
bigger on the video in noise than in quiet. This means that the two were sitting closer together.
5
Discussion
While it is known that hearing impaired listeners require a 4-5 dB better SNR to perform
the same as normal hearing listeners [22], the variables investigated in this study did not find an
effect of hearing status of the listener on their behaviour in group conversations (see Table 1).
Nevertheless, this finding is in accordance with the findings by Lu et al. [9]. The main assumption
behind these hypotheses is that hearing impaired listeners have more difficulties understanding
speech and that they would therefore use techniques to improve the signal-to-noise ratio such
as an optimal head orientation [7] and getting more visual cues [14] by looking at the talker.
What is not taken into account, is that maybe the listener is not aware of how to improve the
SNR, maybe those behaviours are for the most part determined by the social relations between
interlocutors [4,19] or maybe the normal hearing listeners are also struggling with understanding
the talker in group conversations. However, Brimijoin et al. [10] did find a difference in complexity
of head movement between HI and NH which was not found in the current study. This is probably
linked to the difference in set up as Brimijoin’s study was a controlled experiment where the head
movement was tracked while the participants were asked to orient their head towards the target
stimulus. As the current study was looking at a group conversation, it is not very comparable
to the task in Brimijoin’s experiment. Additionally, the number of directional reversals of the
head was counted in the overall conversation whereas in order to be somewhat more similar to
Brimijoin’s experiment, looking at only when the head is the redirected towards the new talker
would have been more accurate. Nevertheless, due to the realistic setting of the current study,
other factors such as the conversation content, the conversation’s distribution between the three
interlocutors as well as external distractors could have had a major effect on head movement.
Similarly, the real-life setting used meant that the noise condition was not as controlled as
18
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:19==
in previous studies such as Lu et al. [9]. Unlike Lu et al., no overall significant change in head
orientation with respect to the current talker was found in the current study. One reason could
be that the quiet condition was not completely quiet, on some occasions, other people were still
present in the canteen or the cleaner would clean the tables. This could lead to fewer differences
due to noise condition, and it could be possible that isolated noises in quiet are more distracting
than a constant noise level. In the noise condition, the level was also not constant as can be seen in
the spread seen in Figure 4. Additionally, as seen in [13], changes in conversation structures occur
at higher noise levels, where a significant change was found starting at 78 dB SPL. On the other
hand, interlocutors did move closer in the noise condition than in the quiet condition, as also found
by Hadley et al. [7], indicating that there was a change in difficulty noticed by the participants in
the noise condition. The noise condition was also not found to have a difference in how much the
gaze was on the talker. Previous studies, such as Buchan et al. [11] and Hadley et al. [13], did find
that noise had an effect on how much the gaze would be on the mouth of the talker. Unfortunately,
investigating this was not possible in this study due to the limiting factor of the visual angle of
the Pupil Invisible eye-tracking glasses. The visual angle being of roughly 4° [38] means that the
maximum distance the subject can be from the wearer to differentiate between gaze on eyes and
mouth is roughly 70 cm (assuming the distance between mouth and eyes is 5 cm) [39]. As this
distance cannot be assured in this real-life set up, the difference between gaze on eyes and gaze
on the mouth could not be measured. Lastly about noise, the presence of noise did not have a
significant effect on fixation duration as previously found by Cui et al. [12]. A near significant
effect was however found when looking at the fixation duration while listening. It could be that
not enough data was collected to find an effect of noise as well as the distractions present in quiet
could also have affected the fixation duration while listening.
The current study clearly shows that the impact of seating position plays a big role in deter-
mining the behaviour in group conversation. This is quite intuitive as switching attention from
one talker to the other will take more time in the beside condition as the interlocutors are seated
further apart. Additionally, it is also not as easy to be aware of turn-taking in the beside condi-
tion as both interlocutors are rarely, if at all, in the same visual field. Further studies should be
done investigating the impact of conversational partners’ position relative to each other to identify
whether these changes in behaviour are linked to the change in distance or the actual location of
the interlocutors.
Overall, this study investigated if behavioural trends were consistently present in realistic group
conversations, and confirmed previous findings about gaze location [5,9,13] and head orientation
[5, 9] while listening still held. It also found that hearing impairment did not have a significant
effect on behaviour as initially hypothesised. Further research needs to be done to find out whether
eye-tracking glasses data could be used to motor hearing aids. First, the usage of eye-tracking data
into reflecting spatial attention of the listener needs to be investigated. This also includes a way
to estimate how quickly spatial attention can change and whether there is a characteristic in the
gaze movement and head movement that could differentiate it from simple distractions. Then, the
eye-tracking data needs to be able to be processed in real-time and how to give that information
to the HA. Lastly, it should be investigated how the spatial attention information should be used
19
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:20==
for beamforming so that it has a true benefit for the HA users.
6
Conclusion
In this study, eye-tracking glasses were used to characterise the behaviour of listeners in real-
life group conversations. It was found that two consistent behaviour traits of a listener in group
conversation are that the gaze is on the talker the majority of the time and that the head is not
directly oriented towards the talker most of the time. The effect of noise was only found to be
of relevance in terms of distance between participants and the particular case of the gaze on the
talker in the beside condition. The relative location of the conversational partners was shown to
have a big impact on variables such as gaze on the talker, head orientation, head movement and
fixation duration while listening. Lastly, hearing status has overall been found to not have an
effect on the gaze and head movement of the listener. These findings are useful as it shows that
eye-tracking glasses data can provide information about the listener’s behaviour in realistic scenes.
This could be used in the future to identify the listener’s attention and accordingly program the
HA directionality which would improve communication for hearing impaired listeners in complex
scenes.
20
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:21==
References
[1] G. Takahashi, C. D. Martinez, S. Beamer, J. Bridges, D. Noffsinger, K. Sugiura, G. W.
Bratt, and D. W. Williams, “Subjective measures of hearing aid benefit and satisfaction in
the nidcd/va follow-up study,” Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, vol. 18, no. 04,
pp. 323–349, 2007.
[2] “Pupil invisible:
Overview,”
pupil Labs. [Online]. Available:
https://pupil-labs.com/
products/invisible/
[3] R. Vertegaal, G. Van der Veer, and H. Vons, “Effects of gaze on multiparty mediated commu-
nication,” in Graphics interface, 2000, pp. 95–102.
[4] L. V. Hadley and J. F. Culling, “Timing of head turns to upcoming talkers in triadic con-
versation: Evidence for prediction of turn ends and interruptions,” Frontiers in Psychology,
vol. 13, 2022.
[5] R. Vertegaal, R. Slagter, G. Van der Veer, and A. Nijholt, “Eye gaze patterns in conversations:
there is more to conversational agents than meets the eyes,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2001, pp. 301–308.
[6] K. G. Munhall, J. A. Jones, D. E. Callan, T. Kuratate, and E. Vatikiotis-Bateson, “Visual
prosody and speech intelligibility: Head movement improves auditory speech perception,”
Psychological science, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 133–137, 2004.
[7] L. V. Hadley, W. M. Whitmer, W. O. Brimijoin, and G. Naylor, “Conversation in small
groups: Speaking and listening strategies depend on the complexities of the environment and
group,” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, vol. 28, pp. 632–640, 2021.
[8] J. A. Grange and J. F. Culling, “The benefit of head orientation to speech intelligibility in
noise,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 139, no. 2, pp. 703–712, 2016.
[9] H. Lu, M. F. McKinney, T. Zhang, and A. J. Oxenham, “Investigating age, hearing loss, and
background noise effects on speaker-targeted head and eye movements in three-way conver-
sations,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 149, no. 3, pp. 1889–1900,
2021.
[10] W. O. Brimijoin, D. McShefferty, and M. A. Akeroyd, “Auditory and visual orienting responses
in listeners with and without hearing-impairment,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, vol. 127, no. 6, pp. 3678–3688, 2010.
[11] J. N. Buchan, M. Paré, and K. G. Munhall, “The effect of varying talker identity and listening
conditions on gaze behavior during audiovisual speech perception,” Brain research, vol. 1242,
pp. 162–171, 2008.
[12] E. Cui and B. Herrmann, “Eye movements decrease during effortful speech listening,” bioRxiv,
2023.
21
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:22==
[13] L. V. Hadley, W. O. Brimijoin, and W. M. Whitmer, “Speech, movement, and gaze behaviours
during dyadic conversation in noise,” Scientific reports, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2019.
[14] L. A. Ross, D. Saint-Amour, V. M. Leavitt, D. C. Javitt, and J. J. Foxe, “Do you see what
i am saying? exploring visual enhancement of speech comprehension in noisy environments,”
Cerebral cortex, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1147–1153, 2007.
[15] D. E. Broadbent, “Attention and the perception of speech,” Scientific American, vol. 206,
no. 4, pp. 143–153, 1962.
[16] A. R. Hunt, J. Reuther, M. D. Hilchey, and R. M. Klein, “The relationship between spatial
attention and eye movements,” Processes of visuospatial attention and working memory, pp.
255–278, 2019.
[17] C. Rorden and J. Driver, “Does auditory attention shift in the direction of an upcoming
saccade?” Neuropsychologia, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 357–377, 1999.
[18] M. M. Hendrikse, G. Llorach, G. Grimm, and V. Hohmann, “Influence of visual cues on
head and eye movements during listening tasks in multi-talker audiovisual environments with
animated characters,” Speech Communication, vol. 101, pp. 70–84, 2018.
[19] A. Kendon, “Some functions of gaze-direction in social interaction,” Acta psychologica, vol. 26,
pp. 22–63, 1967.
[20] R. Nicoras, S. Gotowiec, L. V. Hadley, K. Smeds, and G. Naylor, “Conversation success in
one-to-one and group conversation: a group concept mapping study of adults with normal
and impaired hearing,” International Journal of Audiology, pp. 1–9, 2022.
[21] B. Larsby and S. Arlinger, “Speech recognition and just-follow-conversation tasks for normal-
hearing and hearing-impaired listeners with different maskers,” Audiology, vol. 33, no. 3, pp.
165–176, 1994.
[22] S. Hygge, J. Ronnberg, B. Larsby, and S. Arlinger, “Normal-hearing and hearing-impaired
subjects’ ability to just follow conversation in competing speech, reversed speech, and noise
backgrounds,” Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 208–215,
1992.
[23] J. Hart, D. Onceanu, C. Sohn, D. Wightman, and R. Vertegaal, “The attentive hearing
aid:
Eye selection of auditory sources for hearing impaired users,” in Human-Computer
Interaction–INTERACT 2009: 12th IFIP TC 13 International Conference, Uppsala, Swe-
den, August 24-28, 2009, Proceedings, Part I 12.
Springer, 2009, pp. 19–35.
[24] T. Ricketts and S. Dhar, “Comparison of performance across three directional hearing aids,”
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, vol. 10, no. 04, pp. 180–189, 1999.
[25] T. A. Ricketts, “Directional hearing aids,” Trends in Amplification, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 139–176,
2001.
22
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:23==
[26] K. H. Kendrick, J. Holler, and S. C. Levinson, “Turn-taking in human face-to-face interaction
is multimodal: gaze direction and manual gestures aid the coordination of turn transitions,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, vol. 378, no. 1875, p. 20210473, 2023.
[27] G. Marquart, C. Cabrall, and J. de Winter, “Review of eye-related measures of drivers’ mental
workload,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp. 2854–2861, 2015.
[28] “Take the free online hearing test from widex.” [Online]. Available: https://www.widex.com/
en/service/hearing-test/
[29] M. Krueger, M. Schulte, T. Brand, and I. Holube, “Development of an adaptive scaling method
for subjective listening effort,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 141, no. 6,
pp. 4680–4693, 2017.
[30] D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker, “Fitting linear mixed-effects models using
lme4,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5823, 2014.
[31] V. A. Brown, “An introduction to linear mixed-effects modeling in r,” Advances in Methods
and Practices in Psychological Science, vol. 4, no. 1, 2021.
[32] F. E. Satterthwaite, “An approximate distribution of estimates of variance components,”
Biometrics bulletin, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 110–114, 1946.
[33] D. Snyder, G. Chen, and D. Povey, “Musan: A music, speech, and noise corpus,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1510.08484, 2015.
[34] J. S. Duncan, “On the structure of speaker-auditor interaction during speaking turns,” vol. 3,
1974.
[35] S. C. Levinson and F. Torreira, “Timing in turn-taking and its implications for processing
models of language,” Frontiers in psychology, vol. 6, p. 731, 2015.
[36] “Face mapper,” Pupil Lab. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.pupil-labs.com/enrichments/
face-mapper/
[37] “Retinaface,” gitHub. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/deepinsight/insightface/tree/
master/detection/retinaface
[38] M. Tonsen, C. K. Baumann, and K. Dierkes, “A high-level description and performance eval-
uation of pupil invisible,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00508, 2020.
[39] “Visual angle calculator.” [Online]. Available: https://elvers.us/perception/visualAngle/
23
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:24==
Appendices
A
Questionnaire
The questionnaire contained the following questions:
Part 1 (filled out by experimenter):
What condition are you in?
Noise
Quiet
Which turn
1
2
Group
Are you hearing impaired
Yes
No
Part 2 (for HI participants)
Has your hearing aid setting changed due to noise?
Yes
No
If yes, please describe what changed. (i.e. noise reduction, directionality, etc.)
Part 3 (for all participants)
Are you wearing contact lenses?
Yes
No
Continues on next page.
24
Florence Mazzetti
==PAGE:25==
Which position are you sitting in?
Position 1
Position 2
Position 3
Position 4
How much effort was it to understand talker 1 (most left)?
1 – no effort
2
3 – very little effort
4
5 – little effort
6
7 – moderate effort
8
9 – considerable effort
10
11 – a lot of effort
12
13 – utmost effort
14 – I only heard noise
How much effort was it to understand talker 2 (most right)?
1 – no effort
2
3 – very little effort
4
5 – little effort
6
7 – moderate effort
8
9 – considerable effort
10
11 – a lot of effort
12
13 – utmost effort
14 – I only heard noise
Were there any major distractions during the conversation? (i.e. a sudden loud
noise, someone passing by, etc.)
Yes
No
If so please mention what the distraction(s) was:
Continues on next page.
25
Using eye-tracking glasses to characterise behaviour in real-life communication.
==PAGE:26==
How engaged were you in the conversation?
1 – completely
2
3 – very much
4
5 – considerably
6
7 – moderately
8
9 – a little
10
11 – a very little
12
13 – not at all
26
Florence Mazzetti
