==PAGE:1==
.
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Optimal Short-term Operation of
Hybrid Energy Storage Systems in
Energy and Reserve Markets
MASTER THESIS
SUPERVISOR
PANAGIOTIS ANDRIANESIS.
DTU WIND AND ENERGY SYSTEM
BRONO NJI NCHE - S200107
June 23, 2023
i
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Hybrid Energy Storage Systems (HESSs) combine the individual advantages of two or
more energy storage technologies.This thesis considers the optimal short-term operation
of a HESS that participates in energy and reserve markets. The HESS decides short-term
economic basepoints and setpoints for the individual systems to deliver the assumed market
obligations in energy and frequency regulation,applying an energy management and control
policy that accounts for the degradation of specific technologies (lithium-ion batteries,
supercapacitors,).
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Research Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
STATE-OF-THE-ART REVIEW
3
2.1
Overview of Hybrid Energy Storage Systems (HESS) . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Definition and Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Classification and types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.4
Opportunities and Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.5
Energy and Regulation Service (Rs) Market . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.6
ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS(ESS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.7
ESS Degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
FREQUENCY REGULATION
20
3.1
Frequency deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Frequency Restoration (FR)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Frequency Containment Reserve FCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
System design framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
Parameter Choice for HESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.2
Regulation capability submission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.3
Regulation Signal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.4
Response power
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.5
SoC Estimation, Losses and Efficiency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.6
Control Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.7
End of Life (EOL) Estimation of the Battery and Supercapacitor .
31
4
RESULTS
32
4.1
Power management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.1
Cycle counting via rainflow counting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.2
Battery and Supercapacitor degradation cost . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
40
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
i
==PAGE:4==
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1
Motivation
Hybrid Energy Storage System (HESS) technology is fast becoming a global trend in
facilitating the integration of renewable energy into the power system. Hybridization of
energy storage system is a combination of two or more storage technologies that have
matching features.
Hybridization is carried out in order to take advantage of the strengths of each technology
while mitigating their drawbacks. HESS results in lower cost, increased system life time,
and increased system efficiency. HESS uses one storage system for high dominant energy
storage with a low self-discharge rate and lower energy-specific installation costs. While
the other storage system is used to handle high power demand transients, and fast load
swings [4].
Battery storage units are characteristics with high specific energy, limited life cycle, low
specific power, and low self-discharge units with a low cost per watt while supercapacitors
has as characteristics; high specific power, less specific energy, longer lifetimes, faster
charging, and a higher capacity for self-discharge [45].
With these characteristics, HESS deployment of a battery–SC combined together in one
unit can be highly efficient as they both complement each other.
The provision of ancillary services is very important for the maintainace of grid stability.
Power grids are constantly facing threats due to load and generation disturbances which
can lead to fluctuation in the system frequency . Once this fluctuation is not carefully
manage it can lead to power outages. Therefore it is paramount to propose methods and
techniques that can be implemented in order to regularise this power mismatch.
Frequency regulation can be achieved by balancing power between generation and con-
sumption. It is the responsibility of the Transmission service operators who monitors and
control the power grid to coordinate the regulation of frequency. However, frequency
regulation is a challenging task and requires advanced regulation control technique and
policies.
1
==PAGE:5==
These thesis aims at suggesting an optimal short-term operation of a hybrid energy storage
system for the provision of frequency regulation services in the energy and reserve market.
It aims at designing a power management policy that allocates power to the battery and
supercapacitor with the aim of improving battery life span and to minimize operation cost.
1.1.1
Research Objective
The main goal of this thesis project is to model the transient operation of a Hybrid Energy
Storage System (HESS) that participates in energy and reserve markets and optimally
decides short-term economic basepoints and setpoints for the individual systems to deliver
the assumed market demands in energy and frequency regulation. The t main objectives of
the thesis work includes:
1. Accurate modeling of the individual storage systems (lithium-ion batteries, superca-
pacitors, and vanadium redox flow batteries) with an active topology (each system is
connected to its own power converter) as well as modeling their degradation.
2. Simulation of control policies for the HESS, which defines setpoints for each system.
1.1.2
Methodology
In an attempt to answer the research question, the thesis follows three work packages,
which addresses each of the aforementioned objectives.
1. The first work package involves research on the state-of-the-art HESSs, market
trends, models that describe their short-term operation, identification, and selection
of the most relevant degradation models. For each system, a detailed model will be
developed that considers capabilities and constraints. The system degradation will
be quantified for any given usage profile.
2. The second work package includes simulation of control policies that will be decided
at the beginning of this package, and will be parameterized for specific system sizes.
The model should be able to produce setpoints for each system at a granularity of 1
second that is appropriate for the provision of frequency regulation services.
2
==PAGE:6==
2. STATE-OF-THE-ART REVIEW
2.1
Overview of Hybrid Energy Storage Systems (HESS)
2.1.1
Definition and Concepts
A conventional Energy Storage System (ESS) is based on a single energy storage tech-
nology for storing energy which can be used when needed. Various battery technologies
among others have been used for energy storage. However, this kind of structure usually
allows for limited control, produces low efficiency, is costly, and has a short life span. To
tackle these problems, in recent years, HESS which combines two or more energy storage
technologies has gained rapid popularity.
Hybrid energy storage system (HESS) is a cutting edge technology that combines two
or more energy storage technologies (examples: batteries, supercapacitor, flywheel,and
pump-hydro among others) such that when integrated, they overcome limitations that may
be inherent in either [33].
In a HESS, typically one storage (high power) is used to handle the high transient signal and
fast load fluctuations, such a storage unit should be characterised by a fast response time,
high efficiency and high cycle life. While, the other storage (high energy) handles the low
transient signals and is characterised by a low self discharge rate and low energy specific
installation cost [8]. In this thesis, the focus is on HESS that combines both lithium-ion
battery and supercapacitor (SC) for short term frequency regulation services in the energy
and reserve markets. The two proposed storage technologies, battery-supercapacitor when
combined in a HESS, exploits and complements each other’s characteristics to the benefit
of the system as well as the resource provider. Some of the benefits includes relatively low
total investment cost compared to a single storage unit system, high storage unit lifespan
especially for the battery, and high system efficiency.
Over the years, great strides have been made in the exploration and use of HESS for power
grid service. A number of promising applications of HESS include:
• HESS has been applied for large scale wind and PV-park power management [8][47]
3
==PAGE:7==
[55].
• In the area of mobility, hybrid powered electric vehicles (supercapacitor/battery,
battery/fuel cell) are in in circulation [61] [62] [22].
• HESS is being applied in autonomous renewable energy supply systems mostly base
on battery-hydrogen combination [28] [11].
• Regional, district, household level grid connected HESS for various services such as
energy supply, ancillary services energy arbitrage [7] [37][16] [24].
As the use of HESS continues to gain importance in power system for various grid services,
the use of HESS for frequency regulation services is fast gaining momentum in the energy
and reserve market. Globally, the HESS Hybrid market share is anticipated to grow at a
considerable rate and it is envisaged to reach multi-million by 2030 [57].
2.1.2
Components
The main components of the HESS used in this thesis includes a supercapacitor, a lithium-
ion battery, inverters, and a load. Detailed overview of the storage technologies (superca-
pacitor, battery, radox flow battery) is given in section 3 below.
2.1.3
Classification and types
The combination of high energy and high power storage units can be realised in multiple
ways. A number of connection topology exist for HESS. This topology include the
Passive Hybrid Energy Storage Topology (P-HEST) and the Active Hybrid Energy Storage
Topology (A-HEST).
Passive Hybrid Energy Storage Topology (P-HEST)
This topology is achieved by
directly connecting the storage technologies to the grid without any intermediary (power
electronic converters). The voltages in the two storage technologies (supercapacitor and
battery) are identical to the grid voltage. Energy flow distribution between the different
storage systems depends on the equilibrium voltages and the internal impedance of the
energy storage units. The management of power drawn from the storage units in a P-HEST
cannot be done separately hence their individual power contribution cannot be specified
[8].
The P-HEST is cost-effective, it requires no space, and weighs less because no additional
power electronics are required and more so, the wiring is straightforward. Figure1.1
illustrates the passive hybrid topology of a super capacitor and battery.
4
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1 – Passive hybrid energy storage topology [24]
Active Hybrid Energy Storage Topology (A-HEST)
In an A-HEST, the storage units
are decoupled through the use of converters. That is, each storage technology is connected
to the grid through an intermediary. With the A-HEST, the decoupled storage technologies
can be operated optimally following their individual characteristics. In an A-HEST such
as battery-supercapacitors A-HEST, it is possible to account for the individual power
contribution from the storage units. In the A-HEST, the storage units are decoupled
therefore, SC capacity can be fully utilised and consequently not limited by the voltage
of the battery as is the case with P-HEST [24]. Despite the flexibility of P-HEST, this
topology is more costly, has more weight and takes up more space due to the extra
converters. Figure1.2 illustrates the A-HEST of a battery-supercapacitor hybrid energy
system connected through two converters.
Figure 1.2 – Passive hybrid energy storage topology [24]
2.1.4
Opportunities and Challenges
Application of HESS has several opportunities compared to a single energy storage system.
• HESS are flexible and this allows the coverage of a wider range of applications,
which will otherwise not be possible with single HESS.
• Taking into account one specific application, the use of a HESS allows for avoiding
the over-sizing of a single- ES technology which can as a result minimise the cost
5
==PAGE:9==
by up to 15% [16].
• Introduction of a new ES technology in the system to build a HESS can reduce the
stress of the principal ES technology, significantly extending its lifetime (by up to
40% in some cases [54]).
However, as a major challenge, an energy management system (EMS) has to be carefully
designed to manage the operation of the different storage technologies so as to achieve the
desired aim. The EMS, has to measure or estimate the state of charge and state of health of
each ESS technology and evaluate the operational point of the system. Secondly, Optimal
sizing of the HESS is not a straight forward task as HESSs are usually design to carry out
unique task with specific requirements[29].
2.1.5
Energy and Regulation Service (Rs) Market
Energy market is basically a market handling process specifically designed for the trade
and provision of energy. This energy may refer to the electrical energy market or other
energy resources [34]. In the European union(EU), electricity market has been designed to
provide incentives to clean energy transition while delivering on key objectives of energy
security and affordability. Regulation service is a part of the energy market that ensures the
provision of ancillary services. Regulation service provides market-based compensation to
resources that have the ability to adjust output or consumption in response to an automated
signal [41]. Regulation service corrects for short-term changes in the power grid that might
affect the stability of the power system. The main goal of regulation service is to match
generation and demand ensuring the grid functions normally while maintaining the system
frequency within acceptable normal operations bounds (49.9 - 50.1 Hertz).
Regulation service markets are usually operated by Transmission Service Operators (TSOs)
or Independent Service Operators (ISOs). In the regulation service market, RS resources
are paid for injecting or absorbing electricity to/from the grid, responding to the regulation
signal received from the TSO [34]. Figure 1.3 illustrates the basic market operation strategy
for a regulation service market.
6
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.3 – Overview of Regulation service market operation. [24]
Technical requirements for HESS in reserve and energy market
Storage resources providing FCR-N are expected to meet technical requirements before
participating in the energy and reserve market. The technical requirements for reserves
resources providing FCR-N are found in [39]. In Section 3 a more detail technical
requirement is explained. On a general note, some basic requirements include:
• The reserve units should be able to provide full up and down regulation services
within the required time.
• Reserve units are expected to provide continuous regulation depending on the
frequency regulation.
• Reserve units are expected to meet up at all times to their submitted power capability.
2.1.6
ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS(ESS)
Battery Energy Storage systems(BESS)
Large scale battery energy systems are on the rise each year. About 50% capacity of
installed stationary BESS provides frequency regulation why other services provided by
BESS include energy arbitrage, peak shaving, black start, and other renewable energy
integration support services [45]. Battery storage technologies are well suited for balancing
services and frequency regulation due to their short response time characteristics as well
as high energy density. Continuous decrease in battery investment cost and high increase
in the penetration of renewable energy technologies into the power grid has facilitated the
rapid increase in the share of BESS in the frequency regulation market [42]. Significant
services performed by the BESS can be summarised as follows:
7
==PAGE:11==
• Reserve Power: BESS act as a reserve capacity that can be called up in an unexpected
condition such as loss of generator or load with the aim of maintaining system
stability.
• Load following: Due to its fast response time and high power output, BESS can be
use to track the variation of loads and ensure the system frequency is stable.
• Arbitrage: BESS can be use to store electric energy during periods of low price and
resale later during high price periods.
• Renewable Energy system support and Regulation: BESS is also used to support
the Renewable energy sources and power system in smoothing their power output as
well as regulating the power system by maintaining the frequency and voltage of the
grid.
Over the years, different BESS technology types have been developed and modelled for
power system application purposes. such technologies include; Lithium-ion, Lead-Acid,
Sodium-sulphate, and Vanadium Redox flow batteries.
Lithium-Ion Battery (LIBs)
Lithium-ion battery is an important storage unit in our
society as it supplies powers to millions of people every day. Basic components from the
range laptops, mobile phones right up to hybrid and electric vehicles use makes use of
LIBs. Lithium-Ion batteries are considered one of the most popular battery technologies in
recent times. They are rechargeable batteries that uses the reverse reduction of lithium-ion
to store energy [44] in other words, it is a rechargeable battery that charges and discharges
when lithium-ions move between the negative (anode) and positive (cathode) electrode.
Figure1.4 is a schematic representation of a LIB.
During the charging process, current is passed into the battery. The ions are forced to
move from the positive electrode (cathode) to the negative electrode (anode). The battery
is charged by the potential difference between the two electrode. On the other hand, during
the discharging process, a discharge circuit is formed between the two electrodes and the
ions stored in the negative electrode are forced to migrate to the positive electrode as a
result, energy is continually being used.
The main characteristics of lithium-ion battery storage that makes it suitable for power
system applications services especially for frequency regulation services includes;
• Lithium-ion charges at nearly 100% efficiency as compared to other battery technol-
ogy.
• Overall high life expectancy of about 3000 cycles at 80% depth of discharge.
8
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4 – Structural Schematic representation of a Li-ion battery with the charge and discharge
operation [14]
• Due to its low maintenance, high efficiency,long life time and availability, it is
considered significant for future development compared to other BESS technologies.
• Lithium-ion is light, compact, easy, and quick to charge and has low self-discharge
rate approximately 10 %/month.
Despite the numerous advantages of lithium-ion storage technology for power system
applications, it has some drawbacks such as: high cost(this is fast changing as new
technologies are being developed), inflammability, overcharge, over discharge and is
non-resistant to relatively high temperatures.
Vanadium Redox Flow Battery (VRFB)
This technology is a type of rechargeable flow
battery which employs the use of vanadium ions as charge carriers [23][14]. It consists of
two key elements the cell stacks and electrolyte. It differs from the conventional battery in
that its reaction occurs between two electrolytes rather than between an electrolyte and
an electrode. In addition, VRFB stores its two electrolytes external to the battery and the
electrolytes are circulated through the cell stack. VRFB requires storage tanks and pumps
for the circulation of large volumes of electrolytes through the cells. Hence, limiting the
system to stationary applications purposes [32]. Figure 1.5 is a schematic representation
of the flow battery.
VRFB has several advantages which makes it suitable for large power system application
services. VRFB does not release toxic vapor or gases, it has minimal risk of explosion,
cycling can be done at any state of charge or discharge without permanent damage. For
power systems application purposes, VRFB has the following advantages in terms of:
9
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.5 – Schematic of flow battery
[14]
• Size: VRFB has the advantage of scaling flexibility. Since its energy is stored in
tanks, the tanks can be easily increased in size depending on the application and
space. Hence making VRFB adaptable for industrial scale applications at low cost.
An increase in capacity only requires an increase in the size of the tank. The higher
the battery capacity, the lower the price per kilowatt hour of energy [21].
• In terms of operation, thermal management is easier and more feasible for VRFB.
VRFB shows lower discharge rate compared to other battery technologies hence the
actual capacity of the battery is greater.
• Safety: VRFB is not flammable and does not have toxic lead. It does not store charge
as compared to other battery technologies therefore, it has low risk of shock hazards.
• Cycle and service life: VRFB can operate for decades due to its active low cost
rechargeable electrolyte which never wears out as a result of the chemical reaction
involved [21]. A demonstration of up to more than 20 000 charge and discharge
cycles have been carried out [15].
• Energy and efficiency: VRFB has an energy conversion efficiency of about 90% at
low current density [14], about 75% efficiency for frequency regulation Application.
With regards to the draw backs characterised by the VRFB, it has a low specific energy
density of 12-40Wh/kg hence limiting its application to stationary storage [51]. Despite
10
==PAGE:14==
technological advancement, the initial cost of battery investment per battery power is still
high as compared to other battery storage technologies such as the Lithium-ion battery[60].
SuperCapacitor (SC)
Among the numerous storage system undergoing extensive de-
velopment, SC is one of them. In the energy-power spectrum, SC takes an intermediate
level between batteries and dielectric capacitors. SC have higher power densities than the
battery and higher energy densities than the dielectric capacitors [6].
A supercapacitor(SC) is a high-energy version of a conventional capacitor. They are
governed by the same fundamental equations as conventional capacitors and are said to
hold hundreds of times more energy per unit volume or mass. A SC is an electrochem-
ical device consisting of two porous electrodes immersed in an electrolyte solution that
stores charge[1]. Figure 1.6 is a schematic representation of an electric double layer
supercapacitor.
Figure 1.6 – Schematic of an electric double layer supercapacitor
[17]
SC stores their energy in the electrochemical double layer (Helmholtz Layer) formed at
a solid/electrolyte interface. Thin charge layers are formed at the surface of the solid
electrode and they compensate for the electronic charge at the electrode surface [27].
Capacitance of a SC is proportional to the area of the conduction plate. The SC is
characterised by several features that makes it suitable for power grid applications such as:
11
==PAGE:15==
Capacitance:
SCs have very high capacitance per unit volume compared to conventional
capacitors. The capacitance is said to be a hundred to few thousands farad (typically
5000F)[35]. This high capacitance gives it the ability to store more charge making it
suitable for energy storage purposes.
Power Density:
SCs have high power density compared to the lithium-ion battery. It
is said to be about 100 times greater than that of a lithium-ion battery hence giving it the
ability to store and release more short-term power.
Life cycle:
SCs can under go a charge/discharge cycle of about 1000,000 cycles which
is remarkably high, about 1000 times bigger compared to the batteries. Generally, SCs are
said to last from 10-30 years[20].
Charge/Discharge:
A SC is said to have a fast charge rate approximately 1-10 seconds.
In terms of discharge, a SC can withstand deep discharge. That is a discharge of all its
stored energy.
Temperature:
SC can operate in a wide range temperature (-40 to +60°C).
Again,despite the enormous advantages of a SCs, some drawbacks which might limit its
usage includes high cost and low energy density[20]. On a general note, SCs are efficient
storage technologies which can be used in combination with other storage technologies to
compliment each other.
Table 2.1 summarises the comparison between the three diffident storage technologies
[21][32][13].
Type
li-ion battery
Supercapacitor
VRFB
Cycle life (cycles)
500-2000c
100 000 - 1M
>16000
Cycle efficiency(%)
70-90
75-98
60-85
Self-discharge rate
10%/month
20%-40%/day
low
Discharge duration
few hours
1s - 10s
1-10hours
Response time (seconds)
30
1-10
100µ
Cost per capacity($/KWh)
500 - 3800
300-20 000
400+
Cost per cycle ($)
0.2
0.001
-
Specific energy (Wh/Kg)
100-250
5
25
Specific power(W/Kg)
500-1000W/kg
10,000
80-150
Table 2.1 – Summarised comparison of the storage technologies (supercapacitor, lithium ion, and
VRFB)
12
==PAGE:16==
2.1.7
ESS Degradation
Battery degradation
The health of a BESS is affected by its storage and operating conditions. There are two
main battery degradation categorise calendar aging and cycle aging. The life of a battery
deteriorates with charging and discharging cycles and also during storage over time [40].
Battery degradation leads to capacity fade and power fade hence limiting the capability
and performance of the battery. knowledge on battery degradation is crucial for cost-
effective decarbonisation of the power grid. Degradation cost plays a significant role in the
scheduling of BESS hence should not be ignored [18].
Mechanisms that contribute to battery degradation can be summarised thus:
• Ageing Mechanism: Continued usage of LIBs over time diminishes the storage
capacity while increasing the internal resistance there by affecting the energy that
can be delivered for each cycle by the battery as well as limiting the power delivered
at an instant.
• State of health: This mechanism is a figure of merit of the degraded state of the
battery compared to its nominal state. This information is important as battery users
are able to determine the condition of usage for the battery.
• Cycle ageing: This mechanism relates to the charge and discharge process of the
battery. This relates to the capacity loss caused by the amount of energy cycled
through out the battery’s life. It is a function of the battery state of charge. The
amount of degradation is affected by temperature and current intensity.
• Calendar ageing: This mechanism relates to the loss of battery capacity as a result
of time passed independent of its utilisation. The degradation that occurs over time
highly depends on temperature and state of charge.
Battery Degradation models
Two potential types of models for predicting battery
degradation frequently used are the physical-based electrochemical model and data-based
semi-empirical model [53]. The semi-empirical models with moderate complexity, accu-
racy and expansibility is often use over physical-based electrochemical models due to its
more complex nature and robust computational burden [56]. The semi-empirical model can
be analysed as single factor-based model or as a combined factor-based model. Figure 1.7
demonstrates some of the commonly applied methods for battery degradation estimation.
13
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.7 – Commonly Used battery degradation models [56].
A selection of some of the semi-empirical model approach (single factor and combined
factor based model) description and considerations are summarised thus;
Linear model
1. Estimates the equivalent battery degradation cost.
2. Considers cycle life of the battery is measured by the total amount of energy that
can flow through out.
3. Assumes the number of cycle of failure of the battery is only associated with battery
DOD.
The model estimates the capacity loss of the battery by applying the Eq.2.3 from [9] [56];
Ln = Qmaxgn fn
(2.1)
Where;
Ln is the life time throughput,Qmax is the battery nominal energy (kWh), gn is the battery
DOD within an allowable range (%), fn is the number of cycles to failure under gn
Lli fetime = 1
n
n
∑
1
Ln
(2.2)
Where;
Lli fetime is the average value of the lifetime throughput.
Qlinear
loss (T) =
T
∑
t=1
(CLPESS(t)∆T)
(2.3)
Where;
14
==PAGE:18==
Qloss is the capacity loss, CL =
1
Llifetime is the equivalent battery capacity loss per KWh,
PESS(t) is the average output power during the time interval ∆(t).
NREL MODEL
1. Is Weighted Ah ageing model.
2. The Model assumes the battery has a finite life according to the summation of
effective ampere-hours(Ah).
3. It supposes the battery reaches its EOL when the effective ampere-hour reaches its
EOL.
This model estimates the capacity loss of the battery by applying Eq.2.5 from [9];
TR = CRDRLR
(2.4)
Where;
TR the rated charge life, CR is the rated battery capacity under the rated current rate,DR is
the rated DOD measuring the rated battery life, LR is the number of cycles to failure under
the rated discharge C-rate and DR
QNREL
loss (T) = 1
TR
T
∑
t=1
dee f (t)[56][9]
(2.5)
Where;
Qloss is the capacity loss, TR , is the rated charge life, de f f (t) is the effective ampere hour
discharged value.
PLET
1. Peukert lifetime energy throughput.
2. The model builds a relationship between the battery cycle and DOD.
3. The model assumes constant total energy throughput for specific DOD through out
the experiment.
Capacity loss of the battery is estimated by applying Eq 2.7 from [50]
Cli fe
PLET(T) = nDODKp
(2.6)
15
==PAGE:19==
where; n = the total number of charging/discharging cycles during the whole lifetime of
the battery, including complete cycles and incomplete cycles, kp = the Peukert Lifetime
constant restricted between 1.1 and 1.3.
QPLET
loss (T) =
1
Cli fe
PLET
T
∑
t=1
(∆DOD(t))Kp[56]
(2.7)
where;
Qloss is the capacity loss, Clife
PLET , is the total energy throughput, ∆DOD(t) is the state of
charge during the time interval t.
Arrhenius-based Models
• The model captures the dependency of battery degradation rate on stress factors due
to calendar ageing or cycle ageing.
The model estimates the capacity loss of the battery due to calendar ageing and cycle
ageing by applying 2.8 2.9 from [31] and [30].
Qcal = Acal(SOC)exp( Ea
RT )(t)zcal
(2.8)
where;
Qcal is the capacity loss due to calendar ageing, Acal(SOc),is the pre-exponential factor
depending on SOC, t is the calendar time and zcal is the fitting parameter.
Similarly, the capacity loss due to cycle ageing is obtained thus;
Qcyc = Acyc(C)exp(E(C)
RT )(Ah)zcyc
(2.9)
where;
Qcyc is the capacity loss due to calendar ageing, Acal(C),is the pre-exponential factor
depending on the current rate C, E(C) is the activation energy dependent on the current
rate, Ah is the battery Ah-throughput relating to DOD, zcyc is the fitting parameter.
Rainflow Cycle Counting Algorithm (RCCA)
The RCCA has been used extensively in
material fatigue stress analysis to count cycles and quantify their depth and their respective
range and mean. It is also applied for battery life assessment to estimate battery remaining
useful component. The method is based on a three point or four point counting method as
described in. [58] [48][59].
• The model considers local extrema (points at which the current direction changes)
of the SOC profile.
16
==PAGE:20==
• The model assesses battery degradation considering the number of cycles a battery
can withstand until the end of its lifetime.
• It is base on the high dependency of battery life on DOD.
• Cost of battery degradation is modeled as the sum of degradation from all cycles.
Figure1.8 is an example of a rainflow counting result of a SOC profile of a battery.
Figure 1.8 – Rainflow cycle counting example [48].
Considering a cycle of depth (u) with its cycle of depth function φ(u), the model estimates
the life time loss (L) of the battery by applying Eq:2.10 [58]
L =
I
∑
i=1
Φ(ui)
(2.10)
where;
I is the number of cycles identified by the rain flow algorithm.
There are many more battery degradation modelling techniques that have been used by
various researchers to achieve their desired objectives. However, in this thesis, the rainflow
algorithm will be used for the estimation of the battery degradation.
17
==PAGE:21==
Supercapacitor Degradation
Accurately predicting the remaining useful life (RUL) of a super capacitor is crucial in
improving the reliability of the energy storage systems as well as effectively minimising
the occurrence of failures. Degradation of SC can be quantified by carrying out accelerated
ageing test, Energy cycling test and calendar life test as they address real operating modes
of the SC [46]. SC ageing (service life) is influenced by external stress such as voltage,
current, and temperature. Model base approach and data-driven approach are the two main
stream methods for predicting the remaining useful life of a SC.
Model base Approach
: This modeling approach evaluates the RUL of a SC using
equivalent circuit model based on either the electrical performance or energy storage
principle of the SC. The equivalent circuit model makes use of parametric RC (capacitor-
resistor) network to model the electrical behavior of the SC applying simple differential
equations in the model formulation.
Electrical characterisation
Data-driven approach
: Unlike the model base approach, the data-driven approach
models the RUL of SC using different methods to predict the trends of the SC’s parameters
during the ageing process mainly base on historical data of the ageing process and SOC
data[46].
Rainflow counting Approach
This approach applies the three point rainflow counting
method for the SC’s life time estimation [49] [59].
• In this method, the charging and discharging process is taken into account by using
the Ampere hour (Ah) units for stored energy quantification.
• The weight of each depth of charge of the SC can be determined from data provided
by the manufacturers, or data obtained from experimental tests.
• The data obtained are generally presented as curve of the cycle’s numbers curve
versus the magnitude of discharge current.
• Data from the curve are used to calculate the approximated expression CF and the
parameters y1,y2,λ1,λ2 are obtained by using the least mean square method.
The lifetime of the SC is calculated considering that the fraction of lifetime consumed
during a given cycle is 1/CF.
18
==PAGE:22==
CF = y1e−λ1DOD +y2e−λ2DOD
(2.11)
The total damage D over a given time can be calculated by applying Eq. 2.12 from [49]
D =
I
∑
i=1
Ni
1
CF,i
(2.12)
Where;
D is the life loss of the SC, Ni is the number of cycles of i fraction of discharge depth.
2.1.8
Summary
This chapter exposes the concept of HESS, detailing the main purpose and types of HESS
and their different application areas. It also gives an overview of some of the different
storage units, their characteristics, and possible area of application. This chapter also looks
at the factors influencing battery degradation, as well as methods applied in accounting
for battery degradation. Finally, the method to account for battery and super capacitor
degradation was briefly introduced. More details about the method will be described in
chapter 4.
19
==PAGE:23==
3. FREQUENCY REGULATION
3.1
Frequency deviation
Power systems are expected to remain in a state of operating equilibrium under normal
operating conditions and to regain some acceptable level of equilibrium within minimum
possible time after being subjected to transience or disturbance [52].
Imbalances in power systems are caused by the continual fluctuations in the load and
recently the increase penetration of renewable energy sources into the power system. These
frequent imbalance in the power system when not regulated may lead to power system
failure and great economic loss. Frequent imbalance between generation and demand
sometimes causes the frequency to go above or below the required limit [49.9 50.1]. Figure
1.1 illustrates a real wold frequency signal for the Nordic synchronous system for one day
3rd march 2023.
Figure 1.1 – One day real world frequency signal 3rdMarch2023.
As seen on Figure 1.1 the frequency signal is not stable with high transient variation.
20
==PAGE:24==
Therefore, there is the need to regulate the frequency within the required limits.
3.2
Frequency Restoration (FR)
Frequency stability ensures the smooth operation of the power system in a tolerable point
of frequency equilibrium insuring minimal loss of load [26]. In power system, frequency
regulation is performed either through internal or external sources. Internal source implies
frequency regulation is realised by prime mover control of synchronous generators while
on the other hand, the external source regulation includes the use of technologies such as
electrical energy storage systems and diesel generators to either inject or absorb power so
as to stabilise the system frequency. This technologies that provide power for frequency
curtailment are known as active power reserved and are automatically controlled based on
frequency deviation.
In the EU, the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
(ENTSO-E), has partition the frequency reserves into three categories (Primary control,
Secondary control, and Tertiary control) reserves as seen on 2.2.
Figure 2.2 – The ENTSOE-E requirement for frequency control reserve[26].
In this paper, the focus is on the primary frequency containment reserve which is a fast
response reserved activated within few seconds in case of frequency deviation.
21
==PAGE:25==
3.2.1
Frequency Containment Reserve FCR
FCR is an active power reserve that is automatically controlled based on variation in
frequency in a power system. Frequency Containment Reserve for Normal Operation (FCR-
N) and Frequency Containment Reserve for Disturbances (FCR-D) aims at containing the
frequency during normal operation and disturbance within the standard frequency range of
49.9Hz and 50.1Hz and limits the frequency to 49.5Hz and 50.5Hz in case the frequency
goes outside the standard limits. [38].
FCR-N is a symmetrical reserve and should be able to perform upward and downward
regulation. That is it should be able to increase power production or reduce power
consumption for up regulation and be able to decrease power production or increase
consumption [38]. Reserves used in carrying out frequency containment during normal
operation are expected to meet certain technical requirements.
• FCR-N should have a minimum size of atleast 0.1 MW and should be fully activated
within 3 minutes
• Within the frequency rage of 49.9 to 50.1 Hz, the volume of activated capacity shall
be proportional to the magnitude of the frequency deviation.The unit should be able
to provide continuous regulation depending on the frequency deviation [38].
• Reserves which are capable of controlling their power continuously, shall have linear
control
3.3
System design framework
In this section, the system design framework looks at the management and control of a
1.4MW lithium-ion battery-supercapacitor Hybrid energy storage system . The design
framework aims at proposing a control technique (algorithm) for the management of the
HESS response to frequency regulation signal from the TSO for the purpose of frequency
regulation. The control techniques also takes into consideration to ensure the HESS meets
all required specifications as stipulated by the TSO. The power allocation technique for the
distribution of power to the battery and supercapacitor is based on utilizing the SC more
aggressively to respond to the regulation signal. while the remaining power not handled by
the SC is allocated to the Battery.
22
==PAGE:26==
3.3.1
Parameter Choice for HESS
The most relevant parameters considered for any given HESS are the rated power and
energy capacity of the storage units. The rated power determines the power value for which
all power elements in the HESS system such as converters are designed [19].
The energy capacity relates to the amount of energy that can be stored by the HESS. This
energy is used during the charge and discharge process of HESS. Constant fluctuations
in the degree of charge of the HESS leads to change in the maximum power that can be
absorbed/injected during the charge/discharge process. [19].
Some of the main parameters and equations used in formulating the power management
control policy for frequency regulation purpose is gotten from [24] and [5]. Table 3.1 is a
list of the parameters used in the design process.
Parameters
HESS
Nominal power (MW)
1.4
Maximum Time of operation (Hours)
0.25
HESS Score
1
Table 3.1 – Parameters for the HESS
A list of parameters used for the ESS (Battery and Supercapacitor) is listed on Table 3.2.
Parameter
LI-ion Battery
Supercapacitor
Self discharge rate
10%/month
30%/day
Degradation coefficient
0.001%
0.001%
Discharging efficiency (ηdischr)
95%
95 %
Charging efficiency (ηchr)
95%
95%
Initial state of charge
50%
50%
Cycle life
1500 (cycles)
500,000(cycles)
Table 3.2 – List of parameters used for the Battery and Supercapacitor
3.3.2
Regulation capability submission
In the energy and reserve market, RS providers periodically submit their regulation capa-
bility (Pn) in MW to the TSO within a required time interval T (typically between 15-60
minutes) an the price per unit of their capability (Pn) MW that it can provide for T [24].
The HESS is required to sustain full power regulation service for T = 15 minutes (0.25
hours) during the bidirectional charge and discharge mode. In a battery-supercapacitor
HESS, in practice the SC contribution to the regulation capability is only a few percent
[24]. In this case, only the battery capacity is taken into consideration and submitted as the
HESS capability.
23
==PAGE:27==
3.3.3
Regulation Signal
In an energy regulation service market, the Transmission System Operator (TSO) manages
the operation and transfer of electrical power from generation to the load and continuously
monitor the operation of the power grid so as to take necessary actions when required. In
case of imbalance in the system due to power mismatch, the TSO generates signals at every
second which is sent as regulation signal (Rt) to the RS providers. (Rt) is sent as power
required for the the purpose of frequency regulation. The RS providers in turn provide
the required power in response to (Rt). The decision of how much power the resource
provides at the required time is solely the decision of the TSO. This decision is usually
made taking into consideration the resource capability price for 1MW of power submitted
by the RS providers at the time of submission of its resource capability [5]. In most cases,
the TSO sends the system frequency as the regulation signal assuming the convention that
(Rt) is normalised to the range [-1 1], where (Rt > 0) indicates power shortage in the grid
and the HESS is required to inject power while (Rt) < 0 indicate excess power and the
HESS is required to absorb power from the grid . The power that causes the deviation in
frequency can be approximated through a linear relationship [5] and (Rt) modelled through
Eq 3.1 [2].
Rt = k[1(f t> ¯f0)(f t −¯f0)−1(f t<f0)(f0 −f t)]
(3.1)
Where, 1x is the indicator function f t, f0, ¯f0 is the system frequency, lower and upper
bound of the allowable system frequency deviation respectively.
As can be seen from Eq.3.1, when the system frequency goes above the upper frequency
limit, Rt > 0, the HESS has to absorb power from the system by charging up. On the other
hand, if Rt < 0 the HESS discharges. While for RT = 0, this implies no charge or discharge
mode (system idling).
Worthy of note is the high transient characteristic of the regulation signals which is as a
result of the frequent mismatch between supply and demand. This high transient nature
of the regulation signal requires fast response resources with high ramp rate that are able
to handle the high transient signals [5]. It is for this reason that a battery-supercapacitor
HESS technology is suggested as a plausible solution in handling the response power for
frequency regulation purposes. Figure 3.3 illustrates the regulation signal sent by the TSO
normalised to [-1,1].
24
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.3 – Regulation signal from the TSO to the RS provider representing needed power for
frequency regulation .
3.3.4
Response power
Once the TSO observe mismatch between the generation and demand, it periodically sends
signal (regulation signal) to the RS providers. When the the signal is received, the resources
respond by providing the needed regulation power ((Pr)) for balancing the frequency. (Pr)
is expected to be a perfect response. However, this is not usually the case as there are
losses. For this reason, there will be need to account for deviations and to evaluate the
performance of the HESS. The performance score is rank between [0 1]. In the case where
the response does not meet the requested power there shall be penalty on the resource
depending on the agreement between the TSO and RS provider. (Pr) is calculated as the
product of the regulation signal and the HESS capability Pn in MW. . In order to provide
an accurate regulation power, the HESS is considered to have power BasePiont value for
every 5 minutes interval(P5min
BasePoint). The base point value is used to ensure the storage
units to provide the regulation power in full as requested by compensating for the losses
that may occur during the charge discharge process. Eq. 3.2is applied to evaluate (Pr).
Pr = Rt ∗(Pn +(P5min
BasePoint))
(3.2)
It should be noted that (Pr) can either be a charging or discharging power. A perfect
response will require that the energy storage units operates within their state of charge
limits at all times, as well as within their maximum power limits.
SoCmin
bat ≤SoCt
bat ≤SoCmax
bat
(3.3)
25
==PAGE:29==
Where;
SoCmin
bat is the minimum state Of charge bound for the battery, SoCsetpoint
bat
is the state of
setpoint of the battery (it is the desired or target level of charge for the battery) SoCmax
bat is
the maximum state of charge bound for the battery.
SoCmin
SC is the minimum state of charge bound for the SC, SoCsetpoint
SC
is the SOC setpoint
target for the SC and SoCmax
SC is the maximum state of charge of the SC.
−Pbat ≤Pbat
setpoint ≤Pbat
(3.4)
−PSC ≤PSC
setpoint ≤PSC
(3.5)
Where;
−Pbat is the maximum power discharged for the battery, Pbat
setpoint is the power setpoint of
the battery, Pbat is the maximum charged power of the battery.
−PSC is the maximum power discharged for the supercapacitor, PSC
setpoint is the power
setpoint of the SC and [−PSC,PSC] is the power rage of the SC.
3.3.5
SoC Estimation, Losses and Efficiency
The SoC of a storage unit is an important parameter which indicates how much energy
is stored in the the storage unit at time t. In general, SoC is defined as the current en-
ergy stored in a storage system relative to its total energy capacity, commonly express
in percentage. In order to determine the SOC of a storage system,several methods have
been applied by different researchers taking into consideration the specific system design
requirements. Methods such as Coulomb counting, OCV measurement and, Kalman filters
have been used to estimate SoC for battery and supercapacitors.
Energy storage units such as batteries and supercapacitors, have inherent losses that
affect their efficiency during operation and even when not in use.losses such as ohmic
losses, capacitive losses, chemical losses and self discharge losses are common with
storage systems. When modelling the operation of such systems, the losses should be
accounted for in order to provide a more accurate representation of the actual efficiency
and performance of the the storage units. Techniques such as the use of mathematical
loss models that accounts for factors such as internal resistance, self discharge rate and
other storage losses can be Incorporated with energy calculation models to obtain a more
accurate result of the actual energy state in the storage unit [3].
.
26
==PAGE:30==
Efficiency determines how effectively the storage device converts and stores energy. knowl-
edge on the efficiency of a storage unit is crucial for performance evaluation, energy
management, system design, cost analysis, environmental impact assessment, and com-
parative analysis [43]. In storage system applications, it is important to account for the
the charging efficiency (ηchr
bat ) and discharging efficiency(ηdischr
bat
) as they are often use to
account for losses in the battery or supercapacitor. The charge/discharged efficiency gives
a representation of how efficient the energy conversion processes in a battery or SC occurs
during operation.
Base on the above definitions, the SOC of the storage unit for example the battery can be
estimated by applying the energy flow or energy balance equation of the battery storage
Eq.3.6.
SoCbat[t] ∗Ebat = SoCbat[t−1] ∗Ebat ∗(1−staticbat)
+(PowerSetPointbat[t]| (>0))∗ηchr
bat ∗
1
3600
+(PowerSetPointbat[t])| (<0) ∗
1
ηdischr
bat
∗
1
3600
(3.6)
Where;
SoCbat[t] is the battery state of charge at time t, Ebat is the current energy stored in the
battery, SoCbat[t−1] is the battery state of charge at the previous time step, (1−staticbat) is
the self discharge rate of the battery (energy loss), (PowerSetPointbat[t]| (>0)) represent all
values of power setpoint of the battery above zero at time t while (PowerSetPointbat[t])| (<0)
represents all values of power setpoint of the battery less than zero at time t. ηchr
bat and
ηdischr
bat
are the charged and discharge efficiencies of the battery. The factor
1
3600 converts
the power values from seconds to hours.
In Eq.3.6, the left side (SoCbat[t] ∗Ebat) is the available energy of the battery at time t.
The right hand side of the equation represent the charge and discharge energy flow in
the battery.The first term (SoCbat[t−1] ∗Ebat ∗(1 −staticbat) represent the energy at the
previous time step after accounting for losses.
The second term (PowerSetPointbat[t]| (>0))∗ηchr
bat ∗
1
3600) represent the amount of energy
stored in the battery in the time interval t. That is the energy absorbed from the grid.
The third term (PowerSetPointbat[t])| (<0)∗
1
ηdischr
bat
∗
1
3600) represent the amount of discharged
energy from the battery during the time interval t.That is energy injected into the grid.
On a general note, the energy flow equation captures the dynamics of flow in the battery
accounting for the SOC, energy loss, absorbed and injected power efficiencies of the
battery.
27
==PAGE:31==
3.3.6
Control Algorithm
The allocation of power to storage units in a HESS for regulation services remains a
challenging task and requires a well developed control techniques. The aim of the con-
trol process is to ensure the response power is allocated to the various storage resources
properly taking into consideration their capabilities and system design specifications. The
general idea with the allocation of power to storage units in a battery-supercapacitor HESS
as earlier mentioned is to ensure that the storage unit with high power density (SC) handles
the high transient frequency components of the regulation signal.On the other hand, the low
frequency component of the regulation signal is handled by the high energy density storage
unit(battery). This idea in general aims at minimizing frequent charging and discharging of
the system that would have occurred if it was an only battery storage system. Minimizing
the frequent usage of the battery guarantees an extension of the life span of the battery
and will also minimize investment cost as the battery will not be frequently maintained or
replaced within a short time.[16].
Due to the increasing desire for the use of HESS in the frequency regulation service market
because of its enormous benefits, several power control techniques have been suggested by
different researchers. The most commonly use control techniques that have been applied
by most researchers involves the use of linear filters. High pass and low pass filters have
been used to perform control actions to distribute power between storage subsystems in a
HESS depending on their response time [12]. Model predictive control, rule-based control,
neural networks, and fuzzy logic control are some of the most commonly used control
techniques for power allocation in HESS [12] [36].
In [25] a methodology for the sizing of energy storage system considering power and
energy capacities has been developed for FR services. The suggested technique was applied
to a 12-bus grid model with high wind power penetration. The estimated storage size for
inertial response and primary FR services was validated through real time simulations.
According to [5], a novel portfolio for providing primary active power has been proposed
by the distribution network operator of the UK ,National Grid (NG). The novel portfolio is
known as Enhanced Frequency Response (EFR) service.It suggest a design guideline for
the HESS to provide EFR by allocating power to the various storage unit based on the SoC
of the SC.
In the USA, a novel technique suggested by PJM proposed a fast regulation framework
known as “RegD” that provides a fast frequency support. With this technique, a control
28
==PAGE:32==
mechanism is used in the power systems to maintain the grid frequency within acceptable
limits. When the grid frequency deviates from its nominal value, Regulation Down is
activated to decrease the power output from the generating units connected to the grid [24]
[10].
In [2], another technique proposed allocates power to both the BESS and SC based upon
their maximum power ratings while fulfilling their constraints at the same time. The
method handles the frequent partial charge and discharge transitions, which are detrimental
the BESS by using two battery banks instead of one large battery bank. The charging and
discharging of two battery banks are controlled in an innovative approach to reduce the
transitions between the partial charge and discharge transitions.
The control algorithm use in this thesis work is proposed by [24] . The control policy
aims at managing power distribution to the battery-supercapacitor HESS by using the SC
aggressively. The SC is used aggressively to handle response power as much as possible
depending on the available energy of the SC and as much the remaining capacity allows.
When the SC is used to it max capability, the rest of the response power is handled by the
battery. By applying this technique, the battery would have gone through lower number of
charge-discharge cycles. This approach extends the life span of the battery significantly.
Eq.3.7 is the power allocation algorithm used by the SC to respond to the request.
Pr
SC =











min(Pr, ESC∗ηdischarge
SC
t
)
if Rt > 0
max(Pr,−Ccap−ESC
ηcharge
SC
∗t )
if Rt < 0
0
if Rt = 0
(3.7)
Eq.3.7 estimates the output response power allocated to the SC by making a comparison
between the response power(Pr) and the maximum charged and discharged power capability
of the SC.The algorithm takes into consideration storage system capacity, charge and
discharged efficiency, current amount of energy stored in the SC. Pr
SC is calculated based
on the following conditions.
• The fist condition implements a comparison between Pr and the maximum power
that can be discharged by the SC to determine actual power to meet the request. The
comparison assigns the minimum power value between Pr and Pmax
SCdischr when ever
Rt > 0 to Pr
SC .
The condition Rt > 0 represents power shortage and by implication, SC needs to
inject power to the grid to meet the desired power shortage.
The equation Pmax
SCdischr = (ESC∗ηdischar
SC
t
) is the maximum discharge power capability of
29
==PAGE:33==
SC based on the current energy (ESC) stored in the SC at time t and the discharging
efficiency (ηdischarge
SC
). The (min) function in this condition ensures that the discharge
power should not exceed the SC discharging capability, taking into account both the
requested power and the discharge limitations. This equation ensures that, whenever
the discharge power is higher than the response power the SC is able to deliver the
response power as required. On the other hand, when the response power is higher
than the discharging power the SC delivers the power up to its maximum capability
and the remainder will be handled by the battery.
• The second condition implements a comparison between Pr and the maximum
charged power of the SC. It takes the maximum value between the two powers when
ever Rt < 0 and assign it to the SC. This condition Rt < 0 indicate excess power in
the grid . This indicates that the SC needs to absorb excess power from the grid by
charging up.
The equation CSC−ESC
ηdischar
SC
∗t calculates the maximum charging power that the SC can
sustained. It takes into consideration the remaining energy capacity in the SC
(CSC −ESC), the charging efficiency (etachar
SC ), and the regulation signal time interval
(t). The max function in this condition ensures the charging power does not exceed
the SC’s capability. This condition ensures the SC is charged within the system’s
operational limits taking into consideration the response power. When the charging
power is greater than the response power, this indicates that the SC has sufficient
capacity to absorb the excess power from the grid. On the other hand, if the the
response power is greater than the charging power, the SC charges up to its maximum
capability and the rest of the power is handled by the battery.
• The last condition ensures that for a zero requested power that is when Rt = 0, the
power output is set to zero PSC = 0. This means there is no power exchange therefore
an idling system.
Once power has been allocated to the SC, the rest power is handled by the battery. Eq.3.8 is
then applied to obtain Pr
bat which is simply the difference between the requested power and
the response power of the SC. However, one must keep in mind that the allocated power to
the battery or supercapacitor must be within the maximum and minimum allowable power
limits.
Pr
bat = Pr −PSC
(3.8)
It should be noted that the HESS has a power base point value for every 5 minute interval.
30
==PAGE:34==
The power base point value of the HESS is the sum of the individual power base point
values of the individual storage units.The power basepoint value here refers to a reference
or nominal power level used as a starting point or reference for the power calculations. The
power set point values for the storage units are a sum of their individual power base point
values and their response power as in Eq.3.9 and 3.10.
Pbat
setpoint = Pbat
basepoint +Pbat
(3.9)
PSC
setpoint = Pcap
basepoint +PSC
(3.10)
3.3.7
End of Life (EOL) Estimation of the Battery and Supercapaci-
tor
Estimating the end of life of a battery or supercapacitor is necessary due to several reasons;
• Regarding performance and reliability, the EOL estimation assess the performance
capability as well as how reliable the storage unit can be through out its life span.
It provide system operators with knowledge on when to carry out maintenance or
replacement of storage unit for optimal performance.
• With regards to economic considerations, EOL enables the calculation of the invest-
ment cost, operational cost, and replacement cost of the storage unit over its life
time. With this information, resource owners can make informed decision regarding
the economic visibility of the storage unit.
• Performance and safety characteristics of the battery and SC changes as they ap-
proach their EOL. Knowledge on the EOL of these storage units allows for proactive
measures and possible mitigation to respond to failures or hazards.
• In terms of the environment, EOL estimation facilitates the planning for proper
disposal or recycling of the battery or supercapacitor.
To estimate the EOL of a battery or SC required knowledge on their SOC when in use is
required
31
==PAGE:35==
4. RESULTS
In this chapter, the results of the power allocation algorithm are presented and discussed.
In the later part of the chapter, the life span improvement of the HESS as well as the
economic gains of using a batttery-supercapacitor HESS for frequency regulation purposes
are discussed. In this thesis MATLAB was used to analyse the frequency data and to
perform all necessary calculations needed to attain the objective.
4.1
Power management
This section aims at validating the power management technique proposed in Section3.3.6
The suggested methodology applied is tested by using real world frequency data obtained
at the Nordic synchronous area. The frequency data has a granularity of 1 second and the
non critical frequency window is set to 49.9Hz - 50.1Hz. In order to visualize the system
behaviour for better analysis, the HESS is run first 900 seconds (15 minutes) and then for
one day (86400 seconds) and the results discussed below. The first illustration Figure 1.1
represents the system frequency which is constantly monitored by the TSO in case of any
high fluctuation caused by power mismatch in the grid.
Figure 1.1 – Real world frequency Signal
It should be noted here that, the original frequency data obtained from March 3rd 2023
from the Nordic synchronous area was originally in 0.1 sec period. However, the data
has been modified and frequency signal taken for every 1 second. The fluctuations of the
frequency though within normal frequency operation range are highly transient. Therefore,
32
==PAGE:36==
Action is needed to provide quick response in handling the fluctuations. In order to provide
the need power, the regulation signal is normalized to [-1 1] as illustrated in Figure 1.1 is
generated by the TSO and transmitted to the RS provided for appropriate response.
Figure 1.2 – Regulation Signal send by the TSO to the RS provider requesting for provision of
regulation power
The HESS sizing takes into account the capacity size in (MWh) and maximum power rating
in (MW) of the storage units in the HESS. In this thesis, sizing of the storage units was not
performed, however, the energy and power capacity for the storage units where gotten from
a previous work [24], the basic technical requirement document [38] for storage units used
in energy reserve market and from the description paper for the thesis. The parameters
used are tabulated in Table 3.1and 3.2 above.
In the order to apply the system design framework proposed in section 3.3, the regulation
capability of the HESS is taken as the rated power Pn. The HESS is designed to have power
base point value. The results obtained from the application of Eq.3.2 are represented in
Figure 1.3. It represents the regulation power provided by the HESS for the frequency
regulation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.3 – HESS power response to the grid for frequency regulation
As can be seen in both figures the response power is in line with the regulation signal.
Therefore, the HESS is able to provide the requested power for the regulation service. It
should be noted that a perfect response to the regulation signal is always expected. The
33
==PAGE:37==
HESS response is scored between 0 and 1 and in a case were the the HESS is unable to
meet the needed power, the HESS will be liable to penalty depending on the agreement
between the TSO and the resource service provider.
The control algorithm proposed in section 3.3.6 is used to operate the HESS by ensuring
power is allocated to the battery and supercapacitor according to their capabilities. Upon
the application of Eq.3.7 , the algorithm ensures that the SC is used aggressively to inject
into the grid as well as to absorb power from the grid. The remaining power not handled
by the SC is then stored by the battery. The battery power is obtained by applying Eq.3.8.
Figure 1.4a and 1.4b represents the capacitor power for the 900s and for 1 day (86400
seconds) of running the system while Figure 1.4c and 1.4d represents the battery power for
the two time interval.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.4 – Active HESS operation power allocation result for: 1.4a and 1.4b supercapacitor
power and (c) and (d) battery power for 900 seconds and 1 day (86400 seconds).
Comparing the power between the battery and the supercapacitor it can be clearly seen
that the greatest share of the regulation power is allocated to the SC. As seen in figure
1.4a and 1.4c during the first 15 minutes of operation of the HESS, the SC is fully used to
perform the regulation service. On the other hand, the battery power remains constant at
around -0.1 MW. Again as observed in figure 1.4b and 1.4d for the case of 1 day operation,
the super capacitor excessively handles the regulation power however, the battery also
participated in the regulation service by injecting power into the grid for most of the time
while also staying constant at -0.1 MW for most of the time. From the above result one can
conclude that, the power allocation algorithm effectively distributes power to the battery
34
==PAGE:38==
and supercapacitor as intended. Worthy to note is the fact that the two storage units are
rated at a maximum output power of 1 MW each and they are both operated well within
their power limits when providing the regulation service. The storage units are assigned
power basepoint values which are considered when deciding the base point values. Table
4.1 tabulates the power basepoint and power setpoint values obtained for the storage units.
Storage unit
Power basepoint (MW)
Power setpoint(MW)
HESS
0.2105
1.6105
Li-ion Battery
0.1053
1.1053
Supercapacitor
0.1053
1.1053
Table 4.1 – Power BasePoint and PowerSetpoin values for the HESS and storage units.
Once the separate powers of the HESS units have been obtained, it is important to also
account for the battery state of charge. In order to evaluate the system state of charge, the
energy balance equation of the battery storage 3.6 is implemented. Figure1.5 represents
the state of charge variations for the super capacitor and the battery.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.5 – Battery and Supercapacitor SoC for the 300s and 1 day
As illustrated in Figure 1.5c and 1.5d the battery has a narrow state of charge variation
mainly because only a few charge-discharged response is handled by the battery. For most
of the time the battery remains idle at a constant energy level. From the SoC behaviour,
one might say the battery only tends to be functional during periods of low demand or only
when the the super capacitor has reached its full potential. Also, as seen in Figure1.5a and
1.5b the SC also experience a narrow state of charge variation despite the high transient
nature of the response power it handles. This is so due to SC inherent characteristics and
35
==PAGE:39==
charge discharge behaviour. The minimal increase can be attribute to the SC absorbing
small amount of power or delivering a small amount of energy to meet a sudden demand.
4.1.1
Cycle counting via rainflow counting
In order to model the battery and super capacitor degradation cost, the rain flow counting
algorithm is used as described in section 2.1.7. The rainflow algorithm is implemented
using MATLAB and the following results are obtained. Figure 1.6 and 1.7 is the rain-
flow matrix histogram of the battery state of charge obtained from applying the rainflow
counting algorithm. The figures indicate the number of cycles (number of complete charge
and discharge cycles) the battery and supercapacitor has undergone during the one day
operation. The figures also illustrates the cycle rage for each cycle and the cycle average.
Once the number of cycles have been counted, it is possible to account for the total life
loss of the battery and eventually the degradation cost.
Figure 1.6 – Rainflow matrix histogram for indicating the number of cycles counted from the SOC
profile of the SC for one day operation of the HESS
The above figure represents the rainflow counting of cycles of charge and discharge power
that occurred during the one(1) day operation of the HESS. As clearly seen, the super
capacitor undergoes several cycles of charge and discharge process in one day mainly
because of its excessive usage.
36
==PAGE:40==
Figure 1.7 – Rainflow matrix histogram of indicating the number of cycles counted from the SOC
profile of the Battery for one day operation of the HESS
The above figure represents the rainflow counting of cycles of charge and discharge power
that occurred during the one day operation of the HESS. As seen, the battery undergoes
fewer cycles of charge and discharge process in one day. This is mainly because it is not
over used .
4.1.2
Battery and Supercapacitor degradation cost
Once the cycles have been counted, the cycle depth stress function φ(ui) is then used
to model the total life loss from the cycle of depth u. φ(u) is measured in terms of
(normalized) changes in the SoC. The cycle depth function indicates that if a battery or
supercapacitor is repeatedly cycled with cycle depth u, then it can operate
1
φ(ui) number of
cycle before reaching its end of life [48]
Considering the battery and supercapacitor, I assumE a polynomial cycle depth stress
function φ(u) = 5.25x10−4u2.03 [48] and the cycle depth (u) for each cycle obtained
through the rainflow algorithm, the total life loss of the storage units for one day operation
is obtained by applying Eq.2.10. The equation is the sum total of life loss from all half
cycles. The cycle depth (u) is a product of the cycle range and the rated capacity of the
storage units, the results obtained for the total life loss L of the storage units are tabulated
in table 4.2 below.
Storage unit
Complete cycles
Total life loss
Li-ion Battery
6
3.8888x10−6
Supercapacitor
150
1.3889x10−6
Table 4.2 – Results on the estimation of the total life loss of the battery and supercapacitor during
one day operation through
The values obtained for the total life loss for one day operation of the HESS is ≈0 for the
37
==PAGE:41==
both battery and the supercapacitor. The small total life loss per day due to degradation
particularly for the battery validates the power management algorithm proposed considering
the fact that the battery remained idled for most times of the day.
The battery and supercapacitor assumed to have cycle life of 1500 and 500,000 cycles
respectively before reaching their end of life.
With this information coupled with results on the number of cycles per day,one is able to
estimate the number of years the the battery and supercapacitor can sustain before being
unable to provide the needed service.
The approximated number of years can be estimated by applying the below equation. The
result is tabulated on Table.4.3.
LS = CT
Cd
/365
(4.1)
where cT is the total cycle before EOL, Cd is the average cycle per day and 365 number of
days in a year.
Storage unit
Total number of years
Li-ion Battery
6.85 years
Supercapacitor
9.132 years
Table 4.3 – Results of the estimated total number of years of operation of the the battery and
supercapacitor.
In a battery-supercapacitor HESS energy storage system, the operational cost is mostly
incurred by the maintenance and replacement of the degraded battery. Since degradation
occurs due to frequent charging and discharge of the battery, the operational cost denoted
f(Pchar
max ,Pdischar
max
) is a function of the battery charge /discharge responses . The cost function
f(Pchar
max ,Pdischar
max
) used assumes a linear relation between the degradation cost and battery
life[48]. To estimate the total loss of life in terms of cost, lets assume (A) to be the battery
cell replacement cost of 50dkk/MWh and the energy capacity of the EBAT in MWh then
the degradation cost function f(Pchar
max ,Pdischar
max
) is;
f(Pchar
max ,Pdischar
max
) = ∆L(Pchar
max ,Pdischar
max
)∗Ebat ∗A
(4.2)
Assuming Eq.4.2 is applied for both the battery and supercapacitor, the cycle degradation
cost can be estimated as in Table 4.4.
Storage unit
cost as a result of L
Li-ion Battery
1.777x104 dkk
Supercapacitor
0.3610 dkk
Table 4.4 – Results of estimated total loss of life calculated in terms of cost.
38
==PAGE:42==
Again according to the estimate cost, the battery turns to have a higher have a higher cost
of life loss compared to the capacitor mainly because of its limited cycle life coupled with
the fact that it is prone to degradation over time.
4.1.3
Summary
In this chapter, the optimal power allocation algorithm implementation results are reported,
it reveals that, a Li-ion-battery-SC HESS is able to provide regulation service in response
to a regulation signal by effectively allocating power to the the storage units in such a way
that the SC is excessively used over the battery while performing the required service.
The HESS is able to deliver the required service within the 15 minute required time for the
full provision of the bidirectional regulation service. Also, the state of charge estimation
was done done by applying the rainflow cycle counting method. With this method one was
able to account for the total number of complete charge and discharge cycles the battery
and supercapacitor where subject to. Finally, the total loss of life was estimated as well as
the cost of associated with the loss of life when the HESS is operated for 1 day.
39
==PAGE:43==
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
5.1
Conclusion
This thesis is focused on proposing an optimal short-term approach in managing the
operation of a HESS that participates in the energy reserve market. This report starts
by reviewing several battery-supercapacitor degradation models as well as several other
control policies used in the allocation of power to storage units in a HESS. The report give
an over view of the regulation service market. It looks at how storage units submits their
capability to the TSO as well as how regulation signal is send by the TSO. Furthermore,
the report presents a technical review of the frequency regulation requirements as well as
the technical requirement for energy systems participate in the reserve market.
The the thesis further proposes a power allocation policy that aims at allocating regulation
power to storage units in a HESS. The REPORT considers a battery-supercapacitor Hybrid
energy storage system used for providing regulation services in response to regulation
signal received from the TSO. Since the regulation signals are characterise with high
transient charge discharge signals, the proposed method suggest the use of high power, fast
response supercapacitor storage unit and high energy lithium ion battery storage unit to be
used in response to the regulation signal. The SC is used extensively so as to minimize
cost incurred as a result of battery replacement. A power management policy is presented
that account for the system losses, system efficiency why deciding power basepoint and
power setpoint values for the individual storage units.
Finally, the rainflow cycle counting algorithm was use to account for the battery degra-
dation by estimating the number of cycles the battery and super capacitor undergoes for
one day operation in the regulation service market by using their state of charge profile.
Furthermore , data obtained as a result of implementing the rain flow counting was used to
account for the battery and SC loss of life as well as the cost associated with the loss of life.
According to the estimation , one can conclude that, the SC can last for several years despite
40
==PAGE:44==
being used aggressively compared to battery. This is mainly to the inherent characteristics
of the the SC and low degradation rate mainly due to its inherent characteristics. On the
other hand for the case of the battery, one can conclude that onece the the allocation of
power to the battery is carfully managed, the life span of the battery can be increased by
efffect decreasing the operational cost inscured due to replament of the battery.
5.2
Future work
This section proposes some topics for future research;
• online parameter estimation of battery degradation models[48].
• Optimization and control strategies: Develop advanced optimization algorithms
and control strategies to efficiently manage the energy flow and maximize the
performance of HESS. This includes optimizing the power dispatch between different
storage technologies based on real-time system conditions and demand profiles.
• Performance evaluation and modeling: Enhance the understanding of the perfor-
mance characteristics and limitations of each storage technology within the HESS.
This includes developing accurate models and simulation tools to evaluate the system
performance, predict the degradation behavior, and optimize the system design for
different applications and operating conditions
41
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1] Giancarlo Abbate, Eugenio Saraceno, and Achille Damasco. Supercapacitor for
future energy storage. Sustaining Resources for Tomorrow, pages 205–243, 2020.
[2] Umer Akram and Muhammad Khalid. A coordinated frequency regulation framework
based on hybrid battery-ultracapacitor energy storage technologies. IEEE Access,
6:7310–7320, 2017.
[3] MD Arifujjaman.
A comprehensive power loss, efficiency, reliability and cost
calculation of a 1 mw/500 kwh battery based energy storage system for frequency
regulation application. Renewable energy, 74:158–169, 2015.
[4] Ibrahem E Atawi, Ali Q Al-Shetwi, Amer M Magableh, and Omar H Albalawi. Re-
cent advances in hybrid energy storage system integrated renewable power generation:
Configuration, control, applications, and future directions. Batteries, 9(1):29, 2022.
[5] Mohamed Bahloul and Shafiuzzaman K Khadem. Design and control of energy stor-
age system for enhanced frequency response grid service. In 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), pages 1189–1194. IEEE, 2018.
[6] HE Becker. Low voltage electrolytic capacitor, us patent 2 800 616 (to general
electric). 1957.
[7] Thilo Bocklisch.
Intelligente dezentrale energiespeichersysteme.
uwf
UmweltWirtschaftsForum, 22(1):63–70, 2014.
[8] Thilo Bocklisch. Hybrid energy storage systems for renewable energy applications.
Energy Procedia, 73:103–111, 2015.
[9] Chiara Bordin, Harold Oghenetejiri Anuta, Andrew Crossland, Isabel Lascurain
Gutierrez, Chris J Dent, and Daniele Vigo. A linear programming approach for
battery degradation analysis and optimization in offgrid power systems with solar
energy integration. Renewable Energy, 101:417–430, 2017.
42
==PAGE:46==
[10] Raymond H Byrne, Ricky J Concepcion, and C´esar A Silva-Monroy. Estimating
potential revenue from electrical energy storage in pjm. In 2016 IEEE Power and
Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2016.
[11] Roberto Carapellucci and Lorena Giordano. Modeling and optimization of an energy
generation island based on renewable technologies and hydrogen storage systems.
International journal of hydrogen energy, 37(3):2081–2093, 2012.
[12] V Germanovich Chirkin, L Yurievich Lezhnev, D Anatolyevich Petrichenko, and
I Arkadyevich Papkin. A battery-supercapacitor hybrid energy storage system design
and power management. International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics,
119(15):2621–2625, 2018.
[13] Youngho Cho, Jae Woong Shim, Seog-Joo Kim, Sang Won Min, and Kyeon Hur.
Enhanced frequency regulation service using hybrid energy storage system against
increasing power-load variability. In 2013 IEEE Power & Energy Society General
Meeting, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2013.
[14] Rune Christensen. Vanadium Redox Flow Battery, pages 113–146. Danish Energy
Agency, 2018. The newest version of the catalogue will always be available from the
Danish Energy Agency’s web site.
[15] Christian Doetsch and Jens Burfeind. Vanadium redox flow batteries. In Storing
energy, pages 363–381. Elsevier, 2022.
[16] Roger A Dougal, Shengyi Liu, and Ralph E White. Power and life extension of
battery-ultracapacitor hybrids. IEEE Transactions on components and packaging
technologies, 25(1):120–131, 2002.
[17] Dr.R.J.Jena. Power system protection. https://www.cet.edu.in/noticefiles/
228_POWER_SYSTEM_PROTECTION.pdf. accessed: 26.03.2022.
[18] Jacqueline S Edge, Simon O’Kane, Ryan Prosser, Niall D Kirkaldy, Anisha N Patel,
Alastair Hales, Abir Ghosh, Weilong Ai, Jingyi Chen, Jiang Yang, et al. Lithium ion
battery degradation: what you need to know. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
23(14):8200–8221, 2021.
[19] SA Eroshenko, GB Nesterenko, VM Zyryanov, NG Kiryanova, and GA Pranke-
vich. Identification of parameters for the hybrid electrical energy storage system
in autonomous power system. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering, volume 836, page 012008. IOP Publishing, 2020.
43
==PAGE:47==
[20] M Haris, M Noman Hasan, and S Qin. State of health prediction of supercapacitors
using multi-trend learning of narx neural network. Materials Today Sustainability,
20:100201, 2022.
[21] Papenheim Jessica. Integration of vanadium redox flow batteries in grid-connected
microgrids. TECHNICO LISBOA, 2019.
[22] Zhenhua Jiang and Roger A Dougal. A compact digitally controlled fuel cell/battery
hybrid power source. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 53(4):1094–1104,
2006.
[23] Tossaporn Jirabovornwisut, Soorathep Kheawhom, Yong-Song Chen, and Amornchai
Arpornwichanop. Optimal operational strategy for a vanadium redox flow battery.
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 136:106805, 2020.
[24] Younghyun Kim, Vijay Raghunathan, and Anand Raghunathan. Design and manage-
ment of battery-supercapacitor hybrid electrical energy storage systems for regulation
services. IEEE Transactions on Multi-Scale Computing Systems, 3(1):12–24, 2016.
[25] Vaclav Knap, Sanjay K Chaudhary, Daniel-Ioan Stroe, Maciej Swierczynski, Bogdan-
Ionut Craciun, and Remus Teodorescu. Sizing of an energy storage system for
grid inertial response and primary frequency reserve. IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, 31(5):3447–3456, 2015.
[26] Vaclav Knap, Rakesh Sinha, Maciej Swierczynski, Daniel-Ioan Stroe, and Sanjay
Chaudhary. Grid inertial response with lithium-ion battery energy storage systems.
In 2014 IEEE 23rd International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), pages
1817–1822. IEEE, 2014.
[27] R¨udiger K¨otz and MJEA Carlen. Principles and applications of electrochemical
capacitors. Electrochimica acta, 45(15-16):2483–2498, 2000.
[28] George Kyriakarakos, Anastasios I Dounis, Konstantinos G Arvanitis, and George
Papadakis. A fuzzy logic energy management system for polygeneration microgrids.
Renewable Energy, 41:315–327, 2012.
[29] Jose I Leon, Eugenio Dominguez, Ligang Wu, Abraham Marquez Alcaide, Manuel
Reyes, and Jianxing Liu. Hybrid energy storage systems: Concepts, advantages, and
applications. IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine, 15(1):74–88, 2020.
[30] Yi Li, Kailong Liu, Aoife M Foley, Alana Z¨ulke, Maitane Berecibar, Elise Nanini-
Maury, Joeri Van Mierlo, and Harry E Hoster. Data-driven health estimation and
44
==PAGE:48==
lifetime prediction of lithium-ion batteries: A review. Renewable and sustainable
energy reviews, 113:109254, 2019.
[31] Chang Liu, Yujie Wang, and Zonghai Chen. Degradation model and cycle life
prediction for lithium-ion battery used in hybrid energy storage system. Energy,
166:796–806, 2019.
[32] Alexandre Lucas and Stamatios Chondrogiannis. Smart grid energy storage controller
for frequency regulation and peak shaving, using a vanadium redox flow battery.
International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 80:26–36, 2016.
[33] JF Manwell et al. Hybrid energy systems. Encyclopedia of energy, 3(2004):215–229,
2004.
[34] Behnam Mohammadi-Ivatloo, Amin Mohammadpour Shotorbani, and Amjad Anvari-
Moghaddam. Energy Storage in Energy Markets: Uncertainties, Modelling, Analysis
and Optimization. Academic Press, 2021.
[35] Marcelo Gustavo Molina. Dynamic modelling and control design of advanced energy
storage for power system applications. Dynamic Modelling, 300, 2010.
[36] Jorge Moreno, Micah E Ort´uzar, and Juan W Dixon. Energy-management system for a
hybrid electric vehicle, using ultracapacitors and neural networks. IEEE transactions
on Industrial Electronics, 53(2):614–623, 2006.
[37] Steffen Nicolai, Peter Bretschneider, and Dirk Westermann. Hierarchische speichere-
insatzoptimierung. at-Automatisierungstechnik, 62(5):364–374, 2014.
[38] Fingrid Oyj. The technical requirements and the prequalification process of frequency
containment reserves (fcr), 2019.
[39] Fingrid Oyj. Terms and conditions for providers of manual frequency restoration
reserves (mfrr). Fingrid Oyj, 2020.
[40] Samuel Pelletier, Ola Jabali, Gilbert Laporte, and Marco Veneroni. Battery degrada-
tion and behaviour for electric vehicles: Review and numerical analyses of several
models. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 103:158–187, 2017.
[41] Pjm.
Regulation Market.
https://learn.pjm.com/three-priorities/
buying-and-selling-energy/ancillary-services-market/
regulation-market. accessed: 19.05.2023.
45
==PAGE:49==
[42] Gregory L.. Plett. Battery management systems: Battery modeling. Artech House.,
2015.
[43] Vijay Raghunathan, Aman Kansal, Jason Hsu, Jonathan Friedman, and Mani Srivas-
tava. Design considerations for solar energy harvesting wireless embedded systems.
In IPSN 2005. Fourth International Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor
Networks, 2005., pages 457–462. IEEE, 2005.
[44] Venkatasailanathan Ramadesigan, Paul WC Northrop, Sumitava De, Shriram San-
thanagopalan, Richard D Braatz, and Venkat R Subramanian. Modeling and simula-
tion of lithium-ion batteries from a systems engineering perspective. Journal of the
electrochemical society, 159(3):R31, 2012.
[45] Giuliano Rancilio, Alexandre Lucas, Evangelos Kotsakis, Gianluca Fulli, Marco
Merlo, Maurizio Delfanti, and Marcelo Masera. Modeling a large-scale battery
energy storage system for power grid application analysis. Energies, 12(17):3312,
2019.
[46] Vlasta Sedlakova, Josef Sikula, Jiri Majzner, Petr Sedlak, Tomas Kuparowitz, Bran-
don Buergler, and Petr Vasina. Supercapacitor degradation assesment by power
cycling and calendar life tests. Metrology and Measurement Systems, 23(3), 2016.
[47] V Chandra Sekhar and G Satyanarayana. An efficient energy storage unit for stan-
dalone solar pv-hybrid renewable energy sources.
[48] Yuanyuan Shi, Bolun Xu, Yushi Tan, and Baosen Zhang. A convex cycle-based
degradation model for battery energy storage planning and operation. In 2018 Annual
American Control Conference (ACC), pages 4590–4596. IEEE, 2018.
[49] M Abdou Tankari, G Lefebvre, K Bellache, M Bailo Camara, and B Dakyo. Superca-
pacitor lifetime estimation based on rainflow cycle counting method. In 2015 IEEE
Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference (VPPC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2015.
[50] Duong Tran and Ashwin M Khambadkone. Energy management for lifetime ex-
tension of energy storage system in micro-grid applications. IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, 4(3):1289–1296, 2013.
[51] TYCORUN.
Vanadium Battery vs Lithium Comparison in Energy Storage
Requirements October 17, 2022.
https://www.tycorun.com/blogs/news/
vanadium-battery-vs-lithium-comparison-in-energy-storage-requirements.
accessed: 07.04.2023.
46
==PAGE:50==
[52] Electrical 4 U.
Power System Stability.
https://www.electrical4u.com/
power-system-stability/. accessed: 10.04.2023.
[53] Maria Varini, Pietro Elia Campana, and G¨oran Lindbergh.
A semi-empirical,
electrochemistry-based model for li-ion battery performance prediction over lifetime.
Journal of Energy Storage, 25:100819, 2019.
[54] Bogdan Vulturescu, Stephane Butterbach, and Christophe Forgez. Experimental
considerations on the battery lifetime of a hybrid power source made of ultracapacitors
and lead-acid batteries. IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power
Electronics, 2(3):701–709, 2014.
[55] Guishi Wang, Mihai Ciobotaru, and Vassilios G Agelidis. Power smoothing of large
solar pv plant using hybrid energy storage. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy,
5(3):834–842, 2014.
[56] Shuoqi Wang, Dongxu Guo, Xuebing Han, Languang Lu, Kai Sun, Weihan Li,
Dirk Uwe Sauer, and Minggao Ouyang. Impact of battery degradation models on
energy management of a grid-connected dc microgrid. Energy, 207:118228, 2020.
[57] Market WAtch.
Hybrid Energy Storage System (HESS) Market Size, Rev-
enue, and Forecast 2030.
https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/
hybrid-energy-storage-system-hess-market-size-revenue-and-forecast-2030-2023-0
accessed: 11.06.2023.
[58] Bolun Xu. Batteries in electricity markets: economic planning and operations. PhD
thesis, University of Washington, 2018.
[59] Bolun Xu, Jinye Zhao, Tongxin Zheng, Eugene Litvinov, and Daniel S Kirschen.
Factoring the cycle aging cost of batteries participating in electricity markets. IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, 33(2):2248–2259, 2017.
[60] Yadong Yang, Yimin Zhang, Tao Liu, and Jing Huang. Improved broad temperature
adaptability and energy density of vanadium redox flow battery based on sulfate-
chloride mixed acid by optimizing the concentration of electrolyte. Journal of Power
Sources, 415:62–68, 2019.
[61] Hyunjae Yoo, Seung-Ki Sul, Yongho Park, and Jongchan Jeong. System integration
and power-flow management for a series hybrid electric vehicle using supercapacitors
and batteries. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 44(1):108–114, 2008.
47
==PAGE:51==
[62] Jim P Zheng, T Richard Jow, and MS Ding. Hybrid power sources for pulsed current
applications. IEEE transactions on aerospace and electronic systems, 37(1):288–292,
2001.
48
