==PAGE:1==
MasterвҖҷs Thesis
M.Sc. in Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology
Quantum mechanical calculations of the
electric susceptibility of solids
By Amalie Helena SГёndersted
Supervisor: Kristian Sommer Thygesen
Co-supervisor: Mark Kamper Svendsen
Kongens Lyngby, June 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Computational AtomicВӯscale
Materials Design, Department of Physics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
I would like to thank my supervisors, Kristian Sommer Thygesen and Mark Kamper Svendsen,
for their invaluable guidance and support throughout this project. Without them, the work behind
this thesis would not have been possible to carry out. I also wish to express my appreciation to the
CAMD section for help and assistance on various challenges that occurred, in particular ThorbjГёrn
Skovhus, Thomas Olsen and Mikael Kuisma. Lastly, I wish to thank Jakob KjГҰrulff Svaneborg,
not only for our enriching discussions and his thorough proofВӯreading of this thesis, but also for
his great patience and understanding during countless hours of frustration and confusion, and for
sharing my joy in the small breakthroughs.
By Amalie Helena SГёndersted Вӯ s171093
Signature
Date
iii
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this thesis, we predict optical properties of solids from firstВӯprinciples calculations of the electric
susceptibility. The electric susceptibility contains important information about electronic excitaВӯ
tions in solids and thus is a key parameter when we want to describe how light interacts with and
propagates through matter. Accurate descriptions of lightВӯmatter interactions are crucial for the
design of many modern technologies within optics, photonics and material designs, that could for
instance be lasers, wave guides or solar cells. In addition to this, calculating the electric susceptiВӯ
bility accurately across a broad frequency range allows for correlation energy calculations via the
fluctuationВӯdissipation theorem [1] potentially improving density functional theory calculations
for solids, and predictions of all sorts of material properties. However, calculating the electric
susceptibility is no trivial task. Historically, it was introduced as a parameter that could only be
determined experimentally. Advances in quantum mechanics and manyВӯbody perturbation theory
have illuminated its nature, but exact calculations require that all exchange and correlation effects
be taken into account, a task that is impossible in practice. Approximate methods for determining
the electric susceptibility have been developed and have to some extent been successful in preВӯ
dicting optical spectra. The random phase approximation (RPA) neglects the exchangeВӯcorrelation
functional, but is computationally inexpensive and has proven to accurately describe plasmonic
excitations typically happening at higher frequencies in optical spectra. However, the neglect of
the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel means that excitonic excitations, mostly present at lower frequenВӯ
cies near the band gap, are not described in this theory. The BetheВӯSalpeter equation (BSE) on
the other hand gives an approximation to the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel and through this capВӯ
tures the excitons in the spectra. But the BSE is computationally costly, and it is only possible to
calculate the excitations at low frequencies with this method. The two methods each have differВӯ
ent strengths and weaknesses, but when excitons are present, none of them can give an accurate
description of the electric susceptibility over a broad range of frequencies. This project seeks to
bridge this gap by combining RPA and BSE calculations on the electric susceptibility in a hybrid
method. We propose four different hybrid methods denoted the Kernel Hybrid, the Simple Hybrid,
the Simple Hybrid ВӯH and Transition ВӯH. The hybrids are calculated for four different materials and
compared to experimental data both on high and low frequency spectra. For three of the materials,
we have also implemented the soВӯcalled fВӯsum method proposed by [2] to compare the hybrids to
this method. We show that all four hybrid methods do better than the RPA and BSE in predicting
optical spectra. We also compare the four methods to each other, and suggest some criteria for
when to apply each of them.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Understanding Electric Susceptibility and Its Connection to Optical Spectra
3
2.1
Absorption, refractive indices and extinction coefficients . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Electronic excitations in optical spectra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Linear Response Theory and TDDFT: Defining Electric Susceptibility
13
3.1
Time dependence in quantum mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Linear response theory and the Kubo formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
The KramersВӯKronig relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
TDDFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
ManyВӯBody Perturbation Theory: General Formalism and Derivations of the RPA
and BSE
25
4.1
Single particle GreenвҖҷs functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Feynman diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Random phase approximation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
BetheВӯSalpeter equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Hybrid Approaches: Creating Hybrid Expressions for Electric Susceptibility
51
5.1
Finite density response functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
The Kernel Hybrid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
The Simple Hybrid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4
Connection between the Kernel Hybrid and Simple Hybrid . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.5
The Simple Hybrid Вӯ H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.6
The Transition Вӯ H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.7
The fВӯsum method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
The TammВӯDancoff Approximation
61
6.1
Influence of the TDA on the real and imaginary part of polarizability for silicon .
61
6.2
The longВӯrange Coulomb interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Applying Hybrid Approaches: Calculating Electric Susceptibility and Spectra for
Solids
69
7.1
Hybrid model calculations for various solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Overestimated fВӯsums
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7.3
Hybrid function selection across materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.4
Kernel Hybrid function with local field effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
8
Conclusion and Outlook
85
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
Contents
v
==PAGE:6==
A Kubo Formula
89
B
Density Functional Theory (DFT)
91
C Coulomb Interaction in Reciprocal Space
93
D Single Particle GreenвҖҷs Functions
94
E
Imaginary Time and Matsubara GreenвҖҷs Functions
97
F
Hedin Equations
102
G The NonВӯCorrelated TwoВӯParticle Function in the Lehmann Representation
106
H The Bare and Screened Interaction in Reciprocal Space and BandВӯMomentum Basis108
I
Calculation Settings and Convergence
110
Bibliography
123
vi
Contents
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The goal of this project is to predict optical properties of solids from firstВӯprinciples calculations of
the electric susceptibility. Electric susceptibility serves as a crucial parameter in physics, yielding
insights into the optical attributes of solids. One of the prominent properties that can be found from
the electric susceptibility is the refractive index, describing how light propagates through matter.
The refractive index gives us information about transmission, reflection, absorption and refraction
in the solid of interest. Thus, the refractive index needs to be determined when a research group
for instance would like to design optical fibers or solar cells where the path taken by the light is
important to obtain the desired effects in the technology in question. The electric susceptibility
also enables us to determine electron energy loss spectra (EELS), which gives information about
plasmons in the material. Plasmons, collective oscillations of the free electron gas density, have
significant implications for the optical properties of the material and the development of devices
using plasmonic phenomena. For instance, this understanding can enhance the design of plasmonic
lasers, which can be used for sensing and information technology [3].
From a more theoretical perspective, knowing the electric susceptibility over a wide range of freВӯ
quencies enables us to determine correlation energies. In density functional theory (DFT), which
in general is used for determining ground state energies and wave functions for complicated manyВӯ
particle systems, we need a ground state Hamiltonian describing the system. Some terms in this
Hamiltonian are known, e.g. the term corresponding to the kinetic energy, the potential energy due
to external fields, and Hartree interactions. But we need to add a soВӯcalled exchangeВӯcorrelation
functional. The exchangeВӯcorrelation functional is composed of the exchange energy, which is
exact in the HartreeВӯFock methods, and the correlation energy. Thus, particularly the correlaВӯ
tion energy, which accounts for electron correlation, the phenomenon where the movements and
properties of any one electron depends on the simultaneous properties and positions of all other
electrons, is something what we do not know. This term acts in a collective way, accounting for the
manyВӯbody interactions that remain after we have written down the terms that we know already.
But it is possible to show that it has a connection to the electric susceptibility via the fluctuationВӯ
dissipation theorem [1]. If we know the electric susceptibility up to very large frequencies, then,
in theory, we are able to determine the correlation energy. This would then enable us to perform
DFT calculations yielding more accurate wave functions and energies, in turn yielding more acВӯ
curate descriptions of solids. By performing computational characterizations of solids, ideally we
can help the experimentalists in their search for materials with specific properties needed in their
research.
In this project we perform calculations of the electric susceptibility over a wide range of frequenВӯ
cies. These calculations will be based on methods from linear response theory and manyВӯbody
perturbation theory, and will rely on ground state calculations from density functional theory.
Modelling these properties, one must account for the interactions between the particles in the solid.
Electrons and holes may combine to form excitons, thereby complicating the problem. Excitons
are well described by the BetheВӯSalpeter equation (BSE), but this equation is computationally exВӯ
pensive and not feasible for large systems where many electronic bands need to be taken into
account to achieve a broad frequency range and converged spectrum. A much simpler approach
is the Random Phase Approximation (RPA). This equation is numerically cheaper, but cannot
account for excitonic effects. However, it has proven successful in describing spectra at higher
frequencies. Plasmons can occur in the material due to the longВӯrange component of the Coulomb
interaction between the electrons in the material, and the RPA is capable of describing this effect.
In this project we aim at developing hybrid numerical approaches that combine the strengths of
Chapter 1. Introduction
1
==PAGE:8==
both these methods, capturing the important excitonic effects in a computationally feasible way in
order to accurately predict the electric susceptibility over a wide range of frequencies. The success
of the method is evaluated by comparison to experimental data on refractive indices, extinction coВӯ
efficients and EELS for four different materials, rutile TiO2, anatase TiO2, MoS22 and hexagonal
BN (hBN). We also predict the spectra for HfS2. Here we do not have experimental data, and thus
the predictions are made for experimental groups to confirm or reject in the future.
A large part of the project has been focused on understanding the extensive theory behind electric
susceptibility. Understanding the theory is crucial for interpreting results and handling problems
as they occur during the work. As a consequence, a large part of the thesis focuses on the theory
behind the calculations. The theory is covered in chapters 2Вӯ5 and is written at a level that should
be understandable for a reader unfamiliar with linear response theory and manyВӯbody perturbation
theory. A reader already acquainted with these topics may choose to skip parts of these chapters,
or read them more superficially.
In chapter 2 we give the classical definition of the electric susceptibility and explain its connection
to optical properties and spectra. We explain how to find absorption using the electric susceptibilВӯ
ity, and how absorption is connected to the soВӯcalled extinction coefficient. We also explain the
connection between the electric susceptibility and the dielectric function, and how the dielectric
function can be used to determine the refractive index. We introduce the physics behind two imporВӯ
tant types of electronic excitations that can sometimes be seen in optical spectra, namely excitons
and plasmons, and how to observe them experimentally.
In chapter 3 we dive further into the nature of the electric susceptibility through linear response
theory. This yields a quantum mechanical description of the electric susceptibility and through
Time Dependent DFT (TDDFT) we obtain a first mathematical expression for it. We also explain
the KramersВӯKronig relation which is obeyed by the electric susceptibility, and all other causal
response functions.
The TDDFT expression contains an exchangeВӯcorrelation functional which is unknown, and to get
further into the description, chapter 4 explains manyВӯbody perturbation theory. We derive the RPA
and explain its connection to the TDDFT expression. We then derive the BSE and explain how it
can be used to describe excitons in matter. We describe why the BSE is computationally heavy,
and how we can reduce the problem by using the TammВӯDancoff approximation.
In chapter 5 we propose four different hybrid approaches, combining the RPA and BSE calculaВӯ
tions in different ways. One of these hybrids makes use of the TDDFT expression for the electric
susceptibility.
In chapter 6 we show the results of our first investigations. We consider how using the TammВӯ
Dancoff approximation in the BSE changes the results for the electric susceptibility, and how to
improve the results under its limitations. The evaluations are done on bulk silicon. We show that
by careful consideration to the dynamics of the approximation, we are able to create very accurate
predictions for the optical spectra.
In chapter 7 we present the main results of this thesis. Here we show refractive indices and EELS
spectra found from electric susceptibilities calculated with the hybrids on four materials together
with experimental data. We compare the hybrid approaches, evaluate their strengths and weakВӯ
nesses, and discuss their use cases.
In chapter 8 we conclude on the work done in this project and discuss interesting future investigaВӯ
tions that can be made on the basis of the findings in this work.
Additional discussion of theory and results, as well as convergence tests for all calculations perВӯ
formed, may be found in appendix AВӯI.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Understanding Electric Susceptibility and
Its Connection to Optical Spectra
2.1
Absorption, refractive indices and extinction coefficients
This section takes a classical approach as a first step to explore the electric susceptibility. We will
investigate how the electric susceptibility can be employed to describe some wellВӯknown and meaВӯ
surable phenomena in nature by deriving the connections to some physical quantities known from
classical electromagnetism. This motivates our search for the electric susceptibility and enables us
to later compare our calculations to experimental data. The discussion in this section takes outset
in [4].
In general, we would like to describe how electric fields interact with and propagate through media.
For this, we need the Maxwell equations, which in matter read,
вҲҮВ· D = ПҒf
вҲҮВ· B = 0
вҲҮГ— E = вҲ’вҲӮB
вҲӮt
вҲҮГ— H = J + вҲӮD
вҲӮt ,
(2.1)
where E and B are the electric and magnetic fields respectively, ПҒf is the free charge density and
J is the current density. The HВӯfield is defined as H = B/Вө0 вҲ’M, where M is the magnetization
of the material and Вө0 = 4ПҖ В· 10вҲ’7 H/m is the vacuum permeability. In a linear medium the
magnetization is proportional to the HВӯfield,
M = ПҮMH,
(2.2)
where ПҮm is the magnetic susceptibility of the medium. Hence the magnetic field can be written
as,
B = Вө0ВөrH, where Вөr = 1 + ПҮm,
(2.3)
where Вөr is the relative permeability of the medium.
The DВӯfield, or the displacement field, is defined as
D = Оө0E + P,
(2.4)
where Оө0 = 8.85 В· 10вҲ’12 F/m is the vacuum permittivity and P is the polarization of the material.
The polarization accounts for the induced electric field of a dielectric medium due to an external
electric field and is defined as the electric dipole moment per unit volume. In a dielectric, the
electrons are bound to the atoms, but when subject to an electric field they will shift from their
average equilibrium positions, having the negatively charged electrons displaced opposite to the
direction of the electric field and the positively charged core displaced in the direction of the field.
Hence each atom constitutes a small electric dipole, and when summed up they create a macroВӯ
scopic polarization of the material. Thus, the external electric field makes the charges respond by
rearranging themselves creating an opposing field that partially cancels the external field. This
effect is also known as screening. In this way, eq. (2.4) implies that the EВӯfield, being the total
electrical field, is the external DВӯfield minus the induced field counteracting the external one.
In a linear, homogeneous and isotropic material the polarization is related to the electric field as,
P = Оө0ПҮE,
(2.5)
Chapter 2. Understanding Electric Susceptibility and Its Connection to Optical Spectra
3
==PAGE:10==
where ПҮ is the electric susceptibility of the material. And so ПҮ is a linear response function conВӯ
necting the polarization of the dielectric to the electric field. In this case, the displacement field
becomes
D = ОөE, where Оө = Оө0Оөr and Оөr = 1 + ПҮ.
(2.6)
We call Оө the permittivity and Оөr the dielectric function. The dielectric function is also called the
relative permittivity since it is defined as the ratio between the dielectric function and vacuum
permittivity. Оөr is related to the electric susceptibility as written in eq. (2.6), and thus we will
sometimes work with this quantity instead of directly with the electric susceptibility. Since Оөr
relates the total electric field to the external one, and the total electric field is the sum of the external
field and the polarization, it encodes the material response to an external field. Оөr, since measuring
the dielectric function relative to the vacuum permittivity, will be larger than 1, and thus eq. (2.6)
tells us that the external field will be larger than the total one, meaning that the material response
consists of a charge redistribution lowering the total field. That is, the charges redistribute in such
way that they screen the external field. Just like ПҮ, the dielectric function is then a linear response
function. We will return to this in the next section.
Note that we have encountered a limitation of this thesis. We aim at describing the linear response
of a material to an electrical field, but will not be able to account for nonlinear responses. We furВӯ
ther note that the electric and magnetic susceptibility, together with the dielectric function and the
relative permeability, are all material specific functions. They depend on the microscopic structure
of the material, and classically they would have to be determined experimentally.
Lets assume that we are in a medium with no free charges or currents, such that ПҒf = 0 and
J = 0. Substituting eq. (2.3) and (2.6) into the third and fourth equation of the Maxwell eqs. (2.1)
respectively, we then have that
вҲҮГ— E = вҲ’Вө0Вөr
вҲӮH
вҲӮt ,
вҲҮГ— H = Оө0Оөr
вҲӮE
вҲӮt .
(2.7)
We take the curl on both sides of the first equation of (2.7) and employ the second equation to
write,
вҲҮГ— (вҲҮГ— E) = вҲ’Вө0Вөr
вҲӮ
вҲӮtвҲҮГ— H = вҲ’Вө0ВөrОө0Оөr
вҲӮ2E
вҲӮt2 .
(2.8)
Now since ПҒf = 0 and using eq. (2.6) in the first Maxwell equation of (2.1), we have that
вҲҮВ· D = 0 вҮ’Оө0ОөrвҲҮВ· E = 0.
(2.9)
Assuming that we are not at the plasma frequency, such that Оөr Мё= 0, we may write the leftВӯhand
side of eq. (2.8) as
вҲҮГ— (вҲҮГ— E) = вҲҮ


:0
вҲҮВ· E

вҲ’вҲҮ2E = вҲ’вҲҮ2E.
(2.10)
And eq. (2.8) then becomes,
вҲҮ2E = Вө0ВөrОө0Оөr
вҲӮ2E
вҲӮt2 .
(2.11)
This is the wave equation which in general reads,
вҲҮ2u = 1
v2
вҲӮ2u
вҲӮt2 ,
(2.12)
where v is the speed of light in the media. Comparing eq. (2.11) and (2.12) we see that in free
space, where Оөr = Вөr = 1, and where v = c since c is the speed of light in vacuum, we have that
c =
1
вҲҡВө0Оө0
.
(2.13)
4
2.1. Absorption, refractive indices and extinction coefficients
==PAGE:11==
Nonmagnetic materials do per definition not become magnetized in response to an applied HВӯfield,
and thus it follows from eq. (2.3) that the magnetic susceptibility must be close to zero. Thus, in
the case of nonmagnetic materials, eq. (2.3) implies that relative permeability is then close to 1,
Вөr = 1. In this case, comparing eq. (2.11) and (2.12), and using eq. (2.13), we then obtain,
1
v2 = Оөr
c2 вҮ’c
v = вҲҡОөr.
(2.14)
The quantity, c/v is the definition of the refractive index n. It describes how light is deflected
when it encounters the media due to refraction. In general however, both the refractive index and
the dielectric function are complex quantities and depend on frequency of the incoming wave. And
so from eq. (2.14) we have that
Лңn =
p
ЛңОөr.
(2.15)
The complex refractive index can be separated into its real and imaginary parts as,
Лңn = n + iОә.
(2.16)
And we define the complex dielectric function as,
ЛңОөr = Оө1 + iОө2.
(2.17)
The real part, n, is then the refractive index as defined above, and Оә is called the extinction coefВӯ
ficient. Оә describes how much attenuation we have in the medium. From eq. (2.15) we now see
that
n = Re(
p
ЛңОөr),
Оә = Im(
p
ЛңОөr).
(2.18)
Using eq. (2.15) and (2.16) we may write,
n + iОә =
вҲҡ
Оө1 + iОө2
вҮ’n2 вҲ’Оә2 + 2inОә = Оө1 + iОө2
вҮ’Оө1 = n2 вҲ’Оә2, Оө2 = 2nОә.
(2.19)
We can relate the extinction coefficient to the absorption of the material. This is done by considerВӯ
ing the plane wave solution to the wave eq. (2.11) thereby obtaining an electric field propagating
in the zВӯdirection,
E = E0ei(kzвҲ’Пүt),
(2.20)
where E0 is the amplitude of the wave, Пү is the angular frequency of the wave and k is the wave
vector related to the wavelength О» and the complex refractive index, k = 2ПҖ/(О»/Лңn). Since О» =
2ПҖc/Пү in vacuum, we can write the wave vector as
k = ПүЛңn
c
= Пү
c (n + iОә),
(2.21)
and substituting this into eq. (2.20), we have that
E = E0ei( Пү
c (n+iОә)zвҲ’Пүt) = E0eвҲ’Пү
c Оәzei( Пүn
c zвҲ’Пүt).
(2.22)
From this it is clear that the wave decays exponentially into the medium. In general the intensity
of the wave can be found as I вҲқEEвҲ—, such that
I вҲқeвҲ’2Пү
c Оәz.
(2.23)
Further, from Beers law,
I = eвҲ’Оұz,
(2.24)
2.1. Absorption, refractive indices and extinction coefficients
5
==PAGE:12==
where Оұ is the absorption coefficient. By comparing eq. (2.23) to eq. (2.24) we find the connection
between the extinction and absorption coefficients,
Оұ = 2Пү
c Оә.
(2.25)
From the analysis it is now clear that the electric susceptibility is related to the dielectric function
initially through eq. (2.6). We have further stated that the dielectric function is a complex quantity,
and taking the square root of it, we see in eq. (2.18) that the real part yields the refractive index
and the imaginary part yields the extinction coefficient of the material, and then though eq. (2.25),
the absorption of the material.
2.1.1
Generalized theory
The theory presented above was simplified in order to present some points on how the electric
susceptibility contains information about material response to external fields. When we defined
the electric susceptibility and the dielectric function in eq. (2.5) and (2.6) we assumed that the
material in consideration was isotropic and homogeneous. We would like to generalize the theory.
In an anisotropic medium, ПҮ and Оө are tensors, and in an inhomogeneous medium we need to let ПҮ
and Оө be functions of the position.
Further, we will be using a slightly different formulation of the dielectric function than the one
given in eq. (2.6), which will also make more clear the physical interpretation of the displacement
field and the dielectric function. From the definition of the DВӯfield, eq. (2.4), we see that the total
electric field, the EВӯfield, is the DВӯfield minus the induced field corresponding to the polarization,
P. The total electric field must be the external field minus the induced one. Instead of speaking
directly of electric fields, the theory may also be expressed in terms of potentials. Also taking into
account that the material can be anisotropic and inhomogeneous, we may then instead write eq.
(2.6) as [5],
Оҙ(vtot(r, Пү)) =
Z
ОөвҲ’1
r (r, rвҖІ, Пү)vext(rвҖІ, Пү)drвҖІ.
(2.26)
Where Оҙ(vtot(r, Пү)) is a change in the total potential and vext is the external potential. ОөвҲ’1
r
relates
the external potential and the change in the total potential, and thus it encodes the material response
in the form of a screening process as also described in the previous section.
2.2
Electronic excitations in optical spectra
As was found out in the previous section, the electric susceptibility enables us to describe the
absorption of a dielectric. In this section we describe some types of electronic excitations, namely
excitons and plasmons, that can sometimes be observed in optical spectra. We will later need this
theory to describe strengths and weaknesses of models for finding the electric susceptibility and to
understand and interpret obtained results.
2.2.1
Excitons
When an incoming particle, that could be a photon, excites an electron from the valence band into
the conduction band creating a hole in the valence band, the electron and hole are bound together
by the screened attractive Coulomb interaction W between them. The electronВӯhole pair is what
we call an exciton [4]. Screening refers to the fact, that other charged particles surrounding the
electron/hole cancels some of the Coulomb potential binding the exciton together. When light
excites electrons from the valence bands into the conduction bands, the frequency of the light will
match that energy difference between the two bands. And so, normally, the incoming photon will
have an energy of at least the band gap in order to excite the system, but the attractive potential
between the pair lowers the energy, and thus we are able to observe excitonic peaks at energies
less than that of the band gap. Note however that excitons also may lie above the band gap, thus
6
2.2. Electronic excitations in optical spectra
==PAGE:13==
affecting the spectrum at larger energies too. But at large enough energies, the binding energy
becomes too weak, and the effect of excitons becomes negligible. There is not a clear point at
which this happens. In a first description, the exciton can be modelled as a hydrogenВӯlike system.
The energy of the excitons inside the band gap, En, is then given as [4],
En = Eg вҲ’Вө
m0
1
Оө2r
RH
n2 ,
(2.27)
where Eg is the energy of the band gap, and the last term is the excitation energy of the excitons,
similar to that of the hydrogen atom. However, since we describe the excitons in matter and not in
free space, the vacuum permittivity is replaced by the dielectric function of the medium in which
the excitons are, and the mass of a free electron, m0, is replaced by the effective mass, Вө, of the
exciton. RH is the Rydberg constant and n is an integer, revealing that the excitons create a series of
separate peaks in the spectrum. Excitonic peaks below the band gap can for example be observed
experimentally in bulk MoS2 as seen in figure 2.1 found by [6] using soВӯcalled spectroscopic
ellipsometry.
Figure 2.1: Experimentally found imaginary part of the dielectric function for Bulk MoS2. The
two rather sharp peaks at low frequencies are excitons. Data obtained from [6].
The exciton can move through the crystal transporting energy. The strength and stability of the
exciton is determined by multiple conditions. The pair is more strongly bound if they have the
same group velocityНҫ otherwise they will drift apart while moving through the crystal. The group
velocity is given as
vG = 1
Д§
вҲӮE
вҲӮk ,
(2.28)
which implies that we will see more strongly bound excitons when the valence and conduction
bands are parallel. Secondly, the screened attractive potential between the electron and hole needs
to be strong enough to bind the pair and to protect it against collisions with phonons. The maximal
energy of a phonon is on the order kBT, and so the binding energy should exceed this. Therefore,
we are more likely to see excitonic peaks in the spectrum at low temperatures. This effect is for
example seen in GaAs in figure 2.2 obtained from [7]. It is important to note, that also at higher
temperatures do the excitons affect the spectrum, but they are less pronounced as they are more
loosely bound. Neglecting excitonic effects, it can be derived classically that the absorption should
be proportional to the square root of the energy [4], but due to excitons at room temperature, the
initial rise in absorption will be somewhat more abrupt than this.
2.2. Electronic excitations in optical spectra
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Experimentally found absorption spectrum for GaAs. The round dots are from an exВӯ
periment at 294 K, the squares at 186 K, the triangles at 90 K and the dots at 21 K. We clearly see
how the excitonic peak becomes more pronounced at lower temperatures. At about room temperВӯ
ature, we do however also see a more sharp rise in the absorption spectrum than the theoretically
predicted square root behaviour. Figure obtained from [7].
The binding energy depends on how strongly the electron and hole interact through the screened
Coulomb interaction. If the screening in the material is small, the screened coulomb interaction
between them is larger, and they are more likely to form a stable exciton. If, on the other hand,
the screening is very large, they are only weakly bound Вӯ if at all Вӯ and will not see them in the
spectrum. That is the case for metals, and thus we do not observe excitons in metals. The Coulomb
attraction between the electron and hole means that they are drawn closer together which increases
the overlap between their wave functions. FermiвҖҷs Golden rule then implies, that this causes an
increase in transitions rate, yielding more intense absorption [4]. And so, excitonic absorption
peaks can be quite large compared to the continuous part of the spectrum.
In general, we distinguish between two types of excitons, the Frenkel and the MottВӯWannier. The
Frenkel excitons are tightly bound excitons, and often the electron and hole will be on the same
atom. These are very localized excitons and if they are to move through the material it is done
by hopping between neighboring atoms. They are typically observed in rare gas crystals, alkali
halides and molecular crystals [4]. The MottВӯWannier excitons on the other are more weakly bound
excitons and can consist of an electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band of
semiconductors [4]. These are the excitons that we consider in this project.
A way of modelling excitons in the spectrum is through the BetheВӯSalpeter equation (BSE). We
will go much more into depth with the BSE and its derivation in section 4.4. But to get the a first
glimpse of the physics, we shortly consider a 1D chain of atoms forming a valence and a conduction
band, following the note of [8]. The system can be modelled with a Hamiltonian, H, consisting
of a nonВӯinteracting and interacting part, H0 and HвҖІ, both consisting of the operators, ЛҶbвҖ /ЛҶb which,
when having the subscript c, creates/annihilates an electron in the conduction bands, and when
having the subscript v creates/annihilates a hole in the valence band. The nonВӯinteracting part is a
tight binding Hamiltonian with nearest neighbor hopping,
H0 = E0 вҲ’
X
n
ОөvЛҶbвҖ 
nvЛҶbnv + ОөcЛҶbвҖ 
ncЛҶbnc вҲ’t

ЛҶbвҖ 
nvЛҶb(n+1)v + ЛҶbвҖ 
nvЛҶb(nвҲ’1)v + ЛҶbвҖ 
ncЛҶb(n+1)c + ЛҶbвҖ 
ncЛҶb(nвҲ’1)c

.
(2.29)
The attractive Coulomb interaction can be found as
HвҖІ = вҲ’
X
n,m
U
1 + |n вҲ’m|
ЛҶbвҖ 
cnЛҶbcnЛҶbвҖ 
vmЛҶbvm,
(2.30)
where U is the onВӯsite Coulomb interaction, inversely proportional to the screening.
8
2.2. Electronic excitations in optical spectra
==PAGE:15==
The zeroВӯmomentum states can be described as
|ПҲn,q=0вҹ©=
1
вҲҡ
N
NвҲ’1
X
m=0
ЛҶbвҖ 
(n+m)cЛҶbвҖ 
mv|0вҹ©b.
(2.31)
The state describes the creation of a hole in the valence band at unit cell m and the creation of an
electron in the unit cell n + m, i.e. the electron and hole are separated by n unit cells in real space.
Using these elements to create a N Г—N matrix version of the Hamiltonian we may find the eigenВӯ
values,
Hnm =

Оөc вҲ’Оөv вҲ’
U
n + 1

Оҙnm вҲ’2tОҙn,mВұ1.
(2.32)
The eigenvalues can then be used to determine the imaginary part of the dielectric function, i.e.
the absorption spectrum, which will have poles in the energies corresponding to the eigenvalues.
That this is so will be shown later, but for now, the point just is that the Hamiltonian will give us
excitation energies below the band gap. A plot of the density of states (DOS) for the excitation
states is shown in figure 2.3. Here we see that a stronger binding energy modelled by the parameter
U creates discrete states below the band gap.
Figure 2.3: Plot of the density of states for excitations plotted for two values of the onВӯsite Coulomb
interaction U obtained from finding the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian in eq. (2.32). The energy
of the valence band is put to 0, Оөv = 0, while the energy of the conduction band is Оөc = U + 5
which is why the two plots are separated from each other. When the interaction is weak, U = 1,
no excitonic peaks occur. But when it is stronger, U = 10, we see some excitation peaks below the
continuum of excitations, which are excitations from the valence to the conduction bandsНҫ these
discrete peaks are excitons.
2.2.2
Plasmons
At larger excitation energies, under the right conditions, it is possible to observe soВӯcalled plasВӯ
monic peaks. In principle, we also have excitons at these larger energies, but they are less visible
due to screening, and instead the dominant feature is the plasmons. In a plasma, we have a colВӯ
lection of charges in equilibrium, but if a region with excess charge is created, it will be pushed
away from its original position by the surrounding charges. The velocity achieved by this process
will make the charges overshoot their original position and create an oscillating movement. This is
what we call plasma oscillations: these are collections of longitudinal excitations of the electrons
in the material, and a quantum of this is what we call a plasmon [4].
In a material with no average charge density, the first of the Maxwell eqs., (2.1), reads
вҲҮВ· (Оө0ОөrE) = 0,
(2.33)
2.2. Electronic excitations in optical spectra
9
==PAGE:16==
which is satisfied for transversely polarized waves. But if Оөr = 0 the material can carry longitudiВӯ
nally polarized waves, and this is therefore the condition under which we can observe plasmons.
In a simple Lorentz oscillator model, it is possible to show that an approximation to the plasma
frequency is [4],
Пүp =
 nee2
Оө0m0

,
(2.34)
where m0 is the effective mass and ne is the electron density. Considering plasmons we often
think about metals since these can be modeled as free electron gases with the potential for makВӯ
ing this collective longitudinal oscillation. But since we would like to study materials with more
complex spectra in this project, by which we mean that at lower energies we also observe excitons,
we would really like to consider plasmons in semiconductors. Overall, the dynamics behind the
semiconductor plasmons are the same as in metals. But in metals, all electrons and holes are in
the conduction band, and so, when the system gets excited at the plasma frequency, the excitation
is an intraband transition. In semiconductors on the other hand, the electrons in the valence band
have to be excited across the band gap, and it is instead an interband excitation that constitutes the
plasmon [9]. The mathematical description of the plasmons is then a bit more complex since we
cannot just use the free electron gas model, and also because plasmons at lower frequencies can
be influenced by excitons. In [9] they propose a better model for plasmons in undoped semiconВӯ
ductors. It is also possible that free charges e.g. from doping or impurities, can create metalВӯlike
plasmons in the semiconductor, or that we are able to excite surface plasmons [4]. A more detailed
description is beyond the scope of this thesis, but more information can be found in [9] and [4].
It is the longВӯrange part of the Coulomb interaction which is responsible for the creation of plasВӯ
mons [10]. This statement seems reasonable since the plasmonic oscillation is a collective reВӯ
sponse, thus relying on the charges interacting across longer distances. The BSE, that was shortly
mentioned in the section above, does in principle contain this longВӯrange component of the Coulomb
interaction and thus, in theory, it is able to capture plasmonic effects. However, there are two
problems in regard to describing plasmons with the BSE. One is that since the method is comВӯ
putationally expensive, we are only able to include a few bands in the calculations. The plasВӯ
mons are typically present at larger energies, and thus, to capture the plasmonic response, we need
many electronic bands in the calculation, making the BSE unsuited for this type of investigation.
Figure 2.4: Plot (a) is an experimenВӯ
tally found EELS spectrum for bulk silВӯ
icon. We see a clear plasmonic peak
at around 18 eV. Figure obtained from
[11]
Further, as will become clearer later on, the BSE makes
use of the TammВӯDancoff approximation, which works
better if the longВӯrange component of the Coulomb interВӯ
action is taken out of the calculations [10]. However, the
plasmons are also captured by another manyВӯbody perВӯ
turbation method, namely the Random Phase ApproxiВӯ
mation (RPA), which is a mean field method much less
computationally costly. The RPA too contains the longВӯ
range Coulomb interaction and is then capable of capturВӯ
ing the plasmonic effects.
The plasmons, and if we are at low energies also the exciВӯ
tons, can be observed through electron energy loss specВӯ
troscopy (EELS). See for example figure 2.4 obtained
from [11] displaying some experimental EELS data for
silicon. In EELS, electrons at different energies are emitВӯ
ted onto the sample and by measuring the reduced enerВӯ
gies and momenta of the electrons after they have interВӯ
acted with the material, one obtains a spectrum that conВӯ
tains peaks at the plasma frequency Пүp [2]. In qВӯresolved
10
2.2. Electronic excitations in optical spectra
==PAGE:17==
EELS, the momentum transfer can be found by measuring the deflection angle after the electrons
have interacted with the sample. The electrons transfer momenta corresponding to different wave
vectors q. The transferred energy for some specific q is then the initial energy of the electron minus
the final energy. EELS that are not qВӯresolved contain the sum of all momentum transfers. In this
project, we have only considered photons, which implies zero momentum transfer q = 0. Thus,
ideally, we would like to obtain data from qВӯresolved EELS such that we can consider q = 0 specВӯ
tra. However, it has not always been possible to find qВӯresolved EELS, and nonВӯqВӯresolved EELS
is then considered to be better than no benchmarking at all. Especially since the q = 0 spectrum
is dominant in the spectrum compared to other qВӯvectors.
EELS is related to the dielectric function [2],
EELS = вҲ’Im
 ОөвҲ’1
r (q, Пү)

.
(2.35)
Since the longitudinal oscillations are only possible at Оөr = 0, incoming light with frequencies
corresponding to the plasma frequencies, Пү = Пүp, will create strong peaks in the EELS spectrum.
The dielectric function is a matrix and in reciprocal space, the matrix entries correspond to differВӯ
ent reciprocal lattice vectors, G, GвҖІ. Since we are searching for longВӯrange responses in order to
capture plasmonic effects, we are only interested in the macroscopic component corresponding to
G = GвҖІ = 0 in eq. (2.35).
2.3
Summary
In this section we saw that a medium will respond to an applied external field by redistributing
the charges and thereby creating a net polarization. In the case where we have a linear material,
the polarization is related to the total electric field through the electric susceptibility ПҮ. Thus, the
electric susceptibility describes a linear response of the system corresponding to redistributions of
charge densities as a result of the electric field present in the media creating an overall polarization.
Likewise, the dielectric function ОөвҲ’1
r
is a linear response function relating the total potential to the
externally applied one encoding how charges will redistribute in order to screen the externally
applied field. We have seen that these two quantities are related to each other, and that they enable
us to find important optical quantities like the absorption, extinction coefficient, refractive index
and EELS spectra. Finally we described that optical spectra can be influence by bound electronВӯ
hole pairs called excitons creating excitation states below the band gap of the material. We also
described plasmons, being collective, longitudinal charge oscillations.
Both the electric susceptibility and the dielectric function describe the response of charges inside
the material, i.e. they describe dynamical processes of particles governed by the laws of quantum
mechanics. In electromagnetism the particles are treated as classical objects with definite posiВӯ
tion and momenta and they only interact through electromagnetic fields. However, to accurately
account for the material response, we need to describe the system using time dependent quantum
mechanics. Thus we need to investigate time dependent quantum mechanics within the framework
of linear response theory. This is what we will do in the next chapter.
2.3. Summary
11
==PAGE:18==
12
2.3. Summary
==PAGE:19==
3
Linear Response Theory and TDDFT:
Defining Electric Susceptibility
In this section we dive deeper into the physics behind the electric susceptibility and the dielectric
function. In the previous section we saw how they are both defined as linear response functions, and
we will now look into the consequences of this and how it enables us to create equations for them,
thus working beyond classical electromagnetism where they could only be found experimentally.
In this section we therefore develop the tools for describing time dependence in quantum mechanВӯ
ics. We give the Kubo formula, and we show how this leads to an expression for the electric
susceptibility. We consider the expression in the nonВӯinteracting case. And we derive a connecВӯ
tion to the dielectric function. Often the systems in consideration will have periodic structures, so
we rewrite the expressions for the electric susceptibility and the dielectric function for this case.
We finally show that the electric susceptibility obeys the KramersВӯKronig relation and discuss the
consequences of that.
3.1
Time dependence in quantum mechanics
In time dependent quantum mechanics we would like to describe how states and observables repreВӯ
sented by hermitian operators develop as time progresses. To describe the time dependence of the
system, we generally work within three pictures, the Heisenberg picture, the SchrГ¶dinger picture
and the Interaction picture. In the following, we use the definitions from [12].
In the SchrГ¶dinger picture we assume that the Hamiltonian does not depend on time. The time
dependence of the states can be found as,
|ПҲ(t)вҹ©= eвҲ’i ЛҶHt|ПҲ0вҹ©,
(3.1)
where we are working in natural units, i.e. Д§ = 1. The operators may or may not depend on time,
but their time dependence is not described within this picture. Thus, it is mostly useful to apply
this picture if the operators are time independent.
In the Heisenberg picture, the Hamiltonian is still assumed to not depend on time. The states are
time independent, and the time dependence of the operators can be found as
ЛҶA(t) = ei ЛҶHt ЛҶAeвҲ’i ЛҶHt.
(3.2)
Both the Heisenberg and SchrГ¶dinger picture however assumed that the Hamiltonian did not deВӯ
pend on time. In general, the quantum mechanical objects in our material will be interacting with
each other and the surroundings and therefore the Hamiltonian will be evolving in time. To deal
with this, the interaction picture separates the Hamiltonian, H into a nonВӯinteracting, H0, and inВӯ
teracting part, V (t), which can be time dependent,
ЛҶH = ЛҶH0 + ЛҶV (t).
(3.3)
In the interaction picture, the time dependence of the operators can simply be described by the
nonВӯinteracting part of the Hamiltonian,
ЛҶAI(t) = ei ЛҶH0tAIeвҲ’i ЛҶH0t,
(3.4)
Chapter 3. Linear Response Theory and TDDFT: Defining Electric Susceptibility
13
==PAGE:20==
where the subscript I indicates that the operator is in the interaction picture. The time dependence
of the states is given as,
|ПҲ(t)вҹ©I = ei ЛҶH0t|ПҲ(t)вҹ©,
(3.5)
where |ПҲ(t)вҹ©is in the SchrГ¶dinger picture. Taking the time derivative on both side of eq. (3.5) and
using eq. (3.1) and (3.3) we obtain
iвҲӮt|ПҲ(t)вҹ©I = вҲ’ЛҶH0ei ЛҶH0t|ПҲ(t)вҹ©+ iei ЛҶH0tвҲӮt|ПҲ(t)вҹ©
= ei ЛҶH0t(вҲ’ЛҶH0 + ЛҶH)|ПҲ(t)вҹ©= ei ЛҶH0t ЛҶV (t)|ПҲ(t)вҹ©= ЛҶVI(t)|ПҲ(t)вҹ©I.
(3.6)
And so we have a differential equation for the state in the interaction picture containing only the
interacting part of the Hamiltonian. The time dependence of the states can also be written as
|ПҲвҹ©I(t) = ЛҶUI(t, t0)|ПҲ(t0)вҹ©I.
(3.7)
ЛҶUI(t, t0) is also called the timeВӯevolution operator since it evolves the state in time t0, ПҲ(t0), to a
later time t, ПҲ(t). Substituting this state into eq. (3.6) we obtain that,
iвҲӮt ЛҶUI(t, t0)|ПҲ(t0)вҹ©I = ЛҶVI(t) ЛҶUI(t, t0)|ПҲ(t0)вҹ©I,
(3.8)
from which we read off that
iвҲӮt ЛҶUI(t, t0) = ЛҶVI(t) ЛҶUI(t, t0).
(3.9)
Integrating this on both sides and dividing by i we have that
ЛҶUI(t, t0) = вҲ’i
Z t
t0
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ) ЛҶUI(tвҖІ, t0)dtвҖІ + C,
(3.10)
where C is an integration constant. From eq. (3.7) it is clear that we have the boundary condition
ЛҶUI(t0, t0) = 1. Thus, C = 1 and we see that ЛҶUI(t, t0) fulfills the selfВӯconsistent equation,
ЛҶUI(t, t0) = 1 вҲ’i
Z t
t0
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ) ЛҶUI(tвҖІ, t0)dtвҖІ.
(3.11)
This may be expanded as an infinite series by iteration. From this it becomes clear that the interВӯ
action picture offers a simple time dependence of the operators at the expense of a complicated
time dependence of the states. Thus, the time dependence of the states in this picture must be
approximated. For this, we use linear response theory.
3.2
Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
In linear response theory we let the interaction term ЛҶVI(t) be a small perturbation to the unperturbed
Hamiltonian ЛҶH0, and in this way it is justified to only include terms up to first order in ЛҶVI(t) such
that [12],
ЛҶUI(t, t0) вүҲ1 вҲ’i
Z t
t0
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)dtвҖІ.
(3.12)
In appendix A, following the note of [13], we show that under the assumption that the perturbaВӯ
tion was turned on adiabatically a long time ago (t0 вҶ’вҲ’вҲһ) such that ЛҶVI(t) = eвҲ’i(Пү+iО·)t ЛҶVI =
eiH0teвҲ’i(Пү+iО·)t ЛҶV eвҲ’iH0t, the perturbation leads to a change in the expectation value of some operВӯ
ator ЛҶA(t),
ОҙвҹЁЛҶA(Пү)вҹ©=
X
s
 
вҹЁ0| ЛҶA|sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶV |0вҹ©
E0 вҲ’Es + Пү + iО· вҲ’
вҹЁ0| ЛҶV |sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶA|0вҹ©
Es вҲ’E0 + Пү + iО·
!
,
(3.13)
14
3.2. Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
==PAGE:21==
which is the Kubo formula. The states |sвҹ©are eigenstates of the unperturbed Hamiltonian ЛҶH0 with
eigenvalues Es, and the state |0вҹ©is the ground state with energy E0. Now from this we can find the
electric susceptibility. The electric susceptibility accounts for the charge redistribution resulting
from applying an external field: we are therefore looking for the change in expectation value of the
charge density operator, ЛҶA(t) = ЛҶn(t), due to a perturbation of the form ЛҶV =
R
vext(r, Пү)ЛҶn(r)dr.
Substituting this into eq. (3.13) we then have that [13],
ОҙвҹЁЛҶn(r, Пү)вҹ©=
Z X
s
вҹЁ0|ЛҶn(r)|sвҹ©вҹЁs|ЛҶn(rвҖІ)|0вҹ©
E0 вҲ’Es + Пү + iО·
вҲ’вҹЁ0|ЛҶn(rвҖІ)|sвҹ©вҹЁs|ЛҶn(r)|0вҹ©
Es вҲ’E0 + Пү + iО·

vext(rвҖІ, Пү)drвҖІ
=
Z
ПҮ(r, rвҖІ, Пү)vext(rвҖІ, Пү)drвҖІ.
(3.14)
Note how the electric susceptibility is the term connecting the external field to a change in the elecВӯ
tron density, i.e. a polarization of the material, as already discussed. As the expression suggests,
we may read off the electric susceptibility,
ПҮ(r, rвҖІ, Пү) =
X
s
вҹЁ0|ЛҶn(r)|sвҹ©вҹЁs|ЛҶn(rвҖІ)|0вҹ©
E0 вҲ’Es + Пү + iО·
вҲ’вҹЁ0|ЛҶn(rвҖІ)|sвҹ©вҹЁs|ЛҶn(r)|0вҹ©
Es вҲ’E0 + Пү + iО·

.
(3.15)
The expression describes how the density in the point r changes due to a perturbation in the density
in some other point rвҖІ [13]. Therefore, we rename the electric susceptibility the densityВӯdensity
response function, or, in short, the density response function. Eq. (3.15) is then the density response
function in the Lehmann representation, referring to the fact that we have used the eigenstates |sвҹ©
of the unperturbed Hamiltonian as basis set. The poles in the expression, Пү = Вұ(Es вҲ’E0) are
the excitation energies of the system. If the frequency is the plasma frequency, Пү = Пүp, then |sвҹ©is
the plasma wave function. Although we now know this formal expression for the density response
function in eq. (3.15), we are in general not able to determine the manyВӯbody eigenstates |sвҹ©for
the unperturbed Hamiltonian ЛҶH0. If there are no interactions between the electrons, the states |sвҹ©
are however single particle eigenstates and we may write them in terms of Slater determinants.
Therefore we will now determine an expression for the nonВӯinteracting density response function,
ПҮ0, from eq. (3.15), containing only elements that we are actually able to calculate.
3.2.1
NonВӯinteraction density response function
Still with the outset in [13], we determine the nonВӯinteracting density response function in this
section. Initially, we use that the number density operator is defined as
ЛҶn(r) = ЛҶОЁвҖ (r)ЛҶОЁ(r),
(3.16)
where ЛҶОЁвҖ  and ЛҶОЁ are operators creating and annihilating position eigenvectors respectively,
ЛҶОЁвҖ (r)|0вҹ©= |rвҹ©.
(3.17)
Applying the identity operator we can find an expression for ЛҶОЁвҖ (r),
ЛҶОЁвҖ (r)|0вҹ©=
X
i
|iвҹ©вҹЁi|rвҹ©=
X
i
П•вҲ—
i (r)ЛҶcвҖ 
i|0вҹ©вҮ’ОЁвҖ (r) =
X
i
П•вҲ—
i (r)ЛҶcвҖ 
i,
(3.18)
where ЛҶcвҖ 
i is the creation operator and where we used that вҹЁr|iвҹ©= П•i(r), which are the original
single particle basis functions. Substituting eq. (3.16) into the first bracket of eq. (3.15) and using
eq. (3.18),
вҹЁ0|ЛҶn(r)|sвҹ©= вҹЁ0|ЛҶОЁвҖ (r)ЛҶОЁ(r)|sвҹ©
=
X
i,j
П•вҲ—
i (r)П•j(r)вҹЁ0|ЛҶcвҖ 
iЛҶcj|sвҹ©.
(3.19)
3.2. Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
15
==PAGE:22==
Now for вҹЁ0|ЛҶcвҖ 
iЛҶcj|sвҹ©to be different from zero, we need the state i to be occupied in the ground state
|0вҹ©and j to be empty. To account for this, we introduce the occupation numbers,
fi =
(
1,
П•i is occupied
0,
П•i is empty.
(3.20)
Such that we now have that
вҹЁ0|ЛҶcвҖ 
iЛҶcj|sвҹ©= fi(1 вҲ’fj)Оҙ0,sвҲ’j+i.
(3.21)
The state s вҲ’j + i is the state obtained from s after removing an electron in state j and adding an
electron in state i. Using eq. (3.19) and (3.21) in eq. (3.15) we have
ПҮ0(r, rвҖІ, Пү)
=
X
s,i,j
m,n
fi(1 вҲ’fj)fn(1 вҲ’fm)
П•вҲ—
i (r)П•j(r)П•вҲ—
m(rвҖІ)П•n(rвҖІ)
E0 вҲ’Es + Пү + iО·
вҲ’П•вҲ—
i (rвҖІ)П•j(rвҖІ)П•вҲ—
m(r)П•n(r)
Es вҲ’E0 + Пү + iО·

Оҙ0,sвҲ’j+iОҙ0,sвҲ’m+n.
(3.22)
The Kronecker delta kills the sum over s such that the states need to satisfy, n = i and m = j.
As a consequence of this, the energy Es entering the denominator of eq. (3.15) becomes Es =
E0 вҲ’Ei + Ej and Es = E0 вҲ’En + Em.
ПҮ0(r, rвҖІ, Пү) =
X
i,j
f2
i (1 вҲ’fj)2
П•вҲ—
i (r)П•j(r)П•вҲ—
j(rвҖІ)П•i(rвҖІ)
Ei вҲ’Ej + Пү + iО·
вҲ’
П•вҲ—
i (rвҖІ)П•j(rвҖІ)П•вҲ—
j(r)П•i(r)
вҲ’Ei + Ej + Пү + iО·

(3.23)
We then use that f2 = f since f is either 1 or 0, and in the last term, we then do i вҶ”j such that
ПҮ0(r, rвҖІ, Пү) =
X
i,j
fi(1 вҲ’fj)
П•вҲ—
i (r)П•j(r)П•вҲ—
j(rвҖІ)П•i(rвҖІ)
Ei вҲ’Ej + Пү + iО·
вҲ’
X
i,j
fj(1 вҲ’fi)
П•вҲ—
j(rвҖІ)П•i(rвҖІ)П•вҲ—
i (r)П•j(r)
Ei вҲ’Ej + Пү + iО·
=
X
i,j
(fi(1 вҲ’fj) вҲ’fj(1 вҲ’fi))
П•вҲ—
i (r)П•j(r)П•вҲ—
j(rвҖІ)П•i(rвҖІ)
Ei вҲ’Ej + Пү + iО·
=
X
i,j
(fi вҲ’fj)
П•вҲ—
i (r)П•j(r)П•вҲ—
j(rвҖІ)П•i(rвҖІ)
Ei вҲ’Ej + Пү + iО·
.
(3.24)
In the nonВӯinteracting case we are able to actually calculate the density response function. The
states entering the expression are just single particle eigenstates for the singleВӯparticle Hamiltonian
which we may write up using Slater determinants, and knowing the singleВӯparticle Hamiltonian and
the states, we can find the eigenenergies by solving the singleВӯparticle SchrГ¶dinger equation. In
this project, we will find the states and energies using Density functional theory (DFT) to obtain
the nonВӯinteracting KohnВӯSham singleВӯparticle orbitals which are then used in the expressions for
the density response functions. In DFT, the ground state energies and wave functions are found
through a selfВӯconsistency problem which can be solved iteratively. The method relies on a DFT
Hamiltonian, which contains an exchangeВӯcorrelation potential. There have been developed some
different exchangeВӯcorrelation functions to approximate it. In this project we have been using
the PBE, which is explained in [14]. An explanation of the theory behind DFT can be found in
appendix B.
16
3.2. Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
==PAGE:23==
3.2.2
Connection to the dielectric function
Using eq. (2.26) and (3.14) we are able to derive a connection between the electric susceptibility
and the dielectric function. Eq. (2.26) stated that
Оҙ(vtot(r, Пү)) =
Z
ОөвҲ’1
r (r, rвҖІ, Пү)vext(rвҖІ, Пү)drвҖІ.
(3.25)
The total potential can be written as the sum of the external potential and the induced potential,
and the induced potential is a polarization which is a displacement of the electron density [5], i.e.
Оҙ(vtot(r, Пү)) = vext(r, Пү) +
Z ОҙвҹЁЛҶn(rвҖІвҖІ, Пү)вҹ©e2
0
|r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ|
drвҖІвҖІ,
(3.26)
where we have introduced a new variable [12],
e2
0 =
e2
4ПҖОө0
.
(3.27)
By comparing eq. (3.26) and (3.25), and substituting the expectation value of the density as written
in eq. (3.14), into the position of the density in eq. (3.26), we have that
Z
ОөвҲ’1
r (r, rвҖІ, Пү)vext(rвҖІ, Пү)drвҖІ = vext(r, Пү) +
Z Z e2
0ПҮ(rвҖІвҖІ, rвҖІ, Пү)vext(rвҖІ)
|r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ|
drвҖІdrвҖІвҖІ
=
Z 
Оҙ(r вҲ’rвҖІ) +
Z e2
0ПҮ(rвҖІвҖІ, rвҖІ, Пү)
|r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ|
drвҖІвҖІ

vext(rвҖІ, Пү)drвҖІ.
(3.28)
Comparing the left and right hand side of eq. (3.28) we see that the electric susceptibility and the
dielectric function are connected through the expression
ОөвҲ’1
r (r, rвҖІ, Пү) = Оҙ(r вҲ’rвҖІ) +
Z e2
0ПҮ(rвҖІвҖІ, rвҖІ, Пү)
|r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ|
drвҖІвҖІ.
(3.29)
3.2.3
Periodic systems and local field effects
Many of the systems that are relevant to consider will show periodicity in their crystal structure
and therefore it will be convenient work in reciprocal space. In this way, the representation reflects
the periodicity. In the following, we take outset in [13], and define the Fourier transform as,
ПҮ0(Q, QвҖІ, Пү) = 1
V
ZZ
eiQrПҮ0(r, rвҖІ, Пү)eвҲ’iQвҖІrвҖІdrdrвҖІ,
(3.30)
where V is the volume of the crystal, and the wave vector Q = G + q, where G is a reciprocal
lattice vector and q is a wave vector in the first Brillouin zone. With this definition of the forward
Fourier transform, the inverse transform takes the form
ПҮ0(r, rвҖІ, Пү) = 1
V
X
QQвҖІ
eвҲ’iQrПҮ0(Q, QвҖІ, Пү)eiQвҖІrвҖІ.
(3.31)
If f(r, rвҖІ) = f(r + R, rвҖІ + R) where R is a lattice vector, i.e. the function is space invariant when
translated with a direct lattice vector, then in reciprocal space f(G + q, GвҖІ + qвҖІ) = f(G + q, GвҖІ +
q)ОҙqqвҖІ. We therefore do the substitution r вҶ’r + R and rвҖІ вҶ’rвҖІ + R in the Fourier transform in
eq. (3.30), noting that d(rвҖІ + R) = drвҖІ since d
dr(r + R) = 1,
f(Q, QвҖІ) = 1
V
Z Z
eiQrf(r, rвҖІ)eвҲ’iQвҖІrвҖІdrdrвҖІ
= 1
V
Z Z
ei(G+q)(r+R)f(r + R, rвҖІ + R)eвҲ’i(GвҖІ+qвҖІ)(rвҖІ+R)drdrвҖІ
= 1
V ei(GвҲ’GвҖІ)Rei(qвҲ’qвҖІ)R
Z Z
ei(G+q)rf(r, rвҖІ)eвҲ’i(GвҖІ+qвҖІ)rвҖІdrdrвҖІ
= f(Q, QвҖІ)ei(GвҲ’GвҖІ)Rei(qвҲ’qвҖІ)R,
(3.32)
3.2. Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
17
==PAGE:24==
Per definition G is is a point in the reciprocal lattice if and only if, eiGR = 1, i.e. G В· R = 2ПҖn for
n вҲҲZ. So the first exponential in eq. (3.32) vanishes. Further, for the right hand side of eq. (3.32)
to be equal to the left hand side, we need ei(qвҲ’qвҖІ)R = 1 which is also true for (q вҲ’qвҖІ) В· R = 2ПҖn.
However, since q(вҖІ) is a vector within the first Brillouin zone, this can only happen in a set of
measure zero, i.e. q вҲ’qвҖІ = 0 is the only solution. Thus we have shown that f(G + q, GвҖІ + qвҖІ) =
f(G+q, GвҖІ+q)ОҙqqвҖІ. Now, working in reciprocal space, we label the states of (3.24) with the band
index n and the wave vector k from the first Brillouin zone. So let us write up the nonВӯinteracting
density response function, eq. (3.24), in this basis,
ПҮ0(r, rвҖІ) =
X
k,kвҖІ
X
n,m
(fnk вҲ’fmkвҖІ)П•вҲ—
nk(r)П•mkвҖІ(r)П•вҲ—
mkвҖІ(rвҖІ)П•nk(rвҖІ)
Enk вҲ’EmkвҖІ + Пү + iО·
.
(3.33)
And translate it to reciprocal space using eq. (3.30),
ПҮ0
GGвҖІ(q, Пү) = 1
V
Z Z X
n,m,
k,kвҖІ
(fnk вҲ’fmkвҖІ)П•вҲ—
nk(r)ei(G+q)rП•mkвҖІ(r)П•вҲ—
mkвҖІ(rвҖІ)eвҲ’i(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІП•nk(rвҖІ)
Enk вҲ’EmkвҖІ + Пү + iО·
drdrвҖІ,
(3.34)
where we have used the notation ПҮ0
GGвҖІ(q, Пү) = ПҮ0(G+q, GвҖІ +q, Пү). Now since we are assuming
that we are in a periodic medium, the states entering this expression must satisfy BlochвҖҷs theorem,
П•nk(r) = eikrunk(r),
(3.35)
i.e. it must be a plane wave modulated by a function unk(r) which has the same periodicity as the
lattice, unk(r + R) = unk(r). The Fourier transform in eq. (3.34) is over all space, but now any
point in space can be represented as a sum of a lattice point R and a vector r within the unit cell,
so doing the substitution r вҶ’r + R and considering the numerator in the integral over r in eq.
(3.34) we may write
Z
П•вҲ—
nk(r)ei(G+q)rП•mkвҖІ(r)dr вүЎвҹЁП•nk|ei(G+q)r|П•mkвҖІвҹ©
=
X
R
Z
unitВӯcell
eвҲ’ik(r+R)uвҲ—
nk(r + R)ei(G+q)(r+R)eikвҖІ(r+R)umkвҖІ(r + R)dr
=
X
R
ei(G+q+kвҖІвҲ’k)R
Z
unitВӯcell
eвҲ’ikruвҲ—
nk(r)ei(G+q)reikвҖІrumkвҖІ(r)dr
=
X
R
ei(q+kвҖІвҲ’k)R
Z
unitВӯcell
П•вҲ—
nk(r)ei(G+q)rП•mkвҖІ(r)dr
= Оҙk,kвҖІ+qвҹЁП•nk|ei(G+q)r|П•mkвҖІвҹ©.
(3.36)
Using this expression in the integral over rвҖІ in eq. (3.34) we obtain the expression,
ПҮ0
GGвҖІ(q, Пү) = 1
V
X
n,m,
k,kвҖІ
(fnk вҲ’fmkвҖІ)вҹЁП•nk|ei(G+q)r|П•mkвҖІвҹ©вҹЁП•mkвҖІ|eвҲ’i(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІ|П•nkвҹ©
Enk вҲ’EmkвҖІ + Пү + iО·
Оҙk,kвҖІ+qОҙk,kвҖІ+q.
(3.37)
We make the interchange of variable names k вҶ”kвҖІ such that our final expression becomes
ПҮ0
GGвҖІ(q, Пү) = 1
V
X
n,m,k
(fnk+q вҲ’fmk)вҹЁП•mk|eвҲ’i(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІ|П•nk+qвҹ©вҹЁП•nk+q|ei(G+q)r|П•mkвҹ©
Enk+q вҲ’Emk + Пү + iО·
.
(3.38)
18
3.2. Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
==PAGE:25==
To obtain the dielectric function in reciprocal space, we realize that the last term in eq. (3.28) is a
convolution in rвҖІвҖІ,
Z
vC(r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ)ПҮ(rвҖІвҖІ, rвҖІ, Пү)drвҖІвҖІ where vC(r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ) =
e2
0
|r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ|,
(3.39)
and thus the Fourier transform is just the product of the Fourier transform the Coulomb potenВӯ
tial and the density response function. The Coulomb potential in reciprocal space is derived in
appendix C. Thus, in reciprocal space, eq. (3.28) becomes
ПөвҲ’1
GGвҖІ(Пү) = ОҙGGвҖІ +
4ПҖe2
0
|q + G|2 ПҮGGвҖІ(q, Пү).
(3.40)
The different components GGвҖІ in eq. (3.40) give us information on the variations of the dielectric
function on different length scales. But the external potential will vary on a length scale much
larger than that of the unit cell. The external potential will, however, induce fluctuations on all
length scales of the system. These fluctuations induce local potentials that also have microscopic
components, and even though this will not be resolved experimentally, it will affect the long waveВӯ
length component of the total potential and thus indirectly affect the experiment [2]. In the end,
what will be measured is the component corresponding to G = GвҖІ = 0 and thus we define the
macroscopic dielectric function [5],
ПөM(Пү) = lim
qвҶ’0
1
ПөвҲ’1
00 (q, Пү).
(3.41)
We call other components with G Мё= 0 and GвҖІ Мё= 0, local field effects. These arise from microscopic
variations in the material [2]. To neglect local field effects corresponds to neglecting offВӯdiagonal
elements of ПөGGвҖІ. In this case, the matrix inversion performed when finding the macroscopic
dielectric function in eq. (3.41) will just correspond to finding the inverse value of the G = GвҖІ = 0Вӯ
component, and we will have that ПөM(Пү) = limqвҶ’0 Пө00(q, Пү). To account for local field effects
affecting the G = GвҖІ = 0Вӯcomponent we need to perform the matrix inversion before taking the
G = GвҖІ = 0Вӯcomponent.
Consider once again eq. (3.40). In this project, we consider optical transitions. Compared to
electrons, photons have very small momenta relative to their energy. And therefore, to a good
approximation, we can neglect the momentum transfer in optical transitions, which implies that
q = 0. Thus, if G = GвҖІ = 0, the Coulomb interaction being proportional to 1/|G + q|2 Вӯ see
appendix C Вӯ will diverge. However, using perturbation theory, it can shown that in fact the matrix
elements in (3.38) will be proportional to q2 thus cancelling the divergence.
LetвҖҷs develop a little further on eq. (3.41) using eq. (3.40), here taking outset in [10],
ПөM(Пү) = lim
qвҶ’0
1
ПөвҲ’1
00 (q, Пү) =
1
(1 + vC(q)ПҮ(q, Пү))00
= 1 вҲ’
 vC(q)ПҮ(q, Пү)

00
1 +
 vC
0 (q)ПҮ(q, Пү)

00
вүЎ1 вҲ’
 vC(q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)

00 ,
(3.42)
where we have introduced the irreducible density response function, ВҜПҮ, and the longВӯrange part of
the Coulomb interaction (vC
0 )GGвҖІ =
1
|q|ОҙG,0ОҙGGвҖІ. We will justify the definition and explain the
construction of the irreducible density response function in a moment, but accepting the definition
for now, from eq. (3.42) it can be seen that ВҜПҮ is linked to absorption whereas ПҮ from eq. (3.40) is
linked to loss. Recall that from eq. (2.25), the absorption is proportional to Оә which in turn through
eq. (2.19) is linked to the macroscopic dielectric function. And so, from eq. (3.42), ОөM = 1вҲ’vC
0 ВҜПҮ,
3.2. Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
19
==PAGE:26==
the irreducible density response function determines the dielectric function, which then yields the
extinction coefficient, and finally the absorption. We will also call ВҜПҮ the polarizability. And from
eq. (2.35) the loss spectrum is the imaginary part of the inverse dielectric function, which is then
linked to ПҮ via eq. (3.40).
The irreducible density response function satisfies a soВӯcalled Dyson equation, which is a type of
selfВӯconsistent equation that we will encounter multiple times in this project,
ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІ = ПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІ вҲ’
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮGGвҖІвҖІ(q, Пү)
 vC
0 (q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)

GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ
вҮ’ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІвҖІ  1 + vC
0 (q)ПҮ(q, Пү)
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ ,
(3.43)
or equivalently,
ПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІвҖІ  1 вҲ’vC
0 (q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ .
(3.44)
Due to the Coulomb interaction only being different from zero in the G = GвҖІ = 0 component, the
term inverted in eq. (3.43), 1+vC
0 (q)ПҮ(q, Пү), yields a matrix, that has ones in the diagonal except
at G = GвҖІ = 0 and which has values, vC
0 ПҮ0GвҖІ, in the first row. Now this type of matrix will have
a G = GвҖІ = 0 component in its inverse version, which is just 1 over the expression in the original
matrix. Thus, taking the G = GвҖІ = 0 component of eq. (3.43) does indeed satisfy eq. (3.42),
ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)00 =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮ(q, Пү)0,GвҖІвҖІ  1 + vC
0 (q)ПҮ(q, Пү)
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,0 =
ПҮ00(q, Пү)
1 + vC
0 (q)ПҮ00(q, Пү).
(3.45)
Assume that there exists a quantity P such that
ПҮG,GвҖІ(q, Пү) = PG,GвҖІ(q, Пү) +
X
GвҖІвҖІ
PG,GвҖІвҖІ(q, Пү)vC
GвҖІвҖІ(q)ПҮGвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ(q, Пү).
(3.46)
Substituting eq. (3.44) into this yields
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІвҖІ  1 вҲ’vC
0 (q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ = PG,GвҖІ(q, Пү)
+
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
PG,GвҖІвҖІ(q, Пү)vC
GвҖІвҖІ(q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ  1 вҲ’vC
0 (q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ .
(3.47)
Rearranging,
ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)G,GвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
PG,GвҖІвҖІ(q, Пү)
 1 вҲ’vC
0 (q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)

GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ + PG,GвҖІвҖІ(q, Пү)vC
GвҖІвҖІ(q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ
= PG,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ
PG,GвҖІвҖІ  vC
GвҖІвҖІ(q) вҲ’vC
0 (q)

ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ
= PG,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ
PG,GвҖІвҖІВҜvC
GвҖІвҖІ(q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ,
(3.48)
where we defined the truncated Coulomb interaction,
ВҜvC
G(q) = 0 for G = 0
ВҜvC
G(q) = vC
G(q) for G Мё= 0.
(3.49)
20
3.2. Linear response theory and the Kubo formula
==PAGE:27==
Note that all one has to do to obtain the polarizability, ВҜПҮ, instead of the density response function,
ПҮ, in eq. (3.46) is then to put to longВӯrange component of the Coulomb interaction to zero! At
first sight, working with the polarizability instead of the density response function may seem a
bit redundant, but in chapters 6, 7 we will most often work with the polarizability, rather than
the density response function directly. This is partly due to the fact that the polarizability is linked
more directly to the absorption and thus it allows us to omit some conversion steps, but also, as will
be shown in chapter 6, because the TammВӯDancoff approximations works better when excluding
the longВӯrange component of the Coulomb interaction. Another important point is that from eq.
(3.42), it is apparent that we can determine the EELS spectra from the polarizability, even though it
does not contain the longВӯrange component of the Coulomb interaction which is otherwise needed
in order for us to observe plasmons in the spectrum. We will just need to invert ОөM as stated in the
formula (2.35). So when determining EELS spectra later in this thesis, chapter 7, this is exactly
what we do.
3.3
The KramersВӯKronig relation
The dielectric function and the density response function are, as the name suggests, response funcВӯ
tions and the real and imaginary part are bound by causality. This is what the KramersВӯKronig
relation encodes. To derive this relation, we consider the polarization as stated initially in eq. (2.5)
but as a function of time [15],
P(t) = Оө0
Z t
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ(t вҲ’tвҖІ)E(tвҖІ)dtвҖІ = Оө0
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ(П„)E(t вҲ’П„)dП„,
ПҮ(П„) = ПҮ(П„)Оё(П„).
(3.50)
The Heaviside function ensures causalityНҫ the polarization response cannot happen before the elecВӯ
tric field is applied. In eq. (3.50) we used that multiplying a causal function by the Heaviside theta
function leaves the causal function unchanged. Now, we would like to know how the medium
responds to an incoming wave of frequency Пү, and therefore we need to Fourier transform the
expression. Eq. (3.50) is a convolution and thus the Fourier transform of P(t) is just the product
of each of the Fourier transformed functions,
P(Пү) = Оө0ПҮ(Пү)E(Пү).
(3.51)
To determine ПҮ(Пү) we use that in ПҮ(t) = Оё(t)ПҮ(t) the Heaviside function can be written as
Оё(t) = 1
2 + sign(t)
2
.
(3.52)
And the Fourier transform of this is
Оё(Пү) =
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
1
2 + sign(t)
2

eiПүtdt
= 1
2
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
eiПүt + 1
2 lim
О·вҶ’0

вҲ’
Z 0
вҲ’вҲһ
ei(ПүвҲ’iО·)tdt +
Z вҲһ
0
ei(Пү+iО·)tdt

= 1
2

2ПҖОҙ(Пү) вҲ’1
iПү вҲ’1
iПү

= ПҖОҙ(Пү) + i
Пү.
(3.53)
To find the Fourier transform of ПҮ(t)Оё(t) we then use that we may write this as a convolution,
ПҮ(Пү) =
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
eiПүtПҮ(t)Оё(t)dt = 1
2ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
Оё(ПүвҖІ вҲ’Пү)ПҮ(ПүвҖІ)dПүвҖІ
= 1
2ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ

ПҖОҙ(ПүвҖІ вҲ’Пү) вҲ’
i
ПүвҖІ вҲ’Пү

ПҮ(ПүвҖІ)dПүвҖІ
= 1
2ПҮ(Пү) вҲ’i
2ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ(ПүвҖІ)
ПүвҖІ вҲ’ПүdПүвҖІ
вҮ’ПҮ(Пү) = вҲ’i
ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ(ПүвҖІ)
ПүвҖІ вҲ’ПүdПүвҖІ.
(3.54)
3.3. The KramersВӯKronig relation
21
==PAGE:28==
Writing this up in terms of the real and imaginary part, ПҮ(Пү) = ПҮ1(Пү) + iПҮ2(Пү), we have that
ПҮ1(Пү) + iПҮ2(Пү) = вҲ’i
ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ1(ПүвҖІ) + iПҮ2(ПүвҖІ)
ПүвҖІ вҲ’Пү
dПүвҖІ = вҲ’i
ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ1(ПүвҖІ)
ПүвҖІ вҲ’ПүdПүвҖІ + 1
ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ2(ПүвҖІ)
ПүвҖІ вҲ’ПүdПүвҖІ,
(3.55)
and we may then split this into two equations for the real and imaginary part respectively,
ПҮ1(Пү) = 1
ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ2(ПүвҖІ)
ПүвҖІ вҲ’ПүdПүвҖІ
ПҮ2(Пү) = вҲ’1
ПҖ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ПҮ1(ПүвҖІ)
ПүвҖІ вҲ’ПүdПүвҖІ.
(3.56)
This is the KramersВӯKronig relation yielding the connection between the real and imaginary part
of the density response function. The transformation that relates the real and imaginary parts is
denoted a Hilbert transformation. The fact that the outset of the derivation consisted of imposing
causality by multiplying the density response function by the Heaviside function, reveals that the
real and imaginary part are bound to each other by causality. Thus, we may check if a given density
response function is causal without having to transform back to the time domain. An important
point is that the real part of a response function depends on the entire spectrum of the imaginary
part. Adding a peak in the imaginary spectrum affects the real part on all frequencies. This effect
is shown in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: 6 Lorenzian peaks added in the order indicated on the plot of the imaginary part to the
left. Every time a new peak is added, a superposition between this peak and the peaks already in
the plot is created. In the end, when all peaks are added, the superposition is constituted by the
black curve. The real part on the plot to the right shows the Hilbert transform of the imaginary
part. I.e. initially, when we only have the red peak, the real part is the red curve on the right plot.
When we add the green peak, the superposition of the red and green peak has the real part plotted
with green, and so on. Thus, finally, when the yellow curve is added, we obtain the superposition
marked with the black curve on the left plot, and therefore, the real part on the right plot is marked
with both yellow and black.
3.4
TDDFT
Up until now we have derived an exact expression for the density response function, eq. (3.15),
and its connection to the dielectric function, eq. (3.29) in real space and (3.40) in frequency space.
However, we are unable to solve the SchrГ¶dinger equation for interacting systems in order to obВӯ
tain the energies and wave functions entering these expressions. Therefore we decided to derive
expressions for the nonВӯinteraction density response function in real space, eq. (3.24), and in freВӯ
quency space, eq. (3.38). Here, the wave functions can be written as Slater determinants, and we
22
3.4. TDDFT
==PAGE:29==
can find the eigenenergies by solving the SchrГ¶dinger equation with these states and the singleВӯ
particle nonВӯinteracting Hamiltonian. In this project, actually determining eigenstates and energies
for the density response functions is done using DFT which is explained in appendix B. Employing
timeВӯdependent DFT (TDDFT), we will now find a connection between the nonВӯinteracting and
interacting density response function derived in the previous section. We will follow the derivation
in [5]. Thus, even though the nonВӯinteracting density response function at first sight seemed of litВӯ
tle use, we may find a formal connection to the full interacting one thereby justifying our interest
in it. As we will see, this otherwise exact expression that we will be arriving at, contains elements
that we are unable to actually calculate. Therefore we will in chapter 4 proceed to manyВӯbody
perturbation theory to explore the content of the terms and from this derive approximations.
This section follows the note of [5]. To determine a connection between the interacting and nonВӯ
interacting density response function the idea in TDDFT is to create an effective potential in the
form [5],
vR[n](r, t) =
Z e2
0n(rвҖІ, t)
|r вҲ’rвҖІ| drвҖІ + vion(r) + vxc[n](r, t) + vext(r, t),
(3.57)
where we defined
vxc[n](r, t) = ОҙExc[n]
Оҙn(r, t).
(3.58)
And the first term is the Hartree potential,
vH[n](r, t) =
Z e2
0n(rвҖІ, t)
|r вҲ’rвҖІ| drвҖІ
(3.59)
From eq. (3.14) we know that a change in the external potential yields a polarization through the
density response function and we may write the density response function as a functional derivative
reflecting this,
ПҮ(r, rвҖІ, t вҲ’tвҖІ) =
Оҙn(r, t)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)

n0(r).
(3.60)
We further define the density response function of the nonВӯinteracting KohnВӯSham system as
ПҮKS(r, rвҖІ, t вҲ’tвҖІ) =
Оҙn(r, t)
ОҙvR(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)

n0(r).
(3.61)
Consider eq. (3.60). The density can be considered a functional of the effective potential, vR which
is a functional of the external potential as eq. (3.57) suggests. By using the chain rule of functional
derivatives we obtain that,
ПҮ(r, rвҖІ, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = Оҙn[vR[vext]](r, t)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)

n0(r) =
ZZ
Оҙn(r, t)
ОҙvR(r1, t1)

n0(r)
ОҙvR(r1, t1)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)dr1dt1
=
ZZ
ПҮKS(r, r1, t вҲ’t1)ОҙvR(r1, t1)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)dr1dt1.
(3.62)
Considering eq. (3.57) four terms may add to calculating ОҙvR(r1,t1)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ,tвҖІ) . However, since the ionic
potential is not a functional of the density, and thus neither of the external potential, only the
external potential, the exchangeВӯcorrelation and the Hartree term contribute. Considering first the
external potential,
Оҙvext(r1, t1)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ) = Оҙ(r1 вҲ’rвҖІ)Оҙ(t1 вҲ’tвҖІ).
(3.63)
The functional derivative of the Hartree term is,
ОҙvH(r1, t1)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ) =
ZZ ОҙvH[vR](r1, t1)
Оҙn(r2, t2)
Оҙn(r2, t2)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)dr2dt2 =
ZZ e2
0Оҙ(t1 вҲ’t2)
|r1 вҲ’r2|
ПҮ(r2, rвҖІ, t2 вҲ’tвҖІ)dr2dt2.
(3.64)
3.4. TDDFT
23
==PAGE:30==
And the exchange correlation term,
Оҙvxc(r1, t1)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ) =
ZZ Оҙvxc[vR](r1, t1)
Оҙn(r2, t2)
Оҙn(r2, t2)
Оҙvext(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)dr2 =
ZZ
fxc(r1, r2, t1 вҲ’t2)ПҮ(r2, rвҖІ, t2 вҲ’tвҖІ)dr2dt2,
(3.65)
where we defined
fxc(r, rвҖІ, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = Оҙvxc[vR](r, t)
Оҙn(rвҖІ, tвҖІ)
(3.66)
Substituting eq. (3.63), (3.64) and (3.65) into eq. (3.62) we then have,
ПҮ(r, rвҖІ, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = ПҮKS(r, rвҖІ, t вҲ’tвҖІ)
+
ZZZZ
ПҮKS(r, r1, t вҲ’t1)

fxc(r1, r2, t1 вҲ’t2) + e2
0Оҙ(t1 вҲ’t2)
|r1 вҲ’r2|

ПҮ(r2, rвҖІ, t2 вҲ’tвҖІ)dr1dr2dt1dt2.
(3.67)
Thus we have now shown that within TDDFT, the KohnВӯSham density response function can be
related to the true density response function through the soВӯcalled exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel.
Doing a Fourier transform of the expression we obtain [10],
ПҮGGвҖІ(q, Пү) = ПҮKS
GGвҖІ(q, Пү) +
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮKS
GGвҖІвҖІ(q, Пү)
 fxc
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІ(q, Пү) + vC
GвҖІвҖІ(q)

ПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ(q, Пү).
(3.68)
This expression is in principle exact, but we do not know the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel, eq.
(3.66). Exchange refers to the antiВӯsymmetry of the wavefunction which is due to Pauli exclusion
principle, and correlation is sort of a collective term accounting for the remaining manyВӯbody
interactions. As this suggests, determining the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel is no trivial task. In
order to gain more insight into dynamics of this kernel, we will introduce manyВӯbody perturbation
theory.
3.5
Summary
In this section we focused on linear response theory. We assumed that the system in consideration
was subject to a small perturbative potential, and saw how the expectation value of an operator
changed under this perturbation. From this we could then determine how the expectation value
of the density operator changed when subject to a potential, and this yielded the density response
function, eq. (3.15). We saw how response functions are restricted to obey the KramersВӯKronig
relation. However, in a general quantum mechanical system with interacting electrons we are not
able to actually calculate the density response function since it contains the manyВӯbody eigenstates
|sвҹ©of the unperturbed Hamiltonian ЛҶH0. We derived an expression for the nonВӯinteracting density
response function containing only elements that we can actually determine, eq. (3.24). We saw
how to reformulate the response function in a periodic system, eq. (3.38), and we discussed the
effect of local fields. In order to find the eigenvalues and Вӯstates for the nonВӯinteracting density
response function, we use DFT to obtain the nonВӯinteracting KohnВӯSham singleВӯparticle orbitals,
and DFT is explained in appendix B. We used TDDFT to derive a connection between the nonВӯ
interacting and interacting density response function, eq. (3.68). This expression contains the
Hartree potential and the nonВӯinteracting density response function, which we are indeed able to
determine, but it also contains the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel, which is not a known quantity. In
the next section we will employ manyВӯbody perturbation theory in order to eventually gain insight
into this exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel.
24
3.5. Summary
==PAGE:31==
4
ManyВӯBody Perturbation Theory: General
Formalism and Derivations of the RPA and
BSE
In this section we will investigate an alternative derivation of the density response function using
manyВӯbody perturbation theory. This formulation yields further insight into the nature and dynamВӯ
ics of the density response function and enable us to find approximate methods for modelling the
interactions in the systems contained in the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel.
Initially, we will introduce manyВӯbody perturbation theory including the singleВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs
functions, imaginary time and Matsubara GreenвҖҷs functions and Wicks theorem. From this we
then show how to obtain an expression for the density response function in the random phase
approximation (RPA). We discuss the limitations of this approximation and then derive a more
accurate expression, the BetheВӯSalpeter equation (BSE), for the density response function. We
finally discuss the challenges connected to this equation.
4.1
Single particle GreenвҖҷs functions
In manyВӯbody problems we would ideally like to solve the SchrГ¶dinger equation to obtain eigenВӯ
values and Вӯstates to determine the density response function eq. (3.15). Having interactions, this
is not possible, but we may instead describe the system using single particle GreenвҖҷs functions.
Following derivations and definitions from [12], we here describe the evolution and propagation
of a single particle governed by a manyВӯbody Hamiltonian.
In general we define four different GreenвҖҷs functions, the advanced, retarded, lesser and greater
GreenвҖҷs functions,
GR
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) = вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(tвҖІ)}
E
,
GA
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) = iОё(tвҖІ вҲ’t)
D
{ЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(tвҖІ)}
E
,
G<
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) = i
D
ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(tвҖІ), ЛҶcv(t)
E
,
G>
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) = вҲ’i
D
ЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(tвҖІ)
E
.
(4.1)
The retarded GreenвҖҷs function propagates a particle from time tвҖІ to the time t, and the Heaviside
theta function ensures that causality is respected. From the advanced GreenвҖҷs function we can find
the state of the system in the past based on the current state of the system. The GreenвҖҷs functions
are related through the equation,
G>
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) вҲ’G<
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) = GR
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) вҲ’GA
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ).
(4.2)
In appendix D we derive an expression for the GreenвҖҷs function of nonВӯinteracting electrons,
GR
0 (k, Пү) =
1
Пү + iО· вҲ’Оөk
.
(4.3)
where Оөk are eigenvalues of the nonВӯinteraction Hamiltonian ЛҶH0 and О· is a small, positive number.
We show how to apply the Equation of Motion technique to find an expression for the single particle
Chapter 4. ManyВӯBody Perturbation Theory: General Formalism and Derivations of the RPA and BSE
25
==PAGE:32==
GreenвҖҷs functions in a simple example, where a particle in a discrete state l can hop back and fourth
to a continuum of states v, and how this yields a first encounter with the important concept of selfВӯ
energy denoted ОЈR(Пү), appearing in the expression of the retarded GreenвҖҷs function as
 GR(Пү)
вҲ’1 = (GR
0 (Пү))вҲ’1 вҲ’ОЈR(Пү),
(4.4)
the selfВӯenergy being zero if the hopping term tv is zero and otherwise yielding a finite lifeВӯtime
of the particle in a given state. It turns out that the eq. (4.4) is a very general relation, not only
relevant to the specific case considered in the appendix D . One can define the soВӯcalled spectral
function,
A(Пү) = вҲ’2Im
 GR(Пү)

,
(4.5)
corresponding to the density of states. With ОЈR(Пү) = 0 the imaginary part of eq. (4.4) becomes a
deltaВӯfunction for О· вҶ’0, and the particle will be in a state with energy Оө that it cannot leave. But
with ОЈR(Пү) Мё= 0, and if we assume that the selfВӯenergy is constant, we can make the definition
ОЈR = iО“, and the spectral function becomes a Lorentzian with a certain width. Fourier transВӯ
forming this Lorentzian, we will have an exponential damping eвҲ’О“t corresponding to the particle
lifetime becoming finite.
Actually determining GreenвҖҷs function can be difficult. Consider the expression for the retarded
GreenвҖҷs function in eq. (4.1). If we assume that ЛҶH is time independent, we may find the time
dependence of the operators ЛҶcv from the Heisenberg picture. Further assuming that tвҖІ = 0 we can
then write the expectation value for the first term in the anticommutator as
D
ЛҶcv(t)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ
E
= 1
Z Tr

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶHei ЛҶHtЛҶcveвҲ’i ЛҶHtЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ

.
(4.6)
Thus, we have an expression containing three exponential functions, each to be understood in terms
of their series expansion. Having interactions in the system, this will in most cases not be someВӯ
thing we can determine. Sometimes we may determine the GreenвҖҷs function using the Equation of
Motion technique, but this requires the Hamiltonian to be quadratic and having interactions, this
will not be the case. However, we can obtain a simpler expression by introducing imaginary time,
it вҶ’П„,
(4.7)
and by introducing the Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function,
GvvвҖІ(П„, П„ вҖІ) = вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(П„ вҖІ)
E
,
(4.8)
where the time ordering operator TП„ let later times be to the left. For fermions it is defined as
TП„(ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(П„ вҖІ)) = Оё(П„ вҲ’П„ вҖІ)ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(П„ вҖІ) вҲ’Оё(П„ вҖІ вҲ’П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(П„ вҖІ)ЛҶcv(П„).
(4.9)
In the appendix E, we show that the Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function can be written as,
GvvвҖІ(П„, 0) = вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(0)
E
= вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0)ЛҶcvI(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІI
E
0
D
ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0)
E
0
.
(4.10)
This expression is simpler since the expectation value is with respect to the nonВӯinteracting HamilВӯ
tonian ЛҶH0 and since the timeВӯdependent annihilation operator, ЛҶc, is in the interaction picture, thus
having its time evolution described by the nonВӯinteracting Hamiltonian. Further, recalling eq.
(3.11), we now only have one infinite series in the numerator and denominator respectively in
the form of ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0). And in this way we have simplified the expression used in determining the
26
4.1. Single particle GreenвҖҷs functions
==PAGE:33==
time evolution of an interacting system. By iteration of eq. (3.11), it can be shown that another
equivalent but useful formulation of ЛҶUI is,
ЛҶUI(П„, П„ вҖІ) =
вҲһ
X
n=0
(вҲ’1)n
n!
Z П„
П„ вҖІ dП„1...
Z П„n
П„ вҖІ
dП„TП„

ЛҶVI(П„1)... ЛҶVI(П„n)

.
(4.11)
It will often Вӯ and in this project, always Вӯ be so that the interaction part of the Hamiltonian is the
Coulomb interaction, which may expressed in second quantization in the following way [12],
ЛҶvC = 1
2
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
X
ПғПғвҖІ
ЛҶcвҖ 
Пғ(r)ЛҶcвҖ 
ПғвҖІ(rвҖІ)
e2
0
|r вҲ’rвҖІ|ЛҶcПғвҖІ(rвҖІ)ЛҶcПғ(r)drdrвҖІ.
(4.12)
The factor 1/2 corrects for doubleВӯcounting. The Coulomb interaction is a longВӯrange instantaneous
interaction, meaning that the interaction between two particles decreases only as a power law as
the distance between them increases. The Coulomb force is, as discussed in chapter 2, responsible
for the formation of bound states and the emergence of collective excitations such as plasmons.
Substituting eq. (4.12) and (4.11) into eq. (4.10) we obtain that
GvvвҖІ(П„, 0) = вҲ’
PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1)n
n!
R ОІ
0 dП„1...
R ОІ
0 dП„n
D
TП„

ЛҶvCI(П„1)...ЛҶvCI(П„n)ЛҶcvI(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІI
E
0
PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1)n
n!
R ОІ
0 dП„1...
R ОІ
0 dП„n вҹЁTП„ (ЛҶvCI(П„1)...ЛҶvCI(П„n))вҹ©0
.
(4.13)
Now Вӯ with eq. (4.12) in mind Вӯ we have an expression containing products of creation and anВӯ
nihilation operators. Using WickвҖҷs theorem, we may express the numerator and denominator of
eq. (4.13) as a sum of all possible contractions between pairs of operators and with a sign change
whenever two fermion operators are interchanged in order to perform the contraction. With WickвҖҷs
theorem we can show, that the denominator and numerator of eq. (4.13) becomes an infinite series
containing only single particle Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function,
G0(П„, П„ вҖІ) = вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶcvI(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vI(П„ вҖІ)
E
0 ,
(4.14)
which, it can be shown, also can be written as [12],
G0(v, iПүn) =
1
iПүn вҲ’Оөv
(
Пүn = qn = 2nПҖ
ОІ ,
for bosons
Пүn = kn = (2n+1)ПҖ
ОІ
,
for fermions.
(4.15)
In appendix E we elaborate on WickвҖҷs theorem, and use it show that the nonВӯinteracting density
response function can be written as a product of two nonВӯinteracting GreenвҖҷs functions,
ПҮ0(q, iqn) =
1
V ОІ
X
ikn
X
kПғ
G0(k + qПғ, iqn + ikn)G0(kПғ, ikn),
(4.16)
where kn = (2n+1)ПҖ
ОІ
is the fermionic frequencies and qn = 2nПҖ
ОІ are the bosonic frequencies. Using
the residue theorem, we show that this is exactly the density response function that we also saw in
eq. (3.38). Thus, the linear response theory and the manyВӯbody perturbation theory are connected
and in agreement.
4.2
Feynman diagrams
In the previous section we considered an expression for the expectation value in the Matsubara
GreenвҖҷs function using imaginary time, eq. (4.10), which became eq. (4.13). Using WickвҖҷs theoВӯ
rem in the numerator and denominator of eq. (4.13), we will now first see that we can write them
as determinants of matrices containing just single particle nonВӯinteracting GreenвҖҷs functions, and
4.2. Feynman diagrams
27
==PAGE:34==
in this way obtain all possible ways that a system can interact. We will see that the terms can be
represented with Feynman diagrams. We will once again follow [12].
Initially, we switch to the notation i вҶ’(ri, Пғi, П„i), i.e.
Z
f(i)di =
X
Пғi
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
dri
Z ОІ
0
dП„if(ri, П„i).
(4.17)
And so to save space, we also simply use i as a subscript. Such that the integrals in eq. (4.13) over
the Coulomb interaction become,
Z ОІ
0
ЛҶvC(П„i)dП„i =
Z 1
2ЛҶcвҖ 
i+ЛҶcвҖ 
iвҖІ
+vC
i,iвҖІЛҶciвҖІЛҶcididiвҖІ,
(4.18)
where, if we compare to eq. (4.12),
vC
i,iвҖІ =
e2
0
|ri вҲ’riвҖІ|Оҙ(П„i вҲ’П„iвҖІ),
(4.19)
and where the subscript i+ = (Пғi, ri, П„i +О·) means that we have added a small number, О·, making
sure that when the time ordering operator in the full expression acts, the two creation operators
will be to the left in the end. Eq. (4.13) then becomes
GvvвҖІ(П„, 0) = G(v, vвҖІ)
= вҲ’
PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1/2)n
n!
R
d1d1вҖІ...dndnвҖІvC
1,1вҖІ...vC
n,nвҖІ
D
TП„

ЛҶcвҖ 
1+ЛҶcвҖ 
1вҖІ
+ЛҶc1вҖІЛҶc1...ЛҶcвҖ 
n+ЛҶcвҖ 
nвҖІ
+ЛҶcnвҖІЛҶcn

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ
E
0
PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1/2)n
n!
R
d1d1вҖІ...dndnвҖІvC
1,1вҖІ...vC
n,nвҖІ
D
TП„

ЛҶcвҖ 
1+ЛҶcвҖ 
1вҖІ
+ЛҶc1вҖІЛҶc1...ЛҶcвҖ 
n+ЛҶcвҖ 
nвҖІ
+ЛҶcnвҖІЛҶcn
E
0
.
(4.20)
And using WickвҖҷs theorem on the operators in the expectation value, we can write it as a determiВӯ
nant,
GvvвҖІ(П„, 0) =
PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1/2)n
n!
R
d1d1вҖІ...dndnвҖІvC
1,1вҖІ...vC
n,nвҖІ

G0(v, vвҖІ)
G0(v, 1)
G0(v, 1вҖІ)
. . .
G0(v, nвҖІ)
G0(1, vвҖІ)
G0(1, 1)
G0(1, 1вҖІ)
. . .
G0(1, nвҖІ)
G0(1вҖІ, vвҖІ)
G0(1вҖІ, 1)
G0(1вҖІ, 1вҖІ)
. . .
G0(1вҖІ, nвҖІ)
...
...
...
G0(nвҖІ, vвҖІ)
G0(nвҖІ, 1)
G0(nвҖІ, 1вҖІ)
. . .
G0(n, nвҖІ)

PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1/2)n
n!
R
d1d1вҖІ...dndnвҖІvC
1,1вҖІ...vC
n,nвҖІ

G0(1, 1)
G0(1, 1вҖІ)
. . .
G0(1, nвҖІ)
G0(1вҖІ, 1)
G0(1вҖІ, 1вҖІ)
. . .
G0(1вҖІ, nвҖІ)
...
...
...
G0(nвҖІ, 1)
G0(nвҖІ, 1вҖІ)
. . .
G0(n, nвҖІ)

.
(4.21)
This is a key result. From this, we can construct the interacting Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function from a
series of nonВӯinteracting single particle GreenвҖҷs function, eq. (4.14), which we may conveniently
find using eq. (4.15). We will in general be using Feynman diagrams to represent the terms in the
series. Take for instance the denominator of eq. (4.21) to first order. This is
1 + (вҲ’1/2)
Z
d1d1вҖІvC
1,1вҖІ
 G0(1, 1)G0(1вҖІ, 1вҖІ) вҲ’G0(1вҖІ, 1)G0(1, 1вҖІ)

.
(4.22)
28
4.2. Feynman diagrams
==PAGE:35==
We make the notation that a single particle GreenвҖҷs function G0(n, nвҖІ) is a solid fermion line
connecting its two arguments, n and nвҖІ marked with dots, and with an arrow pointing to n. And
vC
n,nвҖІ is marked with an undulating interaction line, connecting its arguments, n and nвҖІ. If different
lines meet each other at some point, this point is called a vertex. Thus, the possible diagrams from
eq. (4.22) are
1 вҲ’1
2
1
1вҖІ
vC
1,1вҖІ
+ 1
2 1
1вҖІ
vC
1,1вҖІ
(4.23)
We can generate all terms in the sum of eq. (4.21) using these principles, and there will be (2n)!
different Feynman diagrams to each order since there are 2n GreenвҖҷs functions in each order of the
determinants. Besides, there are n interaction lines. To second order, we will have the arguments
1, 1вҖІ, 2 and 2вҖІ and we will have two interaction lines vC
1,1вҖІ and vC
2,2вҖІ. Thus, one of the terms will for
instance be G0(1, 2)G0(1вҖІ, 1вҖІ)G0(2, 1)G0(2вҖІ, 2) represented by
1вҖІ
1
2
2вҖІ
vC
1,1вҖІ
vC
2,2вҖІ
(4.24)
Note that by interchanging 2 and 2вҖІ and/or 1 and 1вҖІ we would obtain the same diagramНҫ and so there
are 4 equivalent diagrams. Further we can also interchange the interaction lines, 2(вҖІ) вҶ”1(вҖІ), which
yields another 2! equivalent diagrams. In general, there will be 2nn! equivalent combinations,
which cancels the (1/2)n/n! in the expression (4.21). If we let each interaction line hold a minus
sign, vC вҶ’вҲ’vC, we further get rid of the (вҲ’1)n. The sign from the determinant will match the
number of fermion loops, which are fermion lines starting at some vertex, possibly connecting to
other vertices, but ending up at the original vertex.
This was the denominatorНҫ the numerator has the same arguments but also an additional annihilation
operator vвҖІ and creation operator v giving rise to one extra GreenвҖҷs function to each order, such
that there are now 2n + 1 GreenвҖҷs functions to each order. In the Feynman representation, this is
then one extra fermion line, but also, since both v and vвҖІ appear only once in each term, two of
the fermion lines will be external, meaning that they are only connected to a vertex in one end.
An example of a term to second order could be G0(1, 1вҖІ)G0(1вҖІ, vвҖІ)G0(2, 2вҖІ)G0(2вҖІ, 1)G0(v, 2вҖІ)
represented by
vвҖІ
1вҖІ
1
2вҖІ
2
v
vC
1,1вҖІ
vC
2,2вҖІ
(4.25)
We can also write diagrams by multiplying them together: a valid 2nd order diagram could be
vвҖІ
v
1
1вҖІ
vC
1,1вҖІ
2
2вҖІ
vC
2,2вҖІ
(4.26)
But the first of these two diagrams is also a valid 1st order diagram. And so we may factorize out
the decoupled Feynman diagrams which are not holding external fermion lines in the numerator,
and they end up cancelling with the denominator, such that we are left with the connected diagrams,
G(v, vвҖІ) =
пЈ«
пЈӯ
+
+
+ ...
пЈ¶
пЈё

1 +
+ ...


1 +
+ ...

(4.27)
4.2. Feynman diagrams
29
==PAGE:36==
And in this way we end up with only one infinite series. We may even simplify this a little further
by reintroducing the selfВӯenergy now defined as all diagrams without the external fermion lines
that cannot be reduced by cutting a single internal fermion line,
ОЈ(v, vвҖІ) =
+
+
+ ... вүЎ
(4.28)
In this way eq. (4.27) can now be written as
G(v, vвҖІ) вүЎ
=
+
+
+ ...
=
+
= G0(v, vвҖІ) +
ZZ
G0(v, i)ОЈ(i, j)G(v, vвҖІ)didj.
(4.29)
This is a Dyson equation. If the system in consideration is translation invariant, it makes sense to
describe it in reciprocal space. By moving into reciprocal space eq. (4.29) becomes an algebraic
equation [12], which we may solve for G(v, vвҖІ),
G(k, ikn) =
G0(k, ikn)
1 вҲ’G0(k, ikn)ОЈ(k, ikn) =
1
ikn вҲ’Оөk вҲ’ОЈ(k, ikn),
(4.30)
where we used eq. (4.15) in the second equality. Notice how the shape of eq. (4.4 / D.18) reappears,
justifying that ОЈ is a selfВӯenergy in both cases.
Another important realization from moving into reciprocal space is that we have to have momenВӯ
tum conservation at each vertex. This can be ensured by adding momenta to each fermion and
interaction line. For example:
q
p
q
pВӯq
(4.31)
The quantity,
, is called the pair bubble. Substituting the momentum from the pair bubble
in the diagram (4.31) into nonВӯinteracting singleВӯparticle Matsubara GreenвҖҷs functions, we realize
that this is exactly eq. (4.16), and thus
вҲ’ПҮ0 =
(4.32)
When three lines meet at an internal vertex, momentum conservation leaves one of the momenta
undetermined. This undetermined momentum must be integrated over all possible values. With eq.
(4.29), in Fourier space, the problem of determining the interacting Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function
is reduced to determining the selfВӯenergy containing the irreducible Feynman diagrams without
external fermion lines. However, this is still an infinite series, and therefore we will have to find
approximations to it. For this, we apply the random phase approximation.
4.3
Random phase approximation
In order to approximate the selfВӯenergy, eq. (4.28), the idea in RPA is to only include the most
divergent diagrams assuming that we are in the limit of high particle densities. We continue to
follow [12].
30
4.3. Random phase approximation
==PAGE:37==
It can be shown, that the most divergent diagrams are those to lowest order in the expansion.
The idea is to consider how the terms entering the expression for the selfВӯenergy could be made
dimensionless if we were to measure them in powers of the Fermi momentum kF . For a selfВӯenergy
to an arbitrary order n, there are n internal momenta. Each momentum corresponds to an integral
over k and a sum over ikn originating from the Fourier transform. We also have a 1/ОІ = kbT in
front of the integral, which is an energy, and since EF вҲқk2
F , we also have 1/ОІ вҲқk2
F . Then,
1
ОІ
X
ikn
Z
dk вҲқk2+3
F
,
(4.33)
since the integral over k is in three dimensions. Further, there are n interaction lines. In reciprocal
space, as we have shown in appendix C, the Coulomb interaction is proportional to 1/q2, and since
q is a momentum, we must have that
vC(q) вҲқkвҲ’2
F .
(4.34)
Finally, as we have seen in the previous section, there are 2n + 1 GreenвҖҷs function in the full
expression, and so, without the two external fermion lines, there are 2n вҲ’1 GreenвҖҷs function
to order n in the selfВӯenergy. Since we have seen that the nonВӯinteracting GreenвҖҷs function is
proportional to the inverse energy, we will have that
G0(k, ikn) вҲқПөвҲ’1
k
вҲқkвҲ’2
F .
(4.35)
Thus, in total,
ОЈ(n)(k, ikn) вҲқk5n
F kвҲ’2n
F
kвҲ’2(2nвҲ’1)
F
= kвҲ’n+2
F
.
(4.36)
It is wellВӯknown that kF = (3ПҖne)1/3, where ne is the electron density, so for high densities the
lower order diagrams dominate
n < nвҖІ вҮ’|ОЈ(n)| вү«|ОЈ(nвҖІ)| for ne вҶ’вҲһ.
(4.37)
Further, within the same order, terms in the selfВӯenergy with more interaction lines having the same
momentum will be more divergent. This is due to e.g. vC(q)2 вҲқqвҲ’4 diverging faster for q вҶ’0
than vC(q)vC(q вҲ’p) вҲқ
1
q2(pвҲ’q)2 . Because of the momentum conservation at the vertices, this
means that diagrams with pair bubbles connected to interaction lines are the most divergent ones:
the same momentum must come in as comes out, and thus the two interaction lines will have the
same momentum,
q
q
(4.38)
And so, in RPA we make the approximation of the selfВӯenergy,
ОЈRPA(k, ikn) =
+
+
+ ...
=
пЈ«
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈӯ
+
+
+ ...
пЈ¶
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈё
=
(4.39)
4.3. Random phase approximation
31
==PAGE:38==
Where
вҲ’W RPA =
=
+
+
+ ...
(4.40)
is the renormalized Coulomb potential. We can write it as a Dyson equation,
вҲ’W RPA =
+
 
+
+ ...
!
= вҲ’vC вҲ’vCПҮ0W RPA
вҮ’вҲ’W RPA =
вҲ’vC
1 вҲ’vCПҮ0 .
(4.41)
Substituting vC into this expression we obtain that
W RPA(q, iqn) =
4ПҖe2
0
q2 вҲ’4ПҖe2
0ПҮ0(q, iqn).
(4.42)
Normally, since vC(r) вҲқrвҲ’1, the Coulomb potential suffers from a divergence when we try to
Fourier transform it into the frequency domain, as also seen in appendix C. However, if we assume
long waves such that the density response function ПҮ0(q, iqn) is a constant, doing a Fourier transВӯ
form of the expression (4.42) into real space reveals that the RPA renormalized Coulomb potential
will be multiplied by an exponentially decaying function. We can see this by considering
W(r) = e2
0
eвҲ’ksr
r
= vC(r)eвҲ’ksr,
W(q) =
Z вҲһ
0
Z ПҖ
0
Z 2ПҖ
0
e2
0
eвҲ’ksr
r
eвҲ’iqr cos(Оё)r2 sin(Оё)dП•dОёdr =
4ПҖe2
0
k2
s + q2 .
(4.43)
Comparing eq. (4.42) in the long wave limit and (4.43) we see that k2
s = вҲ’4ПҖe2
0ПҮ0(0, 0). This is
the ThomasВӯFermi wave screening wave vector. It means that RPA introduces a screening of the
bare Coulomb potential.
We can further show that not only is the bare Coulomb interaction screened in RPA: also external
fields are screened. We have previously found the connection between the dielectric function and
the density response function, eq. (3.29), which we restate here for convenience,
ОөвҲ’1
r (r, rвҖІ, Пү) = Оҙ(r вҲ’rвҖІ) +
Z e2
0ПҮ(rвҖІвҖІ, rвҖІ, Пү)
|r вҲ’rвҖІвҖІ|
drвҖІвҖІ.
(4.44)
We also saw that this is a convolution, and since the Coulomb interaction is diagonal in G, the
Fourier transform of this is just the product of the two functions,
ОөвҲ’1
r (q, Пү) = 1 + vC(q)ПҮ(q, Пү).
(4.45)
We would like to determine ПҮ(q, Пү). In analogy to the discussion surrounding eq. (E.20) in apВӯ
pendix E, we can write the density response function as [12],
ПҮ(q, П„) = вҲ’1
V вҹЁTП„ (n(q, П„)n(вҲ’q))вҹ©0
= вҲ’1
V
X
k,kвҖІ
Пғ,ПғвҖІ
D
TП„

ЛҶcвҖ 
k,Пғ(П„)ЛҶck+q,Пғ(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
kвҖІ,ПғвҖІЛҶckвҖІвҲ’q,ПғвҖІ
E
.
(4.46)
32
4.3. Random phase approximation
==PAGE:39==
Analogous to the principles that we have seen previously we can represent this with Feynman
diagrams. We earlier saw that the GreenвҖҷs functions are characterized by two external fermion
lines, but since we now have four creation and annihilation operators in total in eq. (4.46), we need
four external fermion lines. The two right most operators in eq. (4.46) represent an absorption of
a fourВӯmomentum q and and the two left most operators represent an emission. Thus we write
D
TП„

ЛҶcвҖ 
k,Пғ(П„)ЛҶck+q,Пғ(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
kвҖІ,ПғвҖІЛҶckвҖІвҲ’q,ПғвҖІ
E
вҶ’
k
k + q
...
kвҖІ
kвҖІ вҲ’q
(4.47)
To connect the two vertices we need to sum all possible ways that the system can interact. This
may involve any number of Coulomb interaction lines, and thus we get diagrams like
вҲ’ПҮ(q, Пү) вүЎ
k
k + q
kвҖІ
kвҖІ вҲ’q
=
+
+
+
+
+ ...
(4.48)
As the last term in eq. (4.48) suggests, we have diagrams connected with single photon lines. Thus,
we define the irreducible diagrams as those that cannot be separated by cutting a photon line,
вҲ’ВҜПҮ вүЎ
=
+
+
+
+ ...
(4.49)
Expressing eq. (4.48) in terms of eq. (4.49) we obtain that
вҲ’ПҮ(q, Пү) =
=
+
+ ...
=
+
вҲ’ВҜПҮ(q, Пү) вҲ’ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)vC(q)ПҮ(q, Пү)
вҮ’вҲ’ПҮ(q, Пү) =
вҲ’ВҜПҮ(q, Пү)
1 вҲ’vC(q)ВҜПҮ(q, Пү).
(4.50)
In RPA however, just like for the selfВӯenergy, we let the series of irreducible diagrams consist only
of the most divergent ones, which are those containing pair bubbles, ПҮ0(q, Пү), such that ВҜПҮ(q, Пү) вҶ’
ПҮ0(q, Пү), and eq. (4.50) then becomes,
ПҮRPA(q, Пү) = ПҮ0(q, Пү) + ПҮ0(q, Пү)vC(q)ПҮRPA(q, Пү)
вҮ’ПҮRPA(q, Пү) =
ПҮ0(q, Пү)
1 вҲ’vC(q)ПҮ0(q, Пү).
(4.51)
4.3. Random phase approximation
33
==PAGE:40==
Diagrammatically this means that eq. (4.48) is reduced to a series of connected pairВӯbubbles,
вҲ’ПҮRPA(q, Пү) =
+
+
+ ...
(4.52)
Notice that the RPA expression for the density response function is exactly the expression from
TDDFT, eq. (3.68), without the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel. Substituting the RPA expression for
the density response function into eq. (4.45), we obtain that
 ОөRPA
r
вҲ’1 = 1 +
vC(q)ПҮ0(q, Пү)
1 вҲ’vC(q)ПҮ0(q, Пү) =
1
1 вҲ’vC(q)ПҮ0(q, Пү)
вҮ’ОөRPA = 1 вҲ’vC(q)ПҮ0(q, Пү).
(4.53)
Then, using eq. (3.25) in reciprocal space for a translation invariant system, we have
vtot(q, Пү)RPA =
1
ОөRPA vext =
vext
1 вҲ’vC(q)ПҮ0(q, Пү).
(4.54)
Notice the resemblance between eq. (4.51) and (4.54). The density response function describes
the change in the density at some point r, i.e. the polarization of the system due to a change in the
charge density in some other point rвҖІ, while the dielectric function describes the screening response
of the system due to an external field. The similarity between the two equations reveals that the
response of the system will be the same, no matter if the perturbation comes from the charges not
being in equilibrium or from an external field. In both cases, the charges will redistribute to screen
the field.
To sum up, in RPA, the selfВӯenergy is approximated by an infinite perturbative expansion retainВӯ
ing only the most divergent Feynman diagrams. This series then only consists of pairВӯbubbles, a
pairВӯbubble corresponding to an electronВӯhole pair being created and annihilated again in a virtual
process. This process can be considered to be a polarization of the system as a response to the
charged particle interacting through the Coulomb interaction or interacting with an external field.
Through the approximation of the selfВӯenergy, the RPA allows us to obtain an expression for the
interacting density response function using only pair bubbles, consisting of the nonВӯinteracting
density response function and the Coulomb interaction, eq. (4.51). Thus, even though the nonВӯ
interacting density response function maybe at first seemed of little use, we now see that it can be
used in RPA to model interactions.
The response in the form of a system polarization leads to screened Coulomb interactions between
charged particles in the system. This is indeed a physically sound response: an electron will attract
holes which then partially cancel the field of the electron, and thus the electron will only interact
with other charged particles in the system though a weakened Coulomb interaction.
However, if we would like to describe the interaction between two specific charged particles, the
RPA is not of any help. The RPA describes how a single charged particle interacts with a mean
electric field generated by charged particles in its surroundings through the Hartree potential. But
it is unable to describe the interaction between two charged particles, and thus cannot predict the
presence of excitons in the absorption spectrum. Excitonic behaviour is generated by the soВӯcalled
34
4.3. Random phase approximation
==PAGE:41==
vertex corrections which are neglected in RPA. This is something that we will return to in the next
section.
However, the RPA does contain the longВӯrange variation of the Hartree potential, G = GвҖІ =
0, and this interaction is responsible for collective charge oscillations giving rise to plasmonic
effects. Thus, RPA does well describe the plasmonic effects in the material happening typically
at frequencies well above the band gap. At these larger frequencies we may also have some weak
excitonic effects, but the spectrum will often dominated by the plasmons, and the RPA will typically
yield satisfying predictions for the spectra, as we will also see in chapter 7.
Importantly, we have gained insight into the physics of the density response function originally
derived in section 3.4 about TDDFT, eq. (3.68). Here, the full density response function contains
three terms: the first term is the nonВӯinteracting density response function, the second term conВӯ
tains the Hartree interaction and the third contains the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel. The first two
terms are exactly the expression derived in RPA, eq. (4.51). Thus, these terms correspond to the
electrons of the system interacting with each other and external fields through the Coulomb interВӯ
action thereby creating a polarization, which is consistent with the assumptions made in order to
derive eq. (3.68), i.e. the first term containing the bare nonВӯinteracting density response function
came from the term in the effective field containing the external field, and the term containing the
Coulomb interaction came from the Hartree potential which is a potential mimicking the Coulomb
interaction. The term containing the exchangeВӯinteraction kernel on the hand is neglected in RPAНҫ
these are all the Feynman diagrams containing other interactions than those described by pairВӯ
bubbles. Thus, an important weakness of the RPA is the lack of exchange and correlation effects.
To obtain some of the dynamics from these diagrams, we need to find a way of including some of
them. This is exactly what we will do in the BetheВӯSalpeter equation.
4.4
BetheВӯSalpeter equation
To go beyond RPA we need to add the soВӯcalled vertex corrections which is done by solving the
fourВӯpoint BetheВӯSalpeter equation (BSE). In this section, we derive the BSE. The BSE will depend
on an exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel which we will need to approximate with the soВӯcalled GWВӯ
approximation justified by the Hedin equations. We consider an important reformulation of the
BSE, and then consider the scaling problems in this equation and how the problem is simplified
by imposing the TammВӯDancoff approximation.
In RPA, we considered the polarization created by electrons and holes interacting only through
the Hartree potential, and so we did not include exchangeВӯcorrelation effects. Since there were
no direct interactions, using the singleВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs functions was sufficient for describing the
singleВӯparticle excitations that can occur. But now we would like to also describe more complex exВӯ
citations with excitons, which involve the correlated motion of an electronВӯhole pair. TwoВӯparticle
GreenвҖҷs functions are a natural generalization of the singleВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs functions to describe
twoВӯparticle excitations. Thus, we need twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs functions to describe the system. In
the following, we will in general take outset in [10].
When the RPA fails in describing excitons, it is because it is a mean field method approximating the
direct Coulomb interaction with the Hartree potential, as we saw both in section 4.3 about the RPA,
and also in section 3.4 about TDDFT. Excitons are bound together by the Coulomb interaction, and
therefore we need the explicit Coulomb potential, eq. (4.12), in our Hamiltonian in order to catch
this effect. LetвҖҷs consider what happens if we just naively add the Coulomb interaction in the
Hamiltonian. We then have a general Hamiltonian on the form [10],
ЛҶH =
Z
Оө(1)ЛҶcвҖ (1)ЛҶc(1)d1 + 1
2
Z Z
ЛҶcвҖ (1)ЛҶcвҖ (2)e2
0Оҙ(t1 вҲ’t2)
|r1 вҲ’r2|
ЛҶc(2)ЛҶc(1)d1d2,
(4.55)
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
35
==PAGE:42==
where we used the notation as seen before i = (ri, ti). Note that the Hamiltonian is time invariant
and the time dependence in the operators will cancel, but for notational consistence in the following
we have written the Hamiltonian as a function of time anyways. We have neglected spin in the exВӯ
pression for the Coulomb interaction, eq. (4.12). The first term in eq. (4.55) is the nonВӯinteracting
part, ЛҶH0, containing the kinetic energy and the external potential in a position basis. We define the
timeВӯordered GreenвҖҷs function,
G(1, 2) = вҲ’i
D
T

ЛҶc(1)ЛҶcвҖ (2)
E
= GR(1, 2) + G<(1, 2).
(4.56)
T is the time ordering operator as also seen before, eq. (4.9), now ordering the times ti, tj instead
of the imaginary times П„, П„ вҖІ. The retarded and lesser GreenвҖҷs functions were defined in eq. (4.1),
but this time we write them in a position basis. In appendix D it is shown that we can obtain an
equation for the single particle GreenвҖҷs function using the Equation of Motion (EOM) technique.
Inspired by this, we take the derivative on each side of eq. (4.56),
iвҲӮt1G(1, 2) = iвҲӮt1

вҲ’i
D
Оё(t1 вҲ’t2)ЛҶc(1)ЛҶcвҖ (2) вҲ’Оё(t2 вҲ’t1)ЛҶcвҖ (2)ЛҶc(1)
E
= Оҙ(t1 вҲ’t2)
D
ЛҶc(1)ЛҶcвҖ (2) + ЛҶcвҖ (2)ЛҶc(1)
E
вҲ’i
D
T

iвҲӮt1ЛҶc(1)ЛҶcвҖ (2)
E
= Оҙ(1, 2) вҲ’i
D
T

iвҲӮt1ЛҶc(1)ЛҶcвҖ (2)
E
.
(4.57)
Differentiating the Heaviside theta function gave us a deltaВӯfunction in time, and we then used
that for equal times we have the antiВӯcommutation relation ЛҶc(r)ЛҶcвҖ (rвҖІ) + ЛҶcвҖ (r)вҖІЛҶc(r) = Оҙ(r вҲ’rвҖІ) for
fermions. Using the Heisenberg equation of motion with the Hamiltonian, eq. (4.55), we see that
iвҲӮt1ЛҶc(1) = [ЛҶc(1), H] =
Z
Оө(1вҖІ)
n
ЛҶc(1), ЛҶcвҖ (1вҖІ)
o
ЛҶc(1вҖІ)d1вҖІ
+ 1
2
Z Z n
ЛҶc(1), ЛҶcвҖ (1вҖІ)
o
ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ) + ЛҶcвҖ (1вҖІ)
n
ЛҶc(1), ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)
o e2
0Оҙ(t1вҖІ вҲ’t2вҖІ)
|r1вҖІ вҲ’r2вҖІ|
ЛҶc(2вҖІ)ЛҶc(1вҖІ)d1вҖІd2вҖІ
= Оө(1)ЛҶc(1) +
Z 1
2ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)e2
0Оҙ(t1 вҲ’t2вҖІ)
|r1 вҲ’r2вҖІ|
ЛҶc(2вҖІ)ЛҶc(1)d2вҖІ +
Z 1
2ЛҶcвҖ (1вҖІ)e2
0Оҙ(t1вҖІ вҲ’t1)
|r1вҖІ вҲ’r1|
ЛҶc(1)ЛҶc(1вҖІ)d1вҖІ
= Оө(1)ЛҶc(1) +
Z e2
0Оҙ(t1 вҲ’t2вҖІ)
|r1 вҲ’r2вҖІ|
ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)ЛҶc(2вҖІ)ЛҶc(1)d2вҖІ.
(4.58)
Note what we made the notational switch, 1вҖІ вҶ’2вҖІ in the last term of the second last line of eq.
(4.58) such that the last two terms could be collected.
Substituting this back into eq. (4.57) we have
(iвҲӮt1 вҲ’Оө(1)) G(1, 2) = Оҙ(1, 2) вҲ’i
Z e2
0Оҙ(t1 вҲ’t2вҖІ)
|r1 вҲ’r2вҖІ|
G2(1, 2вҖІ, 2, 2
вҖІ+)d2вҖІ,
(4.59)
where the superscript вҖқ+вҖқ means that the operator containing this variable should be to the left in
the timeВӯordering. We have defined the twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function,
G2(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = вҲ’
D
T

ЛҶc(1)ЛҶc(2)ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)ЛҶcвҖ (1вҖІ)
E
.
(4.60)
Note the sign in front of the term with the twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function in eq. (4.59). The sign in
the last line of eq. (4.57) and the sign in the definition of the twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function (4.60)
cancel each other. So the minus sign in eq. (4.59) comes from moving around fermionic operators
36
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
==PAGE:43==
inside the timeВӯordering operator: the left most creation operator, ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ), in eq. (4.58) substituted
into eq. (4.57) is moved to the right twice, and the two annihilation operators switches place, such
that we obtain (вҲ’1)3 = вҲ’1 to match the operators in the twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function, eq. (4.60),
with the arguments of eq. (4.59).
If we were to continue the EOM technique, the next equation would contain a threeВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs
function and so onНҫ the set of equation does not close. We need the twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function
in order to model direct Coulomb interaction between two particles Вӯ which of course makes sense
since the Coulomb interaction is a twoВӯbody interaction Вӯ but the derivation reveals that we are
unable to determine it with the EOM technique. A description of the density response function
containing the information from the twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function is necessary if we want to have
excitons in the calculated spectra.
We define the twoВӯparticle correlation function 4ПҮ(1, 1вҖІ, 2, 2вҖІ) as the twoВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function
minus the uncorrelated contribution from the singleВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function describing each of
the particle propagation separately and independently,
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = вҲ’G2(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) + G(1, 1вҖІ)G(2, 2вҖІ).
(4.61)
As the notation suggests, this is a four point version of the density response function. We here
need a trick to find an expression for 4ПҮ, which involves introducing a small external potential v
and calculating the variations in G which respect to that, and then in the end put the potential to 0
[10]. It can be shown that this is in fact equivalent to eq. (4.61) [10],
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = ОҙG(1, 1вҖІ)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)

v=0 = вҲ’G2(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) + G(1, 1вҖІ)G(2, 2вҖІ).
(4.62)
In the following we will derive the BSE from eq. (4.62). We will start using the simplified notation
f(ВҜ3) =
R
f(3)d3, i.e. a bar means that we integrate with respect to the variable. As a first step,
we would like to rewrite eq. (4.62) using that
G(1, ВҜ3)GвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 3вҖІ) = Оҙ(1, 3вҖІ)
Оҙ
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)
 G(1, ВҜ3)GвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 3вҖІ)

= 0
вҮ’ОҙG(1, ВҜ3)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)GвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 3вҖІ) = вҲ’G(1, ВҜ3)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 3вҖІ)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)
вҮ’ОҙG(1, ВҜ3)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)GвҲ’1(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ) = вҲ’G(1, ВҜ3)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2) G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ)
вҮ’ОҙG(1, 1вҖІ)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2) = вҲ’G(1, ВҜ3)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2) G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ).
(4.63)
We can find an expression for the inverse GreenвҖҷs function in eq. (4.63) from the general relation,
GвҲ’1 = (G0)вҲ’1 вҲ’ОЈ.
(4.64)
From comparing the expression from TDDFT, eq. (3.68) and the RPA expression, eq. (4.51), we
see that it makes sense to split the selfВӯenergy into two contributionsНҫ one containing the exchangeВӯ
correlation term and one containing the Hartree potential. Having introduced the small external
potential, v, we need to temporarily add this as well,
ОЈ = ОЈxc + vH + v,
(4.65)
Further, we can find an alternative expression for the Hartree potential in terms of the GreenвҖҷs
function, using that the mean density can be written as
ЛҶn(r) = вҹЁЛҶcвҖ (r)ЛҶc(r)вҹ©,
(4.66)
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
37
==PAGE:44==
which when compared to eq. (4.56) means that
ЛҶn(3) = вҲ’iG(3, 3+).
(4.67)
The superscript on the last argument of G implies that it is the last term when writing out the time
ordering operator of eq. (4.56), defined in , eq. (4.9), that contributes when we want to obtain the
mean density, eq. (4.66). With this, we can write the Hartree potential, eq. (3.59), as,
vH(2, 2вҖІ) = vC(2, ВҜ3)n(ВҜ3)Оҙ(2, 2вҖІ) = вҲ’ivC(2, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3, ВҜ3+)Оҙ(2, 2вҖІ),
(4.68)
where we used eq. (4.19) in the definition of the Coulomb potential, vC. Combining eqs. (4.64,4.65,4.68)
the expression in eq. (4.63) becomes
ОҙG(1, 1вҖІ)
Оҙv(2, 2вҖІ) = вҲ’G(1, ВҜ3)Оҙ (вҲ’ОЈxc(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ) + ivC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)G(ВҜ4, ВҜ4+)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ) вҲ’v(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ))
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)
G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ). (4.69)
We apply the chain rule on the first term,
ОҙОЈxc(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)
= ОҙОЈxc(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2) = ОҙОЈxc(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5)
4ПҮ(ВҜ5вҖІ, 2, ВҜ5, 2вҖІ).
(4.70)
The Hartree term becomes
Оҙ (vC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)G(ВҜ4, ВҜ4+))
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2)
Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ) = vC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)4ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, 2, ВҜ4, 2вҖІ),
(4.71)
where we used eq. (4.62) and that vC is not a functional of v. Finally, the last term is
Оҙv(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
Оҙv(2вҖІ, 2) = Оҙ(ВҜ3, 2вҖІ)Оҙ(ВҜ3вҖІ, 2).
(4.72)
Substituting eqs. (4.70, 4.71, 4.72), into eq. (4.69), and changing the variable name 5 вҶ’4 in eq.
(4.70), we obtain
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ)
= G(1, 2вҖІ)G(2, 1вҖІ)
+ G(1, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ)
ОҙОЈxc(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
ОҙG(ВҜ4вҖІ, ВҜ4) вҲ’ivC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ4вҖІ+, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)

4ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, 2, ВҜ4, 2вҖІ).
(4.73)
We define the nonВӯcorrelated twoВӯparticle function,
4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = G(1, 2вҖІ)G(2, 1вҖІ).
(4.74)
And with this eq. (4.73) becomes,
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = 4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) + 4ПҮnc(1, ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ, ВҜ3)Оһ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4, ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4вҖІ)4ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, 2, ВҜ4, 2вҖІ),
(4.75)
where
Оһ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4, ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4вҖІ) = ОҙОЈxc(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
ОҙG(ВҜ4вҖІ, ВҜ4) вҲ’ivC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ4вҖІ+, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ).
(4.76)
Eq. (4.75) with (4.76) is the BetheВӯSalpeter equation and we call eq. (4.76) for the kernel. 4ПҮ has a
connection to the density response function and can be viewed as a generalized, fourВӯpoint version
of ПҮ,
вҲ’4ПҮ(1, 2, 1+, 2+)i = вҲ’iОҙG(1, 1+)
Оҙv(2+, 2) = Оҙn(1)
Оҙv(2) = ПҮ(1, 2),
(4.77)
38
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
==PAGE:45==
where we used the expression for the density in eq. (4.67), and we also used that the nonВӯlocal
potential v is identical to a local potential when evaluated in the same point. This yields an expresВӯ
sion similar to definition of the density response function, eq. (3.60). With these arguments, the
nonВӯcorrelated twoВӯparticle function reads,
4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1+, 2+) = G(1, 2+)G(2, 1+).
(4.78)
Imagine we would like to draw this with a Feynman diagram. If a GreenвҖҷs function can be repВӯ
resented by a fermion line, then the two fermion lines in eq. (4.78) now should meet in the ends,
making the diagram for the nonВӯcorrelated twoВӯparticle function resemble a pair bubble. This turns
our thoughts to the nonВӯinteracting density response function. However, the two GreenвҖҷs functions
entering eq. (4.78) are not necessarily the nonВӯinteracting GreenвҖҷs functions as in the expression
for ПҮ0. If we approximate the GreenвҖҷs function in eq. (4.78) with the nonВӯinteracting GreenвҖҷs
functions then we obtain the nonВӯinteracting density response function. In that case eq. (4.78)
becomes,
4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1+, 2+) = G(1, 2+)G(2, 1+) вүҲG0(1, 2+)G0(2, 1+) = ПҮ0(1, 2).
(4.79)
Thus, if we put 1вҖІ = 1+ and 2вҖІ = 2+, neglect the vertex correction by taking ОҙОЈxc/ОҙG = 0 and
make the approximation of the singleВӯparticle GreenвҖҷs function as just described, we recover the
RPA Dyson equation for ПҮ, eq. (4.51), from the BSE (4.75).
While this is all very nice, we have not at this point gotten much further from the TDDFT descripВӯ
tion. We still have an exchangeВӯcorrelation contribution in the form of the vertex correction which
we do not know. To go further, we need the Hedin equations and the GWВӯapproximation.
Hedin equations
The Hedin equations are integral equations that can be used to calculate the GreenвҖҷs function, selfВӯ
energy, polarizability and vertex correction. A derivation of the Hedin equations can be found in
appendix F.
The Hedin equations consist of a Dyson equation for the irreducible vertex ЛңО“, with the first term
being a local contribution corresponding to the HartreeВӯFock selfВӯenergy and the last term being the
vertex correction. The second equation is an expression for the exchangeВӯcorrelation selfВӯenergy,
the third is the irreducible density response function, or polarizability, and the fourth is an equation
for the screened interaction. The fifth Hedin equation is simply the Dyson equation for the GreenвҖҷs
function, which we have seen before. The five Hedin equations are [10]:
ЛңО“(1, 2, 3) = Оҙ(1, 3)Оҙ(2, 3) + ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5) G(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ6)G(ВҜ6вҖІ, ВҜ5)ЛңО“(ВҜ6, ВҜ6вҖІ, 3)
ОЈxc(1, 2) = iW(1, ВҜ4)G(1, ВҜ3)ЛңО“(ВҜ3, 2, ВҜ4)
ВҜПҮ(1, 2) = вҲ’iG(1, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1)ЛңО“(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ, 2)
W(1, 2) = vC(1, 2) + vC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4)W(ВҜ4, 2)
G(1, 2) = G0(1, 2) + G0(1, 2)ОЈ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 2).
(4.80)
The Hedin equations can be solved iteratively for G and the selfВӯenergy ОЈ: the exchangeВӯcorrelation
part of the selfВӯenergy used to calculate G in the fifth of equations (4.80) is the selfВӯenergy calcuВӯ
lated using the same G in the second of the eqs., eq. (4.80). The selfВӯenergy and GreenвҖҷs function
obtained through this process can then be used to solve the BSE for the twoВӯparticle correlation
function 4ПҮ. However, in practical applications it is not possible to find a convergent behavior
in this set of equations without doing simplifications [16]. Therefore we consider the soВӯcalled
GWВӯapproximation.
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
39
==PAGE:46==
GWВӯapproximation
In order to determine the selfВӯenergy, we often choose to apply the soВӯcalled GWВӯapproximation.
This approximation corresponds to making an initial guess of neglecting the vertex correction by
assuming that [10],
ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5) = 0,
(4.81)
such that the irreducible vertex, ЛңО“, becomes,
ЛңО“(1, 2, 3) = Оҙ(1, 3)Оҙ(1, 2).
(4.82)
We then iterate the Hedin eqs. (4.80) once, obtaining that
ОЈxc(1, 2) вүҲiW(1, 2)G(1, 2).
(4.83)
Which then leads to,
ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
ОҙG(1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = iОҙ(1, 1вҖІ)Оҙ(2, 2вҖІ)W(1, 2) + iG(1, 2) ОҙW(1, 2)
ОҙG(1вҖІ, 2вҖІ).
(4.84)
We decide to neglect the last term in this equation since it is of higher order in W, and we are left
with a BSE kernel Оһ, eq. (4.76), consisting of two terms, one containing the bare and another the
screened interaction,
Оһ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4, ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4вҖІ) вүҲiОҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4вҖІ)Оҙ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4)W(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ) вҲ’ivC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ4вҖІ+, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ).
(4.85)
To comply with the notation in the literature used in this project [10][16], we have to make a small
redefinition at this point. Recall the relation between the twoВӯparticle correlation function and
the density response function, eq. (4.77), вҲ’4ПҮ(1, 2, 1+, 2+)i = ПҮ(1, 2). To get rid of the вҲ’i we
simply redefine 4ПҮ(1, 2, 1+, 2+) вҶ’вҲ’4ПҮ(1, 2, 1+, 2+)i. We there also redefine 4ПҮnc, eq. (4.74),
4ПҮnc = GG, such that 4ПҮnc вҶ’вҲ’i4ПҮnc. In this way, the BSE in the GWВӯapproximation becomes,
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ)i =4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ)i
+4ПҮnc(1, ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ, ВҜ3)i
 iОҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4вҖІ)Оҙ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4)W(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ) вҲ’ivC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ4вҖІ+, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
 4ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, 2, ВҜ4, 2вҖІ)i,
(4.86)
which simplifies to
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = 4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = 4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) + 4ПҮnc(1, ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ, ВҜ3)Оһ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4, ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4вҖІ)4ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, 2, ВҜ4, 2вҖІ).
(4.87)
And we have redefined the kernel in eq. (4.85),
Оһ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4, ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4вҖІ) = vC(ВҜ3, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ4вҖІ+, ВҜ4)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ) вҲ’W(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)Оҙ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4вҖІ)Оҙ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4).
(4.88)
The BSE after our reВӯdefinitions therefore retains the same form as in eq. (4.75). The first term
in the kernel corresponds to the RPA and the second term describes a direct interaction between
charged particles, and thus enables us to describe excitonic effects, which will perhaps become
more clear in a moment. If the screened Coulomb interaction W between the electron and hole is
small, corresponding to them being very weakly bound, the second term becomes negligible and
the expression reduces to RPA, as discussed earlier.
It is illustrative to consider the BSE in terms of Feynman diagrams, and so we represent eq. (4.87)
as [16],
4ПҮ =
1
1вҖІ
2вҖІ
2
=
1
1вҖІ
2вҖІ
2
+
1
1вҖІ
4вҖІ
4
3
3вҖІ
2вҖІ
2
Оһ
(4.89)
40
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
==PAGE:47==
where
3
3вҖІ
4вҖІ
4
Оһ
=
3
3вҖІ
4вҖІ
4 вҲ’
3
3вҖІ
4вҖІ
4
(4.90)
In order to obtain the twoВӯpoint ПҮ, the density response function, from the twoВӯparticle correlation
function 4ПҮ, we need to put 1вҖІ = 1+ and 2вҖІ = 2+. To illustrate this, imagine closing the fermion
lines at these points. In the left hand side of diagram (4.89) the two fermion lines 1 and 1вҖІ then meet
each other, which will be marked with a dot. The same goes for 2вҖІ and 2. The four fermion lines
have become two. Since there was already a circle in this diagram, the new diagram now looks
like a double circle. In the same way, the first term on the right hand side of eq. (4.89) becomes a
single circle, i.e. a pair bubble, and so on. This changes eq. (4.89) to become
1
2 = 1
2 + 1
4вҖІ
4
3
3вҖІ
2
Оһ
= 1
2 + 1
3
4вҖІ
2 + 1
3
3вҖІ
2
(4.91)
By iterating this, we see clearly that the expression contains a series of pairВӯbubbles connected
by interaction lines, and this is exactly the RPA expression. Further, we get the contributions
with the screened interaction. Thus, the deltaВӯfunctions on the vCВӯterm in eq. (4.88) meant that
the diagrams closed in a way that yielded Hartree interactions but no direct interaction between
charged particles, while on the other hand the deltaВӯfunctions in the WВӯterm yield interaction lines
that do mediate direct interaction. Consider the beginning of an expansion of the last term in eq.
(4.91),
1
3
3вҖІ
2 = 1
3
3вҖІ
2 + 1
4 4вҖІ
2
3
3вҖІ
+ 1
4вҖІ
4
3
3вҖІ
2 + ...
(4.92)
Which are now diagrams that contain the screened interaction between the electron and hole. The
screened Coulomb interaction W in the second term of eq. (4.87) will often be found using RPA.
However, this leads to an overestimation of the exciton binding energies. This is due to an overesВӯ
timation of the shortВӯrange correlation energies in RPA leading to an underestimation the screening
and thus an overestimation of W [16].
The BSE in frequency domain
To shortly sum up some of the previous sections, we would like to determine the twoВӯparticle corВӯ
relation function from the BSE, eq. (4.75). The twoВӯparticle correlation function then describes
the propagation of two particles under the influence of variations in the Hartree potential and the
exchangeВӯcorrelation selfВӯenergy. From the BSE we are able to determine the density response
function since ПҮ(1, 2) = 4ПҮ(1, 2, 1+, 2+), which then holds information about excitonic behavior
in the physical spectra as opposed to the ПҮ(1, 2) that can simply be found using RPA. The electronВӯ
hole interaction is described through a kernel, eq. (4.76), which contains the functional derivative
of the exchangeВӯcorrelation selfВӯenergy with respect to the GreenвҖҷs function, and this is what is
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
41
==PAGE:48==
different from the RPA where this quantity is neglected. In order to approximate the vertex corВӯ
rection, we use the GW approximation which corresponds to iterating the Hedin equations once
with an initial guess of ОҙОЈ/ОҙG = 0. Now, we would like to reformulate the equation in a way that
enables us to implement and solve it. For this, we need to initially consider the BSE in reciprocal
space.
We make the assumption that the system is time invariant and thus the BSE fulfills,
4ПҮ(t1 + c, t2 + c, t1вҖІ + c, t2вҖІ + c) = 4ПҮ(t1, t2, t1вҖІ, t2вҖІ),
(4.93)
where c is some constant time shift. We omitted the space argument for simplification. There are
multiple ways of defining a set of time arguments that fulfill this criteria and reduce the number of
time arguments. To follow the definitions and conventions of [10], we make the choice,
П„2 = t1 вҲ’t1вҖІ,
П„3 = t2 вҲ’t2вҖІ,
П„1 = 1
2 ((t1 вҲ’t2вҖІ) + (t1вҖІ вҲ’t2)) .
(4.94)
We then define the Fourier transform of the elements of the BSE as,
C(П„1, П„2, П„3) =
1
(2ПҖ)3 C(ВҜПү1, ВҜПү2, ВҜПү3)eвҲ’iВҜПү1П„1eвҲ’iВҜПү2П„2eвҲ’iВҜПү3П„3.
(4.95)
It is shown in [17] that this leads to the expression for the BSE in reciprocal space,
4ПҮ(Пү1, Пү2, Пү3) = 4ПҮnc(Пү1, Пү2, Пү3) +
4ПҮnc(Пү1, Пү2, ВҜПү4)
(2ПҖ)2
Оһ(Пү1ВҜПү4, ВҜПү5)4ПҮ(Пү1, ВҜПү5, Пү3),
(4.96)
Obtaining the density response function from this expression corresponds to letting
П„2 = П„3 = 0,
П„1 = t1 вҲ’t2,
(4.97)
once again assuming time invariance. In frequency space, this corresponds to,
4ПҮ(Пү) = 1
2ПҖ
4ПҮ(Пү, ВҜПү2) =
1
(2ПҖ)2
4ПҮ(Пү, ВҜПү2, ВҜПү3).
(4.98)
In this case, two of the exponentials in eq. (4.95) disappear, and it makes sense to make the defiВӯ
nition,
ПҮ(t1, t2) = 4ПҮ(t1, t2, t1+, t2+) =
1
(2ПҖ)3
4ПҮ(ВҜПү1, ВҜПү2, ВҜПү3)eвҲ’iВҜПү1П„1 вүЎ1
2ПҖ
4ПҮ(ВҜПү1)eвҲ’iВҜПү1П„1.
(4.99)
With this definition we then choose to cancel the Пү3 dependence in eq. (4.96), such that it becomes
4ПҮ(Пү1, Пү2) = 4ПҮnc(Пү1, Пү2) +
1
(2ПҖ)2
4ПҮnc(Пү1, Пү2, ВҜПү4)Оһ(Пү1, ВҜПү4, ВҜПү5)4ПҮ(Пү1, ВҜПү5).
(4.100)
Where the kernel in the GWВӯapproximation is,
Оһ(Пү1, Пү2, Пү3) = vC вҲ’W(Пү2 вҲ’Пү3).
(4.101)
Here we used that the time dependence in the Coulomb interaction is just a deltaВӯfunction, eq.
(4.19), and thus in reciprocal space it becomes a constant. Note however, that it is still a function
of the space arguments even though we for consistency did not write it. We may convince ourВӯ
selves that the screened interaction takes this form in reciprocal space by doing the inverse Fourier
transform,
W(t1, t2, t1вҖІ, t2вҖІ) =
1
(2ПҖ)3 W(ВҜПү2 вҲ’ВҜПү3)eвҲ’iВҜПү1П„1eвҲ’iВҜПү2П„2eвҲ’iВҜПү3П„3
=
1
(2ПҖ)2 W(ВҜПү4)eвҲ’iВҜПү4П„2eвҲ’iВҜПү3(П„3+П„2)Оҙ(П„1)
= 1
2ПҖW(ВҜПү4)eвҲ’iВҜПү4П„2Оҙ(П„1)Оҙ(П„3 + П„2),
(4.102)
42
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
==PAGE:49==
where we defined Пү4 = Пү2 вҲ’Пү3. Using the definitions in eq. (4.94), the two deltaВӯfunctions in eq.
(4.102) implies that
t1 вҲ’t1вҖІ = t2вҖІ вҲ’t2
t1 + t1вҖІ = t2вҖІ + t2,
(4.103)
which can be true only if t1 = t2вҖІ and t1вҖІ = t2, such that,
W(t1, t2, t1вҖІ, t2вҖІ) = 1
2ПҖW(ВҜПү4)eвҲ’iВҜПү4П„2Оҙ(t1, t2вҖІ)Оҙ(t1вҖІ, t2)
= W(П„2)Оҙ(t1, t2вҖІ)Оҙ(t1вҖІ, t2) = W(t2вҖІ вҲ’t2)Оҙ(t1, t2вҖІ)Оҙ(t1вҖІ, t2)
= W(t1 вҲ’t2)Оҙ(t1, t2вҖІ)Оҙ(t1вҖІ, t2).
(4.104)
This is exactly what appears in eq. (4.88) for the screened interaction, confirming that eq. (4.101)
is correct.
With this kernel, we then arrive at the expression for the BSE in the GWВӯapproximation in recipВӯ
rocal space [10],
4ПҮ(Пү1, Пү2) = 4ПҮnc(Пү1, Пү2) + 1
2ПҖ
4ПҮnc(Пү1, Пү2) (vC вҲ’W(Пү2 вҲ’ВҜПү3)) 4ПҮ(Пү1, ВҜПү3).
(4.105)
The nonВӯcorrelated twoВӯparticle function in the Lehmann representation
In appendix G we show how to derive twoВӯparticle nonВӯcorrelated function in the Lehmann repreВӯ
sentation. The result is,
4ПҮnc(r1, r2, r1вҖІ, r2вҖІ, Пү) =
X
i,j
(fj вҲ’fi)
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)П•j(r2)П•вҲ—
j(r1вҖІ)
Пү + iО·sgn(fj вҲ’fi) + Оөj вҲ’Оөi
.
(4.106)
where П•i(r) = вҹЁr|iвҹ©, and |iвҹ©are the eigenstates of the nonВӯinteracting Hamiltonian with eigenvalВӯ
ues Оөi, and occupation numbers fi.
The BSE as a matrix equation
This section takes outset in [10] unless otherwise indicated. Consider the general expression for
the BSE, eq. (4.87), restated here:
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = 4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) + 4ПҮnc(1, ВҜ3вҖІ, 1вҖІ, ВҜ3)Оһ(ВҜ3, ВҜ4, ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4вҖІ)4ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, 2, ВҜ4, 2вҖІ).
(4.107)
We introduce the new notation
4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) вүЎПҮ2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ.
(4.108)
With the inspiration from Einstein notation, we sum over repeated indices in the discrete limit or
integrate in the continuous limit. To avoid confusion, we will omit writing the preВӯsuperscript вҖқ4вҖқ
which otherwise indicates that ПҮ is a fourВӯpoint equation. Eq. (4.107) is then written as,
ПҮ2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ = ПҮ
2вҖІ,2
nc 1,1вҖІ + ПҮ
3,3вҖІ
nc 1,1вҖІОһ4вҖІ,4
3,3вҖІПҮ2вҖІ,2
4вҖІ,4.
(4.109)
In the discrete limit, where we sum over repeated indices, it is now clear, that the double subscript,
i.e. 1,1вҖҷ on the first term, can be thought of as a common index for the rows of a matrix, while the
superscript, i.e. 2вҖҷ,2 on the first term, refers to the columns. We can solve eq. (4.109) for ПҮ by
multiplying with ПҮвҲ’1
nc from the left and ПҮвҲ’1 from the rightНҫ
 ПҮвҲ’1
nc
3,4
1,1вҖІПҮ5,6
3,4
 ПҮвҲ’12вҖІ,2
5,6
=
 ПҮвҲ’1
nc
3,4
1,1вҖІ ПҮ
5,6
nc 3,4
 ПҮвҲ’12вҖІ,2
5,6 +
 ПҮвҲ’1
nc
3,4
1,1вҖІ ПҮ
5,6
nc 3,4Оһ7,8
5,6ПҮ9,10
7,8
 ПҮвҲ’12вҖІ,2
9,10
вҮ’
 ПҮвҲ’1
nc
2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ =
 ПҮвҲ’12вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ + Оһ2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ
вҮ’
 ПҮвҲ’12вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ =
 ПҮвҲ’1
nc
2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ вҲ’Оһ2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ.
(4.110)
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
43
==PAGE:50==
To determine ПҮ, we then need to find expressions for ПҮnc and Оһ.
To find ПҮnc, we would like to do a change of basis for the expression in eq. (4.106) from a position
to an eigenstate representation. Focusing on the states in the numerator of eq. (4.106) we have,
X
i,j
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)П•j(r2)П•вҲ—
j(r1вҖІ)
=
X
i,j
вҹЁr1|П•iвҹ©вҹЁП•i|r2вҖІвҹ©вҹЁr2|П•jвҹ©вҹЁП•j|r1вҖІвҹ©
=
X
i,j
вҹЁr1|вҹЁr2| (|П•iвҹ©|П•jвҹ©вҹЁП•i|вҹЁП•j|) |r2вҖІвҹ©|r1вҖІвҹ©
= вҹЁr1|вҹЁr2|
пЈ«
пЈӯX
i,j
|П•iвҹ©|П•jвҹ©вҹЁП•i|вҹЁП•j|
пЈ¶
пЈё|r2вҖІвҹ©|r1вҖІвҹ©.
(4.111)
If we then replace this position basis with an eigenstate basis we have
вҹЁП•1|вҹЁП•2|
пЈ«
пЈӯX
i,j
|П•iвҹ©|П•jвҹ©вҹЁП•i|вҹЁП•j|
пЈ¶
пЈё|П•2вҖІвҹ©|П•1вҖІвҹ©=
X
i,j
Оҙ1,iОҙ2,jОҙ1вҖІ,jОҙ2вҖІ,i
= Оҙ1,2вҖІОҙ2,1вҖІ,
(4.112)
where we used that fact that the eigenstates are orthogonal. The deltaВӯfunctions killed the sum. We
then have that the nonВӯcorrelated function becomes
ПҮ
n2вҖІ,n2
nc n1,n1вҖІ(Пү) =
(fn2 вҲ’fn1)Оҙn1,n2вҖІОҙn2,n1вҖІ
Пү + iО·sgn(fn2 вҲ’fn1) + Оөn2 вҲ’Оөn1
,
(4.113)
where ni refers to the eigenstates, П•ni. And so, the nonВӯcorrelated twoВӯparticle function is diagonal
in this basis. Note that this implies that we have to have fn1 Мё= fn2 since we need to invert (4.113)
in eq. (4.110). This constraint makes sense physicallyНҫ the occupation numbers fi at T = 0 are 1 if
the state ni refers to a valence band v and 0 if ni is a conduction band c. Thus, ПҮnc is only different
from zero if n1 = n2вҖІ = v and n1вҖІ = n2 = c or vice versa. Thus, intraband transitions do not
contribute. Optical absorption is mostly due to interband transitions and therefore it makes sense to
only include transitions where fn1вҖІ Мё= fn1 i.e. transitions between valenceВӯ and conduction bands.
Thus, from now on, the notation in ПҮnc using the band indices is a reference to these two options,
and ПҮnc can be written as a matrix on the form,
ПҮ
n2вҖІ,n2
nc n1,n1вҖІ =
 
ПҮ
cвҖІ,vвҖІ
nc c,v
0
0
ПҮ
vвҖІ,cвҖІ
nc v,c .
!
(4.114)
To realize what this implies for twoВӯparticle correlation function, we consider the BSE in eq.
(4.109). Iterating it just once would yield,
ПҮn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = ПҮ
n2вҖІ,n2
nc n1,n1вҖІ + ПҮ
n3,n3вҖІ
nc n1,n1вҖІОһn4вҖІ,n4
n3,n3вҖІПҮ
n2вҖІ,n2
nc n4вҖІ,n4 + ...
(4.115)
This implies that ПҮ can have a вҖқcrossed overвҖқ version of indices compared to 4.114: For examВӯ
ple, it is possible that the first matrix in the second term of eq. (4.115), which bears indexes
n1, n1вҖІ, n3, n3вҖІ, corresponds to v, c while the last matrix, with the indices n4вҖІ, n4, n2вҖІ, n2 correВӯ
sponds to c, v, yielding the overall indexing, ПҮc,v
v,c. Thus, compared to ПҮnc, ПҮ has two more possible
set of indices,
ПҮn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ =
 
ПҮcвҖІ,vвҖІ
c,v
ПҮvвҖІ,cвҖІ
c,v
ПҮcвҖІ,vвҖІ
v,c
ПҮvвҖІ,cвҖІ
v,c
!
,
(4.116)
44
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
==PAGE:51==
i.e. this matrix can have offВӯdiagonal elements different from zero.
We would then like to determine the kernel in this new basis. In general, if we want a state |Fвҹ©in
a basis |iвҹ©we write,
вҹЁi|Fвҹ©= вҹЁi|ВҜrвҹ©вҹЁВҜr|Fвҹ©= F(ВҜr)П•вҲ—
i (ВҜr),
(4.117)
where we used that
R
|rвҹ©вҹЁr|dr = 1. So changing the basis of a four point operator from a position
basis to a basis of eigenstates is obtained through,
вҹЁn1|вҹЁn2|F|n1вҖІвҹ©|n2вҖІвҹ©= F n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = вҹЁn1|ВҜr1вҹ©вҹЁn2|ВҜr2вҹ©вҹЁВҜr1|вҹЁВҜr2|F|ВҜr1вҖІвҹ©|ВҜr2вҖІвҹ©вҹЁВҜr1вҖІ|n1вҖІвҹ©вҹЁВҜr2вҖІ|n2вҖІвҹ©
= П•вҲ—
n1(ВҜr1)П•вҲ—
n2(ВҜr2)F(ВҜr1,ВҜr2,ВҜr1вҖІ,ВҜr2вҖІ)П•n1вҖІ(ВҜr1вҖІ)П•n2вҖІ(ВҜr2вҖІ).
(4.118)
Making this change of basis on the direct and screened interaction term respectively in the kernel
yields
(W/vC)n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = П•вҲ—
n1(ВҜr1)П•вҲ—
n2(ВҜr2)(W/vC)(ВҜr1,ВҜr1вҖІ)П•n1вҖІ(ВҜr1вҖІ)П•n2вҖІ(ВҜr2вҖІ),
(4.119)
where an explicit expression the screened interaction can be found by combining eq. (4.41) with
(4.53), such that [18],
W(1, 2) = ОөвҲ’1(1, ВҜ3)vC(ВҜ3, 2).
(4.120)
We can write a twoВӯpoint function as a four point function using that f(1, 1вҖІ) = f(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ)Оҙ(1, 2вҖІ)Оҙ(2, 1вҖІ).
Then, using the expression for the kernel in equation (4.88) written with our new notation (4.108),
we obtain that
Оһ2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ = vC(1, 2)Оҙ(2вҖІ+, 2)Оҙ(1, 1вҖІ) вҲ’W(1, 1вҖІ)Оҙ(1, 2вҖІ)Оҙ(1вҖІ, 2)
= vC(1, 2, 2вҖІ, 1вҖІ) вҲ’W(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = v1вҖІ,2
1,2вҖІ вҲ’W 2вҖІ,2
1,1вҖІ .
(4.121)
Then, in our new basis,
Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = vn1вҖІ,n2
n1,n2вҖІ вҲ’W n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ ,
(4.122)
where the bare and screened interaction terms are defined in eq. (4.119). More explicit expressions
in this basis are derived in appendix H together with eq. (4.120) in reciprocal space. With eq.
(4.113) and (4.122) we can express the twoВӯparticle correlation function in eq. (4.110) in the new
basis. We use that the deltaВӯfunction in eq. (4.113) allows us to make the change f2 вҶ’f1вҖІ and
Оөn1 вҶ’Оөn2вҖІ for later convenience,
 ПҮвҲ’1n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ =
 ПҮвҲ’1
nc
n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ вҲ’Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ
= (z + Оөn2 вҲ’Оөn2вҖІ)Оҙn1,n2вҖІОҙn2,n1вҖІ
(fn1вҖІ вҲ’fn1)
вҲ’Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ
=
1
(fn1вҖІ вҲ’fn1)
 (z + Оөn2 вҲ’Оөn2вҖІ)Оҙn1,n2вҖІОҙn2,n1вҖІ вҲ’(fn1вҖІ вҲ’fn1)Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ

,
(4.123)
where z = Пү + iО·sgn(fn1вҖІ вҲ’fn1). We define a matrix,
F n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = (fn2 вҲ’fnвҖІ
2)Оҙn1,n2вҖІОҙn1вҖІ,n2.
(4.124)
Which is a diagonal matrix, and which now fulfills that
F n3,n4
n1,n1вҖІОһn2вҖІ,n2
n3,n4 = (fn4 вҲ’fn3)Оҙn1,n3Оҙn1вҖІ,n4Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n3,n4 = (fn1вҖІ вҲ’fn1)Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ,
(4.125)
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
45
==PAGE:52==
which matches the last term of eq. (4.123), and being a diagonal matrix, we may write the prefactor
as the inverse of the matrix F. This means that we can write eq. (4.123) as,
 ПҮвҲ’1n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ =
 F вҲ’1n3,n4
n1,n1вҖІ
 (z + Оөn2 вҲ’Оөn2вҖІ)Оҙn3,n2вҖІОҙn2,n4 вҲ’F n5,n6
n3,n4 Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n5,n6

.
(4.126)
We now define a twoВӯparticle Hamiltonian,
 H2pn2вҖІ,n2
n3,n4 = (Оөn2вҖІ вҲ’Оөn2)Оҙn3,n2вҖІОҙn2,n4 + F n5,n6
n3,n4 Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n5,n6
= (Оөn2вҖІ вҲ’Оөn2)Оҙn3,n2вҖІОҙn2,n4 + (fn4 вҲ’fn3)Оһn2вҖІ,n2
n3,n4 ,
(4.127)
and with this definition, eq. (4.126) becomes,
 ПҮвҲ’1n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = вҲ’
 F вҲ’1n3,n4
n1,n1вҖІ
 H2p вҲ’zI
n2вҖІ,n2
n3,n4 .
(4.128)
We invert this equation to solve for ПҮ,
ПҮn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = вҲ’
 H2p вҲ’zI
вҲ’1n3,n4
n1,n1вҖІ F n2вҖІ,n2
n3,n4
= вҲ’
 H2p вҲ’zI
вҲ’1n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ
 fn2 вҲ’fn2вҖІ

=
 H2p вҲ’zI
вҲ’1n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ
 fn2вҖІ вҲ’fn2

.
(4.129)
From linear algebra we know that the eigenvectors of H2p do not change when we add an identity
matrix, while the eigenvalues change with z,
if H2pv = Ev then (H2p вҲ’zI)v = (EО» вҲ’z)v.
(4.130)
If we assume that the screened interaction is instantaneous, such that H2p is not a function of
frequency, then eq. (4.130) is an ordinary eigenvalue problem. Further, the matrix H2p вҲ’zI can
be expressed in terms of a matrix A containing the eigenvectors v in the columns, and a matrix Оӣ
containing the eigenvalues EО» вҲ’z in the diagonal,
H2p вҲ’zI = AОӣAвҲ’1,
(4.131)
or the inverse relation, since this is what we have in eq. (4.129),
(H2p вҲ’zI)вҲ’1 = AОӣвҲ’1AвҲ’1.
(4.132)
We then multiply by the identity, (AвҖ )вҲ’1AвҖ , and obtain
(H2p вҲ’zI)вҲ’1 = AОӣвҲ’1AвҲ’1 = AОӣвҲ’1AвҲ’1(AвҖ )вҲ’1AвҖ  = AОӣвҲ’1NвҲ’1AвҖ ,
(4.133)
where we made the definition
N = AвҖ A.
(4.134)
Writing eq. (4.133) with the notation generally used in this section instead of matrix products, and
using that ОӣвҲ’1 is diagonal such that the elements of it is just 1/(EО» вҲ’z), we have
((H2p вҲ’zI)вҲ’1)n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ =
X
О»,О»вҖІ
AО»
n1,n1вҖІ
 NвҲ’1О»вҖІ
О» (AвҖ )n2вҖІ,n2
О»вҖІ
EО» вҲ’z
=
X
О»,О»вҖІ
AО»
n1,n1вҖІ
 NвҲ’1О»вҖІ
О» (AвҲ—)О»вҖІ
n2вҖІ,n2
EО» вҲ’z
,
(4.135)
46
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
==PAGE:53==
where
NО»вҖІ
О» =
X
n1,n2
(AвҲ—)О»
n1,n2AО»вҖІ
n1,n2,
(4.136)
is the overlap matrix between the eigenvectors of H2p. Note that this is not the identity, because
H2p is not Hermitian. With this, eq. (4.129) then becomes,
ПҮn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ =
X
О»,О»вҖІ
AО»
n1,n1вҖІ(NвҲ’1)О»вҖІ
О» (AвҲ—)О»вҖІ
n2вҖІ,n2
EО» вҲ’z
 fn2вҖІ вҲ’fn2

.
(4.137)
With this, the primary task becomes finding the eigenvalues and Вӯstates of the Hamiltonian in
eq. (4.127). Consider this together with eq. (4.116) where we saw that the states entering 4ПҮ
corresponds to four different combinations of v, c and c, v. And so the Hamiltonian can be split up
in the same way:
 H2pn2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ =
  H2pcвҖІ,vвҖІ
c,v
 H2pvвҖІ,cвҖІ
c,v
 H2pcвҖІ,vвҖІ
v,c
 H2pvвҖІ,cвҖІ
v,c
!
,
(4.138)
where
 H2pcвҖІ,vвҖІ
c,v
= (ОөcвҖІ вҲ’ОөvвҖІ)Оҙv,vвҖІОҙc,cвҖІ + ОһcвҖІ,vвҖІ
c,v .
(4.139)
This part of the Hamiltonian corresponds to transitions at positive frequencies. The transitions at
negative frequencies are described by
 H2pvвҖІ,cвҖІ
v,c
= (ОөvвҖІ вҲ’ОөcвҖІ)Оҙv,vвҖІОҙc,cвҖІ вҲ’ОһvвҖІ,cвҖІ
v,c .
(4.140)
The offВӯdiagonal elements are the soВӯcalled coupling terms,
 H2pvвҖІ,cвҖІ
c,v
= ОһvвҖІ,cвҖІ
c,v
 H2pcвҖІ,vвҖІ
v,c
= вҲ’ОһcвҖІ,vвҖІ
v,c .
(4.141)
It is possible to reduce the problem further by considering the explicit kВӯpoint dependence of the
eigenstates and by accepting to find the density response function of a specific q instead of for all
q at once. Consider part of the Hamiltonian, eq. (4.139), with kernel, Оһ, found in eq. (4.122),
now expressed explicitly in a bandВӯmomentum basis, such that the eigenstates, v and c, now are
considered to consist of an index referring to the band and an index referring to the kВӯpoint [18],
 H2pcвҖІk4,vвҖІk2
ck1,vk3
= (ОөcвҖІk4 вҲ’ОөvвҖІk2)Оҙv,vвҖІОҙc,cвҖІОҙk1,k4Оҙk2,k3 + ОһcвҖІk4,vвҖІk2
ck1,vk3 ,
(4.142)
such that v(вҖІ) and c(вҖІ) now refers only to the band instead of the total eigenstate. The deltaВӯfunction
on the first term and momentum conservation in the kernel means that we may fix one of the four kВӯ
points. LetвҖҷs explore why that is. First of all, the bare and screened Coulomb interaction conserve
momentum at the vertices of their Feynman diagrams,
k3
k1 = k3 + q
k2
k4 = k2 + q
k3 + q
k2 + q
k3
k2
(4.143)
The photon line in the bare Coulomb interactions carries momentum q, and the screened interaction
carries momentum k2 вҲ’k3. To illustrate why this is a reduction of the problem, consider an
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
47
==PAGE:54==
example where we have 5 valence and 5 conduction bands with 10 kВӯpoints each, such that we have
5Г—10 = 50 valence eigenstates and 50 conduction eigenstates. The twoВӯparticle Hamiltonian then
has the dimension of (50 Г— 50)(50 Г— 50). But due to the momentum conservation just described,
one of the four momenta in the expression is fixed. In this way we are left with 5Г—1 = 5 eigenstates
(corresponding to the number of v or c bands) for one of the indices. And if we further fix q, we
are left with only two momenta that can vary, and the Hamiltonian has the reduced dimension of
(50 Г— 5)(50 Г— 5). For example if we know k2, q and k3 in the diagrams, we can find k1 and k4.
Eq. (4.142) then becomes,
 H2pcвҖІ,vвҖІ,k2
c,v,k3 (q) = (ОөcвҖІ,k2+q вҲ’ОөvвҖІ,k2)Оҙv,vвҖІОҙc,cвҖІОҙk2,k3 + ОһcвҖІ,vвҖІ,k2
c,v,k3 .
(4.144)
With this, our final step is to find the twoВӯpoint density response function from eq. (4.137) in
reciprocal space. First of all, we need to transform the BSE back from the basis that we transformed
it into, eq. (4.118), by doing the inverse transformation,
ПҮ(r1, r2, r3, r4, q, Пү) =
X
n1,n2
n3,n4
X
k2,k3,q
П•n1,k3+q(r1)П•n2,k2(r2)ПҮn1,n3,k2
n4,n2,k3(q, Пү)П•вҲ—
n3,k3(r3)П•вҲ—
n4,k2+q(r4).
(4.145)
And to obtain the density response function, we just need to set r1 = r2 and r3 = r4. The Fourier
transform was defined back in eq. (3.30). And with this, we then have,
ПҮG,GвҖІ(q, Пү) = 1
V
X
n1,n2
n3,n4
X
k2,k3,qвҖІ
ZZ
ei(G+q)rП•n1,k3+q(r)П•n2,k2(rвҖІ)ПҮn1,n3,k2
n4,n2,k3(q, Пү)
Г—П•вҲ—
n3,k3(r)П•вҲ—
n4,k2+q(rвҖІ)eвҲ’i(GвҖІ+qвҖІ)rвҖІdrdrвҖІ.
(4.146)
Back at eq. (3.32) and in the text below, we saw that we need to have q = qвҖІ. And using eq. (3.36),
where we saw how to convert the integral to bracket notation, we finally obtain,
ПҮG,GвҖІ(q, Пү) = 1
V
X
n1,n2
n3,n4
X
k2,k3
вҹЁП•n3,k3|ei(G+q)r|П•n1,k3+qвҹ©ПҮn1,n3,k2
n4,n2,k3(q, Пү)вҹЁП•n4,k2+q|eвҲ’i(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІ|П•n2,k2вҹ©.
(4.147)
And the kernel entering the Hamiltonian are,
ОһcвҖІ,vвҖІ,k2
c,v,k3
= (vC)v,vвҖІ,k3
c,cвҖІ,k2 вҲ’W cвҖІ,vвҖІk2
c,v,k3 ,
(4.148)
where
(vC)v,vвҖІ,k3
c,cвҖІ,k2 (q) = 1
V
X
G
vC
G(q)вҹЁП•c,k3+q|ei(G+q)r|П•v,k3вҹ©вҹЁП•vвҖІ,k2|eвҲ’i(G+q)rвҖІ|П•cвҖІ,k2+qвҹ©,
(4.149)
and
W cвҖІ,vвҖІk2
c,v,k3 (q) = 1
V
X
G,GвҖІ
ОөвҲ’1
G,GвҖІ(q)vC
GвҖІ,GвҖІ(q)вҹЁП•c,k2+q|eвҲ’i(G+q)r|П•ncвҖІ,k2вҹ©вҹЁП•vвҖІ,k3+q|ei(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІ|П•nv,k3вҹ©.
(4.150)
Eqs. (4.149, 4.150) are derived in appendix H.
48
4.4. BetheВӯSalpeter equation
==PAGE:55==
Scaling problems
With the BSE on matrix form, eq. (4.137), where the elements of the equation are found by solving
the eigenvalue problem for the BSE Hamiltonian in eq. (4.138), we can find the density response
function in reciprocal space using eq. (4.147).
However, creating the BSE Hamiltonian is computationally costly. The size of the matrix scales
as N2
v N2
c N2
k, where Nv are the number of valence bands, Nc the number of conduction bands and
Nk the number of kВӯpoints, cf. eq. (4.144). We need to determine the kernel Оһ, eq. (4.148) for
every element in this matrix, which quickly become a lot of elements. In particular evaluating the
many matrix elements of W is expensive [10]. vC is diagonal in G which reduces the problem of
determining its matrix elements slightly, but for every of the N2
v N2
c N2
k elements, W needs to be
calculated for all combinations of G and GвҖІ and we also need to determine ОөвҲ’1. The latter will be
found using an RPA calculation. But this means that for every matrix element and combination of
G and GвҖІ, one has to do an RPA calculation to find ОөвҲ’1 and evaluate the brackets of eq. (4.150).
Further, when solving the eigenvalue problem of the BSE Hamiltonian, such that we can construct
the twoВӯparticle correlation function using eq. (4.137), we need to perform a diagonalization. If
many transitions are included, the matrix may become too large and memory problems may occur
[10].
The fact that the BSE is so computationally heavy means that in real calculations we have to reduce
the number of bands that we include in the calculations. In practice, this means that we will only
include a few valence and conduction bands close to the Fermi energy. The absorption spectrum of
a given material depends on the energy differences between the bands, and if we only include some
of the highest valence bands and the lowest conduction bands, we will only obtain the absorption
spectrum at low frequencies, since these transitions are the lowest energy excitations possible for
the material in consideration. The imaginary part of the density response function corresponds
to specific transitions between the bands and it is local in nature, as seen in section 3.3 about the
KramersВӯKronig relation, the peaks having just some small finite broadening. Therefore, unless
a specific frequency transition has sufficient energy to cross over into bands not encompassed in
the BSE calculation, the limited selection of bands incorporated in the BSE will still accurately
yield the absorption spectrum at low frequencies. However, as one may recall from section 3.3,
the real part will depend on the entire spectrum of the imaginary part. Thus, a consequence of only
including a few bands in the calculation is that the real part of the density response function not
will be converged, nor at low frequencies.
TammВӯDancoff approximation
To handle at least some of the scaling problems in the BSE, we can use the TammВӯDancoff apВӯ
proximation. There are two different versions of this approximation. According to [10] and [16]
the TammВӯDancoff approximation involves only including the first and fourth quadrant of the BSE
Hamiltonian (4.138), thus excluding the coupling elements of the matrix. In this way, the matrices
entering the BSE become Hermitian. According to [18] on the other hand, the TammВӯDancoff inВӯ
volves only including the positive frequency transitions, which in our expression for H2p, (4.138),
corresponds to only including the first quadrant in the calculations. We look more into these two
versions of the TammВӯDancoff approximation in chapter 6.
4.5
Summary
LetвҖҷs sum a bit up on what we have learned so far, also from previous chapters. In chapter 3, we saw
how to derive an exact expression for the density response function. We saw that through TDDFT,
it can be connected to the nonВӯinteracting density response function, eq. (3.68), which is a twoВӯ
point Dyson equation for the density response function containing a term with the Hartree potential
and a term with the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel. We then looked into the alternative formulation
of manyВӯbody perturbation theory and saw that the term in TDDFT containing the Hartree potential
4.5. Summary
49
==PAGE:56==
corresponds to the expression we obtain using RPA. The RPA, yielding a mean field expression
for the interaction between charges in the system, contains the longВӯrange Coulomb interaction
and is therefore successful in describing plasmons, but fails in capturing excitonic effects due to
the neglect of vertex corrections. To go further, we introduced and derived the BSE, obtaining a
Dyson equation for the twoВӯparticle correlation function, which is a four point equation that can
be used to obtain the density response function. We then applied the GWВӯapproximation and saw
that the kernel is split in two terms like in TDDFT, the first term once again corresponding to
RPA, but the second term now describing the screened Coulomb interaction between electrons and
holes, thus capturing the excitonic effects. We then discussed the fact that the BSE, being a fourВӯ
point equation, is computationally expensive, and introduced the TammВӯDancoff approximation
to reduce the problem slightly. We have also previously seen that the density response function
obeys the KramersВӯKronig relation, section 3.3. Thus, the real part of the density response function
depends on the entire imaginary part of the function, meaning that we can only assume it to be fully
converged if all optical transitions are included. For real material however, we will not be able to
include enough bands in the BSE calculation for the real part to be converged.
50
4.5. Summary
==PAGE:57==
5
Hybrid Approaches: Creating Hybrid
Expressions for Electric Susceptibility
The BSE calculations will only include few bands around the band gap. This means that we will
only have information about transitions up to small, finite frequencies, but perhaps a greater issue in
regards to this, is that the real part of the density response function will most often not be converged
at low frequencies. The RPA density response function on the other hand can easily be calculated
up to very high frequencies, but does not capture the excitonic effects which, fortunately, mostly
are present at the low frequencies close to the band gap. Motivated by this, we will now search for
hybrid functions that combine the strengths of these methods.
Our first attempt is to take the twoВӯpoint equation from TDDFT and determine an expression for
the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel based on the BSE calculated density response function in order to
capture excitonic interactions. The Hartree term can of course be found by doing an RPA calcuВӯ
lation. We will call this method for determining the density response function the Kernel Hybrid
function. We will see how to determine another hybrid from a diagrammatic derivation also comВӯ
bining RPA and BSE calculations and call this method the Simple Hybrid function. We will show
that the Kernel Hybrid and the Simple Hybrid functions can be connected, thereby enabling us
to interpolate between them. We then consider a more simple approach, where we do an interВӯ
polating transition between the imaginary part of a BSE calculated density response function at
low frequencies and an RPA calculated one at higher frequencies, obtaining the imaginary part of
an approximated combined density response function, which we then Hilbert transform to obtain
the entire approximated density response function. We call this the Transition Вӯ H method, H for
Hilbert. And we finally also consider a variant of the Simple Hybrid where we only create the hyВӯ
brid from the imaginary parts of the RPA and BSE density response functions and then do a Hilbert
transform to find the real part. We call this the Simple Hybrid Вӯ H method. We explain the work of
[2] in order to be able to compare our results to their method. Here they made an exponential tail on
the imaginary part of the BSE density response function in order to impose the fВӯsum rule, i.e. the
area of the tail should correspond to that of the transitions not included in the BSE calculation, and
this imaginary part was then Hilbert transformed. We call this the fВӯsum method. First however,
we will introduce the concept of finite density response functions, since all hybrid functions make
use of this concept.
5.1
Finite density response functions
In principle, the BSE and RPA calculated density response functions should include infinitely many
bands. That is of course not possible, and for practical applications not necessary either. Instead,
having a finite but converged number of bands will suffice. While this is achievable for the RPA, the
computational cost of the BSE unfortunately makes convergence in the number of bands unattainВӯ
able. Therefore all hybrid functions will in some way make use the concept of вҖҷfiniteвҖҷ density
response function in the sense that not a converged number of bands are included in the calculation
of them. They will also depend on a fully converged RPA, which then in our terminology is not
finite. Thus, we introduce a subscript, F, for finite on the density response functions. Finding the
finite BSE calculated density response function, ПҮBSE
F
, then involves selecting a computationally
realistic number of bands to be included, while at the same time taking into account that we would
like to include enough bands for the most prominent excitonic effects to be captured. A reasonable
rule of thumb turns out be to include bands within about a cutoff of Оҙ = 2 eV on each side of
the band gap, вҲҶEgap. This means, that we are ensured that all transitions in the frequency range
Пүc = EF Вұ
 вҲҶEgap/2 + Оҙ

are included, and the BSE calculation should describe the correct
Chapter 5. Hybrid Approaches: Creating Hybrid Expressions for Electric Susceptibility
51
==PAGE:58==
spectrum including excitonic peaks at these low frequencies up until this cutoff. After this point,
ideally the fully converged RPA calculation should contain the correct spectrum. There will also
be some transitions from the BSE calculation up until the maximal q = 0 energy difference beВӯ
tween the lowest included valence band and the highest included conduction band, we can call this
frequency point Пүm where m stands for maximum. The concept is illustrated in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Band structure of bulk rutile TiO2. The red lines represent the cutoff limit. The blue
bands are the ones included in the calculation, while the green bands are not. It is hard to see why
the lowest included band falls within the cutoff, so we have marked the point where it is on the
inclusion side of the cutoff limit.
Figure 5.1 illustrates how we select the number of bands included in ПҮBSE
F
. The red curves mark
the range of included energies. This leads to the blue bands being included, while the green bands
are not. We have marked the direct band gap with a red arrow to the right, which according to the
DFTВӯPBE calculation is 1.756 eV and located in the О“Вӯpoint. We then include bands within 2.0 eV
to each side of this direct band gap. This leads to 6 valence bands and 6 conduction bands being
included in the calculation, all marked with numbers at the right hand side of the figure. As the
figure illustrates, the bands just need to be within the range of included energies at one point to be
included in the calculations. Thus, the sixth valence band is just included since it crosses the red
line at the point marked with a black circle.
Some hybrids make use of a finite RPA calculation, ПҮRPA
F
, as well. In which ways will become
clearer in the next sections. But the investigations in this project revealed that the ПҮRPA
F
calculaВӯ
tions, although they should include the same bands as included in the ПҮBSE
F
calculation, should be
converged with respect to the number of kВӯpoints, even when it was not possible to obtain full kВӯ
points convergence in the ПҮBSE
F
calculation due to memory problems. The peaks and irregularities
of the ПҮRPA
F
calculations, present solely due to a lack of kВӯpoints, will be reflected in the hybrid denВӯ
sity response functions, i.e. they will not be removed by whatever operation that is done to create
the hybrid. And since these irregularities or peaks are only present due to a lack of convergence,
they are of course very unwanted. When the BSE calculations are not fully kВӯpoint converged,
they too are expected to contain convergence related peaks and irregularities, but it is not so that
the errors in the ПҮRPA
F
and ПҮBSE
F
will cancel each other. Thus, to minimize the amount of unwanted
behavior in the hybrid density response functions, we restrict the convergence issues to be in the
52
5.1. Finite density response functions
==PAGE:59==
ПҮBSE
F
calculations. You can find more information on the actual calculations and convergence in
appendix I.
5.2
The Kernel Hybrid
In the beginning of this thesis we studied linear response theory, and we derived the density reВӯ
sponse function using the formalism of TDDFT. Thus, an obvious way of avoiding using the fourВӯ
point BSE is using the density response function from TDDFT since it is just a twoВӯpoint equation.
The formulation in TDDFT is thus simpler than that of BSE although the general expressions, eq.
(3.68) and (4.75) are constructed very similarly with the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel fxc being
analogous to the functional derivative of the selfВӯenergy with respect to the GreenвҖҷs function in
the BSE. However, the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel fxc is unknown, whereas we saw that we can
approximate the selfВӯenergy in the GWВӯapproximation. So even though it is easier to solve the
twoВӯargument TDDFT equation than the fourВӯargument BSE, we have to work our way around not
knowing the kernel.
The expression used in TDDFT in reciprocal space was given in eq. (3.68) and is restated here for
convenience, but without the function arguments q, Пү to save space,
ПҮGGвҖІ = ПҮ0
GGвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮ0
GGвҖІвҖІ
 fxc
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІ + vC
GвҖІвҖІ

ПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ.
(5.1)
Inspired by the similarities between the construction of the BSE and the TDDFT density response
functions, i.e. they are both Dyson equations, the idea is now to construct an exchangeВӯcorrelation
kernel using the BSE. In this way, we hope to obtain information about the twoВӯparticle interactions
from the BSE in the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel.
We start by expressing eq. (5.1) explicitly in terms of the RPA density response function, eq.
(4.51), this time written with explicit matrix notation,
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІ = ПҮ0
GGвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮ0
GGвҖІвҖІvC
GвҖІвҖІПҮRPA
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІ
=
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮ0
GGвҖІвҖІ
 ОҙGвҖІвҖІGвҖІ + vC
GвҖІвҖІПҮRPA
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІ

.
(5.2)
We isolate ПҮ0 in this expression,
ПҮ0
GGвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ .
(5.3)
Substituting this expression for ПҮ0 into eq. (5.1) we have,
ПҮGGвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ
+
X
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІ,GIV
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 fxc
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGIV + vC
GIV

ПҮGIV GвҖІ.
(5.4)
We then multiply by the inverse RPA density response function,
X
GвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
G,GвҖІвҖІПҮGвҖІвҖІGвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GX
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GGX ПҮRPA
GXGвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ
+
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ,
GIV ,GX
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GGX ПҮRPA
GXGвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 fxc
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGIV + vC
GIV

ПҮGIV GвҖІ,
(5.5)
5.2. The Kernel Hybrid
53
==PAGE:60==
or
X
GвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
G,GвҖІвҖІ ПҮGвҖІвҖІGвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ОҙG,GвҖІвҖІ  Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ
+
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ,GIV
ОҙG,GвҖІвҖІ  Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 fxc
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGIV + vC
GIV

ПҮGIV GвҖІ,
=
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
G,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІвҖІ,GIV
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
G,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 fxc
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGIV + vC
GIV

ПҮGIV GвҖІ.
(5.6)
And rearranging further,
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ ПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ
=
X
GвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPA
G,GвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ
+
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ,GIV
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPA
G,GвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 fxc
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGIV + vC
GIV

ПҮGIV GвҖІ,
(5.7)
or,
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 Оҙ + vCПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ ПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ = ОҙG,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІвҖІ,GIV
ОҙG,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ  fxc
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGIV + vC
GIV

ПҮGIV GвҖІ
= ОҙG,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ

fxc
GGвҖІвҖІ + vC
GвҖІвҖІ

ПҮGвҖІвҖІGвҖІ.
(5.8)
Multiplying out the parenthesis on the left hand side of this equation,
X
GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
G,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ ПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ + ОҙG,GвҖІвҖІвҖІvC
GПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ = ОҙG,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ

fxc
GGвҖІвҖІ + vC
GвҖІвҖІ

ПҮGвҖІвҖІGвҖІ
X
GвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
G,GвҖІвҖІ ПҮGвҖІвҖІGвҖІ +
vC
GПҮGGвҖІ = ОҙG,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ
fxc
GGвҖІвҖІПҮGвҖІвҖІGвҖІ +
vC
GПҮGGвҖІ,
(5.9)
and then multiplying with the RPA density response function from the left we obtain,
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ ПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІОҙGвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІfxc
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ
X
GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ОҙGGвҖІвҖІвҖІПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ = ПҮRPA
GGвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІfxc
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ
ПҮGGвҖІ = ПҮRPA
GGвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІfxc
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІПҮGвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ.
(5.10)
We then isolate the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel,
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GGвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮGвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІ вҲ’ПҮRPA
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІ

(ПҮ)вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ =
X
G
вҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
GIV ,GX
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GGвҖІвҖІ ПҮRPA
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІfxc
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGIV ПҮGIV GXПҮвҲ’1
GXGвҖІ
вҮ’fxc
GGвҖІ =
 ПҮRPAвҲ’1
GGвҖІ вҲ’(ПҮ)вҲ’1
GGвҖІ .
(5.11)
54
5.2. The Kernel Hybrid
==PAGE:61==
Up until now, everything have been exact. But now, in order to get further, we will assume that
the full density response function ПҮ, can be approximated by the BSE density response function,
ПҮBSE. However, since we will only be able to include a few bands around the band gap as exВӯ
plained in section 5.1, we can only use finite calculations, ПҮBSE
F
and ПҮRPA
F
, and thus we make the
approximation to the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel,
fxc
GGвҖІ вүҲ
 ПҮRPA
F
вҲ’1
GGвҖІ вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’1
GGвҖІ .
(5.12)
We then use the kernel, eq. (5.12), in eq. (5.10), i.e. the TDDFT expression in terms of the RPA,
yielding a Dyson equation for the Kernel Hybrid, ПҮKH,
ПҮKH
GGвҖІ = ПҮRPA
GGвҖІ +
X
GвҖІвҖІ,GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPA
F
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІ вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІвҖІ

ПҮKH
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІ,
(5.13)
which we may solve for the Kernel Hybrid function,
X
GвҖІвҖІ
 
ОҙGGвҖІвҖІ вҲ’
X
GвҖІвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GGвҖІвҖІвҖІ
 ПҮRPA
F
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІ вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’1
GвҖІвҖІвҖІGвҖІвҖІ
!
ПҮKH
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІ = ПҮRPA
GGвҖІ
ПҮKH
GGвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ

1 вҲ’ПҮRPA  ПҮRPA
F
вҲ’1 вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’1вҲ’1
G,GвҖІвҖІ ПҮRPA
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІ.
(5.14)
The function should be understood in the following way: up until the frequencies corresponding
to the bands included in the finite calculations, that is within Пүm, the kernel is different from zero,
and after this point, it becomes zero. However, remember that we are only sure that all transitions
are included up until Пүc. If we are above the cutoff point, the Kernel Hybrid function yields the
full ПҮRPA density response function, but if we are below, the kernel introduced a correction to the
full RPA calculation.
Due to the construction of the kernel, eq. (5.12), and the way it appears in the overall expression for
the hybrid density response function, eq. (5.14), it is very sensitive to small differences between
the finite RPA and BSE calculation at larger energies, where only few transitions are present: the
one minus the kernel is inverted, and the finite RPA and BSE calculations are both inverted to
construct the kernel. So a small value for the density response functions at a given frequency in
the imaginary parts of the RPA and BSE calculations can result in a large kernel if the two values are
not the exact same. And the large kernel then results in a small hybrid density response function.
At energies above Пүc, the imaginary parts of ПҮBSE
F
and ПҮRPA
F
become gradually smaller since fewer
and fewer transitions occur with still larger frequencies, up until Пүm where we reach the energy
difference between the lowest included valence band and the highest included conduction band,
after which they should both become zero. But the single transitions occurring between Пүc and Пүm
are not located at the exact same frequencies in the two calculations. That the transitions are not
located at the exact same frequency is less of a problem at smaller energies, where the transitions
are part of a continuum. Having the dynamics in the overall expression as just described, even a
small difference in the calculations can make the BSE and RPA calculation dominate the hybrid
density response function, dragging it down to 0 in the range between Пүc and Пүm instead of having
it approaching the full RPA calculation as desired. Therefore, we decided to multiply the kernel
with a FermiВӯDirac function, which then kills the kernel at frequencies above the cutoff frequency,
Пүc. After this point, the kernel is killed over a range which we decided to be 1/2 eV, i.e. we define
a transition temperature ЛңT, such that kB ЛңT = 1/2 eV, and the hybrid function becomes the full RPA
calculation. Thus, our expression for the Kernel Hybrid function is,
ПҮKH
GGвҖІ =
X
GвҖІвҖІ
пЈ«
пЈӯ1 вҲ’ПҮRPA
 ПҮRPA
F
вҲ’1 вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’1
exp

(Пү вҲ’Пүc)/kB ЛңT

+ 1
пЈ¶
пЈё
вҲ’1
GGвҖІвҖІ
ПҮRPA
GвҖІвҖІGвҖІ.
(5.15)
5.2. The Kernel Hybrid
55
==PAGE:62==
This is a rather small correction, but we do note that (5.15), as opposed to (5.14), does not entirely
satisfy the KramersВӯKronig relation. Often, we will make the approximation to only consider the
G = GвҖІ = 0 components of the two finite and full density response functions. This corresponds
to not taking all local field effects into account. However, bear in mind that the density response
functions entering the expression (5.15) already hold some of the local field effects due to the way
they were created in the first place. In this case, eq. (5.15) reduces to
ПҮKH =
ПҮRPA
1 вҲ’
ПҮRPA
exp((ПүвҲ’Пүc)/kB ЛңT)+1
 ПҮRPA
F
вҲ’1 вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’1.
(5.16)
5.3
The Simple Hybrid
The Simple Hybrid function has its basis in a more intuitive argument. Recall the BSE in the
GWВӯapproximation, e.g. in its diagrammatic form, after imposing the condition enabling us to
obtain the density response function from 4ПҮ(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) with 1вҖІ = 1+ and 2вҖІ = 2+, restated here
convenience,
1
2 = 1
2 + 1
3
4вҖІ
2 + 1
3
3вҖІ
2
(5.17)
Imagine iterating the middle diagram. It is clear, that we would obtain a pair bubble, connected
with a bare Coulomb interaction to a pair bubble, and so on. Thus what is the apparent is that we
would obtain the RPA expression for the density response function, eq. (4.52),
вҲ’ПҮRPA =
+
+
+ ...
(5.18)
And then we would also obtain diagrams with at least one screened Coulomb interaction line.
At each vertex we have a sum over all states. See for example the expression for the pair bubble,
eq. (3.34). Thus, the finite BSE and RPA calculations will have fewer included bands and therefore
fewer states in this sum compared to the fully converged RPA calculations where the sum at the
vertex ideally is over all interband transitions. The idea in the Simple Hybrid function is then to
take the BSE calculation, subtract the finite RPA calculation, i.e. removing the diagrams in (5.18)
from (5.17) with only a finite number of transitions, and then replace them by the fully converged
RPA calculation,
ПҮSH
G,GвҖІ =
 ПҮBSE
F

G,GвҖІ вҲ’
 ПҮRPA
F

G,GвҖІ + ПҮRPA
G,GвҖІ.
(5.19)
The discussion above, in section 5.2 about the Kernel Hybrid function, concerning the need for
a FermiВӯDirac factor on the
 ПҮBSE
F

G,GвҖІ вҲ’
 ПҮRPA
F

G,GвҖІ term also applies here. Thus, we need to
modify eq. (5.19) such that it becomes,
ПҮSH
G,GвҖІ =
 ПҮBSE
F

G,GвҖІ вҲ’
 ПҮRPA
F

G,GвҖІ
exp

(Пү вҲ’Пүc) /kB ЛңT

+ 1
+ ПҮRPA
G,GвҖІ.
(5.20)
This is the Simple Hybrid function. Once again we run into the problem that the small change
introduced by the FermiВӯDirac factor has the consequence that the expression not entirely obey the
56
5.3. The Simple Hybrid
==PAGE:63==
KramersВӯKronig relation. Since we are interested in the G = GвҖІ = 0 component, as explained
back in section (3.2.3), we finally obtain the Simple Hybrid function implemented in this project,
ПҮSH =
ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’ПҮRPA
F
exp

(Пү вҲ’Пүc) /kB ЛңT

+ 1
+ ПҮRPA.
(5.21)
5.4
Connection between the Kernel Hybrid and Simple Hybrid
In this section we show that there is a straightforward connection between the Kernel and Simple
Hybrid functions. More specifically, we show that by incorporating a complex number x in the
Kernel Hybrid, it converges to the Simple Hybrid in the limit of large x. The connection has not
been used in actual calculations of hybrids for the materials in consideration in this project, as
we will see in the next chapter. We derive the connection anyway because it is interesting that
such a connection can be created, but also because one could imagine that a possible alternative
hybrid approach could be created from a combination of the Kernel and Simple Hybrid functions,
using a nonВӯextremal value for x. If that was to be the case, and if it was to be useful, we should
create a criteria for finding an appropriate value for x. That could e.g. be an x yielding the correct
fВӯsum. However, none of the materials considered in this project seemed to benefit from such a
combined hybrid function, since Вӯ as we will later see Вӯ in all cases, either the Kernel or Simple
hybrid functions will in themselves yield satisfying predictions. However, the investigations in this
project have been strongly limited by time and thus we have only considered in total 4 different
materials. Therefore, we cannot rule out the possibility that such an approach could be beneficial
more generally.
Consider the Kernel Hybrid function in the G = GвҖІ = 0 version, eq. (5.16),
ПҮKH =
ПҮRPA
1 вҲ’nF ПҮRPA
 ПҮRPA
F
вҲ’1 вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’1,
(5.22)
where nF is the FermiВӯDirac distribution. Consider now a complex number x with the same value
for its real and imaginary part, Re(x) = Im(x). The idea is to add this x to all density response
functions entering eq. (5.22), which we then write as
ПҮKH(x) + x =
ПҮRPA + x
1 вҲ’nF (ПҮRPA + x)
 ПҮRPA
F
+ x
вҲ’1 вҲ’
 ПҮBSE
F
+ x
вҲ’1.
(5.23)
Remember, all density response functions are complex functions, so we have added a complex
number to each complex function value. We rewrite eq. (5.23) as
ПҮKH(x) =
1
1
ПҮRPA+x вҲ’nF
1
ПҮRPA
F
+x + nF
1
ПҮBSE
F
+x
вҲ’x
=
 ПҮRPA + x
  ПҮRPA
F
+ x
  ПҮBSE
F
+ x

 ПҮRPA
F
+ x
  ПҮBSE
F
+ x

вҲ’nF
 ПҮBSE
F
+ x

(ПҮRPA + x) + nF
 ПҮRPA
F
+ x

(ПҮRPA + x) вҲ’x.
(5.24)
If x is zero, this is just the Kernel Hybrid. In the numerator of eq. (5.24) we have a polynomial to
third order in x and in the numerator we have a polynomial to second order. Note that the highest
order coefficients are 1 in both numerator and denominator. In general we may then write such an
5.4. Connection between the Kernel Hybrid and Simple Hybrid
57
==PAGE:64==
equation as
x3 + bx2 + cx + d
x2 + ОІx + Оі
вҲ’x = x(x2 + ОІx + Оі) + bx2 + cx + d вҲ’ОІx2 вҲ’Оі
x2 + ОІx + Оі
вҲ’x
= bx2 + cx + d вҲ’ОІx2 вҲ’Оіx
x2 + ОІx + Оі
= (b вҲ’ОІ)x2 + (c вҲ’Оі)x + d
x2 + ОІx + Оі
.
(5.25)
Now in the limit of very large x, eq. (5.25) becomes,
lim
xвҶ’вҲһ
(b вҲ’ОІ)x2 + (c вҲ’Оі)x + d
x2 + ОІx + Оі
= (b вҲ’ОІ)x2
x2
= b вҲ’ОІ.
(5.26)
Comparing this to the left hand side of eq. (5.25), the coefficients b and ОІ are the second and first
order coefficients in the numerator and denominator respectively. In eq. (5.24), the second order
coefficient in the numerator will be
b = ПҮRPA + ПҮRPA
F
+ ПҮBSE
F
.
(5.27)
The first order coefficient in the denominator will be
ОІ = ПҮRPA
F
+ ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’nF ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’nF ПҮRPA + nF ПҮRPA
F
+ nF ПҮRPA
= ПҮRPA
F
+ ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’nF ПҮBSE
F
+ nF ПҮRPA
F
.
(5.28)
Using eq. (5.26), we then have
lim
xвҶ’вҲһПҮKH(x) = b вҲ’ОІ = ПҮRPA + ПҮRPA
F
+ ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’
 ПҮRPA
F
+ ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’nF ПҮBSE
F
+ nF ПҮRPA
F

=
 ПҮBSE
F
вҲ’ПҮRPA
F

nF + ПҮRPA = ПҮSH,
(5.29)
which is exactly eq. (5.21). Thus in the limit of large x, ПҮKH(x) approaches ПҮSH.
5.5
The Simple Hybrid Вӯ H
This hybrid approach is very similar to the Simple Hybrid approach. The only difference is that
instead of using the entire density response functions in eq. (5.21) for ПҮSH, we only calculate the
imaginary part of the hybrid function with this formula,
Im
 ПҮSHвҲ’H
=
Im
 ПҮBSE
F

вҲ’Im
 ПҮRPA
F

exp

(Пү вҲ’Пүc) /kB ЛңT

+ 1
+ Im
 ПҮRPA
.
(5.30)
And the real part is then obtained through a Hilbert transform of this imaginary part, eq. (3.56).
This is why we have a вҖқВӯHвҖқ in the name of the method: the H stands for Hilbert. It allows us to
avoid the problem of ПҮSH not obeying the KramersВӯKronig due to the FermiВӯDirac factor.
5.6
The Transition Вӯ H
Finally, we have the Transition Вӯ H function. This is the simplest of the methods and does not use
a finite RPA calculation. In this method we naively transition through interpolation from the BSE
imaginary part to the full RPA imaginary part and find the real part through a Hilbert transform.
The transition is made over the course of 2 eV in the following way. The starting point is Пүc, and
we then find two frequency points at 1 eV to each side of Пүc, Пү1 = Пүc вҲ’1eV and Пү2 = Пүc + 1eV.
Since these two points are not necessarily on our frequency grid, we more specifically find the two
points on the grid closest to Пү1 and Пү2 respectively. We then create a function x with numbers
58
5.5. The Simple Hybrid Вӯ H
==PAGE:65==
between 0 and 1, and transition from the BSE imaginary part to the RPA imaginary part. The
Transition Вӯ H function then becomes,
Im
 ПҮTвҲ’H
=
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈі
Im
 ПҮBSE
F

for Пү < Пү1,
(1 вҲ’x) Im
 ПҮBSE
F

+ xIm
 ПҮRPA
for Пү1 вүӨПү < Пү2, x вҲҲ[0, 1]
Im
 ПҮRPA
for Пү2 вүӨПү.
(5.31)
5.7
The fВӯsum method
The fВӯsum method was proposed by [2] and for some of the materials we will be comparing the
hybrid functions to this approach. The fВӯsum has its basis in the soВӯcalled oscillator strengths fij
which was originally introduced in a classical treatment of the absorption and emission processes.
Absorption and emission were originally treated in a dipole oscillator model, and the oscillator
strength was used to explain why some transition lines are stronger than other. With quantum
mechanics we now know that the oscillator strength has its connection to dipole matrix elements
[4],
fij = 2mПүji
3
|вҹЁj|r|iвҹ©|2,
(5.32)
where Пүji = Оөj вҲ’Оөi is the energy difference of the two states between which the transitions
happens. According to the ThomasВӯReicheВӯKuhn sum rule, or the fВӯsum rule, stating the sum of
oscillator strengths is equal to the number of electrons in the system,
X
ij
fij = ne.
(5.33)
Thus, the oscillator strength is a conserved quantity for a given system in consideration. Eq. (5.33)
can be rewritten to give us the relation [2],
Z вҲһ
0
Пү Im ПҮ(Пү)dПү = ПҖnee2
2m .
(5.34)
For the relation to be satisfied, the density response function needs however to be converged.
Otherwise we lack the highВӯfrequency transitions that would otherwise have contributed to the
leftВӯhand side of this expression and the relation will not be satisfied. The fВӯsum method proposed
by [2] exploits this. The idea is to use the full, wellВӯconverged RPA calculation to find the fВӯsum.
We then calculate the leftВӯhand side of eq. (5.34) with the BSE density response function and ask
ourselves the question of how much is missing in order to obtain the true fВӯsum. We then add an
exponential tail to the imaginary part of BSE calculated density response function and fit the slope
Оі to obtain the right fВӯsum [2],
Z Пүc
0
Пү Im ПҮBSE
F
(Пү)dПү +
Z вҲһ
Пүc
ПүC0eвҲ’ОіПүdПү =
Z вҲһ
0
Пү Im ПҮRPA(Пү)dПү.
(5.35)
The parameter C0 is fitted to ensure continuity between the exponential tail and the imaginary part
of the BSE density response function.
The real part of this modified imaginary part of a density response function is then found with a
Hilbert transform.
5.7. The fВӯsum method
59
==PAGE:66==
60
5.7. The fВӯsum method
==PAGE:67==
6
The TammВӯDancoff Approximation
In general we have to use the TammВӯDancoff approximation (TDA) in order to do BSE calculations
due to the scaling problems. In this chapter we consider how the TDA changes the results and how
to improve the results under this limitation. To evaluate, we consider bulk silicon in a FCC lattice.
The simplicity of the material means that the real part at low frequencies is converged at just
8 bands, which for Si corresponds to 4 valence bands and 4 conduction bands to each side of the
band gap. The convergence test is shown in appendix I.0.5. Thus, contrary to most other materials,
we are actually able to perform a BSE calculation with enough bands included for the real part of
the polarizability function to be well converged. And the few bands needed for convergence also
means that we can do the BSE calculations without the TDA such that we can evaluate on the
inclusion of this approximation. Details on the calculation settings can be found in section I.
6.1
Influence of the TDA on the real and imaginary part of
polarizability for silicon
In the GPAW code, it is possible to perform an RPA calculation with the BSE code, i.e. to put
W = 0 in the BSE calculations. By doing so, we can perform two calculations on Si and with the
same parameters: one calculation using the BSE code in RPA mode, and one using the RPA code
to see that the two codes are in agreement. Initially, we turn off the TDA in the BSE calculation to
confirm that the two codes are in agreement. Afterwards, we turn on the TDA, still performing an
RPA calculation with the BSE code. By comparing the real and imaginary parts of the polarizability
from the BSE and RPA codes, we see how introducing the TDA changes the results. We also do
a Hilbert transform of the imaginary part of the polarizability found with the BSE code under the
constraint that the G = GвҖІ = 0 component of the polarizability is an antiВӯsymmetric function,
to see if the KramersВӯKronig relation is satisfied. We denote this function BSEH. The results are
shown in figure 6.1. In figure 6.1 (B) is shown the imaginary part of the polarizability. The RPA
A
B
Figure 6.1: Three RPA calculation on Si. The red curve is normal RPA, the green curve is found
with the BSE code in RPA mode without the TDA, and the orange curve shows the effect of includВӯ
ing the TDA on this material. The imaginary parts are in agreement (B), but including the TDA
lowers the real part (A). The blue curve in (A) shows the Hilbert transform of the imaginary part of
the polarizability found with the BSE code in RPA mode under the TDA and under the constraint
that it is antiВӯsymmetric.
calculation (red), the BSE calculation in RPA mode with (orange) and without (green) the TDA are
close to being in agreement, even though including the TDA does lift the peaks slightly around 3.7
Chapter 6. The TammВӯDancoff Approximation
61
==PAGE:68==
and 4.5 eV. In figure 6.1 (A), displaying the real part of the polarizability, we see that once again
the RPA calculation (red) and the BSE calculation in RPA mode without the TDA (green) are in
full agreement. However, this time, when including the TDA (orange), we obtain a result that is
off compared the RPA calculation. And what is even worse is that if we do a Hilbert transform
of the imaginary part of the polarizability found with the BSE code in RPA mode under the TDA,
figure 6.1 (B, orange), under the constraint that it is an odd function, we obtain a different real part
than the one obtained from the code, figure 6.1 (A, blue). Thus, the polarizability resulting from
doing a BSE calculation under the TDA does not obey KramersВӯKronig when we take into account
that the polarizability is antiВӯsymmetric. This is very problematic.
It turns out, the majority of the problems, at least for Si, stems from the GPAW version of the TDA
not taking into account that the polarizability is an odd function. This is illustrated in figure 6.2.
A
D
C
B
Figure 6.2: The four plots are meant to illustrate the issue of using the GPAW version of the TDA,
where only the first quadrant of the BSE matrix is included. In (A) we have extracted the numeraВӯ
tor of the polarizability in the Lehmann representation, called вҖҷweightsвҖҷ, and the eigenvalues, and
manually calculated the polarizability using the formula for the polarizability in the Lehmann repВӯ
resentation, confirming that the imaginary part of the polarizability is an odd function. We have
also plotted the imaginary part of the polarizability found with the BSE code in RPA mode. In (C)
we shown the real part of the same calculations. In (C) we also show the Hilbert transform of the
imaginary part of the polarizability that was manually calculated from the weights and eigenvalues
to confirm, that the polarizability obeys the KramersВӯKronig. Figure (B) shows the same calculaВӯ
tion, but now only with positive frequencies. (D) then shows that now all three calculations are in
agreement also in the real part.
In the data behind figure 6.2 we have extracted the eigenvalues and weights, that is the numeraВӯ
tor of the polarizability in the Lehmann representation, found in the BSE code and put them into
eq. (3.15). This yields the red curves in (A) and (C), and we have also plotted the polarizability
obtained from the BSE code, the green curves. In (C), we see that the real part from eq. (3.15)
does indeed obey the KramersВӯKronig relation (red, blue), while the BSE code has resulted in a
real part (green) that is not in agreement with the two others, even though the positive frequency
transitions were in agreement as seen in (A). If we restrict ourselves to only consider the imaginary
62
6.1. Influence of the TDA on the real and imaginary part of polarizability for silicon
==PAGE:69==
part in the positive frequency range (B), also in the eq. (3.15), we see that the real part calculated
with the equation, the one found with a Hilbert transformation of the imaginary part and the real
part obtained from the BSE code are all in agreement. This confirms that the main problem in the
BSE code is that the negative frequency transitions are not included. At this point, this may seem
to be a trivial conclusion, but at the time of the investigations there were some different possible
explanations for the lower lying real part of the BSE outputted polarizabilities. It was possible that
the BSE code behind the scene did take into account the negative frequency transitions although
they were not outputted. It was also possible that the problem was really in the calculated spectra,
i.e. in the imaginary part. In this connection, it could also be a more general consequence of the
TDA. Neglecting not only the negative frequency transitions but also the offВӯdiagonal blocks in the
BSE Hamiltonian, might influence both the imaginary and real part of the polarizability, making
the lower lying real part unavoidable when using the TDA. After all, the imaginary part of the
polarizability found with the BSE code, figure 6.1 (B), is slightly different from the RPA calcuВӯ
lated one. However, what the investigations show is that by imposing the fact that the imaginary
part of the polarizability is antiВӯsymmetric and doing a Hilbert transform under this constraint of
the outputted imaginary part from the BSE subject to the TDA, we may improve our predictions
significantly. And the offВӯdiagonal blocks of the matrix do not influence the spectrum that much,
at least for Si.
What we have shown is that the GPAW BSE code ignores the antiВӯsymmetric nature of the G =
GвҖІ = 0 component of the polarizability, and that the results are significantly improved by either
Hilbert transforming the imaginary part of the polarizability obtained from the BSE code under
this constraint or by simply including the negative frequency transitions directly in the BSE code.
To reduce the computational complexity when creating the BSE matrix, it makes sense to use the
GPAW version of the the TDA, where we only include the positive frequency transitions, instead
of the versions of the TDA proposed by [10] and [16]. But afterwards, we should add the negative
frequency transitions to impose the antiВӯsymmetry of the function when determining the polarВӯ
izability. Throughout the rest of this thesis, we have therefore made this correction. The early
generated results are based on a Hilbert transform of the imaginary part, while some of the later
results are obtained after an implementation of the negative frequency transitions in the BSE code
explicitly, thus directly calculating a real part that obeys the KramersВӯKronig removing the need
for a Hilbert transform after the calculation. The two approaches are equivalent, but the Hilbert
transform is sensitive to the imaginary part of the polarizability going to zero in both ends of the
spectra and the best results are obtained after appending a lot of extra zeros in both ends. This was
therefore something that we did, and if the imaginary part did not go completely to zero at zero
frequency, we subtracted the value of the polarizability at zero frequency before doing the Hilbert
transform. However, as figure 6.2 (C) also shows, doing a Hilbert transform of the imaginary part
is in general just as good as including the negative frequency transitions explicitly.
After making this correction, we calculate the refractive index and the extinction coefficient for
Si and compare to experimental data, now putting the BSE calculation in BSE mode. What we
further want to point out here is the importance of shifting the eigenenergies in calculations of the
polarizability, such that the band gap of the calculations matches the true band gap of the material
in consideration. In general, DFT tends to underestimate the band gap. And the real part of the
polarizability, especially in the limits of very low or very large frequency, is sensitive to the peaks
being located correctly. Thus, before finding the real part with a Hilbert transform, the peaks in the
imaginary part of the spectrum need to be shifted to match the band gap. This is simply done by
adding an energy to the frequencies that makes the peaks match the band gap and then appending
a tail of zeroes to fill out the gap that has then appeared between the calculated polarizability and
zero energy. We denote the BSE calculated polarizability in which the real part is found using a
Hilbert transform and where the imaginary part has been shifted to match the band gap, BSEHS.
6.1. Influence of the TDA on the real and imaginary part of polarizability for silicon
63
==PAGE:70==
The results are shown in figure 6.3.
A
B
Figure 6.3: The plot (A) shows the refractive index of Si, while the plot (B) shows the extinction
coefficient. The black dots are experimental data obtained from [19]. The red curve is based on the
BSE calculation of the polarizability that was originally obtained from [2] which is an output of the
BSE code. The green curve shows the effect of doing a Hilbert transform of the imaginary part to
find the real part of the density response, before using it to calculate the refractive index/extinction
coefficient. Note that after having found the refractive index, this green curve is moved to match
the band gap. The orange curve shows the effect of energy shifting the eigenvalues and zero
appending like describe above before doing the Hilbert transform. Note the striking agreement
with the experimental data.
In conclusion, the TDA generates an imaginary part of the polarizability at positive frequencies
that, for silicon at least, is in satisfying agreement with the polarizability calculated without any apВӯ
proximations. However, the real part is underestimated, primarily due to the negative frequencies
not being included. So to improve our predictions, before creating any hybrid functions, we need
to include the negative frequencies or Hilbert transform the imaginary part under the constraint
that the polarizability is an odd function. Further, we need to correct the imaginary parts of the
BSE and RPA calculations to match the correct band gap. Due to the shift of energies, the RPA
calculations will also need to be Hilbert transformed such that the KramersВӯKronig relation is still
obeyed. A last point to be made is that we in general do not know the band gap of the materials
in consideration. More accurate calculations are available Вӯ like GWВӯcalculations Вӯ but predicting
correct band gaps are out of the scope of this project. Thus, since we are benchmarking on exВӯ
perimental data, we match the location of the excitonic peaks in the calculated BSE spectrum to
the excitonic peak in the experimental datasets by shifting the frequencies as just described before
creating the hybrids.
64
6.1. Influence of the TDA on the real and imaginary part of polarizability for silicon
==PAGE:71==
6.2
The longВӯrange Coulomb interaction
Figure 6.4: Five plots of the positive and negative transitions for
Si. The plots (A) and (B) are not under the TDA and are just sanity
checks for the formula used to switch between the polarizability
and density response function, eq. (3.45). The plots (C), (D) and
(E) are under the TDA. But in (C) and (D) we have calculated
the density response function with the BSE code implementation
in GPAW, and then found the polarizability from that, while in
(E) we have found the polarizability with the BSE code directly.
This indicates that the TDA does not work well if the longВӯrange
Coulomb interactions are included in the calculations. Note that
the real part of the density response function is not plotted since
it is rather large in the ends compared to the imaginary part, and
thus it would not be a readable plot if both were displayed.
The attentive reader perhaps
noticed that we talked about
the polarizability and not the
density response function in
the last section, the difference
being, as also mentioned in the
section 3.2.3, if the G = GвҖІ =
0 component of the Coulomb
interaction is put to zero or is
included. If included, we obВӯ
tain the density response funcВӯ
tion in the very end of the calВӯ
culation, and if put to zero,
we obtain the polarizability.
In this section we explore the
effect of including the longВӯ
range part of the Coulomb inВӯ
teraction in the BSE calculaВӯ
tions subject to the TDA. ConВӯ
sider figure 6.4. The two upВӯ
per plots (A) and (B) are calcuВӯ
lations without the TDA. Plot
(A) is the density response
function output from the RPA
and BSE code once again put
in RPA mode, i.e.
W
=
0.
The code output is then
converted to the polarizabilВӯ
ity shown in (B) with the forВӯ
mula (3.45), which is what the
arrow between the plots inВӯ
dicates.
This is just a sanВӯ
ity check.
We then turn on
the TDA to see what happens.
Note, that at this point we have
included the negative frequenВӯ
cies, so the TDA refers to neВӯ
glecting the offВӯdiagonal of the BSE matrix. Once again, we calculate the density response function
shown in plot (C), but this time, the TDA makes the approximation worse as was of course to a
certain extend expected. But what is problematic is that converting to the polarizability, plot (D),
we do not get the desired spectrum: the BSE polarizability has an imaginary and real part that apВӯ
pear completely flat at the yВӯaxis scale shown in the figure. However, if we instead ask the code to
output the polarizability, still under the TDA, the result is much more satisfying. This is what we
see in plot (E). This indicates that the calculations should be made having the longВӯrange Coulomb
interaction put to zero, since the TDA is problematic otherwise.
To get a clue of the dynamics in the BSE Hamiltonian, we turn off the TDA and perform two
BSE calculations on our Si system, one calculation with and one without the longВӯrange Coulomb
interaction. We then plot the values of the matrix elements of the BSE Hamiltonian by colorВӯcoding.
The result is shown in figure 6.5.
6.2. The longВӯrange Coulomb interaction
65
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.5: The left figure displays the absolute values of the BSE Hamiltonian that is used to create
the density response function and the right figure displays the BSE Hamiltonian used to create the
polarizability. I.e. the left figure has the longВӯrange interactions included, whereas the right figure
has not. Both matrices has traces and max values that are in the same order of magnitude, and
therefore comparing them on the same scale seems reasonable. The values are colorВӯcoded as
shown at the bar to the right of the figure: the darker the green, the larger the value of the element
inside the BSE matrix.
From figure 6.5 we see that when the longВӯrange Coulomb interaction is included, which it is in
the case of the density response function, the elements in the offВӯdiagonal are more prominent then
in the case where the longВӯrange Coulomb interaction is put to zero. This indicates the TDA will
exclude more information when used in a calculation of the density response function, and is a first
step in the direction of understanding what goes wrong in figure 6.4 when we try to calculate the
density response function with the BSE code under the TDA.
Finally, since the investigation suggests that the TDA fails when the longВӯrange Coulomb interacВӯ
tion is included, we would expect that calculating EELS spectra under the TDA does not go well,
since EELS spectra reveal plasmons which are due to the this longВӯrange interaction. Thus, in figВӯ
ure 6.6, we show an EELS spectrum based on an RPA calculated polarizability on Si together with
an EELS spectrum obtained from the polarizability calculated with the BSE code in RPA mode
under the TDA.
Figure 6.6: Calculated EELS spectrum for Si. The green dashed curve shows an RPA calculation
while the red curve is an BSE calculation with W = 0 thus yielding RPA. We see the effect of
including the TDA since this is the only difference between the calculations.
66
6.2. The longВӯrange Coulomb interaction
==PAGE:73==
In figure 6.6 we see that including the TDA in the calculation yields a result for the EELS spectrum
quite different from the full RPA calculated one. In general, the RPA is good at predicting EELS
spectra, so including the TDA introduces an unwanted change to the predicted EELS spectrum.
Our investigations seem to suggest that the TDA works less well when the longВӯrange Coulomb
interaction is included. This is backed by [10]. Further, we think it does make some intuitive sense:
the offВӯdiagonal blocks of the BSE matrix consist of the coupling part alone, eq. (4.141), i.e. they
hold some of the information about interactions in the system. Neglecting them is in general a
good approximation if matrix elements holding the interactions are small compared to the transiВӯ
tion energies [10]. However, if the longВӯrange Coulomb interactions are taken into account, the
interactions in the system are stronger, and thus the TDA is worse. Thus, in conclusion, we should
use the BSE code to calculate polarizabilities rather than density response functions. Luckily, all
equations that we have derived for the density response function, including the hybrids, are also
valid for the polarizability.
6.2. The longВӯrange Coulomb interaction
67
==PAGE:74==
68
6.2. The longВӯrange Coulomb interaction
==PAGE:75==
7
Applying Hybrid Approaches: Calculating
Electric Susceptibility and Spectra for Solids
In this chapter we present the primary results of this project. We have calculated the polarizability
with RPA, BSE and the hybrid functions described in chapter 5 for the materials TiO2 in rutile
and anatase form, bulk MoS2, hBN and HfS2, and from the polarizability we have determined the
refractive index and the EELS spectrum, sometimes also the extinction coefficient. When available
online, we have included experimental data from various research groups in the plots, to see how
well the hybrids can predict this data. We will be comparing the hybrids and their performance on
predicting the experimental data, first on each of the materials, and later we will see if we can draw
some conclusions across the materials.
7.1
Hybrid model calculations for various solids
Rutile and anatase TiO2 are two semiconductors which have gained interest due to their possible
use in photochemical applications [20, 21], that could be as photocatalysists or in soВӯcalled wet
solar cells [20]. Rutile is the stable form of TiO2 whereas anatase is metastable, but the anatase
form shows the most photocatalytic activity [22]. According to [23] they have the same point
group, being tetragonal, 4/mmm, but they have different structures. We begin by considering the
rutile form. The calculations was done using some experimental lattice parameters of rutile TiO2
that are a = 4.584 Г… and c = 2.953 Г… obtained from [23]. The space group is P42/mnm [24].
As we also illustrated in figure 5.1, we include bands within Оҙ = 2 eV of each side of the band
gap corresponding to 6 valence bands and 6 conduction bands in the finite calculations. The direct
band gap was found by fitting the outputted BSE polarizability to the experimental data, and was
found to be about 3.4 eV. Thus, for this system, Пүc = 3.4eV + 2eV = 5.4eV. More details on the
structure, calculation settings and convergence of the full and finite RPA calculations can be found
in appendix I. We have studied this material with two settings for the polarization of the incoming
electrical field. First we consider the case where the electrical field is polarized along the soВӯcalled
ordinary axis (вҖҷoВӯaxisвҖҷ), meaning that it is parallel to the a/b axis of the unit cell [25]. In figure 7.1
we show the results on our predictions for the refractive index, extinction coefficient and EELS
together with experimental data.
Figure 7.1 shows in (A) and (D) the refractive index and extinction coefficient respectively obtained
directly from the full and finite RPA calculations and the BSE calculation. The black dots are
experimental data. What is apparent Вӯ and perhaps not so surprising Вӯ is that the RPA calculations do
not capture the excitonic peak located just below 4 eV in the refractive index. The BSE calculation
does, but the height of the peak and also what seem to be the static refractive index according
to the experimental data, is underestimated due to the number of bands not being converged, as
described in section 3.3 and 4.4. We do not have experimental data down to 0 eV, but by considering
the tendency of the data, it seems to be aiming at a static refractive index of about 2.5Вӯ2.6, which
is perhaps a bit more than what the fully converged RPA calculation suggests. That the full RPA
calculation seems to underestimate the static refractive index may be due to the influence of the
excitonic peak. The plots (B) and (E) show the refractive index and extinction coefficient found
with the four hybrids, once again together with experimental data. All hybrids seem to capture the
excitons. But the Kernel Hybrid largely overestimates the height of the peaks, and in the refractive
index, it locates of the peak at a frequency that is too small. We will return to why that is in section
7.3. The Simple Hybrid, the Simple Hybrid Вӯ H and Transition Вӯ H are largely in agreement and
predict the experimental data very well. The Simple Hybrid predicts the static refractive index
to be a little smaller than the two Вӯ H functions, but since the Вӯ H functions lie a bit above the
Chapter 7. Applying Hybrid Approaches: Calculating Electric Susceptibility and Spectra for Solids
69
==PAGE:76==
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 7.1: Hybrid predictions and experimental data for refractive index, extinction coefficient
and EELS for rutile TiO2 with the polarization of the electric field pointing along oВӯaxis. (A) and
(D) shows the refractive index and extinction coefficient respectively, found from the full RPA
calculation, the finite RPA calculation and the BSE calculation. (B) and (E) shows the refractive
index and extinction coefficient calculated from the polarizability found with the four hybrid funcВӯ
tions considered in the project. (C) shows the fВӯsum method proposed by [2] together with the
RPA and BSE calculation. (A,B,C,D,E) all have experimental data on the refractive index marked
with black dots. The experimental data for the refractive index and extinction coefficient were
obtained from [25]. (F) shows the EELS spectrum predicted by the full RPA calculation and the
four hybrids. Experimental data is marked with black dots. The experimental data for the EELS
spectrum was obtained from [26].
70
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
==PAGE:77==
experimental data at low frequencies while the Simple Hybrid lies a bit below, we cannot tell
which ones performs the best in predicting the data. The fВӯsum method (C) overestimates the
height of the peak in the refractive index only slightly, but the static refractive index seems to be
very overestimated. The EELS spectrum predicted by the RPA and the four hybrid functions are
plotted together with experimental data in (F). All are in agreement and seem to capture the overall
trends of the experimental data very well, capturing the plasmonic peaks at about 12 and 25 eV
and the rise in intensity at 40Вӯ45 eV. However, it does seem that the RPA and hybrids are locating
the peaks at slightly higher energies than what is found experimentally. Besides, the predicted
spectrum is quite noisy compared to the experimental data. The fВӯsum method is not made in a
way that enables it to predict the spectrum at larger frequencies, and thus it is not included in (F).
The fВӯsums of the RPA polarizabilities, before and after the correction of the energies to match
the band gap, together with the fВӯsums of the hybrids, can be found in table 7.1. We here see
that all hybrids have a larger fВӯsum compared to the original fully converged RPA calculated
polarizability. But their fВӯsums are also slightly larger than the fВӯsum of the RPA calculation after
we have corrected it for the underestimated band gap. The Kernel Hybrid has the largest fВӯsum,
about 6% larger than that of the band gap corrected RPA, whereas the other hybrids only are about
1.5Вӯ1.7 % larger. We will discuss this further in section 7.2.
We then consider the case that the electric field is pointing along the soВӯcalled extraordinary axis
(вҖҷeВӯaxisвҖҷ), meaning that the field is parallel to the cВӯaxis of the TiO2 giving us an outВӯofВӯplane
calculation. The results are shown in figure 7.2.
Considering figure 7.2, the RPA calculations shown in (A,D) do not capture the excitonic effects
present slightly below 4 eV in the refractive index and at about 4.5 eV in the extinction coefficient.
The BSE does capture this effect, but underestimates the height of the peak in the refractive index.
The BSE also underestimates the static refractive index, that the experimental data seems to be
aiming at, which is perhaps around 2.5, in agreement with the static refractive index that the fully
converged RPA calculation suggests. The BSE does however make a very good prediction for
the extinction coefficient. As for the hybrid functions, (B,E), the Simple Hybrid and the two ВӯH
hybrids underestimate the height of the excitonic peak. The ВӯH hybrids seem to perform better at
lower frequencies, yielding what seems to become the correct static refractive index according to
the experimental data. The Kernel Hybrid performs well on this material, predicting both the height
of the excitonic peak and the static refractive index quite in accordance with the experimental data.
The fВӯsum method once again overestimates the static refractive index, as shown in (C). In (F) we
were not able to find experimental EELS for TiO2 explicitly referring to the eВӯaxis. Assuming that
the RPA predicts this spectrum well, all four hybrid functions do however lie on top of the RPA
calculation, and thus all hybrids behave as desired.
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
71
==PAGE:78==
B
A
E
D
C
F
Figure 7.2: Theoretical predictions for refractive index (A,B,C), extinction coefficient (D,E) and
EELS (F) for rutile TiO2 with the electric field pointing along the eВӯaxis together with experimental
data. The experimental data for the refractive index and extinction coefficient were obtained from
[25]. We were not able to find experimental EELS data explicitly referring to this axis.
72
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
==PAGE:79==
We now consider anatase TiO2. The lattice parameters used in the calculations are found experВӯ
imentally by [21] to be a = b = 3.782 Г… and c = 9.502 Г…, and the space group is I41/amd
[24]. By fitting to the experimental data, the direct band gap was found to be about 4.6 eV.
We included bands within Оҙ = 1.6 eV to each side of the band gap resulting in the inclusion
of 12 valence bands and 10 conduction bands in the finite calculations. Thus, for this system,
Пүc = 4.6eV + 1.6eV = 6.2eV. More details on the structure, calculation settings and and converВӯ
gence tests can be found in appendix I, section I.0.2. The results of our predictions of the refractive
index, extinction coefficient and EELS together with experimental data are shown in figure 7.3.
A
B
E
D
C
F
Figure 7.3: Theoretical predictions for refractive index (A,B,C), extinction coefficient (D,E) and
EELS (F) for anatase TiO2 together with experimental data. The experimental data for the refracВӯ
tive index and extinction coefficient were obtained from [25], and experimental data for the EELS
spectrum was obtained from [26].
The RPA and BSE calculated refractive index and extinction coefficients for anatase TiO2 are
shown in figure 7.3, (A,D). The RPA calculations do not capture the excitonic peaks seen between
about 3Вӯ5 eV. It does seem like the experimental data on the refractive index is aiming at a static
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
73
==PAGE:80==
refractive index of just a bit more than 2, perhaps 2.1Вӯ2.2, which is in agreement with the fully
converged RPA. The BSE does capture the excitonic effects, but in the refractive index, the single
peak at about 4.5 eV is split into two peaks in the BSE calculation, and the size of the peaks in the
extinction coefficient are overestimated. This is likely due to convergence issues, as also discussed
in (I.0.2). Many bands have to be included in the BSE calculation to just obtain excitonic effects
up to Оҙ = 1.6 eV above the direct band gap, and the price is fewer kВӯpoints. We did try to decrease
Оҙ but the excitonic peaks were not properly captured with such a small cutoff. More specifically,
we tried a cutoff of 1 eV, and even though the peaks were still there, they were just too small in the
BSE calculation for the hybrids to yield satisfying results. The hybrids need the BSE calculation
to have properly described the excitonic effects, and this need was just not met at a Оҙ below 1.6 eV.
This may at first seem strange: our cutoff energy Пүc with a Оҙ of 1.6 was 6.2 eV, and the excitonic
peaks lie between 3Вӯ5 eV. So one could ask, why we cannot have a cutoff energy down to 5 eV and
still capture all excitonic effects. Here we need to remember that the Coulomb attraction between
the electron and hole lowers the energy compared to the energy difference between the valence
and conduction band that the transition happened between. Thus, even though the two bands have
an energy difference above approximately 5 eV, they may contribute with an exciton in the energy
range of 3Вӯ5 eV. Now, the hybrid functions are shown in (B,E) for the refractive index and extinction
coefficient respectively. The Simple Hybrid and the two Вӯ H hybrids seem to capture both the height
of the excitonic peaks quite well as well as the static refractive index. They do however inherit the
issues from the BSE calculation, having too large peaks in the extinction coefficients and having
the single excitonic peak at about 4.5 eV in the refractive index being split into two peaks. The
peaks in the extinction coefficient are a bit smaller for these hybrids compared to the BSE due to
the RPA calculations. The Kernel Hybrid does not perform well on this material, largely overВӯ
and underestimating the peaks in the refractive index around 3.5 eV and 4.5 eV respectively. Also
the extinction coefficient is very off. The fВӯsum method (C) captures the excitonic peaks in the
refractive index quite well, but seems to overestimate the static refractive index. In (F) is shown
the EELS spectrum. Once again, all hybrids lie on top of the RPA calculated EELS, which captures
the overall trends in the experimental spectrum with plasmonic peaks around 15 and 28 eV. Note
that we have a smaller peak in the experimental data in the range of around 5Вӯ8 eV. The RPA does
not fully capture this peak, having only a small peak at around 8 eV, whereas the hybrids actually
show more activity in this frequency range. The peak, being low in energy, is likely influenced by
excitons, which the RPA do not describe, making the hybrids predict the experimental data slightly
better here. One should take into account that EELS spectra are less well predicted under the TDA,
as discussed in chapter 6. And the excitonic effects in the EELS spectrum above are introduced by
the BSE calculation which is subject to the TDA. However, this was due to the TDA working less
well when the longВӯrange Coulomb interaction is included. And if the peak in the EELS spectrum
is excitonic in nature, then it is not only caused by the longВӯrange Coulomb interaction. Besides,
as seen back at figure 6.6, the TDA makes us predict the plasmonic peak less well, but the peak
has not vanished.
Next we consider bulk MoS2 which too is a semiconductor, and further is part of a class of layered
materials called transition metal dichalcogenides. Typically these are composed of hexagonally
packed layers, which consist of a transition metal, in the case of MoS2 that is molybdenum, surВӯ
rounded by two layers of a chalcogen, which in the case of MoS2 is sulfur, in a trigonal prismatic
arrangement [27]. Van der Waals forces bind adjacent layers together. Transition metal dichalcoВӯ
genides have gained attention due to this van der Waals anisotropic nature yielding some interesting
optical features [6]. E.g. MoS2 has a large birefringence, which is the phenomenon that an incomВӯ
ing ray of light can be split in two when it passes through the material such that the two rays takes
different paths. This is due to the material having different refractive indices along different crystal
axes, such than an incoming ray of light, being polarized along these different axes, propagates at
different speeds [28]. Thus, bulk MoS2 can e.g. be used as a polarizer. As another example MoS2
74
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
==PAGE:81==
has been used to create fieldВӯeffect transistors [27]. The lattice parameters of bulk 2H вҲ’MoS2,
which is the most stable phase of bulk MoS2 and refers to the trigonal prismatic arrangement of the
chalcogen, are found experimentally in [29] to be a = b = 3.161 Г… and c = 12.295 Г…. The space
group is P63/mmc [24]. For MoS2 we were able to include bands with Оҙ = 2.5 eV on each side
of the band gap corresponding to 4 valence bands and 8 conduction bands. The direct band gap
was found to be about 2 eV by fitting the results to the experimental data. Thus, for this system,
Пүc = 2eV + 2.5eV = 4.5eV. More details on the structure, calculation settings and and converВӯ
gence tests can be found in appendix I, section I.0.3. The results of our predictions of the refractive
index, extinction coefficient and EELS together with experimental data are shown in figure 7.4.
A
B
D
E
F
C
Figure 7.4: Theoretical predictions for refractive index (A,B,C), extinction coefficient (D,E) and
EELS (F) for bulk MoS2 together with experimental data. The experimental data for the refractive
index and extinction coefficient were found from the experimental dielectric function obtained
from [6], and experimental data for the EELS spectrum was obtained from [27].
In figure 7.4 (A,D) we see the refractive index and extinction coefficient respectively obtained
from the two RPA calculations and the BSE calculation together with some experimental data.
Note that the experimental data is not a direct measurement of the refractive index / extinction
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
75
==PAGE:82==
coefficient. Instead [6] has measured the dielectric function from which we have calculated the
refractive index and extinction coefficients from eq. (2.15) and (2.16). This is just to be consistent
since we have in general been considering the refractive index and extinction coefficients for the
other materials. The experimental data displays two very sharp excitonic peaks just below 2 eV
which the BSE only partially captures. The peaks are there, but they are too wide and not high
enough. Further, the second peak is not located close enough to the first peak compared to the
experimental data. To capture the sharpness of these peaks, it is likely that we would need many
more kВӯpoints and a smaller broadening О· in our calculations. However, we were unable to include
more kВӯpoints in the BSE calculation due to memory limitations, and having a smaller О· without
increasing the number of kВӯpoints would not yield satisfying results in the rest of the spectra. The
two RPA calculations do not capture the excitonic effects, but we do see a rise in the spectrum
at the band gap around the 2 eV, this rise being located close the second peak, and thus likely
also contributing to this peak, which is then not solely excitonic in nature. The experimental data
seems to suggest a static refractive index just below 4, perhaps 3.8Вӯ3.9. To no surprise at this point,
the BSE predicts a static refractive index too small compared to this. Perhaps more surprisingly,
the fully converged RPA calculation only suggests a static refractive index of approximately 3.5.
There are two possible reasons this. Either the RPA calculation is not well enough converged,
or the excitonic peaks cause an increase in the static refractive index. This latter reason is not
unlikely since the excitonic peaks are quite large and located closely to 0 eV due the band gap
being relatively small in this material. The hybrids (B,E) inherit the flaws of the BSE calculation,
having the second exciton peak being located at an energy too large. However, they are closer to
predicting the static refractive index. The Kernel Hybrid is closest, while the Simple Hybrid and
the two Вӯ H hybrids underestimate the static refractive index a bit. Considering the first excitonic
peak in (B,E), i.e. the peak at the lowest energy, the Kernel Hybrid does actually capture more of
the sharpness contrary to the BSE and the other hybrids. It does however overestimate the large
peak in the extinction coefficient (E), just above 3 eV. The fВӯsum (C) does well on this material,
only overestimating the static refractive index a bit. In (F) we see the EELS spectrum. Once again,
all hybrids follows the RPA calculation, and the large plasmonic peak at 20Вӯ30 eV is well captured.
Also a smaller peak around 10 eV seems to be present in the spectrum.
Let us now consider hexagonal boron nitride, hBN. This material too is a layered material conВӯ
sisting of hexagonally packed layers with van der Waals forces binding adjacent layers together.
Thus, like it was the case for MoS2, the material exhibits a large anisotropy. Another characteristic
property of hBN is its large band gap making it a good electric insulator [30]. The space group
is P63/mmc, and the lattice constants of hBN are found experimentally in [30]. In this paper, the
lattice parameters are given as a function of temperature. At a temperature of 98 K, they are found
to be a = b = 2.5058 Г… and c = 6.6090 Г…. In the calculation that we have done on hBN, we made
some initial DFT calculations in order to find the ground state eigenstates and Вӯenergies to be used
in the polarizabilities in the BSE and RPA calculations. You can read more about the theory of
DFT in section B and the implementation and actual calculations in this project in Appendix I. In
these DFT calculations, we had a FermiВӯDirac occupation width of kBT = 0.01, corresponding
to a temperature of 116 K. This applied to all the materials. Thus, the lattice parameters we have
chosen from the paper are at a temperature close to what we have worked with in this project, but
in hindsight it would have been nice to match the temperature in the DFT calculations on hBN to
one of the available ones from the paper. And also, there are lattice parameters available at 114
K, i.e. even closer to the calculation temperature of 116 K, and it would have made more sense to
choose these lattice parameters for the calculations. Another point to consider here is the fact that
we have derived the BSE and RPA at T=0, but actually use a small but finite temperature in the
DFT calculations. However, having some smearing in the DFT calculations in general a necessity
for the sake of convergence. During the iterations in DFT, we may imagine a band very close to
the Fermi level being in one iteration below the Fermi level and in the next iteration above, thus,
76
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
==PAGE:83==
if we are at 0 K, going from having an occupation of 0 to an occupation of 1, thereby hindering
convergence. A small smearing is enough to avoid this problem. But the BSE and RPA assume 0
K so one may consider if this is a problematic disagreement. However, the occupation width used
will only introduce a very small occupation of the conduction bands when we work with semiconВӯ
ductors, so it seems reasonable to assume that the small temperature has a negligible effect on the
calculated ground state. For hBN we were able to include bands within Оҙ = 2.9 eV to each side
of the direct band gap corresponding to 5 valence and 2 conduction bands. The direct band gap
was fitted to the experimental data to be around 6.7 eV, and thus the cutoff frequency of hBN was
Пүc = 6.7eV + 2.9eV = 9.6eV. Details on the structure, calculation settings and convergence can
be found in appendix I, section I.0.4. For this material, due to a lack of time, we did not deterВӯ
mine the extinction coefficient, and we did not employ the fВӯsum method. Figure 7.5 shows our
predictions for the refractive index and EELS together with some experimental data.
A
B
C
Figure 7.5: Theoretical predictions for refractive index (A,B) and EELS (C) for hBN together with
experimental data. The experimental data for the refractive index was obtained from [31], and
experimental data for the EELS spectrum was obtained from [32].
In figure 7.5 (A) we see a large excitonic peak in the experimental data just above 6 eV captured by
the BSE but not by the RPA. The experimental data seems to suggest a static refractive at about 2.1Вӯ
2.3, which is a bit more than we have found with the fully converged RPA calculation. Considering
the hybrids (B), we see that the Simple Hybrid and the two Вӯ H hybrids predict the experimental data
very well. The Kernel Hybrid also finds a suitable static refractive index, but as we have also seen
for some of the other materials, particularly anatase TiO2, the Kernel Hybrid largely overestimates
the excitonic peak and also locates it at the wrong energy compared to the experimental data. The
EELS spectrum in (C) is plotted at lower energies than we have seen for the other materials up
until now. The first problem is that the RPA does not predict the right location for the largest peak
compared to the experimental data. According to the experimental data, the peak is around 7.5 eV,
whereas the RPA locates it at around 11 eV. Moreover, considering the EELS spectrum at lower
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
77
==PAGE:84==
energies, the hybrids do not to follow the RPA calculation, as opposed to other EELS spectra that
we have considered. A possible explanation is that the peaks in the experimental data, both the
large peak at 7.5 eV but also the shoulder at approximately 6Вӯ7 eV, are influenced by excitons. The
shoulder, which is located just around the band gap of the material and thus most likely is a purely
excitonic peak, is reflected in all of the hybrids, all having a peak at around 7 eV. What is also
worth noticing is that the Simple Hybrid and the two Вӯ H hybrids, although not having the right
shape of the peak, do shift down the large peak in energy compared to RPA, moving it closer to
the experimental data. All calculations also have a rise in intensity at energies from 15 eV and up,
just as the experimental data show.
We finally consider HfS2. Like MoS2 it is a transition metal dichalcogenide with potential appliВӯ
cation in electronics and optoelectronics, see for example [33]. Here they mention that HfS2 is
predicted to have a carrier mobility 5 times higher than that of MoS2, and that it is predicted to be
an efficient photocatalyst for water splitting. The work on HfS2 differs from the other materials.
The BSE and RPA calculations have been made in close collaboration with one of my supervisors,
Mark Svendsen. The research section at which this project has been made, has a collaboration
with a neighboring experimental department, which has bought a HfS2 crystal that they intend to
measure the refractive index on. Thus, we would like to make predictions on the refractive index
for this material, and we do not beforehand have experimental data available for benchmarking.
Instead of using experimental lattice parameters, the lattice parameters of HfS2 were found by
with a DFT calculation with a soВӯcalled D3 relaxation, and were found to be a = b = 3.63 Г… and
c = 5.88 Г…. The space group is PВӯ3m1. We included bands within Оҙ = 2.6 eV to each side of the
band gap corresponding to 4 valence bands and 3 conduction bands. For the other materials, as
previously mentioned, we found the band gap by matching the location of the excitonic peaks in
the BSE calculation to the experimentally observed ones. Since we do not have experimental data
available, that is of course not possible. Instead, the band gap was found from a GW calculation
which provides much more reliable band gaps than DFT with the PBE functional. The GW band
gap was found to be 2.9 eV. Thus, for this system, Пүc = 2.9eV + 2.6eV = 5.5eV. A little more
information on the HfS2 calculations can be found in appendix I, section I.0.6. Figure 7.6 displays
the predicted refractive index and EELS spectrum.
The BSE calculation, figure 7.6 (A), displays two excitonic peaks below 3 eV, not captured by the
RPA calculations. Both the full RPA calculation and the BSE predict a static refractive index of
approximately 2.5 eV. It might be a coincidence that they are in agreement. The RPA calculation
has this value due to being converged with respect to the number of bands, whereas the BSE
calculation has a higher static refractive index than the finite RPA calculation due to the excitonic
peaks being close to zero energy and therefore influencing the static refractive index significantly
compared to higher energy transitions. We would like the hybrids to contain both effects, which
should result a higher static refractive index than the RPA and BSE calculations. The hybrids (B)
predict the excitonic peaks as well. As foreseen, the Simple and Kernel Hybrids predict a slightly
higher static refractive index, about 2.6Вӯ2.7, and the Вӯ H hybrids predict a static refractive index of
about 3.
The EELS spectrum (C) is very interesting here. The RPA, Simple and Kernel Hybrids are in agreeВӯ
ment, showing a large plasmonic peak around 30 eV. But the two Вӯ H hybrids lack this peak. The
two Вӯ H hybrids have their real parts of the polarizability determined through Hilbert transforms
of the imaginary parts. By considering plots of the polarizability found with the Вӯ H hybrids, we
could see that the transitions at lower frequencies cause a shift in the real part of the polarizability,
such that the real part does not follow the RPA calculated real part, even at very high frequencies.
For HfS2, this shift in the real part has the consequence that the poles in the RPA calculated diВӯ
electric function, which cause the peaks in the EELS spectrum, are simply not present in the Вӯ H
78
7.1. Hybrid model calculations for various solids
==PAGE:85==
A
B
C
Figure 7.6: Theoretical predictions for refractive index (A,B) and EELS (C) for HfS2.
hybrids. This reveals a serious flaw in the Вӯ H hybrids in regards to predicting the spectrum at large
energies. However, it also shines light on a more general issue. The Kernel and Simple Hybrids
do not obey the KramersВӯKronig due to the FermiВӯDirac factor that was imposed on them, and that
is unacceptable for any physically correct density response function or polarizability. The correcВӯ
tion is only present over the course of 1/2 eV, making the error relatively small, but due to the
KramersВӯKronig relation, the correction influences the real part of the spectrum nonВӯlocally. HowВӯ
ever, as seen, the price for imposing the KramersВӯKronig will in some cases be an EELS spectrum
that does not follow the RPA calculation. The Kernel and Simple Hybrids on the other hand will
follow the RPA at large energies per construction. So whether to choose hybrid functions which
obey the KramersВӯKronig relation or hybrid functions which we are sure always follow the RPA
at large energies is a dilemma.
7.2
Overestimated fВӯsums
An indicator of how well the hybrids perform is their fВӯsums. In theory, the wellВӯconverged RPA
calculation should obey the fВӯsum rule. This is due to the RPA being a soВӯcalled conserving
approximation [34], meaning that it is possible to show that the approximation of the selfВӯenergy
with pairВӯbubbles should result in a GreenвҖҷs function that conserves different physical quantities,
including the fВӯsum [35]. Thus, a hypothesis could be that the hybrid with the fВӯsum closest to
that of the RPA would predict the experimental data the best. Table 7.1 shows the fВӯsums of the
RPA and hybrids in units of eV/Г…3. The RPA should really obey the fВӯsum rule before we do the
shift in energies, вҲҶE, that make the polarizabilities match the material band gap. Therefore we
have calculated the RPA fВӯsum before and after this energy shift (band gap corrected).
7.2. Overestimated fВӯsums
79
==PAGE:86==
Materials
Method
RPA
RPA,
band gap
corrected
Simple Hybrid (ВӯH)
Kernel Hybrid
Transition Вӯ H
Rutile TiO2, oВӯaxis
88.92
97.54
99.01
103.06
99.25
Rutile TiO2, eВӯaxis
87.23
96.86
98.04
102.58
98.48
Anatase TiO2
78.59
87.72
89.04
96.47
89.12
MoS2
63.08
66.41
66.91
70.41
66.25
hBN
66.63
78.18
78.50
84.96
78.56
HfS2
55.74
61.39
61.60
62.93
61.73
Table 7.1: The fВӯsum in units of eV/Г…3 calculated for the fully converged RPA polarizability,
before (first column) and after (second column) we have corrected for the underestimation of the
band gap. After this correction, the four hybrids are calculated, and we here show their resulting
fВӯsums for each of the materials in consideration. Note that the Simple Hybrid and the Simple
Hybrid Вӯ H have the same fВӯsum since they only differ in the real part part of the polarizability.
Considering table 7.1 we are not surprised to see that the band gap corrected RPA always has a
larger fВӯsum than the original RPA calculated polarizability, and the hybrids are influenced by this,
having fВӯsums closer to the band gap corrected RPA. We tried to impose the fВӯsum on the band gap
corrected finite and full RPA calculations by multiplying the spectra by ПүвҲ’вҲҶE
Пү
which does indeed
yield the correct fВӯsums, but in the end yields hybrids that do not predict the experimental data very
well. While the RPA is in principle a conserving approximation before the band gap correction,
it is an open question how the correction affects this property. Shifting the energies introduces
a mismatch between the energies and wavefunctions. Had we performed the DFT calculation
with a selfВӯconsistent GW selfВӯenergy instead of PBE, we would have obtained a more physically
correct band structure and corresponding wavefunctions. This might make the band gap correction
unnecessary, and we would avoid the mismatch.
If we accept the fВӯsum of the band gap corrected RPA and compare it to the fВӯsums of the hybrids,
we see that especially the Kernel Hybrid tends to overestimate the fВӯsum, whereas the Simple
Hybrid and the two Вӯ H hybrids only overestimate it a bit. However, rutile TiO2, eВӯaxis, and MoS2
were described well by the Kernel Hybrid. Besides, we used the fВӯsum method on all the TiO2
variants and MoS2, finding that in general the prediction of the fВӯsum method was not as good
as the Simple Hybrid and the Вӯ H hybrids. The fВӯsum rule specifically imposes the fВӯsum, and
thus we have not included it in the tableНҫ this fВӯsum is by construction almost exactly equal to the
fВӯsum of the original RPA calculated polarizability. Thus, we do not believe that aiming for the
right fВӯsum necessarily yields the best results.
One can also question whether the RPA calculation completely hits the right fВӯsum. For one thing,
we only converged the RPA calculation up to 60 eV, and in theory we should converge to infinite
energies. The slightly higher fВӯsums of the Simple Hybrid and the Kernel Hybrid, which do better
than the RPA and BSE calculations in predicting the spectra we have considered, may be closer to
the true fВӯsum, since one could hypothesize that the full RPA would have reached this fВӯsum had
we converged to even higher frequencies. Another point to make is that we are using KohnВӯSham
calculated eigenstates and Вӯenergies, which may be problematic because the RPA derivation takes
outset in the Hartree picture. The use of KohnВӯSham states is an improvement over the Hartree
states since in this way we are able to incorporate exchange and correlation effects via the PBE
exchangeВӯcorrelation potential that the Hartree states do not contain. But it has the consequence
that when calculating the RPA polarizability, we have a mix of approximations entering the exВӯ
pressions, using KohnВӯSham eigenvalues and Вӯenergies but Hartree electronВӯelectron interactions.
As a consequence, the fВӯsum rule might not be exactly conserved.
80
7.2. Overestimated fВӯsums
==PAGE:87==
It remains undetermined to what extent the overestimated fВӯsums of the hybrids are a problem in
regards to their ability to predict the correct physical spectra, and how corrections should be imВӯ
posed, if that is the case. An easy way to improve the predictions would be using selfВӯconsistent
GW in the DFT calculations instead of PBE. When we have not done so it is due to GW calculaВӯ
tions being more computationally demanding.
7.3
Hybrid function selection across materials
For most materials, the Simple Hybrid Вӯ H and Transition Вӯ H are in agreement at both higher
and lower frequencies. There are mainly two differences between these two hybrids. The first
difference is the way they transition from a frequency range where we have a BSE calculation,
to a frequency range where we only have the fully converged RPA. The Transition Вӯ H hybrid
transitions in an interpolating way over the course of 2 eV, while the Simple Hybrid Вӯ H transitions
through a FermiВӯDirac factor working over 1/2 eV, as described in chapter 5. In principle the way
of transitioning can influence the entire spectrum due to the Hilbert transform. Further, recall
that the BSE polarizability has a contribution that is equal to the finite RPA calculation. Another
difference between them is that in the Simple Hybrid Вӯ H, this RPA contribution is replaced by
the fully converged RPA calculation, where in the Transition Вӯ H it is not. We do also see very
small differences between them in the spectra, see for example the refractive index for bulk MoS2,
figure 7.4 (B), and rutile TiO2, eВӯaxis, figure 7.2 (B). But the differences seem negligible. The
two hybrids seem to do rather well in predicting the experimental data. Especially rutile TiO2, oВӯ
axis, anatase TiO2 and hBN are very well predicted by these two hybrids, both at higher and lower
frequencies. However, the main flaw in these hybrids is the risk that the Hilbert transform may
lift the real part of the Вӯ H polarizabilities in such a way that we do not obtain the desired EELS
spectrum, like we saw for HfS2, figure 7.6 (C).
In general the Simple Hybrid is very similar to the Вӯ H predictions. However, not having the
Hilbert transform means that the refractive indices are slightly smaller than the two Вӯ H hybrids for
all materials. The two Вӯ H hybrids are in general slightly closer to the experimental data for the
refractive indices, see rutile TiO2, eВӯaxis, figure 7.2 (B), MoS2, figure 7.4 (B), and hBN, figure 7.5
(B), and in the remaining two cases, rutile TiO2, oВӯaxis, figure 7.1 and anatase TiO2, figure 7.3, the
lowest frequency experimental data is sandwiched between the Simple Hybrid and the Вӯ H hybrids.
But the differences between these three hybrids are quite small and the shapes of the graphs are
almost identical. The fact the Simple Hybrid, as opposed to the Вӯ H hybrids, does not obey the
KramersВӯKronig relation is a serious flaw of this method even though the error is small. But on
the other hand, the higher frequency EELS spectra are not in risk of failing. Choosing between
Simple Hybrid and the Вӯ H hybrids then poses a dilemma. The right choice probably depends on
the intended use. If we are only interested in the low frequency spectrum, like the refractive index,
then the Вӯ H hybrids yield the most accurate results. If, on the other hand, you would like to predict
the polarizability at all frequencies, then the Simple Hybrid is a safer choice.
The fВӯsum method did well in predicting the refractive index of MoS2, but otherwise it has a
tendency to overestimate the static refractive index. From the way it is constructed it can not be
used to predict higher frequency spectra.
The Kernel Hybrid has a tendency to sometimes overestimate the height of the peaks, and also the
fВӯsum of this hybrid lies further away from that of the fully converged RPA calculation than the
three other hybrids. However, it seems to do better in predicting the refractive index for MoS2
and rutile TiO2, eВӯaxis, than the Simple Hybrid and the two Вӯ H hybrids, see figure 7.2 and 7.4
respectively. But that means that in 3/5 cases the Kernel Hybrid overestimated the height of the
exciton peaks, that is for rutile TiO2, oВӯaxis, anatase TiO2 and hBN. Here, the Simple Hybrid and
the two ВӯH functions did much better in predicting the experimental refractive index, including
the exciton peak heights. So letвҖҷs consider what happens. Recall the expression for the Kernel
7.3. Hybrid function selection across materials
81
==PAGE:88==
Hybrid, eq. (5.16). We will be ignoring the FermiВӯDirac factor, which only works over a short
energy interval, and also lies beyond the energy interval, that we consider here anyway. What we
then see is that the denominator of the Kernel Hybrid has a pole when the real part of the full RPA
calculation times the kernel is 1, and if at the same time the imaginary part is 0. In figure 7.7 we
see a plot of the real and imaginary part of the full RPA calculated polarizability times the kernel,
which is the inverse finite RPA calculated polarizability minus the BSE calculated polarizability,
for each of the materials considered in this project.
A
D
E
F
C
B
Figure 7.7: Real of imaginary part of the RPA polarizability times the kernel from the denominator
of the Kernel Hybrid for each of the materials considered in this project. A horizontal dashed line
marks 1 on the yВӯaxis since the real part of the denominator of the Kernel Hybrid has a pole here.
When this line is intersected by the real part, we have also made a vertical dashed line to indicate
what the value of the imaginary part is at this energy.
What figure 7.7 reveals is that in the three cases, where the Kernel Hybrid behaves badly, the real
part intersects 1. The imaginary part of rutile TiO2, oВӯaxis, is about 0.3, for anatase TiO2 it is about
0.1, and for hBN less than 0.1. This is consistent with the fact that Kernel Hybrid performs worse
on anatase TiO2 and hBN, and is better in the case of rutile TiO2, oВӯaxis. In the case of rutile TiO2,
eВӯaxis, and MoS22, the real part does not intersect 1 at all, and this is also where the Kernel Hybrid
is the hybrid making the prediction closest to experiments. This indicates a possible criterion for
when to apply the Kernel Hybrid and when to apply the Simple Hybrid. If the real part of the
RPA calculated polarizability times the kernel intersects 1 at a point where the imaginary part is
below some threshold, we should apply the Simple Hybrid, and if not, we should apply the Kernel
Hybrid. To determine if this criterion holds and what the threshold should be, would require much
more benchmarking than done in this project.
7.4
Kernel Hybrid function with local field effects
We have investigated the effect of including local field effects in the Kernel Hybrid more directly.
That means using eq. (5.15), ПҮKH
GGвҖІ, for the Kernel Hybrid instead of eq. (5.16), ПҮKH, which we
have been using up until now, the difference being that the polarizabilities entering the expression
are now matrices with the entries corresponding to reciprocal lattice vectors G, GвҖІ. It is not that
local field effects were not included before, using eq. (5.16) for the Kernel Hybrid. Recall back
from eq. (3.42) that the polarizability is linked to the macroscopic dielectric function, which is
defined as one over the G = GвҖІ = 0 component of the inverse dielectric function. The inversion
introduces local field effects, and since our expression with the polarizability is equivalent to this,
82
7.4. Kernel Hybrid function with local field effects
==PAGE:89==
the polarizabilities entering the Kernel Hybrid (5.16) did hold information about the local fields.
But in this section we introduce the results from including local field effects fully into the Kernel
Hybrid.
In making this investigation, we make use of the results from chapter 6. For the BSE, we need
to include the TDA since the calculations are otherwise too computationally heavy. But since the
TDA does not work well if we include the longВӯrange Coulomb interactions, we need to work with
the polarizabilities instead of the density response functions. This may seem like a trivial note,
having worked with the polarizabilities so far anyway. But due to the way the GPAW codes are
created, this was important to take into account during the implementation.
In figure 7.8 is shown the refractive index and EELS spectrum for rutile TiO2, oВӯaxis, calculated
with Kernel Hybrids with and without direct local field effects together with experimental data. In
general, we calculated the polarizability for this material with a plane wave cutoff of 150 eV, but in
this investigation it is reduced to 50 eV corresponding to matrices that contain 47 Г— 47 reciprocal
lattice vectors. This was done in order to obtain smaller polarizability matrices, since we needed
to perform calculations with them to find the Kernel Hybrid. We also tried a cutoff of 100 eV, but
the result was worse than what we see in figure 7.8.
B
A
Figure 7.8: Kernel Hybrid function with local field effects constructed from polarizability matrices
of dimensions 47 Г— 47, together with the Kernel Hybrid without direct inclusion of local field
effects. The experimental data for the refractive index (A) were obtained from [25]. (B) shows the
EELS spectrum predicted by the full RPA calculation and the four hybrids. Experimental data is
marked with black dots. The experimental data for the EELS spectrum was obtained from [26].
From figure 7.8 we see that the method does not seem too promising. Comparing to the Kernel
Hybrid without direct local field effects, the static refractive index is perhaps closer to the experiВӯ
mental one, and the peak is less overestimated, but some very strange and large peaks has appeared
around 5 eV. Considering the EELS spectrum, we see that the overall trends are followed, but we
have a very sharp divergent peak around 7 eV. From considering the inverted expression in the
Kernel Hybrid matrices, eq. (5.15), i.e. the 1 вҲ’ПҮRPA Г— kernel, at different frequencies, we know
that they are very numerically unstable, i.e. they have determinants very close to zero, and so the
inversion does not go well. The problem increases when more matrix entries are included in the
polarizabilities entering the Kernel Hybrid. Thus, we are actually able to sort of avoid the problem
by only considering a subset of the matrix. The strange peaks around 5 eV in the refractive index
and 7 eV in the EELS spectrum first appear when the matrices include 26 Г— 26 reciprocal lattice
vectors. Thus, in figure 7.9 we have included only the first 25 Г— 25 entries.
The number of 25Г—25 entries is found from eyesight. Thus, this approach of reducing the matrices
is rather questionable. Considering figure 7.9, the beginning of a peak around 5 eV has begun to
appear, even though it seems small enough at this point to not really pose a problem. Besides, it is
7.4. Kernel Hybrid function with local field effects
83
==PAGE:90==
B
A
Figure 7.9: Kernel Hybrid function with local field effects constructed from polarizability matrices
with only the first 25 Г— 25 matrix entries, together with the Kernel Hybrid without direct inclusion
of local field effects. (A) is the refractive index with experimental data from [25] and (B) is the
EELS spectrum with experimental data from [26].
still true that matrix inversion in (5.15) is unstable, and therefore it is not at all clear, why reducing
the polarizability matrices works. From gradually increasing the number of matrix entries included,
it seems that some specific G entries work in a destabilizing way, creating large divergent peaks
in the spectrum. This can also happen when only a few matrix entries are included. Initially,
when more entries are included, the behaviour is suppressed. But at some point Вӯ for this system it
happens at 26 Г— 26 Вӯ the behaviour can no longer be suppressed and no matter how many matrix
entries are included, the spectrum keeps having divergent peaks or rapid oscillations.
84
7.4. Kernel Hybrid function with local field effects
==PAGE:91==
8
Conclusion and Outlook
8.1
Conclusion
This project described how the electric susceptibility, also called the density response function, can
be used to determine important optical features of materials. More specifically, we saw that from
the density response function, we can determine absorption spectra, electron energy loss spectra,
refractive indices and extinction coefficients, which are all important information when one wishes
to characterize a solid. We explained that some important effects that can sometimes be observed
in these spectra are plasmons and excitons at higher and lower frequencies respectively, and modВӯ
els for the density response function should then ideally capture these effects. To model the density
response function, we began by defining it through linear response theory. We derived an expresВӯ
sion for the density response function using timeВӯdependent density functional theory (TDDFT)
in reciprocal space, and saw that even though this expression was exact, we did not know the
exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel entering the equation and needed to find approximations to that. We
introduced the irreducible density response function, also called the polarizability. The polarizВӯ
ability is characterized by having the longВӯrange component of the Coulomb interaction put to
zero during its calculation. Otherwise, all equations which apply to the density response function,
also apply to the polarizability. We then introduced manyВӯbody perturbation theory, and derived
the Random Phase Approximation (RPA). We recognized the RPA expression to be exactly the
TDDFT density response function without the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel. The RPA, containing
the longВӯrange Coulomb interaction, is able to capture plasmonic effects in the solids. But since
the RPA is a mean field approximation to the interactions in the solid, it is incapable of describing
direct twoВӯparticle interactions, and thus it does not capture excitonic effects. We then derived the
BetheВӯSalpeter equation (BSE) which does capture these important effects, but unfortunately it is
a computationally heavy method. We introduced the TammВӯDancoff approximation which is emВӯ
ployed in order reduce the computational cost. But even then, we are only actually able to include
a few bands around the Fermi level in the BSE calculations on real materials.
Exploiting the fact that excitons are typically most important for low frequency transitions, while
plasmons dominate the highВӯfrequency spectrum, we proposed four different hybrid functions suitВӯ
able for the calculation of the density response function over a wide range of frequencies. These
four hybrid functions, which we called the Kernel Hybrid, the Simple Hybrid, the Simple Hybrid
Вӯ H and Transition Вӯ H, were composed of a finite BSE calculation together with a fully converged
RPA calculation, and sometimes also a finite RPA calculation having the same bands included as
the BSE calculation. These hybrid functions also address the issue that the real and imaginary parts
of the density response function are connected via the KramersВӯKronig relation, making the real
part a nonВӯlocal function that depends on the entirety of the imaginary part, which means that it is
often not converged when only few bands are included in the calculation.
8.1.1
The TammВӯDancoff approximation
An important insight from this project is that one needs to be cautious when using the TammВӯ
Dancoff approximation in the BSE. The scaling problems of the BSE means that the approximaВӯ
tion can be a necessity. But for some systems it tends to change the results drastically. A way
to improve the results is to include the negative transitions when calculating the polarizabilities
exploiting that the G = GвҖІ = 0 component is antiВӯsymmetric in the frequency domain, either
by directly including these transitions or by performing a Hilbert transform on the imaginary part
of the calculated polarizability under this constraint. For systems where the coupling part of the
matrix is small, this yields quite accurate results, as we saw in the case of silicon. Including the
negative frequencies is also an improvement for systems where the coupling part is stronger. We
Chapter 8. Conclusion and Outlook
85
==PAGE:92==
also saw that the TammВӯDancoff approximation works better when the longВӯrange component of
the Coulomb interaction is not included in the calculations. Thus, we should determine the polarВӯ
izability with the BSE code instead of the density response function.
8.1.2
Hybrid models for predicting experimental data
RPA, finite RPA and BSE calculated polarizabilities were used to create the four hybrids, and
sometimes also the fВӯsum method. All these calculated hybrid polarizabilities were then used to
determine the refractive indices, EELS spectra, and sometimes also the extinction coefficients for
the materials rutile TiO2 with the incoming electric field polarized along the ordinary and extraorВӯ
dinary axes respectively, anatase TiO2, bulk MoS22, hBN and HfS2. Except for HfS2, we were
in most cases able to benchmark the predicted spectra against experimental data. All hybrids in
general did well in predicting the experimental data, in particular much better than the RPA and
BSE calculations. As expected from the theory, the BSE calculations tend to underestimate the
static refractive indices, and the fully converged RPA calculations did not capture the excitonic
peaks. Besides, sometimes the RPA will also underestimate the static refractive index, when this
is influenced by excitons present at low frequencies. In all cases, the hybrids predicted the exciton
peaks and with few exceptions, they also predicted the static refractive indices quite well. Except
in the case of HfS2, all hybrids followed the full RPA calculated EELS spectrum as desired, thus
accurately describing the plasmons present in the experimental EELS spectra. When excitonic
peaks were present in the experimental EELS spectra, these were not captured by the RPA, but all
hybrids predicted these peaks.
We saw that most often the Simple Hybrid, the Simple Hybrid Вӯ H and the Transition Вӯ H yield
very similar predictions, especially the two latter hybrids. However, as seen for HfS2, the Hilbert
transform performed in the two Вӯ H hybrids for finding their real parts means that the spectrum is
affected everywhere by the imaginary part at smaller frequencies. Thus, the EELS spectra from
the two ВӯH hybrids might not follow the RPA calculated EELS spectra as they should. The Simple
Hybrid and Kernel Hybrid do not obey the KramersВӯKronig relation due to the FermiВӯDirac factor
imposed in these models. But the risk of not obtaining the correct EELS spectrum means that we
are leaning towards using the Simple and Kernel Hybrids for predicting full spectra. However, if
the spectrum is only needed at lower frequencies in some specific use case, e.g. for finding the
refractive index, the two Вӯ H hybrids work very well. Comparing the Simple Hybrid and the Kernel
Hybrid, we would say that overall the Simple Hybrid did best in predicting the low energy spectra
for rutile TiO2, oВӯaxis, anatase TiO2 and hBN, while the Kernel Hybrid did better in predicting
the spectra for rutile TiO2, eВӯaxis, and MoS2. There seemingly appears to be a tendency for the
Kernel Hybrid to fail when part of the spectrum is close to one of its poles. In these cases however,
the Simple Hybrid did very well. And when there were no poles in the denominator of the Kernel
Hybrid, it did better than the Simple Hybrid. Thus, a possible idea is to test if such a pole is present
in the Kernel Hybrid, perhaps simultaneously considering the value of the imaginary part at the
frequency point of the pole. If the pole is present, and if the imaginary part of the denominator is
below some threshold value, one should use the Simple Hybrid, and otherwise, one should use the
Kernel Hybrid.
8.2
Outlook
Many potentially interesting conclusions can be drawn from this project, but further investigations
are necessary in order to confirm that they hold in general. The validity of the idea of selecting a
hybrid function based on whether a pole is present in the real part of the denominator of the Kernel
Hybrid, as explained in section 7.3, lacks statistical evidence. Our results point in that direction,
but we would need to test it on many more materials to be sure. In general, we need to test the
hybrids on many more materials where we have experimental data available.
Further, the hybrids all had the problem of overestimating the fВӯsums, mostly due to them being
86
8.2. Outlook
==PAGE:93==
based on RPA and BSE calculations that had been band gap corrected, since the shift in energies
introduced a mismatch between the energies and wavefunctions entering the expressions for the
density response functions or polarizabilities. Therefore we would like the band gap corrected
polarizabilities, i.e. the full RPA but also the finite BSE and RPA calculated polarizabilities, to
have the same fВӯsum after the correction. One way to approach this problem could be to base the
BSE and RPA calculations on selfВӯconsistent GW calculations instead of using a PBE exchangeВӯ
correlation functional in the DFT calculations as we did in this project. Alternatively, we could
look for another way of correcting for the change in fВӯsums upon the band gap correction.
It is a problem that the Kernel and Simple Hybrids do not obey the KramersВӯKronig relation due to
the FermiВӯDirac factor. We imposed the FermiВӯDirac factor in these two hybrids to prevent them
from dragging the hybrid polarizability down to zero instead of having it approach the full RPA
calculation, as explained in chapter 5. It is desirable to develop an alternative way of achieving the
same purpose that does not have the unintentional consequence that the hybrid no longer obeys the
KramersВӯKronig relation.
In general, the BSE calculations did well in predicting the shape of the refractive indices of the
materials considered in this project, although as also expected, the values for the refractive indices
were underestimated. However, in particular for bulk MoS2, one of the peaks present in the exВӯ
perimental data was not present in the BSE calculation, figure 7.4. The hybrids will never be able
to predict an excitonic peak that was not present in the BSE calculation, and so, to obtain better
results, one could consider ways to improve the BSE calculation. One way could be to do the
calculations without the TammВӯDancoff approximation. In this project, using the approximation
was necessary to perform the calculations due to the computational cost. If the cost of calculations
could be reduced, for instance by improving the GPAW implementation of the BSE, it is possible
that we would be able to perform calculations without the TammВӯDancoff approximation, at least
for some materials. Further, in the derivation of the BSE in the GW approximation, we assumed
that the screened interaction W was instantaneous, such that the BSE matrix was not a function of
frequency. One could imagine implementing a frequency dependence to improve the BSE calculaВӯ
tions. This could perhaps be based on the recently proposed method by [36], where the frequency
dependence of W is described in an efficient multipole approximation.
Finally, it would be interesting to understand exactly why it was problematic to include local field
effects in the Kernel Hybrid. There was a tendency for the local field effects to correct for the flaws
of the Kernel Hybrid Вӯ the location and height of the peak and the static refractive matched the
experimental data better than the Kernel Hybrid without local field effects Вӯ but rapid oscillations
or divergent peaks would start to appear when more matrix entries were included in the calculation.
We do not fully understand why these peaks appear or why creating the Kernel Hybrid using only
subsets of the RPA and BSE polarizability matrices would reduce the problem. Understanding why
this happens could potentially enable us to correct the model to generate better predictions.
8.2. Outlook
87
==PAGE:94==
88
8.2. Outlook
==PAGE:95==
A
Kubo Formula
The following derivation takes outset in [13]. In linear response theory, we include only terms up
to first order in ЛҶVI(t) in the timeВӯevolution operator,
ЛҶUI(t, t0) вүҲ1 вҲ’i
Z t
t0
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)dtвҖІ.
(A.1)
LetвҖҷs consider how this changes the expectation value of some operator ЛҶA(t). In thermal equilibВӯ
rium, the expectation value can in the interaction picture be found as,
вҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©= 1
Z0
X
n
вҹЁn(t)|I ЛҶAI(t)|n(t)вҹ©IeвҲ’ОІEn,
(A.2)
where ОІ =
1
kBT is the inverse temperature, |n(t)вҹ©I are a complete set of eigenstates for ЛҶH0 with
eigenenergies En, and Z0 = Tr
 eвҲ’ОІEn
is the partition function. We now use eq. (3.7) to write
вҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©= 1
Z0
X
n
вҹЁn(t0)|I ЛҶUвҖ 
I (t) ЛҶAI(t) ЛҶUI(t)|n(t0)вҹ©IeвҲ’ОІEn
= 1
Z0
X
n
вҹЁn(t0)|I

1 + i
Z t
t0
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)dtвҖІ

ЛҶAI(t)

1 вҲ’i
Z t
t0
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)dtвҖІ

|n(t0)вҹ©IeвҲ’ОІEn
вүҲвҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©0 + i
Z0
Z t
t0
X
n
вҹЁn(t0)|I

ЛҶVI(tвҖІ) ЛҶAI(t) вҲ’ЛҶAI(t) ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)

|n(t0)вҹ©IdtвҖІeвҲ’ОІEn
= вҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©0 + i
Z0
Z t
t0
X
n
вҹЁn(t0)|I
h
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ), ЛҶAI(t)
i
|n(t0)вҹ©IdtвҖІeвҲ’ОІEn
= вҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©0 + i
Z t
t0
Dh
ЛҶVI(tвҖІ), ЛҶAI(t)
iE
0 dtвҖІ,
(A.3)
where we used eq. (A.1) and neglected the second order term in ЛҶVI(t) in (A.3). The term вҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©0 =
1
Z0
P
n вҹЁn(t0)| ЛҶA(t)|n(t0)вҹ©eвҲ’ОІEn is the expectation value in the unperturbed case, ЛҶH = ЛҶH0. And
so the perturbation changes the expectation value by an amount
ОҙвҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©= вҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©вҲ’вҹЁЛҶA(t)вҹ©0 = вҲ’i
Z вҲһ
t0
Оё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
Dh
ЛҶAI(t), ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)
iE
0 dtвҖІ.
(A.4)
This is the Kubo formula. The Heaviside function reveals that we have a retarded function meaning
that the function obeys causality: A perturbation applied at time tвҖІ creates a response at time t > tвҖІ.
To develop this expression, letвҖҷs assume that the system in consideration is time invariant. In this
case, it makes sense to let eq. (A.4) be a function of tвҲ’tвҖІ. We make the notation change, tвҖІ вҶ’tвҲ’tвҖІ
and we put t = 0. LetвҖҷs further assume that we are at very low temperatures, such that T вҶ’0 and
ОІ вҶ’вҲһ. In this case,
X
n
eвҲ’ОІEn
Tr (eвҲ’ОІEm) =
X
n
eвҲ’ОІEn
P
m eвҲ’ОІEm =
X
n
eвҲ’ОІE0eвҲ’ОІ(EnвҲ’E0)
P
m eвҲ’ОІE0eвҲ’ОІ(EmвҲ’E0)
=
X
n
eвҲ’ОІ(EnвҲ’E0)
P
m eвҲ’ОІ(EmвҲ’E0) =
(
1,
En = Em = E0,
0,
Otherwise.
(A.5)
Appendix A. Kubo Formula
89
==PAGE:96==
Where the last equality comes from the exponential function approaching 0 for ОІ вҶ’вҲһunless the
argument is 0 which is the case for En = Em = 0. Thus, we only get a contribution from the
ground state, i.e. |n(t0)вҹ©= |0вҹ©when evaluating the expectation value.
We use this result in eq. (A.4) and apply the identity operator 1 = P
s |s вҹ©вҹЁs| where |sвҹ©are
eigenstates of ЛҶH0,
ОҙвҹЁЛҶAвҹ©= вҲ’i
X
s
Z 0
t0

вҹЁ0| ЛҶAI(t)|sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)|0вҹ©вҲ’вҹЁ0| ЛҶVI(tвҖІ)|sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶAI|0вҹ©

dtвҖІ.
(A.6)
We then assume that the perturbation is turned on adiabatically a long time ago, t0 вҶ’вҲ’вҲһ. We
may write ЛҶVI(t) = eвҲ’i(Пү+iО·)t ЛҶVI = ei ЛҶH0teвҲ’i(Пү+iО·)t ЛҶV eвҲ’i ЛҶH0t, where we applied eq. (3.4). Under
this assumption, we can then use the nonВӯinteracting ground state for the calculations. We then
obtain
ОҙвҹЁЛҶA(Пү)вҹ©= вҲ’i
X
s
Z 0
вҲ’вҲһ
вҹЁ0| ЛҶA|sвҹ©вҹЁs|ei ЛҶH0tвҖІeвҲ’i(Пү+iО·)tвҖІ ЛҶV eвҲ’i ЛҶH0tвҖІ|0вҹ©dtвҖІ
+ i
X
s
Z 0
вҲ’вҲһ
вҹЁ0|ei ЛҶH0tвҖІeвҲ’i(Пү+iО·)tвҖІ ЛҶV eвҲ’i ЛҶH0tвҖІ|sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶA|0вҹ©dtвҖІ
(A.7)
Since the states |sвҹ©are eigenstates for the Hamiltonian ЛҶH0 we know that eвҲ’i ЛҶH0t|sвҹ©= eвҲ’iEst|sвҹ©,
and since eвҲ’iEst is just a number we may then write,
ОҙвҹЁЛҶA(Пү)вҹ©= вҲ’i
X
s
Z 0
вҲ’вҲһ
eвҲ’i(E0вҲ’Es+Пү+iО·)tвҖІвҹЁ0| ЛҶA|sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶV |0вҹ©dtвҖІ
+ i
X
s
Z 0
вҲ’вҲһ
eвҲ’i(EsвҲ’E0+Пү+iО·)tвҖІвҹЁ0| ЛҶV |sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶA|0вҹ©dtвҖІ.
(A.8)
Evaluating the integral the exponential is 1 in the upper limit, tвҖІ = 0, and vanishes in the lower
limit, tвҖІ вҶ’вҲ’вҲһand thus we are left with,
ОҙвҹЁЛҶA(Пү)вҹ©=
X
s
 
вҹЁ0| ЛҶA|sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶV |0вҹ©
E0 вҲ’Es + Пү + iО· вҲ’
вҹЁ0| ЛҶV |sвҹ©вҹЁs| ЛҶA|0вҹ©
Es вҲ’E0 + Пү + iО·
!
.
(A.9)
This is the Kubo formula.
90
==PAGE:97==
B
Density Functional Theory (DFT)
Consider the full Hamiltonian of interacting electrons and nuclei [37],
ЛҶH = ЛҶTe + ЛҶTn + ЛҶuee + ЛҶVion + ЛҶvnn + ЛҶvext
(B.1)
where ЛҶTe and ЛҶTn are the kinetic energies of the electrons and nuclei respectively, and ЛҶuee, ЛҶVion
and ЛҶvnn are the interacting potentials between the electrons, the nuclei and electrons and the nuclei
respectively, and ЛҶvext is an external potential. The problem can be further simplified using the BornВӯ
Oppenheimer approximation: the nuclei are about 105 times heavier than the electrons, and thus
the lattice ions move slowly around their equilibrium positions compared to the lighter electrons.
We therefore consider them to be fixed to their positions, meaning that ЛҶTn = 0, and the repulsive
potential ЛҶvnn becomes a constant with no relevance for the Hamiltonian. We therefore also put
ЛҶvnn = 0. ЛҶVion now accounts for the fact that the fixed nuclei generate a static potential in which
the electrons are moving. We are left with
ЛҶH = ЛҶTe + ЛҶuee + ЛҶVion + ЛҶVext.
(B.2)
With this Hamiltonian, we could in principle solve the SchrГ¶dinger equation to obtain eigenvalues
and Вӯenergies, but being too computationally expensive [37], DFT makes a reformulation of the
problem. Here, the ground state electron density, n0(r), becomes the central variable instead of the
manyВӯbody wave function. This reduces the problem considerably since the density is a function
of only three spatial variables, whereas the full wave function for N electrons will be a function
of 3N variables. Making this reformulation is justified by the HohenbergВӯKohn theorems. The
ground state energy is then a functional of the ground state density,
E0[n0] = Te[n0] + uee[n0] + Vion[n0] + Vext[n0],
(B.3)
where e.g.
Te[n0] = вҹЁПҲ0| ЛҶTe|ПҲ0вҹ©.
(B.4)
The potential from the ions can be written in terms of the ground state density as
Vion[n0] =
Z
vion(r)n0(r)dr,
(B.5)
where
vion(r) = вҲ’e2
P
X
i=1
Zi
|r вҲ’Ri|.
(B.6)
P is the number of nuclei, Z is the atomic number and Ri is the position of nucleus number i. As
we have seen before, the external potential has this form as well,
Vext[n0] =
Z
vext(r)n0(r)dr.
(B.7)
By minimizing the total energy with respect to the density we can find the ground state density n0,
ОҙE[n]
Оҙn(r) = 0.
(B.8)
Appendix B. Density Functional Theory (DFT)
91
==PAGE:98==
From this density we would then be able to determine all other quantities of interest. However, we
only know an exact expression for the external potential. The kinetic energy, Te and the electronВӯ
electron interaction potential, uee are unknowns and we need to approximate them. In the KohnВӯ
Sham formulation, Te is treated as the kinetic energy Ts of a corresponding nonВӯinteracting system
while uee is approximated by the Hartree energy,
EH =
Z Z n(rвҖІ)n(r)
|r вҲ’rвҖІ| drdrвҖІ,
(B.9)
and an exchangeВӯcorrelation term Exc which accounts for manyВӯbody effects of the system, such
that the total energy is now
E[n] = Ts[n] + 1
2
Z Z n(rвҖІ)n(r)
|r вҲ’rвҖІ| drdrвҖІ +
Z
(vion(r) + vext(r)) n(r)dr + Exc[n].
(B.10)
By taking the functional derivative of this we obtain the KohnВӯSham equation. We define
vR[n](r) = vH[n](r) + vion(r) + ОҙExc[n]
Оҙn(r) + vext(r)
(B.11)
where we defined the Hartree potential as,
vH[n](r) =
Z
n(rвҖІ)
|r вҲ’rвҖІ|drвҖІ.
(B.12)
In this way we have obtained an expression describing a fictitious system of nonВӯinteracting elecВӯ
trons generating the same density of a system of interacting electrons through this effective potenВӯ
tial. The SchrГ¶dinger equation for the fictitious system of electrons then becomes,

вҲ’вҲҮ2
2m + vR(r)

П•i(r) = ОөiП•i(r).
(B.13)
From the solution to this equation we can find the ground state density as
n(r) =
N
X
i=1
fi|П•i(r)|2,
(B.14)
where fi is the occupation number. This is a selfВӯconsistency problem which can be solved iterВӯ
atively for the density. We provide an initial guess for the singleВӯparticle orbitals, solve for the
electron density, and use this density to create a new set of orbitals, until the new set of orbitals
are consistent with the starting set of orbitals. However, the exchangeВӯcorrelation potential is unВӯ
known. There have been developed some different functionals to approximate it, for example LDA
and PBE. Accounting for these goes beyond the scope of this report.
From the procedure described here we can obtain the eigenstates and Вӯenergies needed to determine
the nonВӯinteracting density response function, eqs. (3.24, 3.38), in terms of the nonВӯinteracting
KohnВӯSham system.
92
==PAGE:99==
C
Coulomb Interaction in Reciprocal Space
The Coulomb interaction can be written as,
vC(r) = e2
0
|r|
(C.1)
in real space. With the Fourier transform defined in eq. (3.30), the Fourier transform of eq. (C.1)
becomes
vC
G(q) = e2
0
V
Z eвҲ’iQr
r
dr
= e2
0
V
Z 2ПҖ
0
Z ПҖ
0
Z вҲһ
0
r2 sin(Оё)eвҲ’iQr cos(Оё)
r
drdОёdП•
= 2ПҖe2
0
V
Z ПҖ
0
Z вҲһ
0
r sin(Оё)eвҲ’iQr cos(Оё)drdОё
(C.2)
We make the substitution, u = cos(Оё), such that we have,
vC
G(q) = вҲ’2ПҖe2
0
V
Z вҲ’1
1
Z вҲһ
0
reвҲ’iQrudrdu
= вҲ’2ПҖe2
0
V
Z вҲһ
0

ireвҲ’iQru
Qr
вҲ’1
1
dr
= вҲ’2ПҖe2
0
V
Z вҲһ
0
ieiQr
Q
вҲ’ieвҲ’iQr
Q

dr
= 4ПҖe2
0
V Q
Z вҲһ
0
Im
 eiQr
dr
(C.3)
Now this will clearly diverge. In order to avoid this, we add a small positive number iО· which kills
the upper bound,
vC
G(q) = 4ПҖe2
0
V Q lim
О·вҶ’0
Z вҲһ
0
Im

ei(Q+iО·)r
dr
= 1
V
4ПҖe2
0
|Q|2
(C.4)
Using the expression for Q, this is
vC
G(q) = 1
V
4ПҖe2
0
|G + q|2
(C.5)
Appendix C. Coulomb Interaction in Reciprocal Space
93
==PAGE:100==
D
Single Particle GreenвҖҷs Functions
In the case of nonВӯinteracting electrons, the Hamiltonian can be written as [12],
ЛҶH0 =
X
kПғ
ОөkПғЛҶcвҖ 
kПғЛҶckПғ,
(D.1)
and the retarded GreenвҖҷs function, i.e. the first expression in eq. (4.1), becomes
GR
0 (kПғ, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶckПғ(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
kПғ(tвҖІ)}
E
,
(D.2)
where we put v = vвҖІ = k in eq. (4.1) since we in the nonВӯinteracting case have ЛҶH = ЛҶH0, and we
are therefore able to describe the system in an eigenbasis of ЛҶH0 which is diagonal in k. With the
Hamiltonian being time independent, the time dependence of the operators in the GreenвҖҷs function
can be found using the Heisenberg equation of motion,
iвҲӮtЛҶckПғ(t) =
h
ЛҶckПғ, ЛҶH0
i
(t) =
X
kвҖІПғвҖІ
ОөkвҖІПғвҖІ
h
ЛҶckПғ, ЛҶcвҖ 
kвҖІПғвҖІЛҶckвҖІПғвҖІ
i
(t) = ОөkПғЛҶckПғ(t),
(D.3)
where we used the fact that [A, BC] = {A, B} C вҲ’B {A, C} which applies when we are conВӯ
sidering fermions fulfilling antiВӯcommutation relations, and that
n
ЛҶci, ЛҶcвҖ 
j
o
= Оҙij. Eq. (D.3) has the
solution,
ЛҶckПғ(t) = eвҲ’iОөkПғtЛҶckПғ.
(D.4)
Further using that we know the occupation of free electrons,
D
ЛҶckПғЛҶcвҖ 
kПғ
E
= 1вҲ’nF (Оөk) and
D
ЛҶcвҖ 
kПғЛҶckПғ
E
=
nF (Оөk), with nF (Оөk) being the FermiВӯDirac distribution, the expectation value in eq. (D.2) beВӯ
comes
Dn
ЛҶckПғЛҶcвҖ 
kПғ
oE
= 1, Thus, the full eq. (D.2) becomes
GR
0 (kПғ, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)eвҲ’iОөk(tвҲ’tвҖІ).
(D.5)
Doing a Fourier transform of the expression we arrive at a result, that we are using several times
in this project,
GR
0 (kПғ, Пү) = вҲ’i
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
Оё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)ei(Пү+iО·)(tвҲ’tвҖІ)eвҲ’iОөk(tвҲ’tвҖІ)dt
= вҲ’i
Z вҲһ
0
ei(Пү+iО·вҲ’Оөk)tdt
=
1
Пү + iО· вҲ’Оөk
,
(D.6)
where we on the second line put tвҖІ = 0.
In some simple cases we might be able to actually determine the GreenвҖҷs function. LetвҖҷs consider
an example. A particle in state l is able to hop to a continuum of states v through a hopping term
tвҲ—
v or vice versa through the hopping term tv. We may write the Hamiltonian of such a system as,
ЛҶH = ОөlЛҶcвҖ 
l ЛҶcl +
X
v
ОөvЛҶcвҖ 
vЛҶcv +
X
v

tвҲ—
vЛҶcвҖ 
vЛҶcl + tvЛҶcвҖ 
l ЛҶcv

.
(D.7)
94
Appendix D. Single Particle GreenвҖҷs Functions
==PAGE:101==
We define two retarded GreenвҖҷs functions for the system,
GR(l, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶcl(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
,
GR(ОҪ, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
.
(D.8)
These two GreenвҖҷs functions then describe a particle initially in the state l, which either remains
in l or hops to v. To investigate this further, we apply the Equation of Motion technique by taking
the derivative with respect to t on each side,
iвҲӮtGR(l, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = iвҲӮt

вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶcl(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
= Оҙ(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶcl(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{iвҲӮtЛҶcl(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
= Оҙ(t вҲ’tвҖІ) вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{iвҲӮtЛҶcl(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
,
(D.9)
where we on the first term used that {ЛҶcl(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)} = 1 for t = tвҖІ. Using the Heisenberg equation
of motion on the second term, we have that
iвҲӮtЛҶcl(t) = [ЛҶcl, H] (t) =
"
ЛҶcl, ОөlЛҶcвҖ 
l ЛҶcl +
X
v
ОөvЛҶcвҖ 
vЛҶcv +
X
v

tвҲ—
vЛҶcвҖ 
vЛҶcl + tvЛҶcвҖ 
l ЛҶcv
#
(t)
= Оөl
n
ЛҶcl, ЛҶcвҖ 
l
o
ЛҶcl вҲ’
:0
{ЛҶcl, ЛҶcl}ЛҶcвҖ 
l

+
X
v
tv
n
ЛҶcl, ЛҶcвҖ 
l
o
ЛҶcv вҲ’
:0
{ЛҶcl, ЛҶcv}ЛҶcвҖ 
l

(t)
= ОөlЛҶcl(t) +
X
v
tvЛҶcv(t).
(D.10)
For the second GreenвҖҷs function in eq. (D.8) we have that
iвҲӮtGR(ОҪ, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = Оҙ(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{iвҲӮtЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
= вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{iвҲӮtЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
,
(D.11)
where we used that {ЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)} = 0 for equal times, t = tвҖІ. Once again applying the Heisenberg
equation of motion to determine iвҲӮtЛҶcv(t) we see that
iвҲӮtЛҶcv(t) =
h
ЛҶcv, ЛҶH
i
(t) =
X
vвҖІ
ОөvвҖІ
n
ЛҶcv, ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ
o
ЛҶcvвҖІ(t) +
X
vвҖІ
tвҲ—
vвҖІ
n
ЛҶcv, ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ
o
ЛҶcl(t) = ОөvЛҶcv(t) + tвҲ—
vЛҶcl(t).
(D.12)
Substituting the results of eq. into eq. (D.9) and using the definitions of the GreenвҖҷs functions in
eq. (D.8) we now have
iвҲӮtGR(l, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = Оҙ(t вҲ’tвҖІ) вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
*
{ОөlЛҶcl(t) +
X
v
tvЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
+
= Оҙ(t вҲ’tвҖІ) + ОөlGR(l, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) +
X
v
tvGR(v, l, t вҲ’t).
(D.13)
And similarly substituting the results of eq. (D.12) into the eq. (D.11) we now have
iвҲӮtGR(v, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = iвҲӮtGR(ОҪ, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ОөvЛҶcv(t) + tвҲ—
vЛҶcl(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
l (tвҖІ)}
E
,
= ОөvGR(v, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) + tвҲ—
vGR(l, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ).
(D.14)
95
==PAGE:102==
With eq. (D.13) and (D.14) we have obtained two coupled equations which we may rewrite as
(iвҲӮt вҲ’Оөl)GR(l, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) вҲ’
X
v
tvGR(v, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = Оҙ(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
(iвҲӮt вҲ’Оөv)GR(v, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) вҲ’tвҲ—
vGR(l, l, t вҲ’tвҖІ) = 0.
(D.15)
We will now assume that tвҖІ = 0 and do a Fourier transform. For the left hand sides we need to use
that
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
ei(Пү+iО·)tiвҲӮtGR(t)dt =


:0
h
iei(Пү+iО·)tGR(t)
iвҲһ
вҲ’вҲһвҲ’i
Z вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
(i(Пү + iО·))ei(Пү+iО·)tGR(t)dt
= (Пү + iО·)GR(Пү).
(D.16)
Here we used that GR(t) is zero in the lower integration limit due to the step function, and that the
exponential function, due to the iО· term, kills the expression in the upper integration limit. The
Fourier transform of a delta function is just 1. Now using this in eq. (D.15) we obtain the two
GreenвҖҷs functions in reciprocal space,
(Пү + iО· вҲ’Оөl)GR(l, l, Пү) вҲ’
X
v
tvGR(v, l, Пү) = 1
(Пү + iО· вҲ’Оөv)GR(v, l, Пү) вҲ’tвҲ—
vGR(l, l, Пү) = 0.
(D.17)
This is just two equations with two unknowns, so we can solve them to find the GreenвҖҷs function
governing the evolution of the state l, i.e. GR(l, l, Пү),
GR(l, l, Пү) =
1
Пү + iО· вҲ’Оөl вҲ’ОЈR(Пү), where ОЈR(Пү) =
X
v
|tv|2
Пү + iО· вҲ’Оөv
.
(D.18)
As mentioned in the main text, ОЈR(Пү) is called the selfВӯenergy. It is zero if there is no interaction
in the system, i.e. tv = 0, and we recover eq. (D.6), the GreenвҖҷs function for nonВӯinteracting
electrons. It has the physical consequence of yielding a finite lifetime of a particle in a given state.
This becomes clear from considering the soВӯcalled spectral function, as described in the main text.
96
==PAGE:103==
E
Imaginary Time and Matsubara GreenвҖҷs
Functions
The retarded GreenвҖҷs function is [12],
GR
vvвҖІ(t, tвҖІ) = вҲ’iОё(t вҲ’tвҖІ)
D
{ЛҶcv(t), ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(tвҖІ)}
E
.
(E.1)
In the main text we described that if ЛҶH is time independent, we may find the time dependence of the
operators ЛҶcv from the Heisenberg picture, and assuming tвҖІ = 0 we saw that the expectation value
will contain three exponential functions, each to be understood in terms of their series expansion.
And we introduced imaginary time, it вҶ’П„, and defined the Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function,
GvvвҖІ(П„, П„ вҖІ) = вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(П„ вҖІ)
E
,
(E.2)
LetвҖҷs assume that П„ вҖІ = 0 and write the expectation value of eq. (E.2) as
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(0)
E
= 1
Z Tr

TП„

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶHe
ЛҶHП„ ЛҶcveвҲ’ЛҶHП„ ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ

.
(E.3)
Eq. (3.5) connecting the time dependence of states in the interaction picture with the time depenВӯ
dence of states in the SchrГ¶dinger picture reads
|ПҲ(t)вҹ©I = ei ЛҶH0t|ПҲ(t)вҹ©,
(E.4)
while for t = 0, |ПҲ(0)вҹ©I = |ПҲ(0)вҹ©.
From eq. (3.7) defining the unitary time evolution operator ЛҶUI(t, t0) we may then write
|ПҲ(t)вҹ©I = ЛҶUI(t, t0)|ПҲ(t0)вҹ©I = ЛҶUI(t, t0)ei ЛҶH0t0|ПҲ(t0)вҹ©= ЛҶUI(t, t0)ei ЛҶH0t0eвҲ’i ЛҶHt0|ПҲ(0)вҹ©,
(E.5)
where we used the definition of the time dependence of states in the SchrГ¶dinger picture eq. (3.1).
Using eq. (3.5), the left hand side of this equation can be written as,
|ПҲ(t)вҹ©I = ei ЛҶH0teвҲ’i ЛҶHt|ПҲ(0)вҹ©.
(E.6)
Comparing eq. (E.5) and (E.6) we now see that
ЛҶUI(t, t0) = ei ЛҶH0teвҲ’i ЛҶH(tвҲ’t0)eвҲ’i ЛҶH0t0,
(E.7)
where we have used that eqs. (E.5, E.6) must hold for any initial state |ПҲ0вҹ©, such that we may
indeed regard eq. (E.7) as an operator identity. Inspired by this, we apply eвҲ’П„ ЛҶH0eП„ ЛҶH0 twice inside
eq. (E.3),
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(0)
E
= 1
Z Tr
пЈ«
пЈ¬
пЈӯTП„
пЈ«
пЈ¬
пЈӯeвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH e
ЛҶHП„eвҲ’П„ ЛҶH0
|
{z
}
ЛҶUI(0,П„)
eП„ ЛҶH0ЛҶcveвҲ’П„ ЛҶH0
|
{z
}
ЛҶcvI(П„)
eП„ ЛҶH0eвҲ’ЛҶHП„
|
{z
}
ЛҶUI(П„,0)
ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ
пЈ¶
пЈ·
пЈё
пЈ¶
пЈ·
пЈё.
(E.8)
From the expression for ЛҶUI(П„, 0), eq. (E.7), we can write,
eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH = eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0eОІ ЛҶH0eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH = eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0 ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0).
(E.9)
Appendix E. Imaginary Time and Matsubara GreenвҖҷs Functions
97
==PAGE:104==
Substituting this into eq. (E.8) we then have,
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(0)
E
= 1
Z Tr

TП„

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0 ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0) ЛҶUI(0, П„)ЛҶcv(П„) ЛҶUI(П„, 0)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІI

= 1
Z Tr

TП„

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0 ЛҶUI(ОІ, П„)ЛҶcv(П„) ЛҶUI(П„, 0)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІI

,
(E.10)
where we used that ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0) ЛҶUI(0, П„) = ЛҶUI(ОІ, П„) which is apparent from considering eq. (E.7).
Inside the time ordering operator, all nonВӯfermionic operators commute, i.e. they satisfy the same
algebra as ordinary numbers. This applies also to the timeВӯordered exponentials implicitly conВӯ
tained in ЛҶUI, and therefore inside the timeВӯordering operator, we can combine exponentials just as
with ordinary numbers. This means that we can move ЛҶU(П„, 0) such that
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(0)
E
= 1
Z Tr

TП„

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0 ЛҶUI(ОІ, П„) ЛҶUI(П„, 0)ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ

= 1
Z Tr

TП„

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0 ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0)ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ

.
(E.11)
Using eq. (E.9) we may write Z = Tr

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH
= Tr

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0 ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0)

. We use the notation
D
ЛҶA
E
0 = 1
Z0
Tr

eвҲ’ОІ ЛҶH0 ЛҶA

,
(E.12)
such that Z = Z0
D
ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0)
E
0. Substituting this into eq. (E.11) and using the notation in (E.12)
in the numerator we obtain,
GvvвҖІ(П„, 0) = вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶcv(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІ(0)
E
= вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0)ЛҶcvI(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІI
E
0
D
ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0)
E
0
.
(E.13)
Since the expectation value is with respect to the nonВӯinteracting Hamiltonian ЛҶH0 and ЛҶc is in the
interaction picture, this expression in much simpler. Further, we now only have one infinite series
in the numerator and denominator respectively in the form of ЛҶUI(ОІ, 0). And in this way we have
simplified the expression used in determining the time evolution of an interacting system. The
infinite series was defined in eq. (3.11) and expressed in a different way in (E.7). By iteration of
eq. (3.11), it may be shown that yet another equivalent but useful formulation of ЛҶUI is,
ЛҶUI(П„, П„ вҖІ) =
вҲһ
X
n=0
(вҲ’1)n
n!
Z П„
П„ вҖІ dП„1...
Z П„n
П„ вҖІ
dП„TП„

ЛҶVI(П„1)... ЛҶVI(П„n)

.
(E.14)
Using the expression for the Coulomb interaction, eq. (4.12), this becomes
GvvвҖІ(П„, 0) = вҲ’
PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1)n
n!
R ОІ
0 dП„1...
R ОІ
0 dП„n
D
TП„

ЛҶvCI(П„1)...ЛҶvCI(П„n)ЛҶcvI(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vвҖІI
E
0
PвҲһ
n=0
(вҲ’1)n
n!
R ОІ
0 dП„1...
R ОІ
0 dП„n вҹЁTП„ (ЛҶvCI(П„1)...ЛҶvCI(П„n))вҹ©0
.
(E.15)
Using WickвҖҷs theorem, the expectation values with respect to ЛҶH0 of pairs of these operators can
then be expressed in terms of nonВӯinteracting singleВӯparticle Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function defined
as
G0(П„, П„ вҖІ) = вҲ’
D
TП„

ЛҶcvI(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
vI(П„ вҖІ)
E
0 ,
(E.16)
the expression being nonВӯinteracting since the expectation value is with respect to ЛҶH0, and since
the operators are in the interacting picture, their timeВӯdependence is governed by ЛҶH0 as well. Here
98
==PAGE:105==
we put v = vвҖІ since we may find an eigenbasis with respect to ЛҶH0 in which the Matsubara GreenвҖҷs
function is diagonal. For the nonВӯinteracting case, which we may find in almost the exact same way
as we found the nonВӯinteracting retarded GreenвҖҷs function, eq. (D.6), we obtain the very similar
result
G0(v, iПүn) =
1
iПүn вҲ’Оөv
(
Пүn = qn = 2nПҖ
ОІ ,
for bosons
Пүn = kn = (2n+1)ПҖ
ОІ
,
for fermions
(E.17)
Thus, we may express the denominator and numerator of eq. (E.15) as infinite series containing
only single particle GreenвҖҷs functions which Вӯ since we know the exact expression from eq. (E.17),
is a very big advantage.
As an example of WickвҖҷs theorem, consider the expectation value of a product of four operators:
вҹЁЛҶcвҖ 
1ЛҶc2ЛҶcвҖ 
3ЛҶc4вҹ©.
(E.18)
Using WickвҖҷs theorem, this can be expressed as a sum of all possible contractions:
вҹЁЛҶcвҖ 
1ЛҶc2ЛҶcвҖ 
3ЛҶc4вҹ©= вҹЁЛҶcвҖ 
1ЛҶc2вҹ©вҹЁЛҶcвҖ 
3ЛҶc4вҹ©вҲ’вҹЁЛҶcвҖ 
1ЛҶcвҖ 
3вҹ©вҹЁЛҶc2ЛҶc4вҹ©+ вҹЁЛҶcвҖ 
1ЛҶc4вҹ©вҹЁЛҶc2ЛҶcвҖ 
3вҹ©,
(E.19)
where the first term corresponds to the case where the first two operators are contracted, the second
term corresponds to the case where the first and third operators are contracted, and so on. Note
that to obtain the middle term we interchanged ЛҶc2 and ЛҶcвҖ 
3 which introduced a sign change, but in
this example, the term will not contribute since it contains the expectation value of two creation
(annihilation) operators which is zero. In the last term we interchange ЛҶcвҖ 
3 and ЛҶc4 which introduces
a sign change, but then we interchange ЛҶc2 and ЛҶc4 introducing once more a sign change, and ends
up with a positive sign.
WickвҖҷs theorem can not only be used to gain information about the expectation value in eq. (??).
We can also use the theorem to derive the nonВӯinteracting density response function, [12] eq. (8.80),
ПҮ0(q, П„) = вҲ’1
V вҹЁTП„ (n(q, П„)n(вҲ’q))вҹ©0
= вҲ’1
V
X
k,kвҖІ
Пғ,ПғвҖІ
D
TП„

ЛҶcвҖ 
k,Пғ(П„)ЛҶck+q,Пғ(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
kвҖІ,ПғвҖІЛҶckвҖІвҲ’q,ПғвҖІ
E
0 .
(E.20)
Applying WickвҖҷs theorem to this expression, we need to consider combinations of operators yieldВӯ
ing single particle GreenвҖҷs operators, and how many times we interchange fermionic operators
determine the sign of the term. We then obtain,
ПҮ0(q, П„) = 1
V
X
k,kвҖІ
Пғ,ПғвҖІ
пЈ«
пЈӯ
D
TП„

ЛҶck+q,Пғ(П„)ЛҶcвҖ 
kвҖІ,ПғвҖІ
E
0
D
TП„

ЛҶcвҖ 
k,Пғ(П„)ЛҶckвҖІвҲ’q,ПғвҖІ
E
0 вҲ’
0 for qМё=0
z
}|
{
вҹЁn(q)вҹ©0вҹЁn(вҲ’q)вҹ©0
пЈ¶
пЈё
= 1
V
X
kПғ
G0(k + qПғ, П„)G0(kПғ, вҲ’П„),
(E.21)
where we used the definition of the Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function for nonВӯinteracting particles, eq.
(E.16). Further, we assumed that q Мё= 0 such that the last term in the first line of eq. (E.21) became
zero, and another consequence of this is that we need to have k + q = kвҖІ for the expectation value
to be different from zero.
99
==PAGE:106==
If we now Fourier transform eq. (E.21) we will be able to use the result arrived at earlier, eq. (D.6).
It can be shown that the Matsubara GreenвҖҷs function has a periodicity of ОІ for bosons and an вҖқantiВӯ
periodicityвҖқ ОІ for fermions, and so the Fourier transform of the Matsubara GreenвҖҷs functions are
defined as
Gv,vвҖІ(iПүn) =
Z ОІ
0
eiПүnП„Gv,vвҖІ(П„)dП„
(
Пүn = qn = 2nПҖ
ОІ ,
for bosons
Пүn = kn = (2n+1)ПҖ
ОІ
,
for fermions,
Gv,vвҖІ(П„) = 1
ОІ
X
iПүn
eвҲ’iПүnП„Gv,vвҖІ(iПүn).
(E.22)
A Fourier transform of a product in the time domain is a convolution in the frequency domain, and
so we obtain,
ПҮ0(q, iqn) =
1
V ОІ
X
ikn
X
kПғ
G0(k + qПғ, iqn вҲ’ikn)G0(kПғ, вҲ’ikn),
(E.23)
where iqn is a bosonic frequency while ikn is the fermionic frequency as defined in eq. (E.22).
Letting ikn вҶ’вҲ’ikn this becomes,
ПҮ0(q, iqn) =
1
V ОІ
X
ikn
X
kПғ
G0(k + qПғ, iqn + ikn)G0(kПғ, ikn).
(E.24)
We are then able to apply eq. (D.6) obtaining that
ПҮ0(q, iqn) =
1
V ОІ
X
iknkПғ
1
ikn + iqn вҲ’Оөk+q
1
ikn вҲ’Оөk
= 1
ОІ
X
ikn
f(ikn),
(E.25)
where f(ikn) is implicitly also a function of iqn. To evaluate this sum, it turns out that we need
to convert it into a contour integral and multiply with the FermiВӯDirac distribution. LetвҖҷs consider
why: integrating the density function multiplied by the FermiВӯDirac distribution around a closed
loop we have
I
nF (z)f(z)dz = 0.
(E.26)
Integrating around a loop of infinite radius we have a diverging expression,
Z вҲһ
0
Z 2ПҖ
0
zdОёdz.
(E.27)
But from eq. (E.25) we see that f(z) вҲј
1
z2 for large z and so, for the total expression approaches
zero for z вҶ’вҲһand the right hand side of eq. (E.26) is zero as stated.
On the left hand side of eq. (E.26) we may now apply the residue theorem,
I
g(z)dz = 2ПҖi
X
p
Resp(g) where Resp(g) = lim
zвҶ’p(z вҲ’p)g(z),
(E.28)
where the subscript p refers to the poles of g. The poles of the FermiВӯDirac distribution are
nF (z) =
1
eОІz + 1, poles for z = ikn = i 1
ОІ (2n + 1)ПҖ.
(E.29)
100
==PAGE:107==
To evaluate the residue, we apply LвҖҷHГҙpitalвҖҷs rule,
lim
xвҶ’c
f(x)
g(x) = lim
xвҶ’c
fвҖІ(x)
gвҖІ(x) .
(E.30)
And so the residue becomes
lim
zвҶ’ikn(z вҲ’ikn)nF (z) = lim
zвҶ’ikn
z вҲ’ikn
eОІz + 1 =
1
ОІeОІ 1
ОІ (2n+1)ПҖi = вҲ’1
ОІ .
(E.31)
Applying eq. (E.28) to eq. (E.26) we then have
I
nF (z)f(z)dz = 2ПҖi
пЈ«
пЈӯX
ikn
Resikn(nF )f(ikn) +
X
z
Resz(f)nF (z)
пЈ¶
пЈё= 0
вҮ’
1
ОІ
X
ikn
f(ikn) =
X
z
Resz(f)nF (z),
(E.32)
where ikn denotes the poles of the FermiВӯDirac distribution and z denotes the poles of f, which
can immediately be read off from eq. (E.25) to be z = Оөk and z = Оөk+q вҲ’iqn. For the first pole
we then have
lim
zвҶ’Оөk
z вҲ’Оөk
(z + iqn вҲ’Оөk+q)(z вҲ’Оөk) =
1
Оөk + iqn вҲ’Оөk+q
,
(E.33)
and for the second pole,
lim
zвҶ’Оөk+qвҲ’iqn
z вҲ’Оөk+q + iqn
(z + iqn вҲ’Оөk+q)(z вҲ’Оөk) =
1
Оөk+q вҲ’iqn вҲ’Оөk
.
(E.34)
Substituting this into eq. (E.32) and using eq. (E.25) we then get
ПҮ0(q, iqn) =
1
V ОІ
X
kПғ

nF (Оөk)
Оөk + iqn вҲ’Оөk+q
+ nF (Оөk+q вҲ’iqn)
Оөk+q вҲ’iqn вҲ’Оөk

.
(E.35)
We finally use that eвҲ’ОІiqn = 1, such that nF (Оөk+q вҲ’iqn) = nF (Оөk+q) and our final expression
for eq. (E.35) becomes
ПҮ0(q, iqn) = 1
V
X
kПғ
nF (Оөk) вҲ’nF (Оөk+q)
Оөk + iqn вҲ’Оөk+q
,
(E.36)
which is equivalent to the expression found in the linear response chapter 3, eq. (3.38).
101
==PAGE:108==
F
Hedin Equations
In this appendix we derive the Hedin equations with outset in [10]. Initially, we need to derive an
expression for the exchangeВӯcorrelation selfВӯenergy. For this, we first need to once more consider
eq. (4.59), where we derived the EOM for G and G2. If we neglect all interactions, G simplifies
to the nonВӯinteracting G0 and G2 disappears from the EOM, such that the equation becomes,
(iвҲӮt1 вҲ’Оө(1))G0(1, 2) = Оҙ(1, 2) вҮ’GвҲ’1
0 (1, 2) = (iвҲӮt1 вҲ’Оө(1))Оҙ(1, 2).
(F.1)
Substituting this into the left hand side of eq. (4.59) we get,
GвҲ’1
0 (1, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3, 2) = (iвҲӮt1 вҲ’Оө(1))Оҙ(1, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3, 2) = (iвҲӮt1 вҲ’Оө(1))G(1, 2).
(F.2)
Now multiplying both sides by G0(4, 1) and integrating over 1 we have
G0(4, ВҜ1)GвҲ’1
0 (ВҜ1, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3, 2) = G(4, ВҜ1)Оҙ(ВҜ1, 2) вҲ’iG0(4, ВҜ1)vC(ВҜ1, ВҜ2вҖІ)G2(ВҜ1, ВҜ2вҖІ, 2, ВҜ2вҖІ+)
G(1, 2) = G0(1, 2) вҲ’iG0(1, ВҜ1вҖІ)vC(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ)G2(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ, 2, ВҜ2вҖІ+).
(F.3)
In the last line we just renamed 4 вҶ’1 and 1 вҶ’1вҖІ. Using the definition of 4ПҮ, eq. (4.61), eq. (F.3)
becomes
G(1, 2) = G0(1, 2) вҲ’iG0(1, ВҜ1вҖІ)vC(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ)
 G(ВҜ1вҖІ, 2)G(ВҜ2вҖІ, ВҜ
2вҖІ+) вҲ’4ПҮ(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ, 2, ВҜ2вҖІ+)

= G0(1, 2) + G0(1, ВҜ1вҖІ)vH(ВҜ1вҖІ)G(ВҜ1вҖІ, 2) + iG0(1, ВҜ1вҖІ)vC(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ)4ПҮ(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ, 2, ВҜ2вҖІ+)
= G0(1, 2) + G0(1, ВҜ1вҖІ)vH(ВҜ1вҖІ)G(ВҜ1вҖІ, 2) + iG0(1, ВҜ1вҖІ)vC(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ)ОҙG(ВҜ1вҖІ, 2)
Оҙv(ВҜ2вҖІ) ,
(F.4)
where we used eq. (4.68) in the second line and eq. (4.62) in the third line. However, we allow for
v to be a physical external potential, which does not need to be put to 0 at the end of the calculations.
Also, since compared to eq. (4.62), 2 = 2вҖІ, and we only have one argument in the potential making
it a local potential. Thus, we add the potential in eq. (F.4). Next, we need to invert this equation.
We do this by multiplying the left and right hand side by GвҲ’1
0 (3, ВҜ1) from the left and GвҲ’1(ВҜ2, 3вҖІ)
from the right,
GвҲ’1
0 (3, ВҜ1)G(ВҜ1, ВҜ2)GвҲ’1(ВҜ2, 3вҖІ) = GвҲ’1
0 (3, ВҜ1)G0(ВҜ1, ВҜ2)GвҲ’1(ВҜ2, 3вҖІ)
+ GвҲ’1
0 (3, ВҜ1)G0(ВҜ1, ВҜ1вҖІ)(vH(ВҜ1вҖІ) + v(ВҜ1))G(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2)GвҲ’1(ВҜ2, 3вҖІ)
+ iGвҲ’1
0 (3, ВҜ1)G0(ВҜ1, ВҜ1вҖІ)vC(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2вҖІ)ОҙG(ВҜ1вҖІ, ВҜ2)
Оҙv(ВҜ2вҖІ) GвҲ’1(ВҜ2, 3вҖІ),
(F.5)
yielding the equation,
GвҲ’1(3, 3вҖІ) = GвҲ’1
0 (3, 3вҖІ) вҲ’(vH(3) + v(3))Оҙ(3, 3вҖІ) вҲ’ivC(3, ВҜ2вҖІ)ОҙG(3, ВҜ2)
Оҙv(ВҜ2вҖІ) GвҲ’1(ВҜ2, 3вҖІ).
(F.6)
Comparing this to eq. (4.64) with eq. (4.65) it is now clear that we have
ОЈxc(1, 2) = ivC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)ОҙG(1, ВҜ3)
Оҙv(ВҜ3вҖІ) GвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 2).
(F.7)
102
Appendix F. Hedin Equations
==PAGE:109==
And using the last line of eq. (4.63) this can also be written as,
ОЈxc(1, 2) = вҲ’ivC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)G(1, ВҜ4)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ4, ВҜ4вҖІ)
Оҙv(ВҜ3вҖІ)
G(ВҜ4вҖІ, ВҜ3)GвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 2)
= вҲ’ivC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)G(1, ВҜ3)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 2)
Оҙv(ВҜ3вҖІ)
.
(F.8)
In the last line we did 4 вҶ’3. We decide to define the soВӯcalled irreducible vertex function. This
function is defined in terms of a вҖҷclassicalвҖҷ total potential, vtot, which is the external potential and
the Hartree potential, vtot = v + vH, such that our irreducible vertex becomes
ЛңО“(1, 2, 3) = вҲ’ОҙGвҲ’1(1, 2)
Оҙvtot(3)
.
(F.9)
Using eq. (4.64), eq. (F.9) becomes one of the Hedin equations,
ЛңО“(1, 2, 3) = вҲ’Оҙ
 GвҲ’1
0 (1, 2) вҲ’vH(1, 2)

Оҙvtot(3)
+ ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
Оҙvtot(3)
= вҲ’Оҙ((iвҲӮt1 вҲ’Оө(1) вҲ’v(1) вҲ’vH(1))Оҙ(1, 2)
Оҙvtot(3)
+ ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
Оҙvtot(3)
= вҲ’Оҙ((iвҲӮt1 вҲ’Оө(1) вҲ’vtot(1))Оҙ(1, 2)
Оҙvtot(3)
+ ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5)
Оҙvtot(3)
= Оҙ(1, 3)Оҙ(2, 3) вҲ’ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5) G(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ6)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ6, ВҜ6вҖІ)
Оҙvtot(3)
G(ВҜ6вҖІ, ВҜ5)
= Оҙ(1, 3)Оҙ(2, 3) + ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5) G(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ6)G(ВҜ6вҖІ, ВҜ5)ЛңО“(ВҜ6, ВҜ6вҖІ, 3).
(F.10)
To evaluate the term with the nonВӯinteracting GreenвҖҷs function we used eq. (F.1) where we let
Оө(1) вҶ’Оө(1) + v(1). And to evaluate the term with the selfВӯenergy we used the chain rule and eq.
(4.63). In the last equality, we used the definition of ЛңО“, eq. (F.9).
Further, we know that the interaction between the electron and hole will be screened, and therefore
we would like the screened interaction to appear in our expressions. Thus, we search for at way to
introduce the dielectric function since, e.g. from eq. (4.41) with (4.53), we know that
W(1, 2) = ОөвҲ’1(1, ВҜ3)vC(ВҜ3, 2).
(F.11)
From eq. (2.26) we see that
ОөвҲ’1(1, 2) = Оҙvtot(1)
Оҙv(2) = Оҙ (v(1) + vH(1))
Оҙv(2)
= Оҙ(1, 2) + vC(1, ВҜ3)ПҮ(ВҜ3, 2),
(F.12)
where we used eq. (3.64) in the last equality. The equation is then in agreement with eq. (4.44).
With this, we use eq. (F.12) and (F.11) and the chain rule to rewrite eq. (F.8) as
ОЈxc(1, 2) = вҲ’ivC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)G(1, ВҜ3)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ3, 2)
Оҙvtot(ВҜ4)
Оҙvtot(ВҜ4)
Оҙv(ВҜ3вҖІ)
= ivC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)ОөвҲ’1(ВҜ4, ВҜ3вҖІ)G(1, ВҜ3)ЛңО“(ВҜ3, 2, ВҜ4)
= iW(1, ВҜ4)G(1, ВҜ3)ЛңО“(ВҜ3, 2, ВҜ4).
(F.13)
This is another of the Hedin equations.
103
==PAGE:110==
We then invert eq. (F.12),
Оө(1, 2) = Оҙv(1)
Оҙvtot(2) = Оҙ (vtot(1) вҲ’vH(1))
Оҙvtot(2)
= Оҙ(1, 2) вҲ’vC(1, ВҜ3)ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3, 2),
(F.14)
where we used that
ОҙvH(1)
Оҙvtot(2) = Оҙ (vC(1, ВҜ3)n(ВҜ3))
Оҙvtot(2)
= vC(1, ВҜ3)ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3, 2).
(F.15)
The first equality comes from eq. (4.68), and we used the product rule in the last equality, but with
ОҙvC/Оҙvtot = 0. We made the definition of the irreducible density response function
ВҜПҮ(1, 2) = Оҙn(1)
Оҙvtot(2) = вҲ’iОҙG(1, 1+)
Оҙvtot(2) .
(F.16)
The last equality was shown in eq. (4.68). Eq. (F.14) is equivalent to eq. (4.53) but with the irreВӯ
ducible density response function instead of the nonВӯinteracting one, which the irreducible density
response function was approximated to in RPA. Using eq. (4.63) and (F.9), eq. (F.16) becomes a
third Hedin equation,
ВҜПҮ(1, 2) = iG(1, ВҜ3)ОҙGвҲ’1(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)
Оҙvtot(2)
G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1) = вҲ’iG(1, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1)ЛңО“(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ, 2).
(F.17)
We recall the definition of the full density response function, eq. (3.60), restated here in our current
notation:
ПҮ(1, 2) = Оҙn(1)
Оҙv(2).
(F.18)
Using the chain rule on eq. (F.18) we now have
ПҮ(1, 2) = Оҙn(1)
Оҙvtot(ВҜ3)
Оҙvtot(ВҜ3)
Оҙv(2) = ВҜПҮ(1, ВҜ3)
 Оҙ(ВҜ3, 2) + vC(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)ПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, 2)

= ВҜПҮ(1, 2) + ВҜПҮ(1, ВҜ3)vC(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)ПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, 2),
(F.19)
where we used eq. (F.12) and (F.16).
Now substituting eq. (F.12) into eq. (F.11), and then using eq. (F.19), we have a fourth Hedin
equation:
W(1, 2) = vC(1, 2) + vC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)ПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ3)vC(ВҜ3, 2)
= vC(1, 2) + vC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)
 ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ3) + ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4)vC(ВҜ4, ВҜ4вҖІ)ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, ВҜ3)

vC(ВҜ3, 2)
= vC(1, 2) + vC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4)
 vC(ВҜ4, 2) + vC(ВҜ4, ВҜ4вҖІ)ПҮ(ВҜ4вҖІ, ВҜ3)vC(ВҜ3, 2)

= vC(1, 2) + vC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4)W(ВҜ4, 2).
(F.20)
The fifth Hedin equation is simply the Dyson equation for the GreenвҖҷs function as seen before, e.g.
eq. (4.29). Thus, in summary we have the five Hedin equations:
ЛңО“(1, 2, 3) = Оҙ(1, 3)Оҙ(2, 3) + ОҙОЈxc(1, 2)
ОҙG(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ5) G(ВҜ5вҖІ, ВҜ6)G(ВҜ6вҖІ, ВҜ5)ЛңО“(ВҜ6, ВҜ6вҖІ, 3)
ОЈxc(1, 2) = iW(1, ВҜ4)G(1, ВҜ3)ЛңО“(ВҜ3, 2, ВҜ4)
ВҜПҮ(1, 2) = вҲ’iG(1, ВҜ3)G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 1)ЛңО“(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ, 2)
W(1, 2) = vC(1, 2) + vC(1, ВҜ3вҖІ)ВҜПҮ(ВҜ3вҖІ, ВҜ4)W(ВҜ4, 2)
G(1, 2) = G0(1, 2) + G0(1, 2)ОЈ(ВҜ3, ВҜ3вҖІ)G(ВҜ3вҖІ, 2).
(F.21)
104
==PAGE:111==
The Hedin equations can now be solved iteratively for G and the selfВӯenergy ОЈ: the exchangeВӯ
correlation part of the selfВӯenergy used to calculate G in the fifth of equations (F.21) is the selfВӯ
energy calculated using the same G in the second of the equations (F.21). The selfВӯenergy and
GreenвҖҷs function obtained through this process can then be used to solve the BSE for the twoВӯ
particle correlation function 4ПҮ. However, in practical applications it is not possible to find a conВӯ
vergent behavior in this set of equations and one need to employ the soВӯcalled GWВӯapproximation.
105
==PAGE:112==
G
The NonВӯCorrelated TwoВӯParticle Function
in the Lehmann Representation
We here take outset in [10]. Recall eq. (4.74), restated here for convenience, but with the redefiВӯ
nition as described in the main text, i.e. we multiply by i,
4ПҮnc(1, 2, 1вҖІ, 2вҖІ) = вҲ’iG(1, 2вҖІ)G(2, 1вҖІ).
(G.1)
In order to determine the nonВӯcorrelated function in the Lehmann representation, we first consider
the timeВӯordered GreenвҖҷs function eq. (4.56). We restate the timeВӯordered GreenвҖҷs function and
write out the expectation value and the timeВӯordering operator,
G(1, 2вҖІ) = вҲ’i
Z
X
n

Оё(t1 вҲ’t2вҖІ)вҹЁn|ЛҶc(1)ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)|nвҹ©вҲ’Оё(t2вҖІ вҲ’t1)вҹЁn|ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)ЛҶc(1)|nвҹ©

eвҲ’ОІEn.
(G.2)
Assuming that we are at zero temperature, we may use eq. (A.5). At the same time, we employ
the identity operator and now have that,
G(1, 2вҖІ)T=0 = вҲ’i
X
nвҖІ

Оё(П„)вҹЁ0|ЛҶc(1)|nвҖІвҹ©вҹЁnвҖІ|ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)|0вҹ©вҲ’Оё(вҲ’П„)вҹЁ0|ЛҶcвҖ (2вҖІ)|nвҖІвҹ©вҹЁnвҖІ|ЛҶc(1)|0вҹ©

,
(G.3)
where the states |nвҖІвҹ©are eigenstates of the nonВӯinteracting Hamiltonian ЛҶH0, and assuming timeВӯ
invariance we defined the time difference П„ = t1вҲ’t2вҖІ. In a general basis, we may write the GreenвҖҷs
function with ОЁ(r, t) such that we can use eq. (3.18) with a time dependence in ОЁ and c,
ОЁвҖ (r, t) =
X
i
П•вҲ—
i (r)ЛҶcвҖ 
i(t).
(G.4)
To express the time dependence of the creation/annihilation operator we use eq. (3.2). We then
have that,
G(1, 2вҖІ)T=0 = вҲ’iОё(П„)
X
nвҖІ
X
i,j
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
j(r2вҖІ)ei(Оө0вҲ’ОөnвҖІ)П„вҹЁ0|ЛҶci|nвҖІвҹ©вҹЁnвҖІ|ЛҶcвҖ 
j|0вҹ©
+ iОё(вҲ’П„)
X
nвҖІ
X
i,j
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
j(r2вҖІ)ei(ОөnвҖІвҲ’Оө0)П„вҹЁ0|ЛҶcвҖ 
j|nвҖІвҹ©вҹЁnвҖІ|ЛҶci|0вҹ©.
(G.5)
On the first term, we need both the states П•i(r1) and П•j(r2вҖІ) to be empty in the ground state for
the matrix elements to yield something different from zero. And on the second term, we need the
two states to be occupied. Using the occupation numbers defined in eq. (3.20) we then obtain,
G(1, 2вҖІ)T=0 = вҲ’iОё(П„)
X
nвҖІ
X
i,j
(1 вҲ’fi)(1 вҲ’fj)П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
j(r2вҖІ)ei(Оө0вҲ’ОөnвҖІ)П„Оҙ0+i,nвҖІОҙ0+j,nвҖІ
+ iОё(вҲ’П„)
X
nвҖІ
X
i,j
fifjП•i(r1)П•вҲ—
j(r2вҖІ)ei(ОөnвҖІвҲ’Оө0)П„Оҙ0вҲ’i,nвҖІОҙ0вҲ’j,nвҖІ.
(G.6)
The Kronecker deltas implies that i = j. We then also use that (1 вҲ’fi)2 = (1 вҲ’fi) on the first
term and f2
i = fi on the second term. And also the sum over nвҖІ and the Kronecker deltas imply,
106
Appendix G. The NonВӯCorrelated TwoВӯParticle Function in the Lehmann Representation
==PAGE:113==
that the energy in the first term will satisfy that Оө0 + Оөi = ОөnвҖІ, such that the energy expression in
the exponential becomes Оө0 вҲ’ОөnвҖІ = вҲ’Оөi. And on the second term, Оө0 вҲ’Оөi = ОөnвҖІ such that this
exponential becomes ОөnвҖІ вҲ’Оө0 = вҲ’Оөi. And so we are left with
G(1, 2вҖІ)T=0 =
X
i
 вҲ’iОё(П„)(1 вҲ’fi)П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)eвҲ’iОөiП„ + iОё(вҲ’П„)fiП•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)eвҲ’iОөiП„
= i
X
i
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)eвҲ’iОөiП„ (Оё(вҲ’П„)fi вҲ’Оё(П„)(1 вҲ’fi)) .
(G.7)
Now, the other GreenвҖҷs function entering eq. (G.1), G(2, 1вҖІ), will be very similar. But it is a
function of t2 вҲ’t1вҖІ and from considering eq. (4.94) and (4.97), this means that it is a function of
вҲ’П„ instead of П„. Thus we may write,
G(1, 2вҖІ)G(2, 1вҖІ) =
 
i
X
i
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)eвҲ’iОөiП„ (Оё(вҲ’П„)fi вҲ’Оё(П„)(1 вҲ’fi))
!
Г—
пЈ«
пЈӯi
X
j
П•j(r2)П•вҲ—
j(r1вҖІ)eiОөjП„ (Оё(П„)fj вҲ’Оё(вҲ’П„)(1 вҲ’fj))
пЈ¶
пЈё
=
X
i,j
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)П•j(r2)П•вҲ—
j(r1вҖІ)ei(ОөjвҲ’Оөi)П„ (Оё(П„)fj(1 вҲ’fi) + Оё(вҲ’П„)fi(1 вҲ’fj)) .
(G.8)
We exploited that we are about to do a Fourier transform to obtain the Lehmann representation,
and thus terms with Оё(П„)Оё(вҲ’П„) will not contribute. We would now like to convert eq. (G.8) to
reciprocal space. On the first term, where Оё(П„) is in the expression, the integral is changed to be
from 0 to вҲһ, and thus we need the Fourier transform to have a +iО·, О· вҶ’0+ in the exponential to
kill the upper bound of the integral. On the second term where Оё(вҲ’П„) is in front of the expression,
doing the Fourier transform changes the boundary of the integral to being from вҲ’вҲһto 0. Thus we
need to define the Fourier transform with вҲ’iО· to kill the lower boundary of the integral. And thus
we have,
4ПҮnc(r1, r2, r1вҖІ, r2вҖІ, Пү) = вҲ’i
X
i,j
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)П•j(r2)П•вҲ—
j(r1вҖІ)
Г—

fj(1 вҲ’fi)
Z вҲһ
0
ei(Пү+iО·+ОөjвҲ’Оөi)П„dП„ + fi(1 вҲ’fj)
Z 0
вҲ’вҲһ
ei(ПүвҲ’iО·+ОөjвҲ’Оөi)П„dП„

= вҲ’
X
i,j
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)П•j(r2)П•вҲ—
j(r1вҖІ)

вҲ’fj(1 вҲ’fi)
Пү + iО· + Оөj вҲ’Оөi
+
fi(1 вҲ’fj)
Пү вҲ’iО· + Оөj вҲ’Оөi

=
X
i,j
(fj вҲ’fi)
П•i(r1)П•вҲ—
i (r2вҖІ)П•j(r2)П•вҲ—
j(r1вҖІ)
Пү + iО·sgn(fj вҲ’fi) + Оөj вҲ’Оөi
.
(G.9)
In the last equality we used that to have a contribution in the sum different from zero, we need to
have either fj = 1 and fi = 0 or vice versa. If fj = 1, then we get a +iО· in the denominator, and
if fi = 1 then we get a вҲ’iО· in the denominator.
107
==PAGE:114==
H
The Bare and Screened Interaction in
Reciprocal Space and BandВӯMomentum
Basis
This appendix takes outset in a loose mix between [10] and [18], but none of them derive these
expressions very explicitly, so the sources are only used for validation and to align definitions and
conventions. In general, the screened interaction is found by
W(r, rвҖІ) =
Z e2
0ОөвҲ’1(r, rвҖІвҖІ)
|rвҖІвҖІ вҲ’rвҖІ|
drвҖІвҖІ.
(H.1)
From the definition of the inverse Fourier transform, eq. (3.31), W can be written as
W(r, rвҖІ) = 1
V
Z
X
G1,G2,q
GвҖІ
1,GвҖІ
2,qвҖІ
ОөвҲ’1
G1,G2(q)eвҲ’i(G1+q)rei(G2+q)rвҖІвҖІvC
GвҖІ
1,GвҖІ
2(qвҖІ)eвҲ’i(GвҖІ
1+qвҖІ)rвҖІвҖІei(GвҖІ
2+qвҖІ)rвҖІdrвҖІвҖІ.
(H.2)
The integral over rвҖІвҖІ yields a deltaВӯfunction Оҙ(G2 + q, GвҖІ
1 + qвҖІ), meaning that we have qвҖІ = q and
GвҖІ
1 = G2. Since vC is diagonal in G, we further have G2 = GвҖІ
2, and thus we are left with
W(r, rвҖІ) = 1
V
X
G1,G2,q
ОөвҲ’1
G1,G2(q)eвҲ’i(G1+q)rvC
G2,G2(q)ei(G2+q)rвҖІ.
(H.3)
But this is exactly the inverse Fourier transform of WG,GвҖІ(q), so
WG,GвҖІ(q) = ОөвҲ’1
G,GвҖІ(q)vC
GвҖІ,GвҖІ(q),
(H.4)
where
vC
G,GвҖІ(q) =
4ПҖe2
0
|G + q|2 ОҙG,GвҖІ.
(H.5)
From the basis change in eq. (4.119) we write vC as
(vC)n1вҖІ,n2
n1,n2вҖІ = 1
V
Z Z X
G,q
ei(G+q)reвҲ’i(G+q)rвҖІvC
G(q)П•вҲ—
n1(r)П•вҲ—
n2(rвҖІ)П•n2вҖІ(rвҖІ)П•n1вҖІ(r)drdrвҖІ,
(H.6)
Where the arguments in the wave functions were changed in accordance with the deltaВӯfunctions in
vC as seen in eq. (4.121). In the main text we then transformed explicitly into a bandВӯmomentum
basis, see eq. (4.142), so we change the arguments in (H.6) such that
(vC)v,vвҖІ,k3
c,cвҖІ,k2 = 1
V
Z Z X
G,q
ei(G+q)reвҲ’i(G+q)rвҖІvC
G(q)П•вҲ—
c,k2(r)П•вҲ—
vвҖІ,k3(rвҖІ)П•cвҖІ,k2(rвҖІ)П•v,k3(r)drdrвҖІ.
(H.7)
Using eq. (3.36), we write eq. (H.7) as
(vC)vk3,vвҖІk2
ck1,cвҖІk4 = 1
V
X
G,q
vC
G(q)вҹЁП•c,k1|ei(G+q)r|П•v,k3вҹ©вҹЁП•vвҖІ,k2|eвҲ’i(G+q)rвҖІ|П•cвҖІ,k4вҹ©Оҙk1,q+k3Оҙk2,вҲ’q+k4
(vC)v,vвҖІ,k3
c,cвҖІ,k2 (q) = 1
V
X
G
vC
G(q)вҹЁП•c,k3+q|ei(G+q)r|П•v,k3вҹ©вҹЁП•vвҖІ,k2|eвҲ’i(G+q)rвҖІ|П•cвҖІ,k2+qвҹ©.
(H.8)
108
Appendix H. The Bare and Screened Interaction in Reciprocal Space and BandВӯMomentum Basis
==PAGE:115==
For W we then have that
W n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ =
Z Z
П•вҲ—
n1(r)П•вҲ—
n2(rвҖІ)W(r, rвҖІ)П•n1вҖІ(rвҖІ)П•n2вҖІ(r)drdrвҖІ
(H.9)
where we used the deltaВӯfunctions for W as seen in eq. (4.121). Using eq. (H.3),
W n2вҖІ,n2
n1,n1вҖІ = 1
V
Z Z
X
G,GвҖІ,q
ОөвҲ’1
G,GвҖІ(q)eвҲ’i(G+q)rvC
GвҖІ,GвҖІ(q)ei(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІП•вҲ—
n1(r)П•вҲ—
n2(rвҖІ)П•n1вҖІ(rвҖІ)П•n2вҖІ(r)drdrвҖІ.
(H.10)
Transforming into the bandВӯmomentum basis, we finally have,
W cвҖІk4,vвҖІk2
ck1,vk3
= 1
V
X
G,GвҖІ,q
ОөвҲ’1
G,GвҖІ(q)vC
GвҖІ,GвҖІ(q)вҹЁП•c,k1|eвҲ’i(G+q)r|П•ncвҖІ,k4вҹ©вҹЁП•vвҖІ,k2|ei(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІ|П•nv,k3вҹ©Оҙk1,вҲ’q+k4Оҙk2,q+k3
W cвҖІk4,vвҖІk2
ck1,vk3
= 1
V
X
G,GвҖІ,q
ОөвҲ’1
G,GвҖІ(q)vC
GвҖІ,GвҖІ(q)вҹЁП•c,k4+q|eвҲ’i(G+q)r|П•ncвҖІ,k4вҹ©вҹЁП•vвҖІ,k3+q|ei(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІ|П•nv,k3вҹ©
W cвҖІ,vвҖІk2
c,v,k3 (q) = 1
V
X
G,GвҖІ
ОөвҲ’1
G,GвҖІ(q)vC
GвҖІ,GвҖІ(q)вҹЁП•c,k2+q|eвҲ’i(G+q)r|П•ncвҖІ,k2вҹ©вҹЁП•vвҖІ,k3+q|ei(GвҖІ+q)rвҖІ|П•nv,k3вҹ©.
(H.11)
109
==PAGE:116==
I
Calculation Settings and Convergence
This section accounts for the structural setup of the materials that we have made calculations on
in this project, and we show how many bands and kВӯpoints are required to obtain converged data
through convergence tests. We need in total three different calculations in order to construct the
hybrid functions as explained in chapter 5: a BSEF calculation, an RPAF and an RPA calculation.
The two finite calculations are not converged with respect to the number of bands. As explained
in section 4.4, the BSE calculation is too computationally costly to include a converged number
of bands. We will however, as shown in figure 5.1, aim at including bands at around 2 eV above
and below the band gap in order to catch the excitonic effects. Of course, we include more if
we can, but accept to include less if the number of kВӯpoints otherwise will be unacceptably low
convergence wise.
There are lots of parameters in the calculations that one could converge on. We have chosen to only
consider the number of bands and kВӯpoints, and all other parameters are put to standard settings.
So letвҖҷs start by considering these.
For all materials, two calculators were made in total. The initial calculator did the DFT ground
state calculation to find the ground state density. In this calculator we used a plane wave cutoff of
800 eV, the exchangeВӯcorrelation kernel was PBE, and we allowed for a FermiВӯDirac occupation
width of 0.01, corresponding to 116 K, in order to have a finite, but low, temperature. The О“Вӯpoint
was included in the list of kВӯpoints. We converged on the number of kВӯpoints in this calculator with
respect to the ground state energy.
The next calculator held the density constant and generated the kВӯpoints used in the actual polarВӯ
izability calculations. We made this second calculator instead of using the one described above
because the full RPA calculation often required more kВӯpoints to be properly converged than what
was needed for the ground state density to be converged, while the finite BSE calculation could
only be performed if we included fewer kВӯpoints than what was used in the first calculator. Thus,
this second calculator was made in two versions.
One of them was used in the full RPA calculation, and we made convergence tests for each material
to find a suitable number of kВӯpoints and bands to be included in these calculations by considering
the resulting polarizability. When the polarizability plots stopped changing when more kВӯpoints
or bands were added, we had reached convergence. In this calculation, we chose a broadening of
О· = 0.05 eV.
The other version had much fewer kВӯpoints and was used for the finite BSE calculation. To find
out how many kВӯpoints should be included in this calculator, we did a kВӯpoint convergence test
on the finite RPA calculation. When the convergence test was done on the finite RPA calculation
instead of the BSE calculation, it is simply because this is much computationally cheaper. And it
seems reasonable to assume that when the finite RPA calculation, having exactly as many bands
as the finite BSE calculation, was converged, then the BSE calculation could be assumed to be
converged too. However, it was not always possible to use a perfectly converged number of kВӯ
points in the BSE calculations, and in this case this convergence test was merely a sanity check:
we may have to accept that the calculation is not perfectly kВӯpoint converged, but the overall trends
in the plots should not change anymore when we were around the number of kВӯpoints that we were
able to include in the BSE calculation. If the overall trends in the plots were still changing at the
maximum possible number of kВӯpoints, we would have to accept including fewer bands. Including
fewer bands means that we have room for more kВӯpoints, and also the number of kВӯpoints converged
110
Appendix I. Calculation Settings and Convergence
==PAGE:117==
faster. We used a broadening of О· = 0.1 eV in BSE calculations, which we justify in convergence
section on the TiO2, rutile, section I.0.1.
Also the finite RPA calculation should to be converged with respect to the number of kВӯpoints, as
also described in the main text, section 5.1, and since we could include many kВӯpoints in this finite
RPA calculation, we also used a smaller broadening of 0.05 eV instead of the 0.1 eV that was used
in the BSE calculations. Thus, the convergence tests done on the finite RPA calculation to find
the number of kВӯpoints needed for the BSE calculation, could not be used directly. However, we
did not perform the convergence test on the finite RPA calculation directly, since we could just use
the result from the convergence test of the full RPA calculation. If the full RPA calculation was
converged at some specific kВӯpoint density, then the smaller RPA calculation would of course also
be converged at this point, having the same broadening but fewer bands. So we just reused this
result.
When the calculators were made, we did the polarizability calculations. Also here are some difВӯ
ferent parameters that one could consider. We had to select a plane wave cutoff Ecut. The plane
wave cutoff is a variable that we will often be specifying in the result section. This parameter is
the local field effect cutoff in the dielectric function.
Д§2|q + G|2
2m
вүӨEcut
(I.1)
The plane wave cutoff restricts the number of plane waves used in the calculation, such that all plane
waves obey eq. I.1. We chose to not converge on this parameter: the matrices have dimensions
corresponding to the number of GGвҖІ vectors, and therefore we were often limited in how large a
plane wave cutoff we could have. The code would crash due to CPU memory problems if the plane
wave cutoff was too large when the code tried to temporarily store the matrix. And so, the plane
wave cutoff was just put to 100 eV for most materials, unless otherwise stated.
The parameter О· was chosen to be small for the two RPA calculations, we chose it to be 50 meV,
since we can include as many kВӯpoints as we desire as described above, and therefore may aim
for large precision. For the BSE calculation, we did a small study on one of the materials, TiO2
in rutile phase, to find a suitable О·, and as discussed in the next subsection, we decided to have a
broadening of 100 meV based on this small study. Due to lack of time the investigation was not
repeated on all materials, but that is something that could have been nice to have. Instead, we kept
using the 100 meV for О·.
We will specify the kВӯpoint density dk instead of directly the number of kВӯpoints. The number of
kВӯpoints can be found using that the density is related to the number of kВӯpoints in each lattice
direction as
dki = N ai
2ПҖ,
(I.2)
where ai are the lattice vectors. We have used the вҖҷeven=TrueвҖҷ function in GPAW, meaning that
the number of kВӯpoints are rounded up to the nearest even number. We have done a BSE and RPA
calculation using the GPAW response codes вҖҷbse.pyвҖҷ and вҖҷdf.pyвҖҷ respectively. Documentation and
codes can be found in [38] and [39]. The kВӯpoint densities have the dimension of length, and we
measure them in units of kВӯpoints per Г…вҲ’1. In the following when giving numerical values for
kВӯpoint densities, we will not always state the unit, but it is always implicitly there.
In the following, many yВӯaxes will have the name ПҮ. In the main text we used this symbol for the
density response function, whereas we used ВҜПҮ for the polarizability. However, in the following
sections we will use ПҮ for the polarizability.
111
==PAGE:118==
I.0.1
Rutile TiO2
According to [23] the experimental lattice parameters of rutile TiO2 are a = 4.584 Г… and c =
2.953 Г…. The spacegroup is number 136 and we used atomic position basis (0, 0, 0), (0.3, 0.3, 0.0)
obtained from [24]. The angles between the lattice vectors are 90, 90 and 90 degrees. The BSE
and both RPA calculations were made with a plane wave cutoff at 150 eV.
As seen in figure 5.1 and also mentioned in the section 7, we include bands within Оҙ = 2 eV,
yielding 6 valence bands and 6 conduction bands in the finite calculations. The direct band gap
was found by fitting the outputted BSE polarizability to the experimental data, and was found to
be about 3.4 eV, yielding a cutoff frequency of Пүc = 3.4eV + 2eV = 5.4eV.
As described in the previous subsection, we made a convergence test on the ground state energy
on the first calculator. The result for rutile TiO2 is shown in figure I.1, left. We see that at around
a kВӯpoint density of 3Вӯ4, the ground state density is converged, so in the calculations of the poВӯ
larizabilities we made sure to be above this limit. Note that the yВӯscale is logarithmic. We then
converged on the kВӯpoint density in the second calculator by considering the resulting plots of
ПҮRPA
F
at a broadening of 50 meV. The results are shown in I.1, middle and right corresponding to
the imaginary and real part of the polarizability respectively. Already at a kВӯpoint density around
6Вӯ8, the level of convergence seems acceptable. A well converged system should however have
a kВӯpoint density at least at 12. But the BSE calculation for this system and with the number of
bands stated above puts a limit to the density of 7. Being at an acceptable level of convergence at
6Вӯ8, this is sufficient.
Figure I.1: Left: convergence on the kВӯpoint density in the ground state calculation in the first
calculator with respect to the ground state energy. Middle, right: imaginary and real part of the
polarizability for different kВӯpoint densities.
However, since we have to be somewhat below perfect convergence, we consider what is a suitable
value of the broadening of the peaks, О·. Thus, we compare a well converged result from figure I.1,
more specifically the one with a density of 16, and then we made 4 finite RPA calculations where
the kВӯpoint density was kept at 7, and where we varied the broadening from 50 to 200 meV, to see
which one of them matches the well converged plot the most. The result is shown in figure I.2.
112
==PAGE:119==
Figure I.2: The plot shows a convergencetest on the parameter О·. In the real BSE calculations for
this material we can only have a kВӯpoint density of 7, which is below the limit for a well converged
kВӯpoint density at approximately 12. Therefore we compare some finite RPA calculation for the
polarizability at kВӯpoint density of 7 but with different broadenings to a well converged finite RPA
calculation to see which one matched the most.
It is perhaps not possible to draw a very clear conclusion on a suitable broadening from figure I.2.
It may at first glance appear that a О· of 50 meV is closest to the well converged RPA calculation.
However, note that at around 3.25 eV in the plot of the imaginary part, the 50 meV plot dives too
much, at around 3.5 eV it has an extra peak, and the single peak in the well converged case at
around 4.5 eV is three peaks in the 50 meV case. In the real part, it is very wiggly compared to
the well converged case. The differences seem small, but they will have a large effect on the final
hybrid results which will have the wrong shape compared to experimental results. In the other end
of the scale, at 200 meV, much of the information about where the peaks of the imaginary part
of the polarizability are located has vanished, which is not desirable either. Instead, a reasonable
compromise is found in a broadening of 100 meV. The shape resembles the well converged case
with some very small deviations. The peaks Вӯ in both the real and imaginary part Вӯ are of course
not high enough, but the idea is to compensate for that through the full RPA calculation, and in the
finite case, obtaining the right shape of the polarizabilities are of greater importance.
We finally did a convergence test on the full RPA calculation. The calculations were done with an
О· of 50 meV and a plane wave cutoff at 150 eV. Having found an acceptably converged kВӯpoint
density in the finite calculation at around 8, we chose to initially keep the kВӯpoint density in the full
case at 9 and converging on the number of bands. The broadening was put to 50 meV. The real and
imaginary part of the polarizability for different number of bands are shown in figure I.3, upper left
and right. The plot reveals that to obtain convergence up to the 60 eV that we have included, 100
bands needs to be included in the calculations. We then converged on the kВӯpoint density keeping
the number of bands at 100, (I.3), lower left and right. It may be a bit hard to see when perfect
convergence happens if we do not zoom on the axis and so we have only made the plot up to 10
eV. This is because we want to consider the small oscillations. If we were to consider the entire
plot, it would look like it had converged with respect to the number of kВӯpoints immediately. The
plots reveal that perfect convergence is obtained at about a density of 19.
113
==PAGE:120==
Figure I.3: The two upper plots shows a convergence test on the number of bands included in
the full RPA calculation. Here, the kВӯpoint density in the second calculator was kept at fixed at
9. Convergence occurs at around 100 bands. The number of bands was then put to 100, and we
converge the kВӯpoint density, and the result of this is shown on the two lower plots, where we have
zoomed on the axis to be able to see what happens (and of course also checked that nothing else
happens at higher frequencies, but we have not included that here). Perfect convergence occurs at
around a kВӯpoint density of 19.
OutВӯofВӯplane calculations
We also did an outВӯofВӯplane calculation on TiO2, rutile meaning that the incoming EВӯfield was
polarized parallel to the cВӯaxis. This did of course not change the ground state calculation, nor
did it change the number of bands included in the finite calculations when Пүc was chosen to 2 eV.
However, by mistake, we included one more valence band in the calculation. The mistake however
is so small that we donвҖҷt think it made sense to redo all calculations. However, it does increase the
cutoff to 2.1 eV. Thus, Пүc = 3.4eV + 2.1eV=5.5eV. We need to ensure convergence in the second
calculator on the finite and full RPA calculations. In both cases, the plane wave cutoff was put to
100 eV. The two finite calculations had a broadening of 100 meV while the full RPA calculation
had a broadening of 50 meV. Figure I.4 shows the convergence on the finite RPA calculation on the
imaginary part (left) and the real part (right). Convergence happens at about a kВӯpoint density of
8Вӯ10, which is rather low compared to many other materials considered in this project. The the real
BSE calculations we have a kВӯpoint density of 8, and this is then to be considered a well converged
density.
114
==PAGE:121==
Figure I.4: Left, right: imaginary and real part of the polarizability for different kВӯpoint densities.
We then converged the full RPA calculation with respect to the number of bands, while the kВӯpoint
density was fixed at 9. The calculations were done with an О· of 50 meV and a plane wave cutoff
at 100 eV. The result is shown in figure I.5 with the imaginary part (upper, left) and the real part
(upper, left). Here we see that the system is converged at about 120 bands. We then converged on
the number of kВӯpoints. Convergence happens at about a kВӯpoint density of 15.
Figure I.5: The two upper plots shows a convergence test on the number of bands included in
the full RPA calculation. Here, the kВӯpoint density in the second calculator was kept at fixed at
9. Convergence occurs at around 120 bands. The number of bands was then put to 120, and we
convergence on the kВӯpoint density, and the result of this is shown on the two lower plots. Once
again, we have zoomed on the axis to be able to see what happens. Perfect convergence occurs at
around a kВӯpoint density of 15.
115
==PAGE:122==
I.0.2
Anatase TiO2
The lattice parameters of TiO2 in the anatase phase are found experimentally by [21] to be a =
b = 3.782 Г… and c = 9.502 Г…, and the space group is number 141. The basis of the atomic
positions was found at [24] to be (1/2, 1/2, 1/2), (0, 1/2, 0.457152) and the angles between the
lattice vectors in the conventional unit cell are 90, 90 and 90 degrees. The setup was created using
the ASE spacegroup subpackage [40].
Initially we converged the number of kВӯpoints in the first calculator with respect to the ground state
energy. The result is shown in figure I.6, left. The plot shows that we, even at rather large kВӯpoint
densities, have some deviations from the ground state energy, that the calculation otherwise seems
to have converged to already at a kВӯpoint density of 3. Note however that the energy differences
on the yВӯscale are very small. So it does seems reasonable to conclude that we have convergence
already at a kВӯpoint density of 3.
We then converged the second calculator with respect to the kВӯpoint density needed to be included
in the finite BSE calculation. The calculations were done with an О· of 50 meV and a plane wave
cutoff at 100 eV. From a convergence point of view, anatase TiO2 is one of the more challenging
materials. Proper convergence requires way more kВӯpoints than we are able to include in the BSE
calculation. To compensate a bit, we have only included bands within Оҙ = 1.6 eV on each side of
the band gap, which corresponds to 12 valence bands and 10 conduction bands. We experimented
with including even fewer bands in the calculations, but this results in the excitonic peaks not being
captured properly, and studying the plots we concluded that a compromise on the kВӯpoint density
was to be preferred over including too few bands. Note however that we would normally aim at
having bands within at least 2 eV on each side of the band gap, so we did reduce this number a
bit. The direct band gap was found by fitting the outputted BSE polarizability to the experimental
data, and was found to be about 4.6 eV. Thus, for this system, Пүc = 4.6eV + 1.6eV = 6.2eV.
Figure I.6 shows a convergence test on the kВӯpoint density in finite RPA calculation with a broadВӯ
ening of the 100 meV matching the broadening that we intend to use in the BSE calculation. The
plots reveals that the finite RPA polarizability is only fully converged at kВӯpoint density of 12Вӯ15.
In our real BSE calculations we did not achieve having a larger density than 7. From considering
(I.6) this is perhaps not an awful level of convergence, but we would normally have aimed at more
kВӯpoints had that been possible.
Figure I.6: Left: convergence on the kВӯpoint density in the ground state calculation in the first
calculator with respect to the ground state energy. Middle, right: imaginary and real part of the
polarizability for different kВӯpoint densities.
We finally converged the full RPA calculation. Here we first converged on the number of bands,
while the kВӯpoint density was fixed at 8. The calculations were done with an О· of 50 meV and a
plane wave cutoff at 100 eV. The result is shown in figure I.7 with the imaginary part (upper, left)
and the real part (upper, left). Here we see that the system is converged at about 170 bands. We
then converged on the number of kВӯpoints. Convergence happens at about a kВӯpoint density of 20.
116
==PAGE:123==
Figure I.7: The two upper plots shows a convergence test on the number of bands included in
the full RPA calculation. Here, the kВӯpoint density in the second calculator was kept at fixed at
8. Convergence occurs at around 170 bands. The number of bands was then put to 170, and we
convergence on the kВӯpoint density, and the result of this is shown on the two lower plots. Once
again, we have zoomed on the axis to be able to see what happens. Perfect convergence occurs at
around a kВӯpoint density of 20.
I.0.3
MoS2
The lattice parameters of bulk 2HВӯ MoS2, which is the most stable phase of bulk MoS2, are found
experimentally in [29] to be a = b = 3.161 Г… and c = 12.295 Г…. The space group number is 194,
and the atomic positions can be described in the basis (2/3, 1/3, 1/4), (2/3, 1/3, 0.633082). The
angles between the lattice vectors are 90, 90 and 120 degrees. The setup was created using the
ASE spacegroup subpackage [40].
Initially, we converged the ground state density. The result is shown in figure I.8, left. This reveals
that we have convergence at a kВӯpoint density of 5.
The plane wave cutoff of the BSE, finite RPA and full RPA calculations is 100 eV, and the О· = 100
meV for the finite BSE calculation. For this material we are able to include bands with Оҙ = 2.5 eV
on each side of the band gap corresponding to 4 valence bands and 8 conduction bands. The direct
band gap was found by fitting the outputted BSE polarizability to the experimental data, and was
found to be about 2 eV. Thus, for this system, Пүc = 2eV + 2.5eV = 4.5eV.
We then made a kВӯpoint density convergence test on the finite RPA calculation with the same О·
(and all other settings). The result is shown in figure I.8 middle (imaginary part) and right (real
part) where we have plotted different values of the kВӯpoint density. The test revels that convergence
happens at about a kВӯpoint density of 12. We were however only able to perform BSE calculations
with a kВӯpoint density of 8. A kВӯpoint density of 6 had, in our own assessment of the plots in figure
I.8, not been sufficient, but just at 8 we believe that the degree of convergence is acceptable.
117
==PAGE:124==
Figure I.8: Left: convergence on the kВӯpoint density in the ground state calculation in the first
calculator with respect to the ground state energy. Middle, right: imaginary and real part of the
polarizability for different kВӯpoint densities.
We then converged the second calculator for the full RPA calculation with respect to the number
of bands, while the kВӯpoint density was fixed at 10. The calculations were done with an О· of 50
meV and a plane wave cutoff at 100 eV. The result is shown in figure I.9, the two upper plots. The
system is fully converged at about a 100 bands. We then converged the full RPA calculation with
respect to the number of kВӯpoints while keeping the number of bands fixed at 110. The result is
shown in figure I.9, the two lower plots. Perfect convergence happens at around a kВӯpoint density
of 20. There is zoom on the axis on this plot like for the previous materials.
Figure I.9: The two upper plots shows a convergence test on the number of bands included in
the full RPA calculation. Here, the kВӯpoint density in the second calculator was kept at fixed at
10. Convergence occurs at around 100 bands. The number of bands was then put to 110, and we
convergence on the kВӯpoint density, and the result of this is shown on the two lower plots. Once
again, we have zoomed on the axis to be able to see what happens. Perfect convergence occurs at
around a kВӯpoint density of 20.
118
==PAGE:125==
I.0.4
hBN
The lattice constants of hBN are found experimentally in [30] to be a = b = 2.50583 Г… and
c = 6.6090 Г… at a temperature of 98 K which is close to the temperature which we are doing
the calculations at: remember that we have decided to work with a FermiВӯDirac occupation of
0.01 corresponding to a temperature of 116 K. The space group number is 194, and the atomic
positions can be described in the basis (1/3, 2/3, 1/4), (1/3, 2/3, 3/4). The angles between the
lattice vectors are 90, 90 and 120 degrees. The setup was created using the ASE spacegroup
subpackage [40].
For this material, we included bands within Оҙ = 2.9 eV to each side of the band gap corresponding
to 5 valence bands and 2 conduction bands. The direct band gap was found by fitting the outputted
BSE polarizability to the experimental data, and was found to be about 6.7 eV. Thus, for this system,
Пүc = 6.7 eV + 2.9 eV = 9.6 eV.
The convergence on the number of kВӯpoints in the first calculator is shown on figure I.10, left.
Convergence occurs at a kВӯpoint density of 4. We then converged on the number of kВӯpoints needed
for the BSE calculation by considering the finite RPA calculation with О· = 100 meV and a plane
wave cutoff at 100 eV. Figure I.10, middle (imaginary part) and right (real part) of the finite RPA
polarizability respectively for different values of the kВӯpoint density. Convergence happens at
about a kВӯpoint density of 14Вӯ16. In the real BSE calculation we had a kВӯpoint density of 8, which
is perhaps a bit low considering the plots, but does seems acceptable.
Figure I.10: Left: convergence on the kВӯpoint density in the ground state calculation in the first
calculator with respect to the ground state energy. Middle, right: imaginary and real part of the
polarizability for different kВӯpoint densities.
We then did a convergence on the full RPA with respect to the number of bands. The calculations
were done with an О· of 50 meV and a plane wave cutoff at 100 eV. The result is shown in figure I.11.
We see that compared to the other materials considered in the project, hBN converges rather fast
with respect to the number of bands included, already around 40 bands. We then kept the number
of bands at 40 and converged on the kВӯpoint density. Here, on the other hand, perfect convergence
happens rather lately, above approximately a kВӯpoint density of 30.
119
==PAGE:126==
Figure I.11: The two upper plots shows a convergence test on the number of bands included in
the full RPA calculation. Here, the kВӯpoint density in the second calculator was kept at fixed at 8.
Convergence occurs at around 40 bands. The number of bands was then put slightly above this,
at 60 bands, and we convergence on the kВӯpoint density, and the result of this is shown on the two
lower plots. Once again, we have zoomed on the axis to be able to see what happens. Perfect
convergence occurs at around a kВӯpoint density of above 30.
I.0.5
Si
We here show some convergence tests on bulk Si. The data shown in figure 6.3 was obtained from
one of my supervisors, Mark Svendsen, and was used in his work, [2], since the point of the figure
was to show that the combination of shifting to eigenvalues to match the band gap and a subsequent
Hilbert transform of the BSE calculation results in a theoretical prediction which almost exactly
matches the experiment removing the need Вӯ in the case of Si Вӯ to do any other corrections, like the
FВӯsum correction which was made in his work. I have not received the details on the settings of his
calculation. But it will not make a large difference, since we can make calculations very similar to
those in figure 6.3.mq ls
However, an important point is that for Si, the real part of the polarizability is converged already
at about 8 bands, which is what we see in figure I.12, upper right. We have also made convergence
testS on the number of kВӯpoints shown in the two lower plots.
120
==PAGE:127==
Figure I.12: The two upper plots shows a convergence test on the number of bands included in
the full RPA calculation. Here, the kВӯpoint density in the second calculator was kept at fixed at 5.
Convergence occurs at around 8 bands. The number of bands was then put somewhat higher to be
completely sure Вӯ to 16 Вӯ and we convergence on the kВӯpoint density, and the result of this is shown
on the two lower plots. Once again, we have zoomed on the axis to be able to see what happens.
Perfect convergence occurs at around a kВӯpoint density of 20.
I.0.6
HfS2
The work on HfS2 has been made in close collaboration with one of my supervisors, Mark SvendВӯ
sen. The research section, at which this project has been made, has a collaboration with a neighВӯ
boring experimental department, which has bought a HfS2 crystal that they intend to measure at
least the refractive index on. Thus, we would like to make predictions on the refractive index for
this material. We had hoped to get the experimental data before this report was handed in, but there
was not enough time for the experimental department to finish its work.
The lattice parameters of HfS2 were found by with a DFT calculation with a soВӯcalled D3 relaxation
by my supervisor. He found them to be a = b = 3.626965 Г… and c = 5.882979 Г…. The space group
number is 164, and the atomic positions can be described in the basis (0, 0, 0), (2/3, 1/3, 0.763952).
The angles between the lattice vectors are 90, 90 and 120 degrees. He also sent me the finite BSE
and the full RPA calculations, so there has not been any need to converge on the full RPA calculaВӯ
tion.
To save time, we did not make a convergence test on the finite RPA calculation. The number of
bands should of course match the BSE calculation, and having done numerous kВӯpoint density
convergence tests at this point for other materials, we just made a finite RPA calculation with a
high kВӯpoint density of 20.
The settings of the BSE calculations was as follows: The first calculator had a kВӯpoint density of
1. The occupation was put to 0.05, i.e. a bit larger than has been the setting for the other materials
121
==PAGE:128==
considered in this project. This corresponds to a temperature of 580 K. The second calculator had
a kВӯpoint density of 6, and a occupation of 0.0001 (1.16 K), i.e. a bit lower than we had normally
done in this project. I did make a new calculation Вӯ i.e. I did not use MarkвҖҷs BSE calculation Вӯ
because I wanted the calculation to go up to higher frequencies due to the way some of the hybrids
are constructed. But otherwise, the calculations settings were the same.
For this material, we included bands within Оҙ = 2.6 eV to each side of the band gap corresponding
to 4 valence bands and 3 conduction bands. As mentioned previously, we do in general not know
the correct value for the band gap of the material, and have decided to just fit the BSE excitonic
peaks to the excitonic peaks in the experimental datasets. Since we do not have an experimental
dataset, my supervisor Mark made a GW calculation to make a better prediction for the band gap.
He found it to be 2.9 eV. Thus, for this system, Пүc = 2.9eV + 2.6eV = 5.5eV.
122
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
[1]
Kristian S. Thygesen. Adiabatic connection, RPA and beyond. Power point slides, 10302
Electronic Structure Methods in Material Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Lecture 5, 2022.
[2]
Mark Svendsen. LightВӯMatter Interactions from First Principles. DTU Physics, 2022.
[3]
M. A. Noginov et al. вҖңDemonstration of a spaserВӯbased nanolaserвҖқ. In: (2009). URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/nature08318.
[4]
Mark Fox. Optical Properties of Solids. Oxford, 2017.
[5]
Kristian S. Thygesen. Density response function. Handout, DTU, 2013.
[6]
Battulga Munkhbat et al. вҖңOptical Constants of Several Multilayer Transition Metal DichalcoВӯ
genides Measured by Spectroscopic Ellipsometry in the 300вҖ“1700 nm Range: High Index,
Anisotropy, and HyperbolicityвҖқ. In: (2022). URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/
acsphotonics.2c00433.
[7]
M. D. Sturge. вҖңOptical Absorption of Gallium Arsenide between 0.6 and 2.75 eVвҖқ. In:
(1962). URL: https://journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/pr/pdf/10.1103/PhysRev.
127.768.
[8]
Kristian S. Thygesen. Elementary interband transitions: Excitons. Handout, DTU, 2013.
[9]
I. Egri. вҖңPlasmons in semiconductors and insulators: a simple formulaвҖқ. In: (1982). URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0038109882905555.
[10]
Richars M. Martin et al. Interacting Electrons. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
[11]
J. Stiebling. вҖңOptische Eigenschaften des einkristallinen Siliziums aus ElektronenenergievВӯ
erlustmessungenвҖқ. In: (1978). URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01351544.
[12]
Henrik Bruus and Karsten Flensberg. ManyВӯBody Quantum Theory in Condensed Matter
Physics. Oxford, 2016.
[13]
Kristian S. Thygesen. Linear response theory. Handout, DTU, 2013.
[14]
Matthias Ernzerhof John P. Perdew Kieron Burke. вҖңGeneralized Gradient Approximation
Made SimpleвҖқ. In: (1996). URL: https : / / journals . aps . org / prl / abstract / 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevLett.77.3865.
[15]
Martijn Wubs. KramersВӯKronig relations. Handout, 34032 Optical Properties of Solids, LecВӯ
ture 2, 2013.
[16]
Giovanni Onida et al. вҖңElectronic excitations: densityВӯfunctional versus manyВӯbody GreenвҖҷsВӯ
function approachesвҖқ. In: (2002).
[17]
P. Romaniello et al. вҖңDouble excitations in finite systemsвҖқ. In: (2009). URL: https://pubs.
aip.org/aip/jcp/article/130/4/044108/932971/Double-excitations-in-finite-systems.
[18]
GPAW developer. BetheВӯSalpeter Equation Вӯ Theory. 2023. URL: https://wiki.fysik.dtu.
dk/gpaw/documentation/bse/bse.html#bse-theory.
[19]
D. E. Aspnes and A. A. Studna. вҖңDielectric functions and optical parameters of Si, Ge, GaP,
GaAs, GaSb, InP, InAs, and InSb from 1.5 to 6.0 eVвҖқ. In: (1983). URL: https://journals.
aps.org/prb/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevB.27.985.
[20]
Oliver Diwald et al. вҖңThe Effect of Nitrogen Ion Implantation on the Photoactivity of TiO2
Rutile Single CrystalsвҖқ. In: (2004). URL: https://pubs-acs-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/
full/10.1021/jp030529tg.
[21]
Peng Gao et al. вҖңEffect of Ru, Rh, Mo, and Pd Adsorption on the Electronic and Optical
Properties of Anatase TiO2(101): A DFT InvestigationвҖқ. In: (2018). URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/1996-1944/12/5/814.
[22]
Diana Rakhmawaty Eddy et al. вҖңHeterophase Polymorph of TiO2 (Anatase, Rutile, Brookite,
TiO2 (B)) for Efficient Photocatalyst: Fabrication and ActivityвҖқ. In: (2023). URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2079-4991/13/4/704.
Bibliography
123
==PAGE:130==
[23]
Toshitaka Kubo et al. вҖңSurface Structures of Rutile TiO2 (011)вҖқ. In: (2007). URL: https:
//pubs-acs-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/pdf/10.1021/ja072281h.
[24]
Anubhav Jain et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to
accelerating materials innovation. 2013. URL: https://materialsproject.org/.
[25]
G. E. Jellison Jr. et al. вҖңSpectroscopic ellipsometry of thin film and bulk anatase вҖһTiO2вҖқвҖқ. In:
(2003). URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228607629_Spectroscopic_
ellipsometry_of_thin_film_and_bulk_anatase_TiO/download.
[26]
Launay M et al. вҖңEvidence of a rutileВӯphase characteristic peak in lowВӯenergy loss spectraвҖқ.
In: (2004). URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/230719821_Evidence_of_
a_rutile-phase_characteristic_peak_in_low-energy_loss_spectra.
[27]
Binbin Yue et al. вҖңHighВӯenergy electronic excitations in a bulk MoS2 single crystalвҖқ. In:
(2017). URL: https://journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/prb/pdf/10.1103/PhysRevB.
96.125118.
[28]
G. A. Ermolaev et al. вҖңGiant optical anisotropy in transition metal dichalcogenides for nextВӯ
generation photonicsвҖқ. In: (2021). URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-
21139-x.
[29]
B. Schonfeld et al. вҖңAnisotropic MeanВӯSquare Displacements (MSD) in Single Crystals of
2HВӯ and 3RВӯMoS 2вҖқ. In: (1983). URL: https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/doi/pdf/10.1107/S0108768183002645.
[30]
W. Paszkowicz1 et al. вҖңLattice parameters and anisotropic thermal expansion of hexagonal
boron nitride in the 10вҖ“297.5 K temperature rangeвҖқ. In: (2002). URL: https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s003390100999.
[31]
A. Segura et al. вҖңNatural optical anisotropy of hВӯBN: Highest giant birefringence in a bulk
crystal through the midВӯinfrared to ultraviolet rangeвҖқ. In: (2018). URL: https://journals-
aps-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/prmaterials/pdf/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.024001.
[32]
Frederic Fossard et al. вҖңAngleВӯresolved electron energy loss spectroscopy in hexagonal
boron nitrideвҖқ. In: (2018). URL: https://hal.science/hal- 01633518/file/PhysRevB.
96.115304.pdf.
[33]
Binjie Zheng et al. вҖңHCVD growth of largeВӯarea and highВӯquality HfS2 nanoforest on diВӯ
verse substratesвҖқ. In: (2018). URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/
pii/S0169433217333032.
[34]
Gordon Baym and Leo P. Kadanoff. вҖңConservation Laws and Correlation FunctionsвҖқ. In:
(1961). URL: https://journals.aps.org/pr/abstract/10.1103/PhysRev.124.287.
[35]
Robert van Leeuwen and Nils Erik Dahlen. An Introduction to Nonequilibrium Green FuncВӯ
tions. Theoretical Chemistry Materials Science Centre Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, 2005.
[36]
Dario A Leon et al. вҖңFrequency dependence in G W made simple using a multipole approxВӯ
imationвҖқ. In: Physical Review B 104.11 (2021), p. 115157.
[37]
J Kohanoff. Electronic Structure Calculations for Solids and Molecules: Theory and ComВӯ
putational Methods. Cambridge University, 2006.
[38]
GPAW developer. bse.py. 2023. URL: https://gitlab.com/gpaw/gpaw/blob/master/
gpaw/response/bse.py.
[39]
GPAW developer. df.py. 2023. URL: https://gitlab.com/gpaw/gpaw/-/blob/master/
gpaw/response/df.py.
[40]
Ask Hjorth Larsen et al. вҖңThe atomic simulation environmentвҖ”a Python library for working
with atomsвҖқ. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29.27 (2017), p. 273002.
124
Bibliography
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
125
==PAGE:132==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like at this
place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is there a difference
between this text and some nonsense like вҖңHuardest gefburnвҖқ? Kjift вҖ“ not at all! A blind text like this gives
you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text
should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is no need
for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 309
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
