==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU HEALTH TECH
EXPERIMENTAL & TRANSLATIONAL IMMUNOLOGY
T-CELLS and CANCER
MASTER THESIS
Development and Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells
Against Solid Tumours
SUPERVISORS:
H´olmfridur R´osa Halld´orsd´ottir (hohal@dtu.dk)
Maria Ormhøj (marorm@dtu.dk)
Sine Reker Hadrup (sirha@dtu.dk)
hand-in date: 21.06.2023
Authors:
Emily Sophie Hudson, s184256
Kathrine Jæger Moos, s184259
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos 
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering (MSc)  
Master’s thesis (2x 30 ECTS points) 
Development and Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells against Solid Tumours 
 
 
Supervisors 
Professor Sine Reker Hadrup 
Assistant Professor Maria Ormhøj 
Postdoc Hólmfridur Rósa Halldórsdóttir 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Health Technology 
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________            _____________________________________ 
Emily Sophie Hudson 
 
 
Kathrine Jæger Moos 
                  Kgs. Lyngby, June 21, 2023  
                  Kgs. Lyngby, June 21, 2023 
==PAGE:3==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
Acknowledgement
First of all, thanks to the CAR group for making us feel welcome from the very ﬁrst day. It
has been fantastic having so competent and friendly colleagues around us, always generous and
helpful in giving away your best advice.
Thank you Sine for running this inspiring group and giving us the opportunity to spend the last
year of our education surrounded by excellent and important science in the T-Cells & Cancer
group.
Maria, thank you for always keeping an optimistic and positive atmosphere and for always
getting our moods up after #badresultsfriday. You really taught us a lot. We were complete
rookies in the lab, and your invaluable support has been essential for what we have achieved
this year.
H´of´ı aka Mussemor, thank you for always being just a call away whenever we had questions or
needed advice. A big thanks for always providing us with mice for our experiments, and for
showing us how to sacriﬁce and dissect mice, even though we were looking away half of the time.
Finally, we really appreciate that you ”always follow the rules” :)
It has been an amazing time, but sometimes also very stressful (especially at the end). We are
very happy and proud to ﬁnalise our master, but we know for certain that we in future will look
back and miss our everyday life at DTU.
Lastly, thanks to all the mice sacriﬁcing their lives in order to promote science. We really
appreciate it ≺3
i
==PAGE:4==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
Abstract
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy has revolutionized haematological cancer treat-
ment, but its potency against solid tumours remains limited, in particular, due to the hetero-
geneous and immunosuppressive tumour microenvironment. Fourth-generation CAR T cells,
known as TRUCKs, aim to overcome these challenges by secreting transgenic payloads upon
target antigen engagement, with the purpose of stimulating the immune system and inducing
epitope spreading. In order to completely elucidate the functionality of TRUCKs in vivo a fully
murine model is needed.
The aim of this project was to establish a syngeneic murine model to facilitate in vivo testing
of CARs and examine the murine CAR T cell functionality. For this, a protocol for producing
murine CAR T cells using lentiviral and retroviral vectors was developed. The lentiviral system
proved inadequate in transducing murine T cells, however, 2nd generation CAR T cells target-
ing the epidermal growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) and CD19 were successfully
generated using a retroviral system, with an average transduction eﬃciency of 37% and 42%,
respectively. Additionally, murine colorectal carcinoma cell lines (CT26) expressing the target
antigen, EGFRvIII, and luciferase were established with the purpose of evaluating the CAR T
cell function and for future engraftment in mice.
To assess the functionality of the CARs, activation and degranulation assays was conducted
by co-culturing murine EGFRvIII CAR T cells with the CT26+EGFRvIII or K562+EGFRvIII
target cells and CD19 CAR T cells with B cells. The results demonstrated the CAR T cells
to signiﬁcantly upregulate activation (CD25/CD69) and degranulation (CD107a) markers upon
antigen engagement, emphasizing the intended selectivity and functionality of the murine CAR
T cells. In conclusion, a protocol for production of murine CAR T cells and murine target cell
lines was successfully established, constituting the necessary components for in vivo experiments
using a fully murine model. The functional capacity of the murine CAR T cells was exhibited
by in vitro co-culture with target cells, emphasizing the incitement for in vivo testing.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
List of Abbreviations
ACIP - Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices
ACT - Adoptive cell transfer therapy
APC - Antigen-presenting cell
BC - Bu↵y coat
BCMA - B cell maturation antigen
BCR - B-cell receptor
BiTE - Bispeciﬁc T-cell engager
bp - Base pair
CAR - Chimeric antigen receptor
Cas9 - CRISPR-associated protein 9
CAF - Cancer-associated ﬁbroblast
CD - Cluster of di↵erentiation
CLX - Cell line xenograft
CRISPR - Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats
CRS - Cytokine release syndrome
CTLA-4 - cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–associated
antigen 4
DC - Dendritic cell
DMSO - Dimethyl sulfoxide
DNA - Deoxyribonucleic acid
EGF - Epidermal growth factor
EGFR - Epidermal growth factor receptor
EGFRvIII - Epidermal growth factor recep-
tor variant III
EF-1↵- Eukaryotic translation elongation fac-
tor 1 alpha
FACS - Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
FBS - Fetal Bovine Serum
FasL - Fas ligand
FDA - Food and Drug Administration
GFP - Green Fluorescent Protein
GBM - Glioblastoma multiform
HLH - Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
HPV - Human papillomavirus
ICAM-1 - Intracellular adhesion molecule 1
ICANS - Immune e↵ector cell-associated neu-
rotoxicity syndrome
ICOS - Inducible T-cell Costimulator
IFN - Interferon
IL - Interleukin
iPDX - Immune patient derived xenograf
LDL-R - Low-density lipoprotein receptor
iii
==PAGE:6==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
MAS - Macrophage ActivationSyndrome
MDSC - Myeloid-derived suppressor cells
MFI - Mean ﬂuorescence intensity
MHC - Major histocompatibility complex
MOI - Multiplicity of infection
Mφ - Macrophage
NFAT - Nuclear factor of the activated T cell
NOD - Nonobese diabetic
NSG - NOD scid gamma
PAMP - Pathogen-associated molecular pat-
tern
PBMC - Peripheral blood mononuclear cell
PBS - Phosphate Bu↵ered Saline
PD-1 - Programmed cell death protein 1
PD-L1 - Programmed cell death-ligand 1
PDX - Patient derived-xenograft
PI3k - Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
pMHC - peptide-MHC
PRR - Pattern recognition receptor
RT - Room temperature
scFv - Single-chain variable fragment
SCD - Spontaneous cells death
SCID - Severe combined immunodeﬁciency
SynNotch - Synthetic Notch
TAA - Tumour-associated antigens
TAM - Tumour-associated macrophages
TCR - T-cell receptor
TDSF - Tumour-derived soluble factor
TFH - T follicular helper cell
TGF-a - Transforming growth factor-alpha
TIL - tumour inﬁltrating lymphocyte
TLR - Toll-like receptor
TME - Tumour microenvironment
TNF - Tumour necrosis factor
TNFR - Tumour necrosis factor receptor
TRAF - TNF receptor-associated factor
Treg - Regulatory T cell
TRUCK - T cell redirected for universal
cytokine-mediated killing
UTD - Untransduced
VEGF - Vascular endothelial growth factor
VH - Variable Heavy Chain
VL - Variable Light Chain
WT - Wildtype
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgement
i
Abstract
ii
List of Abbreviations
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Immune System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
T Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Cancer and Immunotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Chimeric Antigen Receptor T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.1
CAR T Cell Cytotoxic E↵ector Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.2
Generations of CARs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.3
Clinical Production of CAR T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.3.4
CAR T Cell Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.5
Toxicities and Prevention Strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3.6
EGFRvIII - A Potential Target for CAR T Cell Therapy against Glioblas-
toma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.4
Viral Delivery and Editing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.5
Pre-clinical Mouse Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.5.1
Human Xenograft Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.5.2
Syngeneic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.5.3
Humanized Mouse Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.6
Mouse-to-Human Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2
Aim
27
3
Materials and Methods
28
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.1
Cell Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.2
Constructs and Plasmids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
Cell Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
Transformation of DNA Plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
v
==PAGE:8==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
CONTENTS
3.2.3
Transfection and Puriﬁcation of Lentivirus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.4
Virus Titration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.5
Lentiviral Transduction of Human T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.6
Isolation, Activation and Transduction of Murine T cells . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.7
Isolation of Murine B cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.8
Establishment of Cell Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.9
Functional and Phenotypic Assays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.10 Flow Cytometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.11 Degranulation and Activation Assays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Results
41
4.1
Establishment of CAR T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.1
Comparing Constructs, Time of Transduction and LentiBOOST® Addition 41
4.1.2
Comparing Lentiviral Transduction in Murine and Human T cells
. . . .
44
4.1.3
Lentiviral Transduction of Human T Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Retroviral Transduction of Murine T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.1
Retroviral Transduction Protocol Establishment with GFP Construct
. .
46
4.2.2
Retroviral Transduction with EGFRvIII CAR and CD19 CAR . . . . . .
48
4.3
Establishment of CT26 Cancer Cell Lines for CAR T in vitro Functional Evalu-
ation and in vivo Engraftment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Expansion and Evaluation of Thawed Murine T Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5
Phenotypic Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.6
Functional Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.6.1
Evaluation of CAR T Cell Degranulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.6.2
Evaluation of CAR T Cell Activation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Discussion
59
5.1
Impaired Lentiviral Gene Transfer Speciﬁcally in Murine T Cells . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Eﬃcient Retroviral Mediated Gene Transfer of CARs to Murine T Cells . . . . .
62
5.3
Evalutation of Murine T Cell Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.4
Phenotypic Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.5
EGFRvIII and CD19 CAR T Cells Upregulate Degranulation and Activation
Markers upon Antigen Engagement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.6
Considerations of the Established Murine Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
vi
==PAGE:9==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
CONTENTS
6
Conclusion
73
References
74
Appendix
96
Appendix 1: Plasmid Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
Appendix 2: Staining Antibodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Appendix 3: Gating Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
vii
==PAGE:10==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
The development of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy has revolutionised the
treatment of haematological cancers, making it a promising treatment strategy for other types
of cancers. However, CAR T cell therapy has shown limited clinical e↵ect against solid tumours,
which can be explained by the quality, persistence or functionality of the CAR T cells and by
the antigen heterogeneity and immunosuppressive characteristics of the tumour microenviron-
ment (TME). Fourth generation of CAR T cells, also known as T cells redirected for antigen-
unrestricted cytokine-initiated killing (TRUCKs), aims to overcome the limitations of antigen
heterogeneity and the challenging TME by secreting a transgenic payload upon engagement
with the target antigen, resulting in an enhanced anti-tumour response. In order to completely
elucidate the functionality of TRUCKs in vivo, a fully murine model is needed. Syngeneic mice
models retain intact and functioning immune systems and are therefore of particular relevance
for early immunotherapy studies of TRUCKs. These enable the opportunity to evaluate if the
payload stimulates the immune system, for example by recruiting other immune cells and in-
ducing epitope spreading, leading to an enhanced anti-tumour response. A deeper insight into
the functionality of TRUCKs is necessary for developing CAR T cells suitable for treating solid
tumours.
1.1
The Immune System
The purpose of the immune system is to protect individuals and maintain their health, by
detecting and eliminating a wide variety of pathogens, as well as cancer cells. The immune
system is divided into two main parts. The innate immune system facilitates immediate, but
non-speciﬁc protection against pathogens through epithelial barriers and innate immune cells
[1]. The adaptive immune system, also known as the acquired immune system, is activated by
the innate immune system and is in contrast highly speciﬁc and creates immunological memory
after exposure to a pathogen. The adaptive immune system can further be divided into cell-
mediated immunity, facilitated by T cells, and humoral immunity, which is facilitated by B cells
[2]. The e↵ector functions of T cells, make them great candidates for ﬁghting cancers, which
will be further elaborated in the following sections.
1
==PAGE:11==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1.1
T Cells
T cells are a subtype of lymphocytes, and they are essential for the establishment of immune
responses, homeostasis, and memory. They derive from hematopoietic stem cells found in the
bone marrow and migrate to the thymus, where they undergo several maturation steps [3, 4].
This involves re-arrangement of the T cell receptor (TCR) genes, leading to a diverse T cell
repertoire, which is followed by selection processes to maintain central tolerance. These processes
include positive selection, which aims to eliminate T cells that do not recognize and bind major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, and negative selection, which refers to elimination
of T cells that bind too strongly to self [4, 5]. During this process, the T cells will commit to
become either CD4+ or CD8+ T cells, depending on if the TCR recognises MHC II or MHC I,
respectively. After maturation, na¨ıve T cells circulate between blood and secondary lymphoid
organs, where they encounter antigen-presenting cells, most commonly dendritic cells, which
take up and present antigens to T cells through a peptide-MHC (pMHC) complex [6].
Figure 1: T Cell Di↵erentiation An illustration of how T cells di↵erentiate into subsets depending on
co-receptor, MHC Class and cytokine signalling. Created with BioRender.com.
2
==PAGE:12==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
If a na¨ıve T cell recognises the antigen through its TCR, a synapse will be formed, leading
to its activation and di↵erentiation through three signals, illustrated in Figure 1 [7]. Signal I
is generated from the interaction between TCR and pMHC, leading to activation of the na¨ıve
T cell. Signal II is the co-stimulatory signal, promoting survival and expansion of the T cell.
This signal is facilitated by interaction between co-stimulatory molecules on the T cell, such
as CD28, and its associated ligand, CD80/CD86, on the antigen presenting cell (APC). Signal
III is delivered by secretion of cytokines by the APC, which binds speciﬁc receptors on the T
cell, resulting in di↵erentiation of na¨ıve T cells into one of the subsets of e↵ector T cells, also
illustrated in Figure 1 [7].
Na¨ıve CD8+ T cells become cytotoxic T cells, that promote killing of target cells, through
the release of vesicles containing perforin and granzymes [8]. Perforin promotes the formation of
pores in the target cell membrane, thus facilitating the entry of granzymes into the cell. Another
cytotoxic mechanism involves interaction between the FasL on the T cell and Fas on the target
cell, which induces apoptosis of the target cell [8]. Na¨ıve CD4+ T cells di↵erentiate into di↵erent
subsets of helper T cells, including Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17, TFH or Treg, depending on which
type of immune response is needed and induced via the APC cytokine release [9]. In addition,
both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells can di↵erentiate into memory T cells, which are responsible for
raising an augmented immune response at second exposure [10].
1.2
Cancer and Immunotherapy
Cancer is responsible for around 10 million deaths yearly worldwide, making it the second leading
cause of death in the world, only surpassed by cardiovascular diseases [11].
The prominent
number of cancer-related deaths is not only associated with a high number of cases but also
with cancer being challenging to treat. Cancer is a large group of diseases, that are caused by
di↵erent mechanisms. In addition, cancer cells are very heterogeneous, not only among patients
and cancer types but also within the individual patient and tumour. As a result, cancers respond
di↵erently to treatments, meaning there is not a single strategy to prevent or cure them all [11].
It is further complicated by the patient’s genetics, physiology, and lifestyle, which will a↵ect the
development of cancer, as well as the response to treatment [12, 13]. The immune system is
another crucial aspect, as it is designed to detect and eliminate abnormal cells in the body.
3
==PAGE:13==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
However, as these cancer cells arise from normal cells, the immune system is not always
able to recognise the cells, leading to the development of tumours [14]. Cancer cells are further
able to protect themselves from the immune system through a variety of mechanisms, further
complicated by the formation of a hostile tumour microenvironment, illustrated in Figure 2 [15].
Figure 2: Tumour Microenvironment and Escape Mechanisms Tumour cells protect them-
selves from an immune response by various escape mechanisms and by development of a hostile TME, resulting
in suppression of CAR T cells and tumour progression. The illustration is created with BioRender.com with
inspiration from Foeng et. al [16].
Firstly, cancer cells are able to upregulate immune checkpoints, such as PD-L1, on the sur-
face for suppression of T cell activity. Another mechanism is by downregulating the expression
of tumour-associated antigens, MHC molecules, and co-stimulatory molecules (CD80/CD86),
resulting in decreased immunogenicity and T cell activation [17]. The continuous genetic mu-
tations will additionally cause formation of tumour cells, that no longer express neo-antigens
recognised by the immune system, resulting in escape variants [18].
Another escape mechanism involves secretion of tumour-derived soluble factors (TDSFs),
which inhibits the immune response [19].
These TDSFs include chemokines such as CCL2,
CXCL8 and CXCL16, and cytokines such as TGF-beta, IL-6 and IL-10, as well as vascular en-
dothelial growth factor (VEGF), which induces angiogenesis, vascular permeability, and tumour
4
==PAGE:14==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
genesis [20]. TDSFs further stimulate recruitment of immunosuppressive immune cells, such
as regulatory T cells (Tregs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and tumour-associated
macrophages (TAMs), as well as stromal cells such as cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts (CAFs) and
vascular endothelial cells. These cells express inhibitory ligands and secrete factors, that suppress
the e↵ector function of tumour-speciﬁc immune cells and promote angiogenesis, proliferation,
invasion and metastasis of the tumour [15]. Another essential component of the TME is the
extracellular matrix, composed of collagen, ﬁbronectin, elastin and laminin. The extracellular
matrix provides not only a physical sca↵old for cells, but also promotes tumour cell dissemi-
nation by depositing cytokines, growth factors and proangiogenic factors such as VEGF [21].
Collectively, the components of the TME are essential for tumour progression and complicate
the treatment even further.
One approach to overcome these obstacles is by immunotherapy, which aims to boost or
alter the patient’s immune system, making it able to recognise and eliminate cancer cells. Im-
munotherapy is an emerging ﬁeld of cancer treatment and has led to the development of a series of
di↵erent strategies and treatment methods. The most common treatment is immune checkpoint
inhibitors, including anti-CTLA4, anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1, which have shown to be highly
e↵ective against various types of high-mutation rate cancers such as melanoma, non-small cell
lung cancer and breast cancer. The principle behind this therapy is to block inhibitory signals of
T cell activation, thereby enabling tumour-reactive T cells to overcome regulatory mechanisms
and establish an e↵ective response against the tumour [22].
Another branch of immunotherapy is vaccines, which can be further divided into prophylactic
and therapeutic vaccines. Prophylactic vaccines are given to healthy individuals and aim to
protect the body against viruses that cause cancer, such as human papillomavirus (HPV), which
primarily causes cervical cancer, but have been found to attribute to penis-, anal- and mouth
cancers [23]. Therapeutic vaccines are given to cancer patients and help the immune system
recognise cancer-speciﬁc antigens, to induce killing of cancer cells that express the antigens
[24]. Another type of immunotherapy is adoptive cell transfer (ACT), which includes tumour
inﬁltrating lymphocyte (TIL) and gene-modiﬁed T cells expressing engineered TCRs or CARs,
all illustrated in Figure 3.
TIL therapy involves ex vivo expansion of TILs from resected tumour material, followed by
adaptive cell transfer into the patient [26]. TIL therapy relies on pre-treatment in terms of
lymphodepleting chemotherapy, which eliminates the majority of lymphocytes, thus avoiding
5
==PAGE:15==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 3: Adoptive Cell Transfer Therapy ACT comprises several di↵erent branches of therapies.
TIL therapy exploits the patient’s own immune cells, by speciﬁcally expanding the TILs before reinfusion. In
contrast, TCR and CAR therapy rely on genetic engineering of the patient’s T cells to express a TCR or CAR
targeting a desired antigen. The illustration is created with BioRender.com with inspiration from Rohaan et. al
[25].
Tregs and competing cytokines, that might suppress the anti-cancer response. This approach is
supported by murine studies, demonstrating that adoptively transferred cells were more likely
to expand and engraft in vivo upon lymphodepleting treatment [27]. TIL therapy further relies
on subsequent administration of IL-2, as it is essential for T cell growth [25].
The principle behind TCR therapy involves isolation of peripheral blood T cells, which are
genetically modiﬁed in vitro to express TCRs targeting tumour-speciﬁc antigens. The generated
T cells are then administered back to the patient, who has been treated with lymphodepleting
chemotherapy in advance [25]. Recognition of antigens by the modiﬁed TCR relies on antigen
presentation on MHC molecules. A downside to this therapy is that cancer cells tend to down-
regulate their MHC expression, resulting in escape from the T cell mediated immune responses
[25]. CAR T cell therapy enables circumvention of this limitation, as CARs carry the same
e↵ector functions as TCR-modiﬁed T cells, but are independent of MHC-expression [25]. This
will be elaborated further in the following section.
6
==PAGE:16==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1.3
Chimeric Antigen Receptor T cells
CARs are fusion proteins containing four main elements depending on the desired function of the
CAR T cell: 1) an extracellular domain, 2) a hinge region, 3) a transmembrane domain and 4) one
or more intracellular signalling domains as illustrated in Figure 4 [28]. The extracellular domain
is responsible for recognition and binding of antigens and typically consists of the variable light
and heavy chain from a monoclonal antibody, which is connected by a peptide linker, forming
a single-chain variable fragment (scFv) [29]. This allows very speciﬁc and MHC-independent
targeting of antigens, such as proteins or sugar moieties. The orientation of the variable domains
within the scFv, depending on the structure of the scFv being conﬁgured as VL-linker-VH (L/H)
or VH-linker-VL (H/L), might inﬂuence the CAR expression on the T cell surface, but also
whether the CAR T cells properly bind the antigen and signal [29, 30].
Figure 4: CAR Structure Structure of CAR when incorporated in the T cell membrane. The construct
is synthesized by coupling the extracellular domain, a scFv fragment derived from a monoclonal antibody, to a
transmembrane domain via a spacer. To be able to ensure T cell activation, the receptor is connected to one or
more intracellular signalling domains. Created with BioRender.com with inspiration from Rodriguez-Lobato et
al. [28].
The hinge domain is an extracellular structural region, that functions as a spacer, by separat-
ing the binding domain from the transmembrane domain, thereby providing stability for eﬃcient
CAR expression and activity [29]. The hinge domain is also responsible for providing ﬂexibility
to access the targeted antigen. The optimal length of the hinge domain depends on the position
of the speciﬁc epitope that is targeted. Short spacers are e↵ective at binding membrane-distal
epitopes, while long spacers provide more ﬂexibility, thus allowing better access to membrane-
proximal epitopes [29, 31]. The length and composition of the hinge are essential for providing
7
==PAGE:17==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
a suitable distance between the target and the CAR T cell, and can as well, a↵ect the CAR
expression and signalling ability [31]. This clearly illustrates the need for optimizing the hinge
region for individual epitopes.
The transmembrane domain consists of a hydrophobic alpha helix that spans the membrane,
with the main function of anchoring the CAR to the membrane. The domain is often derived
from naturally occurring proteins, including CD4, CD8↵and CD28 [32, 33, 34]. Their impact
on the CAR functionality has not been well studied but may a↵ect synapse formation, CAR
expression, stability, and T cell signalling [29].
The intracellular domain is usually derived
from molecules from the CD28 family (CD28 or ICOS), or the tumour necrosis factor receptor
(TNFR) family (4-1BB, OX40, or CD27) of genes [29]. The CD28 family signals through the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-akt pathway, where ICOS has been found to provide a
stronger activation of PI3k than CD28 [35, 36]. However, the use of CD28 is beneﬁcial, as it leads
to the production of high levels of IL-2, due to recruitment of Brb2 and Lck to its intracellular tail
[37]. The TNFR family signals by recruiting TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF) proteins,
which are involved in T cell proliferation, di↵erentiation, and survival [38, 39, 40, 41].
The most commonly used co-stimulatory endo-domains in CARs are CD28 and 4-1BB. Stud-
ies have demonstrated that CD28 elicit a robust and rapid T cell activation, proliferation, in-
creased glycolysis and cytokine secretion, but the T cell persists for a shorter period [42, 43, 44].
In contrast, 4-1BB leads to a slower T cell e↵ector response and less cytokine secretion but pro-
motes sustained persistence of the T cell and greater oxidative metabolism [45]. Furthermore,
4-1BB signalling is associated with genes that are responsible for the formation of memory T
cells [46, 44]. These diverse features make CD28- and 4-1BB-based CARs suitable for di↵erent
disease settings. The strong e↵ector function and short persistence of CD28-based CARs, allow
rapid tumour elimination which might propose an advantage in the treatment of solid tumours
[47]. For example, Textor et al. demonstrated superior solid tumour attack by CD28-based
CAR T cells compared to 4-1BB [47]. In contrast, 4-1BB-based CAR T cells may be used as
treatment for diseases that require sustained T cell persistence [29, 45]. A parallel comparison
of CD28 and 4-1BB CD19 CAR T cells has been performed in a pre-clinical murine study tar-
geting relapsed or refractory B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and a patient study targeting
B Cell Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma [48, 44]. Both studies found the 4-1BB co-stimulated CAR
T to result in a higher anti-tumour eﬃcacy, while causing less severe adverse events, compared
to the CD28-based CAR T cells[48, 44].
8
==PAGE:18==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1.3.1
CAR T Cell Cytotoxic E↵ector Functions
Similar to B cells and antibodies, CARs recognise antigens independently of MHC molecules.
This implies, that CARs do not require antigen processing and presentation on MHC molecules
on the target cell surface. Hence, CAR T cells target antigens expressed on the cell surface rather
than pMHC complexes. However, this may be a limitation as only about 1% of total cellular
proteins are actually expressed on the cell surface, meaning that a huge number of potential
tumor target antigens are not available to a CAR T cell [8, 49, 50].
When CAR T cells meet their target, engagement between the scFv region of the CAR and
antigen leads to the formation of an immunological synapse. This is followed by downstream
signalling through the intracellular signalling domain, resulting in a complex cascade of T cell
activation, proliferation, survival, and expression of transcription factors [51]. This enables the
CAR T cells to mediate their anti-tumoural e↵ector functions mainly through the perforin and
granzyme axis and the Fas and Fas ligand (FasL) axis, but also by the release of cytokines, as
illustrated in Figure 5 [8].
Figure 5: Killing Mechanisms of the CAR T Cell CAR T cells exploit three strategies in the
killing of cancer cells. (1) By the release of perforin and granzymes upon engagement with the targeted antigen.
(2) By CAR T cells cytokine secretion, sensitising the tumour stroma. (3) Slow-acting killing mechanisms in an
antigen-positive milieu activates Fas and FasL axis, making it possible to kill antigen-negative tumour cells via
the caspase cascade. Figure from Benmebarek et al. [8]
9
==PAGE:19==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Exocytosis of cytotoxic granules containing perforin and granzymes ensures rapid and precise
killing of the target cell [8]. Granules will upon formation of the synapse, migrate to the interface
and fuse to the plasma membrane, resulting in the release of vesicles containing the cytolytic
payload into the synaptic cleft [8]. Perforin induces formation of pores on the membrane of the
target cell, which provides access for granzymes to enter. Within the cytoplasm, granzymes
cleave and activate a series of proteins, such as caspase, thus inducing apoptotic cell death [8].
Fas and FasL are members of the TNF-receptor and TNF family, respectively, and are responsible
for slow-acting killing mechanisms. Ligation of Fas on the target cells with FasL on the CAR
T cells, leads to activation of a caspase cascade, resulting in apoptosis of the target cells [52].
Cytokine secretion by the activated CAR T cell can further enhance the anti-tumoral e↵ect
by boosting adjacent immune cells and direct proinﬂammatory responses through secondary
mechanisms [8, 53].
1.3.2
Generations of CARs
Although the fundamental structure is the same, CARs can be classiﬁed into several generations
depending on the organisation of their intracellular signalling domain(s) as illustrated in Figure
6.
The ﬁrst generation of CARs contains a single CD3⇣or Fc✏RIγ, making them similar to the
endogenous TCR. However, their eﬃciency is limited by insuﬃcient production of IL-2, and must
therefore be supplemented by exogenous IL-2 to obtain an eﬃcient anti-tumour response. In
addition, they were found to have low proliferation and a short lifespan in vivo, which promoted
further development of the co-stimulatory domains. The second generation of CARs contains
an additional intracellular domain, a co-stimulatory domain, such as CD28, 4-1BB or OX40. As
previously described, these co-stimulatory domains deliver signals, that increase proliferation,
cytokine secretion and lifespan of the CAR T cell [54, 55].
Third-generation CARs consist of multiple co-stimulatory signaling domains such as CD3⇣-
CD28-41BB or CD3⇣-CD28-OX40. Even though it enables strong e↵ector functions along with
increased proliferation and persistence, it did not show any signiﬁcant clinical outcome compared
to second-generation CARs [55, 57, 58]. As a result, the fourth generation of CARs, also known
as TRUCKs, is based on the second-generation constructs [59]. However, TRUCKs di↵er from
the second generation by secreting a transgenic payload upon activation signalling.
This is
10
==PAGE:20==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 6: Generations of CAR T cells The CAR structure has evolved to become more complex
in order to ensure better activation and to explore other functions, eg. transcription factor activation. The 1st
generation CARs only contained one intracellular domain, CD3⇣, with the 2nd or 3rd generations containing one
or two co-stimulatory domains linked to CD3⇣. 4th generation CARs are known as TRUCKs. The 4th generation
CARs mimic the structure of the 2nd generation CARs, however, it is further engineered with a NFAT-responsive
promoter, capable of producing and secreting payloads upon CD3⇣-signaling. Created with BioRender.com with
inspiration from Poorebrahim et. al [56].
usually achieved by engineering the CARs with a nuclear factor of the activated T cell (NFAT)-
responsive cassette.
In this way, binding of an antigen will initiate CD3⇣-signalling, which
induces activation of the NFAT minimal promotor, resulting in the production and secretion of
the transgenic protein [59]. The purpose of the payload is to enhance the tumour-speciﬁc immune
response and shape the TME. In particular, transgenic payloads aim to induce epitope spreading,
which involves release of tumour-speciﬁc neoantigens upon CAR T cell induced lysis of cancer
cells. These neoantigens become accessible for APCs to process and present to TILs, inducing a
secondary immune response, as illustrated in Figure 7 [49]. In this way, it becomes possible to
obtain more eﬃcient anti-tumour responses with CAR T cell therapy. This is especially relevant
for solid tumours with high heterogeneity, low mutational burden, and evidence of antigen escape
[49].
Originally, TRUCKs were engineered to secrete a speciﬁc cytokine, but have later been
further developed to secrete other types of payloads such as chemokines, enzymes, checkpoint
inhibitors and bispeciﬁc T-cell engagers (BiTEs) [60]. Especially IL-12 has been widely used,
as it stimulates T cell activation, modulates the immunological and vascular TME and recruits
additional immune cells capable of eliminating cancer cells, that are not recognised by the CAR
T cells [59]. This provides a much broader and stronger anti-cancer response while minimising
systemic side e↵ects, as the payload should only be released within the tumour tissue.
11
==PAGE:21==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 7: Epitope spreading induced by payload secreting CAR T cells CAR T cells
recognise and kill antigen-positive T cells, leading to release of antigens. Secretion of cytokines by TRUCKs
attracts immune cells such as DCs, NK cells and macrophages. DCs are able to present neoantigens to TILs,
leading to recognition and killing of antigen-negative T cells. NK cells and macrophages are able to eliminate
antigen-negative cancer cells by secretion of TNF↵. This results in a broader and more eﬃcient anti-tumour
response. Created with BioRender.com
In particular, a study by Gargett et al.
examined CAR T cells that target the tumour
associated antigen GD2, which is highly expressed in glioblastoma tissue. They demonstrated
e↵ective CAR T cell inﬁltration of the brain and controlled tumor growth in an aggressive
orthotopic xenograft model of glioblastoma. They also demonstrated, that introduction of a
retroviral vector encoding an IL-15 transgene to the GD2 CAR resulted in further improvement
of the tumour control. More speciﬁcally, these CAR-T cells achieved a complete response rate
of 50%, illustrating the promising potential of cytokine-secreting CARs for treatment of solid
tumours [61].
12
==PAGE:22==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1.3.3
Clinical Production of CAR T cells
The manufacturing process of CAR T cells is divided into several main steps as illustrated
in Figure 8. 1) Leukapheresis, to collect peripheral blood mononuclear cells from the patient,
followed by isolation of T cells. 2) T cell activation and expansion. Activation of T cells is carried
out ex vivo, by the use of soluble anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies, anti-CD3/CD28 antibody
coated plate or coated magnetic beads, while expansion is achieved by supplementing IL-2, or
IL-7 and IL-15 [62, 63, 64]. 3) Genetic modiﬁcation of the T cells to obtain CAR expression.
Figure 8: Clinical Production Cycle of CAR T Cells The production of CAR T cells for medical
use involves several steps including T cell isolation, activation, transduction and CAR T cell expansion. Before
infusion of the expanded CAR T cell product, the patient is lymphodepleted, which has been proven to e↵ectively
prolong the persistence of the infused product along with improving the in vivo expansion of the CAR T cell [65].
The illustration is created with BioRender.com with inspiration from Blache et. al [66].
This is usually achieved by transduction with self-inactivating lentiviral vectors, which are
approved for use in the clinic. Genetic modiﬁcation can also be achieved by the use of other
genetic engineering systems, such as retroviral vectors or CRISPR/Cas9 [15, 62]. 4) Expansion
of CAR T cells, in order to obtain a suﬃcient amount of CAR T cells. This is usually obtained
13
==PAGE:23==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
by incubation with IL-2 for several days. 5) Cell harvest, which involves isolation of T cells
by separating them from beads, washing, formulation and transferring into infusion bags [67].
6) Pre-treatment of the patient with lymphodepleting chemotherapy, to minimise competition
from stimulatory cytokines that support proliferation of pre-existing T cells. This is followed by
infusion of CAR T cells into the patient [62].
1.3.4
CAR T Cell Therapy
CAR T cell therapy has shown great results in the clinic, especially for treatment of haema-
tological cancers.
This has resulted in CAR T therapy becoming an emerging ﬁeld within
immunotherapy, and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has currently approved six com-
mercial CAR T products for eight indications [68, 69]. This includes CARs targeting CD19 for
treatment of some leukemia- and lymphoma cancers, and CARs targeting BCMA for treatment
of multiple myeloma [43, 70, 71, 72]. CAR T therapy is comprehensive, expensive and associated
with severe side e↵ects. CAR T therapy is typically attempted after other well-established treat-
ments have been tried and are therefore rarely used as a ﬁrst-line treatment [73]. Furthermore,
many patients will not be able to go through with the therapy, as patients receiving intensive
chemotherapy might not be able to deliver a suﬃcient amount of autologous T cells due to low
numbers of T cells with the optimal proliferative capacity [70, 45, 74]. In order to be o↵ered
CAR T therapy there are several requirements for the medical state of the patient and state of
the cancer, for example, that it must be relapsed or refractory [73].
Unfortunately, CAR T cell therapy has shown limited e↵ect against solid tumours, which
can be explained by the quality, persistence and functionality of the CAR T cells and impor-
tantly by the heterogeneity and immunosuppressive characteristics of the TME [75, 70]. CAR
T cells return to the bloodstream and lymphatics system, explaining their e↵ectiveness against
haematological cancers [76]. In contrast, CAR T cells may not be able to penetrate the tissue
of solid tumours through the vascular endothelium [77]. Tumour tissue tends to overexpress en-
dothelin B receptors, leading to downregulation of intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1),
which prevents T cells from leaving the blood vessels [78]. In addition, the chemokines CXCL11
and CXCL12, that promote migration of CAR T cells, are less expressed in tumour tissue [79].
These characteristics, along with a dense extracellular matrix, limit the penetration of CAR T
cells into the tumour, and thereby the eﬃcacy of the therapy [77, 80].
14
==PAGE:24==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1.3.5
Toxicities and Prevention Strategies
Toxicities pose a barrier that limits therapeutic dosing of CAR T cells. Studies (NCT04249947,
NCT03089203) have demonstrated that increased dosing of CAR T cells resulted in signiﬁcant
anti-tumour activity in solid tumours, but were also correlated with higher patient mortality
[75, 81, 82]. The direct causes leading to the higher mortality are unclear, as CAR T cell therapy
is known to induce toxicity by several mechanisms, where the most common can be seen in Figure
9. Among these, cytokine release syndrome (CRS), is one of the most abundant and can be
observed in up to 9 out of 10 patients, usually within the ﬁrst week after administration [83, 84].
CRS is caused by elevated concentrations of a wide variety of cytokines in the serum, including
IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IFNγ, and TNF↵[84, 85]. The cytokine release is initiated by CAR T cells
and lysis of tumour cells, leading to activation and additional cytokine release by other immune
cells and endothelial cells. CRS can be life-threatening and it is therefore crucial to manage the
symptoms in time, for example by treatment with IL-6 antagonists [84, 86, 87, 88, 89].
Figure 9: Common Toxicities in CAR T Therapy Several di↵erent adverse e↵ects have been
observed in CAR T therapy. These can be divided into on-target on-tumour (CRS), on-target o↵-tumour, o↵-
target o↵-tumour, immunogenicity, genotoxicity, and neurotoxicity. The ﬁgure is created with BioRender.com.
15
==PAGE:25==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
The second most common adverse event is neurotoxicity, more speciﬁcally immune e↵ector
cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS) [90, 89]. Neurological toxicities can occur si-
multaneously with CRS and in the absence of CRS, indicating that neurological events might
be caused by di↵erent and unknown mechanisms [84, 86].
Genotoxicity has also been observed following CAR T cell therapy, and the reason can
be linked to the way the CAR T cell product is engineered[91]. The use of integrating viral
vectors proposes a potential risk of oncogenic insertional mutagenesis, leading to disruption of
normal gene expression, which may result in establishment of malignant CAR T cells [92, 93].
Additionally, CAR T cell therapy has been associated with immunogenicity, as the majority of
the antigen recognition domain of the CAR, is derived from murine monoclonal antibodies [94].
They might therefore be recognised as foreign by the immune system, leading to an allergic
reaction, which can cause severe anaphylaxis [95, 96].
Therefore, it is necessary to execute
diligent surveillance, prompt recognition and immediate treatment. However, it is possible to
minimise the risk of immunogenicity by humanising the scFv region. This should especially be
considered in case of repeated dosing [91].
Other toxicities associated with CAR T therapy include on-target o↵-tumour e↵ects, which
arise if the target antigen also is expressed on healthy tissue. This is observed with anti-CD19
CAR T cells, as it eliminates healthy B cells [97]. Despite this, CD19-targeting CAR T cells are
still approved for clinical use, as B cells are not crucial for survival. However, the lack of B cells
leads to an increased risk of infection, which can be mitigated by immunoglobulin replacement
therapy [98]. Unfortunately, cases have also been reported in which on-target o↵-tumour e↵ects
have led to fatal toxicities, as the target antigen was expressed on cells crucial for survival
[89, 91].
O↵-target o↵-tumour events can also be observed if the CAR T cells cross-react with antigens
expressed on healthy tissue, that is structurally similar to the target antigen. These o↵-tumour
events are very serious and have in some cases been fatal [87]. Several strategies exist to minimize
o↵-targeting. Firstly, by executing an extensive search for expression of a target antigen on
normal tissues during the pre-clinical phase.
Secondly, by testing with structurally similar
antigens and toxicity tests in laboratory animals similar to humans [99]. Toxicities could be
further reduced by giving a local administration of CAR T cells to solid tumours, instead of
systemic administration, as this would additionally eliminate the need for CAR T cells to traﬃc
to the tumour site bypassing healthy tissue [100].
16
==PAGE:26==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Another approach is by developing next-generation CAR T cells, whose expression and ac-
tivation can be controlled more precisely. Examples include Dual CARs, synNotch CARs and
On-switch CARs, illustrated in Figure 10, functioning by engineering the CAR T cells to be
dependent on combinatorial antigen-targeting activation with separate signals. Dual targeting
implies T cells that express two di↵erent CARs targeting two di↵erent tumour-associated anti-
gens. This will ensure that CAR T cell activation only occurs when binding to a tumour cell
[91].
Figure 10: Next Generation CAR T Cells The Dual CAR, synNotch CAR and On-switch CAR are
all developed to overcome shortcomings of the earlier generations of CAR T cells. These are primarily designed
for reduction of on-target o↵-tumour e↵ects. The ﬁgure is created with BioRender.com. with inspiration from
Sun et. Al [91].
SynNotch CARs consist of an antigen-recognition domain, a Notch core, and an artiﬁcial
transcription factor. Ligand recognition will induce cleavage, leading to the release of the intra-
cellular transcriptional domain, that subsequently enters the nucleus and activates expression of
the CAR. The CAR recognises a second antigen, meaning that the CAR T cell will only function
if both antigens are present [91, 101].
Another example of next-generation CARs, is Switchable CARs, where small molecules can
be used to switch the CARs on and o↵. The principle behind this is to split the CAR into two
parts by expressing the extracellular antigen-binding domain separately from the intracellular
signal-transduction domain. Only in the presence of a certain small molecule, the two parts
are able to heterodimerize, which leads to activation of the CAR T cell [91]. To sum up, there
exist many next-generation CARs that aim to minimise toxicities, while maintaining therapeutic
anti-cancer e↵ects.
17
==PAGE:27==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1.3.6
EGFRvIII - A Potential Target for CAR T Cell Therapy against Glioblas-
toma
As previously described, CAR T cells have shown limited e↵ect against solid tumours, due to
tumour antigen heterogeneity and the hostile TME. However, CAR T cells might still represent
great potential for the treatment of some cancers, as it opens up new possible antigen targets,
by recognising surface molecules rather than pMHC complexes. An example is for treatment of
glioblastoma multiform (GBM), which is the most common and aggressive malignant primary
brain tumour in adults [102, 103]. GBM is currently almost impossible to treat, as it spreads
into the surrounding brain, making it challenging to remove the entire tumour with surgery.
Although chemo- and radiation therapy can reach the tumour, the cancer cells are still able
to survive and regrow [103]. The lack of e↵ective therapy for glioblastoma patients, leads to a
median survival period of less than 15 months and 5-year survival rate less than 5 percent after
initial diagnosis, thus illustrating the need for better treatments [104]. CAR T cells might be
a solution to this, as studies have demonstrated that they are able to cross the blood-brain-
barrier and reach the GBM cells [105, 103, 106]. Another essential aspect is the expression of
the mutated version of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), known as EGFRvIII. This
is a tumour-speciﬁc antigen, that often is expressed on glioblastoma, and thereby proposes a
potential target for CAR T cell therapy [107].
EGFRs are transmembrane proteins included in the tyrosine kinase receptor family [108].
EGFR is activated by several ligands, counting epidermal growth factor (EGF), transform-
ing growth factor-alpha (TGF-↵), amphiregulin, betacellulin and epiregulin [107, 109].
The
activation involves binding of a ligand, followed by receptor dimerization. The receptor may
dimerize, even though the ligand is not present, however, these remain inactive until binding
of the ligand[110, 111, 107]. Activation of EGFR is related to several signalling pathways,that
impact various cellular processes, including proliferation, metabolism, apoptosis, cell survival
and di↵erentiation [107, 112, 113].
The EGFR protein consists of 1186 amino acids and is composed of an extracellular domain,
responsible for ligand binding and receptor dimerization (exon 1-16), a hydrophobic transmem-
brane domain (exon 17), and an intracellular domain, with tyrosine kinase activity, that is
ﬂanked by the linker region and the C-terminal part of the receptor (exon 18-28) [114, 115, 107].
18
==PAGE:28==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 11: The Structures of Wildtype EGFR and EGFRvIII. The wildtype EGFR and
EGFRvIII structure di↵ers in the extracellular domain due to a deletion of amino acid 6-273 and an insertion
of a glycine residue at the fusion junction in the EGFRvIII [116, 117]. Figure created with BioRender.com with
inspiration from Yang et al. [117].
EGFR is overexpressed in many types of tumours and is demonstrated to be associated with
resistance to chemo-, radio- and hormone therapy. The receptor is often mutated, especially
in the tyrosine kinase and extracellular domains, which leads to elevated or prolonged EGFR
signalling [107, 118, 119, 120]. This abnormal signalling is responsible for enhanced proliferation
and inhibition of apoptosis of tumour cells, as well as metastasis and angiogenesis.
EGFR
ampliﬁcation is often accompanied by gene rearrangement, which involves the deletion of exons
or exon parts. These variations are characterised by deletion of N-terminal (EGFRvI), deletion of
exon 14 and 15 (EGFRvII), deletion of exon 2-7 (EGFRvIII), deletion of exon 25-27 (EGFRvIV)
and deletion of exon 25-28 (EGFRvV) [121, 122, 123]. These have been observed in several
cancer types, including prostate, breast, colon, and non-small cell lung cancer, but they are
by far mostly present in glioblastomas [107]. The EGFR gene is ampliﬁed in about 50% of
glioblastoma patients, and 50-60% of these cases are accompanied by tumour-speciﬁc EGFRvIII
expression. The deletion of exon 2-7 in EGFRvIII, results in a truncated extracellular domain,
as seen in Figure 11, resulting in the receptor being unable to bind the ligand [107]. However,
studies have shown that the receptor is able to dimerise independently of the ligand, causing
constitutive active signalling. Another study suggests that EGFRvIII additionally is associated
with increased membrane stability compared to the wild type, resulting in further elevated
19
==PAGE:29==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
signalling [107]. Even though the mechanism of action is still not fully understood, EGFRvIII
positive cancer cells are found to be associated with increased invasiveness and proliferation,
compared to EGFRvIII negative cancer cells [124].
Several studies have shown EGFRvIII to be targeted by monoclonal antibodies without
attacking the wildtype EGFR. In addition to EGFRvIII being a tumour-speciﬁc receptor and
therefore not expressed in healthy tissue, it is an ideal therapeutic target for the treatment of
glioblastomas [125, 117]. However, one major limitation of EGFRvIII as a target for CAR T
cell therapy is its heterogeneous expression in glioblastoma tumours, which often leads to escape
variants, that are resistant to targeted therapies [117, 76].
1.4
Viral Delivery and Editing Systems
As previously described in section 1.3.3 Clinical Production of CAR T cells, CAR T cells are
produced by genetic engineering, introducing a transgene into the genome of the T cell. Delivery
of the CAR transgenes to human T cells is most commonly done using lentiviral and gamma
retroviral vectors [126].
Viruses have proven to be eﬃcient vehicles for the delivery of DNA and RNA to target cells.
A major advantage of viral vectors is their high gene delivery eﬃciency, why they are frequently
used in the manufacture of CAR T cells. Viral systems utilize the ability of viruses to inject
their DNA inside host cells. Furthermore, viruses replicate their own genetic material, which
proposes another advantage. Lastly, the structure of the virus also prevents degradation of the
otherwise fragile DNA via the lysosome [127, 128, 129]. Furthermore, retro and lentiviruses have
the ability to establish a persistent gene expression post integration to the host genome [126].
However, in recent years research has been focused on lentiviral vectors, as these besides being
more eﬃcient in infecting cells, are also considered the safer alternative [126].
Compared to gamma retroviruses, lentiviruses contain unique properties allowing them to
infect both dividing and non-diving cells, as they can translocate across nuclear membranes
[130, 126]. Lentiviruses can therefore be said to be independent of host cell proliferation, while
retroviruses are cell-cycle dependent as they infect during mitosis [130, 131].
20
==PAGE:30==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
In regard to safety, gamma retroviruses have been considered non-safe in human clinical
settings, as insertional mutagenesis has led to the generation of secondary cancers in previously
reported cases [126].
As gamma retroviral vectors favour integration in close proximity to
promotors, the transgene was in these incidents integrated near a proto-oncogene. In contrast,
lentiviral vectors favour integration in actively transcribed genes and are therefore considered to
be a safer alternative [126]. Furthermore, non-integrating lentiviral vectors have been developed,
eliminating the integrase activity of the lentivirus, without a↵ecting the reverse transcription
and transport of the pre-integration complex to the nucleus [126].
Limitations to viral delivery and editing systems include the fact that viruses insert semi-
randomly, leading to variable cell-surface CAR expression, as the CAR transgene might integrate
at sites with high or low relative transcriptional activity.
Other systems o↵er delivery and
integration with greater precision along with also being capable of co-delivering multiple genes
[132, 133]. The latter proposes another reason for exploring alternative gene editing systems
such as CRISPR/Cas9.
1.5
Pre-clinical Mouse Models
Immunotherapy has revolutionized cancer therapy, and the use of animal models for research is
crucial for the progress and success of the ﬁeld. However, immunocompetent pre-clinical models
allowing the complexity of the human immune system and cancers are needed to further advance
these therapies.
To maximize translation from animal to human, the model should mimic characteristics
of human cancer in terms of genomic heterogeneity of the tumour and the complex tumour
microenvironment consisting of several immune and stromal cell populations [134]. An ideal
model should be able to be engrafted with a primary human cancer sample from a patient,
while still having an intact immune system in order to study the inherent heterogeneity and
adaptability of the immune system, pharmacology, eﬃcacy and safety proﬁle when treated with
immunotherapy[134]. As of today, it is not possible to investigate all aspects simultaneously,
leaving a critical unmet need for optimal pre-clinical models. In the following subsections, the
most common pre-clinical mouse models available for evaluation of immunotherapy along with
the advantages and disadvantages associated with each model will be reviewed.
21
==PAGE:31==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
1.5.1
Human Xenograft Models
Human xenograft models constitute one of the oldest models for the evaluation of cytotoxic
therapies against cancer. Xenograft models are set up by engrafting established human cancer
cell lines, known as cell line xenograft (CLX) or patient-derived cancer cells, known as patient
derived-xenograft (PDX), into an immunodeﬁcient host, as illustrated in Figure 12. This makes
it possible to evaluate the anti-tumour capacity of the treatment [135, 134]. The level of im-
munodeﬁciency should be considered depending on the study. For engraftment of human cancer
cell lines, athymic nude mice work, however, engraftment of primary human tumours requires
a pre-clinical model with engineered combined immunodeﬁciency, e.g NSG mice [134, 136].
Xenograft models using patient-derived tumour cells make it possible to mimic the complex-
ity of human cancer in regard to natural tumour development, heterogeneity, the architecture
of the tumour and microenvironmental factors, which are needed to be considered in order to
establish an e↵ective in vivo model for therapeutic evaluation. However, the full perspective
of the immunotherapy cannot be observed using xenografts, as the model are immunodeﬁcient
and therefore rely on human immune cells infusions. This limits the possibility of studying the
immune system’s adaptability, epitope spreading, and the eﬃcacy of immunomodulating agents
in combination with cell therapy[134]. Furthermore, a low implantation rate is often observed,
making it diﬃcult to ensure tumour propagation in multiple mice. Lastly, limited access to
haematopoietic blood cells along with the unknown survival time of the patient complicates the
use of this model[134].
1.5.2
Syngeneic Models
To overcome some of the limitations of a xenograft mouse model, a syngeneic mouse model can
be used as an alternative. This model, also illustrated in Figure 12, consists of tumour tissues
derived from the same genetic background as a given mouse strain, which allows retainment of
intact immune systems, making it suitable for immunomodulating therapies, such as checkpoint
inhibitors and CAR T cell therapy [138, 139, 134]. Other advantages involve easy preparation
of tumour-bearing mice, reproducibility, and stable in vivo growth [134]. In addition, it is easy
to establish metastasis models through injection of syngeneic cell lines into the mice, whereas
spontaneous metastasis models have been limited.
Syngeneic cell lines are often genetically
engineered to express speciﬁc antigens, making it possible to examine the e↵ectivity of antigen-
22
==PAGE:32==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 12:
Non-humanized Murine Models for Cancer Research Figure comparing
xenograft and syngeneic mouse models in terms of establishment, biology and their applications and disad-
vantages. The illustration is created with BioRender.com with inspiration from [137].
speciﬁc T cells [134].
However, the model is associated with several disadvantages as well,
including that the cell lines are relatively homogenous, making it diﬃcult to recapitulate the
heterogeneity of human tumours [140, 134]. Another disadvantage is that the cell line can bypass
the immune escape steps and give a less physiological environment, in case a non-syngeneic cell
line is used.
Finally, the cell lines are usually inoculated into subcutaneous space, which is
irrelevant to most human cancers.
Despite this, syngeneic mouse models are still useful in
mechanistic investigation and are the most commonly used pre-clinical models [134].
1.5.3
Humanized Mouse Models
Although xenograft and syngeneic cell line models are useful for understanding the fundamen-
tals of tumour immunology and immunotherapy, the immune system is not human. Humanized
mouse models refer to mice carrying functioning human genes, cells, tissues and/or organs, thus
mimicking the humane immune system and allowing the understanding of the mechanism of im-
munotherapy [141]. To date, several di↵erent humanized tumour models have been developed,
including human knock-in mouse model, immune patient-derived xenograft (iPDX) model, im-
munoavatar model and human hemato-lymphoid system mouse model, as illustrated in Figure
13 [138, 141].
23
==PAGE:33==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 13: Humanized Murine Models for Immunotherapy Research. The ﬁgure illus-
trates some of the most common humanized murine models in cancer research along with their applications and
disadvantages. The illustration is created with BioRender.com with inspiration from [137].
In human knock-in mouse models, speciﬁc murine genes or loci are replaced with the cor-
responding from humans [138, 142]. This allows examination of human proteins, such as MHC
molecules and checkpoint molecules, which enables identiﬁcation of tumour associated antigens
and adverse events of immune therapy. The main drawback of this model, is the immune system
which is still fully murine [138]. In iPDX, severe immunodeﬁcient mice (NSG or NOD/SCID) are
transplanted with primary patient-derived xenograft, meaning the human stroma and immune
cells still exist. This allows examination of the interaction between the tumour and pre-existing
tumour-inﬁltrating immune cells, making it suitable for evaluating the eﬃcacy of various im-
munotherapies. However, this is only possible in a limited time frame, as murine innate cells
partially replace their human counterparts. Additionally, it is not possible to examine the re-
cruitment of circulating lymphocytes [142].
Immunoavatar and human hemato-lymphoid models are developed to overcome this. In im-
munoavatar models, the human immune system is reconstituted by engrafting human peripheral
blood cells (PBMCs) into immunodeﬁcient mice, followed by injection of human tumours or cell
lines. This allows examination of the interaction between tumour and tumour-inﬁltrating cells,
both pre-existing and circulating cells. The primary disadvantage of this model is the short
lifetime of PBMCs and development of human xenograft versus host disease, which is thought
to establish due to MHC mismatch between human T cells and murine cells [138]. However, this
24
==PAGE:34==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
can be minimised by knockout of murine MHC molecules or by depletion of CD4+ cells from
PBMCs prior to engraftment [142].
Human hemato-lymphoid models have been developed to achieve a longer time window.
The model uses CD34+ human hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells to reconstitute
human immune population in immunodeﬁcient mice, followed by engraftment of human tumour
tissue.
The development of a human immune system allows examination of the function of
human immune cells in human tumour tissue, making it suitable for translational studies before
entering clinical trials. One disadvantage, is that the human immune cells may be incomplete and
lack physiological maturity, as they lack human thymus tissue. Additionally, human hemato-
lymphoid models are quite time and cost consuming [142].
In general, humanized mice are
considered the best pre-clinical models to date, but are challenged by the shortage and high
costs of generation of mice and human materials [138]. Finally, these models still need further
improvements, to achieve better translatability from mouse to human, enabling better prediction
of eﬃcacy and safety.
1.6
Mouse-to-Human Translation
Animal models are essential for cancer research, especially due to practical and ethical concerns
associated with human experimentation. However, it remains a challenge to obtain successful
and complete translation from animal models to clinical cancer trials. The main reason for this
is that animal models are limited in their ability to mimic the highly complex process of human
physiology, carcinogenesis, and progression [143]. As a result, the eﬃcacy and safety proﬁle from
animal studies is generally not directly translated into clinical trials. In particular, the likelihood
that a treatment will be e↵ective is usually overestimated in animal models, as negative results
often are unpublished [144, 143].
In regard to immunotherapy, the immune system is crucial for the therapeutic outcome.
Despite similar biological functions of the human and murine immune systems, there exist sig-
niﬁcant discrepancies between them. This includes immune system development, activation,
function and response to foreign, which is caused by the environment and evolutionary diver-
gence. More speciﬁcally, this leads to di↵erences in receptor expression, peptide production,
cytokine signaling, antibody production, and T cell development. This is, in particular, a con-
cern, as the therapies become more targeted and speciﬁc. This has led to a growing awareness of
25
==PAGE:35==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
1
INTRODUCTION
the limitation of animal studies and their inability to produce reliable predictions for human clin-
ical trials. Additionally, it emphasises the need for pre-clinical models with better translatability
[143].
This can for example be obtained with in vivo models, that combine the human immune
system and tumour cells, as it allows better mimicking of their complex interplay [145]. How-
ever, better translatability can also be obtained by alternative pre-clinical models such as in
silico computer modelling and human organ on chips, which simultaneously limits the ethical
concern of animal models. Another strategy is testing therapies in humans directly by use of
micro-dosing. In this case, concentrations are less than one-hundredth of the therapeutic dose,
thus limiting the risk of toxicities. However, it still allows determination of drug distribution,
metabolisation and whether it hits the right target [143]. To sum up, several approaches are in
development to increase translatability, thus providing better prediction of eﬃcacy and safety
of new treatments.
26
==PAGE:36==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
2
AIM
2
Aim
This project aims to set up a syngeneic murine model for in vivo testing of CAR T cells. For
this we will develop murine CAR T cells directed against the EGFRvIII mutation found in a
variety of solid tumours, along with preparing murine tumour cell lines expressing the target
antigen, EGFRvIII. To be able to establish a protocol for the production of murine CAR T cells,
both lentiviral and retroviral systems will be evaluated. Furthermore, several conditions will be
evaluated for optimising transduction eﬃciency, expansion and viability of the ﬁnal murine
CAR T cell product. In order to validate the e↵ect of the CAR T cells, functional assays will be
executed by co-culturing with established target cell lines expressing the EGFRvIII mutation.
The aims of this thesis can be divided into following objectives:
• Develop and optimise a protocol for the production of murine CAR T cells targetting
EGFRvIII in order to increase transduction eﬃciency, expansion and viability.
• Establish target cell lines expressing EGFRvIII and EGFRvIII+Luciferase for evaluation
of the murine EGFRvIII CAR T cells and engraftment in mice
• Establish assays for evaluating the e↵ect of the murine CAR T cells on target cells ex-
pressing EGFRvIII.
• Evaluate the murine CAR T cell product in regards to phenotypic expression using Flow
Cytometry
27
==PAGE:37==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Materials
3.1.1
Cell Lines
The following Table 1 presents the cell lines used in this project. The cell lines were used as
target cells or for generation of virus particles and titration of the virus.
The primary cell
cultures were used for isolation of T cell used in CAR T cell production and murine B cell
isolation.
Cell Line
Describtion
Type
HEK-293T
Fetal embryonic kidney cells transfected with adenovirus 5 DNA
Human
SUPT1
T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma
Human
K562
Erythroid-myeloid precursor from chronic myeloid leukemia
Human
CT26
Colorectal carcinoma originating from the BALB/c strain
Murine
PBMCs
Obtained from healthy donors at Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen
Human
Splenocytes
Obtained from spleens of female Balb/c Jrj mice (8-12 weeks old).
Aquired from Janvier Labs and housed at the Bio Facility,
Department of Health Technology, DTU
Murine
Table 1: Cell lines and primary cultures for producing and evaluating human and murine CAR
T cells.
3.1.2
Constructs and Plasmids
In Figure 14 and 15 construct designs of the CARs used in this project are illustrated. The
constructs are based on a 2nd generation CAR containing a scFV antigen recognition domain,
a hinge domain, a transmembrane domain, a co-stimulatory domain (CD28 or 4-1BB) and an
activation endodomain, CD3⇣. To be able to detect the CAR, a T2A skip element was used to
couple a reporter gene, Green Flourescent Protein (GFP) or mCHERRY to the constructs. In the
lentiviral system (Figure 14), the cassette was designed with the human eukaryotic translation
elongation factor 1 alpha (EF-1a) promotor, known for its constitutive activation, to regulate
the construct expression [146]. The constructs for use in the retroviral system (Figure 15) are
28
==PAGE:38==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
designed using the gag promotor. Construct #85, #86, #1 and #2 are optimised for murine
integration, meaning that the CAR components are of murine origin, e.g mCD3⇣, mCD28,
murine transmembrane domain and hinge region.
Figure 14: Lentiviral CAR constructs The ﬁgure illustrates the construct designs of the lentiviral
vectors containing the CAR.
Figure 15: Murine Retroviral CAR Constructs The ﬁgure illustrates the construct design of the
retroviral vectors containing the murine CAR.
The constructs are delivered to the cells using a viral particle generated from packaging
plasmids and the plasmid carrying the construct. A table describing the plasmids used in this
project can be found in Table 2. DTU Plasmid maps are included in Appendix 1 (Figure 28-38).
29
==PAGE:39==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plasmid name
Describtion
Type
Reference
pRSV.REV
REV expression plasmid
(packaging plasmid)
Mammalian
Addgene
Plasmid #12253
pMDLg/p. RRE
Gag/Pol expression plasmid
(packaging Plasmid)
Mammalian
Addgene
Plasmid #12251
pVSV-G (pMD2.g)
VSV glycoprotein expression
plasmid (packaging plasmid)
Mammalian
Addgene
Plasmid #12259
#7
Luciferase plasmid
Human
DTU Plasmid
#9
EGFRvIII plasmid
Human
DTU Plasmid
#10
EGFR plasmid
Human
DTU Plasmid
#44
EGFRvIII (H/L) CAR
Human
DTU Plasmid
#45
EGFRvIII (L/H) CAR
Human
DTU Plasmid
#85
EGFRvIII (L/H) CAR
Murine
DTU Plasmid
#86
EGFRvIII (L/H) CAR
Murine
DTU Plasmid
#105
EGFRvIII CAR - Optimized
Human
DTU Plasmid
PCL-eco
Gag/Pol expression plasmid
(packaging plasmid)
Mammalian
Addgene
Plasmid # 12371
MiGR11
GFP Construct
Mammalian
Addgene
Plasmid #27490
#1
CD19 CAR
Murine
DTU Plasmid
#2
EGFRvIII CAR
Murine
DTU Plasmid
Table 2: Plasmids Plasmids used for genetic engineering of human or murine T cells and cell lines in this
project.
3.2
Methods
3.2.1
Cell Maintenance
Cell lines, T cells, B cells and CAR T cells were cultured in R10 media, consisting of RPMI
1640 Medium (Gibco #72400047) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated Fetal Bovine Serum
(FBS)(Gibco #10500064) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco #15140122). Cells were cul-
tured at 37 ° in 5% CO2 and 80% relative humidity. The cells were regularly counted using
a LUNA-FL™Dual Fluorescence Cell Counter (Logos Biosystems, L20001), mixing 18 µL of
30
==PAGE:40==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
cell culture with 2µL of Acridine Orange/Propidium Iodide Stain before loading 10µL onto a
counting slide and running the analysis. The results of the counts were analysed and the cells
split in order to maintain optimal cell concentrations.
3.2.2
Transformation of DNA Plasmids
For lentivirus or retroviral production, DNA plasmids deliver the necessary material for the
virus particle along with the construct of interest for the cells to be transduced with, such
as a CAR or antigen target. In order to maintain a stock, the plasmids are re-produced, by
transformation of the DNA plasmids. An overview of the plasmids used in this project can
be found in Table 2. The transformation was executed according to the protocol using One
Shot™Stbl3™Chemically Competent E.coli cells (Invitrogen, C7373-03). The desired plasmid
and a vial of the E.coli cells were thawed on ice. Subsequently, 1-5 µL of plasmid was gently
added to the vial of E.coli and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. After incubation, the vial was
heat-shocked for 45 seconds and then incubated on ice for 2 minutes. Afterwards, 250 µL of
pre-warmed S.O.C media (Invitrogen, C7373-03) was added followed by incubation for 1 hour
at 225 rpm in 37 °C. At last, 25-100 µL of the transformation mix was plated on a pre-warmed
LB agar plate containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin and incubated overnight at 37 °C. One colony
was selected for inoculation in 250 ml pre-warmed LB medium supplemented with 100 µg/mL
ampicillin. The ﬂask was then incubated overnight at 225 rpm at 37 °C.
Puriﬁcation of the DNA plasmids was done using the QIAGEN® Plasmid Plus Maxi Kit
(cat. no. 12963) using the high-yield protocol. First, the bacterial culture was harvested by
centrifugation at 4°C for 15 minutes at 6,000 x g. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet
was completely resuspended in 8 mL Bu↵er P1. Afterwards, 8 ml Bu↵er P2 was added and the
tube was gently mixed by inversion until the lysate appears viscous. The tube was incubated
for 3 min at RT. 8 mL of Bu↵er S3 was added to the lysate and mixed gently by inversion
before the lysate was transferred to a QIAﬁlter Cartridge for incubation for 10 minutes at RT.
Subsequently, the lysate was ﬁltered into a new tube using a plunger into the QIAﬁlter Cartridge.
The cleared lysate was mixed with 5 mL BB Bu↵er by inversion 4-6 times. The lysate was then
transferred to a QIAGEN Plasmid Plus spin column within a vacuum stand. Approximately
–300 mbar vacuum was applied until the liquid had been drawn through. To wash the DNA, 0.7
mL ETR Bu↵er was added along with applying vacuum. The DNA was washed again using 0.7
31
==PAGE:41==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
mL PE Bu↵er and vacuum was applied until the liquid was drawn through the column. Residual
wash bu↵er was removed by centrifugation of the spin column at 10,000 x g for 1 min. The
QIAGEN Plasmid Plus spin column was placed into a clean 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and 100 µL
of EB Bu↵er was added. After 1 minute of incubation, the DNA was eluted by centrifugation
for 1 min at 10,000 x g. Lastly, the concentration of the DNA was measured using a Thermo
Scientiﬁc NanoDrop 1000 Spectrophotometer before storage at -18 °C.
3.2.3
Transfection and Puriﬁcation of Lentivirus
Lentivirus was produced by transfecting HEK-293T cells with a transfer plasmid, encoding the
construct of interest, and three packaging plasmids; pMDLg/p.RRE (Addgene plasmid #12251),
pRSV.REV (Addgene plasmid #12253) and pMD2.G (Addgene plasmid #12259). To obtain
a cell conﬂuence of 60-80% at the time of transfection, 10x106 HEK-293T cells were seeded in
30 mL of Hepes-bu↵ered R10 medium (RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco™72400047) containing 10%
FCS (Gibco™10500064) and 100 U/mL Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco™15140122)) in a T175
ﬂask and incubated overnight at 37°C and 5% CO2.
On the day of transfection, 4.6 mL Opti-MEM I Reduced Serum Medium (Gibco™31985062)
was mixed with 129 µL Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen™L3000001) in one tube (Tube A) and
111 µL p3000 reagent (Invitrogen™L3000001) in a second tube (Tube B). 18 µg of pMDL-
g/p.RRE, 18 µg of pRSV.REV, 7 µg of pMD2.G and 15 µg of the transfer plasmid were added
to Tube B to obtain a DNA master mix. The master mix was then added to Tube A in a drop-
by-drop manner, followed by incubation at room temperature (RT) for 15 minutes, to allow
formation of DNA-lipid complexes.
The medium was removed from the HEK-293T cells and DNA-lipid complexes were added
drop by drop without disturbing the cell layer. The cells were incubated for 15 minutes at 37°
C and 5% CO2, followed by the addition of 30 mL preheated R10 medium. The cells were
stored at 37 °C and 5% CO2 and lentiviral particles were harvested after 24 and 48 hours. The
supernatant containing the viral particles was collected and centrifuged at 500g for 10 minutes.
The clariﬁed supernatant was combined with LentiX Concentrator (Clonentech, #631232) at a
ratio of 3:1 (v/v), mixed gently and incubated at 4°C for 30 minutes or overnight. The mixture
was centrifuged at 1500 x g for 45 minutes at 4°C, and the supernatant was removed. The pellet
was resuspended in 300 µL PBS and samples of 50µL aliquots were stored at -80°C.
32
==PAGE:42==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.2.4
Virus Titration
The functional titer of produced lentivirus stocks was determined in a titration experiment
by infection of SUP-T1 cells followed by ﬂow cytometry analysis to determine the expression of
GFP, which will be present in transduced cells (Gating strategy example illustrated in Appendix
3: Figure 39). The procedure involves transfer of 100 µL R10 medium to 8 wells (A1-H1) in a
96-well plate, followed by addition of 50 µL aliquot of lentivirus to A1, and thorough mixing.
50 uL was transferred between the wells, to create a column-wise 3-fold dilution of the virus. 50
µL of diluted virus from each well was added to 8 new wells, that have been seeded with 20.000
SUP-T1 cells. R10 medium was added to obtain a total volume of 200 µL per well, followed by
incubation at overnight 37°C and 5% CO2. The cells were centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 minutes.
The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in FACS bu↵er (PBS containing
2% FBS). The samples were stained with NIR (Invitrogen, L10119 A) using 0.1 µL pr. well
followed by 30 minutes of incubation. Lastly, the cells were washed three times and analysed
with LSRFortessa™ﬂow cytometer (BD, USA). The functional titer of the lentivirus stock was
calculated by the following formula: Virus titer (TU/mL) = (Number of cells × Fluorescent
cells (%) × Dilution factor) / Transduction volume (mL)
3.2.5
Lentiviral Transduction of Human T cells
Isolation and Activation of Human T cells
EasySep™Human T cell enrichment kit was used for the isolation of CD3+ T cells. A sample
with 5 x 107 cells/mL was prepared and added to a 5 mL polystyrene round-bottom tube.
50 µL/mL of the isolation cocktail was added to the sample, mixed and incubated at room
temperature for 5 minutes. RapidSheres™was vortexed for 30 seconds, then 40 µL/mL was
added to the sample and mixed well. R10 medium was added to reach a total volume of 2.5
mL, and the solution was mixed by pipetting up and down 2-3 times. The tube (without lid)
was placed into the magnet and incubated for 3 minutes. The magnet and tube were inverted
in one continuous motion and the enriched cell suspension was poured into a new tube. The
concentration of the cell suspension was then estimated using a LUNA-FL™Dual Fluorescence
Cell Counter. Subsequently, the cell suspension was centrifuged for 5 min at 500 x g, before
resuspension in R10 media to desired cell concentration.
To ensure suﬃcient expression of
33
==PAGE:43==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
low-density lipoprotein receptor(LDL-R), thereby enhancing the eﬃciency of the infection by
lentiviral particles, T cells were activated 24h prior to transduction by adding anti-CD3/CD28-
coupled Dynabeads™beads (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc, #11161D) in a 1:1 or 3:1 ratio (Beads:T
cell) and 20 IU/mL rhIL-2 (Peprotech, #200-02).
Transduction and Expansion of Human T Cells
At 24h post isolation and activation of the T cells (Day 0), lentivirus was added to the sample
at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5, calculated from virus titration data (Day 1). The T
cells were counted, viability determined and resuspended in R10 media to a concentration of 5
x 105/mL on day 3, 5 and 7 along with adding 20 IU/mL rhIL-2 (Peprotech, #200-02). On day
10 the beads are removed, cells counted and centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 min. Subsequently, the
cells are resuspended in 1 mL freezing media (FBS, 10% Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO)) per 5 x
106 cells. To determine the transduction eﬃciency, the cells were analysed by ﬂow cytometry
between day 5-10.
3.2.6
Isolation, Activation and Transduction of Murine T cells
Isolation and Activation of Murine T cells
Isolation of Murine T cells
Spleens were harvested from female BALB/c Jrj mice (8-12 weeks old) that were acquired
from Janvier Labs and housed at the Bio Facility, Department of Health Technology, Technical
University of Denmark. T cells were isolated from murine splenocytes using a negative selection
isolation kit to enrich either CD8a+ (Miltenyi Biotec, CD8a+ T Cell Isolation Kit, mouse, Cat
no. 130-104-075) or Pan T cells (Miltenyi Biotec, Pan T Cell Isolation Kit II, mouse, Cat no.
130-095-130). First, mice were euthanised and sprayed with 70% ethanol, followed by isolation
of the spleen, which was stored in PBS on ice until use (maximum 2 hours). The spleen was
dissociated by ﬁltration through a 70 µm cell strainer using the end of a syringe plunger into
a 50 mL conical tube. FACS bu↵er was added to reach a total volume of 15-30 mL. The cell
suspension was centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 minutes and the supernatant was removed. Cells
were resuspended in 350 µL FACS bu↵er before adding 100 µL of Pan/Na¨ıve CD8a+ T cell
biotin-antibody cocktail. The sample was incubated at 4°C for 5 min. Subsequently, 300 µL of
FACS bu↵er and 200 µL of anti-biotin were added, mixed well and incubated at 4°C for 10 min.
A LS column was prepared by washing with 3 mL FACS bu↵er before the cell solution were
34
==PAGE:44==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
added to the column. To ensure all cells were transferred 3 x 1 mL FACS were used to wash
the tube and then added to the column. The enriched T cell mixture was counted followed by
centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 minutes. The pellet was resuspended to a concentration of 1 x106
cells/mL in R10 + 1% ITS Liquid Media Supplement (Sigma-Aldrich, I3146).
Plate-based Activation
Coating a plate with anti-CD3 (BioxCell, cat #BE0001-1, clone: 145-2C11) and anti-CD28
(BioxCell, cat#BE0015-1, clone 37.51) was performed 24 hours before activation and stored
at 4°C or 2-4 hours before activation and incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2. A mastermix of
PBS and antibodies was prepared containing the following ratios; anti-CD3 0.5 µg/mL PBS and
anti-CD28 5 µg/mL PBS. The mastermix were added to the preferred well plate. See Table 3
for the amounts added:
Blablalba
6-well plate
12-well plate
24-well plate
48-well plate
5 mL/well
2 mL/well
1 mL/well
0.5 mL/well
Table 3: Plate Preparation Amount of activation mastermix to add using di↵erent plates
Blablalba
Bead-based Activation
Activation of T cells using murine anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads™beads (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc,
#11452D) was done in a 1:1 ratio. The amount of beads needed was calculated based on the
number of isolated T cells. The beads were prepared by washing before being added to the T
cells.
Lentiviral Transduction of Activated Murine T cells
As the protocol was not established and our aim was to optimise the transduction eﬃciency by
lentiviral transduction of murine T cells, di↵erent conditions were tested. T cells were seeded at
a concentration of 1 x 106 cells/mL in a plate. Transduction was conducted at 0 or 24 hours post
activation by adding lentivirus at an MOI of 5 or 10. The amount of virus to add was calculated
from a titration done on the lentiviral batch. LentiBOOST® (Sirion Biotech) was added at a
concentration of 0.25 mg/mL, if added to the samples, in order to access the eﬃciency of the
product. Cytokines, Recombinant Mouse IL-2 (R&D systems, 402-ML-020) and Recombinant
35
==PAGE:45==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mouse IL-7(R&D systems, 407-ML-005) (only during the optimisation phase) were added to
the samples 48h and 72h post activation in a concentration of 10 IU/mL, 20 IU/mL or 100
IU/mL. Cells were counted and resuspended to 1 x 106 cells/mL 24h post transduction, and
every second or third day onwards. The samples were prepared for FACS analysis at least 48h
post transduction.
Retroviral Transduction of Activated Murine T cells
The protocol was established with inspiration from Huang, B., Johansen, K. H., & Schwartzberg,
P. L. (2019) [147]. At 24 hours before transfection, 200.000-350.000 HEK 293T cells in 1.2 mL
R10 media were plated in each well of a 12-well plate, to reach a conﬂuency of 60-80% at the time
of transfection. The transfection mix was prepared by mixing 120 µL prewarmed Opti-MEM I
Reduced Serum Medium (Gibco™31985062) and 3.6 µL prewarmed TransIT-293 Transfection
Reagent (Mirus, cat. no. MIR2700) with 0.8 µg of the plasmid of interest and 0.4 µg pCL-Eco
packaging plasmid (Addgene, cat. no. 12371)) followed by incubation for 30 minutes in RT.
The solution was added dropwise to HEK 293T cells and the plate was gently shaken to disperse
the solution, followed by incubation overnight. At 24 hours post-transfection, murine T cells
were isolated and activated as previously described. In addition, the supernatant was carefully
collected from the transfected HEK 293T cells and stored at 4°C. 1.2 mL of R10 media was
added to each well and cells were returned to the incubator for another 24 hours.
At 48 hours post transfection, the supernatant was carefully collected from the transfected
HEK 293T cells and mixed with the previous supernatant. A transduction solution was prepared
from 1 mL of viral supernatant per 1 x 106 T cells, combined with 8 µg/mL Polybrene and 20
IU/mL rhIL-2 (Peprotech, #200-02). Media was carefully removed from the activated T cells
and the transduction solution was added. The plate was centrifuged for 1.5 hour at 1000 x g
at 35°C. The transduction solution was removed, followed by addition of 20 IU/mL rhIL-2 and
R10 media to reach a concentration of 1 x 106 cells/mL. The cells were incubated at 37°C and
5% CO2 overnight. Subsequent day, cells were lifted from the bottom and counted to determine
the expansion and viability. Cells were transferred to a new plate and 20 IU/mL of rhIL-2 were
added. The cells were kept at a density of 0.5 - 1 x 106 cells/mL and supplied with rhIL-2 every
second day until the assay of interest was conducted or frozen on day 6. Cells were frozen by cell
centrifugation before resuspension in freezing media (FBS + 10% DMSO) at a concentration
of 5 x 106 cells/mL. Samples were frozen in cryotubes and kept in gradual cooling containers
overnight in the -80° freezer before transferring the vials to the liquid nitrogen freezer.
36
==PAGE:46==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.2.7
Isolation of Murine B cells
B cells were isolated from mice splenocytes using a negative selection isolation kit to en-
rich CD19+CD3- B cells (EasySep™Mouse B Cell Isolation Kit, Stem Cell Technologies, Cat
#19854A). First, mice were euthanised and sprayed with 70% ethanol, followed by isolation
of the spleen, which was stored in PBS on ice until use (max. 2 hours). The spleen was dis-
sociated by ﬁltration through a 70 µm cell strainer using the end of a syringe plunger into a
50 mL conical tube. FACS bu↵er was added to reach a total volume of 15-30 mL. The cell
suspension was centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 minutes and the supernatant was removed. Cells
were resuspended to a concentration of 1 x 108 cells/mL, and 20 µL/mL of FcR blocker was
added to the sample, followed by transfer to a 5 mL (12 x 75 mm) polystyrene round-bottom
tube. 50 µL/mL of Isolation Cocktail was added to the sample, mixed and incubated for 10
minutes at RT. RapidSpheres were vortexed for 30 seconds, and 75 µL/mL were added to the
sample, followed by mixing and incubation for 2.5 minutes at RT. Media was added to reach a
total volume of 2.5 mL, and mixed by gently pipetting up and down 2-3 times. The tube was
placed without the lid into the magnet and incubated at RT for 2.5 minutes. The enriched cell
suspension was poured into a new tube, by inverting the magnet, containing the tube, in one
continuous motion. Isolated B cells were then ready to use.
3.2.8
Establishment of Cell Lines
For the establishment of target cells for murine in vitro studies the murine colon carcinoma cell
line (CT26) was used. These cells were transduced with lentiviral vectors encoding the EGFRvIII
antigen (DTU plasmid #9). Some of these cells were further transduced with lentiviral vectors
encoding luciferase (Luc) (DTU plasmid #7), which is useful for further evaluation. In order to
have a negative control, CT26 cells were also transduced with luciferase alone. Transduction of
CT26 cells was performed at di↵erent concentrations of lentivirus to ensure suﬃcient transduc-
tion eﬃciency and proportionate expression while reducing the risk of cell death by adding too
much virus.
37
==PAGE:47==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Additionally, a K562 cell line was used to evaluate the CAR T cells. The K562 cell line is
derived from chronic myelogenous leukaemia and lacks expression of MHC class I and II, which
limits endogenous TCR responses. Furthermore, they are easy to genetically engineer, making
them suitable for the experimental purposes of this project [148]. These were transduced using
the same method as described above to generate target cells expressing EGFR (DTU plasmid
#10) or EGFRvIII (DTU plasmid #9).
3.2.9
Functional and Phenotypic Assays
3.2.10
Flow Cytometry
Flow cytometry can be used to investigate cells by accessing their appearance and expression of
speciﬁc molecules and proteins, thereby allowing for analysis of the physical and phenotypical
characteristics of the cells. In order to di↵erentiate cell populations, the preparation of cells
involves staining with marker-speciﬁc antibodies and/or dyes before analysis. Our CAR con-
structs are engineered to express GFP or mCHERRY, and the expression of these can therefore
be directly correlated with CAR expression. Hence, it is not necessary to stain with antibodies
to determine the CAR-positive population.
Staining
Preparation of cells prior to FACS analysis was conducted in a 96-well plate. The plate was
washed two times by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 min, and resuspended in 200 µL FACS
bu↵er (PBS supplemented with 2% FBS). Subsequently, 10 µL of Fc Block solution (Fc Block
diluted 1:10) was added to each well followed by incubation for 10 minutes at 4°C (Fc Block
only for murine cells). Afterwards, surface staining was done by adding 30 µL of Master Mix
to each well, containing the appropriate concentration of desired marker-speciﬁc ﬂuorescent
antibodies, Near Infrared (NIR) and FACS bu↵er, followed by 30 minutes of incubation at 4°C.
Next, excess antibodies/dye were removed by washing three times by centrifugation at 500 x g
for 5 min, the supernatant discarded and resuspension in 200 µL FACS bu↵er before analysis
on a LSRFortessa™ﬂow cytometer (BD, USA). The staining antibodies used in this project can
be found in Appendix 2: Table 4.
38
==PAGE:48==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Staining of EGFRvIII
To detect expression of EGFRvIII on target cells, the cells were stained with primary and
secondary antibodies prior to ﬂow cytometry analysis. First, the target cells were placed in a
96-well plate and washed twice with FACS bu↵er. The target cells were then resuspended in
the antibody solution, containing 1 µL of primary antibody (RM419) and 99 µL of FACS bu↵er
per well, followed by incubation at 4°C for 30 minutes. After incubation, the cells were washed
twice with FACS bu↵er, followed by resuspension in the antibody solution, containing 1 µL of
secondary antibody (A10931) and 99 µL of FACS bu↵er per well. The target cells were washed
two more times with FACS bu↵er, and were then ready for further analysis.
Compensation
To reduce spectral overlaps between ﬂuorochromes when analysing cells using multi-colour an-
tibody panels, a compensation was run and calculated by FACSDiva software (BD, USA) prior
to sample analysis on the LSRFortessa™ﬂow cytometer (BD, USA). OneComp eBeads™(Ther-
moﬁsher, #01-1111-41) were prepared for each ﬂuorochrome/antibody by staining one drop of
beads with 1µL antibody followed by incubation for 10 minutes at RT. Subsequently, the beads
were washed two times by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 minutes and resuspension in 200 µL
FACS bu↵er.
NIR compensation beads were prepared using ArC™Amine Reactive Compensation Bead
Kit (Thermoﬁsher, #A10346). One drop of ArC™Amine Reactive beads was mixed with 1 µL
of NIR dye and 100 µL PBS followed by incubation for 30 minutes at 4°C. Afterwards, the beads
were washed twice in 2 mL PBS by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 minutes. Lastly, one drop of
ArC™Amine Negative beads was added and mixed followed by the addition of 200 µL FACS.
Data Analysis
The ﬂow cytometry data were acquired from the LSRFortessa™ﬂow cytometer (BD, USA) by the
use of FACSDiva software. The FCS ﬁles were imported and analysed using FlowJo™software
(BD, USA).
Cell Sorting
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) is a specialized type of ﬂow cytometry, that allows
sorting of heterogenous cell mixtures, based on speciﬁc light scattering and ﬂuorescent charac-
teristics of each cell [149]. Transduced target cells were sorted to achieve cell lines with high
expression of the speciﬁc protein, EGFRvIII or Luc. Cells were prepared by as described in
39
==PAGE:49==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
the staining section above, however as the cells are cultured after sorting, the preparation was
executed in sterile surroundings. Cells were sorted with FACSMelody™ﬂow cytometer (BD,
USA) at a droplet frequency of 30,000 droplets/seconds and 100-1,000 cells/mL using a 100µm
nozzle. Prior to cell sorting, the droplet was calibrated by use of AccuDrop™(BD. USA) beads.
Unstained control cells were prepared and analysed to set the gates for cell sorting, making it
possible to identify and isolate cells with the desired expression. CT26/K562 cells expressing
luciferase were detected by measuring the PE-CF594 signal, as the luciferase constructs (#7)
are encoded with mCHERRY. The cells of interest were isolated and collected in tubes with R10
media. The sorted cells were resuspended in media at a concentration of 5x 105 cells/mL and
cultured at 37°C for 1-3 weeks before they were used for further experiments.
3.2.11
Degranulation and Activation Assays
Degranulation and activation assays were performed to assess the functionality of CAR T cells
upon interaction with target cells. The experimental set-up involved seeding of target cells and
e↵ector cells in plates. For evaluation of EGFRvIII CAR T cells, CT26 (wildtype (WT) or
EGFRvIII) and K562 (WT, EGFR or EGFRvIII) cancer cells were used as target cells. As
CT26 cancer cells are adherent, they were seeded the day before in a 24-well plate with 60,000
cells in each well. On the day of the assay, 60,000 K562 cancer cells in were seeded in 50 µL
R10 media. E↵ector cells (EGFRvIII CAR T cells and untransduced (UTD) T cells) in 50 µL
R10 media were added to the target cells in a 1:1 ratio. To assess CD19 CAR T cells, freshly
isolated murine B cells were used as target cells, and 100,000 cells were seeded in a 96 well-plate
together with e↵ector cells (CD19 CAR or UTD T cells) in a 1:1 or 3:1 (target:e↵ector) ratio.
In both assays, positive (anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads™beads (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc, #11452D)
3:1 ratio) and negative (R10 Media) controls were prepared with e↵ector cells only (60,000
(EGFRvIII CAR or UTD T cells) or 100,000 (CD19 CAR or UTD T cells)). For degranula-
tion analysis, anti-CD107a antibodies were added simultaneously with target and e↵ector cells
mixing. The cells were then incubated at 37°C for 4-6 hours and expression of the degranula-
tion marker, CD107a, was determined by ﬂow cytometry. For the activation assay, cells were
cultured for 21 hours at 37°C, and expression of the activation markers, CD25 and CD69, was
determined by ﬂow cytometry.
40
==PAGE:50==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
4
Results
This thesis aims to establish a syngeneic mouse model for evaluating CAR T cells and TRUCKs
for treatment of solid tumours in vivo.
The following section contains the results from the
production of human and murine CAR T cells, establishment of murine cancer cell lines, a
phenotypic analysis of the CAR T cells and a functional evaluation of the murine CAR T cell
product after co-culturing with target cells.
4.1
Establishment of CAR T cells
It was attempted to use a lentiviral system for production of murine CAR T cells, as lentiviral
transduction ensures safe and eﬃcient delivery and integration of CARs to human T cells, as
described in subsection 1.4 Viral Delivery and Editing Systems [150]. In addition, materials,
constructs and an optimised protocol for lentiviral transduction had already been established
with great eﬃciency in our research group.
4.1.1
Comparing Constructs, Time of Transduction and LentiBOOST® Addition
The ﬁrst experiment aimed at testing the protocol set-up based on a literature search, while eval-
uating the impact on CAR transduction eﬃciency under several di↵erent conditions, including
time of transduction, constructs, and the usage of LentiBOOST® (Sirion Biotech), a lentiviral
transduction enhancing agent. Murine T cells were transduced with EGFRvIII CAR (H/L)
(Plasmid #44) or EGFRvIII CAR (L/H) (Plasmid #45) at MOI 10 using the method described
in subsection 3.2.6, followed by ﬂow cytometry (See gating strategy from this experiment in
Appendix 3: Figure 40). The results are illustrated in Figure 16A+B.
The transduction eﬃciencies were in general low, as they ranged from around 0% to 13%
(Figure 16A). The highest transduction eﬃciency was obtained with EGFRvIII CAR (L/H),
transduced at 24 hours post activation and in the presence of LentiBOOST®. Due to the lack
of both technical and biological replicates, a statistical analysis comparing the CAR transduction
eﬃciency in CD3+ cells between samples could not be executed. However, the results indicate
that LentiBOOST® enhance the transduction eﬃciency, and construct EGFRvIII CAR (L/H)
is more easily transduced compared to EGFRvIII CAR (H/L).
41
==PAGE:51==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Figure 16: Lentiviral transduction eﬃciency of murine T cells. A) The percentage of CD3+
T cells that expressed the CAR under various conditions, including type of construct, time of transduction, and
usage of LentiBOOST®. B) The percentage of CD4+ or CD8+ T cells, that expressed the CAR under various
conditions, including type of construct, time of transduction, and usage of LentiBOOST®. C) The percentage
of CD3+ T cells that expressed the CAR under various conditions, including time of transduction, and usage of
LentiBOOST® and cytokine concentration. Statistical analysis (One-Way ANOVA) has been performed, but
for simplicity only signiﬁcant di↵erences of LentiBOOST are shown in plot. D) The percentage of CD3+ T cells
that expressed the CAR under various conditions, including type of construct and mode of activation. Signiﬁcant
outcome of the statistical analysis (One-way ANOVA) is shown in the plot. ***P 0.001, **** P 0.0001.
In addition to exploring the CD3+ transduction eﬃciencies, it was examined whether any of
the T cell subtypes, CD4+ or CD8+, were more easily transduced. By staining with CD4+ and
CD8+ targeting antibodies it was possible to visualize their individual transduction eﬃciencies.
As illustrated in Figure 16B, a larger fraction of the CD4+ T cells were transduced with the
CAR constructs compared to CD8+ T cells in all samples.
42
==PAGE:52==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Comparing LentiBOOST®, time of transduction and cytokine concentration
A similar experiment was conducted to conﬁrm observations from the ﬁrst experiment and to
examine the inﬂuence on transduction eﬃciency of other conditions, including higher cytokine
concentrations (IL-2 / IL-7) and activation with anti-CD3/CD28-coated DynaBeads in contrast
to anti-CD3/CD28 plate-based activation. This experiment was executed using only construct
(EGFRvIII CAR (L/H)), due to insuﬃcient amounts of EGFRvIII CAR (H/L) virus.
The
results are illustrated in Figure 16C.
The transduction eﬃciencies achieved in this experiment were generally lower, ranging from
around 0.3% to 3%. As shown in Figure 16C, an increased transduction eﬃciency was observed
in the samples containing LentiBOOST®. A statistical analysis (One-Way ANOVA) displays
signiﬁcant di↵erences (P-values 0.0001) among all samples containing LentiBOOST® com-
pared to their counterparts without LentiBOOST®. In contrast to the ﬁrst experiment, the
statistical analysis showed that transduction at the time of activation (0h transduction) is signif-
icantly better than at 24 hours post activation, but only in the presence of LentiBOOST® (p=
0.0032 and 0.0034). Similarly, a high concentration of murine IL-2 and IL-7 increased the trans-
duction eﬃciency compared to a low concentration, but only in the presence of LentiBOOST®
(Figure 16C). Again, results indicated that CD4+ T cells were more easily transduced compared
to CD8+ T cells (data not shown).
Comparing Mode of Activation
To directly compare anti-CD3/CD28 plate- and bead-based activation of T cells prior to trans-
duction and to evaluate the e↵ect on transduction eﬃciency, a third experiment was conducted.
The samples were transduced at 24 hours post activation using a high concentration of murine
IL-2/IL-7 cytokines (100 IU/mL). Similar to the ﬁrst experiment, we also compared constructs
EGFRvIII CAR (H/L) and EGFRvIII CAR (L/H).
As shown in Figure 16D, the transduction eﬃciencies of the samples were similar to the
results displayed in Figure 16A+C, with the exception of one outlier (bead activated EGFRvIII
CAR (H/L)). All samples transduced with the EGFRvIII CAR (H/L) had very low viability,
ranging from 2% to 20%, compared to UTDs and EGFRvIII CAR (L/H) transduced cells (data
not shown), which may explain the outlier.
43
==PAGE:53==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
4.1.2
Comparing Lentiviral Transduction in Murine and Human T cells
To exclude the possibility of the low transduction eﬃciency being caused by ineﬃcient virus,
and thereby conﬁrm that lentiviral transduction is unsuitable for murine T cells, an experiment
was established comparing transduction of murine and human T cells (Gating strategy is found
in Appendix 3: Figure 40+41). Four di↵erent constructs were examined including EGFRvIII
human CAR (H/L) (Plasmid #44), EGFRvIII human CAR (L/H) (Plasmid #45), EGFRvIII
murine CAR (H/L) (Plasmid #85) and EGFRvIII murine CAR (L/H) (Plasmid #86). Ideally,
all samples were transduced with the same virus batches, but this was not possible due to
limited amount of virus. However, as the viral titer was established beforehand, they were still
comparable. The transduction eﬃciencies of human T cells ranged from 43% to 59%, while it
ranged from 1% to 5% for murine T cells, as shown in Figure 17A (human T cells) and Figure
17B (murine T cells).
Figure 17: Lentiviral transduction eﬃciency and expansion of human and murine T
cells. A) The percentage of human CD3+ T cells that expressed the CARs upon transduction with 4 di↵erent
lentiviruses (24-hour batches) at MOI 5. B) The percentage of murine CD3+ T cells that expressed the CARs
upon transduction with 4 di↵erent lentiviral vectors at MOI 5 or MOI 10. C) Comparison of CAR expression
in human and murine T cells upon transduction under comparable conditions. hCAR = human CAR, mCAR
= murine CAR. D+E) Expansion of human and murine CAR T cells using anti-CD3/CD28 beads for initial
activation, followed by media and rhIL-2 supplement at day 0, 3 and 5 (murine) or day 0, 3, 5, 7 and 10 (human),
which is illustrated by total number of cells (D) and number of population doublings (E).
44
==PAGE:54==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Human T cells are usually transduced at a MOI of 5, while murine T cells are transduced
at a MOI of 10. To have comparable conditions, some murine T cells were transduced at MOI
5, which is illustrated in Figure 17C. Human CD3+ T cells reached 52.7%, 59.4%, 42.5% and
57.3% for EGFRvIII human CAR (H/L), EGFRvIII human CAR (L/H), EGFRvIII murine
CAR (H/L) and EGFRvIII murine CAR (H/L), respectively, while their murine counterparts
reached 2.2%, 1.2%, 2.0% and 5.3%.
It was not possible to make a statistical analysis of these, as there are no technical or bio-
logical replicates. However, a discrepancy in transduction eﬃciency is clearly observed between
human and murine T cells. The expansions of murine and human T cells were monitored from
the day of activation (day 0) and the following 5 days for murine T cells and 10 days for human
T cells, as shown in Figure 17D. For better comparison, the number of population doublings
was determined and is illustrated in Figure 17E. The plot shows that the murine T cells had a
higher expansion rate compared to human T cells, which probably is correlated to the limited
proportion of CAR-positive murine T cells.
4.1.3
Lentiviral Transduction of Human T Cells
As lentiviral transduction of murine T cells was limited, we aimed to evaluate the functionality
and eﬃciencies of the three di↵erent EGFRvIII CARs by killing, activation and/or degranulation
assays, using human T cells, to determine the better CAR construct. To do this, batches of
human T cells expressing EGFRvIII CAR (H/L), EGFRvIII CAR (L/H) and EGFRvIII CAR
s10C (Plasmid #105) were produced. EGFRvIII CAR (H/L) and EGFRvIII CAR (L/H) T
cells were made with both technical and biological replicates (BC-418, BC-420 and BC-422),
while EGFRvIII CAR s10C only had technical replicates (BC-418). As shown in Figure 18A,
the transduction eﬃciencies were quite similar for all three constructs ranging from 42% to 54%.
The expansion of the T cells was monitored from the day of activation (day 0) and the following
10 days, which is illustrated in Figure 18B+C (Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure
41). In general, the expansion rates were quite similar, but EGFRvIII CAR (L/H) expands the
least, making the sample protrude slightly.
45
==PAGE:55==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Figure 18: Lentiviral transduction eﬃciency and expansion of human T cells.
A)
The percentage of human CD3+ T cells that expressed the EGFRvIII CARs upon transduction with 3 di↵erent
constructs. B+C) Expansion of CAR T cells using anti-CD3/CD28 beads for initial activation, followed by media
and rhIL-2 supplement at day 0, 3, 6, 8 and 10, which is illustrated by total number of cells (B) and number of
population doublings (C).
4.2
Retroviral Transduction of Murine T cells
The aim was to achieve suﬃcient transduction eﬃciencies of murine T cells, and as the lentiviral
transduction system seemed unsuitable for murine T cells, a retroviral system was tested instead.
Retroviral vectors are commonly used for transduction of murine T cells, as they have proven
more eﬃcient than lentiviral vectors [151]. The retroviral transduction was conducted using
the protocol described in subsection 3.2.6 Retroviral transduction of activated T cells, with
inspiration from the method described by Huang et al. [147]. Initially, the retroviral transduction
protocol and optimisation were conducted using a MiGR1 GFP construct.
4.2.1
Retroviral Transduction Protocol Establishment with GFP Construct
For optimisation purposes, the usage of 0.5 mL or 1.0 mL of supernatant per 1 x 106 CD8+
T cells were compared (Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 42). As shown in Figure
19A, the transduction eﬃciencies for samples with 0.5 mL of supernatant were between 21% and
30%, while the transduction eﬃciencies for samples with 1.0 mL of supernatant were between
38% and 46%. A di↵erence between the conditions is clearly observed but also conﬁrmed by the
statistical analysis (One-Way ANOVA), thus indicating that 1.0 mL of supernatant is preferable
compared to 0.5 mL (p-value=0.002).
46
==PAGE:56==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
The experiment was repeated, to demonstrate that the results are reproducible. However,
pan T cells were isolated, instead of only CD8+, as CD4+ T cells are also important for im-
munotherapeutic purposes. In addition, it was investigated whether 1.5 mL viral supernatant
per 106 T cells leads to a higher transduction eﬃciency. As demonstrated in Figure 19B, the
highest transduction eﬃciency was achieved with 1.5 mL supernatant with an average of 54%,
while the average was 49% and 41% for 1.0 mL and 0.5 mL, respectively. The statistical analysis
(one-Way ANOVA) showed signiﬁcant di↵erences between all transduced samples compared to
the UTDs, but no signiﬁcant di↵erences between the transduced samples.
Figure 19: Retroviral transduction eﬃciency with GFP construct and expansion
of murine T cells.A) The percentage of murine CD8+ T cells that expressed the GFP upon transduction
with 0.5 mL or 1.0 mL viral supernatant per 106 T cells. Signiﬁcant outcome from statistical analysis (One-
Way ANOVA) is shown in the plot. B) The percentage of murine CD3+ T cells that expressed the GFP upon
transduction with 0.5 mL, 1.0 mL or 1.5 mL viral supernatant per 106 T cells. Signiﬁcant outcome from statistical
analysis (One-way ANOVA) is shown in the plot. C+D) Expansion of CAR T cells using anti-CD3/CD28 coated
plate for initial activation, followed by media and rhIL-2 supplement at day 1, 2, 4, 6 and 8, which is illustrated
by total number of cells (C) and number of population doublings (D). *P 0.05, **P 0.01, ***P 0.001 and
****P 0.0001.
47
==PAGE:57==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
To see how the T cells respond to the three di↵erent concentrations of viral supernatant,
their expansion was monitored from the day of activation (day 0) and the following 8 days. The
T cells were supplemented with media and rhIL-2 on the days of counting, and their expansion
is illustrated by the total number of cells in Figure 19C and the number of population doublings
in Figure 19D. The total number of cells decreased for all samples, including UTDs, the day post
transduction (day 2). The total number of cells peaked on day 4 for all samples but stagnated
the following days. More importantly, this data indicates that a high concentration of viral
supernatant does not negatively a↵ect the expansion and survival of the cells.
4.2.2
Retroviral Transduction with EGFRvIII CAR and CD19 CAR
After the establishment of an optimised retroviral transduction protocol, murine CAR T cells
were produced using the EGFRvIII CAR contstruct (Plasmid #2), with the purpose of evalu-
ating if the protocol was suitable for transduction of larger constructs.
Based on results from the two previous retroviral experiments, samples were prepared by
seeding 1 x 106 pan T cells and using 1.5 mL of viral supernatant. As shown in Figure 20A,
transduction eﬃciencies of CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells range from 23-51%, 31-58% and
16-32%, respectively (Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 43). This indicates that
CD4+ T cells are more easily transduced than CD8+ T cells, conﬁrming observations from the
lentiviral transduction.
Figure 20: Retroviral transduction eﬃciency with EGFRvIII CAR construct and
expansion of murine T cells.A) The percentage of murine CD3+ T cells that expressed the EGFRvIII
CAR upon transduction with 1.5 mL viral supernatant per 106 T cells. B+C) Expansion of CAR T cells using
anti-CD3/CD28 coated plate for initial activation, followed by media and rhIL-2 supplement at day 1, 2, 4, 6 and
8, which is illustrated by total number of cells (B) and number of population doublings (C).
48
==PAGE:58==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
As illustrated in Figure 20B+C, expansion of the T cells was monitored from the day of
activation (day 0) and until day 6. On day 2 (the day after transduction), a signiﬁcant drop was
observed in the total number of T cells for both transduced and UTDs. Most samples heavily
expanded the following day, in particular the CAR T cells, with most samples reaching a total
cell count of about 3 x 106. The total number of UTDs was generally slightly lower, but one
sample inﬂuences the average with a total cell count of 125.000 on day 6.
To conﬁrm that the retroviral protocol was suitable for transduction of murine T cells with
larger constructs, T cells were transduced with either the EGFRvIII CAR again or CD19 CAR
(Plasmid #1). The EGFRvIII CAR were our main focus, but as we had a CD19 CAR construct
available, we used it to conﬁrm, that we had established a comprehensive retroviral protocol
that provided eﬃcient transduction independent of the construct. Additionally, it was investi-
gated how the mode of activation a↵ected the transduction eﬃciency, survival, expansion, and
phenotype of the T cells.
bababa
Figure 21: Retroviral transduction eﬃciency and expansion of murine T cells.A) The
percentage of murine bead or plate-activated CD3+ T cells that expressed the EGFRvIII CAR and CD19 CAR
upon transduction with 1.5 mL viral supernatant per 106 T cells. Signiﬁcant outcome from statistical analysis
(One-Way ANOVA). B+C Expansion of CAR T cells using anti-CD3/CD28 coated plate for initial activation,
followed by media and rhIL-2 supplement at day 1, 2, 4, 6 and 8, which is illustrated by the total number of cells
(C) and the number of population doublings (D). *P 0.05.
As shown in Figure 21A, the transduction eﬃciencies plate activated T cells with the
EGFRvIII CAR was 44%, while it was 34% for bead-activated T cells (Gating strategy found
in Appendix 3: Figure 43). Quite similar results were obtained for CD19 CAR T cells, as the
transduction eﬃciencies were 44% and 41% for plate and bead-activated T cells, respectively.
49
==PAGE:59==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
From these results, it would seem that plate-activated T cells are slightly better transduced
than bead-activated T cells, although no signiﬁcant di↵erence was observed from a statistical
analysis (One-Way ANOVA) comparing the mode of activation (not shown).
Expansion of the T cells was monitored from the day of activation (day 0) and the following
6 days, as shown in Figure 21B. The samples were seeded with di↵erent numbers of T cells,
making it diﬃcult to compare the expansion. For better comparison, the number of population
doublings has been calculated and illustrated in Figure 21C. From this ﬁgure, plate-activated
EGFRvIII CAR T cells and UTDs showed the greatest expansion. The number of population
doublings of EGFRvIII (beads), CD19 (plate) and CD19 (beads) was very similar, while it was
signiﬁcantly lower for bead-activated UTDs.
4.3
Establishment of CT26 Cancer Cell Lines for CAR T in vitro Functional
Evaluation and in vivo Engraftment
CT26 is a murine colorectal carcinoma cell line derived from the BALB/c mouse. It is charac-
terised by being highly immunogenic and is one of the most commonly used syngeneic tumour
models, making it a good starting point for our mouse model. To generate target cell lines for
EGFRvIII CAR T cell functional evaluation, CT26 was transduced with the EGFRvIII antigen
(DTU plasmid #9). To achieve optimal transduction eﬃciency while avoiding cell death, three
di↵erent volumes of concentrated lentivirus were used. As shown in Figure 22A+C, the trans-
duction was eﬃcient with all virus concentrations, as the transduction rate ranged from 77%
to 92% (Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 44). The transduction rates increased
proportionally with the volume of virus, without a↵ecting the viability of the cells.
To establish target cell lines for in vivo engraftment, the CT26 WT and CT26+EGFRvIII
were transduced with Luc (DTU Plasmid #7). Integration of luciferase makes it possible to
visualise the tumour in vivo by bioluminescence imaging. Bioluminescence is produced by the
conversion of chemical energy into visible light by a luciferase-mediated reaction with D-Luciferin
which is injected prior to imaging. The observed signal correlates with the amount of luciferase
produced by target cells, enabling measurement of tumour growth [152].
50
==PAGE:60==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Figure 22:
Lentiviral transduction eﬃciency CT26 cancer cells.A) The percentage of
CT26 WT cancer cells that expressed the EGFRvIII antigen upon transduction at a low, medium and high
concentration of lentivirus. B) The percentage of CT26 WT or CT26+EGFRvIII cancer cells that expressed the
Luc upon transduction at a low, medium and high concentration of lentivirus. C) Flow cytometry analysis of
CT26 WT cells transduced with 50 uL EGFRvIII. D) Flow cytometry analysis of CT26 WT or EGFRvIII cells
transduced with 25 uL Luc.
Similar to the transduction of the EGFRvIII antigen, CT26 cells were transduced with three
di↵erent volumes of concentrated virus. As shown in Figure 22B+D, there was a clear di↵erence
between the three concentrations for both CT26 WT and CT26+EGFRvIII, ranging from 53%-
89% and 23%-80%, respectively (Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 45). The highest
eﬃciency was achieved with the highest volume of virus, with no inﬂuence on cell viability. The
transduced cell lines were subsequently bulk sorted on a FACSMelody™ﬂow cytometer (BD,
USA). Due to limited time, it was not possible to engraft the cell lines in vivo.
4.4
Expansion and Evaluation of Thawed Murine T Cells
To examine whether a murine CAR T cell product could be frozen and stored at -80°C for later
use, a batch of UTDs and transduced (GFP construct) murine T cells were frozen 8 days post
activation. The vials were thawed, followed by counting and expansion by supplement of R10
media and rhIL-2 for 14 days. To test how reactivation a↵ects viability and expansion, samples
were divided in two, with one of them activated using an anti-CD3/CD28-coated plate. The
expansion data is visualised by the total number of cells and number of population doublings in
Figure 23A and 23B, respectively.
51
==PAGE:61==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Figure 23: Expansion of thawed T cells. A+B) Expansion of transduced (GFP construct) T cells
and UTDs upon freezing and thawing. UTD (activated) and Transduced T cells (activated) were activated at day
of thawing (day 0) by using aCD3/aCD28 coated plate. All samples were supplemented with media and rhIL-2
supplement at day 0, 2, 6, 10, 12 and 14. Expansion is illustrated by total number of cells (A) and number of
population doublings (B).
Day 0 represents the total cell count on the day of thawing. Half of the cells died in the
freezing and thawing process (viability of 49%-58%). Furthermore, around half of the reactivated
cells died from day 0 to day 2 (viability of 27%-44%), while the cells that had not been activated,
almost maintained their population size (viability of 45%-59%). As illustrated in Figure 23, it
was possible to expand and achieve population doubling for the reactivated cells for up to 12
days, but by day 14, the total number of cells decreased signiﬁcantly even though a viability
of 57%-82% was observed. The viability of the unactivated cells was 30-40% consistently, with
total cell numbers decreasing over time.
4.5
Phenotypic Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells
To gain insight into the characteristics of the T cells, their phenotype was examined before
and after activation/transduction. Newly isolated T cells (preactivated), untransduced, CD19
CAR and EGFRvIII CAR T cells (bead or plate activated), were evaluated in regard to their
CD44 and CD62L expression by ﬂow cytometry analysis. Plate-activated EGFRvIII CAR and
untransduced T cells had biological replicates while the remaining had only technical replicates.
Figure 24 illustrates the phenotypic distribution based on the expression of CD44 and CD62L
(Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 43).
52
==PAGE:62==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Figure 24: Phenotype distribution of murine T cells.The phenotype distribution observed in
newly isolated (preactivated), UTDs, CD19 CAR or EGFRvIII CAR T cells (bead or plate activated), which is
determined by the expression of CD44 and CD62L.
The e↵ector phenotype is CD44-positive and CD62L-negative, the na¨ıve phenotype is CD44-
negative and CD62L-positive, while the central memory phenotype can be found as the double
positive population. This analysis showed that the central memory phenotype was dominant
in all samples, ranging from 57-70%. The e↵ector phenotype was the second most abundant
for all samples, except plate-activation UTDs and bead-activated EGFRvIII CAR, where the
na¨ıve phenotype was more abundant. There were no observations of a clear correlation between
phenotype distribution and the conditions.
4.6
Functional Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells
Before in vivo testing of the murine CAR T cells, the murine CAR T cell functionality should
be demonstrated in vitro. In this subsection, the ability of the murine EGFRvIII and CD19
CAR T cells to get activated and degranulate when co-culture with target cells is examined.
53
==PAGE:63==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
4.6.1
Evaluation of CAR T Cell Degranulation
The aim of the degranulation assay was to determine if the CAR T cells were able to degranulate
upon culturing with target cells, thus demonstrating if the killing mechanisms of the CARs
function as intended. This was done by culturing the CAR T cells or UTDs with either target
cells, positive or negative controls for 4-6 hours followed by ﬂow cytometry analysis of CD107a
expression.
The EGFRvIII CAR T cells and UTDs were cultured with either CT26 WT, CT26+
EGFRvIII, K562 WT, K562+EGFR, K562+EGFRvIII, beads (positive control) or media (nega-
tive control). The expression of the degranulation marker, CD107a, in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
is shown in Figure 25A and 25B, respectively (Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 46).
blabla
Figure 25: Degranulation assay for EGFRvIII and CD19 CAR T cells.A+B) Expres-
sion of CD107a in CD4+ (A) and CD8+ (B) EGFRvIII CAR T cells and UTDs upon culture with CT26 WT,
CT26+EGFRvIII, K562 WT, K562+EGFR, K562+EGFRvIII, beads (positive control) or media (negative con-
trol). C+D) Expression of CD107a in CD4+ (A) and CD8+ (B) CD19 CAR T cells and UTDs, upon culture
with B cells in a 1:1 ratio, B cells in a 3:1 ratio (B cells:CARs), beads (positive control), or media (negative
control). Signiﬁcant outcome from statistical analysis (Two-way ANOVA) is shown in the plots. *P 0.05,
****P 0.0001.
54
==PAGE:64==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
From these ﬁgures, it is clear, that EGFRvIII CAR T cells, especially CD8+, degranulate
upon interaction with the EGFRvIII antigen. It is furthermore observed, that K562+EGFRvIII
cancer cells stimulate more degranulation than CT26+EGFRvIII, with an average expression
level of 11% (CD4+) and 24% (CD8+) for K562+EGFRvIII and 3% (CD4+) and 14% (CD8+)
for CT26+EGFRvIII. The statistical analysis (Two-way ANOVA) conﬁrms a signiﬁcant di↵er-
ence between these samples and the negative control, with the exception of CT26+EGFRvIII
(CD4+). The expression of CD107a was observed to be signiﬁcantly higher for CT26+EGFRvIII
and K562+EGFRvIII, compared to CT26 WT, K562 WT and K562+EGFR, thus illustrating
that the CAR is speciﬁc to the EGFRvIII antigen.
The CD19 CAR and UTDs (bead or plate activated) were cultured with either B cells in
a 1:1 ratio, B cells in a 3:1 ratio (B cells:CARs), beads (positive control), or media (negative
control). B cells were isolated from a murine spleen just prior to the co-culture. Figure 25C
and 25D illustrate the percentage of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells that express CD107a, respectively
(Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 47). Focusing on CD8+ T cells, statistical analysis
(Two-Way ANOVA) demonstrated highly signiﬁcant di↵erences in the expression levels when
comparing culture with B cells or media (negative control), especially in terms of culture with B
cells in a 3:1 ratio. Signiﬁcant di↵erences were also observed for CD4+ T cells, but these are not
as prominent as those observed for CD8+ T cells. Furthermore, it seems that bead-activated
CAR T cells degranulate more than plate activated, but this is mostly the case for CD4+ T
cells.
4.6.2
Evaluation of CAR T Cell Activation
The aim of the activation assays was to determine if the CAR T cells get activated upon interac-
tion with target cells. The EGFRvIII CAR T cells were thawed and cultured with either CT26
WT, CT26+EGFRvIII, K562 WT, K562+EGFR, K562+EGFRvIII, beads (positive control) or
media (negative control). Untransduced T cells were used as control and cultured under the
same conditions. After 21 hours of culture, samples were analysed by ﬂow cytometry to deter-
mine the expression level of the activation marker, CD25, and early activation marker, CD69
(Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 48).
55
==PAGE:65==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
Analysis of the median ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) was executed to determine if CD4+ and
CD8+ CAR T cells upregulate activation markers upon culture with target cells. The MFI
analysis of CD25 expression is illustrated in Figure 26A+B, and from these ﬁgures it is clear
that expression intensity increases upon culture with CT26+EGFRvIII and K562+EGFRvIII. A
statistical analysis (Two-way ANOVA) conﬁrmed that there were signiﬁcant di↵erences in MFI
of these conditions compared to media. The MFI for expression of CD69 in CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells were also analysed, and the results are illustrated in Figure 26C and 26D. Similar to CD25+,
increased intensities were observed upon culture with CT26+EGFRvIII and K562+EGFRvIII
compared to media. However, statistical analysis (Two-way ANOVA) revealed that they are not
as signiﬁcant, as those observed for CD25+.
blbabla
Figure 26: Activation assay for EGFRvIII CAR T cells. A+B) Expression of CD25 in CD4+
(A) and CD8+ (B) EGFRvIII CAR T cells and UTDs, upon culture with CT26 WT, CT26+EGFRvIII, K562 WT,
K562+EGFR, K562+EGFRvIII, beads (positive control) or media (negative control). C+D) Expression of CD69
in CD4+ (A) and CD8+ (B) EGFRvIII CAR T cells and UTDs, upon culture with CT26 WT, CT26+EGFRvIII,
K562 WT, K562+EGFR, K562+EGFRvIII, beads (positive control) or media (negative control).
Signiﬁcant
outcome from statistical analysis (Two-way ANOVA) is shown in the plots. **P 0.01, ***P 0.001 and ****P
0.0001.
56
==PAGE:66==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
An activation assay for the CD19 CAR T cells was executed by culturing them with either
B cells in a 1:1 ratio, B cells in a 3:1 (B cells:CARs) ratio, beads (positive control), or media
(negative control). Untransduced T cells were used as control and cultured under the same
conditions. After 21 hours of culture, samples were analysed by ﬂow cytometry to determine
the level of expression of activation markers. Similar to the previous activation assay, the MFI
of CD25 and CD69 expression in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were analysed, and the results are
shown in Figure 27 (Gating strategy found in Appendix 3: Figure 49).
blbabla
Figure 27: Activation assay for CD19 CAR T cells.
A+B) Expression of CD25 in CD4+
(A) and CD8+ (B) CD19CAR T cells and UTDs, upon culture with B cells in a 1:1 ratio, B cells in a 3:1 ratio
(B cells:CARs), beads (positive control), or media (negative control). C+D) Expression of CD69 in CD4+ (A)
and CD8+ (B) CD19 CAR T cells and UTDs, upon culture with B cells in a 1:1 ratio, B cells in a 3:1 ratio (B
cells:CARs), beads (positive control), or media (negative control). Signiﬁcant outcome from statistical analysis
(Two-way ANOVA) is shown in the plots. *P 0.05, ****P 0.0001.
blbabla
Focusing on CD25+, CD19 CAR T cells showed increased intensities when they were cultured
with B cells compared to media (negative control). The statistical analysis (Two-way ANOVA)
revealed that the di↵erence in intensity is very signiﬁcant for CD8+ T cells, but it was clear
to see that culture with B cells in a 3:1 ratio gave the highest intensities. Regarding CD4+ T
cells, signiﬁcant di↵erences were also observed, but not for plate-activated CAR T cells cultured
57
==PAGE:67==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
4
RESULTS
with B cells in a 1:1 ratio, and not to the same extent as the CD8+ CARs. Additionally, bead-
activated CAR T cells were associated with higher MFI compared to plate-activated CAR T
cells.
The trends in MFI of CD69 expression were quite similar to those observed for CD25.
CD8+ CAR T cells showed signiﬁcant increases in intensity when they are cultured with B cells
compared to media. Bead-activated CD4+ CAR T cells showed signiﬁcant increases in MFI,
while plate-activated T cells show no signiﬁcant di↵erence compared to media. There was also
observed a clear di↵erence in the intensity of bead and plate-activated CD8+ CAR T cells upon
culture with B cells in a 3:1 ratio. This conﬁrms that bead-activated CAR T cells are more
likely to increase expression of activation markers.
58
==PAGE:68==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
In the Results section, we demonstrated the ability to transduce murine T cells leading to the
generation of murine CAR T cells by using both a lentiviral and retroviral system. Furthermore,
cell lines were established expressing the target antigen.
To assess the murine CAR T cell
product, data on viability, growth and impact of freezing was presented, and an analysis of
murine T cells before and after transduction gave an indication of the cell phenotypes. Lastly,
a functional examination of the CAR revealed that the EGFRvIII and CD19 CAR speciﬁcally
recognised their target. This section will analyse and discuss the signiﬁcance and limitations of
these ﬁndings. Furthermore, suggestions for improvements for future research and mitigation of
the current study’s limitations will be elaborated.
5.1
Impaired Lentiviral Gene Transfer Speciﬁcally in Murine T Cells
The aim of this project was to set up a fully murine model for better testing of 4th generation
CAR T cells, thus requiring a protocol for genetic engineering of murine T cells. It is desirable
to use a lentiviral transduction system, as they are able to infect both dividing and non-dividing
cells and are associated with an increased safety proﬁle compared to retroviral systems [153,
154, 155, 156]. Furthermore, FDA has previously approved CAR T cell products genetically
engineered using a lentiviral system and an increasing number of clinical trials using lentiviral
vectors are observed [156, 157, 133]. In addition, materials, constructs and an optimised protocol
for lentiviral transduction have already been established with great eﬃciency for human T cells in
our research group. Therefore, it would be time and cost saving, along with potentially enhancing
the translatability from mouse to human, as the constructs are identical and have been integrated
through the same mechanism. However, lentiviral vectors have shown to be ineﬃcient for genetic
engineering of murine T cells, emphasising the use of retroviral vectors instead [156]. Despite this,
a literature search was conducted to ﬁnd research on how to optimise lentiviral transduction
of murine T cells.
A paper by Delville et al.
(A Nontoxic Transduction Enhancer Enables
Highly Eﬃcient Lentiviral Transduction of Primary Murine T Cells and Hematopoietic Stem
Cells) demonstrated that LentiBOOST®, which is a universal receptor-independent adjuvant,
was able to facilitate fusion of lentivirus with the cell membrane, increase vector copy number,
and signiﬁcantly improve lentivirus transduction eﬃciency [158].
59
==PAGE:69==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
Based on the above-mentioned considerations, we wanted to investigate if it was possible
to obtain suﬃcient lentiviral transduction eﬃciency using LentiBOOST®.
This was done,
through three experiments with varying conditions, as described in subsection 3.2.6 Lentiviral
Transduction of Activated Murine T cells. These experiments were generally characterised by
very low CD3+ T cell transduction eﬃciency, ranging from almost 0%-13%, with most samples
around 2%-3%, as illustrated in Figure 16. Interestingly, CD4+ T cells showed to be easier
transduced than CD8+ T cells, which have also been observed in other studies [159].
Despite the insuﬃcient transduction eﬃciencies, we were able to observe signiﬁcant increases
in the presence of LentiBOOST® for most samples. This conﬁrms that LentiBOOST® was able
to enhance the eﬃciency of lentiviral transduction of murine T cells. However, the transduction
eﬃciencies are still signiﬁcantly lower, than those achieved by Delville et al., which were at 54%
and 36% for CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, respectively [158]. However, it must be emphasised that
we used a di↵erent construct, which could a↵ect the transduction eﬃciency.
In an attempt to obtain suﬃcient eﬃciencies of lentiviral transduction, additional conditions
were explored. Firstly, we wanted to investigate if the time of transduction had an inﬂuence.
Human T cells are usually transduced 24 hours after activation, while Delville et al. transduced
the murine T cells simultaneously with activation. The impact of transduction at 0 hours versus
24 hours post T cell activation was examined in the two ﬁrst experiments. From these results,
no clear correlation between the time of transduction and transduction eﬃciency was observed.
Furthermore, it was examined whether the concentration of IL-2 and IL-7 had an impact
on the CAR transduction eﬃciency. The results demonstrated that a high concentration (100
IU/mL) of cytokines led to an increased transduction eﬃciency compared to a low concentration
(10 IU/mL). However, the di↵erence was only signiﬁcant in the presence of LentiBOOST® and
may not be the driving factor. Additionally, increased expansion and viability were observed for
T cells supplemented with the high concentration (data not shown), indicating that adjusting
the cytokine concentration could be an advantage.
T cells in the ﬁrst experiment were activated with an anti-CD3/CD28 coated plate, while T
cells in the second experiment were activated with anti-CD3/CD28 beads. However, it was diﬃ-
cult to compare which activation method was preferable, due to varying conditions. Therefore,
we compared bead and plate-based activation in the third experiment. One of the samples acti-
vated with beads and transduced with construct EGFRvIII CAR (H/L), was signiﬁcantly higher
60
==PAGE:70==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
than the remaining samples. However, the viability of samples transduced with the EGFRvIII
CAR (H/L) was extremely low (2%), making the results unreliable. This indicates that the low
viability was caused by the virus. Fortunately, the viability of EGFRvIII CAR (L/H) CAR T
cells was signiﬁcantly higher (39%-66%), and therefore more useful for comparison. From the re-
sults displayed in Figure 16D, plate activation seems to be slightly better, but the circumstances
of the experiments, make it hard to draw a clear conclusion.
From these three experiments, we have clariﬁed that certain conditions increase the trans-
duction eﬃciency, and most signiﬁcantly by supplementing LentiBOOST®. Despite this, trans-
duction eﬃciencies were still far too low to be useful in practice. It would require very large
numbers of murine T cells to achieve enough CAR-positive cells. Furthermore, it would probably
be necessary to sort the CAR T cells, before they can be used for further experiments, which
would be associated with challenges due to the short lifespan of murine T cells ex vivo.
The ﬁnal experiment with lentiviral transduction of murine T cells, aimed at comparing the
di↵erent EGFRvIII CARs and conﬁrming that lentiviral transduction is unsuitable for murine
T cells. This was done by transducing both murine and human T cells with either construct
EGFRvIII human CAR (H/L), EGFRvIII human CAR (L/H), EGFRvIII murine CAR (H/L)
or EGFRvIII murine CAR (L/H). As we only had limited amounts of these viruses, we were
unable to transduce the murine and human T cells under the exact same conditions. However,
they are still comparable as their viral titers were determined via titration experiments. In
previous experiments, murine T cells were transduced at MOI 10, while human T cells were
transduced at MOI 5. For better comparison, some of the murine T cells were transduced at
MOI 5. This resulted in transduction rates between 1% and 5% for murine T cells, and 43%
and 59% for human T cells, as presented in Figure 17A-C. This clearly demonstrates that the
transduction eﬃciencies are substantially lower for murine T cells than for human T cells. From
this we can conﬁrm that the low transduction rate, is not caused by ineﬃcient virus particles,
but rather that lentiviral vectors are unsuitable for genetic engineering of murine T cells.
However, more e↵ort could have been put into the optimisation of the lentiviral protocol.
For example, spinfection of T cells with lentivirus has been demonstrated to induce higher trans-
duction eﬃciencies for both lentiviral transduction of human T cells and retroviral transduction
of murine T cells [160, 161]. It may also be possible to obtain increased virus titers by the use of
ultracentrifugation, instead of LentiX concentrator. However, the usage of LentiX concentrator
is more ﬂexible, faster and easier, thus advocating for the use of LentiX concentrator.
61
==PAGE:71==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
As previously described, it was demonstrated that the low transduction eﬃciencies were not
caused by ineﬃcient virus, but rather by the biological nature of murine T cells. In particular,
Baumann et al. and Tsurutani et al. described that the limited HIV infectivity in murine T
cells is caused by lower eﬃciencies of reverse transcription and nuclear translocation [162, 163].
We would thereby not expect that optimisation of viral titers promote a signiﬁcant increase in
transduction eﬃciency
A study by Kerkar et al. also observed the challenge of transducing murine T cells with
transduction eﬃciencies of 10-14%, where comparative transductions of murine ﬁbroblasts, hu-
man Jurkat T cells, CD8+ and CD4+ were transduced with transduction eﬃciencies above
84% using lentiviral vectors [156]. In addition, we also demonstrated successful transduction of
the EGFRvIII antigen and Luc into a murine CT26 cell line indicating an impaired lentiviral
gene transfer speciﬁcally in murine T cells. As a result, it was concluded that an alternative
transduction system was required in order to produce suﬃcient numbers of murine CAR T cells.
As we were unable to obtain eﬃcient lentiviral transduction of murine T cells, we aimed
at evaluating the functionality and eﬃciencies of the ﬁve di↵erent EGFRvIII CARs by killing,
activation and/or degranulation assays, with human T cells, thus determining the better CAR
construct. Based on the transduction eﬃciencies, L/H CARs seemed to be easier transduced
than H/L CARs. However, it is hard to conclude anything, due to the number of replicates.
Unfortunately, the luciferase-based activation and killing assay failed, and simultaneously we
found out that K562 cancer cells were mycoplasma positive.
With limited time to produce
suﬃcient numbers of target cells, we prioritised using the new K562 target cells for assays with
murine CAR T cells.
5.2
Eﬃcient Retroviral Mediated Gene Transfer of CARs to Murine T Cells
Retroviruses are commonly used for the transduction of murine T cells due to their eﬃcient
transfer of transgenes. This is why a retroviral system was explored for the establishment of
CAR T cells [156].
Protocol Optimisation with GFP Construct
As retroviral transduction of murine T cells was an untried method within our research group, we
had to test and optimize the protocol before cloning the desired construct targeting EGFRvIII
62
==PAGE:72==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
into a retroviral vector. Testing and optimization were done with the use of a GFP construct
(MiGR1 Plasmid), making it possible to determine the transduction eﬃciency by ﬂow cytometry.
The protocol, based on the work done by Huang et al., suggested spinfection with 0.5 mL viral
supernatant per 106 T cells. For our ﬁrst retroviral experiment, only CD8+ T cells were isolated
and transduced. As shown in Figure 19A a signiﬁcant di↵erence (P 0.001) between 0.5 mL of
supernatant compared to 1.0 mL was observed, by having mean transduction eﬃciencies of 27%
and 41%, respectively. Furthermore, T cells transduced with 1.0 mL of supernatant, showed
to have a higher viability, with a mean viability of 60% on day 6, compared to 51% for those
transduced with 0.5 mL. Taking these results into account it seemed advantageous to use 1.0
mL of viral supernatant.
For our second retroviral experiment, pan T cells were isolated instead of CD8+ T cells, as
CD4+ T cells also play a role in CAR therapy. More speciﬁcally, CD4+ T cells have been shown
to co-ordinate and sustain the immune response against tumours [164, 165]. Additionally, Wang
et al. demonstrated a positive correlation between the maintenance of CD4+ CAR T cells and
recursive killing ability of CAR T cells derived from GBM patients [166].
The objective of the second retroviral experiment was to validate the eﬃcacy of the protocol,
and to examine if 1.5 mL supernatant could provide an even higher transduction eﬃciency, and
if it a↵ects the viability. As shown in Figure 19B we could conﬁrm that 1.0 mL supernatant is
better than 0.5 mL in regard to transduction eﬃciency, but the di↵erence was not signiﬁcant
(p-value = 0.34) according to the statistical analysis. We could additionally conﬁrm that 1.5
mL is even better by reaching a transduction eﬃciency of 54% without a↵ecting the viability
adversely. Based on these results, we could conclude that 1.5 mL supernatant per 106 T cells is
preferable in comparison with 0.5 mL and 1.0 mL.
From these two experiments, we proved that it is possible to reach suﬃcient transduction
eﬃciencies of murine T cells. However, the protocol could probably be optimised even further,
to reach higher transduction eﬃciencies. For example, by increasing the amount of supernatant,
increasing the time and g force of the spinfection or by repeated spinfection, as suggested in the
original protocol by Huang et al. [147]. Another strategy could be to concentrate the retrovirus
instead of using viral supernatant, as we did for the lentivirus. This enables the determination
of the virus titer, and thereby determination of the appropriate amount of virus, resulting
in more consistent transduction eﬃciencies.
Lanitis et al.
demonstrated that concentrating
viral particles through ultracentrifugation yielded higher viral titers, resulting in signiﬁcantly
63
==PAGE:73==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
higher transduction of murine T cells compared to unconcentrated retroviral supernatant [151].
Therefore, a retroviral concentrator solution was ordered, however, we did not receive it in time
to test it, as it also requires the establishment of a titration protocol.
Another condition, that could be optimised is the cytokine supplement. Lanitis et al. com-
pared the expansion and functional properties of murine CAR-T cells cultured in hIL-2 alone
or hIL-2 for the ﬁrst 3 days, followed by hIL-7/IL-15 for the remaining days. They demon-
strated that human IL-7/IL-15 supplement promotes higher viability, expansion rate, frequency
of CD8+ T cells and proportion of the central memory phenotype. In addition, hIL-7/IL-15-
expanded CD8+ CAR T cells showed higher persistence, proliferation, and secretion levels of
granzyme B, IL-2 and IFN-γ upon culture with target cells [151]. Based on these results, it
would have been interesting to investigate, if similar results are obtainable.
Eﬃcient Transduction of CAR Constructs
After receiving the EGFRvIII CAR construct (DTU plasmid #2) for retroviral transduction,
an experiment was conducted to determine the transduction eﬃciency, as well as to analyse the
phenotype of the murine T cells before activation and after activation/transduction. As shown in
Figure 20A the average transduction eﬃciencies were 35%, 44%, and 23% for CD3+, CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells, respectively. Similar to lentiviral transduction we observed a higher transduction
eﬃciency of CD4+ T cells compared to CD8+ T cells. Compared to retroviral transduction with
the GFP construct with an average of 54% (CD3+), the transduction eﬃciencies of EGFRvIII
CAR were lower. We did expect this, as the CAR construct (EGFRvIII CAR construct =7354
bp) is larger than the GFP construct (6441 bp), which may impact the level of integration
[167, 168, 169].
Additionally, we observed quite di↵erent CAR transduction eﬃciencies among the samples,
as they ranged from 23%-52% (CD3+ T cells). Three of the transduced samples had very low
viability (15%-48%) compared to the rest (average of 73%). Interestingly, these samples proved
to have the highest transduction rates (46%-52%), indicating that viability post transduction
and transduction rate might be inversely proportional. This hypothesis is conﬁrmed by looking
at the samples with the lowest transduction rates (23%, 26% and 29%), as they had viabilities
of 76%-81%. An explanation could be that the high virus concentration became toxic to the
cells.
64
==PAGE:74==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
The retroviral transduction with CAR constructs was repeated, to conﬁrm the promising
results of the previous experiment. This time we did not only transduce murine T cells with the
EGFRvIII CAR (DTU plasmid #2) but also with a CD19 CAR (DTU plasmid #1) to conﬁrm
the eﬃciency of the protocol across di↵erent constructs. Additionally, the impact of bead- or
plate-based activation was examined. With this experiment, we obtained higher transduction
eﬃciencies, than in the previous one (see Figure 21A). For the EGFRvIII CAR, we reached
transduction eﬃciencies of 44% and 34% for plate and bead-activated CD3+ T cells, respectively.
Transduction eﬃciencies for the CD19 CAR were quite similar, as they reached 44% and 41%
for plate and bead-activated CD3+ T cells, respectively. These results indicated plate-activated
T cells to be slightly easier to transduce than bead activated ones, but the statistical analysis
did not show any signiﬁcant di↵erence between the conditions. In addition, we only had one or
two technical replicates, as samples were combined after transduction. It would therefore have
been necessary to repeat the experiment, in order to draw a conclusion.
Surprisingly, bead-activated untransduced T cells showed a relatively high mCHERRY back-
ground signal (6%). However, the gate was placed based on histograms, as the samples contain-
ing transduced cells would result in a signiﬁcantly lower transduction eﬃciency, which would
have been misleading when calculating CAR+ cells for functional assays (See gating strategy,
Appendix 3: Figure 43). One explanation for the high background signal could be overlaps be-
tween ﬂuorophores in the antibody panel. A compensation was prepared and calculated before
running the ﬂow cytometry assay, however, further adjustments could be made in future assays
to avoid background signal in the highly important CAR expression channel.
To sum up, we were able to eﬃciently transduce murine T cells, with retroviral vectors
encoding CAR constructs. We achieved up to 51% in transduction eﬃciency, demonstrating
that retroviral vectors are much more suitable for the transduction of murine T cells. However,
the main purpose of our murine model is to be able to test the eﬃcacy of TRUCKs in the future,
meaning that murine T cells will need to be transduced with larger constructs, than those we
used in these experiments.
Transduction eﬃciency relies on the size of the construct, most
likely caused by ineﬃcient genomic packaging during virus particle formation [168]. Therefore,
we expect the transduction eﬃciency to decrease for TRUCK constructs. As an example we
observed an average transduction eﬃciency of 54% for the GFP construct (6441 bp), while it
decreased to an average of 37% for the CAR constructs (EGFRvIII CAR construct = 7354
bp, CD19 CAR construct = 7318 bp). In comparison, TRUCK and armoured CAR constructs
65
==PAGE:75==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
plasmids within our research group, are constituted of 9565 bp and 10314 bp, respectively. This
is quite a signiﬁcant increase in size, compared to the GFP, EGFRvIII CAR and CD19 CAR
constructs, emphasising the concern of insuﬃcient transduction. For comparison, Kueberuwa
et al. observed a decrease in retroviral transduction eﬃciency from around 40% to 20% upon
introduction of a single-chain murine IL-12 to a CD19-CD28 CAR construct [168].
It may
therefore be necessary to further optimise the protocol for example in terms of increasing time
or force in the spinfection step or concentrating the retrovirus, as discussed in the previous
subsection.
5.3
Evalutation of Murine T Cell Expansion
In comparison to human T cells, murine T cells are not only harder to genetically engineer
but are also harder to expand subsequently of transduction [161]. This becomes clear when
comparing the number of population doublings of murine with human CAR T cells. In general,
the doubling level of murine T cells was characterised by ﬂuctuation (Figure 19-21), while it
consistently increased for human T cells (Figure 18). Despite this, the doubling levels are quite
similar (around 1-2) on day 6 where murine CAR T cells are usually analysed. However, while
murine T cells tend to die o↵after day 6, human T cells are able to expand for several more days,
resulting in a population doubling level of 3-4. As a result, it is possible to obtain a signiﬁcantly
larger amount of human CAR T cells compared to murine. However, it has to be mentioned, that
this comparison is based on murine and human T cells, which were transduced with retroviral
and lentiviral vectors, respectively, and might have had an inﬂuence on the expansion proﬁle. In
particular, the murine T cells transduced with lentiviral vectors showed a much greater expansion
(population doubling level = 3.6, Figure 17E) than retroviral transduced murine T cells (Figure
21C). However, there could be several causes for this.
Firstly, only a limited proportion of
murine T cells were transduced with the CAR. Secondly, retroviral spinfection could have a
negative e↵ect on viability and growth. This hypothesis is supported by observations of the
untransduced T cells as they have similar viability and growth.
It is highly desirable to obtain eﬃcient expansion, as it requires fewer cells for initial seeding,
thus limiting the usage of virus and murine splenocytes. We attempted to optimise the expansion
of murine T cells upon retroviral transduction, by comparing plate and bead activation. This
experiment demonstrated that plate-activated T cells had greater expansion abilities compared
66
==PAGE:76==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
to their bead-activated counterparts, probably because beads overstimulate the T cells, causing
exhaustion. These observations indicate that anti-CD3/CD28 coated plates are not only prefer-
able regarding transduction eﬃciency, but also as a method of activation. Another strategy
to achieve greater expansion is through cytokine supplementation. As previously mentioned,
Lanitis et al. demonstrated that IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15 supplement leads to a signiﬁcantly higher
expansion rate compared to IL-2 alone, emphasising the use of IL-7 and IL-15 in the future.
Human CAR T cells are usually frozen for later use. However, murine T cells are much more
indolent, meaning that it is hard to keep them alive for a longer period of time, especially after
they have been thawed. As a result, it is often necessary to make a new batch of cells every
time, they are needed. Despite this, we wanted to test if we could freeze, thaw, reactivate and
keep the murine T cells alive.
From the results illustrated in Figure 23, it was proven to be possible to freeze, thaw and keep
murine T cells alive for up to 2 weeks. A clear di↵erence in expansion between activated and non-
activated was observed, making it preferable to activate T cells upon thawing. Unfortunately,
no experiments were conducted to investigate the impact of freezing compared to fresh cells in
regard to their phenotype, CAR expression or function. However, even though we only had
a limited number of cells, we conducted the activation and degranulation assay using frozen
EGFRvIII CAR T cells and achieved reasonable results, indicating that frozen cells can be used
for future experiments.
5.4
Phenotypic Evaluation of Murine CAR T Cells
Another essential factor to optimise is the phenotype of the cells, which can be determined by
the expression of CD44 and CD62L. Newly isolated (preactivated), untransduced, EGFRvIII
CAR and CD19 CAR T cells were analysed by ﬂow cytometry and the distribution of e↵ector
(CD44-positive and CD62L-negative), na¨ıve (CD44-negative and CD62L-positive) and central
memory (CD44-positive and CD62L-positive) T cells were determined. The analysis revealed
that the distribution was quite similar under all conditions, and the central memory phenotype
was clearly dominant (see Figure 24). The e↵ector phenotype was the second most abundant for
all samples, with the exception of two conditions, where the na¨ıve phenotype was more dominant.
Research has demonstrated that na¨ıve and memory T cells are important in CAR T cell therapy
because they are associated with sustained proliferation, higher persistence and greater anti-
67
==PAGE:77==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
tumour potency in vivo. In contrast, e↵ector T cells show poor ability of self-renewal, limited
homing to tumour, and lower survival [170, 171]. Based on these ﬁndings, the high abundance
of central memory T cells in the samples would therefore suggest an advantage to our CAR T
cell product and how it potentially performs in vivo. However, the same phenotype distribution
would probably not be observed for human T cells, as these are isolated from peripheral blood,
while murine T cells are isolated from spleens. The frequency of di↵erent T cell subsets in the
blood di↵ers with age, a↵ecting the phenotype distribution [10]. The di↵erence in phenotype
distribution between human peripheral blood T cells and murine splenocytes might therefore
inﬂuence the observed consistency and e↵ectivity of the CAR T cells, thus resulting in decreased
translatability.
The limited di↵erence in phenotype distribution of newly isolated T cells and activated T
cells indicates that the T cells do not di↵erentiate into a certain phenotype upon activation
and transduction. This is not a major concern, as memory T cells are the dominant phenotype
as desired. However, we do also observe quite a high abundance of e↵ector T cells, which is
undesirable. Studies have demonstrated that substitution of IL-2 with IL-7, IL-15 and IL-21
has a signiﬁcant e↵ect on functionality, homeostasis, di↵erentiation, and expansion of T cells
and simultaneously leads to more prominent proportions of less di↵erentiated T cells [171]. In
particular, a study by W. Weninger et al. demonstrated, that antigen-primed murine splenocytes
primarily acquire the e↵ector phenotype upon culture in IL-2, while splenocytes cultured in IL-
15 acquire the memory phenotype. In addition, CD8IL−15 T cells survive for a longer time and
mount a rapid antigen-speciﬁc response upon injection in mice. They further demonstrated a
signiﬁcant di↵erence in tissue-speciﬁc homing, as CD8IL−15 T cells were much more abundant
in secondary lymphoid tissues compared to CD8IL−2 T cells, leading to longer cell persistence
and antitumor activity in vivo [172, 171]. Another study showed that supplementing with IL-21,
IL-4 and IL-7 maintained the memory phenotype and reduced expression of inhibitory receptors
such as PD-1 and TIM3 in CAR-T cells [173]. These results indicate that it is advantageous to
use other cytokines than IL-2, in order to obtain the memory phenotype, and thereby higher
e↵ectivity and consistency of the CAR T cells. This emphasized an opportunity for further
optimization of the murine CAR T cell generation protocol in future studies.
68
==PAGE:78==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
5.5
EGFRvIII and CD19 CAR T Cells Upregulate Degranulation and Acti-
vation Markers upon Antigen Engagement
To examine the functionality of the EGFRvIII and CD19 CAR T cells upon interaction with their
target antigen, degranulation and activation assays were conducted. As shown in Figure 25A+B
in the result section, we observed a signiﬁcant increase in CD107a expression of EGFRvIII CAR
T cells cultured with K562+EGFRvIII and CT26+EGFRvIII cancer cells, especially in terms of
CD8+ CAR T cells. In general, we observed signiﬁcantly higher expression of CD107a in CD8+
compared to CD4+ EGFRvIII CAR T cells. This was not surprising, as CD8+ T cells have been
considered the main cytotoxic and degranulating population [166]. However, as demonstrated
in this assay, CD4+ CAR T cells do not only provide helper functions to elicit anti-tumour
immune responses but are also able to mediate direct cytotoxicity against tumour cells. These
observations are conﬁrmed by other studies as well. Wang et al. demonstrated that CD4+ CAR
T cells were capable of eradicating GBM and maintaining their e↵ector function independently of
CD8+ T cells [166]. Additionally, exhaustion and e↵ector dysfunction upon interaction tumour
cells were much more common for CD8+ CAR T cells, while CD4+ CAR T cells mediated long-
term eﬃcacy against GBM both in vitro and in vivo. This clearly emphasises the importance
of CD4+T cells for e↵ective CAR therapy [166].
We observed a higher expression of CD107a in EGFRvIII CAR T cells cultured with K562 +
EGFRvIII than CT26 + EGFRvIII cancer cells. The same was observed for the untransduced T
cells, indicating that some of the degranulation is caused by unspeciﬁc recognition of the K562
cancer cells. An explanation could be that K562 appear more immunogenic than the murine
CT26 cancer cells, as these are human cancer cells. We would therefore also expect to see higher
CD107a expression for samples cultured with K562 WT and K562 + EGFR, but this was not
the case. Fortunately, this indicated that our CAR is speciﬁc toward the EGFRvIII antigen and
not towards the EGFR antigen, which is crucial for clinical potential, as EGFR is expressed in
healthy tissue and could potentially lead to serious o↵-target toxicities [174]
Similarly, a degranulation assay was conducted with CD19 CAR T cells, as these were
already produced and could potentially validate our assay. Results from this experiment (Figure
25C+D) showed that culture with B cells in a 3:1 ratio, leads to signiﬁcantly increased expression
of CD107a, especially in terms of CD8+ T cells. Culture with B cells in a 1:1 ratio also led
to increased expression, but it was not very signiﬁcant for CD4+ T cells. We observed that
69
==PAGE:79==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
bead-activated CAR T cells had a signiﬁcantly higher expression of CD107a, compared to plate
activated, making them more preferable to use. However, bead-activated CAR and untransduced
T cells also showed a higher expression level, in both the positive and negative control. This
indicates that there is some background signalling that interferes with the expression level.
Therefore, bead-activated T cells may appear better than they actually are, and not be preferable
compared to plate-activated T cells.
For the activation assay, CAR and untransduced T cells were cultured under di↵erent condi-
tions for 21 hours followed by ﬂow cytometry analysis of CD25 and CD69 expression. In general,
high expression levels of CD25 and CD69 were observed for both CD4+ and CD8+ CD19 CAR
T cells (Gating strategy in Appendix 3: Figure 49). To gain insight into the activation proﬁle
of the T cells, we analysed the MFI of CD25 and CD69 expression. The analysis revealed signif-
icant di↵erences when CD19 CAR T cells were cultured with B cells compared to the negative
control. Similar to the degranulation assay, the most signiﬁcant di↵erences were observed for
CD8+ T cells cultured with B cells in a 3:1 (B cells:CARs) ratio. In addition, bead-activated
CD19 CAR T cells showed more signiﬁcant increases in MFI than plate-activated CAR T cells.
Plate-activated CD19 CAR T cells were removed from the activation plate the day after trans-
duction, while bead-activated CD19 CAR T cells were in culture with beads for a longer period.
This may have a considerable inﬂuence on the expression of activation markers. However, the
negative controls showed almost the same MFI, indicating that this is not the case. Furthermore,
bead-activated CD19 CAR T cells also showed a greater intensity in CD107a expression com-
pared to plate activated. Based on this, it seems that bead-activated CAR T cells are more likely
to degranulate and get activated upon interaction with target cells. This conﬂicts with previous
experiments, demonstrating that plate-activation leads to greater transduction eﬃciencies and
expansion. Thereby, it is diﬃcult to conclude whether bead or plate activation is preferable in
the production of murine CAR T cells.
To sum up, we have demonstrated that the CD19 CAR is able to recognise and respond to
target cells, despite the speciﬁcity of the CD19 CAR T being towards human CD19. Fortunately,
the structure of human and murine CD19 is quite similar, which might explain why we were
able to observe a response [175].
70
==PAGE:80==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
An activation assay was also executed for the murine EGFRvIII CAR T cells, and the MFI of
CD25 and CD69 was determined by ﬂow cytometry (Gating strategy in Appendix 3: Figure 48).
The analysis revealed that both CD4+ and CD8+ EGFRvIII CAR T cells had a signiﬁcantly
(P 0.0001) higher expression intensity when they were cultured with CT26+EGFRvIII and
K562+EGFRvIII, compared to media (Figure 26A+B). Simultaneously, the CAR T cells showed
limited intensity when they were cultured with CT26 WT, K562 WT and K562+EGFR. This
indicates that the CAR only recognises the EGFRvIII receptor, thus conﬁrming the observations
from the degranulation assay. However, the positive control (beads) appears a bit odd, as there
is a signiﬁcantly higher intensity for CARs than UTDs, whereas we expected them to be similar.
However, this is only observed for the positive control, and not for the negative control, CT26
WT, K562 WT or K5625+EGFR, indicating that it might be caused by a technical di↵erence
in bead concentration in the positive controls.
Regarding CD69, MFI analysis revealed that CAR T cells have a signiﬁcantly (P 0.01)
increased intensity in CD69 expression when they were cultured with CT26+EGFRvIII and
K562+EGFRvIII (Figure 26 C+D), indicating that the CAR signiﬁcantly upregulate CD69 in
response to antigen recognition. However, the di↵erence in intensity is not as signiﬁcant com-
pared to CD25, probably explained by CD69 being an early activation marker. CD69 transcrip-
tional expression can be detected 30-60 minutes after activation, leading to a detectable protein
expression after 2-3 hours. The detectable transcriptional expression level declines rapidly after
4-6 hours, resulting in a delayed decrease in the protein expression level [176].
In contrast,
protein expression of CD25 peaks after 12-24 hours, emphasising the increased intensity at the
time of ﬂow cytometry analysis (21 hours post activation) [177]. Finally, no signiﬁcant di↵erence
between culture with CT26 WT, K562 WT, K562+EGFR and media. The results obtained by
this analysis conﬁrmed previous results, that the EGFRvIII CAR T cells selectively recognise
EGFRvIII leading to their activation.
An essential thing to mention is that the EGFRvIII CAR T cells had been frozen before
being used in these assays. The viability of the CAR T cells was extremely low (around 10%)
upon thawing, meaning that we had a large number of dead cells in the culture. The viability
was signiﬁcantly lower than what we observed for GFP-transduced T cells (average viability of
60%) after thawing. The low viability of the EGFRvIII CARs was caused by improper freezing.
However, this did not seem to have an e↵ect on the assays in regard to observing di↵erences
between samples. Compared to the degranulation assay with the CD19 CAR using fresh cells,
71
==PAGE:81==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
5
DISCUSSION
the CD19 CAR seem to degranulate to a higher degree.
It could be due to the cells being
fresh, however, it could also be due to a higher speciﬁcity of the CAR. Another aspect is that
the CT26 cancer cells tested mycoplasma positive. Fortunately, mycoplasma mainly a↵ects the
growth of the cells, and should therefore not inﬂuence assays with short duration [178]. This was
conﬁrmed by comparison to the mycoplasma-negative K562 target cells, as we observed similar
tendencies in CD25, CD69 and CD107a expression.
5.6
Considerations of the Established Murine Model
To investigate the function of the EGFRvIII CAR in the context of potential treatment of GBM,
it must be emphasised that there are certain limitations to the in vitro studies performed during
this project. Firstly, we have used a murine colorectal carcinoma cell line (CT26) with exoge-
nously introduced EGFRvIII, which may give biased results regarding clonality and neglect the
aspect of receptor expression regulation seen in glioblastoma cells [116]. Furthermore, exoge-
nously introduced EFGRvIII may not impact the biology of already deﬁned cancer cell lines, thus
limiting the translation to glioblastoma. A more appropriate cell line for studying EGFRvIII
targeting CARs for the treatment of glioblastoma could therefore be found within cell lines with
endogenous EGFRvIII expression and spontaneous or chemically induced murine glioblastoma,
including GL261, GL26, CT-2A and SMA-560 [124, 179, 180]. The SMA-560 model has suc-
cessfully been utilized by Sampson et al. to test the eﬃcacy of 3rd generation murine CARs
targeting EGFRvIII [181]. There is an ongoing search for more appropriate models, reﬂecting
the nature of GBM cells and it still remains to be established if murine GBM models translate
to GBM in the clinic. However, for the scope of this project, the CT26 cell line proposes a good
starting point, also enabling the possibility of studying epitope spreading relevant for in vivo
studies on TRUCKs, as it is associated with the release of the AH-1 antigen [182].
To sum up, we have discussed the eﬃciency of di↵erent viral delivery systems for genetic
engineering of murine CAR T cells and compared them to human T cells. Furthermore, we
examined the impact of di↵erent optimisation strategies for both transduction and expansion
protocols. While comparing our results to other relevant literature and studies, several sugges-
tions for optimisation were identiﬁed. Further studies may need to be conducted, implementing
these observations, to optimise transduction and expansion protocols before in vivo evaluation
of CAR T cells and TRUCKs.
72
==PAGE:82==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
6
CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
This project aimed to set up a fully murine model for conducting in vivo assessment of CAR
T cells and TRUCKs. To accomplish this, murine EGFRvIII CAR T cells and target cell lines
expressing the target antigen, EGFRvIII, should be established. Furthermore, this project aimed
to assess the CAR regarding its functionality and speciﬁcity towards the target antigen.
Firstly, a lentiviral transduction system for the production of murine CAR T cells was
attempted. However, based on several experiments, it was concluded that the lentiviral system
was too ineﬃcient for genetic engineering of murine cells. Conversion to and optimisation of
a retroviral system, led to eﬃcient CAR integration and production of murine CAR T cells,
yielding an average of 37% (EGFRvIII) and 42% (CD19) CAR positive T cells.
The cell line, CT26, was successfully transduced with the EGFRvIII antigen and luciferase,
with eﬃciencies reaching up to 92%, which led to the establishment of three target cell lines;
CT26+Luc, CT26+EGFRvIII and CT26+EGFRvIII+Luc. The target cells were subsequently
sorted to isolate transduced cells, thereby obtaining a homogeneous population. Unfortunately,
all sorted cell lines tested positive for mycoplasma, which eliminated the possibility of engrafting
the cells in vivo.
Functional assays were successfully established for the evaluation of murine CAR T cells.
Both the degranulation and activation assays revealed signiﬁcant di↵erences when EGFRvIII
and CD19 CAR T cells were cultured with target cells compared to the negative control. This
demonstrated the capability of the murine CAR T cells to bind and respond upon interaction
with their target. It was further demonstrated that the EGFRvIII CAR displayed selectivity
towards EGFRvIII, as it did not respond to the EGFR antigen.
To summarise, this project successfully established a protocol for production of murine CAR
T cells and murine target cancer cell lines constituting the components for in vivo experiments
using a fully murine model. The murine CAR T cells were demonstrated to be functional when
co-cultured with target cells in vitro, emphasizing the incitement for in vivo testing.
73
==PAGE:83==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
References
[1] Eric Vivier and Bernard Malissen. Innate and adaptive immunity: speciﬁcities and sig-
naling hierarchies revisited. Nat. Immunol., 6(1):17–21, January 2005.
[2] Jean S. Marshall, Richard Warrington, Wade Watson, and Harold L. Kim. An introduc-
tion to immunology and immunopathology. Allergy Asthma Clin. Immunol., 14(2):1–10,
September 2018.
[3] Juan Carlos Z´u˜niga-Pﬂ¨ucker.
T-cell development made simple.
Nat. Rev. Immunol.,
4(1):67–72, January 2004.
[4] Brahma V. Kumar, Thomas Connors, and Donna L. Farber. Human T cell development,
localization, and function throughout life. Immunity, 48(2):202, February 2018.
[5] Timothy K. Starr, Stephen C. Jameson, and Kristin A. Hogquist. Positive and Negative
Selection of T Cells. Annual Reviews, November 2003.
[6] Clotilde Th´ery and Sebastian Amigorena.
The cell biology of antigen presentation in
dendritic cells. Curr. Opin. Immunol., 13(1):45–51, February 2001.
[7] Jennifer E. Smith-Garvin, Gary A. Koretzky, and Martha S. Jordan. T Cell Activation.
Annu. Rev. Immunol., 27:591, 2009.
[8] Mohamed-Reda Benmebarek, Clara Helke Karches, Bruno Loureiro Cadilha, Stefanie
Lesch, Stefan Endres, and Sebastian Kobold. Killing Mechanisms of Chimeric Antigen
Receptor (CAR) T Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 20(6), March 2019.
[9] Jinfang Zhu, Hidehiro Yamane, and William E. Paul. Di↵erentiation of E↵ector CD4 T
Cell Populations. Annu. Rev. Immunol., 28(1):445–489, March 2010.
[10] Donna L. Farber, Naomi A. Yudanin, and Nicholas P. Restifo. Human memory T cells:
generation, compartmentalization and homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol., (1):24, January
2014.
[11] Seyed Hossein Hassanpour and Mohammadamin Dehghani. Review of cancer from per-
spective of molecular. Journal of Cancer Research and Practice, 4(4):127–129, December
2017.
74
==PAGE:84==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[12] R. Fisher, L. Pusztai, and C. Swanton. Cancer heterogeneity: implications for targeted
therapeutics. Br. J. Cancer, 108(3):479, February 2013.
[13] Naghma Khan, Farrukh Afaq, and Hasan Mukhtar. LIFESTYLE AS RISK FACTOR
FOR CANCER: EVIDENCE FROM HUMAN STUDIES. Cancer Lett., 293(2):133, July
2010.
[14] Alan N. Houghton and Jos´e A. Guevara-Pati˜no. Immune recognition of self in immunity
against cancer. J. Clin. Invest., 114(4):468, August 2004.
[15] Hao Zhang, Pu Zhao, and He Huang. Engineering better chimeric antigen receptor T cells.
Exp. Hematol. Oncol., 9(1):34–13, December 2020.
[16] Jade Foeng, Iain Comerford, and Shaun R. McColl. Harnessing the chemokine system to
home CAR-T cells into solid tumors. Cell Reports Medicine, 3(3):100543, February 2022.
[17] Chenglong Liu, Mengxuan Yang, Daizhou Zhang, Ming Chen, and Di Zhu. Clinical cancer
immunotherapy: Current progress and prospects. Front. Immunol., 13, October 2022.
[18] Seong Keun Kim and Sun Wook Cho. The Evasion Mechanisms of Cancer Immunity and
Drug Intervention in the Tumor Microenvironment. Front. Pharmacol., 13, 2022.
[19] Ryungsa Kim, Manabu Emi, and Kazuaki Tanabe. Cancer immunoediting from immune
surveillance to immune escape. Immunology, 121(1):1, May 2007.
[20] Hira Lal Goel and Arthur M. Mercurio. VEGF targets the tumour cell. Nat. Rev. Cancer,
13(12):871, December 2013.
[21] Nicole M. Anderson and M. Celeste Simon. The tumor microenvironment. Curr. Biol.,
30(16):921–925, August 2020.
[22] Spencer C. Wei, Colm R. Du↵y, and James P. Allison.
Fundamental Mechanisms of
Immune Checkpoint Blockade Therapy. Cancer Discov., 8(9):1069–1086, September 2018.
[23] F. T. Cutts, S. Franceschi, S. Goldie, X. Castellsague, S. de Sanjose, G. Garnett, W. J.
Edmunds, P. Claeys, K. L. Goldenthal, D. M. Harper, and L. Markowitz. Human papil-
lomavirus and HPV vaccines: a review. Bull. World Health Organ., 85(9):719, September
2007.
[24] Mansi Saxena, Sjoerd H. van der Burg, Cornelis J. M. Melief, and Nina Bhardwaj. Ther-
apeutic cancer vaccines. Nat. Rev. Cancer, 21(6):360–378, June 2021.
75
==PAGE:85==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[25] Maartje W. Rohaan, Soﬁe Wilgenhof, and John B. A. G. Haanen.
Adoptive cellular
therapies: the current landscape. Virchows Arch., 474(4):449–461, April 2019.
[26] Yueshui Zhao, Jian Deng, Shuangfeng Rao, Sipeng Guo, Jing Shen, Fukuan Du, Xu Wu,
Yu Chen, Mingxing Li, Meijuan Chen, Xiaobing Li, Wanping Li, Li Gu, Yuhong Sun,
Zhuo Zhang, Qinglian Wen, Zhangang Xiao, and Jing Li. Tumor Inﬁltrating Lymphocyte
(TIL) Therapy for Solid Tumor Treatment: Progressions and Challenges. Cancers, 14(17),
September 2022.
[27] M. H. Geukes Foppen, M. Donia, I. M. Svane, and J. B. A. G. Haanen. Tumor-inﬁltrating
lymphocytes for the treatment of metastatic cancer. Mol. Oncol., 9(10):1918, December
2015.
[28] Luis Gerardo Rodr´ıguez-Lobato, Maya Ganzetti, Carlos Fern´andez de Larrea, Michael
Hudecek, Hermann Einsele, and Sophia Danhof.
CAR T-Cells in Multiple Myeloma:
State of the Art and Future Directions. Front. Oncol., 10, July 2020.
[29] Sonia Guedan, Hugo Calderon, Avery D. Posey, Jr., and Marcela V. Maus. Engineering
and Design of Chimeric Antigen Receptors. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev., 12:145–156,
December 2018.
[30] William R. Burns, Yangbing Zhao, Timothy L. Frankel, Christian S. Hinrichs, Zhili Zheng,
Hui Xu, Steven A. Feldman, Soldano Ferrone, Steven A. Rosenberg, and Richard A.
Morgan. A high molecular weight-melanoma associated antigen-speciﬁc chimeric antigen
receptor redirects lymphocytes to target human melanomas.
Cancer Res., 70(8):3027,
April 2010.
[31] Ryan D. Guest, Robert E. Hawkins, Natalia Kirillova, Eleanor J. Cheadle, Jennifer Arnold,
Allison O’Neill, Joely Irlam, Kerry A. Chester, John T. Kemshead, David M. Shaw, M. J.
Embleton, Peter L. Stern, and David E. Gilham. The role of extracellular spacer regions
in the optimal design of chimeric immune receptors: evaluation of four di↵erent scFvs and
antigens. J. Immunother., 28(3):203–211, May 2005.
[32] James N. Kochenderfer, Steven A. Feldman, Yangbing Zhao, Hui Xu, Mary A. Black,
Richard A. Morgan, Wyndham H. Wilson, and Steven A. Rosenberg. Construction and
Pre-clinical Evaluation of an Anti-CD19 Chimeric Antigen Receptor.
Journal of im-
munotherapy (Hagerstown, Md. : 1997), 32(7):689, September 2009.
76
==PAGE:86==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[33] C. Imai, K. Mihara, M. Andreansky, I. C. Nicholson, C.-H. Pui, T. L. Geiger, and D. Cam-
pana.
Chimeric receptors with 4-1BB signaling capacity provoke potent cytotoxicity
against acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia, 18(4):676–684, April 2004.
[34] M. Jensen, G. Tan, S. Forman, A. M. Wu, and A. Raubitschek. CD20 is a molecular target
for scFvFc:zeta receptor redirected T cells: implications for cellular immunotherapy of
CD20+ malignancy. Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant., row(Transplant):Actions, 1998.
[35] Sonia Guedan, Avery D. Posey, Jr., Carolyn Shaw, Anna Wing, Tong Da, Prachi R.
Patel, Shannon E. McGettigan, Victoria Casado-Medrano, Omkar U. Kawalekar, Mireia
Uribe-Herranz, Decheng Song, J. Joseph Melenhorst, Simon F. Lacey, John Scholler, Brian
Keith, Regina M. Young, and Carl H. June. Enhancing CAR T cell persistence through
ICOS and 4-1BB costimulation. JCI Insight, 3(1):e96976., January 2018.
[36] Camille Fos, Audrey Salles, Val´erie Lang, Florent Carrette, St´ephane Audebert, Sonia
Pastor, Marguerite Ghiotto, Daniel Olive, Georges Bismuth, and Jacques A. Nun`es. ICOS
ligation recruits the p50alpha PI3K regulatory subunit to the immunological synapse. J.
Immunol., 181(3):1969–1977, August 2008.
[37] Jonathan S. Boomer and Jonathan M. Green. An enigmatic tail of CD28 signaling. Cold
Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol., 2(8):a002436., August 2010.
[38] Tania H. Watts. TNF/TNFR family members in costimulation of T cell responses. Annu.
Rev. Immunol., 23(23-68.):;, 2005.
[39] Jenny Hendriks, Yanling Xiao, John W. A. Rossen, Koenraad F. van der Sluijs, Kazuo
Sugamura, Naoto Ishii, and Jannie Borst. During viral infection of the respiratory tract,
CD27, 4-1BB, and OX40 collectively determine formation of CD8+ memory T cells and
their capacity for secondary expansion. J. Immunol., 175(3):1665–1676, August 2005.
[40] W. W. Shuford, K. Klussman, D. D. Tritchler, D. T. Loo, J. Chalupny, A. W. Siadak,
T. J. Brown, J. Emswiler, H. Raecho, C. P. Larsen, T. C. Pearson, J. A. Ledbetter,
A. Aru↵o, and R. S. Mittler. 4-1BB costimulatory signals preferentially induce CD8+ T
cell proliferation and lead to the ampliﬁcation in vivo of cytotoxic T cell responses. J.
Exp. Med., 186(1):47–55, July 1997.
[41] Gongbo Li, Justin C. Boucher, Hiroshi Kotani, Kyungho Park, Yongliang Zhang, Bish-
was Shrestha, Xuefeng Wang, Lawrence Guan, Nolan Beatty, Daniel Abate-Daga, and
77
==PAGE:87==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Marco L. Davila. 4-1BB enhancement of CAR T function requires NF-B and TRAFs.
JCI Insight, 3(18):e121322., September 2018.
[42] Renier J. Brentjens, Isabelle Rivi`ere, Jae H. Park, Marco L. Davila, Xiuyan Wang, Jolanta
Stefanski, Clare Taylor, Raymond Yeh, Shirley Bartido, Oriana Borquez-Ojeda, Malgo-
rzata Olszewska, Yvette Bernal, Hollie Pegram, Mark Przybylowski, Daniel Hollyman,
Yelena Usachenko, Domenick Pirraglia, James Hosey, Elmer Santos, Elizabeth Halton, Pe-
ter Maslak, David Scheinberg, Joseph Jurcic, Mark Heaney, Glenn Heller, Mark Frattini,
and Michel Sadelain. Safety and persistence of adoptively transferred autologous CD19-
targeted T cells in patients with relapsed or chemotherapy refractory B-cell leukemias.
Blood, 118(18):4817–4828, November 2011.
[43] Jae H. Park, Isabelle Rivi`ere, Mithat Gonen, Xiuyan Wang, Brigitte S´en´echal, Kevin J.
Curran, Craig Sauter, Yongzeng Wang, Bianca Santomasso, Elena Mead, Mikhail Roshal,
Peter Maslak, Marco Davila, Renier J. Brentjens, and Michel Sadelain.
Long-Term
Follow-up of CD19 CAR Therapy in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med.,
378(5):449–459, February 2018.
[44] Zhitao Ying, Ting He, Xiaopei Wang, Wen Zheng, Ningjing Lin, Meifeng Tu, Yan Xie,
Lingyan Ping, Chen Zhang, Weiping Liu, Lijuan Deng, Feifei Qi, Yanping Ding, Xin-
an Lu, Yuqin Song, and Jun Zhu. Parallel Comparison of 4-1BB or CD28 Co-stimulated
CD19-Targeted CAR-T Cells for B Cell Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma. Mol. Ther. Oncolytics,
15:60–68, December 2019.
[45] Joseph A. Fraietta, # Simon F. Lacey, # Elena J. Orlando, Iulian Pruteanu-Malinici,
Mercy Gohil, Stefan Lundh, Alina C. Boesteanu, Yan Wang, Roddy S. O’Connor, Wei-
Ting Hwang, Edward Pequignot, David E. Ambrose, Changfeng Zhang, Nicholas Wilcox,
Felipe Bedoya, Corin Dorfmeier, Fang Chen, Lifeng Tian, Harit Parakandi, Minnal Gupta,
Regina M. Young, F. Brad Johnson, Irina Kulikovskaya, Li Liu, Jun Xu, Sadik H. Kassim,
Megan M. Davis, Bruce L. Levine, Noelle V. Frey, Donald L. Siegel, Alexander C. Huang,
E. John Wherry, Hans Bitter, Jennifer L. Brogdon, David L. Porter, Carl H. June, and
J. Joseph Melenhorst. Determinants of response and resistance to CD19 chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) T cell therapy of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nat. Med., 24(5):563–571,
May 2018.
78
==PAGE:88==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[46] Qiang Dai, Ping Han, Xinyue Qi, Fanlin Li, Min Li, Lilv Fan, Huihui Zhang, Xiaoqing
Zhang, and Xuanming Yang. 4-1BB Signaling Boosts the Anti-Tumor Activity of CD28-
Incorporated 2nd Generation Chimeric Antigen Receptor-Modiﬁed T Cells. Front. Im-
munol., 11, November 2020.
[47] Ana Textor, Laura Grunewald, Kathleen Anders, Anika Klaus, Silke Schwiebert, Annika
Winkler, Maria Stecklum, Jana Rol↵, Anton G. Henssen, Uta E. H¨opken, Angelika Eggert,
Johannes H. Schulte, Michael C. Jensen, Thomas Blankenstein, and Annette K¨unkele.
CD28 Co-Stimulus Achieves Superior CAR T Cell E↵ector Function against Solid Tumors
Than 4-1BB Co-Stimulus. Cancers, 13(5), March 2021.
[48] Xiangyu Zhao, Junfang Yang, Xian Zhang, Xin-An Lu, Min Xiong, Jianping Zhang, Xiaosu
Zhou, Feifei Qi, Ting He, Yanping Ding, Xuelian Hu, Floris De Smet, Peihua Lu, and
Xiaojun Huang. Eﬃcacy and Safety of CD28- or 4-1BB-Based CD19 CAR-T Cells in B
Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia. Mol. Ther. Oncolytics, 18:272–281, September 2020.
[49] Marina Martinez and Edmund Kyung Moon. CAR T Cells for Solid Tumors: New Strate-
gies for Finding, Inﬁltrating, and Surviving in the Tumor Microenvironment. Front. Im-
munol., 10:429884, February 2019.
[50] Even Walseng, Hakan K¨oksal, Ibrahim M. Sektioglu, Anne F˚ane, Gjertrud Skorstad, Gun-
nar Kvalheim, Gustav Gaudernack, Else Marit Inderberg, and S´ebastien W¨alchli. A TCR-
based Chimeric Antigen Receptor. Sci. Rep., 7(1):10713., September 2017.
[51] Ranjit Nair and Jason Westin. CAR T Cells. In Immunotherapy, pages 297–317. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 2021.
[52] Elisabetta Volpe, Manolo Sambucci, Luca Battistini, and Giovanna Borsellino. Fas–Fas
Ligand: Checkpoint of T Cell Functions in Multiple Sclerosis. Front. Immunol., 7, 2016.
[53] Ling Wu, Qianru Wei, Joanna Brzostek, and Nicholas R. J. Gascoigne. Signaling from
T cell receptors (TCRs) and chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) on T cells. Cell. Mol.
Immunol., 17(6):600, June 2020.
[54] Marion Subklewe, Michael von Bergwelt-Baildon, and Andreas Humpe. Chimeric Antigen
Receptor T Cells: A Race to Revolutionize Cancer Therapy. Transfusion Medicine and
Hemotherapy, 46(1):15, February 2019.
79
==PAGE:89==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[55] Cheng Zhang, Jun Liu, Jiang F. Zhong, and Xi Zhang.
Engineering CAR-T cells.
Biomarker Res., 5(1):1–6, December 2017.
[56] Mansour Poorebrahim, Jeroen Melief, Yago Pico de Coa˜na, Stina L. Wickstr¨om, An-
gel Cid-Arregui, and Rolf Kiessling. Counteracting CAR T cell dysfunction. Oncogene,
40(2):421–435, January 2021.
[57] Brian G. Till, Michael C. Jensen, Jinjuan Wang, Xiaojun Qian, Ajay K. Gopal, David G.
Maloney, Catherine G. Lindgren, Yukang Lin, John M. Pagel, Lihua E. Budde, An-
drew Raubitschek, Stephen J. Forman, Philip D. Greenberg, Stanley R. Riddell, and
Oliver W. Press. CD20-speciﬁc adoptive immunotherapy for lymphoma using a chimeric
antigen receptor with both CD28 and 4-1BB domains: pilot clinical trial results. Blood,
119(17):3940–3950, April 2012.
[58] Richard A. Morgan, James C. Yang, Mio Kitano, Mark E. Dudley, Carolyn M. Laurencot,
and Steven A. Rosenberg. Case report of a serious adverse event following the adminis-
tration of T cells transduced with a chimeric antigen receptor recognizing ERBB2. Mol.
Ther., 18(4):843–851, April 2010.
[59] Markus Chmielewski and Hinrich Abken. TRUCKs: the fourth generation of CARs. Expert
Opin. Biol. Ther., 15(8):1145–1154, 2015.
[60] Bryan D. Choi, Xiaoling Yu, Ana P. Castano, Amanda A. Bou↵ard, Andrea Schmidts, Re-
becca C. Larson, Stefanie R. Bailey, Angela C. Boroughs, Matthew J. Frigault, Mark B. Le-
ick, Irene Scarf`o, Curtis L. Cetrulo, Shadmehr Demehri, Brian V. Nahed, Daniel P. Cahill,
Hiroaki Wakimoto, William T. Curry, Bob S. Carter, and Marcela V. Maus. CAR-T cells
secreting BiTEs circumvent antigen escape without detectable toxicity. Nat. Biotechnol.,
37(9):1049–1058, September 2019.
[61] Tessa Gargett, Lisa M. Ebert, Nga T. H. Truong, Paris M. Kollis, Kristyna Sedivakova,
Wenbo Yu, Erica C. F. Yeo, Nicole L. Wittwer, Briony L. Gliddon, Melinda N. Tea,
Rebecca Ormsby, Santosh Poonnoose, Jake Nowicki, Orazio Vittorio, David S. Ziegler,
Stuart M. Pitson, and Michael P. Brown. Original research: GD2-targeting CAR-T cells
enhanced by transgenic IL-15 expression are an e↵ective and clinically feasible therapy for
glioblastoma. J. ImmunoTher. Cancer, 10(9), 2022.
[62] Una O’Doherty Andrew Fesnak. Clinical Development and Manufacture of Chimeric Anti-
gen Receptor T cells and the Role of Leukapheresis. <a href=, May 2017.
80
==PAGE:90==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[63] Bruce L. Levine, James Miskin, Keith Wonnacott, and Christopher Keir. Global Manu-
facturing of CAR T Cell Therapy. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev., 4:92–101, December
2016.
[64] Jianxia Zhou, Liyuan Jin, Fuping Wang, Yuan Zhang, Bing Liu, and Tongbiao Zhao.
Chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cells expanded with IL-7/IL-15 mediate superior
antitumor e↵ects. Protein & Cell, 10(10):764, October 2019.
[65] Cameron J. Turtle, Carolina Berger, Daniel Sommermeyer, Laila-Aicha Hanaﬁ, Barbara
Pender, Emily M. Robinson, Katherine Melville, Tanya M. Budiarto, Natalia N. Steevens,
Colette Chaney, Sindhu Cherian, Brent L. Wood, Lorinda Soma, Xueyan Chen, Shelly
Heimfeld, Michael C. Jensen, Stanley R. Riddell, and David G. Maloney.
Anti-CD19
Chimeric Antigen Receptor-Modiﬁed T Cell Therapy for B Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
and Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia: Fludarabine and Cyclophosphamide Lymphodeple-
tion Improves In Vivo Expansion and Persistence of CAR-T Cells and Clinical Outcomes.
Blood, 126(23):184, December 2015.
[66] Ulrich Blache, Georg Popp, Anna D¨unkel, Ulrike Koehl, and Stephan Fricke. Potential
solutions for manufacture of CAR T cells in cancer immunotherapy.
Nat. Commun.,
13(5225):1–5, September 2022.
[67] Seshu Tyagarajan, Tom Spencer, and Jonathan Smith. Optimizing CAR-T Cell Manufac-
turing Processes during Pivotal Clinical Trials. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev., 16:136–144,
March 2020.
[68] CAR T Cells: Engineering Immune Cells to Treat Cancer. National Cancer Institute.,
March 2022. [Online; accessed 21. May 2023].
[69] Joseph E. Maakaron, Marie Hu, and Najla El Jurdi. Chimeric antigen receptor T cell
therapy for cancer: clinical applications and practical considerations. BMJ, 378:e068956,
August 2022.
[70] Alexander Dimitri, Friederike Herbst, and Joseph A. Fraietta.
Engineering the next-
generation of CAR T-cells with CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing.
Mol. Cancer, 21(1):1–13,
December 2022.
[71] Renier J. Brentjens, Marco L. Davila, Isabelle Riviere, Jae Park, Xiuyan Wang, Lindsay G.
Cowell, Shirley Bartido, Jolanta Stefanski, Clare Taylor, Malgorzata Olszewska, Oriana
81
==PAGE:91==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Borquez-Ojeda, Jinrong Qu, Teresa Wasielewska, Qing He, Yvette Bernal, Ivelise V.
Rijo, Cyrus Hedvat, Rachel Kobos, Kevin Curran, Peter Steinherz, Joseph Jurcic, Todd
Rosenblat, Peter Maslak, Mark Frattini, and Michel Sadelain. CD19-Targeted T Cells
Rapidly Induce Molecular Remissions in Adults with Chemotherapy-Refractory Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med., 5(177):177ra38, March 2013.
[72] Gils Roex, Tom Feys, Yves Beguin, Tessa Kerre, Xavier Poir´e, Philippe Lewalle, Peter
Vandenberghe, Dominique Bron, and S´ebastien Anguille. Chimeric Antigen Receptor-T-
Cell Therapy for B-Cell Hematological Malignancies: An Update of the Pivotal Clinical
Trial Data. Pharmaceutics, 12(2):194, February 2020.
[73] Ajeet Gajra, Abigail Zalenski, Aishwarya Sannareddy, Yolaine Jeune-Smith, Kandice
Kapinos, and Ankit Kansagra. Barriers to Chimeric Antigen Receptor T-Cell (CAR-T)
Therapies in Clinical Practice. Pharmaceutical Medicine, 36(3):163, 2022.
[74] Lenka V. Hurton, Harjeet Singh, Amer M. Najjar, Kirsten C. Switzer, Tiejuan Mi,
Sourindra Maiti, Simon Olivares, Brian Rabinovich, Helen Huls, Marie-Andr´ee Forget,
Vrushali Datar, Partow Kebriaei, Dean A. Lee, Richard E. Champlin, and Laurence J. N.
Cooper.
Tethered IL-15 augments antitumor activity and promotes a stem-cell mem-
ory subset in tumor-speciﬁc T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 113(48):7788–7797,
November 2016.
[75] Regina M. Young, Nils W. Engel, Ugur Uslu, Nils Wellhausen, and Carl H. June. Next-
Generation CAR T-cell Therapies. Cancer Discov., 12(7):1625–1633, July 2022.
[76] Faroogh Maroﬁ, Roza Motavalli, Vladimir A. Safonov, Lakshmi Thangavelu, Alexei Va-
lerievich Yumashev, Markov Alexander, Navid Shomali, Max Stanley Chartrand, Yash-
want Pathak, Mostafa Jarahian, Sepideh Izadi, Ali Hassanzadeh, Naghmeh Shirafkan, Safa
Tahmasebi, and Farhad Motavalli Khiavi. CAR T cells in solid tumors: challenges and
opportunities. Stem Cell Res. Ther., 12(1):1–16, December 2021.
[77] H´el`ene Salmon, Katarzyna Franciszkiewicz, Diane Damotte, Marie-Caroline Dieu-Nosjean,
Pierre Validire, Alain Trautmann, Fathia Mami-Chouaib, and Emmanuel Donnadieu. Ma-
trix architecture deﬁnes the preferential localization and migration of T cells into the
stroma of human lung tumors. J. Clin. Invest., 122(3):899–910, March 2012.
[78] Yogindra Vedvyas, Jaclyn E. McCloskey, Yanping Yang, Irene M. Min, Thomas J. Fahey,
Rasa Zarnegar, Yen-Michael S. Hsu, Jing-Mei Hsu, Koen Van Besien, Ian Gaudet, Ping
82
==PAGE:92==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Law, Nak Joon Kim, Eric von Hofe, and Moonsoo M. Jin. Manufacturing and preclinical
validation of CAR T cells targeting ICAM-1 for advanced thyroid cancer therapy. Sci.
Rep., 9(10634):1–15, July 2019.
[79] Mark C. Poznansky, Ivona T. Olszak, Richard H. Evans, Zhengyu Wang, Russell B. Foxall,
Douglas P. Olson, Kathryn Weibrecht, Andrew D. Luster, and David T. Scadden. Thy-
mocyte emigration is mediated by active movement away from stroma-derived factors. J.
Clin. Invest., 109(8):1101–1110, April 2002.
[80] Jian Li, Wenwen Li, Kejia Huang, Yang Zhang, Gary Kupfer, and Qi Zhao. Chimeric
antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) immunotherapy for solid tumors: lessons learned and
strategies for moving forward. J. Hematol. Oncol., 11(1):22., February 2018.
[81] P-PSMA-101 CAR-T Cells in the Treatment of Subjects With Metastatic Castration-
Resistant Prostate Cancer (mCRPC) and Advanced Salivary Gland Cancers (SGC) -
ClinicalTrials.gov - https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04249947, May 2023. [Online;
accessed 23. May 2023].
[82] CART-PSMA-TGFβRDN Cells for Castrate-Resistant Prostate Cancer - ClinicalTri-
als.gov - https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03089203, March 2017. [Online; accessed
23. May 2023].
[83] Stanford Health Care - Medical treatments: CAR T cell therapy / Side-e↵ects, May 2019.
[Online; accessed 15. May 2023].
[84] Alexander Shimabukuro-Vornhagen, Philipp G¨odel, Marion Subklewe, Hans Joachim
Stemmler, Hans Anton Schl¨oßer, Max Schlaak, Matthias Kochanek, Boris B¨oll, and
Michael S. von Bergwelt-Baildon. Cytokine release syndrome. J. ImmunoTher. Cancer,
6, 2018.
[85] U. Winkler, M. Jensen, O. Manzke, H. Schulz, V. Diehl, and A. Engert. Cytokine-release
syndrome in patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and high lymphocyte
counts after treatment with an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab, IDEC-C2B8).
Blood, 94(7):2217–2224, October 1999.
[86] Daniel W. Lee, Rebecca Gardner, David L. Porter, Chrystal U. Louis, Nabil Ahmed,
Michael Jensen, Stephan A. Grupp, and Crystal L. Mackall.
Current concepts in the
diagnosis and management of cytokine release syndrome. Blood, 124(2):188, July 2014.
83
==PAGE:93==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[87] Jennifer N. Brudno and James N. Kochenderfer. Toxicities of chimeric antigen receptor T
cells: recognition and management. Blood, 127(26):3321–3330, June 2016.
[88] Yongxian Hu, Zhao Wu, Yi Luo, Jimin Shi, Jian Yu, Chengfei Pu, Zuyu Liang, Guo-
qing Wei, Qu Cui, Jie Sun, Jing Jiang, Jue Xie, Yamin Tan, Wanmao Ni, Jifang Tu,
Jinping Wang, Aiyun Jin, Hao Zhang, Zhen Cai, Lei Xiao, and He Huang. Potent Anti-
leukemia Activities of Chimeric Antigen Receptor-Modiﬁed T Cells against CD19 in Chi-
nese Patients with Relapsed/Refractory Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia. Clin. Cancer Res.,
23(13):3297–3306, July 2017.
[89] Challice L. Bonifant, Hollie J. Jackson, Renier J. Brentjens, and Kevin J. Curran. Toxicity
and management in CAR T-cell therapy. Mol. Ther. Oncolytics, 3:16011., April 2016.
[90] Lele Miao, Zhengchao Zhang, Zhijian Ren, and Yumin Li. Reactions Related to CAR-T
Cell Therapy. Front. Immunol., 12, April 2021.
[91] Shangjun Sun, He Hao, Ge Yang, Yi Zhang, and Yang Fu. Immunotherapy with CAR-
Modiﬁed T Cells: Toxicities and Overcoming Strategies. Journal of Immunology Research,
2018, 2018.
[92] S. Hacein-Bey-Abina, C. Von Kalle, M. Schmidt, M. P. McCormack, N. Wul↵raat,
P. Leboulch, A. Lim, C. S. Osborne, R. Pawliuk, E. Morillon, R. Sorensen, A. Forster,
P. Fraser, J. I. Cohen, G. de Saint Basile, I. Alexander, U. Wintergerst, T. Frebourg,
A. Aurias, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet, S. Romana, I. Radford-Weiss, F. Gross, F. Valensi, E. De-
labesse, E. Macintyre, F. Sigaux, J. Soulier, L. E. Leiva, M. Wissler, C. Prinz, T. H.
Rabbitts, F. Le Deist, A. Fischer, and M. Cavazzana-Calvo. LMO2-associated clonal T
cell proliferation in two patients after gene therapy for SCID-X1. Science, 302(5644):415–
419, October 2003.
[93] Salima Hacein-Bey-Abina, Alexandrine Garrigue, Gary P. Wang, Jean Soulier, Annick
Lim, Estelle Morillon, Emmanuelle Clappier, Laure Caccavelli, Eric Delabesse, Kheira
Beldjord, Vahid Asnaﬁ, Elizabeth MacIntyre, Liliane Dal Cortivo, Isabelle Radford, Nicole
Brousse, Fran¸cois Sigaux, Despina Moshous, Julia Hauer, Arndt Borkhardt, Bernd H.
Belohradsky, Uwe Wintergerst, Maria C. Velez, Lily Leiva, Ricardo Sorensen, Nicolas
Wul↵raat, St´ephane Blanche, Frederic D. Bushman, Alain Fischer, and Marina Cavazzana-
Calvo.
Insertional oncogenesis in 4 patients after retrovirus-mediated gene therapy of
SCID-X1. J. Clin. Invest., 118(9):3132, September 2008.
84
==PAGE:94==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[94] Kevin J. Curran, Hollie J. Pegram, and Renier J. Brentjens. Chimeric Antigen Receptors
for T cell Immunotherapy: Current Understanding and Future Direction. J. Gene Med.,
14(6):405, June 2012.
[95] Michael H. Kershaw, Jennifer A. Westwood, Linda L. Parker, Gang Wang, Zelig Eshhar,
Sharon A. Mavroukakis, Donald E. White, John R. Wunderlich, Silvana Canevari, Linda
Rogers-Freezer, Clara C. Chen, James C. Yang, Steven A. Rosenberg, and Patrick Hwu.
A Phase I Study on Adoptive Immunotherapy Using Gene-Modiﬁed T Cells for Ovarian
Cancer. Clinical cancer research : an oﬃcial journal of the American Association for
Cancer Research, 12(20 Pt 1):6106, October 2006.
[96] Cor H. J. Lamers, Ralph Willemsen, Pascal van Elzakker, Sabine van Steenbergen-
Langeveld, Marieke Broertjes, Jeannette Oosterwijk-Wakka, Egbert Oosterwijk, Stefan
Sleijfer, Reno Debets, and Jan W. Gratama. Immune responses to transgene and retrovi-
ral vector in patients treated with ex vivo-engineered T cells. Blood, 117(1):72–82, January
2011.
[97] Gregory M. Chen, Jan Joseph Melenhorst, and Kai Tan. B cell targeting in CAR T cell
therapy: Side e↵ect or driver of CAR T cell function? Sci. Transl. Med., 14(650):eabn3353,
June 2022.
[98] Joshua A. Hill, Sergio Giralt, Troy R. Torgerson, and Hillard M. Lazarus. CAR-T - and a
side order of IgG, to go? - Immunoglobulin replacement in patients receiving CAR-T cell
therapy. Blood Rev., 38:100596., November 2019.
[99] Qibin Liao, Zhuoqun Liu, Cuisong Zhu, Huan He, Meiqi Feng, Lang Jiang, Xiangqing
Ding, Rongxun Sun, Xiaoyan Zhang, and Jianqing Xu. Rapid generation of a mouse model
for evaluating on-target normal tissue toxicity of human CAR-T cells using replication-
defective recombinant adenovirus. J. Adv. Res., 47:163–171, May 2023.
[100] Siyuan Qian, Pedro Villarejo-Campos, Ismael Guijo, Sergio Hernandez-Villafranca,
Damian Garcia-Olmo, Sara Gonzalez-Soares, Hector Guadalajara, Santos Jimenez-
Galanes, and Cheng Qian. Update for Advance CAR-T Therapy in Solid Tumors, Clinical
Application in Peritoneal Carcinomatosis From Colorectal Cancer and Future Prospects.
Front. Immunol., 13, March 2022.
[101] Ehsan Moghanloo, Hasan Mollanoori, Mohsen Talebi, Salar Pashangzadeh, Fatemeh
Faraji, Farimah Hadjilooei, and Habibollah Mahmoodzadeh. Remote controlling of CAR-
85
==PAGE:95==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
T cells and toxicity management: Molecular switches and next generation CARs. Transl.
Oncol., 14(6):101070, June 2021.
[102] Eric C. Holland. Glioblastoma multiforme: The terminator. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,
97(12):6242, June 2000.
[103] Luke Maggs, Giulia Cattaneo, Ali Emre Dal, Ali Sanjari Moghaddam, and Soldano Fer-
rone.
CAR T Cell-Based Immunotherapy for the Treatment of Glioblastoma.
Front.
Neurosci., 15, May 2021.
[104] Ken Chang, Biqi Zhang, Xiaotao Guo, Min Zong, Rifaquat Rahman, David Sanchez,
Nicolette Winder, David A. Reardon, Binsheng Zhao, Patrick Y. Wen, and Raymond Y.
Huang. Multimodal imaging patterns predict survival in recurrent glioblastoma patients
treated with bevacizumab. Neuro-oncol., 18(12):1680–1687, December 2016.
[105] Pavlina Chuntova, Kira M. Downey, Bindu Hegde, Neil D. Almeida, and Hideho Okada.
Genetically Engineered T-Cells for Malignant Glioma: Overcoming the Barriers to E↵ec-
tive Immunotherapy. Front. Immunol., 9, January 2019.
[106] Donald M. O’Rourke, MacLean P. Nasrallah, Arati Desai, Jan J. Melenhorst, Keith Mans-
ﬁeld, Jennifer J. D. Morrissette, Maria Martinez-Lage, Steven Brem, Eileen Maloney,
Angela Shen, Randi Isaacs, Suyash Mohan, Gabriela Plesa, Simon F. Lacey, Jean-Marc
Navenot, Zhaohui Zheng, Bruce L. Levine, Hideho Okada, Carl H. June, Jennifer L. Brog-
don, and Marcela V. Maus. A single dose of peripherally infused EGFRvIII-directed CAR
T cells mediates antigen loss and induces adaptive resistance in patients with recurrent
glioblastoma. Sci. Transl. Med., 9(399), July 2017.
[107] Adrianna Rutkowska, Ewelina Stoczy´nska-Fidelus, Karolina Janik, Aneta W lodarczyk,
and Piotr Rieske. EGFRvIII: An Oncogene with Ambiguous Role. Journal of Oncology,
2019, 2019.
[108] E. Tzahar, H. Waterman, X. Chen, G. Levkowitz, D. Karunagaran, S. Lavi, B. J. Ratzkin,
and Y. Yarden.
A hierarchical network of interreceptor interactions determines signal
transduction by Neu di↵erentiation factor/neuregulin and epidermal growth factor. Mol.
Cell. Biol., 16(10):5276–5287, October 1996.
[109] Raymond C. Harris, Eunkyung Chung, and Robert J. Co↵ey. EGF receptor ligands. Exp.
Cell Res., 284(1):2–13, March 2003.
86
==PAGE:96==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[110] Xiaochun Yu, Kailash D. Sharma, Tsuyoshi Takahashi, Ryo Iwamoto, and Eisuke Mekada.
Ligand-independent dimer formation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a step
separable from ligand-induced EGFR signaling. Mol. Biol. Cell, 13(7):2547–2557, July
2002.
[111] Nicholas J. Bessman, Atrish Bagchi, Kathryn M. Ferguson, and Mark A. Lemmon. Com-
plex relationship between ligand binding and dimerization in the epidermal growth factor
receptor. Cell Rep., 9(4):1306–1317, November 2014.
[112] Cezary Treda, Marta Popeda, Magdalena Ksiazkiewicz, Dawid P. Grzela, Maciej P. Wal-
czak, Mateusz Banaszczyk, Joanna Peciak, Ewelina Stoczynska-Fidelus, and Piotr Rieske.
EGFR Activation Leads to Cell Death Independent of PI3K/AKT/mTOR in an AD293
Cell Line. PLoS One, 11(5):e0155230., May 2016.
[113] Jeroen A. J. M. van de Water, Tugba Bagci-Onder, Aayush S. Agarwal, Hiroaki Wakimoto,
Rob C. Roovers, Yanni Zhu, Randa Kasmieh, Deepak Bhere, Paul M. P. Van Bergen en
Henegouwen, and Khalid Shah.
Therapeutic stem cells expressing variants of EGFR-
speciﬁc nanobodies have antitumor e↵ects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 109(41):16642–
16647, October 2012.
[114] Ken-ichi Sato. Cellular Functions Regulated by Phosphorylation of EGFR on Tyr845. Int.
J. Mol. Sci., 14(6):10761, June 2013.
[115] Kobra Omidfar and Zaynab Shirvani. Single domain antibodies: a new concept for epider-
mal growth factor receptor and EGFRvIII targeting. DNA Cell Biol., 31(6):1015–1026,
June 2012.
[116] Adrianna Rutkowska, Ewelina Stoczy´nska-Fidelus, Karolina Janik, Aneta W lodarczyk,
and Piotr Rieske.
EGFRvIII: An Oncogene with Ambiguous Role.
J. Oncol.,
2019:1092587., December 2019.
[117] Ju Yang, Jing Yan, and Baorui Liu. Targeting EGFRvIII for glioblastoma multiforme.
Cancer Lett., 403:224–230, September 2017.
[118] Endang R. Purba, Ei-ichiro Saita, and Ichiro N. Maruyama.
Activation of the EGF
Receptor by Ligand Binding and Oncogenic Mutations: The “Rotation Model”. Cells,
6(2), June 2017.
87
==PAGE:97==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[119] H. S. Huang, M. Nagane, C. K. Klingbeil, H. Lin, R. Nishikawa, X. D. Ji, C. M. Huang,
G. N. Gill, H. S. Wiley, and W. K. Cavenee.
The enhanced tumorigenic activity of
a mutant epidermal growth factor receptor common in human cancers is mediated by
threshold levels of constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation and unattenuated signaling. J.
Biol. Chem., 272(5):2927–2935, January 1997.
[120] K. Shtiegman, B. S. Kochupurakkal, Y. Zwang, G. Pines, A. Starr, A. Vexler, A. Citri,
M. Katz, S. Lavi, Y. Ben-Basat, S. Benjamin, S. Corso, J. Gan, R. B. Yosef, S. Gior-
dano, and Y. Yarden. Defective ubiquitinylation of EGFR mutants of lung cancer confers
prolonged signaling. Oncogene, 26(49):6968–6978, October 2007.
[121] Joshua M. Francis, Cheng-Zhong Zhang, Cecile L. Maire, Joonil Jung, Veronica E. Manzo,
Viktor A. Adalsteinsson, Heather Homer, Sam Haidar, Brendan Blumenstiel, Chan-
dra Sekhar Pedamallu, Azra H. Ligon, J. Christopher Love, Matthew Meyerson, and
Keith L. Ligon.
EGFR variant heterogeneity in glioblastoma resolved through single-
nucleus sequencing. Cancer discovery, 4(8):956, August 2014.
[122] Jeonghee Cho, Sandra Pastorino, Qing Zeng, Xiaoyin Xu, William Johnson, Scott Van-
denberg, Roel Verhaak, Andrew Cherniack, Hideo Watanabe, Amit Dutt, Jihyun Kwon,
Ying S. Chao, Robert C. Onofrio, Derek Chiang, Yuki Yuza, Santosh Kesari, and Matthew
Meyerson. Glioblastoma-derived Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) carboxyl-
terminal deletion mutants are transforming and are sensitive to EGFR-directed therapies.
Cancer Res., 71(24):7587, December 2011.
[123] A. J. Wong, J. M. Ruppert, S. H. Bigner, C. H. Grzeschik, P. A. Humphrey, D. S. Bigner,
and B. Vogelstein. Structural alterations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in
human gliomas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 89(7):2965, April 1992.
[124] Wojciech J. Stec, Kamila Rosiak, Paulina Siejka, Joanna Peciak, Marta Popeda, Ma-
teusz Banaszczyk, Roza Pawlowska, Cezary Treda, Krystyna Hulas-Bigoszewska, Sylwester
Piaskowski, Ewelina Stoczynska-Fidelus, and Piotr Rieske.
Cell line with endogenous
EGFRvIII expression is a suitable model for research and drug development purposes.
Oncotarget, 7(22):31907, May 2016.
[125] Richard A. Morgan, Laura A. Johnson, Jeremy L. Davis, Zhili Zheng, Kevin D. Woolard,
Elizabeth A. Reap, Steven A. Feldman, Nachimuthu Chinnasamy, Chien-Tsun Kuan, Hua
Song, Wei Zhang, Howard A. Fine, and Steven A. Rosenberg. Recognition of Glioma Stem
88
==PAGE:98==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Cells by Genetically Modiﬁed T Cells Targeting EGFRvIII and Development of Adoptive
Cell Therapy for Glioma. Hum. Gene Ther., 23(10):1043–1053, July 2012.
[126] David Escors and Karine Breckpot. Lentiviral vectors in gene therapy: their current status
and future potential. Arch. Immunol. Ther. Exp., 58(2):107, April 2010.
[127] Y. K. Sung and S. W. Kim. Recent advances in the development of gene delivery systems.
Biomater. Res., 23(1):1–7, December 2019.
[128] Kenya Kamimura, Takeshi Suda, Guisheng Zhang, and Dexi Liu.
Advances in Gene
Delivery Systems. Pharm. Med., 25(5):293–306, October 2011.
[129] Pauline van Nies, Ilja Westerlaken, Duco Blanken, Margarita Salas, Mario Menc´ıa, and
Christophe Danelon. Self-replication of DNA by its encoded proteins in liposome-based
synthetic cells. Nat. Commun., 9(1583):1–12, April 2018.
[130] M. I. Bukrinsky, S. Haggerty, M. P. Dempsey, N. Sharova, A. Adzhubel, L. Spitz, P. Lewis,
D. Goldfarb, M. Emerman, and M. Stevenson. A nuclear localization signal within HIV-1
matrix protein that governs infection of non-dividing cells. Nature, 365(6447):666–669,
October 1993.
[131] In`es Dufait, Therese Liechtenstein, Alessio Lanna, Christopher Bricogne, Roberta
Laranga, Antonella Padella, Karine Breckpot, and David Escors. Retroviral and Lentiviral
Vectors for the Induction of Immunological Tolerance. Scientiﬁca, 2012, 2012.
[132] Gerard J. McGarrity, Gloria Hoyah, April Winemiller, Kris Andre, David Stein, Gary
Blick, Richard N. Greenberg, Cli↵ord Kinder, Andrew Zolopa, Gwen Binder-Scholl, Pablo
Tebas, Carl H. June, Laurent M. Humeau, and Tessio Rebello. Patient monitoring and
follow-up in lentiviral clinical trials. J. Gene Med., 15(2):78–82, February 2013.
[133] Ella S. Atsavapranee, Margaret M. Billingsley, and Michael J. Mitchell. Delivery tech-
nologies for T cell gene editing: Applications in cancer immunotherapy. eBioMedicine, 67,
May 2021.
[134] Brian Olson, Yadi Li, Yu Lin, Edison T. Liu, and Akash Patnaik.
Mouse Models for
Cancer Immunotherapy Research. Cancer Discov., 8(11):1358–1365, November 2018.
[135] Rebecca Kohnken, Pierluigi Porcu, and Anjali Mishra. Overview of the Use of Murine
Models in Leukemia and Lymphoma Research. Front. Oncol., 7:22., February 2017.
89
==PAGE:99==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[136] Madhavi Puchalapalli, Xianke Zeng, Liang Mu, Aubree Anderson, Laura Hix Glickman,
Ming Zhang, Megan R. Sayyad, Sierra Mosticone Wangensteen, Charles V. Clevenger, and
Jennifer E. Koblinski. NSG Mice Provide a Better Spontaneous Model of Breast Cancer
Metastasis than Athymic (Nude) Mice. PLoS One, 11(9):e0163521., September 2016.
[137] William H. Hicks, Cylaina E. Bird, Je↵rey I. Traylor, Diana D. Shi, Tarek Y. El Ahmadieh,
Timothy E. Richardson, Samuel K. McBrayer, and Kalil G. Abdullah.
Contemporary
Mouse Models in Glioma Research. Cells, 10(3):712, March 2021.
[138] M. F. Sanmamed, C. Chester, I. Melero, and H. Kohrt.
Deﬁning the optimal murine
models to investigate immune checkpoint blockers and their combination with other im-
munotherapies. Ann. Oncol., 27(7):1190–1198, July 2016.
[139] Jaquelyn T. Zoine, Sarah E. Moore, and M. Paulina Velasquez. Leukemia’s Next Top
Model? Syngeneic Models to Advance Adoptive Cellular Therapy. Front. Immunol., 13,
March 2022.
[140] N. M. Greenberg, F. DeMayo, M. J. Finegold, D. Medina, W. D. Tilley, J. O. Aspinall,
G. R. Cunha, A. A. Donjacour, R. J. Matusik, and J. M. Rosen. Prostate cancer in a
transgenic mouse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 92(8):3439–3443, April 1995.
[141] Huimin Tian, Yanan Lyu, Yong-Guang Yang, and Zheng Hu. Humanized Rodent Models
for Cancer Research. Front. Oncol., 10, September 2020.
[142] Ryoichi Saito, Takashi Kobayashi, Soki Kashima, Keiyu Matsumoto, and Osamu Ogawa.
Faithful preclinical mouse models for better translation to bedside in the ﬁeld of immuno-
oncology. Int. J. Clin. Oncol., 25(5):831–841, May 2020.
[143] Isabella W. Y. Mak, Nathan Evaniew, and Michelle Ghert. Lost in translation: animal
models and clinical trials in cancer treatment. American Journal of Translational Research,
6(2):114, 2014.
[144] Emily S. Sena, H. Bart van der Worp, Philip M. W. Bath, David W. Howells, and Mal-
colm R. Macleod.
Publication bias in reports of animal stroke studies leads to major
overstatement of eﬃcacy. PLoS Biol., 8(3):e1000344., March 2010.
[145] Zhuo Li, Xiao Yang, and Xiaomin Song.
Humanized Mouse Models for Cancer Im-
munotherapy: A Focus on Human PBMC and HSPC Reconstitution. In Animal Models
90
==PAGE:100==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
for the Development of Cancer Immunotherapy, pages 211–249. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
Chichester, England, UK, September 2022.
[146] Xiaoyin Wang, Zhongjie Xu, Zhengwei Tian, Xi Zhang, Danhua Xu, Qin Li, Junhe Zhang,
and Tianyun Wang. The EF-1↵promoter maintains high-level transgene expression from
episomal vectors in transfected CHO-K1 cells. J. Cell. Mol. Med., 21(11):3044, November
2017.
[147] Bonnie Huang, Kristo↵er Haurum Johansen, and Pamela L. Schwartzberg.
Eﬃcient
CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Mutagenesis in Primary Murine T Lymphocytes. Curr. Protoc.
Immunol., 124(1):e62., February 2019.
[148] Eva Klein, Farkas V´anky, Hannah Ben-Bassat, Hava Neumann, Peter Ralph, Jesper
Zeuthen, and Aaron Polliack. Properties of the K562 cell line, derived from a patient
with chronic myeloid leukemia. Int. J. Cancer, 18(4):421–431, October 1976.
[149] Xiaofeng Liao, Melissa Makris, and Xin M. Luo. Fluorescence-activated Cell Sorting for
Puriﬁcation of Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cells from the Mouse Bone Marrow. Journal of
Visualized Experiments : JoVE, (117), 2016.
[150] Vivian C. W. Fung, Isaac Rosado-S´anchez, and Megan K. Levings. Transduction of Human
T Cell Subsets with Lentivirus. Methods Mol. Biol., 2285(227-254.):;, 2021.
[151] Evripidis Lanitis, Giorgia Rota, Paris Kosti, Catherine Ronet, Aodrenn Spill, Bili Seijo,
Pedro Romero, Denarda Dangaj, George Coukos, and Melita Irving.
Optimized gene
engineering of murine CAR-T cells reveals the beneﬁcial e↵ects of IL-15 coexpression. J.
Exp. Med., 218(2), February 2021.
[152] Jung Eun Kim, Senthilkumar Kalimuthu, and Byeong-Cheol Ahn. In Vivo Cell Tracking
with Bioluminescence Imaging. Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 49(1):3, March
2015.
[153] Masahiro Yamashita and Michael Emerman. Retroviral infection of non-dividing cells:
Old and new perspectives. Virology, 344(1):88–93, January 2006.
[154] P. Lewis, M. Hensel, and M. Emerman. Human immunodeﬁciency virus infection of cells
arrested in the cell cycle. EMBO J., 11(8):3053–3058, August 1992.
91
==PAGE:101==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[155] Michael C. Milone and Una O’Doherty.
Clinical use of lentiviral vectors.
Leukemia,
32(7):1529–1541, July 2018.
[156] Sid P. Kerkar, Luis Sanchez-Perez, Shicheng Yang, Zachary Borman, Pawel Muranski, Yun
Ji, Dhanalakshmi Chinnasamy, Andrew D. M. Kaiser, Christian Hinrichs, Christopher A.
Klebano↵, Christopher Scott, Luca Gattinoni, Richard A. Morgan, Steven A. Rosenberg,
and Nicholas P. Restifo. Genetic engineering of murine CD8+ and CD4+ T cells for pre-
clinical adoptive immunotherapy studies. Journal of immunotherapy (Hagerstown, Md. :
1997), 34(4):343, May 2011.
[157] Roman P. Labb´e, Sandrine Vessillier, and Qasim A. Raﬁq. Lentiviral Vectors for T Cell
Engineering: Clinical Applications, Bioprocessing and Future Perspectives. Viruses, 13(8),
August 2021.
[158] Marianne Delville, Tayebeh Soheili, Florence Bellier, Amandine Durand, Adeline Denis,
Chantal Lagresle-Peyrou, Marina Cavazzana, Isabelle Andre-Schmutz, and Emmanuelle
Six. A Nontoxic Transduction Enhancer Enables Highly Eﬃcient Lentiviral Transduction
of Primary Murine T Cells and Hematopoietic Stem Cells. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev.,
10:341, September 2018.
[159] Krasimira Aleksandrova, Jana Leise, Christoph Priesner, Anette Melk, Fanni Kubaink,
Hinrich Abken, Andreas Hombach, Murat Aktas, Mike Essl, Iris B¨urger, Andrew Kaiser,
Georg Rauser, Marion Jurk, Lilia Goudeva, Wolfgang Glienke, Lubomir Arseniev, Ruth
Esser, and Ulrike K¨ohl. Functionality and Cell Senescence of CD4/ CD8-Selected CD20
CAR T Cells Manufactured Using the Automated CliniMACS Prodigy® Platform. Trans-
fusion Medicine and Hemotherapy, 46(1):47, February 2019.
[160] Rusheni Munisvaradass, Suet Lee Shirley Ding, Hwan Koh Avin Ee, Suresh Kumar,
and Pooi Ling Mok. Overcoming the Challenge of Transduction of Human T-cells with
Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) Speciﬁc for ERBB2 Antigen.
Sains Malaysiana,
46(10):1831–1838, October 2017.
[161] James Lee, Michel Sadelain, and Renier Brentjens.
Retroviral transduction of murine
primary T lymphocytes. Methods Mol. Biol., 506(83-96.):;, 2009.
[162] Jo¨rg G. Baumann, Derya Unutmaz, Michael D. Miller, Sabine K. J. Breun, Stacy M.
Grill, Jane Mirro, Dan R. Littman, Alan Rein, and Vineet N. KewalRamani. Murine T
92
==PAGE:102==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Cells Potently Restrict Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus Infection. J. Virol., November
2004.
[163] Naomi Tsurutani, Jiro Yasuda, Naoki Yamamoto, Byung-Il Choi, Motohiko Kadoki, and
Yoichiro Iwakura. Nuclear Import of the Preintegration Complex Is Blocked upon Infection
by Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus Type 1 in Mouse Cells. J. Virol., January 2007.
[164] Rong En Tay, Emma K. Richardson, and Han Chong Toh. Revisiting the role of CD4+
T cells in cancer immunotherapy—new insights into old paradigms. Cancer Gene Ther.,
28(1):5–17, February 2021.
[165] Camilla Bove, Silvia Arcangeli, Laura Falcone, Barbara Camisa, Rita El Khoury, Beatrice
Greco, Anna De Lucia, Alice Bergamini, Attilio Bondanza, Fabio Ciceri, Chiara Bonini,
and Monica Casucci. CD4 CAR-T cells targeting CD19 play a key role in exacerbating cy-
tokine release syndrome, while maintaining long-term responses. J. ImmunoTher. Cancer,
11(1):e005878, January 2023.
[166] Dongrui Wang, Brenda Aguilar, Renate Starr, Darya Alizadeh, Alfonso Brito, Aniee
Sarkissian, Julie R. Ostberg, Stephen J. Forman, and Christine E. Brown. Glioblastoma-
targeted CD4+ CAR T cells mediate superior antitumor activity. JCI Insight, 3(10), May
2018.
[167] Nathan P. Sweeney and Conrad A. Vink. The impact of lentiviral vector genome size and
producer cell genomic to gag-pol mRNA ratios on packaging eﬃciency and titre. Mol.
Ther. Methods Clin. Dev., 21:574–584, June 2021.
[168] Gray Kueberuwa, Milena Kalaitsidou, Eleanor Cheadle, Robert Edward Hawkins, and
David Edward Gilham. CD19 CAR T Cells Expressing IL-12 Eradicate Lymphoma in
Fully Lymphoreplete Mice through Induction of Host Immunity. Mol. Ther. Oncolytics,
8:41–51, December 2017.
[169] Mukesh Kumar, Brian Keller, Ndeye Makalou, and Richard E. Sutton. Systematic Deter-
mination of the Packaging Limit of Lentiviral Vectors. Hum. Gene Ther., 12(15):1893–
1905, July 2004.
[170] Silvia Arcangeli, Camilla Bove, Claudia Mezzanotte, Barbara Camisa, Laura Falcone,
Francesco Manfredi, Eugenia Bezzecchi, Rita El Khoury, Rossana Norata, Francesca San-
vito, Maurilio Ponzoni, Beatrice Greco, Marta Angiola Moresco, Matteo G. Carrabba,
93
==PAGE:103==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Fabio Ciceri, Chiara Bonini, Attilio Bondanza, and Monica Casucci. CAR T cell man-
ufacturing from naive/stem memory T lymphocytes enhances antitumor responses while
curtailing cytokine release syndrome. J. Clin. Invest., 132(12), June 2022.
[171] Gina L´opez-Cantillo, Claudia Urue˜na, Bernardo Armando Camacho, and Cesar Ram´ırez-
Segura. CAR-T Cell Performance: How to Improve Their Persistence? Front. Immunol.,
13:878209, April 2022.
[172] Wolfgang Weninger, Maura A. Crowley, N. Manjunath, and Ulrich H. von Andrian. Migra-
tory Properties of Naive, E↵ector, and Memory Cd8+ T Cells. J. Exp. Med., 194(7):953,
October 2001.
[173] Pavl´ına Pt´aˇckov´a, Jan Musil, Martin ˇStach, Petr Lesn´y, ˇS´arka Nˇemeˇckov´a, Vlastimil Kr´al,
Milan F´abry, and Pavel Ot´ahal. A new approach to CAR T-cell gene engineering and
cultivation using piggyBac transposon in the presence of IL-4, IL-7 and IL-21. Cytotherapy,
20(4):507–520, April 2018.
[174] Jianchun Chen, Fenghua Zeng, Steven J. Forrester, Satoru Eguchi, Ming-Zhi Zhang, and
Raymond C. Harris. Expression and Function of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
in Physiology and Disease. Physiol. Rev., 96(3):1025–1069, July 2016.
[175] L. J. Zhou, D. C. Ord, S. A. Omori, and T. F. Tedder. Structure of the genes encoding
the CD19 antigen of human and mouse B lymphocytes. Immunogenetics, 35(2):102–111,
1992.
[176] Danay Cibri´an and Francisco S´anchez-Madrid. CD69: from activation marker to metabolic
gatekeeper. Eur. J. Immunol., 47(6):946, June 2017.
[177] Franziska Fuhrmann,
Timo Lischke,
Fridolin Gross,
Tobias Scheel,
Laura Bauer,
Khalid Wasim Kalim, Andreas Radbruch, Hanspeter Herzel, Andreas Hutlo↵, and Ria
Baumgrass. Adequate immune response ensured by binary IL-2 and graded CD25 expres-
sion in a murine transfer model. eLife, December 2016.
[178] Laleh Nikfarjam and Parvaneh Farzaneh. Prevention and Detection of Mycoplasma Con-
tamination in Cell. Cell Journal (Yakhteh), 13(4):203, 2012.
[179] Noriyuki Kijima and Yonehiro Kanemura. Mouse Models of Glioblastoma. In Glioblastoma
[Internet]. Codon Publications, September 2017.
94
==PAGE:104==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
[180] Taemin Oh, Shayan Fakurnejad, Eli T. Sayegh, Aaron J. Clark, Michael E. Ivan,
Matthew Z. Sun, Michael Safaee, Orin Bloch, Charles D. James, and Andrew T. Parsa.
Immunocompetent murine models for the study of glioblastoma immunotherapy. Journal
of Translational Medicine, 12:107, 2014.
[181] John H. Sampson, Bryan D. Choi, Luis Sanchez-Perez, Carter M. Suryadevara, David J.
Snyder, Catherine T. Flores, Robert J. Schmittling, Smita Nair, Elizabeth A. Reap,
Pamela K. Norberg, I. I. James E. Herndon, Chien-Tsun Kuan, Richard A. Morgan,
Steven A. Rosenberg, and Laura A. Johnson.
EGFRvIII mCAR-modiﬁed T-cell ther-
apy cures mice with established intracerebral glioma and generates host immunity against
tumor-antigen loss. Clinical cancer research : an oﬃcial journal of the American Associ-
ation for Cancer Research, 20(4):972, February 2014.
[182] Marco Stringhini, Philipp Probst, and Dario Neri. Immunotherapy of CT26 murine tumors
is characterized by an oligoclonal response of tissue-resident memory T cells against the
AH1 rejection antigen. Eur. J. Immunol., 50(10):1591–1597, October 2020.
95
==PAGE:105==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Appendix 1: Plasmid Maps
Figure 28: EGFRvIII (H/L) CAR Plasmid #44
Figure 29: EGFRvIII (L/H) CAR Plasmid #45
96
==PAGE:106==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 30: EGFRvIII (H/L) CAR Plasmid #85 (Murine)
Figure 31: EGFRvIII (L/H) CAR Plasmid #86 (Murine)
97
==PAGE:107==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 32: EGFRvIII (3C10) CAR Plasmid #105
Figure 33: Luc Plasmid #7
98
==PAGE:108==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 34: CD19 CAR Plasmid #1 (Murine)
Figure 35: EGFRvIII CAR Plasmid #2 (Murine)
99
==PAGE:109==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 36: EGFRvIII Plasmid #9
Figure 37: EGFR Plasmid #10
100
==PAGE:110==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 38: MiGR1 GFP Plasmid (Retro)
bdkfgpkfpoksfpogkpsokgposdkgopksdpgkpsodkoskg˚aks˚agbdkfgpkfpoksfpogkpsokgposdkgopksdpgkpsodkosk
101
==PAGE:111==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Appendix 2: Staining Antibodies
Antibody (AB) / Dye
Colour
Company
Reference
EGFRvIII recombinant rabbit
monoclonal AB (RM419)
-
Invitrogen
Ref: MAS-36216
Goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L)
Cross-Absorbed Secondary AB
APC
Invitrogen
Cat no. A-10931
Hamster Anti-Mouse CD3e
FITC
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 561827
Rat Anti-Mouse CD4
BUV395
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 568375
Rat Anti-Mouse CD8a
BUV737
BD Horizon™
Cat no. 612759
Rat Anti-Mouse CD25
BV480
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 566120
Hamster Anti-Mouse CD69
PE-Cy7
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 561930
Rat Anti-Mouse CD44
BV605
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 563058
Rat Anti-Mouse CD62L
APC
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 561919
Rat Anti-Mouse CD107a
BV421
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 564347
Puriﬁed Rat Anti-Mouse CD16/CD32
(Mouse BD Fc Block™)
-
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 553142
near-IR ﬂuorescent reactive dye
APC-Cy7
Invitrogen
Ref: L10119 A
Armenian Hamster anti-mouse CD3
BV421
BioLegend
Cat no. 100341
Rat Anti-Mouse CD4
APC
BD Pharmingen™
Cat no. 561091
Mouse Anti-Human CD3 (UCHT1)
BV421
BD Horizon™
Cat no. 562426
Mouse Anti-Human CD4 (L200)
PE-Cy7
BD Pharmingen™
Cat. no 560644
CD8 ↵Monoclonal Antibody(5H10)
PerCP
ThermoFischer
Scientiﬁc
Cat no.
MCD0831
Table 4: Antibodies and Dye for Flow Cytometry.The table include an overview of the antibodies
and dye used for Flow Cytometry and their references
102
==PAGE:112==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Appendix 3: Gating Strategies
Figure 39: Titration Gating Strategy
103
==PAGE:113==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 40: Lentiviral transduction of murine T cells Gating Strategy for data analysis
104
==PAGE:114==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 41: Lentiviral transduction of human T cells Gating Strategy for data analysis
105
==PAGE:115==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 42: Retroviral transduction of murine T cells Gating Strategy for GFP construct
data analysis
106
==PAGE:116==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 43: Retroviral transduction of murine T cells Gating Strategy for CAR construct
data analysis
107
==PAGE:117==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 44: EGFRvIII transduction of CT26 Gating Strategy for CT26 + EGFRvIII data
analysis
108
==PAGE:118==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 45: Luc transduction of CT26 Gating Strategy for CT26 + Luc data analysis
109
==PAGE:119==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 46: Degranulation assay of EGFRvIII CAR Gating Strategy for activation assay
data analysis
110
==PAGE:120==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 47: Degranulation assay of CD19 CAR Gating Strategy for activation assay data
analysis
111
==PAGE:121==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 48: Activation Assay of EGFRvIII CAR Gating Strategy for activation assay data
analysis
112
==PAGE:122==
Emily Sophie Hudson & Kathrine Jæger Moos
REFERENCES
Figure 49: Activation Assay of CD19 CAR Gating Strategy for activation assay data
analysis
113
