==PAGE:1==
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive
transcription factors in E.coli
Master Thesis
DTU Bioustain
NOVO NORDISK FOUNDATION CENTRE FOR BIOSUSTAINABILITY
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Yashomangalam Bhutada
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, NOVO NORDISK FOUNDATION CENTRE FOR BIOSUSTAINABIL­
ITY, Kemitorvet, Building 220, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.biosustain.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months (32.5 ECTS) at Novo Nordisk Centre for Biosus­
tainability in a collaborative effort with DTU Chemical Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineeing, MSc Eng.
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering.
Yashomangalam Bhutada ­ s210150
Signature
Date
ii
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Microbial growth and metabolism are significantly affected by substrate heterogeneity in bioreac­
tors [1]. Despite the importance of substrate distribution, glucose heterogeneity and its effects on
bioreactor performance are not fully understood. When glucose is depleted in certain areas of the
bioreactor, the cells may either initiate stress responses or switch to using other carbon sources.
As a result, this may have an impact on the final product titer [2]. This project aims to understand
the role of five transcription factors (FliA, Cra, Crp, RpoS, and PrpR) that are sensitive to glucose
starvation in Escherichia coli [2]. In a scale­down experiment, we simulated oscillating glucose
conditions using intermittent feeding regimes (IFRs) to study E. coli’s response [3]. Compared to
its reference control, the strain with a fliA knockout formed the same amount of biomass in scale­
down experiments. Biomass production was verified through online measurements of ammonia
base addition, oxygen consumption, and carbon dioxide formation during fermentation. This sug­
gests that this knockout strain may contribute to a scale­insensitive phenotype. It was observed that
the ∆fliA strain showed varying performance in tryptophan production strains. Under the same
scale­down conditions, ∆fliA in tryptophan production strain did not result in equal or improved
amount of tryptophan produced. Our findings provide insight into microbial responses to substrate
heterogeneity in large bioreactors, informing strategies for optimizing E. coli cell factories.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
My sincere gratitude goes out to everyone who has assisted me in the journey of my thesis. First
and foremost, I would like to thank Prof. John Woodley and Dr. Suresh Sudarsan for allowing me
to work with the High Density Physiology (HDP) group. I would like to thank Prof. Woodley for
giving me time on short notice and guiding me throughout the thesis writing process. A special
thank you to Suresh for his constant support, guidance, insights, and for giving me this fantastic
exposure. Without Jonas Bafna­Rührer, this thesis would not have been possible; I would like to
express my gratitude for your support throughout the long experiments, weekly feedback meet­
ings, work review, motivating me to present the work at FBM Symposiums, and for always being
available. Additionally, I would like to express my gratitude for the support and assistance of all
my HDP colleagues ­ Peter, Lara, Rebekka, Marta, Miriam, Süleyman, Abraham, and Jean.
I would like to thank Aai, Papa, Mamaji and Tillo for always listening to me and being there for
me. Last but not least, I would like to thank my closest friends, both close by and thousands of
miles away, for always being there for me and inspiring me.
iv
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Structure of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Importance of Scale­down
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Transcription factor and their importance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Carbon Catabolite Repressors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
RpoS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
FliA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
PrpR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Materials
21
3.1
Strain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Medium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Design of Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Pre­culture preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Batch and Fed­batch cultivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.7
Calculation of fermentation parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8
Feeding pulse design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results
33
4.1
Growth physiology of E. coli parent and the transcription factor knock­out strains
33
4.2
Growth physiology of E. coli BW25113 wild type and transcriptional factor knock
out strain under glucose oscillations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Impact of glucose oscillation on tryptophan production strain . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Discussion
43
6
Conclusion
47
7
Future Works
49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
55
A.1
Mechanism of biomass formation in the cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2
E. coli yields’ with respect to substrate consumed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.3
E. coli yields’ with respect to biomass formed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.4
Tryptophan production strain yields with respect to biomass formed
. . . . . . .
57
A.5
CDW values of all samples E. coli BW25113 and its knockout strains
. . . . . .
58
A.6
OD values of all samples E. coli BW25113 and its knockout strains
. . . . . . .
59
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
v
==PAGE:8==
A.7
CER values for E. coli BW25113 and its knockout strains . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.8
OUR values for E. coli BW25113 and its knockout strains
. . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.9
Base volume pumped profile for E. coli and its knockout strains experiments
. .
64
vi
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background of thesis
The mixing of gradients are often one of the most challenging aspects of large­scale bioprocess
scale­up. There are a variety of gradients within the process that can be compared to the character­
istic durations of significant activities within the bioreactor [4]. Large­scale bioreactors requires
longer mixing times than lab­scale bioreactors. The majority of bioprocesses are fed­batch, which
results in high cell densities. High cell densities result in fast conversion and uptake of substrate.
This fast conversion combined with relative long mixing times results in the formation of substrate
gradients.
As glucose is added to the bioreactor from the top, E. coli consumes most of the glucose, leading
to a state of glucose starvation for the cells at the bottom of the bioreactor. Continuous circulation
of the cells exposes the cells to varying glucose concentrations, which may influences the product
formed. Various transcription factors within the cells regulate how the cells respond to these stres­
sors. Cells exhibit varied responses under these differing conditions due to divergent biological
mechanisms. For instance, in high glucose concentration environments, it shifts to an overflow
metabolism producing acetate as a by­product, whereas, in low glucose concentration situations,
it activates EIIA(Glc) and other pathways, as discussed in the theory [5]. A sufficient amount of
glucose is supplied to prevent E. coli from entering the overflow mechanism.
It is possible to use a scale­down bioreactor to understand not only E. coli’s response to glucose
heterogeneity but also how to manage different gradients formed in industrial­scale bioprocesses.
1.2
Aim of thesis
The primary objective of this study is to investigate the role of transcription factors (TFs) in mod­
ulating gene expression, thus determining the bacterial response to various stressors. The project
focuses specifically on understanding how E. coli responds to glucose heterogeneity in the absence
of TFs. Moreover, the study aims to understand E. coli’s response under reference, homogeneous
glucose conditions as well as under scale­down ”feast and famine” scenarios induced by glucose
heterogeneity.
1.3
Structure of thesis
Throughout this thesis, we explore the effect of glucose heterogeneity on E. coli by knocking out
five transcriptional factors in separate strains of E. coli. Using pulse feeding to simulate glucose
heterogeneity, a single­compartment scale­down model was developed. This was then compared
to a reference scenario that maintained a homogeneous glucose environment. Under both reference
and scaled­down conditions, the physiological responses of each strain were compared in detail.
This experimental approach allowed us to determine the impact of each transcriptional factor
knockout on E. coli’s behavior under scaled­down conditions. The bacterial response to one tran­
scriptional factor knockout showed minimal differences between reference and scale­down con­
ditions. The promising candidate was introduced into a tryptophan production strain and tested
under identical conditions.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
At present, most of the items we use to maintain our quality of life are made from raw materials
derived from non­renewable sources of petroleum. But with the current increase in consumption,
it is important to make those raw materials or products from natural sources or renewable carbon
feedstocks such as biomass [6]. As an alternative approach to chemical processes, bioprocesses
must compete with well­established chemical processes. As opposed to chemical processes, which
have achieved full optimization, bioprocesses face the challenge of economic feasibility due to
significant capital expenditures associated with manufacturing and technology investments[7].
The fermentation process is currently being used to produce products such as L­glutamic acid, citric
acid, L­lysine, and others on a large scale. The price of these products is less than $ 5 per kilogram
[8]. Consistent quality and enhanced yield are two crucial factors for fermentation­based products.
A potential factor to consider is the variability of raw materials. Enhancing metabolic accuracy
while maintaining ideal and homogeneous reaction conditions is a major problem for industrial
fermentation [9, 10]. The substrate and gases are adequately mixed during laboratory fermenta­
tions, which are usually performed in volumes of liters. However, the transition to large­scale
fermentation conducted in cubic meter (m3) volumes poses challenges, particularly with regards
to the issue of inadequate mixing of substrates and gases. The inadequacy of mixing can affect the
titer, yield, and productivity of the process, as well as downstream processing [11].
In large­scale fermentations, complete mixing is more difficult due to the larger volume [4]. The
uneven distribution of nutrients and gases can cause variations in microbial growth and metabolic
activity. Consequently, the desired product yield and quality may be affected [12, 13].
Insufficient mixing in large­scale fermentation not only impacts the fermentation process but also
has downstream consequences. In downstream processing, the separation and purification of the
target product from the fermentation broth may be adversely affected. Low process efficiency
and product recovery are observed in cases of non­uniform distribution of cells, contaminants, or
particles in the broth [14].
In order to address these issues, it is important to think carefully about how to scale up fermen­
tation processes, including how to ensure that mixing is sufficient at larger scales or implement
better scaling practices. A successful scale­up requires simulated, optimized, and tested criteria
at every level of the process development process, rather than simply converting the process pa­
rameters used in the culture vessel. Due to the complexity of interaction and interdependence of
fermentation factors, it differs from a straight­lined experimental approach [15].
2.1
Importance of Scale­down
Effects of the substrate gradient, dissolved oxygen O2 gradient, pH gradient, dissolved CO2 and H2
gradient, and effect and shear stress are important factors to consider while designing the bioprocess
[4]. The regime analysis is a useful method for comparing the characteristic times of different
processes in order to understand the behavior of large­scale phenomena. Based on this information,
it is possible to implement scale­down models. A bioprocess can be designed and enhanced using
this method, which enables a complete understanding of the underlying processes [16].
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Enhanced pathway in industrial bioprocess development, adapted from Neubauer et.
al [17]
Scale­down models must adequately mimic the conditions in a large­scale bioreactor for the find­
ings to be applicable to scaling­up difficulties [3]. Scaling­down experiments can be conducted
in both pulse feeding reactors and two­compartment reactors using a variety of methods. Figure
2.2a represent the pulse feeding in the single­compartment model, and Figure 2.2b,c,d represent
the two compartment model [3]. There are advantages and disadvantages associated with both the
single compartment model and the two compartment model, respectively.
A single compartment model is used in bioreactors in order to produce heterogeneity through the
use of control strategies. One example of a single compartment model in a bioreactor is a stirred
tank reactor operating under the assumption of perfect mixing. The control strategies implemented
are to ensure that the entire reactor environment is as homogeneous as possible. In this context,
a control strategy might involve the regulation of agitation speed and aeration rate [18]. Due to
the fact that all cells are exposed to the same conditions at the same time, this model falls short
of replicating the heterogeneity of cell populations observed in bioreactors. The two­compartment
model, on the other hand, allows the cells to traverse between two interconnected compartments
that are subjected to different environmental conditions. It is possible to form this system by in­
terconnecting two stirred­tank reactors (STRs) or by linking a single STR with a plug­flow reactor
(PFR) [16].
For parallel fermentation experiments and in the early stages of process development, a single com­
partment model is a more straightforward approach than a two compartment model. By running
multiple fermentors in parallel, the single­compartment model offers the advantage of being able
to screen multiple strains simultaneously, whereas the two­compartment model presents a chal­
lenge because of its larger footprint. In parallel fermentation experiments, automation is crucial to
achieving successful results since it minimizes human involvement, thereby enhancing data qual­
ity. As a result, several strains can be tested and evaluated using this process. This is possible
with high­troughput screening equipment like AMBR® 250, where up to 24 fermenters can run in
parallel and use control strategies to produce heterogeneity.
4
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of diverse scale­down simulator variants. Cultivation’s characterized by
consistent alterations. (a) pulsating feed profile; two­compartment model: (b) integrating two
agitated tank bioreactors; (c) involving a basic plug­flow bioreactor; (d) inclusive of a plug­flow
bioreactor equipped with stationary mixers and aeration capabilities. F = substrate feed, adapted
from Neubauer et. al [3]
2.2
Transcription factor and their importance
Escherichia coli is a frequently utilized cell factory as a production strain for approximately 30 %
of therapeutic proteins that have been approved for various clinical indications by the FDA and/or
the European Medicines Agency [19, 20]. E. coli has been a favored and efficient option for the
biotechnology industry in expressing non­glycosylated proteins due to its comprehensive genetic
understanding, fast growth rate, and capacity to produce high yields [19, 20]. A few examples
of biopharmaceutical products derived from E. coli are Humulin (rh insulin) for diabetes by Eli
Lilly in 1982 US, Roferon (interferon α2a) for leukemia in 1986 US by Hoffmann­La Roche,
Preotact (human parathyroid hormone) for osteoporosis in 2006 EU by Nycomed Danmark, Preos
(parathyroid hormone) for osteoporosis, hypoparathyroidism in 2013 EU by NPS Pharmaceuticals,
and many others [20].
E. coli exhibits a remarkable capacity for reversing central fluxes in a matter of seconds in response
to alterations in its surroundings. The ability to sense and proficiently react to such fluctuating
circumstances is crucial for the viability of E. coli. This statement applies not only to wild­type
strains in their native habitats, but also to metabolically modified hyper­producers grown in vast
industrial scales [21, 22, 2].
Sigma (σ) factors are crucial in the regulation of gene expression in E. coli, particularly in response
to the diverse environmental conditions that may be encountered within a bioreactor during the
large­scale production of therapeutics or other products [23]. The core RNA polymerase found
is catalytically capable in all bacteria. However, it also needs a σ factor to recognize particular
promoters and initiate transcriptional transcription correctly [23, 24].
Diverse environmental conditions include alterations in nutrient accessibility, oxygenation, pH,
temperature, and other related factors within the framework of large bioreactors [24]. It is proposed
that a regulatory mechanism involving the modification of anti­sigma activity regulates the release
of the σ factor, which in turn coordinates the transcription of the particular regulon under its control
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
5
==PAGE:14==
[25]. Figure 2.3 illustrates specific σ factors may be activated as a result of environmental changes,
which will then result in the transcription of genes that assist in adapting to the new environmental
conditions. Sigma factors facilitate the adaptability of gene regulation, which plays a vital role in
the survival and productivity of E. coli during large­scale bioprocesses.
Figure 2.3: Requirements for establishing a negative feedback circuit of sigma/anti­sigma factors
to ensure an effective and resilient cellular response adapted from Gerardo et al. [23].
Major sigma factors present in E. coli are as follows:
• σ70 : Transcription of house­keeping genes indicates the absence of stress conditions.
• σS or σ38 : The activation of σ38 facilitates the ability to handle unfavorable environmen­
tal conditions, including but not limited to nutrient deprivation, oxidative stress, elevated
temperatures, heightened osmotic pressure, and various other stressors.
• σH or σ32 : This protein plays a crucial role in the cellular response to heat­induced protein
damage.
• σE or σ24 : σ24 is crucial in controlling how cells react to extracytoplasmic stress and ex­
tremely high temperatures.
• σFecI or σ19 : σ19 plays a specific role in the regulation of gene expression for the ferric
citrate transporter.
• σN or σ54 : σ54 governs the process of nitrogen assimilation. Under specific circumstances,
nitrogen assimilation can become challenging, but the expression of certain products from
σ54­dependent genes may provide potential solutions to address this issue.
While E. coli contains a large number of transcription factors, this study focuses on five key tran­
scription factors based on previous research, data analysis, and a literature review. The five TFs
examined in this study are two carbon catabolite repressors, namely cra and crp, the general stress
response factor rpoS, the flagellar growth regulator fliA, and the propionate catabolism regulator
prpR. All these TFs have shown responses under glucose heterogeneity conditions.
6
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Carbon Catabolite Repressors
The phenomenon of exhibiting a preference for glucose as a carbon source has been indicated
as glucose repression or, in a broader sense, carbon catabolite repression (CCR) [26]. The phe­
nomenon of CCR holds significant regulatory importance in numerous bacterial species, with a
significant portion of bacterial genes being subjected to its effects, ranging from 5 to 10 % [27, 28,
29, 30, 31]. The choice of the preferred carbon source is a key determinant of growth rate and, con­
sequently, competitive success with other microbes in natural habitats; hence, CCR is crucial for
competitiveness [27]. The catabolite gene­activator protein (CAP), also known as the transcription
activator CRP, is a key component of the global route of CCR in E. coli [27].
Glucose is a frequently favored carbon source in E. Coli, and its transport into cells is facilitated by
the phosphotransferase system (PTS) [21]. Upon glucose uptake through the phosphoenolpyruvate­
dependent PTS, the dephosphorylation of EIIA, a component of the system, causes direct inhibition
of transporters that facilitate the uptake of non­preferred carbon sources. It is known as inducer
exclusion. The glucose­lactose diauxie in E. coli is one example of this selective use of carbon
sources and is mostly caused by inducer exclusion [21, 27].
2.3.1
Cra ­ Catabolite repressor activator
Cra was initially recognized as FruR, the suppressor of the fruBKA operon, which encodes the
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)­dependent sugar PTS enzymes specific to fructose [32, 33]. Numer­
ous enzymes involved with the glycolytic, gluconeogenic, glyoxylate shunt, and Krebs cycle are
affected by Cra [32]. In total, 164 binding sites were detected for the Cra protein, with 144 (88 %) of
these sites being newly discovered [34]. Figure 2.4 depicts a few of the important genes regulated
by Cra. Cra regulates up to 178 promoters. There is a significant influence of Cra on the balance
of carbon metabolism enzyme levels [34]. The Cra protein belongs to the GalR­Lacl family with
the following characteristics [32]:
1. It can connect to certain DNA sequences due to a helix­turn­helix DNA binding motif located
at its N­terminus.
2. As a transcriptional regulator, it controls the expression of target genes.
3. The protein identifies and attaches to palindromic operator sequences.
4. The specific effector molecules with which Cra interacts are mostly carbohydrates.
Apart from its positive regulation of the ace and ppsA operons, Cra is also implicated in the adverse
control of the fru operon. Therefore, it was determined that Cra functions as a pleiotropic regulatory
protein in addition to controlling the expression of the fru operon [32]. These findings suggest that
Cra has a pleiotropic role in controlling the consumption of a substantial fraction of the carbon
sources available to E. coli [32].
In enteric bacteria, the direction of carbon flux via metabolic pathways is controlled by the Cra
protein. The control regions of the target genes are where Cra binds itself and consequently exerts
a negative effect on the expression of genes encoding glycolytic and Entner­Doudoroff enzymes
while also producing a positive effect on genes encoding the Krebs cycle, glyoxylate shunt, and
gluconeogenic enzymes refer Figure 2.5, Figure 2.7 and Figure 2.8. Independent of cyclic AMP,
Cra exerts a catabolite repression effect on the genes it positively regulates. In contrast, it triggers
catabolite activation of the genes under its negative control [32].
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Illustration shows the gene encoding transcritption factor affected by Cra regulon,
adapted from Shimada et. al [34]
An intriguing finding is that operons that are moderately Cra­dependent tend to be largely con­
trolled by other transcription factors, whereas operons that are extremely Cra­dependent tend to be
poorly regulated by other transcription factors [32].
The Cra protein has the ability to bind to specific promoters in either an inhibitory or activating
manner. Inhibition occurs when a protein binds to regions that overlap or are downstream of the
promoter, whereas activation occurs when a protein binds to regions upstream of the promoter [35].
As shown in Figure 2.5, the Cra positively affects the genes involved in gluconeogenesis and neg­
atively affects the glycolytic enzymes [21], the switch is managed through two primary methods:
allosteriic regulation and transcriptional regulation. Cra’s function is influenced by glycoytic flux.
It is important to note that this information transfer is largely unaffected by the specific kinetic
parameters involved [21].
8
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the feedback loop determining the cellular metabolic transition be­
tween glycolysis and gluyconeogenesis mediated by the fructose­1,6­bisphosphate (FBP)­Cra cir­
cuit adapted from Chubukov et. al. [21]
The regulation of flux is dependent on the interaction between the transcription factor Cra and a
metabolite that signals through flux. An integral part of the flux­sensing system is the FBP­Cra
pair, which senses and detects glycolytic flux [35] refer Figure 2.5. The intracellular concentra­
tions of FBP and FIP are likely to rise when bacteria grow on glycolytic carbon sources. Regulatory
regions in target operons contain Cra’s operator sites, but these catabolites prevent Cra from in­
teracting with them. Based on the findings mentioned above, catabolite repression and catabolite
activation are evident. During catabolite activation, the operons are repressed by Cra, which is
activated by the catabolites. Conversely, in catabolite repression, the operons that are positively
regulated by Cra are inhibited by the catabolites [34, 35].
Figure 2.6: Illustration of ATP demand regulating the mechanism of carbon catabolism adapted
from Chubukov et. al. [21].
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.7: Illustration of Cra mediated genes showing their participation of their respective gene
products in facilitating the associated step­by­step reactions adapted by Shimada et. al. [34].
10
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.8: Control over operon encoding crucial genes in carbon metabolism facilitated by Cra in
Kerbs cycle, adapted from Ramseier et. al [32]
2.3.2
Crp ­ Catabolite activator protein
The transcription factor Crp, which acts as a positive regulator for several genes connected to car­
bon catabolism and other carbon­uptake systems, is the central component of the inducer exclusion
system [21]. The intracellular signaling molecule cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) facil­
itates the activation of Crp. Phosphorylated enzyme II A (EIIA) activates the enzyme adenylate
cyclase, which regulates the production of cAMP [21, 36]. Because of the elevated levels of cAMP,
the complex between cAMP and Crp is possible. These complexes subsequently link to and ac­
tivate the catabolic gene promoters [27]. This correlation of Crp activation can be seen in Figure
2.9a. Crp also functions as a global regulator that impacts over 350 targets [37, 36, 34].
As the activation of Crp is based on the formation of a complex with cAMP, the formation of the
complex is repressed in the presence of external glucose [38]. This impedes Crp from trigger­
ing different carbon­uptake genes [21]. A high growth rate carbon source can induce catabolite
repression through Crp, but it cannot be transmitted through the phosphoenolpyruvate­dependent
PTS. These findings indicate that the operational efficiency of Crp is influenced by the metabolic
environment and the absorption of carbon sources in general, though with a susceptibility to par­
ticular sugars of choice [21]. The Figure 2.10 shows the interaction of the cAMP­CRP complex
with multiple sugar sources and their effect on various genes [39]. The cAMP­CRP complex plays
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
11
==PAGE:20==
a pivotal role in the regulation of the glucose transporter gene ptsG, which is integral to CCR and
diauxic growth [27].
Figure 2.9: Illustration of cAMP­CRP complex formation and genes regulated by CRP, (a): EI­
IAGlc of glucose transporter plays a crucial role in CCR in E. coli. Phosporylation of EIIAGlc
initiates and triggers the activity of adenylate cyclase (AC), causing the synthesis of cyclic AMP
(cAMP). ATP aids in stimulating AC. cAMP­CRP complex formation begins when high concen­
tration of cAMP is available; (b): a complex output is generated through the integration of multiple
signals by dense overlapping regulon, adapted from Gorke et. al.[27]
Along with the carbon limitation, nitrogen and sulfur limitations also influence Crp activity. This
implies that the information that reaches Crp is related to the balance between carbon catabolism
and anabolism rather than the general availability of carbon [21, 38].
Figure 2.10: Illustration of CRP­regulated genes with respect to sugar substrates and transcriptional
factors affecting them, in particular sugar, shown in a dense overlapping regulon network adapted
from Kaplan et. al. [39]
12
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.11: Illustration of feed­forward loop: one transcriptional factor influences the activity of
another transcriptional factor and together they jointly influences the activity of a target gene (a):
Coherent feed­forward loop; (b): In­coherent feed forward loop; (c): representation of group of
genes influcenced by the single­input modules; Negligible feed­back loops in the trancriptional
network of E. coli (d): auto­regulatory positive feedback loop; this might lead to continuous ex­
pression of certain transcription factors, to control them (e): negative regulation exerted by CRP
on adenylate cyclase’s expression, an enzyme responsible for the production of cAMP ­ a cofactor
required for the activity of CRP itself adapted from Gorke et. al [27].
Negative­feedback loop mechanisms via in vitro experiments that employed permeabilized cells.
The findings of the study reveal that the enzyme adenylate cyclase, which is accountable for cAMP
production, is inhibited by α­ketoglutarate and related α­ketoacids. The present inhibition effec­
tively results in the closure of the regulatory circuit that connects the availability of carbon and the
activity of Crp refer Figure 2.12 [21].
CCR of the lac operon is primarily caused by inducer exclusion, which occurs when lactose per­
mease is deactivated in the presence of glucose [27]. According to literature, during the growth on
glucose and lactose, the cAMP levels are low and high, respectively. But the empirical data says
that the cAMP level during the growth rate is comparable in both scenarios [27].
Apart from the ratio of PEP­to­pyruvate, the alarmone cAMP is a significant determinant in the
modulation of carbon catabolism [36]. A number of genes and catabolic enzymes are synthesized
under the control of the alarmone cAMP, which functions together with Crp [36].
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.12: Illustration of the role of Crp and Lacl in uptake of local (lactose­related) and global
(carbon­supply) respectively adapted form Chubukov et. al. [21].
Regarding energy metabolism, cells possess two highly likely reactions to energy deprivation:
they can either amplify complete carbon catabolism or intensify the amount of flux towards ox­
idative phosphorylation [21] refer Figure 2.6. In the presence of a high carbon­to­nitrogen ratio,
α­ketoacids inhibit the expression of genes involved in catabolism through a thorough inhibition
of their expression. Conversely, when the concentration of α­ketoacids is low, gene expression is
induced (resulting in energy shortages). [21].
The negative regulation of the translation of rpoS is attributed to EIIA(Glc) via a mechanism that is
yet to be characterized and potentially indirect. Moreover, the cAMP­CRP complex acts counter­
actively against rpoS transcription [40]. It is only possible in the phosporylated form, EIIA(Glc).
The σ38 levels are not affected by addition or increased environmental glucose levels [40].
Sugars’ effects on cell development rates are reduced when glucose is used as a carbon source.
Regardless of the levels of the secondary input sugar, all strains may develop at comparable rates
(0.65 ± 0.03 doubling/h during the exponential phase) when glucose is present. Glucose also has
the benefit of suppressing endogenous cAMP synthesis, resulting in extremely low intracellular
cAMP concentrations. As a result, the growth medium’s external content of glucose can control
the concentration of cAMP [39].
Table 2.1: Relation between Cra and Crp adapted from Kim et al. [41]
Component
Cra
Crp
Glycolysis
heavily regulated
less regulated (compare with Cra)
TCA cycle
less regulated
(compare with Crp)
more regulated and
mostly activated
fbaA, gapA, pgk, epd,
aceE, aceF, aceB, aceA
Co­regulated
co­regulated genes in glycolysis
fbaA, gapA, pgk, aceEF
repressed
activated
glyoxylate shunt aceBA
activated
repressed
2.4
RpoS
The RpoS transcriptional factor senses the general stress response E. coli [42]. The capacity of E.
coli to recognize a drop in growth rate as a stress signal results in an increase in RpoS protein levels.
14
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:23==
Even when nutrient scarcity is the only environmental issue, this response is triggered [37, 43].
Nutrient scarcity results in the onset of the stationary phase [37, 44, 45]. In starvation conditions,
alterations in the rpoS gene typically emerge as the initial selection because RpoS diminishes the
expression of the high­affinity transport pathway by a factor of four to six folds [42].
In stressed cells, the alarmones ppGpp and RpoS are both increased and work in concert to give
a general repositioning of transcription. Because of this initial stress, E. coli can become more
resilient to a range of stresses [37]. In the stationary phase, elevated levels of RpoS result in more
stable operation of E. coli, however, due to ClpXP protease activity, RpoS is unstable throughout
the exponential growth phase [37].
The diminished competitive interaction between σ70 and σ38 caused a change in transcriptional
priorities. The upregulation of genes associated with high­affinity uptake systems and central
metabolism was noticed in the absence of RpoS [46]. In non­optimal growth settings, σ38 should
be viewed as a second vegetative sigma factor that has a significant influence on not just stress
tolerance but also the total cell physiology [44]. RpoS controls around 10 % of all the genes di­
rectly or indirectly in E. coli [44, 47]. RpoS­controlled genes are divided as follows: 5 % protein
processing, 8 % regulation, 11 % stress, 14 % membrane, 19 % metabolism, 43 % others [44].
Two global variables, cAMP­CRP and the alternative sigma factor RpoS (stress response), are prin­
cipally responsible for controlling E. coli’s capacity to scavenge nutrients and its ability to respond
to stress. The intracellular cAMP concentration was elevated in the case of glucose starvation,
and a co­relation has been observed between the strain­specific growth rate and cAMP in the same
condition [46, 48, 49, 50].
Figure 2.13: Illustration of E. coli’s response to glucose starvation and how rpoS affects the below
mentioned transport genes in prolonged glucose starvation. Mutational changes in all those occurs
adapted from Ferenci et. al. [42].
As RpoS and RpoD compete for unbound RNA polymerases. In the absence of RpoS, the expres­
sion of genes transcribed by σ70 experiences a noticeable positive impact due to increased binding
of RNA polymerases with σ70 [46, 51, 52, 53].
By analyzing RpoS­dependent gene expression patterns at the start of the stationary phase of
growth, the role of the rpoS gene was demonstrated. In particular, genes integral to central metabolic
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
15
==PAGE:24==
functions such as those associated with the carbohydrate phosphotransferase system (PTS; exem­
plified by CRR), the glycolytic pathway (including fbaB and pfkB), and the non­oxidative pentose
phosphate (PP) pathway (represented by talA and tktB) were found to be influenced by RpoS [54].
In cells undergoing stress, levels of both ppGpp and RpoS are observed to increase and work
synergistically, facilitating a comprehensive reorientation of transcription within E. coli [43]. With
varying outcomes reported across different research facilities with response to cell density for stress
regulator RpoS and its regulatory mechanism, this is a topic of controversy [43].
Variations in strains can affect RpoS (or σ38), leading to changes in gene expression, stress re­
sponses, competitive behavior, and the selection of advantageous mutations in prolonged cultures
[43, 55]. Even when cultivated under equivalent conditions, these global variations are frequent,
and many surveyed E. coli strains exhibit distinct and characteristic RpoS protein levels [43, 45].
During prolonged continuous culture, the evolution’s course and the prevalence of mutations are
significantly influenced by the RpoS concentration [43]. In some E. coli strains, the first known
substantial sweep is mutational loss of RpoS, which represents a significant fitness advantage [43].
Several laboratory strains of E. coli K­12 W3110 have been found to exhibit mutational sequences
that involve the loss of RpoS function [37].
By preventing the breakdown of the stress sigma factor RpoS under starving conditions, a drop in
ATP levels might indirectly affect ribosome biogenesis. As a result, the machinery responsible for
transcription is redirected from ribosomal genes to genes that are accountable for stress response
[21]. In the comparable study of two E. coli strains, one with ∆rpoS and the other ∆cya. From the
transcription of 31 genes. In the absence of cAMP, a substantial proportion of the genes impacted
more than three­fold (23 out of 26) exhibited down­regulation. Conversely, when cells were devoid
of RpoS, a majority (9 out of 13) displayed up­regulation [46].
RpoS shows different activity in cases of carbon, phosphorous, and nitrogen limitation [42]. All
the different nutrient starvation is sensed differently, and responses are different. In carbon starva­
tion, degradation of RpoS is halted, leading to an increase in its concentration. Under phosphorous
starvation, RpoS concentrations elevate because of increased translation of RpoS mRNA. In con­
trast, in nitrogen starvation, negligible change is seen in RpoS level, but its activity witnesses a
significant surge [56].
RpoS expression is regulated by CRP in a variety of ways. Additionally, a large number of pre­
viously recognized σ38 dependent genes, including but not limited to csiD and osmY, are directly
controlled by cAMP­CRP, which has the ability to either increase or decrease their expression [44].
σ38 is controlled by the cAMP­CRP complex in a complex and unclear manner. The coordination
of responses to various general stresses and specific carbon starvation is believed to be closely
linked between RpoS and cAMP­CRP. Therefore, cAMP­CRP’s regulatory activity may involve
more than just enabling catabolite regulation of gene expression, suggesting a more comprehensive
involvement [44].
E. coli exhibits a sequence of mutations in rpoS. The trade­off between nutrition and stress toler­
ance, and therefore fitness in various situations, is influenced by rpoS status [45]. In the steady
state in chemostat populations of E. coli, the competition is significantly reduced, and elevated
expression of RpoD­dependent genes enhances nutrient scavenging [45].
Reduced growth rate is observed in poor carbon sources like acetate due to an increase in RpoS
level due to high ppGpp concentration [57]. Two σ subunits were observed to change intracellular
levels in response to stress conditions.
16
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.14: DNA microarray and intracellular/extracellular metabolite concentration measure­
ment is used for the gene analysis of the of the metabolic pathway of E. coli’s rpoS mutant in the
exponential growth phase. Higher accumulation and lower accumulation are shown by bold and
dotter borderlines respectively. The genes which are upregulated by the factor of more than 2 are
depicted by bold arrow and which are down regulated with a factor less then 0.5 are depicted by
dotted arrow in the mutant; permission taken from author for using the figure (pathway) [54].
2.5
FliA
E. coli’s flagella have the crucial role of providing locomotion to the bacteria. It has three parts:
the basal body, the hook, and the filament [37, 58]. The control of the flagellar regulon is quite
complicated, according to research conducted in recent years [59, 47]. More than 1 % of all the
genes in E. coli K12 are responsible for the formation and functioning of flagella [60].
The expansive flagellar regulon, which is meticulously coordinated, consists of 17 operons com­
prising over 50 expressed genes. These, collectively, give rise to the chemotaxis system, a mecha­
nism critical for the synthesis and functionality of the flagellum in bacteria [59, 47]. The multiple
genes that help the flagellum are all downregulated by rpoS [47]. Master regular of Flagellar named
FlhCD and the σ factor­FliA both are indirectly controlled by RpoS [47].
RpoS responds to general stresses and various environmental conditions like changes in temper­
ature, fluctuations in oxygen levels, and the formation of different amino acids, and in response
to this, RpoS suppresses the formation of chemotaxis receptors [47]. The promoters belonging
to class III show specificity towards σ28 RNA polymerase [59]. The fliAZY operon contains the
fliA gene [59, 61] and the fliAZY transcript is transcribed by a class II promoter, and the fliAZ
transcript is transcribed by a class III promoter [59].
The σ28 is an essential component in facilitating transcription starting from class III promoters,
e.g., fliC, the flagellin structural gene [62]. Two things are observed because of the overexpression
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
17
==PAGE:26==
or upregulation of fliA. Firstly, it increases all the intermediate gene promoters; secondly, it results
in an elevation of transcription of early genes [59, 63]. Interestingly, transcription of late gene
promoters is controlled by σ28 which contains fliA [59, 62, 64].
Figure 2.15: Flagellar operon is represented by the transcriptional hierarchy and naming of the
operon is done after the first prescribed gene. Activation and inhibition is depicted by solid and
dotted arrows adapted from Liu et. al. [64].
Figure 2.15 depicts fliA positively regulates class III operons, whereas flgM acts negatively [62].
Class III has a specific sigma factor name, FliA, and an anti­sigma factor name, FlgM. To halt
the FliA binding with the RNA polymerase core enzyme, the FlgM­FliA complex is formed and
regulates Class III operons [62, 63]. Moreover, transcription of fliC is done by the FliA sigma
factor [62].
2.6
PrpR
Degradation of propionate in E. coli is regulated by the 2­methylcitric acid cycle, and propionate
metabolism is controlled by the propionate catabolite regulator (prpR) [65, 66]. Function com­
prising the transcriptional factor PrpR, σ54 ­ sigma factor responding to nitrogen assimilation and
IHF (Integration host factor) activates the prpBCDE operon [65]. E. coli with ∆cya or ∆crp or
abnormalities in cya or crp within cells, affects the transcription of prpR and prpBCDE [65]. Pre­
vious research has shown that the cAMP­CRP complex may control prpR and prpBCDE because
the addition of glucose negatively governs both prpR and prpBCDE [65].
Sometimes E. coli uses propionate as a carbon and energy source, but toxic intermediates are
formed by the metabolism of propionate [66]. prpR exhibits binding affinity towards distinct DNA
sequences located in the promoter regions of genes that participate in propionate metabolism [66].
This binding event facilitates the recognition of promoter sites by RNA polymerase, thereby en­
abling the initiation of transcription of the genes. Resulting in the production of enzymes that are
capable of effectively and securely metabolizing propionate.
18
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:27==
Table 2.2: prpR regulating genes
Regulated gene name
Functional Interaction
prpD
+
prpE
+
prpR
­
prpC
+
prpB
+
Table 2.3: Transcriptional factor and sigma factor affecting prpR
Regulator name
Regulator type
Functional Interaction
CRP
TF
+
PhoB
TF
­
AscG
TF
­
σ70
sigma factor
+
As highlighted in the literature review, there is a limited pool of research focusing on the prpR tran­
scriptional factor. It’s responsiveness to glucose heterogeneity could be attributed to the positive
influence of two critical transcription factors (crp and cra) that substantially affect the physiolog­
ical behavior of cells in such conditions. Please refer to Table 2.3 and Figure 2.4 for the roles of
these transcription factors.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:29==
3
Materials
3.1
Strain
E. coli strain used in this project was E. coli BW25113 wild type and E. coli BW25113 ∆cra,
E. coli BW25113 ∆crp, E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS, E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA and E. coli BW25113
∆prpR. The cells were cultured in glucose media. For the tryptophan production experiment, one
E. coli tryptophan producing strain and one E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production strain. The initial
strains were obtained, and glycerol stock cultures were made and stored at ­70 ◦C.
3.1.1
Preparation of glycerol stocks
Bacterial glycerol stocks were prepared by putting 10 mL seed medium + antibiobic (kanamycin,
which is required for E. coli BW25113 ∆cra, ∆crp, ∆rpoS, ∆fliA and ∆prpR). The bacterial
culture was grown over night at 30 ◦C and 225 rpm. Absorbance at 600 nm was measured to verify
the growth of cells; the OD600 values were in the range of 2­2.5. Final glycerol stocks were made
by diluting the bacterial culture and keeping the glycerol concentration at 15 %.
3.2
Medium
Throughout the project, distinct types of media were employed for the different phases of the ex­
perimental process, which involved the preparation of pre­culture, the execution of batch cultiva­
tion, and the conduct of fed­batch cultivation. These stages, respectively, employed seed medium,
batch medium, and fed­batch medium. We maintained consistency in our experiment by using the
same types of media across all phases. The sterile filter used is Jet BIOFIL®, manufactured by
Guangzhou Jet Bio­Filtration Co. Ltd, Guangzhou, China.
The specifics of the media compositions that we used throughout our study are outlined in the
following Tables 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3.
Table 3.1: Composition of seed medium
Component
Final concentration (mL/L) for 2 g/L Glucose
20 % glucose stock solution
10
M9 salt stock solution
100
2 M MgSO4 stock solution
1
M9 Trace element solution
0.5
M9 vitamin stock solution
1
1 M CaCl2 stock solution
0.1
Sterile water
adjust to the required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
The Kanamycin sulfate of 50 g/L is added only for E.coli’s knockout strain.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.2: Composition of batch medium
Component
Final concentration (g/L) for 20 g/L Glucose
Glucose monohydrate
(C6H12O6 · H20)
22
Ammonium sulfate
((NH4)2SO4)
10
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate
(KH2PO4)
15
Dissolve and adjust volume with space remaining for adjusting pH and adding trace solution
Adjust pH with 5 M NaOH to 6.5
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Component
Final concentration (mL/L)
Trace metal solution
1
Iron & Zinc solution
1
2 M MgSO4 stock
1
Thiamine HCl stock
10
Antifoam 204
0.5
Table 3.3: Composition of feed medium
Component
Final concentration (g/L) for 500 g/L Glucose
Glucose monohydrate
(C6H12O6 · H20)
550
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate
(KH2PO4)
15
Magnesium sulfate heptahydrate
(MgSO4· 7H2O)
13.7
Dissolve and adjust volume with space remaining for addition of trace solution
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Component
Final concentration (mL/L)
Trace metal solution
1
Iron & Zinc solution
1
22
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.4: Composition of 20 % Glucose stock solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Glucose monohydrate
(C6H12O6 · H20)
220
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Table 3.5: Composition of M9 salt stock solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Disodium phosphate
(Na2HPO4)
68
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate
(KH2PO4)
30
Sodium chloride
(NaCl)
5
Ammonium chloride
(NH4Cl)
10
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Table 3.6: Composition of M9 vitamin stock solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Pyridoxine hydrochloride
10
Thiamine hydrochloride
5
Riboflavin
5
Nicotinic acid
5
Calcium D­(+)­pantothenate
5
p­Aminobenzoic acid
5
Thiotic acid
5
Biotin
2
Folic acid
2
Vitamin B12
0.1
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 3.7: Composition of M9 trace element stock solutions
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt dihydrate
(Na2EDTA · 2H2O)
15
Zinc sulphate heptahydrate
(ZnSO4 · 7H2O)
4.5
Manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate
(MnCl2 · 4H2O)
0.7
Cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate
(CoCl2 · 6H2O)
0.3
Copper sulfate dihydrate
(CuSO4 · 2H2O)
0.2
Sodium molybdate dihydrate
(Na2MoO4 · 2H2O)
0.4
Calcium chloride dihydrate
(CaCl2 · 2H2O)
4.5
Ferrous sulfate heptahydrate
(FeSO4 · 7H2O)
3
Boric acid
(H3BO3)
1
Potassium Iodide
(KI)
0.1
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Table 3.8: Composition of Thiamine HCl 10 g/L stock solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Thiamine stock solution
10
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Table 3.9: Composition of 2 M MgSO4 stock solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
MgSO4 · 7H2O
492.94
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
24
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:33==
Table 3.10: Composition of Trace metal solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Copper sulfate pentahydrate
(CuSO4 · 5H2O)
0.33
Cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate
(CoCl2 · 6H2O)
0.54
Calcium chloride dihydrate
(CaCl2 · 2H2O)
2
Manganese(II) sulfate monohydrate
(MnSO4 · H2O)
0.41
Sodium molybdate dihydrate
(Na2MoO4 · 2H2O)
0.3
Zinc sulfate heptahydrate
(ZnSO4 · 7H2O)
6.3
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Table 3.11: Composition of Iron stock solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Iron(III) chloride hexahydrate
(FeCl3 · 6H20)
30.5
Citric acid Monohydrate
250
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
Table 3.12: Composition of Calcium chloride stock solution
Component
Final concentration (g/L)
Calcium chloride dihydrate
(CaCl2 · 2H2O)
147.02
Dissolve in dH2O and adjust volume to required volume
Filter sterile the above prepared media
The Antifoam 204 is from Sigma, Merck KGaA, DE, Article no. A6426­1KG, and LOT no.
MKCK5450. It was sterilized at 121 ◦C for 15 minutes.
3.3
Design of Experiment
The initial experimental design intended to examine one strain per experiment, employing the wild­
type strain as a reference. Figure 3.1 illustrates that this approach would necessitate approximately
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
25
==PAGE:34==
five weeks of experimental work, incorporating the normalization and comparaison of the wild type
strain across 40 AMBR® 250 bioreactor units. Given the recommended operational constraint of
not exceeding 12 AMBR® 250 bioreactors per single experiment, the experimental design was
consequently revised. This updated design is depicted in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.1: Initial design of experiment for all E.coli and its knockout strains.
In the revised design, the duration required to conduct the experiment is reduced to three weeks,
with a 10 % decrease in the utilization of AMBR® 250 bioreactors and a relative reduction in media
consumption compared to the initial design. This final design of experiment (DOE) obviated the
need for wild type strain normalization since a uniform medium was implemented throughout the
entirety of the experiments. Utilizing the same media over an extended five­week experimental
period poses potential contamination risks; hence, this modification in the final DOE provided a
more robust approach.
Furthermore, the feasibility of reserving the AMBR® 250 system for a continuous five­week period
was found to be challenging, particularly considering that each experiment was designed to last for
five days. Therefore, the final experimental design not only improved operational efficiency but
26
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:35==
also increased the logistical feasibility of the experiment by reducing the strain on resources and
the potential for error.
Figure 3.2: Final design of experiment for all E.coli knockout strain.
3.4
Pre­culture preparation
To make the pre­culture for the seed culture, 400 µL of a 15 % glycerol stock stored at ­70 ◦C was
used to inoculate a 250 ml erlynmeyer flask filled with 10 ml of seed medium. The pre­culture was
grown at 30 ◦C connected to TOM sensor modules (Kuhner, Germany) with the agitation speed set
to 225 rpm. The TOM sensor module controlled the air flow rate into the shake flask, and it was
able to measure the off­gas concentrations of O2 and CO2. This was done to maintain consistency
in the inoculation at the start of the batch phase.
3.5
Batch and Fed­batch cultivation
The batch and fed­batch fermentations were done in AMBR® 250. The standard SOP is used for
setting up AMBR® 250. The first sample is scheduled after 12 h of inoculation, and the second
sample is scheduled at the end of the batch phase, which is when the dissolved O2 level goes below
40 %.
The Feed phase starts at the end of the batch phase. The Feed profile was set to an exponential ramp
with the exponent µ set = 0.05 1/h. In the reference condition, the continuous feed was supplied
continuously in the exponential phase, and in the scale­down condition, the pulse feed was supplied
discontinuously in pulses as previously defined.
3.6
Analytical methods
3.6.1
Measurement of the optical density
The measurement of optical density was carried out via a spectrophotometer (Model no: 7205
UV/visible spectrophotometer, manufactured by Jenway, UK) operating at a wavelength of 600 nm,
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
27
==PAGE:36==
with a 9 g/L NaCl solution serving as the reference blank. To ensure values were captured within the
linear range of 0.2 to 2, samples were diluted with the 9 g/L NaCl solution, with dilution increments
ranging from 10 times dilution to 200 times dilution.
3.6.2
Determination of cell dry weight
In order to determine the cell dry weight (CDW), an established protocol was adhered to. Initially,
2 mL Eppendorf tubes were dried at a temperature of 80 ◦C for a minimum duration of 24 h. Sub­
sequently, these tubes were allowed to cool to room temperature in a desiccator before their empty
weights were recorded on a precision scale. The precision scale used is model no: AX224/E,
manufactured by OHAUS Europe GmBH, Switzerland.
A volume of 1 mL of the culture broth was then dispensed into these tubes. Following this, the tubes
underwent centrifugation at approximately 13,300 rpm for 5 minutes at a temperature of 4 ◦C. The
resulting supernatant was reserved in a 96­well plate for impending analysis of the organic acids,
as well as organic acids coupled with tryptophan, particularly in the context of the tryptophan
production strain experiment.
The tubes, now containing wet biomass, were subsequently dried at 80 ◦C for at least 24 h in an
oven. After cooling to room temperature in a desiccator, the tubes containing the dried biomass
were weighed again using a precision scale. The CDW was then calculated by subtracting the
initial weight of the empty tube from the final weight, considering the mass difference relative to
the cell culture broth initially filled into the tube.
3.6.3
Determination of Metabolite Concentrations Using HPLC Analysis
The identification and measurement of glucose and organic acids in the filtered supernatants (with
a pore size of ≤0.45 µm) were accomplished by employing high­performance liquid chromatog­
raphy (HPLC). This technique utilized a Resex® organic acid column, with the refractive index
(RI) chromatograms serving as the basis for the detection. The operational parameters of the sys­
tem were maintained at a temperature of 60 ◦C and a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min. An isocratic elution
process was applied using 9 mM H2SO4.
3.7
Calculation of fermentation parameters
The mass of glucose is calculated as follows:
For batch medium: concentration of glucose in batch medium is 20 g/L and the volume is 100 mL
i.e., 0.1 L
Mass of glucose in batch medium = 20 g/L · 0.1 L = 2 g
(3.1)
For the feed phase, the glucose concentration in batch medium is 20 g/L and the volume is 100 mL
i.e. 0.1 L. In feed medium, glucose concentration is 500 g/L and the added feed volume is 0.062 L
(approx.).
Mass of glucose in feed phase = 20 g/L · 0.1 L + 500 g/L · 0.062 L = 32.63 g
(3.2)
The moles of glucose are then calculated by dividing the grams of glucose by the molecular mass
of glucose.
Moles of Glucose =
mass in g
180.156 g/mol
(3.3)
28
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:37==
The moles of glucose are converted into c­moles by multiplying the number of carbon atoms in
glucose.
Glucose (cmoles) = moles of glucose · no. of cmoles in glucose
(3.4)
The amount of CDW (g) divided by the average amount of cell dry weight formed in the volume
of feed supplied, which is
CDW (g) = avg. CDW (g/L) · V olume of feed supplied (L)
(3.5)
The moles of CDW are then calculated in moles by dividing the grams of CDW by the molecular
mass of biomass. The average molecular mass of biomass is calculated from CH1.8O0.5N0.2 which
is 24.6 g/mol
CDW (moles) = mass in g
24.6 g/mol
(3.6)
The CDW concentration in moles is converted into c­moles by multiplying the number of carbon
atoms in biomass, which is 1.
CDW (cmoles) = moles of glucose · no. of c −moles in glucose
(3.7)
The Biomass yield (Ysx) is calculated as follows:
Ysx = CDW (cmoles)
Glucose (cmoles)
(3.8)
For calculating the yields of online data, which include carbon dioxide emission rate (CER) and
oxygen uptake rate (OUR), the c­moles of CER and moles of OUR are considered, which are
CER­integrated values and OUR­integrated values. And c­moles of CER are calculated by the
above­given method from Eq. 3.6 and Eq. 3.7. In the case of OUR, as c­moles is 0, then the yield
in the result section is calculated in moles of OUR with respect to c­moles of substrate and c­moles
of biomass.
Yield with respect to substrate (Ysz) is:
Ysz =
Z (cmoles)
Glucose (cmoles)
(3.9)
Yield with respect to biomass (Yxz) is:
Yxz =
Z (cmoles)
Biomass (cmoles)
(3.10)
where Z is CER, OUR, Acetic acid, Formic acid, Lactate, Pyruvic acid or Succinic acid.
In the case of tryptophan production strains, the tryptophan yield is calculated in the same manner
as mentioned above.
3.7.1
Growth rate calculation
The batch­phase fermentation is the same for all the strains, irrespective of the reference or scale­
down condition. The maximum growth rate is calculated by taking the average amount of CER
released (moles) in all three experiments and six AMBR® 250 reactors for all six strains. Taking
ln(avg CER (moles)) with respect to time and the slope is the growth rate µmax (1/h). The straight
line part of the exponential phase is taken into consideration while calculating the µmax (1/h).
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
29
==PAGE:38==
3.8
Feeding pulse design
The reactor was divided into four compartments. The bioreactor geometry was inspired by Gisela’s
work refer Figure 3.3. The feed pulsing value was set at around 150 sec. During fermentation,
glucose heterogeneity is the primary stress imposed on the cells. This stress increases over time
as the cell density increases. The objective is to replicate the ratio of time spent by cells in regions
of high glucose concentration (feast state) and low glucose concentration (famine state) within
the 250 mL bioreactor. From Figure 3.4, it is observed that compartments 1 and 2 are in glucose
limitation, and compartments 3 and 4 are in glucose starvation. The ratio of the glucose starvation
area to the limitation area in the bioreactor is around 0.4 refer Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.3: Illustration of bioreactor geometry by dividing it into compartment model
The rate and differential equation for the Monod kinetic model of substrate uptake in each com­
partment of the compartment model are:
qSi = qSmax ·
Si
Si + Ks
(3.11)
dSi
dt = −qSi · X + θij
Vi
· (Sj −Si) + θik
Vi
· (Sk −Si)
(3.12)
Where qSi is the specific substrate uptake rate in compartment i, qSmax is the maximal specific
uptake rate, Si is the substrate concentration in compartment i, Ks is the substrate affinity constant,
X is the biomass concentration θik and θij are the exchange flows between compartment i and its
neighboring compartments j and k (j indicates upper neighbor, k indicates below neighbor), Sj and
Sk are the substrate concentration of compartment j and k, and Vi is the volume of compartment
i. In the case of the top compartment an additional term considering substrate feeding is added to
the differential equation.
30
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.4: Illustration of glucose limitation and starvation with respect to the compartment model
shown in Figure3.3. Values represent the compartment model solution from a steady state simula­
tion for the compartment model. The process parameters of the compartment model were glucose
feed Fs = 312 kg/h, stirring speed N = 140 rpm, Gas flow Fg = 0.79 kg/s, and head pressure phead
= 1 bar. For the Monod kinetic model of substrate uptake by the microorganisms (equations shown
below), the parameters biomass concentration X = 40 gX/L, maximal specific uptake rate qSmax =
0.8 gS g/X/h, and substrate affinity constant Ks = 0.05 gS/L were used. Note, that the simulation of
the compartment model was not performed as part of this thesis but adapted from previous work.
A replication process involves comparing the reference condition (no glucose heterogeneity, i.e.
homogenous glucose concentration) with the scale­down condition (feast and famine conditions),
while employing the same amount of glucose in each cycle. In order to meet the requirements of
the fed­batch condition, the glucose input was gradually increased over time. The design of the
pulse feed is depicted in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: In the design of the pulse feed, the total time of a single feed pulse is 150 sec, the feed
pump is on for around 60 sec, and the glucose starvation phase starts at around 75 sec. The pulse for
the intermittent feeding regime is designed to represent their relative fraction of starvation found
in the compartment model solution refer Figure 3.4. The comparison of the starvation fraction
between compartment model (CM) and intermittent feeding regime (IFR) can be seen in the top
right corner.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:41==
4
Results
4.1
Growth physiology of E. coli parent and the transcription factor
knock­out strains
Figure 4.1: Comparison between growth rate and biomass yield in batch phase
Figure 4.2: Comparison between acetic acid produced by different strain in batch phase
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.1 illustrates the correlation between the maximum growth rate (µmax) observed during the
batch phase and the final biomass yield, represented as cmol of biomass per cmol of substrate. The
strains E.coli BW25113 wildtype and E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA demonstrate a similar growth rate
of approximately 0.66 1/h, with the E. coli BW25113 ∆prpR following closely behind at 0.59 1/h.
The growth rates of E. coli BW25113 ∆cra and E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS are nearly identical, while
the slowest growing strain is E. coli BW25113 ∆crp.
In terms of biomass yield, E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS comes out on top, with E. coli BW25113
∆crp following next. The strains E. coli BW25113 wildtype, E. coli BW25113 ∆prpR, and E. coli
BW25113 ∆fliA show nearly the same biomass production, whereas the least amount of biomass
is produced by E. coli BW25113 ∆cra.
4.2
Growth physiology of E. coli BW25113 wild type and
transcriptional factor knock out strain under glucose oscillations
Figure 4.3a presents the biomass yield (measured as carbon mole of biomass per carbon mole of
substrate) observed at the conclusion of the fermentation process, which is after 60 hours under
fed­batch conditions. Each strain was examined under glucose heterogeneity, implemented via
intermittent pulse feeding, in the scale­down scenario. The E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA strain demon­
strated comparable biomass production behavior in both the reference and scale­down conditions.
Meanwhile, E. coli BW25113 wild­type, E. coli BW25113 ∆crp, E. coli BW25113 ∆cra, and
E. coli BW25113 ∆prpR strains each generated higher biomass yields under the reference condi­
tion as opposed to the scale­down condition. Interestingly, the comparative performance across all
these strains remained consistent regardless of the condition. Notably, the E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS
strain showed enhanced performance in the reference condition compared to the scale­down con­
dition.
In Figure 4.3b, we observe a comparison of CO2 Emission Rates (CER) yield with respect to
carbon mole of substrate consumed across various strains in both reference and scale­down con­
ditions. Intriguingly, every strain emits more CO2 under scale­down conditions than in reference
conditions. Particularly, E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA and E. coli BW25113 ∆cra exhibit similar CER
yields under both conditions. Among these, E. coli BW25113 ∆cra emerges as a more substantial
CO2 producer. This is followed by E. coli BW25113 ∆crp, E. coli BW25113 wild type, and E.
coli BW25113 ∆rpoS strains. Interestingly, E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS shows inconsistent behavior
in reference conditions, but appears more stable in scale­down conditions. The E. coli BW25113
∆prpR, however, demonstrates unexpected behavior, deviating significantly from the expected
pattern. Illustration results for CER are compared with respect to biomass and can be referred
Figure A.3a in the Appendix.
34
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:43==
(a) Biomass yield (carbon moles biomass per
carbon moles substrate)
(b) CER yield (carbon moles CO2 per carbon
moles substrate)
(c) OUR yield (moles O2 per carbon moles sub­
strate)
(d) NH4OH consumed in mL
(e) Acetic acid yield (carbon moles acetic acid
per carbon moles substrate)
Figure 4.3: Comparison of final yields and base consumed in the fermentation across all strains.
The dotted grey line represents equal values in both reference and scale­down condition. The
x­axis and y­axis represent the performance of cells in the reference and scale­down conditions,
respectively. The error bars indicate the standard deviation across triplicates.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Carbon balance of Wildtype strain
(b) Carbon balance of ∆prpR strain
(c) Carbon balance of ∆cra strain
(d) Carbon balance of ∆rpoS strain
(e) Carbon balance of ∆fliA strain
(f) Carbon balance of E. coli BW25113 ∆crp
Figure 4.4: The figure illustrates the carbon balance across all the E. coli BW25113 and its knock­
out strains.
In Figure 4.3c, we examine the Oxygen Uptake Rate (OUR) yield relative to the carbon mole of
substrate consumed in both reference and scale­down conditions. It’s noticeable that all strains
consume more oxygen when in the scale­down condition compared to the reference condition.
When considering strains such as E. coli BW25113 wild­type, E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS, E. coli
BW25113 ∆prpR, E. coli BW25113 ∆cra, and E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA, they all demonstrate sim­
ilar behavior with a comparable deviation from the expected outcomes in both the scale­down
and reference conditions. An interesting observation is that the E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS exhibits
higher fluctuations in the reference condition but appears more stable under scale­down condi­
36
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:45==
tions. Contrastingly, the E. coli BW25113 ∆crp strain shows a significantly higher OUR yield
in the scale­down condition compared to the reference condition. Illustration results for OUR are
compared with respect to biomass and can be referred Figure A.3b in Appendix.
In Figure 4.3d, we can see the quantity of ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) used during the fermen­
tation process. It is interesting to note that in all cases, a greater volume of the base is utilized in
the reference condition compared to the scale­down condition. In the case of the E. coli BW25113
∆fliA strain, the amount of base pumped remains approximately the same in both conditions. This
is followed closely by E. coli BW25113 ∆cra and E. coli BW25113 ∆crp strains. Furthermore,
both E. coli BW25113 ∆prpR and the E. coli BW25113 wild­type strain show similar patterns,
though there is a notable difference in the volume of the base pumped. In the case of the E. coli
BW25113 ∆rpoS strain, the volume of base pumped deviates significantly from both the reference
and scale­down conditions.
Figure 4.3e presents the quantity of acetic acid generated (cmol) with respect to the amount of glu­
cose consumed (cmol). The most notable observation is that all strains, except for E. coli BW25113
∆crp, produced a minimal amount of acetic acid. Specifically, in the E. coli BW25113 ∆crp strain,
we see a significantly higher acetic acid formation in the reference condition compared to the scale­
down condition. Illustration results for acetic acid formed are compared with respect to biomass
and can be referred to in Figure A.3c in Appendix.
Figure A.3d in the Appendix presents the levels of formic acid produced by various strains. In
particular, we observe no formation of formic acid in the case of E. coli BW25113 wild­type, E. coli
BW25113 ∆prpR, and E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS. Only negligible amounts are produced by E. coli
BW25113 ∆cra and E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA. Strikingly, we see a significantly higher production
of formic acid in the E. coli BW25113 ∆crp strain under reference conditions as compared to
scale­down conditions.
Lactate isn’t produced in E. coli BW25113 wild­type, E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS, and E. coli BW25113
∆crp in either condition. In contrast, E. coli BW25113 ∆prpR, E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA, and E.
coli BW25113 ∆cra only produced a very minute amount of lactate (approximately 10−5).
On another note, none of the strains produced pyruvic acid in either the reference or scale­down
conditions. All of the strains tested produced a very small amount of succinic acid, on the order of
10−3 carbon mole of succinic acid per carbon mole of substrate consumed, and this was true under
both reference and scale­down conditions. It’s interesting to note that the strain variants E. coli
BW25113 rpoS and E. coli BW25113 cra produced the smallest amounts, while E. coli BW25113
crp produced the highest succinic acid production. For a more detailed look at these results, you
can refer to Figure A.3e in the Appendix.
The following table provides a comparative analysis based on the ranking of all strains from 1
to 6. Each strain was evaluated according to its performance in both reference and scale­down
conditions, with a score of 6 awarded to those strains that exhibited similar behavior under both
conditions. When interpreting the table, it’s important to remember that strains sharing the same
score have comparable performance. The strain accumulating the highest overall score is selected
for further testing in the context of tryptophan production.
It should be noted that certain factors were not taken into account in this ranking system. Specif­
ically, the yields of pyruvic acid and lactate were disregarded since none of the strains produced
these compounds. Additionally, formic acid yield was also excluded from the analysis as only
three strains produced it, and succinic acid was excluded because it is negligibly produced across
all strains. This scoring system provides a comprehensive view of the strains’ performances, al­
lowing us to discern the optimal strain for tryptophan production with more precision.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.1: Points comparison between strains performed equally with respect to the reference
condition or scale­down condition
Component
Wild type
∆prpR
∆cra
∆rpoS
∆fliA
∆crp
Growth rate in batch phase
6
4
2
2
6
1
Biomass Yield (Ysx)
5
2
5
1
6
5
CER Yield (Ysc)
4
1
6
4
6
4
OUR Yield (Yso)
6
6
6
6
6
1
Base volume pumped (mL)
3
3
5
1
6
5
Acetic acid prod. yield (Ysa)
6
6
6
6
6
1
Total
30
22
30
20
36
17
From Table 4.1, it’s evident that the E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA strain exhibited comparable perfor­
mance in both the reference and scale­down conditions across all metrics. Therefore, this particular
strain has been selected for use in the E. coli tryptophan production experiments to further vali­
date our hypothesis. This choice is informed by the strain’s consistent performance under varying
conditions, which makes it a suitable candidate for our tryptophan production study.
4.3
Impact of glucose oscillation on tryptophan production strain
As seen in Figure 4.5a, the E. coli tryptophan production strain and E. coli ∆fliA ­ tryptophan
production strain both show similar amounts of biomass produced in both reference and scale­
down conditions. However, it’s noticeable that each strain yields a higher biomass in the reference
condition compared to the scale­down condition. An interesting point to observe is that, within
their respective conditions, both strains produced roughly the same amount of biomass.
Figure 4.5b demonstrates the yield of Carbon Emission Rate (CER) with respect to the amount of
glucose consumed (in cmol) for both the E. coli tryptophan production strain and the E. coli ∆fliA
­ tryptophan production strain. It’s interesting to note that both strains exhibit higher CER in the
scale­down condition compared to the reference condition. However, when comparing the two
strains, the E. coli ∆fliA ­ tryptophan production strain seems to emit less CO2 in the scale­down
condition. For both strains, the yield of CER relative to the amount of glucose consumed hovers
around 0.7 (cmol­cer/cmol­s).
Figure 4.5c presents the Oxygen Uptake Rate (OUR) in relation to the amount of glucose consumed
(cmol). The figure reveals that both the E. coli tryptophan­producing strain and the E. coli ∆fliA
tryptophan­producing strain demonstrate higher OUR in the scale­down condition as compared to
the reference condition. Interestingly, it appears that both strains consume approximately equal
amounts of oxygen in both conditions.
As illustrated in Figure 4.5d, the quantity of the base ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) pumped
throughout the course of the fermentation run is greater in the reference condition compared to the
scale­down condition for both strains. Interestingly, we observe that the amount of base pumped is
approximately equivalent in the reference condition and scale­down condition across both strains.
Figure 4.5e depicts the quantity of acetic acid produced in relation to the amount of glucose con­
sumed during fermentation. Interestingly, both strains appear to yield a higher quantity of acetic
acid (cmol) in the scale­down condition as opposed to the reference condition. It’s also notewor­
thy that roughly the same amount of acetic acid is produced in both the reference and scale­down
conditions across both strains.
38
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:47==
(a) Biomass yield (carbon moles biomass per carbon
moles substrate)
(b) CER yield (carbon moles CO2 per carbon moles
substrate)
(c) OUR yield (moles O2 per carbon moles sub­
strate)
(d) Base pumped in mL
(e) Acetic acid yield (carbon moles acetic acid per
carbon moles substrate)
(f) Formic acid yield (carbon moles formic acid per
carbon moles substrate)
Figure 4.5: Comparison of final yields and base consumed in the fermentation across E. coli tryp­
tophan production strain and E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production strain. The error bars indicate
the standard deviation across triplicates.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.5f demonstrates the quantity of formic acid produced in correlation with the glucose con­
sumed during fermentation. It’s interesting to note that the formic acid yield (cmol) is higher in
the scale­down condition for both strains compared to the reference condition. Equally important
is the observation that both strains produce approximately the same amount of formic acid in both
the reference and scale­down conditions.
Figure 4.6: The figure illustrates the carbon balance across E. coli tryptophan production strain and
E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production strain in reference (ref) and scale­down (sd) condition. TPS
(E. coli tryptophan production strain) and TPS ∆fliA (E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production strain).
A negligible amount of lactate (10−5) is formed in both the strains in scale­down condition, and
nothing is formed in reference condition for either strain. No pyruvic acid is formed in both strains
in both reference and scale­down conditions.
Succinic acid is produced in both strains. It is noteworthy that the amount of succinic acid produced
is relatively minimal, roughly on the order of 10−3 carbon mole of succinic acid per carbon mole of
substrate consumed, under both reference and scale­down conditions. For the E. coli tryptophan­
producing strain, the succinic acid yield (cmol) is marginally higher in the scale­down condition
compared to the reference condition. Interestingly, the E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan­producing strain
exhibits consistency in its succinic acid production across both the reference and scale­down con­
ditions.
By looking at the carbon balance of E. coli BW25113 and it’s knockout strains refer Figure 4.4
and E. coli tryptophan production strain refer Figure 4.6. It is observed that biomass produced by
tryptophan production strain is less compared to the non­tryptophan production strain.
Figure 4.7a showcases the tryptophan yield in relation to the amount of glucose consumed. From
the figure, it is evident that the tryptophan production is greater in the reference condition as com­
pared to the scale­down condition for both strains. Interestingly, in the reference condition, the E.
coli ∆fliA tryptophan­producing strain yields more tryptophan than the regular E. coli tryptophan­
producing strain. Conversely, in the scale­down condition, the E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan­producing
strain yields less tryptophan than the regular E. coli tryptophan­producing strain.
40
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.7: Comparison of final trptophan yields with respect to substrate consumed (left) and
final trptophan yields with respect to biomass produced (right) in the fermentation across E. coli
tryptophan production strain and E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production strain. The error bars indicate
the standard deviation across triplicates.
Figure 4.7b illustrates the tryptophan yield in relation to the amount of biomass formed. Notably,
the E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan­producing strain forms more biomass in the reference condition com­
pared to the scale­down condition. Conversely, for the regular E. coli tryptophan­producing strain,
the amount of tryptophan produced in both conditions is roughly equal.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:51==
5
Discussion
The aim of this project is to understand the impact of glucose heterogeneity in transcription factor
of E. coli and to make suggestions to make a robust strain in regards to substrate heterogeneity
during the scale­up process.
As shown in Figure 4.1, the transcription factors absent within the cells influence the growth rate
and biomass yield of the bacteria during the batch phase. Growth rate plays an important role
in the overall execution of fermentation. For instance, if E. coli exhibits a markedly low growth
rate, this will inevitably extend the time required for the bacteria to initiate product synthesis,
further increasing process time­related costs. Therefore, the ideal candidate for scale­up should
demonstrate a balance between a healthy growth rate and a substantial biomass yield. rpoS and
crp are transcription factors that function globally in E. coli. In strains exhibiting rpoS and crp
knockouts (∆rpoS and ∆crp, respectively), growth rates decreased due to extended adaptation
periods and reduced growth rates. Interestingly, ∆cra also demonstrated a low growth rate and
biomass yield. The cra gene, encoding the catabolite repressor/activator protein, plays a key role
in carbon metabolism in E. coli, and its deletion can disturb metabolic flux balance. ∆cra and
∆crp has long lag phase compared to other strain in the batch phase, which can be seen in Figure
A.7 and Figure A.9 respectively in Appendix. Lag phase of E. coli is also influenced by presence
and absence of a transcription factor. Cell growth can be hindered by this disturbance, resulting in
a decreased growth rate and biomass production. As a result, this explains the delicate balance of
metabolic processes within bacteria as well as the influence of transcriptional regulators on their
performance.
E. coli produce acetic acid in batch phase because of glucose abundance due to overflow metabolism.
In order to adjust the acid produced in the batch phase, ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) is pumped.
Other nitrogen sources are available, however the addition of ammonium hydroxide serves a dual
role [67]; it not only helps to maintain the pH by neutralizing the acid generated during the satura­
tion phase due to overflow metabolism, but it also serves as the primary source of nitrogen, which is
vital for bacterial growth during the fed­batch. All proteins in E. coli are composed of amino acids,
which contain nitrogen. The molecular formula of biomass is assumed as CH1.8O0.5N0.2, which
makes nitrogen an indispensable element for biomass production. The mechanism for biomass
production is illustrated in Figure A.1.
It’s noteworthy that producing 1 gram of E. coli biomass requires approximately 40 millimoles of
carbon, 11 millimoles of nitrogen, and 72 millimoles of ATP, emphasizing the energy­intensive
nature of this process. As a result, the GS­GOGAT pathway, which is responsible for assimilating
ammonia, contributes substantially to the cell’s ATP demand. This pathway accounts for approxi­
mately 15 % of the cell’s ATP demand [65]. Consequently, this pathway plays a significant role in
energy metabolism and illustrates the interconnected nature of nutrient uptake, energy metabolism,
and biomass production in E. coli. Moreover, it is evident that ammonium hydroxide (base) is not
only used to produce biomass, as we can see from the following formula:
CH2O + O2 + NH+
4
→CH1.8O0.5N0.2 + H2O + CO2 + H+
(5.1)
The only source of nitrogen which E. coli can obtain is ammonia from NH4+. E. coli will take
ammonia leaving a proton behind. To neutralize the proton, more ammonium hydroxide will be
pumped into the reactor. As a result of this whole mechanism, the amount of biomass formed is
directly proportional to the amount of ammonium hydroxide pumped into the bioreactor.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
43
==PAGE:52==
Figures 4.3a and 4.3d demonstrate a similar correlation between strain performance under refer­
ence and scale­down conditions. This information indicates that it is possible to develop effective
strategies for improving fermentation performance by understanding the role and interplay of dif­
ferent transcriptional factors under a variety of environmental and nutritional conditions.
The amount of biomass produced is inversely related to the CO2 emission rate (CER). In general,
the more efficient the cell is at converting a substrate into biomass (high yield), the less carbon
is lost as CO2 and vice versa. This correlation is satisfied, and we are able to make a similar
observation based on our experiments. Figure 4.3a and 4.3b, the biomass yield (carbon moles
biomass per carbon moles substrate) and CER yield (carbon moles CO2 per carbon moles substrate)
have values ranging from 0.4­0.6 in all the strains. The cells undergo repeated glucose starvation
under scale­down conditions. As a result, cells are stressed in scale­down conditions and they have
to spend more resources to cope with that stress, i.e., on maintenance. As a result, those resources
(carbon) are not used for biomass formation, but merely for maintenance (which produces CO2).
Biomass and CO2 are the two major carbon sources converted from glucose; this is also proved in
the carbon balance seen in Figure 4.4.
In the process of oxidative phosphorylation, oxygen is used as the final electron acceptor, which
produces a considerable amount of ATP required for cellular growth and maintenance. According
to Figure 4.3c, strains exposed to glucose heterogeneity require more energy for maintenance than
strains exposed to glucose homogeneity which is higher OUR per carbon mole of substrate con­
sumed. Similar results are obtained from [2]. As aeration is an expensive part of the bioprocess,
the strain which need more oxygen for growing or maintenance are not good for scale­up, one of
the possible reason is not economically feasible.
As demonstrated by the results, the behavior of E. coli ∆rpoS differed between the reference and
scale­down conditions. As a highly active transcription factor, rpoS influences the performance
of various transcription factor knockout strains under both reference and scale­down conditions.
RpoS degradation isn’t initiated by the introduction of α­methylglucoside; however, glucose ad­
dition rapidly accelerates this process. The carbohydrate phosphotransferase system (PTS) does
not affect the stability of RpoS. As an alternative, it influences the transcription and translation
of RpoS. For the initiation of RpoS degradation, the active metabolism of a carbon substrate is
required [68, 69].
Bacteria use ATP as their currency for exchanging energy. The presence of ATP and the stabi­
lization of RpoS exhibit a unique correlation. RpoS is stable under conditions when the cells lack
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine monophosphate (AMP), precursors to ATP. How­
ever, the impact of ATP on RpoS degradation in­vitro is atypical; an increase in ATPgs (growth
associated maintenance energy) results in a non­linear increase in RpoS degradation rate. Further,
the incorporation of ATPgS into the system results in a modest reduction in the activity of the
ATPase enzyme. This seemingly minor alteration, however, induces a profound effect on RpoS
proteolysis, with a combination of both forms leading to a degradation rate decrease of over 90 %
[68, 69]. Given the importance of rpoS to cellular function, it suggests that high ATP levels are
necessary for cellular control. In the absence of rpoS, it appears that cAMP­CRP controls cellular
processes in an unclear manner [44].
As demonstrated by the results, the behavior of E. coli ∆cra differed between the reference and
scale­down conditions. cra plays a critical role in regulating carbon flux through metabolic path­
ways. It inhibits the expression of genes encoding glycolytic and Entner­Doudoroff enzymes, as
shown in Figure 2.5. Notably, in the E. coli ∆cra strain, the observation made (with regards to
CER, OUR, biomass) and offer ATP conservation as one possible explanation for ATP conserva­
tion, likely attributed to the absence of an excessive commitment to the gluconeogenesis process,
as illustrated in Figures 2.6 and 2.7. Additionally, energy that would otherwise be used to acceler­
44
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:53==
ate the Krebs cycle is conserved within the cell, as shown in Figure 2.8. Consequently, this leads to
improved performance of the E. coli ∆cra strain under both reference and scale­down conditions.
The transcriptional factor crp serves as a global regulator in E. coli, predominantly initiating its
response by binding with cAMP during the glucose starvation phase. ATP is required to form
the cAMP­CRP complex. However, when crp is knocked out, the formation of this complex is
inhibited, and the energy that would otherwise be expended in this process is conserved within the
cells, as represented in Figure 2.12. It is noteworthy that crp plays a crucial role in the TCA cycle,
and its knockout can hinder the bacteria’s ability to complete this cycle effectively. In accordance
with the comparison presented in Table 4.1, the E. coli ∆crp knockout strain does not offer a
suitable choice if the aim is to replicate the reference behavior in a scale­down condition.
A transcription factor known as FliA confers locomotive capabilities on bacteria. The general
observation is that the external energy supplied for stirring in any bioreactor appears to suffice for
the locomotive movement of bacteria. The formation of flagella, which are essential for bacterial
motility, is an energy­intensive process and tends to be less regulated by other general responsive
transcriptional factors. According to Figure 2.15, fliA positively regulates class III operons, and of
all the genes, fliC requires the highest level of additional maintenance energy (ATPgs) [2]. This
finding highlights the potential benefits of the E. coli ∆fliA knockout, as its performance across
all parameters was notably similar in reference and scale­down conditions, making it a promising
choice for future experiments refer Figure 4.3.
Intriguingly, prpR is under the regulatory control of two transcriptional factors, cra and CRP, and it
also demonstrates the ability to down­regulate its own action. Although prpR impacts a relatively
small number of genes, it is noteworthy that the only genes affected are all within the same gene
family. The anticipated behavior of E. coli ∆prpR would align with that of the E. coli wildtype.
Yet, our findings contradict this expectation. Due to a lack of literature that could clarify the
behavior of E. coli ∆prpR under reference and scale­down conditions, one of the assumptions is
that perhaps there are more unidentified genes that are undermining the performance of E. coli
∆prpR in comparison with the E. coli wildtype. Under scale­down conditions, CER emissions are
10 % higher than under reference conditions. This means ∆prpR shouldn’t be knocked out.
In summary looking at the Table 4.1, it was evident that E. coli ∆fliA performed most similarly in
both glucose homogeneous and heterogeneous environments. It is chosen for testing the hypothesis
in tryptophan­producing strains.
In the context of the tryptophan­producing strain of E. coli, it was anticipated that the influence of
glucose heterogeneity would yield a higher tryptophan titre in reference conditions compared to
scale­down conditions. Furthermore, it was postulated that the E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production
strain would exhibit equal or improved performance and lower sensitivity to glucose heterogeneity
on tryptophan titre across both conditions. While the first hypothesis was confirmed, the latter
was contradicted by experimental outcomes. Interestingly, the difference between the tryptophan
titres in reference and scale­down conditions was more pronounced in the E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan
production strain than in the E. coli tryptophan production strain. From Figure 4.5e and Figure 4.5f,
it was evident that E. coli tryptophan production strain and E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production
strain generated a larger amount of by­products, specifically organic acids such as acetic acid and
formic acid in repeated glucose starvation. The increase in undesired production compensates for
the difference in tryptophan titers.
General observations about formic acid generation indicate that the E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan pro­
duction strain experiences oxygen limitation. However, oxygen limitation was avoided at all times
during experiments conducted in this work. The amount of biomass produced by E. coli tryptophan
production strain and its ∆fliA knockout compared to E. coli BW25113 and its knockout strains is
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
45
==PAGE:54==
around 40 %. It is possible that E. coli tryptophan production strain and ∆fliA knockout are highly
genetically modified organisms. Most of the energy and carbon source is used to maintain the cell
and can be seen in high CER and OUR. The E. coli ∆fliA tryptophan production strain does not
meet the criteria for a robust strain for this application. It could be that in highly engineered strains,
the onset of unwanted stress triggers a quick shift in metabolic focus, leading to the production of
non­required products. This behavior appears to be intrinsic to bacteria, particularly E. coli.
46
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:55==
6
Conclusion
In the context of this research, the single­compartment model served as an effective scale­down
tool to investigate the impacts of glucose heterogeneity on transcription factors of E. coli. As a
result of pulse feeding the substrate heterogeneity was created. This study utilized the Advanced
Microscale Bioreactor System (AMBR® 250). By implementing scale­down models in an early
stage, not only the challenges relating to scaling up be identified early, but also the risk of potential
strain (i.e. strains that perform well under industrial conditions) loss in the process development
can be minimized. As a result, it is recommended that scale­down methods be implemented early
in the process development. The pulse feeding scale­down approach is applicable beyond this
study and can be incorporated into other research studies. Substrate heterogeneity, oxygen transfer,
pH fluctuations, and heat transfer are ubiquitous challenges in scaling up fermentation processes.
Thus, the approach can be replicated in various contexts, independent of substrate type or microbial
organism (e.g., bacteria or yeast).
With respect to the results obtained in this thesis, a number of key conclusions can be made. Firstly,
transcription factors play a vital role in regulating the growth rate of E. coli, as evidenced by the
slower growth rate of the knockout strains (except for E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA) during the batch
phase. The variance in response to external conditions and their corresponding effect on growth
rate highlight the critical function of transcriptional factors in E. coli’s physiology.
Secondly, physiological differences between the reference and scale­down conditions were ob­
served in the E. coli BW25113 wild type strain and other transcriptional factor knockout strains.
There were significant differences in biomass yield, CER yield, OUR yield, nitrogen consumption,
and organic acid production. As a result of repeated glucose starvation, there were observable
physiological changes in E. coli. During fermentation, higher biomass production was observed
under reference conditions than under scale­down conditions, a finding that was substantiated by
the amount of base pumped. Additionally, in scale­down conditions, CER emission and oxygen
uptake were greater, indicating that the cells were consuming more energy for maintenance. In­
terestingly, the E. coli ∆fliA knockout conserved more energy, allowing it to maintain similar
behavior under both conditions. E. coli ∆cra, ∆crp, ∆rpoS, ∆prpR displayed varying results un­
der scale­down conditions, which indicates the transcription factors are necessary for the proper
functioning of bacteria under repeated glucose starvation.
Lastly, regarding the tryptophan production of E. coli, it was evident that the E. coli ∆fliA tryp­
tophan producer strain was not a robust strain, as it exhibited different behavior under reference
and scale­down conditions. A possible explanation for this observation is that the existing stress
from genetic modifications for tryptophan production has downregulated the beneficial effects of
the ∆fliA knockout. It was also expected that more ATP conserved with E. coli would lead to
similar tryptophan production under both conditions, but another reason may be a flux issue, and
ATP might not be a limiting factor in this case.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:57==
7
Future Works
This study has illuminated how E. coli behaves under varied conditions of glucose availability.
This behavior was consistently demonstrated across strains with knockouts in various transcription
factors as well as in a tryptophan­producing strain. However, our current approach only explores
the cellular response to one form of stress, namely glucose heterogeneity.
Future work should delve into how these bacteria behave under conditions of oxygen heterogeneity
and a combination of stresses­glucose heterogeneity coupled with oxygen heterogeneity. This will
broaden our understanding of the adaptability and resilience of these organisms under different
forms of stress.
A study of the relationship between ATP levels and RpoS stability may provide strategies for con­
trolling rpoS expression, thus influencing metabolic activity in the cell, and a study of the effects
of cAMP­CRP on cell processes in the absence of rpoS may reveal new regulatory mechanisms.
Further investigation into the mechanisms by which crp affects ATP conservation, especially dur­
ing glucose starvation, may provide further insight into optimizing energy use in E. coli. More
research could be conducted to understand the interaction between fliA and other transcriptional
factors and how this interplay influences the overall bacterial metabolism, and studies could be
designed to assess whether there are conditions under which the knockout of fliA might adversely
affect the bacteria’s survival or efficiency. A genomic analysis on E. coli ∆prpR to identify po­
tentially involved and yet unrecognized genes.
Additionally, the observed similarities in the responses of the knockout strains E. coli BW25113
∆fliA and E. coli BW25113 ∆cra. Future studies should investigate the response of a double
knockout strain, E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA ∆cra. Such studies could reveal if these transcription
factors work synergistically or if their combined knockout negatively impacts the organism.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Martin Ziegler et al. “Engineering of a robust Escherichia coli chassis and exploitation for
large­scale production processes”. In: Metabolic Engineering 67 (2021), pp. 75–87.
[2]
Michael Löffler et al. “Engineering E. coli for large­scale production–strategies considering
ATP expenses and transcriptional responses”. In: Metabolic engineering 38 (2016), pp. 73–
85.
[3]
Peter Neubauer and Stefan Junne. “Scale­down simulators for metabolic analysis of large­
scale bioprocesses”. In: Current opinion in biotechnology 21.1 (2010), pp. 114–121.
[4]
Alvaro R Lara et al. “Living with heterogeneities in bioreactors: understanding the effects of
environmental gradients on cells”. In: Molecular biotechnology 34.3 (2006), pp. 355–381.
[5]
William T Cordell et al. “Milligrams to kilograms: making microbes work at scale”. In:
Trends in Biotechnology (2023).
[6]
Tom A Ewing et al. “Fermentation for the production of biobased chemicals in a circu­
lar economy: a perspective for the period 2022–2050”. In: Green Chemistry 24.17 (2022),
pp. 6373–6405.
[7]
Andy W Sheppard et al. “Biosecurity and sustainability within the growing global bioecon­
omy”. In: Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 3.1­2 (2011), pp. 4–10.
[8]
Jacco Van Haveren, Elinor L Scott, and Johan Sanders. “Bulk chemicals from biomass”. In:
Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining: Innovation for a sustainable economy 2.1 (2008),
pp. 41–57.
[9]
Adrie JJ Straathof et al. “Grand research challenges for sustainable industrial biotechnol­
ogy”. In: Trends in biotechnology 37.10 (2019), pp. 1042–1050.
[10]
Jufang Wang et al. “Anaerobic fermentation for production of carboxylic acids as bulk chem­
icals from renewable biomass”. In: Anaerobes in biotechnology (2016), pp. 323–361.
[11]
Martin Gustavsson and Sang Yup Lee. “Prospects of microbial cell factories developed
through systems metabolic engineering”. In: Microbial Biotechnology 9.5 (2016), pp. 610–
617.
[12]
Pascal S Leonov et al. “Microbial biofilms in biorefinery–Towards a sustainable production
of low­value bulk chemicals and fuels”. In: Biotechnology Advances 50 (2021), p. 107766.
[13]
Jae Ho Shin et al. “Production of bulk chemicals via novel metabolic pathways in microor­
ganisms”. In: Biotechnology advances 31.6 (2013), pp. 925–935.
[14]
Manohar Kalyanpur. “Downstream processing in the biotechnology industry”. In: Molecu­
lar biotechnology 22 (2002), pp. 87–98.
[15]
Frank R Schmidt. “Optimization and scale up of industrial fermentation processes”. In: Ap­
plied microbiology and biotechnology 68 (2005), pp. 425–435.
[16]
Jie Bao, Qin Ye, and Jian­Jiang Zhong. Bioreactor Engineering Research and Industrial
Applications II. Springer, 2016.
[17]
Peter Neubauer et al. “Consistent development of bioprocesses from microliter cultures to
the industrial scale”. In: Engineering in Life Sciences 13.3 (2013), pp. 224–238.
[18]
Gunnar Lidén. “Understanding the bioreactor”. In: Bioprocess and biosystems engineering
24 (2002), pp. 273–279.
[19]
Chung­Jr Huang, Henry Lin, and Xiaoming Yang. “Industrial production of recombinant
therapeutics in Escherichia coli and its recent advancements”. In: Journal of Industrial Mi­
crobiology and Biotechnology 39.3 (2012), pp. 383–399.
[20]
Mohammed N Baeshen et al. “Production of biopharmaceuticals in E. coli: current scenario
and future perspectives”. In: Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology (2015).
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
51
==PAGE:60==
[21]
Victor Chubukov et al. “Coordination of microbial metabolism”. In: Nature Reviews Micro­
biology 12.5 (2014), pp. 327–340.
[22]
Jie Yuan et al. “Kinetic flux profiling of nitrogen assimilation in Escherichia coli”. In: Nature
chemical biology 2.10 (2006), pp. 529–530.
[23]
Luis Gerardo Trevino­Quintanilla, Julio Augusto Freyre­Gonzalez, and Irma Martı́nez­Flores.
“Anti­sigma factors in E. coli: common regulatory mechanisms controlling sigma factors
availability”. In: Current genomics 14.6 (2013), pp. 378–387.
[24]
Mark SB Paget and John D Helmann. “The σ70family of sigma factors”. In: Genome biology
4.1 (2003), pp. 1–6.
[25]
Dominique Missiakas and Satish Raina. “The extracytoplasmic function sigma factors: role
and regulation”. In: Molecular microbiology 28.6 (1998), pp. 1059–1066.
[26]
Boris Magasanik. “Catabolite repression”. In: Cold Spring Harbor symposia on quantitative
biology. Vol. 26. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 1961, pp. 249–256.
[27]
Boris Görke and Jörg Stülke. “Carbon catabolite repression in bacteria: many ways to make
the most out of nutrients”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 6.8 (2008), pp. 613–624.
[28]
Mingzhu Liu et al. “Global Transcriptional Programs Reveal a Carbon Source Foraging
Strategy by Escherichia coli*♦”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 280.16 (2005), pp. 15921–
15927.
[29]
Hans­Matti Blencke et al. “Transcriptional profiling of gene expression in response to glu­
cose in Bacillus subtilis: regulation of the central metabolic pathways”. In: Metabolic engi­
neering 5.2 (2003), pp. 133–149.
[30]
Matthew S Moreno et al. “Catabolite repression mediated by the CcpA protein in Bacillus
subtilis: novel modes of regulation revealed by whole­genome analyses”. In: Molecular
microbiology 39.5 (2001), pp. 1366–1381.
[31]
Ken­ichi Yoshida et al. “Combined transcriptome and proteome analysis as a powerful ap­
proach to study genes under glucose repression in Bacillus subtilis”. In: Nucleic acids re­
search 29.3 (2001), pp. 683–692.
[32]
TM Ramseier. “Cra and the control of carbon flux via metabolic pathways”. In: Research in
microbiology 147.6­7 (1996), pp. 489–493.
[33]
RH Geerse et al. “Relationship between pseudo­HPr and the PEP: fructose phosphotrans­
ferase system in Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli”. In: Molecular and General
Genetics MGG 203 (1986), pp. 435–444.
[34]
Tomohiro Shimada, Kaneyoshi Yamamoto, and Akira Ishihama. “Novel members of the
Cra regulon involved in carbon metabolism in Escherichia coli”. In: Journal of bacteriology
193.3 (2011), pp. 649–659.
[35]
Karl Kochanowski et al. “Functioning of a metabolic flux sensor in Escherichia coli”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110.3 (2013), pp. 1130–1135.
[36]
Katja Bettenbrock et al. “Correlation between growth rates, EIIACrr phosphorylation, and
intracellular cyclic AMP levels in Escherichia coli K­12”. In: Journal of bacteriology 189.19
(2007), pp. 6891–6900.
[37]
Akira Ishihama. “Building a complete image of genome regulation in the model organ­
ism Escherichia coli”. In: The Journal of General and Applied Microbiology 63.6 (2017),
pp. 311–324.
[38]
Conghui You et al. “Coordination of bacterial proteome with metabolism by cyclic AMP
signalling”. In: Nature 500.7462 (2013), pp. 301–306.
[39]
Shai Kaplan et al. “Diverse two­dimensional input functions control bacterial sugar genes”.
In: Molecular cell 29.6 (2008), pp. 786–792.
[40]
Regine Hengge­Aronis. “Signal transduction and regulatory mechanisms involved in control
of the σS (RpoS) subunit of RNA polymerase”. In: Microbiology and molecular biology
reviews 66.3 (2002), pp. 373–395.
52
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:61==
[41]
Donghyuk Kim et al. “Systems assessment of transcriptional regulation on central carbon
metabolism by Cra and CRP”. In: Nucleic acids research 46.6 (2018), pp. 2901–2917.
[42]
Thomas Ferenci. “Hungry bacteria–definition and properties of a nutritional state”. In: En­
vironmental microbiology 3.10 (2001), pp. 605–611.
[43]
Thomas Ferenci. “Bacterial physiology, regulation and mutational adaptation in a chemostat
environment”. In: Advances in microbial physiology 53 (2007), pp. 169–315.
[44]
Harald Weber et al. “Genome­wide analysis of the general stress response network in Es­
cherichia coli: σS­dependent genes, promoters, and sigma factor selectivity”. In: Journal of
bacteriology 187.5 (2005), pp. 1591–1603.
[45]
Thea King, Shona Seeto, and Thomas Ferenci. “Genotype­by­environment interactions in­
fluencing the emergence of rpoS mutations in Escherichia coli populations”. In: Genetics
172.4 (2006), pp. 2071–2079.
[46]
Alessandro G Franchini, Julian Ihssen, and Thomas Egli. “Effect of global regulators RpoS
and cyclic­AMP/CRP on the catabolome and transcriptome of Escherichia coli K12 during
carbon­and energy­limited growth”. In: PLoS One 10.7 (2015), e0133793.
[47]
CL Patten et al. “Microarray analysis of RpoS­mediated gene expression in Escherichia coli
K­12”. In: Molecular Genetics and Genomics 272 (2004), pp. 580–591.
[48]
ABDUL Matin and MIMI K Matin. “Cellular levels, excretion, and synthesis rates of cyclic
AMP in Escherichia coli grown in continuous culture”. In: Journal of bacteriology 149.3
(1982), pp. 801–807.
[49]
Lucinda Notley­McRobb, Alison Death, and Thomas Ferenci. “The relationship between
external glucose concentration and cAMP levels inside Escherichia coli: implications for
models of phosphotransferase­mediated regulation of adenylate cyclase”. In: Microbiology
143.6 (1997), pp. 1909–1918.
[50]
Kaspar Valgepea et al. “Systems biology approach reveals that overflow metabolism of ac­
etate in Escherichia coli is triggered by carbon catabolite repression of acetyl­CoA syn­
thetase”. In: BMC systems biology 4.1 (2010), pp. 1–13.
[51]
Anne Farewell, Kristian Kvint, and Thomas Nyström. “Negative regulation by RpoS: a case
of sigma factor competition”. In: Molecular microbiology 29.4 (1998), pp. 1039–1051.
[52]
Hiroto Maeda, Nobuyuki Fujita, and Akira Ishihama. “Competition among seven Escherichia
coli σ subunits: relative binding affinities to the core RNA polymerase”. In: Nucleic acids
research 28.18 (2000), pp. 3497–3503.
[53]
Thomas Nyström. “MicroReview: Growth versus maintenance: a trade­off dictated by RNA
polymerase availability and sigma factor competition?” In: Molecular microbiology 54.4
(2004), pp. 855–862.
[54]
Mahbuba Rahman et al. “Effect of rpoS gene knockout on the metabolism of Escherichia
coli during exponential growth phase and early stationary phase based on gene expressions,
enzyme activities and intracellular metabolite concentrations”. In: Biotechnology and bio­
engineering 94.3 (2006), pp. 585–595.
[55]
Thea King and Thomas Ferenci. “Divergent roles of RpoS in Escherichia coli under aerobic
and anaerobic conditions”. In: FEMS microbiology letters 244.2 (2005), pp. 323–327.
[56]
Celeste N Peterson, Mark J Mandel, and Thomas J Silhavy. “Escherichia coli starvation
diets: essential nutrients weigh in distinctly”. In: Journal of bacteriology 187.22 (2005),
pp. 7549–7553.
[57]
Beny Spira, Xuye Hu, and Thomas Ferenci. “Strain variation in ppGpp concentration and
RpoS levels in laboratory strains of Escherichia coli K­12”. In: Microbiology 154.9 (2008),
pp. 2887–2895.
[58]
Robert M Macnab. “Genetics and biogenesis of bacterial flagella”. In: Annual review of
genetics 26.1 (1992), pp. 131–158.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
53
==PAGE:62==
[59]
Gavin S Chilcott and Kelly T Hughes. “Coupling of flagellar gene expression to flagellar as­
sembly in Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium and Escherichia coli”. In: Microbiology
and Molecular Biology Reviews 64.4 (2000), pp. 694–708.
[60]
Yoshibumi Komeda, Kazuhiro Kutsukake, and Tetsuo Iino. “Definition of additional flag­
ellar genes in Escherichia coli K12”. In: Genetics 94.2 (1980), pp. 277–290.
[61]
Daniel S Mytelka and Michael J Chamberlin. “Escherichia coli fliAZY operon”. In: Journal
of bacteriology 178.1 (1996), pp. 24–34.
[62]
O Soutourina et al. “Multiple control of flagellum biosynthesis in Escherichia coli: role of
H­NS protein and the cyclic AMP­catabolite activator protein complex in transcription of
the flhDC master operon”. In: Journal of bacteriology 181.24 (1999), pp. 7500–7508.
[63]
Kazuhiro Kutsukake and Tetsuo Iino. “Role of the FliA­FlgM regulatory system on the
transcriptional control of the flagellar regulon and flagellar formation in Salmonella ty­
phimurium”. In: Journal of bacteriology 176.12 (1994), pp. 3598–3605.
[64]
Xiaoying Liu and Philip Matsumura. “Differential regulation of multiple overlapping pro­
moters in flagellar class II operons in Escherichia coli”. In: Molecular microbiology 21.3
(1996), pp. 613–620.
[65]
Sung Kuk Lee, Jack D Newman, and Jay D Keasling. “Catabolite repression of the propi­
onate catabolic genes in Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica: evidence for involvement
of the cyclic AMP receptor protein”. In: Journal of bacteriology 187.8 (2005), pp. 2793–
2800.
[66]
Susanne Textor et al. “Propionate oxidation in Escherichia coli: evidence for operation of a
methylcitrate cycle in bacteria”. In: Archives of microbiology 168 (1997), pp. 428–436.
[67]
Larry Reitzer. “Nitrogen assimilation and global regulation in Escherichia coli”. In: Annual
Reviews in Microbiology 57.1 (2003), pp. 155–176.
[68]
Celeste N Peterson et al. “RpoS proteolysis is controlled directly by ATP levels in Es­
cherichia coli”. In: Genes & Development 26.6 (2012), pp. 548–553.
[69]
T Ferenci. “The spread of a beneficial mutation in experimental bacterial populations: the
influence of the environment and genotype on the fixation of rpoS mutations”. In: Heredity
100.5 (2008), pp. 446–452.
54
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
Mechanism of biomass formation in the cell
Figure A.1: Mechanism of biomass formation inside the bacteria starting from carbon and nitrogen
sources. Figure adapted form Chubukov et al. [21].
A.2
E. coli yields’ with respect to substrate consumed
(a) Formic acid (FA) yield (cmoles of FA
per cmoles of substrate consumed)
(b) Succinic acid (SA) yield (cmoles of SA
per cmoles of substrate consumed)
Figure A.2: Comparison of final yields with respect to substrate consumed and base consumed in
the fermentation across all strains. The dotted grey line represents equal values in both reference
and scale­down condition. The x­axis and y­axis represent the performance of cells in the reference
and scale­down conditions, respectively. The error bars indicate the standard deviation across
triplicates.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
55
==PAGE:64==
A.3
E. coli yields’ with respect to biomass formed
(a) CER yield (cmoles of CER per cmoles
of biomass formed)
(b) OUR yield (moles of biomass per
cmoles substrate)
(c) Acetic acid (AA) yield (cmoles of AA
per cmoles of biomass formed)
(d) Formic acid (FA) yield (cmoles of FA
per cmoles of biomass formed)
(e) Succinic acid (SA) yield (cmoles of SA
per cmoles of biomass formed)
Figure A.3: Comparison of final yields with respect to substrate consumed and base consumed in
the fermentation across all strains. The dotted grey line represents equal values in both reference
and scale­down condition. The x­axis and y­axis represent the performance of cells in the reference
and scale­down conditions, respectively. The error bars indicate the standard deviation across
triplicates.
56
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:65==
A.4
Tryptophan production strain yields with respect to biomass
formed
(a) CER yield (cmoles of CER per cmoles
biomass formed)
(b) OUR yield (moles of OUR per cmoles
biomass formed)
(c) Acetic acid yield (cmoles of acetic acid per
cmoles biomass formed)
(d) Formic acid yield (cmoles of formic acid per
cmoles biomass formed)
(e) Succinic acid yield (cmoles of succinic acid
per cmoles biomass formed)
Figure A.4: Comparison of final yields with respect to biomass formed in the fermentation across
E. coli tryptophan production strain and ∆fliA. The error bars indicate the standard deviation across
triplicates.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
57
==PAGE:66==
A.5
CDW values of all samples E. coli BW25113 and its knockout
strains
(a) CDW values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype
(b) CDW values for E. coli BW25113 ∆prpR
(c) CDW values for E. coli BW25113 ∆cra
(d) CDW values for E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS
(e) CDW values for E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA
(f) CDW values for E. coli BW25113 ∆crp
Figure A.5: The Cell Dry Weight (CDW) values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype and its knock­
out strain as a function of time. The time points have been averaged across three independent
experiments due to the low standard deviation observed between them.
58
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:67==
A.6
OD values of all samples E. coli BW25113 and its knockout
strains
(a) OD values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype
(b) OD values for E. coli BW25113 ∆prpR
(c) OD values for E. coli BW25113 ∆cra
(d) OD values for E. coli BW25113 ∆rpoS
(e) OD values for E. coli BW25113 ∆fliA
(f) OD values for E. coli BW25113 ∆crp
Figure A.6: The OD values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype and its knockout strain as a function
of time. The time points have been averaged across three independent experiments due to the low
standard deviation observed between them.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
59
==PAGE:68==
A.7
CER values for E. coli BW25113 and its knockout strains
(a) CER unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
wildtype
(b) CER unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆prpR
(c) CER unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆cra
(d) CER unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆rpoS
(e) CER unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆fliA
(f) CER unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆crp
Figure A.7: CER unnormalised (mmol/h) values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype and its knockout
strain as a function of time. The time points have been averaged across three independent experi­
ments due to the low standard deviation observed between them.
60
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:69==
(a)
CER
unnormalised
integrated
for
E.
coli
BW25113 wildtype
(b)
CER
unnormalised
integrated
for
E.
coli
BW25113 ∆prpR
(c)
CER
unnormalised
integrated
for
E.
coli
BW25113 ∆cra
(d)
CER
unnormalised
integrated
for
E.
coli
BW25113 ∆rpoS
(e)
CER
unnormalised
integrated
for
E.
coli
BW25113 ∆fliA
(f)
CER
unnormalised
integrated
for
E.
coli
BW25113 ∆crp
Figure A.8: CER unnormalised integrated (mol) values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype and its
knockout strain as a function of time. The time points have been averaged across three independent
experiments due to the low standard deviation observed between them.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
61
==PAGE:70==
A.8
OUR values for E. coli BW25113 and its knockout strains
(a) OUR unnormalised values for for E. coli
BW25113 wildype
(b) OUR unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆prpR
(c) OUR unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆cra
(d) OUR unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆rpoS
(e) OUR unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆fliA
(f) OUR unnormalised values for E. coli BW25113
∆crp
Figure A.9: OUR unnormalised (mmol/h) values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype and its knock­
out strain as a function of time. The time points have been averaged across three independent
experiments due to the low standard deviation observed between them.
62
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:71==
(a) OUR unnormalised integrated for E. coli
BW25113 wildtype
(b) OUR unnormalised integrated for E. coli ∆prpR
(c) OUR unnormalised integrated for E. coli ∆cra)
(d) OUR unnormalised integrated for E. coli ∆rpoS
(e) OUR unnormalised integrated for E. coli ∆fliA
(f) OUR unnormalised integrated for E. coli ∆crp
Figure A.10: OUR unnormalised integrated (mol) values for E. coli BW25113 wildtype and its
knockout strain as a function of time. The time points have been averaged across three independent
experiments due to the low standard deviation observed between them.
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
63
==PAGE:72==
A.9
Base volume pumped profile for E. coli and its knockout strains
experiments
(a) Base volume pumped for E. coli BW25113 wild­
type
(b) Base volume pumped for E. coli BW25113
∆prpR
(c) Base volume pumped for E. coli BW25113 ∆cra
(d) Base volume pumped for E. coli BW25113
∆rpoS
(e) Base volume pumped for E. coli BW25113
∆fliA
(f) Base volume pumped for E. coli BW25113 ∆crp
Figure A.11: Base pumped volume profile across E. coli and all knockout strain under reference
and scale­down condition
64
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
==PAGE:73==
Understanding the response of glucose­sensitive transcription factors in E.coli
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 220
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.biosustain.dtu.dk/
