==PAGE:1==
DTU Entrepreneurship
Supervisor: Lars Alkærsig
Characters: 144.878
Examining the viability of a startup developing
Zero-Party Data solutions to address challenges
faced by SMEs in the e-commerce industry.
Master thesis
Tobias Von Der Recke S213412 & Philip Schandorff Vaarskov S213414
==PAGE:2==
Table of content
Lead authors per section: P = Philip, T = Tobias
Executive Summary (P&T)
4
Thesis Introduction (P&T)
6
Abbreviations (P&T)
7
Literature review (P&T)
7
Area Introduction (T)
7
Data as an Industry (T)
9
Zero-Party Data (P)
10
The consumer data matrix (P&T)
15
Delimitation (T)
16
Small, medium, and large enterprises:
16
Delimitation of commercialized literature
17
Background for the thesis topic
18
State of the Art (T)
19
Data transformation (P)
22
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
23
The cookie-free future
25
Business model exploration (T)
33
Research Opportunity (T)
35
Research Statement (P&T)
37
Sub Questions
37
Methodology (T)
38
Interview guide
38
The Interviews
40
The Lean Startup; Build, Measure, Learn
42
Pretotyping
43
Applying the pretotyping methodology
44
Analysis (P&T)
45
Pretotype #1 (T)
45
Pretotype #2 (T)
53
Pretotype #3 (T)
58
Financial feasibility (P&T)
60
2
==PAGE:3==
Feasibility (P&T)
65
Double Diamond (T)
66
Concept (P)
67
Two-sided E-commerce platform
68
Consumers hesitate to try new products
73
The taste profile
75
Summary of product findings
78
Business Model (P&T)
81
Introduction to the business model (P&T)
81
Membership types (P&T)
81
Business model vs. Pricing model (P)
81
Competitor Analysis (P)
82
Competitor analysis findings
86
Business Opportunity (T)
87
Commercialization possibilities
87
Future Steps (The Next BML-cycle) (P&T)
89
The learnings from previous BML-cycles (T)
89
Design partner (P)
90
Example of a use case (P)
91
Feasibility (P&T
93
Discussion (P&T)
95
Key Findings (P&T)
96
Future research (P&T)
99
Limitations (T)
101
Explore implications (T)
103
Reflection (P&T)
106
Purpose vs. viability (T)
106
Is Zero-party data too niche? (P)
107
Is Zero-party data the future? (P)
108
Self-assessment (P&T)
110
Learning outcomes (P&T)
112
Conclusion (P&T)
113
Appendix (P&T)
116
Bibliography (P&T)
133
3
==PAGE:4==
Executive Summary
The report starts with a literature review to explore existing literature on
zero-party data. However, more literature is needed due to its relatively recent
emergence in 2020. To compensate for this, the research delves into the data
landscape of prominent technology companies and governmental regulations,
supplemented by a comprehensive analysis of data usage in small and medium
enterprises (SMEs). The literature review reveals that privacy and data are
undergoing significant transformations, resulting in the development of new
initiatives aimed at staying true to privacy standards. These initiatives focus on
creating privacy-first solutions that leverage data insights without resorting to
individual tracking.
The analysis is shaped by well-established entrepreneurial theories and
interviews with companies operating in the market. Throughout the analysis
process, build-measure-learn (BML) and Pretotyping principles are fundamental,
contributing to generating a product idea. Applying BML loops and pretotyping
techniques leads to a mockup of a marketplace platform called Micru, which
relies on zero-party data and caters to small-scale food producers in Denmark.
Interviews are conducted with potential platform customers, revealing their
desire to embrace data-driven practices but a need for more willingness to
commit or pay for a membership to the solution.
Moreover, the financial analysis highlights the challenges of operating a
profitable venture without a significant user base. Although the idea generated
valuable insights, it did not prove viable as a startup worth pursuing, despite
the considerable interest gathered. Exploring additional pretotypes could
4
==PAGE:5==
uncover industries with more mature SMEs better positioned to utilize
data-driven approaches.
The analysis sets the stage for further discussion on zero-party data.
Recognizing zero-party data as a robust business foundation, the report
introduces the potential of leveraging it in a new business context. Future
analyses could focus on an agency-driven business model targeting larger
companies with greater financial resources and in-house e-commerce expertise.
The study concludes by reflecting on the technology and development of data in
e-commerce and the possibilities and limitations associated with zero-party
data. While the researchers acknowledge the concept's limitations, there is
significant potential for further research in this field, particularly in exploring
the uncharted territories of data privacy and the future technology standards in
data management.
5
==PAGE:6==
Thesis Introduction
E-commerce is a fast-evolving and constantly growing industry. Along with the
many possibilities it brings, challenges arise as well. The low barrier of entry has
enabled many to migrate their businesses online, but it brings new problems for
those that have not explored the technologies behind them. One major puzzle is
the navigation of the data environment with all its supplementary practices.
This thesis seeks to display the challenges the SMEs face and introduce possible
answers from an ideative point of view. To address these challenges, this study
investigates the concept of zero-party data and if a potential business solution
can empower SMEs with data-driven insights in a suitable manner. Regardless of
product type or company, such a solution enables SMEs to optimize their
e-commerce strategies and enhance overall business performance to drive
growth. The study will also clarify the current data landscape for any online
business and the state-of-the-art best practices for becoming a data-driven
business. The regulations, ethical and legal aspects of data will also be
introduced, with GDPR as a central theme.
The analysis will uncover multiple tests of possible ventures with a feasibility
study of the most promising idea. This is produced by implementing an array of
entrepreneurial methodologies that combines fast learning, well-defined
frameworks, low-cost testing, and early validation of assumptions. The idea is
then brought to life and updated as qualitative and quantitative data is
obtained from the chosen market, and blind spots are enlightened. The research
is completed with a discussion and reflection of the analytic process, zero-party
data limits and potential, the key findings, and future steps.
6
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
ZPD: Zero-party data
FPD: First-party data
E-commerce: Electronic commerce
SSFP: Small-Scale Food Producers
GDPR: General data protection regulation
LTV: Lifetime value
SME: Small and micro-sized enterprises
BML: Build-measure-learn
SaaS: Software as a Service
7
==PAGE:8==
Literature review
The literature review serves as an overview of existing knowledge and scholarly
works on the data related topics. Here will follow an introduction to the field of
this thesis and all information needed to understand before the research
statement is conducted. Various important elements are presented, following
consecutively after the study area is outlined.
Area Introduction
Data. “The modern-day fuel” and “the currency of the digital age” are just some
handpicked labels attributed to data (VWO, 2022; Deloitte, 2013). Few modern
companies can rely simply on intuition, history, and experience. They must
gather information about everything regarding their market and customers and
do it constantly. This has been the case for at least a decade in the Western
digital world but has, since the outbreak of Covid-19 sparked the movement
across the entire world (Villegas et al., 2022). Another movement that the
pandemic sparked was the migration from offline to online. Electronic
commerce (e-commerce) has become obtainable and manageable for almost
anyone interested in starting a business. With selections of numerous SaaS tools
that cover almost all operations, it is also becoming considerably easier (Mlakar
et al., 2021). When physical shopping stopped abruptly for many in 2020, it
simultaneously became a critical life source for especially small and medium
enterprises (SMEs), to explore adjacent income opportunities. They were forced
to start or improve their online presence (Villegas et al., 2022).
When operating in e-commerce, you open new doors, channels, information
sources, and markets (Chaffey et al., 2019). New concepts like web analytics and
8
==PAGE:9==
pattern recognition have also gained extreme traction in line with the rise of
e-commerce (Chitkara & Mahmood, 2020). Data analytics has become a
department of its own in large corporations, and tech behemoths such as
Google and Amazon offer free and low-cost products to analyze and monetize
webshops' own data. But data has today become an umbrella term for many.
They know what it is and why it is important but lack an understanding of how
to utilize it and filter relevant data from the mass (Iqbal et al., 2018).
Today the e-commerce industry in Europe is predicted to have revenue of
€625.10bn in 2023, showing an annual growth rate (CAGR 2023-2027) of 9,33%
(Statista, 2023). From 2020 to 2027, the market size for big data and business
analytics in Europe is expected to grow at a CAGR of 11.5%, reaching €99.27 bn
(Pramod et al., 2020). The rapid growth in both fields has created such high
value that countless different company types now offer services related to data
- from agencies and consultants to software and artificial intelligence tools. It
has also created a gap between SMEs and large enterprises (Bauer et al., 2020).
Data intelligence is a key factor in revenue growth and a unique skill requiring
extensive datasets, know-how, and high operational costs. Skills that SMEs can
rarely cover in-house and rarely afford to outsource (Viswanathan & Telukdarie,
2021). Even those companies and individuals that have the skills have to adjust
to a constantly changing environment. The increase of people becoming more
digitally compatible and the increase of offers online has created many
dilemmas, one being: How much data is needed for SMEs to become
data-driven, and do consumers wish to share it?
With new data protologues, in an area where SMEs are already trailing, the
competitive gap increases, and many unintentionally break data regulations
daily (Dumitriu & Popescu, 2019). A move towards a cookie-free world is
9
==PAGE:10==
predicted, and the EU is already at war with global tech leaders (Botta &
Wiedemann, 2019).
Meanwhile, the majority of e-commerce SMEs are getting left behind, wondering
if they are data-compliant, analytically capable, and uncertain where to begin.
Data as an Industry
Statistical data analysis was introduced in 1663 to monitor bubonic plague
(Connor, 2022). In 1996, IBM reported that it is now more cost-efficient to store
data digitally than on paper (Morris & Truskowski, 2003). In 2013 the global
market of big data and business analytics was valued at $10 billion, and just
seven years later, that figure twenty folded (Pramod et al., 2020).
The explosion of data in recent years has led to the emergence of a new
industry focused on managing, analyzing, and interpreting data. This industry
has become crucial as data has become a vital asset for businesses in various
fields, from healthcare to finance to marketing. A study by the International
Data Corporation predicts that the global data sphere will grow from 33
zettabytes in 2018 to 175 zettabytes by 2025, highlighting the enormous scale of
this industry (Reinsel et al., 2018). Moreover, technological advances have made
it easier than ever to collect and store data, leading to increased demand for
professionals with expertise in data analysis and management (Lohr, 2015).
There will be further expansion of the data industry in the years to come as the
importance of data grows. Data availability and use have also enabled the
development of technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine learning,
and predictive analytics, which can potentially revolutionize many aspects of
the average person's life (Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2017).
10
==PAGE:11==
One fascinating area, whether you are a small company or a global market
leader, is the collection of data. This thesis is going to introduce and explore a
concept that has the potential to be a contender in the race in addressing
questions such as: What does the future of data collection look like, and how
can it become accessible for SMEs?
Zero-party data
Zero-party data (ZPD) refers to the information willingly and explicitly shared
by individuals with a company or organization. The term ZPD was made popular
by Forrester Research in 2017 (Forrester, 2017). It is a very new term for a rather
old practice of gathering data. Scholars in privacy-aware personalization
occasionally prefer terms like "volunteered data" instead of ZPD; academics
and practitioners widely use and understand the term ZPD (Forrester, 2018).
Zero-party data VS First-party data
ZPD is different from first-party data (FPD) in the sense that FPD is a company's
ability to observe the users data “first hand,” while with ZPD, the user
voluntarily gives the data to the company in the form of an exchange (Polonioli,
2022).
Examples of exchanges are when a user is answering a small survey to get
product recommendations or when a user is giving feedback on a product to
get a discount code. The ZPD includes preferences, interests, intentions, and
other personal information that individuals share directly, typically through
surveys, feedback forms, preference centers, or interactive experiences. In
order for the exchange to be executed effectively, the user would usually need
to gain something from giving out their data.
11
==PAGE:12==
Companies can use GDPR-compliant ZPD for data analysis based on the direct
relationship between users and the company rather than relying solely on
observed user behavior (First-party Data).
One significant advantage of ZPD is that retailers can simply ask them instead
of inferring what customers want. An effect is that it requires a smaller amount
of data to achieve statistical significance than traditional big data approaches.
This aspect makes ZPD particularly advantageous for small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs). (Polonioli, 2021)
Furthermore, ZPD can reinforce the users' willingness to share data, as they are
more willing to share their data with companies they trust (Forbes, 2022).
Case studies
While ZPD is primarily gaining traction among E-commerce businesses, its
potential extends beyond this industry. E-commerce businesses, with their direct
customer interactions and online-first approach, are well-suited for utilizing
ZPD. However, it is important to recognize that the mechanics of ZPD can be
applied to various industries and fields. This demonstrates the versatility and
potential of ZPD beyond the realm of E-commerce. Examples of areas and use
cases are shown below.
12
==PAGE:13==
Market research
Image 1 – Screenshot of Red Bull campaign
Brands can use ZPD for market research with the ability to actively seek
customer feedback and ensure that their products and services align with
customer preferences and expectations. For example, when Red Bull wanted to
engage and involve viewers, Red Bull implemented a unique approach for the
Rampage People's Choice campaign. Red Bull gave their fans the power to vote
for their favorite athlete. To facilitate this interactive experience, Red Bull
leveraged a live streaming voting software. By incorporating a live broadcast, a
voting feature beneath the stream, and a social sidebar displaying the finest
user-generated content from the athletes, Red Bull successfully created an
immersive and engaging campaign for its audience. Over 1 million votes were
captured during the event, and Redbull increased its email list with data points
on potential customers' preferences. (Cascade, 2020)
13
==PAGE:14==
Communication preferences
Image 2 – Screenshot of UEFA campaign
Companies can utilize ZPD strategies to get insight into what communication
channels their users prefer. An example was when UEFA launched an exciting
video contest to find the best soccer freestylers in Europe. The contest was live
on-stage and broadcast to millions worldwide during the EURO 2020
competition draw. Participants had to showcase their impressive skills by
capturing them on camera and easily uploading their videos through the direct
video upload feature. They also had to provide some personal information as
part of their entry. Additionally, the users could easily share videos from the
platform to their preferred social media platform. UEFA saw that 92% of the
participants that uploaded videos to the platform did share 2-4 videos to their
social media accounts. By implementing this strategy, UEFA not only expanded
its email list but also gained valuable insights through a combination of user
preferences and behavioral analytics, particularly focusing on users who
actively shared content. (Campaign Asia, 2022)
14
==PAGE:15==
Customer feedback
Image 3 – Screenshot of Premier League campaign
Companies can leverage ZPD to assess customer satisfaction regarding the
experiences they have received. This can give accurate insights into product
development directly from customers' feedback. For example, when Barclays
Premier League in the UK wanted to engage their core fans to fuel growth. By
capturing a wide range of fan insights, including motivations, intentions,
interests, and preferences, Premier League created personalized experiences
for each individual fan. They leveraged zero-party data obtained through
various campaign initiatives, including fan voting for top players and seeking
input on merchandise designs. As a result, they successfully engaged fans and
witnessed substantial revenue growth with an impressive 50% increase in
registered users and a noteworthy 30% rise in the average order value.
(Techcrunch, 2021)
15
==PAGE:16==
The consumer data matrix
Data consists of countless terms, definitions, and interpretations. Therefore, for
the purpose of this project's scope, a matrix is figured. As this project
investigates the SME’s willingness and feasibility to become more data-driven,
the matrix is focused on consumer data. The matrix shows the three types of
consumer data that are paramount within e-commerce, and the fourth and
most recently defined type, zero-party data. The collection of data is, as
depicted, categorized into how it's collected, who the main collector is, and what
the data should showcase.
Table 1, The consumer data matrix
16
==PAGE:17==
Delimitation
Defining when a company is small, medium, or large does not follow a clear
tier-based methodology and is therefore up to interpretation. For this project, it
has been decided to follow the scales presented by the European Commission,
last updated in 2019. The Commission's categorization is as follows:
Small, medium, and large enterprises:
Small Enterprise: Fewer than 50 employees and an annual turnover or balance
sheet total of less than €10 million
Medium Enterprise: Between 50 and 249 employees, and an annual turnover of
less than €50 million or a balance sheet total of less than €43 million.
Large Enterprise: Any company that does not meet the criteria for a small or
medium-sized enterprise
(European Commission, n.d.)
As almost all e-commerce shops within the research market (the country of
Denmark) fall under the small enterprise category, this project may refer to
some companies as medium or large within their respective fields. E.g. the
leading webshop within custom-made bicycle helmets. It also encourages
introducing a lesser-known, but official enterprise category, called
Microenterprises. These are small enterprises that belong to a sub-category
defined as
Micro Enterprise: Fewer than ten employees and an annual revenue of less than
€725.000 or a balance sheet of less than €363.000.
17
==PAGE:18==
(European Commission, n.d.)
Another delimitation necessary for the report is the data landscape. Multiple
core data principles and terms will not be centered or detailed in this report,
such as Big Data. While the report recognizes the importance and influences
technologies such as Big Data and Cloud Computing have on the industry that
this report features, it is not crucial information to disclose when conducting the
academic research of this project. Mega concepts like this will be used and
explained to a limited degree. This is also illustrated in the Learning Objectives.
Delimitation of commercialized literature
Scientific research and entrepreneurial literature form the foundation of this
thesis. It will not explain each literary piece in detail but give a short overview
of the concepts or framework that inspired the research throughout the process.
If a framework is a core element of an analysis, this will be highlighted at the
time. Entrepreneurial concepts are coined from leading and well-renowned
literature by respected authors. The literature and concepts covered in this
thesis are
The Right It by Alberto Savoia. Concept: Pretotyping (Savoia, 2019)
The Lean Startup by Eric Ries. Concept: The build-measure-learn cycle ( (Ries,
2011)
The British Design Council. Concept: The Double Diamond (The British Design
Council, 2005)
18
==PAGE:19==
Background for the thesis topic
During a DTU course called X-tech in the spring of 2022, the authors worked
with a hypothesis that SMEs within e-commerce would be interested in
employing growth strategies based on an AI algorithm’s suggestions. The
algorithm would scan their data and match the webshop's selected goals with
implementable strategies and actions.
A decision was made to gather substantial qualitative data, which led to
conducting over 15 interviews with e-commerce companies. Additionally, a
prototype was developed in collaboration with a specific company serving as a
design partner (this term will be explained later). The exact numbers were as
follows:
-
16 webshop owners interviewed
-
3 expert interviews within data science and legality
-
5 test companies continued from the interviews to test a pretotype of a
product
-
1 company acted as a design partner, meaning tailoring a prototype to
their needs to gain extensive feedback.
The findings were positive, and in conclusion, the team found viable arguments
that SMEs would pay for a SaaS product. Based on interviews, desk research,
and pretotype/prototype feedback, the following was concluded:
-
Small e-commerce companies have a limited understanding of their data
and use it merely as a measurement, not a decision-making parameter.
-
Small e-commerce companies are generally aware that data is useful but
lack the know-how and capabilities to utilize it.
19
==PAGE:20==
-
Their most purchased business models were subscription-based and/or
free trials with tier-based payment within the interviewees' current SaaS
products.
Four members of the X-tech team chose to continue the project after the course
ended, but soon the project fell apart. Two members quit, and the remaining
founders lacked the technical capabilities and soon the motivation to continue.
An important learning after X-tech was that the team wanted to grasp over too
much and therefore met many obstacles. The desire to find data solutions for
SMEs did not vanish and thus is the basis for investigating other, but related to
the X-tech idea, areas of the topic that might suggest a viable business
opportunity. This led to the discovery of zero-party data.
State of the Art
Data-driven decision-making is becoming increasingly important for
organizations to remain competitive in various domains such as healthcare,
business, and risk management. The increased attention to data has also led to
countering issues such as privacy, handling, and cybersecurity. The best
practices, main benefits, and challenges are now introduced to understand the
state of the art of data-driven decision-making.
Benefits of data-driven decision-making
Data-driven decision-making has become increasingly popular in recent years
due to its potential benefits to organizations. Data-driven decision-making can
provide several benefits to businesses, including improved operational
efficiency, better customer service, and increased revenue (National Retail
Federation, 2013). In addition, data-driven decision-making can help
20
==PAGE:21==
organizations make informed decisions based on data-driven insights (Waller,
2020)
One of the key benefits is that it enables organizations to make more accurate
decisions. As pointed out by Waller, data-driven decision-making helps
organizations to base their decisions on facts rather than opinions or
assumptions (Waller, 2020). This, in turn, can help organizations avoid costly
mistakes and make more informed decisions that are more likely to lead to
positive outcomes.
Another benefit of data-driven decision-making is that it can help organizations
to identify patterns and trends that are not immediately apparent through
traditional methods. For example, this was used to identify patient patterns that
led to improved patient outcomes (Majeed & Hwang, 2021). It also sparked
better performance in email marketing for large e-commerce webshops
(Hartemo, 2021). Similarly, data-driven decision-making can help businesses to
identify customer patterns and preferences, which can help them to improve
their customer service and product offerings (Waller, 2020).
Data-based decisions can also help organizations reduce costs and improve
operational efficiency. According to another study, it can help manufacturing
companies optimize their production processes, resulting in reduced costs and
improved efficiency (Ren et al., 2019).
Furthermore, a data-driven decision-making company fosters a culture of data
literacy and data-driven thinking across the organization. Employees at all
levels must be encouraged to leverage data in their decision-making processes
and to seek evidence-based insights to drive innovation and improve outcomes.
21
==PAGE:22==
Challenges
In addition to offering many benefits, data-driven decision-making also
presents some challenges. One challenge is the quality of data, which must be
reliable, relevant, and up-to-date to avoid flawed decisions. Data privacy and
security concerns also pose significant challenges, requiring compliance with
data protection regulations and secure data management systems (Waller,
2020). Another challenge is the complexity of data analysis, which can be
time-consuming and resource-intensive, requiring skilled personnel and
significant investments in infrastructure. The interpretation of data can also be
challenging, requiring skilled analysts who can extract meaningful insights and
avoid data overload (Waller, 2020; Ren et al., 2019)
Best practices
To overcome the challenges of data-driven decision-making, organizations can
adopt several best practices. First, they must establish a strong data
governance framework to ensure the quality, security, and privacy of data
(Abraham et al., 2019). This framework should include policies and procedures
for data collection, storage, sharing, and analysis.
Second, organizations must invest in advanced data analytics tools and
technologies for efficient and effective data analysis (Ren et al., 2019). This can
include machine learning algorithms, natural language processing, and big data
analytics platforms.
Third, organizations must foster a data-driven culture that promotes data
literacy, collaboration, and innovation (Chatterjee et al., 2021). This can involve
training employees on data analysis and interpretation, promoting
22
==PAGE:23==
cross-functional collaboration, and encouraging experimentation and
innovation with data.
Finally, organizations must continuously monitor and evaluate their data-driven
decision-making processes to ensure they are aligned with business goals and
objectives (Abraham et al., 2019). This can involve regularly measuring key
performance indicators (KPIs) and seeking stakeholder feedback.
However, even these best practice elements face the constant threat and
instability of the data environment. Especially today, new and impactful
regulations from governments and decisions from the biggest tech companies
are altering data usability.
The future of data usage remains uncertain, making predictions challenging.
Nonetheless, the following chapter aims to shed light on the most influential
changes in data management and regulation impacting the present. By
exploring these shifts, one can better understand the current data landscape
and its potential effects on the online business sector.
Data transformation
​In recent years, data management has gone through significant changes
started by regulations like the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and
the approaches adopted by major tech companies. GDPR has brought about a
fundamental shift in data handling practices, necessitating a focus on privacy
and individual rights. To align with these regulations, prominent tech giants
have been actively developing alternative data tracking and targeting
approaches prioritizing user privacy. Understanding these developments and
their connection to ZPD is crucial to comprehend the magnitude of this
transformation.
23
==PAGE:24==
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
The General Data Protection Regulation (the European Parliament, 2016) is one
of the most comprehensive and strict security and privacy legislation in the
world. It was put into effect on May 25, 2018. GDPR applies to companies that
process the personal data of EU citizens or residents or if they offer goods or
services to such people. The GDPR also applies if companies are not in the EU
but operate inside the EU.
A consequence of that is that companies outside the EU have made changes to
the way they handle data, as it is more cost-effective to have one way to
comply with data rather than having individual ways for every continent or
country.
The legislation is about how companies handle and process the personal data of
individuals in the EU. The most important categories are:
Personal data
Personal data is any data that relates to an individual that can be used as an
identifier both directly and indirectly. The data type ranges from name, email
address, gender, religious beliefs, web cookies, political opinions, and more.
Pseudonymization1 can also fall under the category of personal data if it is easy
to identify.
1 Pseudonymization is a technique that replaces personally identifiable information with
artificial identifiers to enhance data privacy and security.
24
==PAGE:25==
Data processing
Data processing is any action performed on the data, automatically or
manually. The action ranges from collecting, sorting, structuring, deleting, and
more.
Data subject
Data subject is regarding the person whose data is processed; it can be
customers, website visitors, leads, and more.
Data controller
The person that is responsible and decides why and how the personal data is
being processed.
Data processor
The processor is a third-party company that processes personal data on behalf
of companies. There are very strict rules for the third party and it becomes more
complex and difficult.
Consent
Companies are obliged to show a way to give consent to the individuals that are
visiting or interacting with the company. A typical way on the web is via a
cookie banner. A cookie banner is a popup that pops up before the visitor can
use the site. The individual would need to give consent so that the company can
track and process the information gathered. Before they can continue to
interact with the company. Other consent methods, such as a confirmation
button in newsletters and accounts on platforms, can also be used.
25
==PAGE:26==
Image 4 – Cookie banner pop-up while browsing the internet
The cookie-free future
As previously mentioned, the consequence of GDPR means the leading
technology companies have been forced to change their data management
practices in order to deliver their core product. Therefore the data landscape is
in transition from relying heavily on third-party data and cookies to becoming
cookie-free and more privacy protected in general. As this transition is partly
made from the EU and also the industry itself, a list of the leading technology
companies' approaches is now conducted in three categories: Technology
product, Advertising, and Marketplaces.
Technology product
Microsoft
Microsoft has been vocal about its commitment to GDPR since 2018 and is
constantly working on data protection for its users and clients by providing
privacy controls, transparent data collection practices, and privacy by design.
26
==PAGE:27==
As most of Microsoft’s customers are corporates, they are positioning
themselves as the go-to company for data security and encryption for
corporates, as this is a great concern for their clients. (Microsoft, 2023)
Furthermore, Microsoft employs pop-up surveys to capture users' ZPD; however,
the collected data is not associated with specific individual users.
Image 5 – A survey pop-up when browsing on the Microsoft website.
Apple
On the other hand Apple has seen privacy as a business opportunity to further
position their brand as the go-to privacy brand for end consumers. They are
pushing several industries into being more privacy-focused and transparent
regarding their data approach.
27
==PAGE:28==
For example, in 2020, Third-party-tracking was blocked by default with the
Safari Intelligent Tracking Prevention (ITP) feature on all Safari browsers,
according to Apple’s John Wilander, the engineer behind the ITP. (Wilander,
2020)
Furthermore, in 2021 Apple released iOS 14.5, which included App Tracking
Transparency. The new initiative gives users control over how much of their data
is allowed to be aggregated and used by third parties for advertising or other
purposes (Apple, 2023).
Image 6 – App Tracking Transparency pop-up on an iPad
96% of all users click the Ask App Not to Track button. (Arstechnica, 2021). The
initiative resulted in a significant revenue loss for companies such as META and
Google. META said to CNBC they lost +10B$ in 2022 because of IOS 14.5 as they
28
==PAGE:29==
could no longer track their users with the same level of accuracy, leading to a
decline in the quality of their product offerings for their clients (CNBC, 2022).
Additionally, Apple offers its own internal feedback system called Apple
Feedback Assistant, which enables its users to report on bugs, product
improvements, and more; this can also be leveraged for ZPD. (Apple, 2023)
Image 7 – The Apple feedback assistant presentation
Advertising
Google
In 2020 Google presented their open-sourced initiative called Privacy Sandbox.
The launch date has been postponed several times, and there is no official
launch date yet. With collaborators like Adobe, Samsung, and Yahoo, Google
wants to build a more private internet without third-party tracking and other
identifiers like fingerprints. The products are Topics API, Protected Audience
API, and Attribution Reporting API. Together they are a suite of proposals to
29
==PAGE:30==
make it possible for advertisers to utilize data without privacy tracking. This is
still in development and is solely a proposal for the next privacy standards.
Below are examples of Google presenting Privacy Sandbox and how it is
different from the status quo. (Google, 2022.)
30
==PAGE:31==
Images 8-10 – Explainers of Google privacy sandbox initiatives
Furthermore, Google services like Youtube, Google Maps, and Google Search
have used ZPD in their own advertising to understand their customer better for
years.
31
==PAGE:32==
Image 11 – Youtube advertisement using zero-party data
META
In 2019 The Founder and CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, posted a Facebook note about
the future of privacy regarding the products at META and the company as a
whole. In the note, he mentioned that all new and current products are being
developed with five new privacy principles. The principles are:
32
==PAGE:33==
“Private interactions.
People should have simple, intimate places where they have clear control over
who can communicate with them and confidence that no one else can access
what they share.
Encryption.
People's private communications should be secure. End-to-end encryption
prevents anyone -- including us -- from seeing what people share on our
services.
Reducing Permanence.
People should be comfortable being themselves, and should not have to worry
about what they share coming back to hurt them later. So we won't keep
messages or stories around for longer than necessary to deliver the service or
longer than people want them.
Safety.
People should expect that we will do everything we can to keep them safe on
our services within the limits of what's possible in an encrypted service.
Interoperability.
People should be able to use any of our apps to reach their friends, and they
should be able to communicate across networks easily and securely.
Secure data storage.
People should expect that we won't store sensitive data in countries with weak
records on human rights like privacy and freedom of expression in order to
protect data from being improperly accessed.”
33
==PAGE:34==
Mark Zuckerberg – (Zuckerberg, 2019)
Furthermore, META's new upcoming core product, the MetaVerse will be more
interactive, and ZPD fits very much into that vision. Meta is building ZPD
approaches onto their product from the ground up and will change how users
interact with companies (Forbes, 2022).
Marketplace
Amazon & Walmart
The marketplaces Amazon and Walmart have not been vocal about their
privacy initiatives other than stating that they are following the current GDPR
standards. However, they do possess a competitive edge by employing a
first-party data strategy, primarily due to their ability to monitor user activities
within their own platforms. With users having login credentials, it is anticipated
that Amazon and Walmart will transform their current operations to a
cookie-free alternative easier by leveraging their extensive reservoirs of
first-party data. Notably, the first-party data provides insights into users'
purchasing behavior and search patterns. Furthermore, as the industry evolves
and privacy concerns become more prominent, the reliance on first-party data
positions Amazon and Walmart in a favorable position to further utilize ZPD.
Their direct access to user data avoids the limitations and uncertainties
associated with third-party data sources, ensuring a more reliable and accurate
understanding of customer preferences.
34
==PAGE:35==
Business model exploration
Upon looking at the size of the market, and the vast amount of business models
within data solutions, possible business models have been mapped out. These
are business models that appear greatly throughout the industry of data
businesses. The reasoning for mapping out business types is to explore the
directions that a startup could pursue before learning the pros, cons, and
feasibility. It is simply to understand the opportunities before analysis and
interviews but after general concept knowledge obtained throughout the
literature review.
An open focus on both possible product solutions and income models is listed
below. These are selected based on common market practices and feasibility.
For these reasons, products focusing on deep tech solutions and business
models, such as hardware manufacturing, are not included in the figure.
35
==PAGE:36==
Table 2 – Product offerings and business models
Throughout the analysis and investigation, the aim is to conclude which of the
product and business models have the highest chance of success. It is also
possible that none of the listed ideas are advantageous, which will lead to an
investigation of why not or an investigation of yet unidentified business
possibility. The findings of this exploration are addressed in the section Business
Model Determination.
36
==PAGE:37==
Research opportunity
The research so far has identified a research opportunity that can open up new
possibilities and exploration through an entrepreneurial investigation. By
recognizing the promising potential of ZPD, this study will seek to advance
knowledge and address gaps in the field. First, the identified problems based on
the desk research and the author's preliminary thoughts are highlighted in order
to understand the full picture of challenges that can prove to be key for a viable
startup solution.
The problem area based on the literature review
One of the critical issues for SMEs is the lack of resources in terms of personnel
and technology. State-of-the-art zero-party data strategies are often developed
by teams of experts with significant experience in data collection, analysis, and
management (Chaffey et al., 2019). Due to their lack of expertise and resources,
small and mid-sized companies may be disadvantaged by the latest
technologies.
Another problem is the knowledge gap between smaller and larger corporations.
Large organizations often have dedicated data teams or the ability to
outsource to third-party providers, giving them an advantage in data collection
and analysis. Due to limited resources, smaller companies struggle to bridge this
gap (Cheetah Digital, 2022).
It can also be difficult for smaller companies to understand GDPR and other
data privacy regulations. The regulations are complex and difficult to interpret,
making it challenging to ensure compliance while still using data effectively
(RSM Global, 2019). This can lead to legal risks and financial penalties that could
damage a company's reputation and bottom line.
37
==PAGE:38==
The problem area based on the founders' assumptions
As already addressed, the data landscape has been changing significantly since
the introduction of GDPR in 2018, and now additional regulations are coming
from the EU. From tracking users' behaviors across platforms and devices to
now and the near future, almost nothing can be tracked as it used to.
Big data based on third-party data used to be a key resource for many
companies in the e-commerce industry, but now companies like Apple are
pushing new data and privacy standards for consumers into the market (Apple,
2022). The main companies e-commerce businesses are using for their
marketing efforts, Google and Meta, are slowly following the change, as already
addressed earlier.
On that premise, it is assumed that there is a need for a new way to gather and
utilize data in the e-commerce industry. Currently, the only future-proof
approach is using first and zero-party data and nothing else. Therefore they
would need first to know what zero-party data is and then implement the
strategies in order to become data-driven and get the competitive advantage it
gives. The media and consultant houses like Forbes and Mckinsey have been
picking up the hype about zero-party data and have all written articles about its
potential (Forbes, 2022; Mckinsey & Company, 2022)). It is assumed that the
faster a company can implement the use of ZPD in its organization and in its
business approaches, the faster it can utilize its data to get a competitive
advantage.
Based on all these insights that have been addressed in all chapters above, the
formulation for a research statement and supplementary questions can now be
created. These will guide the remainder of the investigation and will be
answered in the end.
38
==PAGE:39==
Research Statement
Examining the viability of a startup developing Zero-party
data solutions to address challenges faced by SMEs in the
e-commerce industry.
Sub Questions
1. What are the data privacy and regulatory challenges in becoming data-driven
for SMEs in the e-commerce industry, and what are the associated pain points?
2. How can an effective Zero-party-data business solution be developed for
SMEs in the e-commerce industry, and what are the key components of such an
offering?
3. When validating the go-to-market, What criteria and considerations should be
used to determine the optimal industry niche for a Zero-party-data startup?
4. How does the selected entrepreneurial methodology contribute to effectively
assessing a viable new business?
Methodology
In this research, various methodologies were employed to gather and analyze
data. The following will be introduced: The build-measure-learn cycle, an
iterative process that involves building a product, measuring its success, and
learning from the results to make improvements. Next, pretotyping to rapidly
test ideas and determine their viability before investing significant resources.
Further on comes the double diamond design thinking process, a framework
39
==PAGE:40==
developed by the British Design Council that includes four steps: Discover,
Define, Develop, and Deliver. This enables the researchers to apply design
characteristics to find creative solutions and innovative ideas. Finally, interviews
have been conducted with individuals who have experience that is relevant to
the research, providing valuable insights and perspectives. The interviews and
how they were structured will be introduced now.
Interview guide
The research conducted in this study relied heavily on empirical data, with a
particular emphasis on interviews. Interviews played a significant role in
shaping the direction of the processes within the Build-measure-learn loops and
in addressing critical hypotheses. By engaging in interviews, valuable insights
were gathered that guided the iterative cycle of building, measuring, and
learning, enabling a deeper understanding of the research subject. The inclusion
of the interviews as a primary source proved to be useful. The structure of the
interviews, both qualitative and quantitative, will now be introduced.
Interviewing inspired by Robert Yin
Robert Yin is an American social scientist known for being an expert in case
studies and qualitative research (Sage Publications). He uses case study
research as a method for conducting research, and he also shares his
knowledge on how to maximize interview results in his book: “Case Study
Research and Applications - Design and Methods” from 2018 (Yin, 2018). It is the
interview framework described in this book that has been the center of the
structure of interviews for this study.
40
==PAGE:41==
Yin discusses the structure and components of an interview guide, which serves
as a tool for researchers to ensure consistency and effectiveness in their
interviews. The interview guide typically includes a set of open-ended questions
and prompts designed to “decipher” relevant information from participants. Yin
provides guidance on how to develop an interview guide tailored to the
research objectives and the specific case being studied. To encourage
participants to share their perspectives and experiences, he recommends
starting with broad and open-ended questions.
He also highlights the significance of conducting pilot interviews to test and
refine the interview guide before engaging in the actual data collection process.
This helps ensure that the questions are clear, appropriate, and capable of
obtaining the desired information from participants.
Pilot interview
A pilot interview is an interview that serves solely to design an interview
structure (Yin, 2018). It is a test of questions and techniques. This experience
proved to be beneficial for several reasons. First, it allowed the authors to
familiarize themselves with Yin’s recommended interview techniques and apply
them in real life. Identifying areas for improvement was now possible.
Secondly, it provided a solid foundation for the interviews to come, enabling the
researchers to refine their interview protocol and ensure its suitability for the
objective of the study and the research questions.
A pilot interview was done with a company called Dermaspace, which is the
market leader in K-beauty products in Denmark. They had visible ZPD strategies
on their front page but did not have time to evaluate potential interest in the
purpose of this study. They were, therefore, perfect for a test interview. The
41
==PAGE:42==
interview quickly showed the researchers that the questions should be altered.
The initial pilot interview had bias and unsatisfactory communication. Even so,
the experience proved to be positive and enlightening, setting the stage for
future research stages.
The Interviews
The results of the interviews will not be listed in a single section or headline, the
outcomes are intertwined throughout the analysis following the methodology.
However, the inclusion of this section is due to the significant role that
interviews played in generating data and informing the findings. It functions as
a comprehensive overview of the interview process while ensuring transparency
and providing a holistic perspective on the data collection process.
A total of 28 companies help contribute to the findings of this study.
Incorporated in this were ten qualitative interviews and 18 quantitative. The full
list of participating companies can be found in Appendix 1. Learnings from the
pilot interviews created coherence in the nature of the questions, so they were
as similar as possible for the two types of interviews. This helped the
researchers obtain a healthy mix of qualitative interviews and quantitative
interviews. Furthermore, it indicated the distinction between hobbyist
companies and profit-oriented enterprises that operated on a daily basis. The
aim was to get a wide range of diverse interviews as possible for the results to
be representative.
With the large pool of interviewed companies, it was possible to group the
answers into variables that help create coherence and outcomes that could all
be quantified into metrics. Therefore, the data collected could provide valuable
insights into previously unexplored factors that were guesstimates rather than
findings based on data explicitly discussed in the existing literature.
42
==PAGE:43==
The first iteration using the BML method combined with pretotyping had six
interviews, the second had nine, and the last one had 13. As portrayed in the
methodology, the research became increasingly focused as the study
progressed and data was obtained, allowing for a more targeted and
comprehensive analysis. This will be explained in depth further on.
The interviews also contributed to the decision of solely focusing on smaller
companies and discarding the “M” (medium) in SMEs and including an “M'' for
micro-enterprises. The formulation will remain as SME throughout the thesis for
ease of comprehension. This was a decision based on the potential for fast
implementation and interest from the smallest companies, and it was also a
more interesting scope for the authors of this study.
A total of 114 companies were contacted. Two more companies returned the
outreach after the pretotyping was complete, so these have not been accounted
for or included in the results.
Pretotype
Contacted
Quantitative
Qualitative
Total
Interviews
Pretotype 1
41
6
3
6
Pretotype 2
31
6
3
9
Pretotype 3
42
6
4
13
Total (28)
114
18
10
28
43
==PAGE:44==
Table 3 - Number of interviews in each pretotype
The Lean Startup; Build, Measure, Learn
The build-measure-learn theory from Eric Ries’ book, The Lean Startup, is one of
the most well-known entrepreneurial models. As entrepreneurship students, it is
in the author's nature and cannot be avoided. Therefore it is also a core part of
this project's methodology but with significant iterations.
To introduce the build-measure-learn-loop (BML-loop) ChatGPT was asked to
explain it so there is no bias to what is meant by the central concept and to
keep it concise.
Prompt to ChatGPT: Can you explain the Lean Startup theory called
build-measure-learn? Be precise, and limit it to one paragraph.
Response: The build-measure-learn(BML) approach is a core concept of the
Lean Startup methodology. It involves building a minimum viable product
(MVP) quickly, measuring its performance, and learning from the results to
improve the product. The BML cycle starts with building a product or service
that solves a specific problem for a target audience, using the smallest amount
of resources possible. Next, the product is released to the market and its
performance is measured using metrics such as user engagement and
feedback. Finally, based on the data collected, the product is iterated or
improved to better meet the needs of the customers. This cycle is repeated
continuously to ensure the product is constantly evolving and improving,
leading to better customer satisfaction and business success.
(ChatGPT, 11-05-2023)
44
==PAGE:45==
Now that the door has been opened to the use of AI, another Open AI software
that generates images, DALL·E 2, was asked to generate the figure that
portrays the BML loop.
Prompt: A Three-arrowed circular loop in the style of a business theory, include
the following words, Build, Measure, Learn.
Preferred result:
Figure 1 – build-measure-learn loop (DALL·E 2, 11-05-2023)
Pretotyping
The BML loop is a great structure for an iterative process. To make the process
steps actionable and learn faster a core action called Pretotyping (Savoia, 2019)
is implemented. Pretotyping is an early step method to test if there is demand
for an idea without having more than a mock-up, landing page, simulation, or
similar. It's earlier in the iterating design part than a prototype and is coined to
45
==PAGE:46==
show a potential audience how a product beyond the prototype might look, feel,
and function (Savoia, The Right It, P83-87, 2019).
For the analysis, the MVP is replaced in the BML loop with pretotyping. This
allows for testing multiple facets of the hypothesis while getting inputs before
designing or building an actual product. Pretotyping is prioritized, considering
the work relies on a new concept (zero-party data), and there is no priority as to
what industry to focus on (yet). Furthermore, since zero-party data is a new
concept by name, the field is also rather untested and unfamiliar.
Applying the pretotyping methodology
For a successful pretotype, five steps are present. They are as follows:
Step 1: Isolate the Key Assumption
What is the one assumption about the idea that, if false, it is definitely not worth
pursuing?
Step 2: Choose a Type of Pretotype
There are multiple types of pretotyping. They won't all be listed here, but the
chosen type will clearly be defined and explained for each pretotype.
Step 3: Make a Market Engagement Hypothesis
Which type of people, and how many, will interact with the pretotype? And what
kind of interaction? Follow this simple equation:
X (%) of Y (Audience) will do Z (Action)
46
==PAGE:47==
Step 4: Test the Pretotype
Share the pretotype in the selected environment on a small and measurable
scale.
Step 5: Learn, Refine, Hypozoom
Evaluate results and refine the pretotype with new data. If the hypothesis is
confirmed, explore other situations to test the pretotype for a comprehensive
understanding, known as "hypozooming." (Savoia, 2019)
This format will be used to introduce each pretotype completed during the
project time. While the pretotypes take place, interviews are conducted
simultaneously. All interviews are with companies or individuals that have
responded to a pretotype. This serves as qualitative data on top of the
quantitative to gather as much information as possible to create potential
profiles.
Analysis
In this chapter, the entire process, from understanding the problem and finding
solutions, is covered. It is where the authors investigated the spectrum of the
research statement and how it was done. The focus is on the practical
implementation of BML. The BML loop will serve as an underlying structure for
the research approach. Immediately following this, the main principles and
steps of Pretotyping are introduced in the analysis. Lastly, the main findings of
the results will lead to the investigation of the development and delivery of an
MVP.
47
==PAGE:48==
Pretotype #1
For the first pretotype, the general interest and concept of ZPD were in the
spotlight. The researchers wanted to search broadly within the target market,
meaning any SME e-commerce store operating in Denmark. The initial pretotype
carries significant uncertainty, often accompanied by underlying assumptions.
Consequently, the primary objective of the first pretotype was to be concise and
general while exploring various potential business models.
Additionally, it facilitated the identification of promising interviewees or
directions that could be further explored.
In accordance with the listed five steps of pretotyping, the structure was as
follows:
Step 1: Key Assumption
It is assumed that SME e-commerce shops have an interest in becoming more
data-driven.
Step 2: Chosen Pretotype: The Fake Door (Landing page)
A landing page is a concise website comprising essential details about a
business idea and its value proposition. It typically includes strategically placed
call-to-action buttons, such as a prominent "sign up" button.
48
==PAGE:49==
Image 12 – Screenshot of the Landing page (08-06-2023). To see the full landing page, visit
https://flybyday.webflow.io/ or see Appendix 2
Step 3: Market Engagement Hypothesis
80% of companies that have shown interest will want to get a non-binding ZPD
analysis of their current data process and potential optimizations.
Step 4: Test the Pretotype
Invitations, and posts of the landing page were posted in various forums and
social media channels. Additionally, to further expand the outreach, a selected
list of companies from networks and organizations was also used.
Step 5: Learn, Refine, Hypozoom & Findings
The testing of the first pretotype suffered from low participation. The number of
interested companies that matched the search profile was lower than expected
and therefore not representable enough to confirm or deny the key assumption.
49
==PAGE:50==
41 companies were shortlisted from the forums, six of them responded to the
outreach, and while all six companies showed interest, surpassing the 80% goal,
additional data is necessary.
However, the interviews were conducted to gather insights into several diverse
SMEs' data habits and processes, resulting in valuable learnings. It became
obvious that in coherence with the data shown in the literature, data
management and utilization are not considered a high value for many. It
confirmed the assumption that while they acknowledge the importance and
potential of data, it is simply not a prioritization - and possibly won't be for the
coming future. The findings also indicated the need to collect more targeted
and direct data, as the participation rate was insufficient. Consequently, it was
necessary to rethink the industry scope.
Hypozooming
The industries that stood out the most from the interviews were wine and beer
retailers, and there was an immediate sense of urgency from both industries.
The market for wine webshops was crowded (red ocean) and unmanageable.
There were definite signs that most of the webshops were hobby-based, as the
designs did not meet the current UI/UX standards and contained excessive
amounts of text that included unnecessary information.
After further investigation of their business and strategy plans, a general
pattern emerged. Consequently, the decision was made to exclude the wine
retailers from consideration due to two primary factors: Firstly, hobby-based
businesses were discarded because they did not have the resources to
implement new initiatives. Secondly, retailers that primarily dealt with imported
goods lacked in-house production or unique offerings. Given their limited brand
50
==PAGE:51==
value and wide range of similar products, these characteristics rendered them
less suitable for ZPD.
The industry of choice for the next pretotype then became Microbreweries in
Denmark. There had been talks with one brewing company doing the first
pretotype and looked into a couple of others based on the aforementioned
brewery’s recommendation. Instantly, research gave the impression that online
sales of craft beer needed more quality on many fronts. The majority of the
breweries had; Outdated webshop designs, incoherent communication, varying
photo quality, unorganized product categories, and websites that were not
updated. It led to a new area of interest: How does Denmark have many quality
and award-winning microbreweries, but most lack a respectable online
presence?
Microbreweries in Denmark
Before deciding to zoom in on microbreweries in Denmark, it had to be
confirmed that it is an industry with potential. ZPD fits well into almost all
e-commerce businesses, but if an industry doesn't have the logistics for online
sales, or is in a state of decline, analysis of the opportunities here could be
pointless.
Statistics from the Danish national organization of Breweries,
Bryggeriforeningen, show a steady increase in the number of breweries in
Denmark over the last 20 years (Bryggeriforeningen, 2022). This, despite a
global pandemic and rising inflation, is a healthy sign for the industry.
51
==PAGE:52==
Figure 2 – The number of Danish Breweries (Bryggeriforeningen, 2022)
Furthermore, data from Euromonitor on the sales channels for alcoholic drinks
show little to no increase in the sales of alcohol from E-commerce, despite a rise
in the industry (Euromonitor, 2019).
Table 4 – Distribution of alcoholic sales in Denmark (Euromonitor, 2019)
The data in Table 4 did, however, stop before the outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic, when e-commerce especially saw a boost in sales. To understand if
this rise in sales online continued or decreased, several breweries were asked on
52
==PAGE:53==
the matter. They confirmed that they did indeed increase their online sales but
also that this was a “one-time thing” and mainly a black swan event for the year
2020.
“My online sales for 2020 accounted for about 25%[of the total sales (red.)].
Before that, it was less than 5%, and I think I'm back to 5% today” - Michael
Olsen, Founder of Thyras Bryg.
This was enough proof of market potential to rearrange the focus onto
microbreweries in Denmark for the next pretotype.
Business solutions
Before that, another element had to be established. As visible in the style and
tone of the landing page https://flybyday.webflow.io, the actual delivered
product is profoundly vague. Is it a platform? a consultancy? SaaS? This was
intentional as the writers wanted to focus on the problem, solution, and the
theory behind ZPD. However, for the next loop, a clear scope was needed to
gain concrete feedback on ZPD as a business case. And, what better way to
collect viable business models than asking the world's most debated
AI-powered engine again?
Prompt to ChatGPT: A company that helps micro and small breweries within
e-commerce become more data-driven with the premise being zero-party data.
We need 10 viable business solutions. Expect that the potential customers know
little to nothing about utilizing data. Can you help?
Answer: Certainly! Here are 10 viable business solutions that a company can
adopt to help micro and small breweries in e-commerce become more
data-driven with a focus on zero-party data, considering the scenario where
potential customers have limited knowledge about utilizing data:
53
==PAGE:54==
1. Data Readiness Assessment
2. Data Strategy Development
3. Data Collection and Integration Services
4. Customized Data Dashboards
5. Data Training and Workshops
6. Data Insights Reports
7.
Data-Driven Marketing Campaigns
8. Data Privacy Compliance
9. Data Visualization Tools
10. Data Support and Helpdesk
(In-depth explanations following each business solution opportunity have not
been included due to unnecessary elaborations) (ChatGPT, 08-04-2023)
The evaluation of these 10 business models began and immediately saw
recurring problems. First problem: They all have data in their name and sound
very technically-sassy, despite being basic products. This issue had already
been encountered in the literature research and initial round of interviews.
Selling tech to business owners without interest in tech is an uphill battle.
The second problem proved to be more significant. None of the business models
managed to ignite enthusiasm among the researchers. They appeared
uninspiring, lacked substance, and half of them had been previously attempted
by the founders in other projects.
Furthermore, It has been somewhat confirmed that businesses are interested in
data and aware of its potential applications, but also that it is too demanding
and technical. It is evident that the businesses are not on the implementation
level of data-driven strategies that the authors assumed. To address the two
54
==PAGE:55==
new problems, it was necessary to take a step back to develop a product that is
driven by ZPD.
To decide on a business model for investigation, their core issues within
e-commerce were analyzed. It was clear that the breweries had high-quality
products and expertise in their field. It was, however, also clear that simply
implementing ZPD strategies or similar to their shops would not show results
alone. The webshops were too unmanaged and poor in quality. So the
researchers had an idea: Ignore their webshops and find another way to
enhance data-driven online sales with ZPD.
It was decided to investigate the possibilities of a marketplace. A shop within a
shop for Microbrewers to sell their products. The platform would handle the
payment, the design of the marketplace, drive traffic, marketing, and so on, and
all they had to do was ship the orders and pay a fee.
This way, the businesses could become passively data-driven, and this solution
would enable businesses to leverage the benefits of data-driven
decision-making without being overwhelmed by technical complexities.
Additionally, the authors get to develop a product based on their firm belief in
the concept of ZPD.
The pros were plenty. Firstly, it would divert potential customers from brewers'
shops with outdated and poor user experiences, directing them instead to a
well-designed online shop that incorporates coherent design and implemented
ZPD e-commerce strategies. On top of that, a “taste profile” would be developed
where the user tells their preferences in taste, occasions, and values, and a taste
profile would then recommend beers or brands that align with their lifestyle and
taste preferences. Thus implementing one of many ZPD strategies from the
beginning.
55
==PAGE:56==
(Cheetah Digital, 2022)
It was time to investigate if this was the right business solution for the right
audience.
Pretotype #2
It was decided that the approach was redirected from structured to
semi-structured interviews for the interviews that would follow this time. This
allows for fewer open-ended questions and a more free-flowing conversation.
This choice was made to learn about general problems in the industry rather
than necessarily data or e-commerce related. Based on this, it could determine
the underlying assumptions without too much bias.
It was also decided that ZPD would not be an element in itself unless it becomes
obvious to include in the conversation. This was to diminish the distance from
the interviewee and keep the interview informal. At this point, the official
communication is that a business solution is in place and under development,
and this is not just University students with an idea. This was decided, so the
interviews were with business owners sincerely interested in the potential
product.
56
==PAGE:57==
The structure for the second pretotype:
Step 1: Key Assumption
It is assumed that the Danish microbreweries have little to no sales online and
lack strategies and resources to increase them.
Step 2: Chosen Pretotype Clickable Mockup & Cold Canvas
A clickable mockup is an early prototype of a digital product. It showcases the
functionality, layout, and user experience of the product before it is developed.
57
==PAGE:58==
Image 13-14 – Mockup, Micru platform Brewer page & Product page – See Appendix 3 & 4
Image 15 – Pricing & Business model for the Micru Platform
Step 3: Market Engagement Hypothesis
Contact approximately 30 breweries, and 15% of them will respond positively
and want to know more about the business solution.
Step 4: Test the Pretotype
Upon sending out screenshots of the mockup, potential customers express their
interest, leading to the arrangement of a meeting. During this meeting, a
tailored mockup showcasing the breweries' products and stories is presented,
along with their taste profile and visual identity, together with the prices of the
platform. See Appendix 3 and 4.
58
==PAGE:59==
Step 5: Learn, Refine, Hypozoom & findings
Over a period of one week, 31 breweries were contacted, either via phone or
email. Nine of these showed interest and were willing to proceed with further
discussions, thus giving us roughly a 29% success rate. This outcome is highly
encouraging and indicates a positive response from the breweries.
Additionally, All the contacted breweries acknowledged the challenges
associated with operating online. Most of them expressed a lack of interest in
e-commerce, while others admitted to lacking the necessary skills.
“I don't even have a webshop, as I don't want to deal with it. I refer all my
online business to a vendor, so they shop my products on his site”
John Smith, Staarup Haandbryg
“Our online presence is a mess. I have been a part of the brewery for six
months, and it annoys me every day”
Thomas Backmann, Ølsnedkeren
Out of all the interviews, the following was concluded:
-
Data is not a priority and not considered key to business operation.
-
Online sales for breweries are all less than 10% of the total sales, and none
of the breweries have a plan to increase it.
-
There is a surprising skepticism for the future of Danish breweries, despite
the data indicating an increase in both the number of breweries and the
number of craft beers sold domestically.
-
Overall, the solution offered received very positive feedback.
59
==PAGE:60==
The general optimism for the platform for microbreweries, which was now
named Micru, was a positive step forward. It enabled the researchers to pursue
the idea further and start crafting business models and financial key figures.
The process of drafting business models started, and multiple problems arose.
The aim is to have ZPD as the engine behind why customers buy specific
products and to learn more about the customers' preferences and behavior.
However, the breweries showed no real interest in this being important. All that
mattered was, inevitably, if they made more money and how.
Also, as a platform, mass is key. In a big study by Lenny Rachitsky, he talks to
founders or C-level staff from the 17 biggest marketplace platforms in the
United States. A key learning from his research was that there is a bigger
chance of success if the marketplace can solve the pain from the supply end.
Most big marketplaces were founded only to see if there was potential from the
suppliers and if they could solve it (Airbnb, Uber, Hotels.com). Once this was
solved, getting demand would be easier (Rachitsky, 2020).
An additional challenge arose in relation to the pricing and business model
presented to the breweries. Despite the compelling benefits offered, such as
signing up today, such as; free trials, free cancellations, two subscription
models, and low fees from Micru, etc, they became hesitant as soon as they
were asked for an LOI for one of the subscriptions offered. Some showed
complete radio silence, some wanted to wait, and only one brewery was now
ready to commit.
The optimistic entrepreneur would probably keep their head high, and say that
a 1/31 conversion rate, which is around 3,2%, is acceptable and cause for a
continuance. However, it was apparent from the expected orders, average order
value, and costs, that the platform would have little to no turnover before
60
==PAGE:61==
critical mass was reached both from supply and demand. It was decided on a
third BML loop of pretotyping.
Hypozooming
The methodology of the second pretotype was a success, but to hypozoom
beneficially, it was deemed necessary to broaden the scope of Micru. The
breweries had shown interest in unison for the concept and confirmed the
assumed pains for their industry. However, with low engagement and a limited
number of breweries, the focus was rescoped to small-scale food producers
(SSFP) of any food brand in Denmark that targets consumers directly.
Pretotype #3
The new scope incorporated the already established market potential of
microbreweries and expanded to other types of food producers still in the
category of SME. In short, these are delicacies and craft foods that offer
products with long shelf life, thus not fresh foods or produce.
Taking the learnings from how ZPD can be used in a target market and the
feedback from many SMEs and especially in craft food niches (microbreweries
and distilleries), the quality in the pretotypes improved.
The structure for the third pretotype:
Step 1: Key Assumption
It is assumed that Danish micro-producers within consumed goods have little to
no sales online and lack methods to increase it.
61
==PAGE:62==
Step 2: Chosen Pretotype Clickable mockup & Cold Canvas
Clickable mockup and cold canvas contact. The same pretotype was used while
the target market was expanded significantly.
Step 3: Market Engagement Hypothesis
Contact approximately 40 small-scale food producers and 25% of them will
respond positively and want to know more.
Step 4: Test the Pretotype
Step 4 was the same as the second pretotype. Upon sending out screenshots of
the mockup, potential customers can express their interest, leading to the
arrangement of a meeting. During this meeting, a tailored mockup showcasing
the small-scale food producers’ products and stories is presented, along with
their taste profile and visual identity, together with the prices of the platform.
The final mockup and all decisions behind the creation will be elaborated
greatly in the Concept chapter.
Step 5: Learn, Refine, and Findings
The outreach strategy was replicated from pretotype #2 as it had proved
effective. This time, 42 companies were contacted, and 13 returned with positive
feedback, a 26% positive response rate. Thus, surpassing the goal of 25% which
was already an optimistic margin.
As the number of interviews with companies was now quite significant, it
became possible with some certainty to conclude on various parameters.
Patterns were obvious, and the pains became repetitive. It was evident that the
62
==PAGE:63==
following elements were present in multiple companies within the industry of
small-scale food producers:
-
Becoming data-driven is not a priority, nor will it be soon.
-
E-commerce is not a priority, however, identified as a point they want to
improve on.
-
ZPD can improve the online sales of many companies but not as a
stand-alone solution, as the lack of skills from the companies diminishes
the purpose.
-
The SMEs are almost solely interested in solutions that optimize their sales
immediately.
-
The marketplace is interesting for most, but even a low asking price to be
a part of it is enough to scare a significant number of SMEs.
Financial feasibility
Pretotyping is an excellent method for estimating interest and potential in an
idea. However, if pretotypes stand alone as evidence to determine the demand
for a product, it is inconclusive. The combined knowledge from the interviews
and pretotypes must be quantified into a forecast of how the chosen business
model could realistically perform and progress.
A budget for the first year of operation was drafted based on feedback from
the offered subscription models. The two budgets were made with great
uncertainty in many matters; however, the argumentation for each is
documented in the paragraph below the tables.
63
==PAGE:64==
Type 1 budget with membership – 1 year
Table 5 – The membership type 1 financial budget. See Appendix 5
64
==PAGE:65==
Type 2 budget with membership – 1 year
Table 6 – The membership type 2 financial budget. See Appendix 6
Explainers of key figures:
Micru new customers
Considering the interest and acknowledgment received from potential
customers, acquiring three paying customers per month after the launch was
deemed feasible. However, this number is expected to fluctuate and decrease
over time due to factors such as seasonality and limitations related to the
founders' responsibilities and resources. Without specific figures like Lifetime
Value (LTV), the growth of the business is expected to be gradual and
potentially inconsistent. This cautious approach considers the impact of
seasonality, as reflected in the budget projections for the summer months.
65
==PAGE:66==
Micru total customers
The projection for year 1 estimated a total of 17 customers for Micru. This figure
serves as a forecast for new and recurring customers that Micru aims to
acquire. To validate the feasibility of this projection, industry numbers from the
market were consulted to ensure that the projected customer count was within a
reasonable range.
According to The Danish Food Agency (Fødevarestyrelsen), 87.916 companies
were categorized as operating in retail within Food as of 14-06-2023
(Fødevarestyrelsen, 2023). The Danish Food Agency defines a food production
company to be: “any enterprise engaged in the production, manufacturing, or
distribution of food” (Fødevarestyrelsen, 2023). This number alone is, therefore,
not a complete representation of the market. It proved difficult to find exact
estimates of the number of SMEs in Denmark's food industry.
Selected industry codes (Branchekoder) deemed representable were
cross-referenced with the NACE (Statistical Classification of economic activities
in the European Community). See the industry codes and total number of food
plants in Appendix 7.
Considering the selected industry codes, the total market represents 4.146
companies. Obtaining 17 customers in year one would represent approximately
0.4% of the total accessible market.
META advertising
A fixed fee for Social media advertising is set for the first three operating
months. After that, 100% of the profits are used on this post to get the platform
out as fast as possible and obtain data.
66
==PAGE:67==
New consumers
Marketing costs / Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC)
Growth hack consumers
Paying customers on the platform obtained through growth hacking strategies,
such as word of mouth, PR, network, etc.
Upsell revenue:
Revenue from micro-producers purchasing ad space in Micru’s newsletters, front
page views, recommended badges, etc.
The main differences between the membership types
The two budgets differ primarily in terms of the fixed fee and the percentage
taken from the top-line revenue. The Type 1 budget has a fixed fee of 200 DKK
per month, accompanied by a 15% cut from the top-line revenue. On the other
hand, the Type 2 budget eliminates the fixed fee and instead applies a higher
percentage cut of 25% from the top-line revenue. Furthermore, in the type 2
budget, there is an increased demand for upselling, as it is assumed that
customers on the platform for “free” are more willing to invest in upsells.
For the financial feasibility, this doesn't change much. The type 2 budget is more
favorable for Micru, with almost double as high profits, but the bottom line is
still too insignificant to be considered feasible.
Interviews showed a 50%50 split when asked to pick a preferred subscription
type. Some saw the fixed fee of 200 DKK being a killer in type 1, and some saw
the percentage fee of 25% as being a killer in type 2. This leaves Micru with a
67
==PAGE:68==
double-edged sword, where there is not much wiggle room for the highly
price-sensitive SMEs.
“If I have to pay 25% to you for every order, I'm pretty sure I don't make any
money” - Mette Glindemann, Esbjerg Bryghus
Feasibility
The two budgets show the downsides of a marketplace. Despite spending total
profits on marketing, having no salaries, and steadily increasing monthly
revenue, the projected profit bottom line remains minimal. One of the main
factors contributing to the limited profitability is the percentage that Micru
takes from orders, given an average order value of 400 DKK. This means
substantial orders would be required before generating significant profits.
Additionally, It was assumed that with the vast amount of value-creating
upsells that Micru offered, the SSFPs would recognize and accept higher
premium pricing than the ones that were tested.
An important aspect to consider is the consumer demand for the marketplace.
Despite the project's focus on addressing suppliers' pain points, it raises the
question of why there isn't an existing marketplace for small-scale food
producers. This highlights the need for further investigation into the reasons
behind the lack of demand and the potential alternatives in the market.
Thinking that ZPD strategies can be the missing link in the equation is
optimistic. The alternatives and lack of demand are a large gray area that
needs more investigation. Furthermore, competitors are another factor that is
elaborated in the section Competitors.
Based on these figures, the platform is financially unfeasible. For it to succeed, a
lot of money needs to be spent on marketing at a high burn rate. It could be an
68
==PAGE:69==
interesting case for Venture Capital, but there is still the high uncertainty of
consumer demand. More importantly, for this report, the need for ZPD is not
apparent, as the customers are not interested in many of the offers connected
to it - Not even the taste profile feature.
Double Diamond
Figure 3 – Double diamond illustration with explanations
Discover: Literature Review
Define: Pretotype #1
Develop: Pretotype #2 and elaborated Concept and Product
Deliver: Pretotype #3 and financials
The combination of Pretytotyping and Build Measure Learn was a successful
method as it provided both structure and open-ended learning. However, the
loops still needed a path to ensure that multiple scattered loops would not occur.
69
==PAGE:70==
The Double Diamond was a perfect methodology to ensure this. By relooking at
the model but keeping its process chart, the pretotypes were kept in optimal
organization. To visualize this, the four key events of this research have been
plotted into the original figure (See Figure 3). The four headlining elements of
the Double Diamond still served in its original sense. However, each quadrant
had different metrics. The key was to keep thinking in the progression of;
Discover, Define, Develop, Deliver.
Discover, was the desk research and initial outline of the investigation. It
consisted of learning about the problems and potential solutions. It gave a
heading and a direction.
Define, was where the business case surfaced. A first draft of the business
potential and outreach to real potential clients.
Develop, was then the re-scoping and re-targeting but with the same core from
the discovery phase (ZPD). This phase was by far the most productive one as,
according to the model and the project goal, it should set the base for an MVP
or promising solution. It was where the Concept(next chapter) came to life and
the marketplace had a visual appeal.
Deliver, was the last pretotype and the wrap-up, and the conclusion on
feasibility and next ideation.
Using the Double Diamond as a skeleton, there was always an underlying
understanding of what was expected in each phase.
Concept
The Micru platform is a two-sided e-commerce platform designed to bridge the
gap between small-scale food producers (SSFP) and food enthusiasts in
70
==PAGE:71==
Denmark by enabling a more direct and mutually beneficial relationship. The
platform empowers SSFPs to showcase their unique products and connect with
a wider audience while providing food enthusiasts access to a diverse range of
high-quality, locally sourced culinary experiences. Built on the core principles of
ZPD from the ground up, Micru is a platform to enable passively data-driven
approaches for small-scale food producers.
Two-sided E-commerce platform
The Micru platform will be built on typical platform principles, with a vendor and
a consumer aspect, also called the two-sided markets approach (Eisenmann et
al., 2006). Similar experiences can be found on other platforms like DBA, eBay,
Amazon, and more. In essence, the primary objective of these platforms is to
connect two parties who may not have otherwise encountered each other and
facilitate their exchange while charging a fee or advertisement placement for
the service. Micru operates without a physical warehouse stocked with products
from the SSFPs. Instead, Micru follows a system where monthly invoices are
sent to the SSFPs for the products they have sold on the platform.
Enable nationwide selling for the SSFP
Micru facilitates online nationwide sales for SSFPs, allowing them to share their
locally crafted products with a wider customer base across the country.
The SSFPs are having a shop-in-shop on the platform with a visually strong
landing page that shows who they are as a brand and what they offer. Through
detailed product descriptions, origin stories, and product reviews, Micru
provides food enthusiasts with the knowledge and confidence to make informed
choices aligned with their values and preferences. Their values and preferences
71
==PAGE:72==
are matched with a ZPD feature called a Taste Profile. The Taste Profile will be
elaborated on later in the thesis.
Image 16 – Mockup, Taste profile – Micru platform – See Appendix 4 for the full page
The Micru platform features
Additionally to having an online presence on the Micru platform the SSFPs are
also having access to a suite of powerful online operation tools designed to
empower the SSFPs with marketing support, e-commerce store management,
and consumer analysis they otherwise could not do or afford.
72
==PAGE:73==
E-commerce store management
One key aspect that was found doing the research and interviews was that the
SSFPs couldn’t figure out how to manage an online store. Therefore with the
Micru solution, the SSFPs are getting a hassle-free solution for showcasing their
products to a wider audience, with onboarding included. This is done by only
getting one invoice per month with everything sold on the platform instead of
one per order.
Consumer Analysis
The SSFPs will get a monthly detailed report of how many visitors and
purchases they have had, together with valuable insights into consumer
behavior and preferences. By leveraging zero-party data-driven analytics,
SSFPs can uncover trends, identify new market opportunities, and tailor their
offerings accordingly. This zero-party data-driven approach enables the SSFPs
with competitive advantages that will allow them to make informed decisions
that they can use for further growth and a better customer experience. See
Imange 20 on page 80.
Upsells
Upsells of the different marketing initiatives is an add-on to the already
included features of the Micru platform that enables the SSFP to effectively
reach a wider yet specific audience at a minimal expense. Additionally, the
SSPF does not need preliminary knowledge on subjects like digital marketing
and graphic design, as the skilled team at Micru handles all of these tasks.
73
==PAGE:74==
Homepage spotlight
The homepage spotlight gives the SSFP visibility and exposure, which allows
them to capture the attention of visitors and potential customers to showcase
exclusive offers and promotions. The spotlight is a banner and a collection of
their highlighted products.
Newsletter shoutout
The Micru newsletter enables the SSFPs to reach a wider engaged audience
while sharing their unique stories, and passion for their craft and seamlessly
direct readers to their dedicated stores on the Micru platform. It’s a great
cost-effective option to differentiate themselves in a highly competitive market.
Meta ads & Google ads
Micru is strategically implementing marketing campaigns across platforms like
Google and META. By doing this, Micru presents a unique opportunity for SSFPs
to become the showcased company in co-branded marketing initiatives.
Through these collaborative efforts, SSFPs gain the advantage of increased
visibility while reducing their marketing expenses simultaneously.
Benefits for the end consumer
The food enthusiasts can browse a selection of the most innovative and
high-quality products that are locally produced in Denmark, making it easy and
engaging to try out new products from small companies they might never have
heard of. Every week Micru will deliver a newsletter that covers the newest
trends, brands, and topics around small-scale food producers.
74
==PAGE:75==
The platform is a gateway to diverse culinary experiences, from organic farm
produce to handcrafted artisanal delicacies. By emphasizing locality and
quality, Micru ensures that consumers can access ethically sourced, sustainable,
and often unique food options. To connect with the targeted end consumer, a
persona is created.
75
==PAGE:76==
End consumer persona2
Name: Signe Larsen
Age: 32
Location: Aarhus, Denmark
Occupation: Graphic Designer
Persona Background
Signe Larsen, a 32-year-old graphic designer in Aarhus, Denmark, embraces a
creative and health-conscious lifestyle. She values unique, high-quality food
products and is captivated by Aarhus' thriving food scene and sustainability
focus.
Shopping Preferences
Signe prioritizes supporting local businesses and sustainable food producers.
She seeks artisanal food emphasizing her commitment to sustainable farming
and the local economy.
Motivations
Signe is motivated by the pursuit of exceptional quality food and beverages.
Supporting local businesses that prioritize sustainability is a deep-rooted value
for her, as well as online grocery shopping convenience is important, too, due to
her busy schedule. Her commitment to health and well-being leads her to
choose foods that align with her dietary preferences, such as gluten-free,
vegan, or dairy-free options.
2 Persona image created by the A.I Image generator thispersondoesnotexist.com
76
==PAGE:77==
Consumers hesitate to try new products
Why is there a need for a taste profile? 71% of consumers are more likely to buy
a product or service from a name they recognize according to a study
conducted by Onbuy (Onbuy, 2021). There are several reasons why people
hesitate to try out new things (Magness, 2022). Some of the reasons why people
won’t try new things are that they prefer to stay in their comfort zone. It simply
requires less power to choose the options we already know, which can translate
to the power of laziness. (Magness, 2022)
Additionally, people are afraid of the unknown and ultimately failure. It’s the
tradeoff of choosing what they know is “good” compared to the potential
upsides of trying something new. It can be observed when people are traveling
to a new place for holidays. On the first day, everything is new for them, and
after a few days, they tend to stay at restaurants and bars they already know
and shop for brands they can buy back home (KLEPEK & BAUEROVÁ, 2020).
“The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and
strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown.”
- Howard Phillips Lovecraft
The topic is far too large to be covered here, but it's important to include a
perspective as the Micru platform is about trying out new things for most of its
consumers.
77
==PAGE:78==
A Recommendation VS The Taste-profile
Another perspective of this is to look at companies that are using
recommendation engines to deliver new online experiences.
The “typical” recommendation engine is an algorithm that can use Big Data to
recommend products or content to consumers based on how similar customers
are to each other.
Prompt to ChatGPT: Explain what Big Data is very shortly
“Big Data refers to extremely large and complex sets of data that are difficult to
process and analyze using traditional methods. The significance of Big Data lies
in the valuable insights and patterns that can be extracted from it.”
- ChatGPT 12.06.2023
In simple terms the algorithm creates cohorts analysis on products vs its users,
and in recent years the algorithm has become more accurate the more
data-points it has. Since 2012, recommendation algorithms have played a
significant role in online experiences. For instance, approximately 35% of the
things people buy on Amazon and 75% of the content they watch on Netflix
result from product recommendations made by these algorithms (McKinsey,
2013). As this finding was conducted ten years ago, this approach is almost the
status quo for many consumers, and it can express the gravity of the global
adoption of this approach. The SSFP does not have that kind of technology and
data on its current and future customers. But, to not only compete but deliver a
similar experience to its customers, a new and less data-heavy approach is
needed.
78
==PAGE:79==
The ZPD-first online experience
Instead of focusing solely on what the consumers want to buy, the focus will be
on the whole experience. Starting from the initial interaction on the platform to
the experience of trying a new product. Accommodating that the online
experience is specially designed around a unique taste profile and product
reviews. This is built around a ZPD strategy that captures data points across the
whole experience from the customer journey that the SSFP can use for further
product development or marketing purposes.
The taste profile
The process of creating a Taste-profile for an SSFP
The SSFP’s procedure is uncomplicated, as they assign tags to their products
based on differentiating factors such as ingredients, flavor, product category,
and more. This tagging process is similar to how social media platforms like
Instagram and Twitter utilize tags.
79
==PAGE:80==
A product tag list of an IPA beer could look like this:
Image 17 – Showcasing zero-party data points specifically associated with a product.
The consumer user experience
Consumers have multiple ways to engage with the taste profile. One approach
involves creating an account on the platform, where they will be presented with
questions related to their taste preferences during the signup process. Once an
account is created, the platform will display products that align closely with the
user's taste preferences and make every experience unique to each consumer.
Alternatively, they can utilize the product tags to filter the collection page. After
making a purchase, they will be given the opportunity to create an account, and
their preferences will be saved based on the selected filter options.
80
==PAGE:81==
Image 18 – Micru collection page with filters based on Zero-party data
ZPD product reviews
Creating an experience that empowers users to obtain desired products, is one
aspect while verifying the validity of this assumption is another. To validate that
the customer is satisfied with the product, a well-known method will be used
called product review. However, this approach is slightly modified to enhance
the ZPD strategy further.
The product review email will be sent out 30 days after the purchase date,
considering that the consumption of the purchased items might not occur
immediately upon delivery.
Within the product review, customers will be asked questions concerning their
taste experience, which will be directly associated with their taste profile and
81
==PAGE:82==
updated accordingly. Consequently, the next time users visit the platform, their
online experiences will be customized based on the feedback provided in their
product reviews.
Image 19 – Product review survey based on zero-party data
By employing this approach, the SSFPs can effectively validate whether the
tags align with customers' expectations, and this process also serves to address
potential blind spots that may arise during product development. Additionally,
the use of product reviews on e-commerce experiences can also increase the
conversion rate and trust of the brand.
82
==PAGE:83==
Summary of product findings
The difficult part of designing a usable ZPD feature is that the tradeoff needs to
be balanced, and this is a great example of that. The benefit for the consumer is
that it will minimize their fear of trying something new, as the SSFP has
carefully selected tags that make it easier for a consumer to get the right
product. By employing this approach, the SSFP can gather valuable insights into
the flavors and products that consumers desire directly without relying on
surveys that often go unanswered. Implementing such a feature is the potential
to not only boost the conversion rate of purchases but also achieve the dual
objectives of increasing the overall number of purchases and utilizing data for
making informed decisions.
The clients for the Micru platform will get a monthly PDF report that shows
easy-to-understand metrics of their sales and data gathered on the platform.
This report is illustrated in Image 20.
83
==PAGE:84==
Image 20 – A product mockup designed for the monthly report provided to Micru customers.
84
==PAGE:85==
Business Model
Introduction to the business model
The Micru platform operates on a subscription-based business model, where the
SSFP pays a monthly fee and a transaction fee calculated from the total top-line
revenue generated. The SSFP can choose between two options:
Membership types
Membership 1
Membership 2
200kr monthly payment
0kr monthly payment (Free)
15% of revenue
25% of revenue
599 kr in On-boarding fee
599 kr in On-boarding fee
Business model vs. Pricing model
Both memberships give roughly the same revenue to Micru. However, there is a
risk factor that needs to be taken into account. With Membership 1, the risk
factor is lower for Micru, as there is a steady monthly revenue of at least 200 kr
per SSFP. On the other hand, Membership 2 presents a higher risk for Micru but
a lower risk for the SSFP since it's free for them, although the transactional fee
is higher.
As previously mentioned, the SSFP typically have limited budgets, as many view
their businesses as hobbies. The price is selected based on interviews with the
SSFPs, and the 200 kr monthly fee is low compared to the alternatives. The
e-commerce SaaS and platform market start from around the same monthly
85
==PAGE:86==
fee, without the additional features Micru possesses, such as marketing
services, E-commerce operation, and passive data-driven capabilities.
The pricing model is carefully designed to strike a balance between providing
sufficient value to the SSFPs and managing available resources effectively. For
this business model to achieve sustainability, a significant number of SSFPs is
essential. This is a common challenge in the online marketplace and platform
economy, where revenue generated tends to be on the lower side due to the
transactional pricing model. This has been well known from the beginning, and
there is potential to gradually increase the monthly payment over time as long
as the marketplace fulfills its commitments.
Competitor Analysis
To gain a comprehensive understanding of the competitive environment in the
SSFP industry, a competitor matrix is created. This matrix is developed by
examining the top three competitors in the market. The analysis is then divided
into five subcategories, each consisting of five focus areas.
The five sub-categories analysis
The five sub-categories analysis chart highlights the various e-commerce
parameters used to evaluate the top three competitors, and the overall theme
of the analysis is technology and innovation. These parameters are organized
into four main headings, each representing a specific focus area, while each
heading is further divided into five distinct categories.
86
==PAGE:87==
Technology and Innovation parameters
UI/UX
E-Commerce
Parameters
Active Data Collection
Innovative Strategies
and focus areas
Easy navigation
SEO
Visible ZPD strategies
CSR
Category bundles
Site speed
CTA signups
Green mission vision
Fast checkout
Marketing stack
Abandoned Cart
strategies
Trending products /
optimized categories
Responsive site
Payment options
Active newsletter
Use of new technologies
in E-commerce
Site conversion rate
optimized
Fast CMS
Hero product and
seasonal deals.
Technological
advantages
Growth
End Balance = Initial Balance * (1 + Growth Rate) ^ Years
Certain focus areas are self-explanatory based on their names, while others
may require a brief explanation. The following are a few selected focus areas for
clarification:
Conversion rate optimized
Conversion rate is a term that is used to measure the effectiveness of a website
in converting visitors into customers. Typically a good conversion rate lies
between 3-5%. Example: If a website has 500 conversions out of 10,000 visitors,
the conversion rate would be 5%.
While obtaining data for a comprehensive analysis may not always be possible,
a preliminary scan is conducted to evaluate the focus level on conversion rate
optimization. It involves examining important elements on the product pages,
ensuring the website maintains a smooth flow, and confirming that each page is
optimized for the desired actions.
87
==PAGE:88==
Marketing stack
Analyzing the marketing tools utilized by a competitor enables a high-level
overview of its marketing efforts. The analysis primarily focuses on the
company’s social media followers across various platforms and the presence of
marketing tracking scripts. The tracking scripts can reveal what marketing
software is used. Moreover, Facebook allows every user to see the
advertisements being run by each company, which can serve as an indicator of
their activity on the META platform. Additionally, conducting a Google search on
the competitor reveals if they utilize Google AdWords for their Search
Marketing.
Visible ZPD strategies
Examining how competitors utilize ZPD strategies can unveil whether they are
effectively gathering ZPD and whether this is a common approach in the SSFP
industry. Since Micru is constructing its marketplace on ZPD principles, this
analysis can offer valuable insights into the competitive advantage Micru may
potentially possess.
Use of new technologies in E-commerce
By assessing a competitor's adoption of new e-commerce technologies such as
social commerce, personalization, AR/VR, subscription services, and
sustainable/ethical shopping practices, it can provide insights into how modern
and up-to-date they are in the industry. And their readiness for adjustment as
the e-commerce industry is a fast-paced environment. The approaches change
often, and sometimes are more radical than others.
88
==PAGE:89==
The growth score equation
To establish the health and growth of Micru’s main competitors and the industry
as a whole, an equation is made that calculates the growth in the companies'
key figures since their founding.
The equation is as follows:
((End Profit / Initial Profit)^(1 / Years existed) - 1) * 100
The equation is based on a company's profit from their first financial year to the
latest published on cvr.virk.dk. A growth rate can be determined by measuring
the years a company has been running and the profits. This growth rate is then
held against an industry average annual growth rate to determine what the
competitor scores in “growth” in the matrix.
The industry average annual growth rate is set at 8%. This number is an
estimate based on the following information. According to Dansk Erhverv, the
market for online purchases of groceries has risen by 41% since 2019 (Dansk
Erhverv, 2022. This increase most likely mirrors the effect of the global
pandemic and is not solely a trend in shopping for food online. Therefore the
average growth rate of any e-commerce operating in the EU is taken into
consideration. This number is 10% (Statista, 2023). The average is then
decreased a little in this comparison as the industry of shopping craft foods is
generally considered niche and not a megatrend. Thus less growth than e.g. the
clothing industry.
It is important to note that this equation merely rates how the key competitors
are growing on average. It is not an accurate representation of the industry or
89
==PAGE:90==
the financial forecast of the competitors but an estimation to use as a
benchmark.
The competitors scored the following growth rates:
Broders: 11.3% (3/5) Delikatessehuset: 36.62% (5/5) Gourmetshoppen: 10.57% (3/5)
Competitor analysis findings
The Competitor Matrix
Company / Area
Broders
Delikatessehuset
Gourmetshop
UI/UX
4
2
2
E-commerce
parameters
3
3
2
Active data
collection
3
2
2
Innovative
strategies and
focus areas
3
1
1
Growth rate score
3
5
3
Total score
16
13
10
Table 7 - The Competitor Matrix
The competitor analysis reveals several key findings. Firstly, when comparing
the growth rates, it becomes evident that the competitors are performing
relatively well and meeting industry benchmarks. However, a notable drawback
is their lack of updated marketing stacks, indicating a potential lag in their
marketing strategies.
90
==PAGE:91==
Furthermore, their choice of e-commerce platforms falls short of
industry-leading options, which may hinder their ability to leverage advanced
features and functionalities.
Additionally, they are not fully embracing current important technologies that
could enhance their operations and customer experience. Nevertheless, these
competitors have managed to establish a customer base, showcasing their
ability to attract and retain customers. Interestingly, they all began as local
shops and subsequently incorporated e-commerce into their business models,
reflecting their adaptability to changing market trends.
Business Opportunity
Commercialization possibilities
The pretotypes have shown that there is no likely feasible business model for
using ZPD within micro and small e-commerce as of today. However, the
concept of ZPD still has its place among data strategizing. This section will look
at successful ZPD businesses locally and globally. It will also discuss how to pick
and evaluate a different ZPD industry and assess its readiness.
The front runners
Previously mentioned in the Literature review, Cheetah Digital has monetized
greatly with ZPD. Their public whitepaper illustrates successful ZPD projects
with global megabrands such as Vodafone, Discovery, and SKY (Cheetah
Digital, 2022). Their “Playbook” as the paper is titled, highlights comprehensive
data and realized potential, all related to ZPD which is impressive for a new
concept. Cheetah Digital has raised more than $20 Million in funding, employs
91
==PAGE:92==
more than a thousand people (Crunchbase, 2023), and is the most prominent
advocate identified for ZPD today.
Local opportunities
With Cheetah Digital operating primarily under a consultancy-focused business
model targeting large corporations, it is relevant to see which companies do, or
could, offer similar services in Denmark. Cheetah Digital is a beacon of
best-proven business opportunities for commercializing ZPD. Through desk
study research, multiple companies fit the profile. They are found by searching
keywords and scanning offered services. SaaS solutions are also highlighted as
these offer their services globally and could be easily implemented for a Danish
company.
Seven consultancies offer products such as digitalization strategies, data
management, dashboards, or counseling data-driven organizations. Few
mention ZPD, but all have similar offers but without ZPD as the cursor. They
vary in size from a two-man operation to international multi-hundred employees
establishments. The information about the companies is found on their websites,
and the links for all of them can be found in Appendix 8.
On the SaaS side, seven companies were identified. These are more direct in
their usage of the concept ZPD but vary greatly in industry focus. Some are
solely customer-oriented, while others offer AI to fulfill specific needs, and
others claim they can do it all. Marketing is a key value they all offer, and
e-commerce partners are their main references. See the companies in Appendix
8.
92
==PAGE:93==
Business Model Determination
A tangible opportunity is a digital-first consultancy agency offering and
communicating solely ZPD services. The consultancy agency industry is a red
ocean, but among the many players, none seem to have adopted ZPD as a pillar
within their solutions. Becoming an expert in this field is a way to stand out from
the competition. Furthermore, consultancies can operate with low management
and are tech-ready, and the concept leaders of Cheetah Digital are scaling with
a similar mindset. The consultancy agency would also not need to become
experts within a specific industry or niche as the ZPD strategies can be altered
to fit the client's needs, and they are not necessarily limited to the few areas
that the platform Micru solved. The work with the marketplace platform showed
the dangers of limiting to one industry and type of business. To assess the next
viable venture, different approaches would be utilized. This is described in detail
in the “Future Steps.”
Future Steps (The Next BML-cycle)
The learnings from previous BML-cycles
Building upon the insights gained from previous cycles and the competitor
analysis, the next BML-cycle is designed to validate the assumptions regarding
the potential for a new player in the digital consultancy industry in Denmark.
The cycle will prioritize concentrating on exploring a broader industry landscape
with greater financial resources. It will begin where the first cycle stopped. Still,
instead of providing a vague description of the ZPD solution, the focus will be
on solidifying and refining the concept and product in collaboration with a
design partner.
93
==PAGE:94==
Design partner
The first thing would be to use the findings from other competitors like Cheetah
Digital and find a design partner. A good design partner candidate is in one of
the interviewed leads from the first cycle named LOOW. LOOW is an
e-commerce direct-to-consumer clothing company that sells Merino Wool
clothing with an 8-figure yearly revenue in DKK.
A design partner is a close partner with which a company co-develops new
products or services. Incorporating a design partner at an early stage of
product development can minimize the risk of creating a product that the
market fails to resonate with and lacks perceived value (Miller et al., 2014).
Engaging a design partner to use the product during its development phases
and provide valuable feedback can be a more cost-effective and efficient
alternative to creating a Minimum Viable Product (MVP) for a closed audience.
This approach allows for quicker and less expensive iterations based on
real-world usage and insights from the design partner.
However, some pitfalls need to be considered, one such concern is the possibility
of designing a product that is tailored to the needs of only the design partner.
Additionally, the chosen design partner may have inherent biases that can
influence their feedback because their focus is on improving their business. As
an effect of that, blind spots may arise when relying solely on the input of the
design partner. To shed light on these blind spots and continue product
development, utilizing one's network is the natural next step. Once progress in
the solution is developed with the design partner, this should be communicated
94
==PAGE:95==
to trustworthy and relevant parties. Showcasing the groundwork for the idea to
a select group of people from a network can help communicate the vision better
and give clearer market indications. The possibility of qualitative feedback is
also much higher from people you have a pre-established professional
relationship with than with someone reached through cold calling or e-mail.
While the current approach may limit the scale opportunity in the immediate
term, there is an opportunity to turn the consultancy business into a SaaS
product further down the line.
Example of a use case
By examining a fictive use case, the objective is to dive into the practical
implications and efficacy of implementing ZPD into a client in a specific context.
The chosen client is taken from one of the interviewed companies from the first
circle, this client sparked interest when ZPD a service was mentioned.
Client: Dalum dyrehandel
Dalum dyrehandel (Dalum) is a pet accessories business that operates both
online and offline. They have existed for nine years and have grown their
e-commerce store in 2020 (Covid-19) significantly. They were also interviewed
during the first pretotype, so the problems are from the said interview.
The problem for the client
Dalum is seeking to gain deeper insights into its customers' preferences, such as
their tendency towards price vs. quality, familiarity with brands, and their
preference for subscription-based or one-time purchases. With this information,
they will be able to allocate resources towards budget-friendly solutions with
minimized risk efficiently.
95
==PAGE:96==
Solution for the client
To gain insights into the preferences of potential customers regarding the
exchange of their data, it is essential to conduct a thorough investigation into
the trade-off mechanism, as discussed in the literature review. By exploring this
exchange trade-off, valuable information can be obtained regarding the
benefits Dalums' potential customers expect in return for sharing their data.
Simply sending an email with a generic survey titled "We need your help" may
not yield the desired results. Such an approach is likely to attract only the most
loyal customers that are already on the email list and can result in a low
response rate that may not be representative of the broader online store
audience. Therefore, a more effective strategy should be employed to
encourage a higher participation rate and ensure the collected data accurately
reflects the preferences of the primary customer base.
Instead, a tradeoff for the end-consumer would be to gain a better user
experience, a discount, free shipping, free products, etc. It is worth noting that
the current website lacks conversion rate optimization, and most first-time
shoppers use a discount code; the proper solution would be to offer a better
user experience on the website, together with a discount code.
This is done by creating a product recommendation and a discount code while
capturing their email addresses.
The survey is strategically designed to capture the attention of end-users
through an enticing headline such as:
"Udforsk Fantastiske Fund: Opdag spændende produkter og få 15% rabat!"
The survey incorporates targeted questions to address the specific assumptions
Dalums seeks to clarify. In the survey, there will be an email form to capture
96
==PAGE:97==
leads. To get the 15% discount, users must provide their email address. If they
choose not to provide their email, they will be redirected directly to the
personalized product recommendations based on their survey answers.
This solution effectively combines data gathering on potential customers,
resulting in valuable insights, with an enhanced user experience. Furthermore,
by capturing their email addresses, the collected data is associated with each
individual user, enabling further marketing segmentation and personalized
targeting.
Resources Needed
Resources needed for a solution like this would include survey software that can
be implemented on online stores while connecting to email services like
Mailchimp and Klaviyo. There are many survey software companies that can be
used; some of them are Typeform, GoZen, and JotForm. Additionally, an email
service like the ones mentioned above is needed to further use the data
gathered from the survey for segmentation purposes.
Feasibility
Market opportunity & Founder skill-set
Currently businesses are increasingly relying on data to get better customer
insights and provide personalized experiences. With rising privacy concerns and
regulations, such as GDPR, there is a growing need for alternative data sources.
This creates a unique market opportunity for a digital consultancy agency
specializing in zero-party data. The business will offer strategic guidance and
implementation support to help companies leverage this data for personalized
marketing campaigns. Even though zero-party data has a lot of potential, many
businesses don't know how to collect, handle, and make the most of it. This
97
==PAGE:98==
means a great opportunity for a consultancy agency to step in and offer
practical advice and personalized marketing strategies based on zero-party
data. In the future, the consultancy could also offer learning within the
spectrum of correct data management, strategizing, and GDPR compliance.
The two founders possess a great set of skills that are essential for bringing the
business to life. They complement each other in several areas, including sales,
account management, marketing, graphic design, strategy implementation, and
financial understanding. Their combined expertise covers a wide range of
crucial aspects needed to establish and operate a successful agency.
Furthermore, this business idea has a more “lifestyle” potential than a startup
business case with venture capital and an expansive growth rate.
Financials
To pursue the consultancy business opportunity, a quick financial overview is
presented. This is not a thoroughly constructed budget or calculations but an
estimate of how and when the idea can become financially viable.
According to Statista, “The revenue in the IT consulting & implementation
segment of the IT services market in Denmark was forecast to continuously
increase between 2023 and 2027 by a total 159 million U.S. dollars (+26.39
percent).” (Statista, 2023). This shows an industry in a great development with
prosperous estimations.
According to resumé statistics from Jobindex.dk A consultant within IT earns
41.399 DKK monthly (Jobindex, 2023). More specific data from
uddannelsesguiden.dk estimates a “consultant within Sales, IT, and
communication technology” earns 41.829 DKK monthly (Uddannelsesguiden,
98
==PAGE:99==
2023). Based on this, an estimated monthly salary benchmark is set at 40.000DK
for an entry-level consultant in the field of suggested business opportunity.
As the founders are entrepreneurial in spirit and nature, a monthly salary of
20.000 DKK is acceptable for at least the first year of operations. The market of
consultancies within the field is blurry and unpredictable, but the cheapest rates
found at any of the competitors are 745 DKK hourly. To compete, the ZPD
consultancy will offer rates around this price. 40.000DKK (salary) / 745 DKK
hourly rate means that the consultancy needs at least 54 billable hours each
month. Including variable costs, financial costs, assets, and other expenses, the
minimum required billable hours is set at 70. This gives a monthly revenue on
average of 52.150 DKK.
Calculations should also be done on how much project-based partnerships
would earn. Overall, it demonstrates that a feasible monthly income can be
achieved with great room for improvement. More calculations should be done
on competitive hourly rate optimization, services needed to create solutions for
clients, and the lifetime value of a client.
Discussion
The discussion will be used as a platform for the writers to discuss and assess
key elements of the analysis and further research that they desire. It will
present and interpret the key findings, the study’s limitations, and implications
that explore the potential impact of this study. The chapter will also introduce
critical thinking, later elaborated in a reflection.
99
==PAGE:100==
Key Findings
Data readiness in micro and small companies
This study found a surprisingly low data readiness for the interviewed
e-commerce companies. Despite having a presumed idea that the data level
was low, it was much lower than expected. There is significant room for
improvement, and even basic elements are not of interest or concern to the
companies. This has set many companies at a stalemate where growth is
limited, and goals are short-sighted.
This study found no SMEs to hold the status of being data-driven. This could
argue positively for implementing ZPD as the current data-driven mindset is
scarce and therefore does not collide with existing operations. However, it would
need a great behavioral change, both organizational and mental, something
that the companies also showed a low willingness to implement. Many
companies face limitations in terms of SaaS solutions, and if they engage in
social media marketing, their patience is low. However, in numerous instances,
companies have reported attempting these approaches but subsequently
abandoning them due to the perceived lack of prompt results. This matches
exactly with the interview findings: The patience for results is minimal and often
requires immediate positive outcomes.
GDPR Awareness
GDPR is of little to no concern for the companies. Many admit to just having a
copy-pasted section about GDPR in their terms and conditions, and they have
not looked at it since the implementation. With The Danish Data Protection
Agency (Datatilsynet) having limited resources to monitor small e-commerce
100
==PAGE:101==
companies, they see no risk or need to be aware of the regulations. This is
evident when looking at Datatilsynet's published verdicts. In 2022 they reached
an average of two verdicts per month (Datatilsynet, 2022). Furthermore, they
look to the bigger players and public institutions. This is not uncommon, as it is
a fair assessment to expect market leaders to both know and follow the laws.
Therefore, SMEs rely on their marketing channels and data analytics systems to
meet the standard. These companies include Alphabet (Google),
Meta(Facebook, Instagram), and Shopify. Relying on these tech behemoths is
another concern for the industry as it is another restraint for improving one's
business operation.
Marketplace as a business model within the Food &
Beverage industry
Early on, there was a worry present. Why hasn't the food and beverage online
marketplace been done before? The idea itself of taking food & beverage
companies into an Amazon-inspired setup is not unique and doesn't have many
barriers. It was acknowledged that it probably has been tried and failed and
that the only way to resolve the issue today was to figure out where the problem
lies. The general issues of running a marketplace have already been described.
Mass is key, and supply is needed to cater to demand. However, the lack of
involvement obligation from the SSFPs was the key takeaway when presenting
the platform. An idea was presented to increase their sales, brand awareness,
reach, and online presence, but the return was still not great enough for them to
commit time and resources. Despite the potential benefits, the users' reluctance
to pay for a platform with many features proved to be a major setback.
Moreover, the budgeting made for this study had discouraging predictions. For
a marketplace like this to flourish, capital is needed to market a plug-and-play
solution for the companies. The gains have to be present on both sides of the
101
==PAGE:102==
platform, and the behaviorisms of the end consumer are a large gray area that
would need further investigation.
Time is a scarcity for SMEs
When analyzing the results and interviews one key finding was that time is
SMEs' most valuable resource, even more than money. The return on investment
in terms of time should be incredibly high if a new service should be
implemented. When questions regarding the business owners' priorities came
up, answers were coherent that they wanted to do a lot more initiatives but
simply did not have the time. Therefore they were lagging behind on several
parameters compared to bigger companies. Furthermore, a marketing stack
analysis of the Micru companies revealed that some did not have META
tracking, and others did not have Google Adwords tracking. This situation could
suggest that companies either choose not to invest time in acquiring the
knowledge to utilize their e-commerce operation effectively, or they may lack
the financial resources to outsource this task to an agency or hire dedicated
employees.
Irrational use of zero-party data
ZPD is present in some SMEs with the use of surveys, however, they are not
strategically created and do not serve a higher purpose than collecting data for
the company. The data that is being collected is also not curated correctly and
the tradeoff from the consumer side is difficult to spot. The implementation
appears to be a quick-fix "silver bullet3" initiative that has been introduced
without a thorough understanding of its implications. Certain examples might
generate more confusion than they deliver value. However, this is
3 A silver bullet is a simple solution to a complicated problem.
102
==PAGE:103==
understandable as time is a valuable asset that might cause some tasks to be
underdelivered.
Future research
This section offers insights for future research based on the findings and gaps
identified in the study. Future studies are advised to investigate the potential
research directions related to the future of micro and small e-commerce
businesses, considering their growth potential, legal compliance, societal
contributions, and challenges during digital transformations. Additionally, it also
highlights the importance of investigating the adoption of ZPD and the variety
of merits, including privacy regulations, consumer behavior, and market trends.
Future research can focus on the transformative impact of ZPD on privacy
frameworks and how businesses can leverage larger datasets.
A Practical Study
To grasp the potential, likelihood, and effects of a ZPD-focused company, a
practical study from a scientific point of view, disregarding the entrepreneurial
standpoint of this thesis, would enhance understanding. The study should
provide insights into the pros and cons of such strategies in a real-world
business. Through the implementation of zero-party data strategies within a
company for a designated period of time, valuable insights and knowledge can
be gained.
The Future of Micro and Small e-commerce Businesses
This study has identified significant gaps between how SMEs are driven and
how they perceive they are driven. Certainly, conducting a study to research
103
==PAGE:104==
questions related to the dilemma and effects of this gap can provide valuable
insights:
Can an SME become a medium-large enterprise without adopting a data-driven
approach?
Do hobby-based companies adhere to legal regulations regarding data privacy,
and do they contribute positively to society and the economy?
Does digital transition pose excessive challenges or difficulties for SMEs?
Adoption of ZPD and the complex conditions
For companies to stay relevant and competitive they continuously innovate and
develop new technologies and experiences that have the potential to transform
users' expectations and behavior. On the other hand, regulations imposed by
governmental institutions can greatly impact the strategies and visions of
businesses. While users also possess the power to shape the adoption of
technology, behavior, and ethics, it is a complex task to predict the effect and
importance of ZPD in society; therefore, further research is needed.
With the mounting pressure for enhanced privacy regulations from
governments, consumers, and businesses, research on how it would be possible
to get an enhanced privacy framework that disconnects all data points from
individuals while allowing companies to leverage larger and more precise
datasets would be beneficial. It would show how different stakeholders must
prepare and interact with the new technologies. Research on how ZPD can be
effectively implemented into businesses and analyzing how consumers interact
with new products and experiences influenced by ZPD can provide insights on
whether this approach has the potential to be part of the privacy framework
104
==PAGE:105==
and shape long-term market trends or if it will remain a temporary
phenomenon.
To overcome field challenges, more research is required within the development
of standardized frameworks and industry-wide collaboration. It should also help
to identify and mitigate biases and conduct further studies focusing on the
long-term effects of ZPD adoption.
Limitations
This section highlights the limitations encountered in this master thesis. With no
existing peer-reviewed theory and limited research on ZPD, entrepreneurial
methods were relied upon for investigation. The newness of the concept and
lack of established frameworks and methodologies introduce potential biases.
No existing peer-reviewed theory
The basis for both the literature review and the concept formation is limited.
This also includes theories and models related to ZPD. This study wanted to
explore the ZPD concept and its possibilities, but with no models or a limited
theory to back up the investigation, it needed to look elsewhere. This meant that
general entrepreneurial methods set the groundwork for the investigation. Had
there been pre-developed and more peer-approved thinking that could have
contributed to the study, it would have influenced the results significantly. Most
likely, there would have been fewer uncertainties, and the possibilities for desk
research would have been greater. The peer-reviewed theory would have
contributed to the credibility and validity of this thesis’s conclusions and
methodology, as it meets high standards of quality and accuracy.
105
==PAGE:106==
New concept with insufficient research
Zero-party data is a new non-scientific concept with limited established
research, frameworks, methodologies, and limited industry knowledge. The lack
opens up potential biases and blind spots. Factors like personal opinions and
social desirability bias may introduce inaccuracies and distortions in the
information provided. This is because much of the data is self-gathered and
comes from industry white papers that individual perspectives with subjective
factors and company agendas might influence.
Unexpected results
In the build-measure-learn phase, an unexpected development unfolded.
Originally aiming to develop a zero-party data product for the E-commerce
market, the outcome shifted to creating a marketplace catering to food
enthusiasts. This situation is proof of the method's strengths and weaknesses in
using the lean startup approach. While it emphasizes the importance of
maintaining a strong learning focus, it also demonstrates how the initial
problem can evolve with acquiring new knowledge. However, it is a fine balance
between not knowing what you don’t know and acting upon it with constant
learning.
Another unexpected result was a paradox that came from the small-scale food
producers' (SSFP) unwillingness to use the Micru platform, as the analysis was
based upon the SSFP's inability to maintain an e-commerce store and drive
traffic to it. However, they still had a live and functional e-commerce store.
Additionally, the findings revealed a strong contrast between the perception of
GDPR concerns among the interviewed e-commerce owners and the discussions
within the industry. The findings indicated that GDPR was not a big concern for
106
==PAGE:107==
the majority of e-commerce owners. The owners rely on large companies to
handle their GDPR, like META, Google, and Shopify, despite the extensive
discussions surrounding GDPR in the industry.
Explore implications
This section explores the research findings' potential consequences, impacts, or
applications. These broader implications arise from the results and can inform
future research, policy decisions, or practical applications in the field. These
findings offer a speculative perspective into the potential implications.
Practical implications
The findings in this study could especially be interesting in practicality. In
today's data-driven e-commerce landscape, implementing ZPD strategies could
make companies more competitive and GDPR compliant. If implemented, it
offers the opportunity to be data-driven with fewer technical abilities than
before. This compliance ensures adherence to data protection regulations and
enhances customer trust and confidence. Moreover, leveraging ZPD enables
smaller e-commerce companies to compete more effectively against larger
players in the market. With better access to high-quality data directly provided
by customers, these companies can make more informed decisions, tailor their
marketing strategies, and deliver personalized experiences. Especially
personalized experiences in the cookie-free future are a great market
advantage that could enhance growth and customer loyalty.
107
==PAGE:108==
Image 21 – (Cheetah Digital, 2022)
Unlike complex data acquisition methods, ZPD collection does not require
sophisticated data tracking systems or advanced analytics infrastructure. It
allows companies to directly engage with their customers and learn how to
assess their needs. If done correctly and over a longer period of time, a ZPD-run
company should experience happier customers and segmented customer
personas.
Policy Implications
E-commerce and digitalization have significant policy implications as zero-party
data emerges and is adopted. A first step toward addressing zero-party data
collection concerns is for policymakers to recognize and address them. Robust
data protection regulations must be developed to ensure the responsible
handling and storage of consumer data. Clear guidelines on consent, data
usage, and transparency must be developed to ensure consumer privacy and
trust.
Additionally, policy frameworks should encourage innovation and collaboration
in data-driven initiatives. For smaller companies to compete, being adaptive
and flexible with innovative solutions is an advantage they must pursue. ZPD
108
==PAGE:109==
may be unable to beat the biggest players with vast amounts of data. Still, with
good policy frameworks, they could compete with the larger competitors in their
closest competition circle. Overall, policy implications surrounding zero-party
data revolve around privacy protection, competition, and encouraging
innovation through data optimization processes.
Theoretical implications
In light of the limited scientific literature on this relatively new concept, the
theoretical implications of a study investigating the business case for
implementing zero-party data strategies for SMEs are significant. The study
expands the theoretical understanding of data-driven strategies specifically
tailored to micro and small enterprises with limited success operating in the
e-commerce sector. It contributes to developing knowledge in this emerging
field by exploring the theoretical foundations of zero-party data and its
potential applications in SMEs. It offers insights into the theoretical foundation
of ZPD collection, its implications for personalized marketing approaches, and
its potential to increase customer engagement and satisfaction.
The research also addresses the theoretical implications of GDPR compliance
and data privacy regulations. By exploring the challenges and opportunities of
implementing zero-party data strategies, the study enriches the theoretical
discourse surrounding data privacy in the context of SMEs. It does not shed
light on how SMEs can navigate the regulatory landscape but shows how
troublesome and complicated it is for a small company to be fully compliant -
and to prioritize compliance.
The study advances a theoretical understanding of technology adoption models
and frameworks tailored to SMEs by examining the challenges and
opportunities associated with adopting these strategies. This is from an
109
==PAGE:110==
entrepreneurial point of view and would be greatly complimented by similar
scientific research. Contribution to this new field that would benefit from ideas
and theories by acclaimed researchers. In a rapidly evolving e-commerce
landscape, it is always a question of what theory and concepts surpass the
trend phase and become best practices.
Reflection
The reflection on this study presents a dual perspective. The initial section of the
reflection explores various aspects and ideas surrounding ZPD that have not
been previously addressed. This provides a more comprehensive understanding
of the concept, its future prospects, and the general uncertainties associated
with ZPD and data. The second part of the reflection looks inward, focusing on
the authors, the overall project, and their attainment of the learning objectives.
This introspective examination highlights the researchers' overall thoughts as
they reflect on the entire project. It serves as a platform to showcase strengths
and weaknesses while offering insights into their engaging experience in this
research study.
Purpose vs. viability
The results of the research have left the authors with a dilemma. From the very
beginning, it was a priority to research a business idea that could help the
smaller companies in a world where the biggest players succeed, and the
passionate niches are left behind. However, as stated in the findings, the small
companies have left others behind and are willing to remain indifferent in a
vastly changing environment. The unwillingness to adapt, evolve, and ignore
when a hand is reached out, as it happened in this study, is alarming. It leaves a
110
==PAGE:111==
dilemma for the authors of what is most important: Helping the smaller
companies or having a viable startup?
This dilemma is based on a perception that if the company rejects the offered
idea, the fault lies with them and not the idea itself. This is, of course, not the
case, as there are many viable reasons to turn down the offer, like the risk factor
of being a first mover with minimal resources. However, it is debatable how so
many of the companies share a similar belief system of running a business. A
popular consensus learned from the interviews was that if they accept the offer,
the pros should outweigh the cons at around 5:1. This bottleneck has given the
report's authors great confusion. How do you help those who seemingly don't
want to be helped? Or, how do you help those that don't know what kind of help
they need?
The reality, as also introduced in the business opportunity, reveals that
prioritizing larger customers with more capital over small, often one-person-run
companies is a more feasible approach. On the one hand, there is the desire to
help and empower small businesses that influence and affect local economies.
However, the reality is that many of these companies dwell on how to run a
business and don't utilize their one big natural advantage, which is adaptability.
For the authors of this study, the challenge lies in finding the balance between
fulfilling a rewarding mission of supporting small companies and running a
sustainable and profitable business. Being purpose-driven is a big priority for
the authors, but without a healthy business model, it becomes pointless. It
requires careful consideration of resource allocation, scalability, and finding
innovative methods to provide tailored solutions that address smaller
enterprises' unique needs and constraints.
111
==PAGE:112==
Is Zero-party data too niche?
Another observation made by the authors is the risk of basing a company
profile on an area that simply is too narrow. While ZPD offers various spectrums
of work and development, it could be a concept that is best done in shorter
periods, meaning it could prove difficult for a consultancy to maintain clients for
a longer period of time. ZPD primarily focuses explicitly on data willingly shared
by the consumers which may not provide a comprehensive understanding of
their behavior and preferences. The Lifetime value and also the churn rate are
interesting metrics to evaluate for the time being in order to understand this.
However, it is important to consider that as the data collection and privacy field
evolves, zero-party data may expand and integrate with other data sources,
providing a more holistic view. Finding a balance between specializing in ZPD
and offering broader data consultancy services could be a solution to steer
around this dilemma.
Is Zero-party data the future?
Zero-party data general limitations
The application of ZPD brings a variety of advantages such as improved
personalization, trust, transparency, and the ability to gain insights that can
provide a deeper customer understanding. However, it is important to
acknowledge that ZPD also has its own set of limitations.
Limited sample size & User engagement fatigue
If more businesses incorporate zero-party data in their strategies, users may
experience information fatigue. When users are constantly asked to provide
preferences and personal details, the experience can become tiresome and lead
112
==PAGE:113==
to decreased engagement. Moreover, as ZPD relies on users' willingness to
provide their own information, this can result in limited sample size, especially if
the users are hesitant to share their data. Additionally, while users may provide
information willingly, there is a potential for biases and inaccuracies. People's
self-perception or willingness to disclose certain details may vary, leading to
inconsistencies or skewed data.
Implementation challenges & Utilizing ZPD insights
ZPD is currently not a plug-and-play solution, as it requires knowledge of how to
create and execute a ZPD strategy effectively. This involves company-specific
knowledge unique to each organization and the investment of time and
attention from key employees responsible for executing the ZPD strategy.
Collecting, managing, and analyzing zero-party data can pose technical and
logistical challenges for organizations. Furthermore, ZPD alone may not provide
a complete understanding of customers. Other data types, such as first-party
data and contextual data, can provide valuable insights that complement and
enrich the understanding of customers' preferences and behaviors.
Privacy-first alternatives
The future could be free of any data linked to individuals because of the
increasing focus on privacy-first alternatives for tracking and the utilization of
data. As mentioned in the literature review, some of these new technologies are
already in the making, and some are in their early phase. This can indicate that
SMEs are relying on big technology companies to solve the privacy issues by
only providing solutions that can be used with no concern for privacy, which
could make the privacy argument for ZPD irrelevant in some cases.
113
==PAGE:114==
AI-generated experiences & ZPD
There are several indicators that personalized experiences in many forms are
the future of digital experiences, and AI will play a big role in transformation
(Kuusi & Heinonen, 2022). Currently, it is the norm to get recommended
products, videos, content, songs, etc, that are based on its user's preferences. AI
is now limited to narrow intelligence, which means it can only solve specific
problems based on predefined parameters. On the other hand, general
intelligence in AI refers to systems that can understand, learn, and perform a
wide range of intellectual tasks similar to human intelligence. With that in mind,
it is not hard to envision a future where a lot of content, work, and business
strategies are not solely being developed, it's being generated. (Kuusi &
Heinonen, 2022).
For example, generated ultra-personalized digital experiences are still “sci-fi”
for now, as the technology is not there and societies are possibly not ready for
them yet. These experiences will impact industries that produce, develop, and
create products, services, and content. To deliver these generated experiences,
a massive amount of data would be needed, and a variety of data, such as
behavioral data, preference data, contextual data, and more. In this regard,
ZPD could be considered as one potential data source to contribute to this
comprehensive dataset.
Self-assessment
When conducting a self-assessment of the research performance, an evaluation
of the strengths and weaknesses of the researchers is an important step to
understanding the study's outcome and the influence it had.
114
==PAGE:115==
Preexisting knowledge and bias
The authors had an existing interest in the field of data within e-commerce and
data. They had worked on projects before, mastering Google Analytics' full
portfolio of programs, taking data-to-action courses, and having previous
real-life experience in building and scaling e-commerce businesses. This gave a
profound understanding of the subject matter, which added credibility and
passion for the research. However, this passion could also translate into bias. It
is crucial to acknowledge a great “wanting to succeed”-eagerness that then
relates to the common mistake in entrepreneurship of not being able to kill your
darlings. This might have given the researchers extra pain, as they spent more
time on debunked ideas and adjacent mistakes. It can potentially be a risk to
research objectivity.
Strong work ethics
During the research process, the researchers portrayed a strong work ethic and
maintained a focus within free-set boundaries. This contributed to upholding a
standard of high quality. Even though the goal wasn't to interview as many
companies as possible, the researchers managed to get a great amount of data
collected simply due to will and hard work. However, it is typical for the authors
to let their creativity get ahead of them, which occasionally resulted in veering
away from the predetermined scope. While creativity fosters innovation, it
requires careful management to ensure it stays aligned with the research
objectives.
Mentorship
Acknowledging and managing bias has been a paramount factor throughout
the research project. Employing elements such as self-reflection, peer feedback
115
==PAGE:116==
from cohorts, and engaging in regular consultations with the mentor has
actively helped to mitigate the potential influence of these biases. Significantly
the mentoring helped the authors' decision-making and areas of doubt. By
consistently having a critical perspective and challenging notions from the data,
the objectivity of the research has been enhanced. These efforts reflect a
commitment and learning eagerness to generate unbiased and worthful
outcomes.
Learning outcomes
The thesis has been a transformative experience, equipping the authors with
knowledge on zero-party data, data privacy, and small-scale business struggles.
The experience also entailed a deep examination of how to utilize data in
businesses and the exploration of its implications for personalization and
customer experience enhancements. Moreover, the authors gained practical
knowledge in conducting interviews and employing actionable prioritization
methods that can be applied across diverse industries and businesses.
​This journey has expanded the author's startup horizon while providing a solid
foundation for future ventures in the data-driven business landscape. As they
experienced personal and professional growth by testing ideas, applying
academic hypotheses in real-world markets, and developing a robust mindset
toward starting businesses.
Moreover, the journey has revealed that starting a business is not solely about
possessing all the answers but rather about asking the right questions. The
beauty lies in the fact that being in the state of not knowing what you don’t
know is not about seeking definitive answers but asking better questions. And,
when new knowledge arises, you can ask better questions.
116
==PAGE:117==
Conclusion
Data has transformed how businesses operate across various industries, and
governmental regulations such as GDPR, along with the demands from
companies and consumers, are propelling privacy standards and reshaping the
way data is utilized. This dynamic environment drives innovative solutions that
adapt and embrace the changing landscape of data utilization and user privacy.
The challenges in utilizing data and becoming GDPR compliant are not a
prioritized concern for SMEs. To ensure compliance, SMEs rely heavily on
standards by prominent enterprises such as Google, META, and Shopify.
However, these SMEs face significant pain points, primarily related to resource
limitations, with time being the most critical constraint. Given that many of
these companies are led by solo founders or operate with a small team, they
must carefully prioritize their focus to maximize value, typically with a primary
focus on profitability. Consequently, it weakens their competitiveness in the
ever-evolving e-commerce landscape.
An effective zero-party data business solution for SMEs in the e-commerce
industry should prioritize usability with little technical knowledge and offer clear
and actionable data insights. The solution's success lies in its ability to gather
valuable insights that drive decision-making for SMEs. This solution can be
delivered through various means, such as a Software-as-a-Service product, a
digital agency, or other appropriate options. By leveraging these solutions,
SMEs can make informed decisions and optimize their e-commerce strategies
without the need for significant time investment, extensive resources, or
specialized expertise. These offerings simplify the data analysis process and
provide SMEs with valuable insights to enhance their business performance,
117
==PAGE:118==
increase customer engagement, and drive growth. However, zero-party data
cannot be the only solution to a new way of utilizing data, as the data gathered
exhibit bias, and users can suffer from user engagement fatigue. To obtain more
precise insights, additional data sources such as contextual and behavioral data
are essential. Moreover, it is crucial to establish more iterative learning
processes to develop a profitable solution fully.
In the process of validating the go-to-market strategy for a startup centered
around zero-party data, numerous criteria, and factors were taken into account
to identify the most suitable industry niche. The analysis primarily revolved
around identifying crucial criteria that influenced the decision-making process.
Market validation was a significant aspect, encompassing the evaluation of
market maturity, projected growth, and existing trends, which played a decisive
role in assessing potential target markets. The most promising market that was
assessed during this study was small-scale food producers.
Additionally, conducting a financial overview of the selected business model
(marketplace) within the market context was essential to evaluate feasibility
and viability and to gain insights into the limitations and prospects of the
chosen niche. These criteria proved important, as they helped exclude potential
options: The wine retailers industry was excluded due to its maturity, and the
SSFP industry due to financial feasibility concerns. It became a central theme
that the majority of SSFP and other interviewed companies simply were too
small in scale, vision, and capability to engage as potential customers.
The selected entrepreneurial methodologies combined build-measure-learn, and
pretotyping. It enabled fast learning, a clear framework, and low-cost testing of
ideas. The frameworks were ideal, as the researchers had no predetermined
destination but an explorative mindset. It provided user feedback and early
118
==PAGE:119==
validation of assumptions, which helped guide and scope the research from
every pretotype completed. The Double Diamond model was an underlying
structural approach ensuring no unnecessary tests were done, and the research
remained goal-oriented. The quantitative and qualitative interviews gave
constant real-life indications of how the market perceived the business solutions
created. Assumptions could be debunked or confirmed, and the feedback
revealed the general interest in the product's key components. Overall, this
methodology enabled a free yet systematic and evidence-based assessment of
the business's viability.
119
==PAGE:120==
Appendix
Appendix 1 – The full list of participating companies
Company name
Interview type
Crazy Safety
Quantitative
Humleland
Quantitative
Deep Blu
Quantitative
DermaSpace
Pilot
I Love My Type
Quantitative
Nordic Strong
Quantitative
1855Cru
Quantitative
7 Vini
Quantitative
A-vinstouw
Quantitative/Qualitative
Wine Consult
Quantitative
AK Vine
Quantitative
Esbjerg Bryghus
Quantitative/Qualitative
CEP Sport
Quantitative
ABC Hundeudstyr
Quantitative
Dalum Dyrehandel
Quantitative/Qualitative
Ølhunden
Quantitative
Thyras Bryg
Qualitative
Vocatus
Quantitative
Shaiber
Qualitative
120
==PAGE:121==
Staarup Haandbryg
Qualitative
Slowburn
Qualitative
Ølsnedkeren
Qualitative
Social Vanilla
Quantitative
DrinkDansk
Qualitative
Bornholmerhampen
Quantitative
Bullseye Spirits Distillery
Quantitative
Bølle Æbler
Quantitative
Camilles Cacao Love
Qualitative
LOOW
“Design Partner”
121
==PAGE:122==
Appendix 2 – Screenshot of the Fly By Day Landing page
122
==PAGE:123==
123
==PAGE:124==
124
==PAGE:125==
Appendix 3 – Mockup, The Micru platform, Brewer page
125
==PAGE:126==
126
==PAGE:127==
127
==PAGE:128==
128
==PAGE:129==
129
==PAGE:130==
130
==PAGE:131==
Appendix 4 – Mockup, The Micru platform, Product page
131
==PAGE:132==
132
==PAGE:133==
Appendix 5 – 1 year budget membership type 1
133
==PAGE:134==
Appendix 6 – 1 year budget membership type 2
134
==PAGE:135==
Appendix 7 – Total number of Danish food plants in retail
135
==PAGE:136==
Appendix 8 – Competitor analysis, Consultancy & SaaS
136
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
Abraham, R., Schneider, J., & vom Brocke, J. (2019, 12). Data governance: A
conceptual framework, structured review, and research agenda. Science
Direct.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0268401219300787
Apple. (2022, December 22). Legal - Apple Privacy Policy. Apple.
https://www.apple.com/legal/privacy/en-ww/
Apple. (2023). Bug Reporting. Send us your feedback and report bugs.
https://developer.apple.com/bug-reporting/
Apple. (2023, February 13). If an app asks to track your activity. Apple Support.
https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT212025
Arstechnica. (2021, May 7). 96% of US users opt out of app tracking in iOS 14.5,
analytics find. Ars Technica.
https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2021/05/96-of-us-users-opt-out-of-app
-tracking-in-ios-14-5-analytics-find/
Bauer, M., van Dinther, C., & Kiefer, D. (2020, 08 10). Machine Learning in SME: An
Empirical Study on Enablers and Success Factors. CORE.
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/326836032.pdf
Botta, M., & Wiedemann, K. (2019, 07 25). The Interaction of EU Competition,
Consumer, and Data Protection Law in the Digital Economy: The
137
==PAGE:138==
Regulatory Dilemma in the Facebook Odyssey. Sage Journals.
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0003603X19863590
The British Design Council. (n.d.). The Double Diamond. Design Council.
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-resources/the-double-diamond/
Bryggeriforeningen. (2022). Antallet af danske bryggerier. Bryggeriforeningen.
https://bryggeriforeningen.dk/tal/oel/antaldanskebryggerier/
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2017, July 18). What's Driving the Machine
Learning Explosion? Harvard Business Review.
https://hbr.org/2017/07/whats-driving-the-machine-learning-explosion
Campaign Asia. (2022). Behind Oppo's tech and data strategy for sports
sponsorship. www.campaignasia.com.
https://www.campaignasia.com/article/behind-oppos-tech-and-data-str
ategy-for-sports-sponsorship/481067
Cascade. (2020). Strategy Study: How Red Bull Became A Global Brand Through
Marketing. Cascade Strategy.
https://www.cascade.app/studies/redbull-strategy-study
Chaffey, D., Edmundson-Bird, D., & Hemphill, T. (2019). Digital Business and
E-commerce Management (Pearson, Ed.). Pearson.
https://books.google.dk/books/about/Digital_Business_and_E_commer
ce_Manageme.html?id=oYufDwAAQBAJ&redir_esc=y
138
==PAGE:139==
Chatterjee, S., Chaudhuri, R., & Vontris, D. (2021, 01 03). Does data-driven culture
impact innovation and performance of a firm? An empirical examination.
Springer. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10479-020-03887-z
Cheetah Digital. (2022). The Zero-Party Data Playbook. Cheetah Digital.
Chitkara, B., & Mahmood, S. J. (2020, 5 28). Importance of Web Analytics for the
Success of a Startup Business. Springer.
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-15-5830-6_31
CNBC. (2022, February 2). Facebook says Apple iOS privacy change will result in
$10 billion revenue hit this year. CNBC.
https://www.cnbc.com/2022/02/02/facebook-says-apple-ios-privacy-cha
nge-will-cost-10-billion-this-year.html
Connor, H. (2022, 02 15). John Graunt F.R.S. (1620-74): The founding father of
human demography, epidemiology and vital statistics. Sage Journals.
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/09677720221079826
Crunchbase. (2023). Cheetah Digital. Crunchbase.
https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/cheetahdigital
Dansk Erhverv. (2022). e-handelsanalysen 2022 Digital Handel. Dansk Erhverv
Analyse.
Datatilsynet. (2022). Afgørelser. Datatilsynet.
https://www.datatilsynet.dk/afgoerelser/afgoerelser
139
==PAGE:140==
Deloitte. (2013). Data as the new currency. Deloitte.
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/data-as-th
e-new-currency/DR13_data_as_the_new_currency2.pdf
Dumitriu, D., & Popescu, M. A. M. (2019, 11). SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGIES FOR
THE MANAGEMENT OF MODERN E-COMMERCE BUSINESS SOLUTIONS.
ProQuest / DTU Library.
https://www.proquest.com/openview/d0f5d7dda543c62d0206ce2db5d4fb
66/1?cbl=2032215&parentSessionId=1MqfdintiO9wqpyLAieTRL2xY%2F2w
mw8y%2B6sjjBEMQk4%3D&pq-origsite=gscholar&parentSessionId=7882Sj
MgeNhj7I6mIjxsokScQnz6Fm1AkdWOpzC1EZE%3D
Eisenmann, T., Parker, G., & W. Van Alstyne, M. (2006). Strategies for Two- Sided
Markets. Harvard Business Review On Point Article, 12.
Euromonitor. (2019). Distribution Spirits in Denmark.
European Commission. (n.d.). Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) -
Structural business statistics - Eurostat. European Commission.
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/structural-business-statistics/informa
tion-on-data/small-and-medium-sized-enterprises
the European Parliament (Ed.). (2016). General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR). Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation).
Fødevarestyrelsen. (2023). Virksomheder fordelt på kontrolenheder.
foedevarestyrelsen.
140
==PAGE:141==
https://foedevarestyrelsen.dk/Media/638212360665637638/Kontrolobjekt
er_fordelt_paa_enheder.pdf
Forbes. (2022, March 14). Zero-Party Data Is The New Oil. Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/theyec/2022/03/14/zero-party-data-is-the
-new-oil/
Forrester. (2017). Q&A: What Marketers Need To Know About Zero-Party Data.
Forrester.
Google. (n.d.). Protecting your privacy online. The Privacy Sandbox: Technology
for a More Private Web. https://privacysandbox.com/
Hartemo, M. (2021, 12 2). Conversions on the rise – modernizing e-mail
marketing practices by utilizing volunteered data. Emerald.
https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/JRIM-03-2021-00
90/full/html
Iqbal, M., Kazmi, S. H., Manzoor, A., Soomrani, A., Butt, S., & Shaikh, K. (2018, 04
26). A study of big data for business growth in SMEs: Opportunities &
challenges. IEEE. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8346368
Jobindex. (2023). Tjek din løn - Lønberegner - IT-konsulent. Jobindex.
https://www.jobindex.dk/tjek-din-loen/it-konsulent
Klepek, M., & Bauerová, R. (2020). WHY DO RETAIL CUSTOMERS HESITATE FOR
SHOPPING GROCERY ONLINE? Technological and Economic
Development of Economy, 19.
141
==PAGE:142==
Kuusi, O., & Heinonen, S. (2022). Scenarios From Artificial Narrow Intelligence to
Artificial General Intelligence—Reviewing the Results of the International
Work/Technology 2050 Study. Sage Journals.
Lohr, S. (2015). Data-ism: Inside the Big Data Revolution. Oneworld Publications.
https://www.amazon.com/Data-ism-Inside-Big-Data-Revolution-ebook/d
p/B07ZWKPY96
Magness, S. (2022). Do Hard Things: Why We Get Resilience Wrong and the
Surprising Science of Real Toughness. HarperCollins Publishers.
Majeed, A., & Hwang, S. O. (2021, 12 23). Data-Driven Analytics Leveraging
Artificial Intelligence in the Era of COVID-19: An Insightful Review of
Recent Developments. MDPI. https://www.mdpi.com/2073-8994/14/1/16
McKinsey. (2013, October 1). How retailers can keep up with consumers.
McKinsey.
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/retail/our-insights/how-retailers-c
an-keep-up-with-consumers
Mckinsey & Company. (2022, April 6). As the cookie crumbles, three strategies
for advertisers to thrive. McKinsey.
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/growth-marketing-and-sales/our
-insights/as-the-cookie-crumbles-three-strategies-for-advertisers-to-thriv
e
142
==PAGE:143==
Microsoft. (2023). Microsoft Privacy Statement. Microsoft.
https://privacy.microsoft.com/en-us/privacystatement
Miller, R. C., Zhang, H., & Gerber, E. (2014, 02 15). Pair Research: Matching People
for Collaboration, Learning, and Productivity. Usable Programming Group
- MIT CSAIL. http://up.csail.mit.edu/other-pubs/cscw14-pair-research.pdf
Mlakar, I., Jeran, P., Safran, V., & Logothesis, V. (2021, 07 20). A Cost-Effective
Security Framework to protect micro enterprises: PALANTIR e-commerce
use case. IEEE Xplore.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9486359
Morris, R.J.T., & Truskowski, B.J. (2003). The evolution of storage systems.
Berkeley.
https://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs162/Students/Readings/io.morris.pdf
National Retail Federation. (2013). 3 ways data-driven decision-making
improves retail. The Future of Commerce.
https://www.the-future-of-commerce.com/2023/01/05/data-driven-decisi
on-making-retail/
Onbuy. (2021). 71% OF CONSUMERS MORE LIKELY TO BUY A PRODUCT OR
SERVICE FROM A NAME THEY RECOGNISE. Onbuy, 2.
Polonioli, A. (2022). Zero party data between hype and hope. Frontiers in Big
Data, 2.
143
==PAGE:144==
Pramod, B., Shadaab, K., & Vineet, K. (2020). Europe Big Data and Business
Analytics Market Size & Share | 2027. Allied Market Research.
https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/europe-big-data-and-business-an
alytics-market-A06533
Rachitsky, L. (Director). (2020). How to Kickstart and Scale a Marketplace
Business [Film]. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NwiIY3dZr1k
Reinsel, D., Gantz, J., & Rydning, J. (2018, 11). The Digitization of the World from
Edge to Core. Seagate.
https://www.seagate.com/files/www-content/our-story/trends/files/idc-
seagate-dataage-whitepaper.pdf
Ren, S., Zhang, Y., Liu, Y., Sakao, T., Huisingh, D., & Almeida, C. (2019, 02 10). A
comprehensive review of big data analytics throughout product lifecycle
to support sustainable smart manufacturing: A framework, challenges
and future research directions. Science Direct.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652618334255
Ries, E. (2011). The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use Continuous
Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown.
RSM Global. (2019, July 22). 30% of European businesses are still not compliant
with GDPR. RSM Global.
https://www.rsm.global/insights/data-privacy-and-cyber-security/30-eur
opean-businesses-are-still-not-compliant-gdpr
144
==PAGE:145==
Savoia, A. (2019). The Right It Lib/E: Why So Many Ideas Fail and How to Make
Sure Yours Succeed. HarperCollins.
Statista. (2023). eCommerce - Europe. Statista.
https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/ecommerce/europe
Techcrunch. (2021). Collect and leverage zero-party data to personalize
marketing and drive growth. techcrunch.
https://techcrunch.com/2021/11/10/collect-and-leverage-zero-party-data
-to-personalize-marketing-and-drive-growth/?guccounter=1&guce_referr
er=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAABxll
4a8lj73EeLeJ93mnIjXp00NUN6NvV0NdieXRfeJwhNz5UfMG4r_lYwrH
Uddannelsesguiden. (2023). It-konsulent (job) | UddannelsesGuiden.
UddannelsesGuiden |.
https://www.ug.dk/job/job-fordelt-paa-erhvervsomraader/dataitogtelete
knik/tvaergaaendeit/it-konsulent-job
Villegas, W., Criollo, S., Gaibor, W., & Palacios, X. (2022, 10 25). Analysis of Data
from Surveys for the Identification of the Factors That Influence the
Migration of Small Companies to eCommerce. MDPI.
https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/14/11/303
Viswanathan, R., & Telukdarie, A. (2021). A systems dynamics approach to SME
digitalization. Science Direct.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050921003859
145
==PAGE:146==
VWO. (2022). What is a Customer Data Platform? The Complete Guide. VWO.
https://vwo.com/customer-data-platform-guide/
Waller, D. (2020, February 6). 10 Steps to Creating a Data-Driven Culture.
Harvard Business Review.
https://hbr.org/2020/02/10-steps-to-creating-a-data-driven-culture
Wilander, J. (2020, March 24). Full Third-Party Cookie Blocking and More.
WebKit.
https://webkit.org/blog/10218/full-third-party-cookie-blocking-and-more
/
Yin, R. K. (2018). Case Study Research and Applications: Design and Methods.
SAGE Publications.
Zuckerberg, M. (2019, March 6). A Privacy-Focused Vision for Social Networking |
Meta. Meta.
https://about.fb.com/news/2019/03/vision-for-social-networking/
146
