==PAGE:1==
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and
muscle tissue
Master Thesis
DTU Biomedical Engineering
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Sara Saz Segovia
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Sara Saz Segovia, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
Supervisor:
Marie Sand Traberg and Rene B. Svensson
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Institute of Sports Medicine Copen­
hagen in Bispebjerg Hospital, as part of a project for Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree MSc Biomedical Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of human physiology,
biomechanics, biochemistry and statistics.
Sara Saz Segovia ­ s212456
Signature
Date
ii
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The main objective of this project was to investigate tendon and muscle damage in order to
establish an in vitro model using the laboratory settings at the Institute of Sports Medicine
Copenhagen in Bispebjerg Hospital. The aim of the model is to help understanding the
underlying mechanisms of musculoskeletal disorders and facilitate the development of
targeted treatments.
The study focused on two types of tendon disorders: acute and chronic damage or tendinopa­
thy. Acute damage was simulated by subjecting samples to pulling until failure, while
chronic damage was induced through repetitive loading cycles. The chronic disorder
model consisted in subjecting the rat tail tendons to three levels of damage: low, moderate
and high damage. The mechanical data obtained from the tendon samples was compared
to existing values reported in literature that potentially characterise tissue damage. Re­
garding the muscle tissue, partial tearing was investigated to simulate the strain injury.
The site of rupture was explored by subjecting mouse muscles to mechanical pulling.
The extent of damage in both tendon and muscle samples was characterised using his­
tological staining and examined under optical and fluorescent microscopy. Additionally,
damage quantification was performed, revealing a pattern of accumulated damage with
increased loading cycles. The influence of the buffer solution on the mechanical proper­
ties of the tendon, as reported in the literature, was also explored. Furthermore, scanning
electron microscopy was employed to investigate the surface morphology of the tendon,
revealing the presence of kinks in the damaged samples.
In conclusion, the model of tendon damage was successfully achieved, demonstrating
cumulative damage in the tissue despite the limitations encountered during the research.
However, for the muscle, the experiments were not entirely successful. Nevertheless,
they provided meaningful findings and serve as a starting point for further improvements
and a better approach to the method.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my thanks to my supervisor, René Svensson, for his continued
support, guidance, and enthusiasm shown by him throughout this research, without his
knowledge and expertise, this research would not have been possible.
I would also like to thank the Biomechanics Group in Institute of Sports Medicine Copen­
hagen for all the meetings and journal clubs that taught me how to be critical with the
literature and allowed me to learn how a research group works.
Thanks to Bispebjerg Hospital for the laboratory to do the project and all the equipment
used for the experiments.
Lastly, I would also like to thank my family and friends for providing the emotional support
when I needed. And specially my flatmates for all the talks and mental support every day
during the entire thesis.
iv
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research background and significance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research objectives and hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Physiology and structure of tendon and muscle tissue . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Nature of injuries in tendons and myotendinous junction . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Mechanical testing of tendons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Materials and methods
13
3.1
Overview of experimental design and model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Mechanical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Post­processing of mechanical data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Sample preparation for microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Staining techniques for microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
Electron microscopy procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.7
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.8
Explanation of experimental names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Results and Discussion
31
4.1
Mechanical data from rat tail tendon experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Mechanical data in PEG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.3
Mechanical data from mouse leg muscle experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.4
Microscopy images of rat tail tendon experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.5
PEG microscopy images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.6
Microscopy images of mouse leg muscle experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.7
Electron microscopy results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.8
Limitations of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
A Sarcomere structure
65
B Mice type
66
C Processing Scripts
67
D Kolmogorov­Smirnov test table
68
E
Force cycles
69
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
µm
Micrometer
AU
Arbitrary unit
BF
Bright field
CHP
Collagen Hibridasing Peptide
CSA
Cross­sectional area
DAPI 4′,6­diamidino­2­phenylindole
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
EDL
Extensor digitorum longus
EGTA Egtazic acid
GAGs Glycosaminoglycans
HEPES 4­(2­hydroxyethyl)­1­piperazineethanesulfonic acid
KS
Kolmogorov–Smirnov
LVDT Linear variable differential transformer
MPa
Megapascal
MTJ
Myotendinous junction
MTU
Myotendinous unit
PBS
Phosphate­buffered saline
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
PSR
Picro­Sirius Red
QQ plot Quantile­quantile plot
SEM
Standard error of the mean
STD
Standard deviation
vi
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Research background and significance
Tendon disorders represent a great part of the musculoskeletal consultations in orthopaedic
medical facilities, comprising around 30% of the cases. Literature [1] estimates that there
are over 30 million tendon­related procedures performed worldwide annually. These in­
juries involve acute traumatic injuries as well as chronic conditions such as tendinopathy,
greatly impacting the quality of life and function of individuals by affecting the muscu­
loskeletal system and reducing movement productivity [1]. Common symptoms experi­
enced by patients with tendon diseases include pain, immobility and loss of function [2].
Chronic tendon disorders are prevalent among athletes due to overuse conditions in var­
ious sports disciplines. For instance, Achilles tendinopathy is more common in runners,
while patellar tendinopathy is more prevalent in volleyball, handball, and basketball play­
ers. Other risk factors for these conditions include age, sex, body weight, pharmaceutical
treatments and metabolic disorders [1].
The location of tendon disorders can vary, occurring at the tendon insertion site, within the
mid­substance of the tendon, at the myotendinous junction or within the tendon sheath.
For example, the most frequent tendon rupture occurs at the insertion site of the Achilles
tendon, while rotator cuff tears often involve the mid­substance of the tendon [2].
Treatment options for tendon diseases typically include physical therapy, chemical or
pharmaceutical interventions and surgery.
Chemical treatments involve corticosteroid
injections, glyceryl trinitrate patches or sclerotherapy. Other treatment for pain relief is
extracorporeal shock wave therapy. Advanced treatments that incorporate growth fac­
tors and stem cells are also being explored [3]. However, these disorders are challenging
in terms of treatment, and further research is needed to gain a better understanding of
the underlying mechanisms of tendon disorders and develop more targeted therapeutic
approaches.
Various authors have made efforts to study the mechanical properties of damaged ten­
dons and to develop in vitro models to investigate different treatment modalities for these
diseases. While the myotendinous junction is a relatively less explored area, there have
been attempts to investigate its characteristics and location of the related lesions. These
aspects will be further elaborated on in the State of the Art (Section 2.4) of the present
report.
The innovative aspect of this research lies in its comprehensive approach, exploring vari­
ous aspects of tendon analysis ranging from mechanical tests to damage assessment with
different histological stainings, as well as the exploration of different buffer solutions and
utilisation of scanning electron microscopy. This broad investigation provides an overview
of the experimental possibilities in studying tendons. Additionally, the examination of the
myotendinous junction and the identification of the site of lesion further contribute to the
novelty of this research.
1.2
Research objectives and hypotheses
The main objective of this project is to establish a reliable and reproducible protocol in our
laboratory at the Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen in Bispebjerg Hospital. This
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
1
==PAGE:10==
protocol will serve as the foundation for investigating in vitro models of tendon and my­
otendinous junction (MTJ) diseases. While other researchers may have conducted similar
experiments, it is crucial for us to develop a robust protocol that can be consistently repli­
cated in our own laboratory setting. This will enable to obtain reliable and accurate results
that are specific to our experimental conditions and equipment. These initial steps set the
basis for further research and exploration in the department, allowing for investigations
into tendon diseases and potential treatment modalities using our established protocol.
Specific objectives
The specific objectives targeted in this project are the following:
• Conduct an exhaustive literature review on micro­structural damage in tendon and
muscle to establish a strong theoretical foundation for the study.
• Develop specific in vitro loading protocols that can induce variable levels of dam­
age in rat tail tendons, mimicking tendinopathy (limited damage) and rupture (high
damage).
• Establish an in vitro loading protocol that can induce partial tearing of the muscle­
tendon junction in the mouse EDL muscle, simulating a strain injury.
• Utilise optical microscopy techniques in combination with appropriate histological
staining procedures to thoroughly examine and characterise the extent of tissue
damage at the micro­scale.
• Employ electron microscopy to investigate and analyse tissue damage at the nanoscale,
providing a more detailed understanding of the structural changes.
• Quantify the extent of microscopy­based measures of mechanical damage to obtain
objective data on the extent of tissue damage.
• Document the developed protocols, experimental procedures, and obtained results
in the form of a comprehensive thesis.
Hypotheses
In this study, several hypotheses were formulated to guide the research:
• Cumulative damage hypothesis: continuous overloading of tendon fibres leads to
accumulative damage, resulting in tendon disorders. It is hypothesised that mi­
croscopy images will reveal more damaged collagen fibres in the samples subjected
to higher levels of overload, supporting the idea of cumulative damage.
• Site of lesion hypothesis: suggests that the site of lesion in the myotendinous junc­
tion occurs at the folding of the muscle into the tendon. It is proposed that during
rupture, the detachment of tendon fibres occurs in this specific area.
• Water content influence hypothesis: the water content inside tendons plays an im­
portant role in their mechanical properties. It is theorised that lower water content
results in increased tendon stiffness and the ability to withstand more stress. This
is an important parameter to create an accurate in vitro model of the physiological
environment.
• Scanning electron microscopy hypothesis: kinks will be observed in damaged sam­
ples at the micro­scale in the scanning electron microscopy images. These kinks
are believed to be a characteristic feature associated with tendon damage.
2
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
2.1
Physiology and structure of tendon and muscle tissue
Tendons are a type of connective tissue whose general function is to bind structures and
provide support and protection. Compared to other tissues in the body, connective tissue
has cells that are further apart from each other, allowing more space for the extracellu­
lar matrix. The main cell types found in connective tissue include fibroblasts, which are
responsible for producing fibres through protein secretion, as well as macrophages and
mast cells [4]. The tendon­specific fibroblasts are called tenocytes and they are respon­
sible for maintaining the extracellular matrix, synthesising collagenous fibres and proteo­
glycans [5]. Collagenous fibres are an essential component of tendons, characterised by
their thick threads of collagen. These fibres are organised into long, parallel bundles, pro­
viding flexibility, slight elasticity and high tensile strength to resist significant pulling forces.
Tissues containing abundant amounts of collagenous fibres are called dense connective
tissue. These tissues are typically well­vascularised [4]. The morphology of unloaded
tendons is presented with bundles of fibres along the longitudinal axis showing a wavy
pattern or tendon crimps [6]. This crimping is seen under the microscope as bright and
dark bands (shown in Figure 4.14a in Section 4.2). The band morphology of the tendon at
smaller scale is what is called D­banding [7], and it can be seen with electron microscopy
(see Section 4.7).
Tendons are composed of 55­70% water and from the remaining, 60­85% of the dry weight
corresponds to collagen fibres. Collagen is the main structural protein aligned longitudi­
nally in tendons, giving the property of anisotropy to the material, meaning it has different
physical properties along different axes. These collagen fibres are hierarchically arranged
and they aggregate producing sub­units of the tendon with greater diameter, as seen in
Figure 2.1. Fascicles, shown in Figure 2.1, are the focal structure in this research. They
are aggregates of the smallest units that are visible to the human eye, sizing from 150 to
500 micrometres [8].
Figure 2.1: Structure of tendons. Taken from Counihan et al. [5]
Around the 90% of the collagen present in tendons is type I collagen. Type III collagen
corresponds to the 10% and the remaining amount is type V, XI, XII and XIV. Type III
collagen is associated with fibrogenesis and regulation of the size, and it can be found in
the interfascicular matrix; type V is part of the core of the collagen I fibrils and it is also
associated with fibrogenesis; and types XII and XIV form a bridge between collagen type
I molecules [9].
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
3
==PAGE:12==
Out of the remaining part of the tendon, 1­5% corresponds to proteoglycans, which are
non­fibrous glycoproteins. They consist of a protein surrounded by glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) whose main function is to attract water. Decorin is the most found proteogly­
can and it is responsible for the attachment of collagen fibrils [9]. GAGs are believed to
have a significant impact on the mechanical properties of tissues, mainly the viscoelastic
behaviour, due to their interaction with water [5].
The main function of a tendon is to serve as a bridge in the musculoskeletal system be­
tween muscle and bone. The tendon structure goes from the connective tissue of the
muscle (myotendinous junction) to the fixed connections with the bone (osteotendinous
junction or enthesis). Its basic function consists on the transmission of muscle strength
to the bone, thereby enabling movement. This transmission occurs with minimal energy
loss due to the optimal mechanical properties of tendons, including the elastic modulus
and the ability to resist high loads with small deformations [9].
The simplest classification for the tendons is according to their shapes: round and flat.
They are are very different from each other as structural and functional [10]. Round ten­
dons are designed to withstand high loads and a high degree of motion while flat tendons
are well suited for bearing high tensile and complex loads such as compression and shear
[5]. According to its functions, they can be classified as energy storage or positional ten­
dons. Energy storage tendons have the ability to store and release elastic stress energy
through shortening and stretching. In contrast, positional tendons basically transport the
forces created in muscles to the bones without energy storage [10].
Tendon properties are greatly influenced by the material they are made of, which has
nonlinear anisotropy and elastic and viscoelastic behaviour. Nonlinear anisotropy means
that the mechanical properties of tendons vary depending on the direction of the applied
force and the magnitude of the force itself. Viscoelasticity stands for the difference in
the tissue’s mechanical properties depending on the time and recent history of loading
the tissue. Tendons have both viscous properties, which resist deformation under stress,
and elastic properties, which allow them to regain their original shape when the stress is
removed. In other words, when a viscoelastic material such as a tendon is subjected to
stress, it initially undergoes deformation, but over time, the same stress will cause less
deformation [5].
2.1.1
The myotendinous junction
The myotendinous junction (MTJ) is the transition zone between the tendon and the mus­
cle. During muscle activity, the force is transmitted from muscle fibres to the tendon
through the MTJ [11].
The ultrastructure of the myotendinous junction exhibit invaginations or finger­like fold­
ings from the tendon that extend into the muscle membrane at the contact area between
the two tissues [11], as seen in Figure 2.2. Specifically, the end portion of the muscle’s
sarcomeres, the Z­disc, bifurcates into myofilaments bundles that insert directly into col­
lagen fibrils [5] (Figure A.1 in the Appendix A shows the structure of the sarcomere). This
leads to a higher contact area between the tissues and the forces from the myofibrils are
transmitted through a larger surface. This results in reduced stress during muscular con­
traction and higher ultimate properties of the MTJ. The folding also increases the angle of
force transmission, which makes that the force could also be transmitted by shear stress.
Interestingly, studies in certain animal models have shown that the myotendinous junction
in type II muscle fibres is approximately 40% larger compared to type I fibres, which can
be attributed to their ability to generate higher forces [11].
4
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Myotendinous junction of a human semitendinous muscle viewed with electron
microscopy. Taken from Jakobsen et al. [11]. ”M” in the picture refers to muscle and ”T”
to tendon. The scale bar is 10 µm.
The plasticity of the MTJ during loading and unloading has been investigated in animals to
understand how it adapts to training or inactivity. Unfortunately, there is a limited amount
of studies that have been focused on this topic and they have been done with different
approaches. Overall, there is evidence of adaptation with increasing complexity of the
foldings in response to repeated loading, with more branches and longer foldings in the
surface of contact between muscle and tendon. However, the effects of unloading on
the MTJ are less clear and show varying results. Theoretically, the reduction of the sur­
face area due to unloading may lead to weaken the MTJ and make it less effective for
transmitting the loads [11, 12].
According to Jakobsen et al. [11], collagen XXII is exclusively found in the foldings imme­
diately on the tendon side of the MTJ. While the exact function of collagen XXII in the MTJ
is not fully understood, some studies suggest that its absence may increase the suscep­
tibility of the MTJ to rupture. Collagen XXII is unique to the junction, making it a potential
marker for identifying and characterising the MTJ.
2.1.2
Animal tendon and muscle tissues
Rat tendons are commonly used in studies investigating the morphological and structural
properties of human tendons due to their simple structure and accessibility. Following
the terms in the study by Lee et al. [13], rat tendon fascicles serve as a convenient
and manageable model tissue for ex vivo studies. Despite species­specific variations
seen as a main restriction of this model, rat tendons are biologically, structurally, and
functionally suitable for experimental investigation, as they lack vascularity, nerves, and
immune response [14].
Comparative studies between rodent and human tendons [13] have shown that the largest
unit of the rat tail tendon is the fascicle and there are similarities in fibre diameter, with
rat tail tendons measuring around 10­50 micrometres, which closely matches the 15 mi­
crometre diameter observed in human tissue. The same study [13], states that the size
of the fibres across species stays the same, which makes this tissue more suitable for
comparison. The following Figure 2.3, shows the schematic structure of rat tail tendons.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Schematic structure of rat tail tendons. Taken from Lee et al. [13].
Cell distribution within the tendon follows a similar pattern across species. However, there
are differences in the tail fascicle structure, which can stand lower stresses and lacks
peritenon, which potentially influences some types of injuries. Cells and blood vessels
are also found in relatively small amounts in all tendon tissues. Rat tail tendons also
possess a sheath which corresponds to the interfascicular matrix, which can be easily
removed with no resistance and its presence constitutes a difference from human tendons
[13]. The main function of the sheath is to facilitate slippage of the fascicles. An important
difference between tail tendons compared to tendons in other parts of the body is that their
main function is not to support body weight, and thus they are not designed to withstand
high­stress forces [13].
Values for the elastic modulus vary among different human and rat tendons due to the
differences in fibre organisation, species, donor history and age, and experimental proce­
dure of testing [15]. Various parameters can influence the measured properties of tendons
in experiments, such as tissue preservation, testing environment (including buffer solu­
tions), and tissue attachment. The maximal stress before failure also varies depending
on the size of the tendon, ranging from a few MPa (20­30 MPa) in small tendons to higher
values in larger tendons, as reported in the literature [15].
Muscle tissue in rodents exhibits certain differences compared to anatomically similar hu­
man tissue. One notable distinction is the size and mass of the muscles. Humans have
more prominent and more developed muscles relative to their body size. Additionally,
the walking posture differs, as rodents are quadrupedal, leading to differences in mus­
cle usage and organisation compared to humans [16]. Consequently, the structure and
organisation of human leg muscles can be more complex than in rodents, with a higher
number of muscle fibres.
The study conducted by Bloemberg et al. [17] focused on the variations in myosin heavy
chain proteins, which are responsible for muscle movement, between rodents and hu­
mans.
The research revealed differences in contractile properties and fibre type dis­
6
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:15==
tribution between the two species. In terms of fibre type, human muscle has a higher
percentage of type I fibres, known as slow fibres, whereas rodents muscle has a higher
percentage of fast fibres, known as type II fibres [18]. This discrepancy in fibre type dis­
tribution can have distinct functional implications: slow fibres (type I) are intended for
endurance activities, while fast fibres (type II) are designed for intense and short­duration
activities.
2.2
Nature of injuries in tendons and myotendinous junction
The incidences of acute tendon injuries or degenerative tendon pathologies have in­
creased, resulting in pain, functional decline, and reduced exercise tolerance [19]. This
increase may be attributed to factors such as increased athletic participation, particularly
among older individuals, as well as a higher likelihood of accidents. When tendons are
damaged due to indirect injury mechanisms or direct trauma, there can be a significant
loss of function [20]. Tendon and ligament injuries are commonly classified into two cate­
gories: acute injuries, where a single loading event causes tissue tearing or rupture, and
chronic injuries, where a series of minor traumas lead to tissue degeneration or rupture
[21]. The term ”strain” (or sprain in ligaments) refers to damage to the tendon or muscle
caused by excessive stretching that results in tissue tearing.
Degenerative tendon pathology is characterised by changes in cellular activity, disorgan­
isation of collagen matrix and increased neovascularisation. There is also an increment
in the content of proteoglycans and GAGs, which lead to more water binding within the
tendon. Regarding the tenocytes, they become more active and rounded, with elevated
levels of collagen production, which also leads to vascular growth. Pathological tendons
exhibit higher synthesis of collagen type III, which has lower tensile strength and less or­
ganisation, which may be due to fewer cross­links between the fibres. Additionally, there
is increased production of substance P, which is utilised in the sensory nervous system.
The size of the tendons can also change in response to balance the unstructured collagen
fibres, becoming more thickened and thereby increasing the CSA [6].
Figure 2.4 shows the structural changes observed in tendons affected by tendinopathy
compared to healthy tendons. In summary, in healthy tendons, the collagen fibrils, specif­
ically type I collagen, are well­organised and aligned. In tendinopathy, the tenocytes are
smaller and longer, and produce more type III collagen which is found more disorgan­
ised and with inflammatory cell infiltrations. Additionally, more neovascularisation and
innervation is observed [19].
The presence of kinks in the tendon has been reported when suffering from an injury
such as tendinopathy [22]. The concept of kink refers to the twist or curl that the fibres
(or fibrils) suffer as a result of damage, most likely due to the differences in the cross­
linked profile. Previous studies [22] have investigated the differences in structure and
composition in tendons at the microscale after injury. The results showed that the energy­
storing tendons have higher stiffness but the same molecular composition in high strain,
whereas positional tendons can extend further by suffering the formation of kinks [22].
Regarding muscle injuries, the most common indirect type is strain injury, which is a mus­
cular trauma causing tear. Often they are located in the MTJ, and they can be seen as
small disruptions and oedema between the muscle and the tendon. These injuries oc­
cur during activities that involve the muscle being passively overstretched or during fast
eccentric contractions where the MTJ is exposed to high loads during lengthening (rapid
stretch together with a strong muscle contraction) [11].
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Healthy structure tendon vs. tendon with tendinopathy. Taken from Millar et
al. [19].
2.3
Mechanical testing of tendons
The physical properties and consequences of damage on a tendon microstructure are
studied by employing mechanical testing. This testing method is used to determine the
basic mechanical properties, namely force and elongation. By transforming and normal­
ising these data into stress and strain, it becomes possible to compare tissues of varying
sizes. Stress, measured in MPa, is defined as the force per unit of area, while strain
represents the ratio of deformation to the original length, which is dimensionless. Thus,
mechanical testing enables the examination of the stress and strain experienced by the
tissues during tensile or compressive experiments. Additionally, this test can also be
used to measure the modulus of elasticity, a parameter that indicates the stiffness of the
material.
Another mechanical parameter is the yield point or elastic limit, which marks the transition
from elastic, reversible deformation, to plastic, irreversible deformation, when subjected to
a tensile load. Determining the elastic limit of the material can be useful for identifying the
threshold at which micro­damage begins [22]. According to the literature, larger tendons
can withstand loads of 60­100 N/mm2 (MPa), can be deformed up to 10­20% of the initial
length and possess an elastic modulus of around 500 MPa to 1 GPa [23, 24].
The tendon tissue is considered a viscoelastic material, meaning that its behaviour in
terms of stress and strain depends on the strain rate and time. This viscoelastic behaviour
manifests in hysteresis, strain­rate dependency, creep and stress­relaxation phenomena.
Hysteresis refers to the energy loss that results from the disparity between loading and
unloading in the stress­strain curve. Strain­rate dependence implies that increasing the
strain rate leads to elevating stress at the same level of strain. Creep describes the pro­
gressive deformation when a constant force is applied and stress­relaxation denotes the
decline in force when a constant deformation is applied [23].
In this project, hysteresis events have a particular significance due to the cyclic nature of
the tests, although the remaining viscoelastic events mentioned are not directly examined.
Thus, the parameter that will be considered for quantification of damage in mechanical
8
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:17==
testing is the energy loss due to the hysteresis phenomena [23].
Furthermore, mechanical testing allow to study the ultimate characteristics of the mate­
rial, which can be observed in the stress­strain curve when the tendon is stretched until
failure. The typical stress­strain curve for tendon tissue (see Figure 2.5) has three differ­
entiated regions: ”the toe”, where collagen fibres straighten from their initial wavy state,
accompanied by fibre recruitment and slight sliding; the linear region, in which stress is
proportional to strain; and the plastic region, where the collagen fibres surpass the elastic
limit, resulting in irreversible deformation or damage. The slope in the elastic region rep­
resents the aforementioned elastic modulus. Following the plastic region, tissue failure
occurs [23].
Figure 2.5: Stress ­ strain curve for tendons in a failure test. Taken from Butler et al. [15].
For a better understanding of the objective of the present research, failure tests can be
used to simulate mechanical testing of an acute injury, while cyclic overloading of the
tissue can be used to represent a chronic degenerative pathology such as tendinopathy.
2.4
State of the art
This section summarises previous studies related to this research. The focused areas
discussed in this section are tendon damage, MTJ damage and buffer solution.
Tendon damage articles
Title: Accumulation of collagen molecular unfolding is the mechanism of cyclic fatigue
damage and failure in collagenous tissues [25].
The aim of this study was to investigate the collagen molecular damage in tendons that
were exposed to a cyclic loading. The samples were loaded to stress level of 40% of the
failure strength at several strain rates. Creep strain was used to consistently establish the
levels of damage. The quantification of the extent of damage was made with CHP fluores­
cence, which detects denatured collagen. The results revealed an increase in the amount
of damaged collagen due to fatigue as the number of cycles increase. Furthermore, a sig­
nificant correlation was observed between the level of damaged collagen and the creep
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
9
==PAGE:18==
strain, independent of the applied strain rate. These results confirm the accumulation of
damage in tendons exposed to cyclic loading.
Title: Tendon tissue microdamage and the limits of intrinsic repair [14].
This study compared stress and strain curves in undamaged and damaged samples. The
damage was made by a single stretch at various degrees of sub­rupture damage (up to
8% strain). The results showed an extended toe region and a less pronounced elastic
region. This change in the elastic region in the damaged samples might be due to loss
of stiffening of the tissue when loaded above 2% of the initial length, reaching a 10%
lower elastic modulus when loaded at 4% of the initial length. The results also showed a
30% alteration between both curves when stretched 8% of the initial length until failure at
10%. The next step in the study was to analyse how damaged were the collagen fibrils
at different percentages of stretching with collagen hybridising peptide (CHP) staining.
No collagen damage was found when stretching at 2% and 4% of the initial length, but
microdamage at the molecular level was found from 6% of the original length.
Title: A multiscale study of morphological changes in tendons following repeated cyclic
loading [26].
In this study, the tendons were damaged using repeated cyclic loading at three different
strain levels (3%, 6%, and 9% of the original length) describing three different types of
damage: low, moderate and high. The structural changes on the tendon were measured
by analysing the waviness and anisotropy. In the three strain levels, the initial damage
was the same but became more distributed and occurred in a shorter period of time as the
strain level increased. The damage was characterised by the occurrence of kinks in the
wavy fibres, separation and division of the collagen fascicles and morphological changes
of tenocytes (from long spindle to oval cells). In the last stages of damage for the 9% strain
samples, larger fibre disruption, misalignment and severe morphological changes in cells
were observed. It was discussed that all the mechanical variables shown in this study
had a strong linear correlation, which can be due to the microstructural rearrangement
that leads to stress distribution along all the fibres of the tendon.
Title: Multiscale mechanisms of tendon fatigue damage progression and severity are
strain and cycle dependent [27].
In this study, the fatigue damage of tendons and the effect on the cellular environment
were investigated. The damage was caused by loading the samples with 0.5 Hz sinusoidal
waveform at 0.5%, 1.0%, 1.5% and 2.5% strain, several loading cycles (from 50 to 500
cycles). Results showed that the damage is dependent on loading strain and cycle num­
ber, as seen in the mechanical properties and cell morphology. The toe region loading
(0.5%) and elastic­region (1.0%) strains are non­damaging at any number of cycles, with
aligned collagen fibres and no kink formation. From 1.5% strain, there is cycle­dependant
damage, showing progressive accumulation of damaged areas, with kink formation and
disruptions in the fibres. Cells also showed nuclear elongation and more rounded mor­
phology in the samples with larger damage.
Title: Tendons exhibit greater resistance to tissue and molecular­level damage with in­
creasing strain rate during cyclic fatigue [28].
This study investigated the strain­rate dependence of progressive denaturation of colla­
gen in damaged tendons. The damage was analysed with CHP staining by quantifying
the intensity of the fluorescence. Two types of samples were used, cyclic fatigue loaded
and failure, at strain rates of 0.4, 4 and 40%. The results on the mechanical parame­
10
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:19==
ters and fluorescence showed that the denatured collagen was accumulated dependent
on the cyclic strain rate. Moreover, the amount of damaged collagen was increased in
higher strain rates and as a function of the number of cycles.
Title: Repeated subrupture overload causes progression of nanoscaled discrete plasticity
damage in tendon collagen fibrils [7].
After overloading the tissue, scanning electron microscopy was used to examine the struc­
ture of the samples. All the studied samples revealed a severely damaged pattern, char­
acterised by the presence of kinked fibrils. These kinks were more prominent in the sam­
ples with progressive damage compared to those that suffered from a complete failure.
Additionally, in the moderate damage samples, a complete loss of D­banding along the
surface was observed. The distance between kinks increased with the severity of tendon
damage. In cases of extensive damage, some of the fibrils broke into subfibrils, creat­
ing regions in which the tendon forms a highly kinked triangular wavy crimp. It is also
discussed that when the tendon is re­overloaded, new plastic deformation is produced in
places where it was already a plastic deformation, causing what they call a ”progressive
cascade of fibril disruption”. This phenomenon may contribute to a toughening mecha­
nism of the tissue when the tendon is repeatedly overloaded, i.e. the material can absorb
more energy.
MTJ damage articles
Title: Myotendinous junction: morphological changes and mechanical failure associated
with muscle cell atrophy [29].
The aim of this study was to compare the ultrastructure of MTJ in healthy and atrophied
fibres from frogs’ semitendinous muscle and to quantify the degree of membrane folding
at the junctions. The samples were prepared for testing and analysis using electron mi­
croscopy, measuring the membrane folding in the MTJ. The atrophied cells were selected
from characteristics in the ultra­structure. Results showed that atrophied cells showed
less membrane folding, and the junction surface area depends on the length of the ex­
tensions. No significant correlation was found between sarcomere length and index of
folding, which is meant to reduce the stress during the contraction. Moreover, atrophic
cells also showed a change in the type of stress to more tensile.
Title: Site and mechanical conditions for failure of skeletal muscle in experimental strain
injuries [30].
The aim of this study was to research the site of lesion in a muscle­tendon pulled to
failure in a frog model. The investigation was made with electron microscopy. Additionally,
stimulated and unstimulated muscles were compared. The stimulation was made with a
15V current (the voltage is controlled and the current is proportional to voltage by Ohm’s
law) at 15Hz when loading. The myotendinous units (MTU) were strained at physiological
strain rates to failure. The mechanical data showed great differences between stimulated
and unstimulated samples. Stimulated muscle required approximately 30% more force
to reach failure. Regarding the site of failure, electron microscopy showed that the MTU
failed in unstimulated samples within the muscle near the junction or tendon origin while
stimulated failed within lamina lucida in the MTJ, with no overstretched sarcomeres.
Buffer solution
Title: Exposure to buffer solution alters tendon hydration and mechanics [31].
Buffer solution makes reference to an aqueous solution used to keep hydration of the tis­
sues during experimental procedures. This study gives proof that buffer solutions can also
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
11
==PAGE:20==
lead to changes in the properties of the tissue. The most used solution is PBS (phosphate
buffer saline) but it has been shown that, depending on the concentration, it increases the
water content in tendons, leading to a decrease in tensile stiffness or modulus. Thus, it is
an important matter whether to use different types of buffer solutions for the mechanical
testing of tendons as it can alter hydration. Other buffer solutions have been studied at
different concentrations which are NaCl, sucrose, PEG (polyethylene glycol) and SPEG
(NaCl and PEG). All solutes cause an increase in water at low concentrations when com­
pared to fresh­frozen hydration while they have different behaviours when prepared at
high concentrations. The concentration of each of the solutes that correspond to the
original hydration of the tendon is 7.7% for PEG, 12.6% for SPEG, 21.4% for NaCl and
15.9% for sucrose. It was concluded that 8% PEG maintains the mechanical properties
and adding NaCl (SPEG) promotes correct hydration without solute diffusion.
12
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:21==
3
Materials and methods
3.1
Overview of experimental design and model selection
In this section, an overview of the entire procedure is provided, highlighting the steps
involved. In the following sections, each step will be explained in detail, allowing for a
precise description of the experimental process.
During the course of the experiments, several steps were performed to investigate and
understand the mechanical damage of the tendons. Initially, preliminary trials were con­
ducted to familiarise with laboratory procedures and software tools. The first aim was
to determine the maximum stress the tendons could withstand. Subsequently, the fo­
cus was on force cycles to induce damage, where a specific stress value was applied
to the tendons over varying numbers of cycles. Additionally, displacement cycles were
considered to create different levels of damage. Ultimately, the classification of damage
into high, moderate, and low categories was based on the number of cycles with a fixed
stress value applied. The influence of PEG buffer solution on tendon properties was also
examined due to the relation of the properties with the content of water within the tendon.
Due to variations among animals, adjustments were made to experimental parameters to
accommodate differences in tendon strength. Furthermore, mouse muscle­tendon units
were tested during the rigor mortis phase to investigate the damage to the myotendinous
junction. Throughout the experiments, data on force and elongation were recorded, facil­
itating later analysis and interpretation of the mechanical behaviour of the tendons.
Following the mechanical testing, the histological analysis phase began. The initial steps
involved fixating the samples in the stress position, i.e. stretched, with formaldehyde and
rapid freezing of the tendon embedded in Tissue Tek using liquid nitrogen. Subsequently,
the samples were sliced into 16 µm sections. This was followed by two types of stain­
ing procedures, namely Picro­Sirus Red (PSR) and Collagen Hybridising Peptide (CHP),
which will be described in Section 3.5. To conclude, the last step was capturing images
of the most representative areas of the sample using optical and fluorescent microscopy.
The flow chart of the entire process is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Flow chart of the experiments of the project.
An additional experiment was visualising the samples using scanning electron microscopy.
This analysis focused on two experimental samples and one control sample, allowing for
detailed imaging and examination of their exposed surface, after freeze­fracture. The
scanning electron microscopy procedure will be explained in more detail in Section 3.6.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
13
==PAGE:22==
Model selection
The model used in this study was specifically chosen to make basic research on tendons
and muscle tissue. Rat tail tissue was selected as the source for the tendon samples.
The tail of a rat is composed of caudal vertebrae, which serve as an extension of the
vertebral column. The number of vertebrae can vary depending on the specific rat species.
Surrounding these bones there are tendons and blood vessels [32]. The tendons are
enclosed within a protective sheath called the parietal paratenon and typically have a
diameter ranging from 100 to 300 micrometres. As the vertebral column tapers down,
the number of tendons decreases, ranging from twelve to four units [33]. Complete rat
tails, obtained from previous studies conducted in the department, were utilised for this
research. The used rats were 16 weeks old Wistar strain. The tendons from the last
available bones of the tail were carefully extracted. These tendons were then divided
individually and frozen at a temperature of ­20ºC for preservation. Among the various
tendons found within the tail unit, those with a consistent diameter of approximately 200­
300 micrometres throughout their entire length were selected for further testing.
For the muscle tissue samples, both legs from a C57BL/6 mouse (further information
about the type of mice in Appendix B) were taken for study. The muscle of choice was the
extensor digitorum longus (EDL) muscle, which has four distinct muscle­tendon units, as
seen in Figure 3.2b). The EDL muscle is situated beneath the tibialis anterior muscle and
plays an important role in foot and toe movements. It originates from the lateral condyle
of the tibia and the anterior surface of the fibula. The muscle inserts onto the dorsal
surfaces of the second and third phalanges of the four lateral toes (see Figure 3.2a). Its
primary actions include dorsiflexion (lifting the foot upwards) and eversion (turning the foot
outward) of the foot and extension of the toes [4].
(a) Overview of the human anterior right leg.
Taken from the anatomy book [4].
(b) Dissected EDL from mouse.
Figure 3.2: EDL muscle in human and mice.
It is important to note that the extraction of the muscle and the mechanical testing was
conducted during the rigor mortis phase of the mouse, which typically lasts around 3 hours
and involves the stiffening and contraction of muscles. The rigor mortis is highly influenced
14
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:23==
by temperature (lower temperatures delay the process), physical activity, age and cause
of death [34]. For practical reasons and due to the limitations of the experimental setup
(impossibility of active contraction of the muscle), rigor mortis was utilised to replicate the
muscle contraction state.
This basic model serves as a prelude to the ultimate goal of obtaining information that
could be useful to human models.
3.2
Mechanical testing
3.2.1
Rat tail tendons
The tendon is carefully positioned on the mechanical testing machine under the light of
a stereo dissection microscope, used to do a detailed examination of its structure. The
tensile test machine, manufactured by Deben [35], is connected to a computer software
that controls mechanical parameters such as speed, sample rate, and signal gain. The
specific Deben tensile testing machine utilises a 20 N load cell. The samples are clamped
in a horizontal orientation and stretched in the same direction [35]. The specific used
tensile test machine is shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Tensile test machine. Image taken from Deben [35].
The mechanical testing equipment consists of two custom­made hooks to which the ten­
dons are attached, enabling horizontal movement to stretch the tissue. A motor is em­
ployed to pull back, resulting in the elongation of the tendon, while the machine mea­
sures the resulting force. The force is measured using a load cell based on strain­gauge,
while the position is measured using an LVDT (Linear Variable Differential Transformer).
Strain­gauge is a device that has a deformable material that causes variations in the elec­
trical resistance, which is directly related to strain. The measured strain of the material
with known stiffness allows to calculate the force [36]. LVDT is used to measure linear
displacement from an electrical signal with the direction and distance information of the
movement using electromagnetic coupling [37].
Different options are available for the motor speed, with a choice of 4 mm per minute for
this particular protocol. This speed represents the second­fastest option that the machine
can handle. The fastest speed, set at 6 mm/min, is less reliable because it is close to
the maximum limit, making it susceptible to fluctuations. It is important to note that the
speed options in this setup are relatively slow compared to the actual speed at which
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
15
==PAGE:24==
damage occurs in real­life situations, which is a limitation of this particular configuration.
The frequency for capturing elongation­force data points, also known as the sample rate,
is set at 100 samples per second. Additionally, the gain of the signal is adjusted to 50x,
providing enhanced resolution in the recorded data points.
Throughout the duration of the experiment, the samples are immersed in a Phosphate
Buffered Saline (PBS) solution with a concentration of 0.15 M. PBS is a water­based
solution that consists of sodium phosphate, sodium chloride, potassium chloride, and
potassium phosphate, each present in specific concentrations. When a single tablet is
dissolved in 200 mL of deionised water, it results in the formation of a phosphate buffer
solution with the following concentrations: 0.01 M phosphate buffer, 0.0027 M potassium
chloride, and 0.137 M sodium chloride. This solution, at a temperature of 25 °C, has a
pH value of 7.4. The cumulative concentration of these components amounts to 0.15 M,
which aligns with the concentration found in the human body and is non­toxic to most cells
[38].
The attachment of the tendon to the hooks is an important aspect to consider. Due to the
high water content (55­70%) on tendons, their surface has a low friction coefficient, which
makes them prone to glide and creates a great challenge for a secure attachment to the
hooks. However, this gliding condition is advantageous in living tendon tissue because
it facilitates movement, avoids friction and maintains the position of the tendon during
muscular contraction [6].
To address the attachment issue, a basic mechanism involving the use of knots was em­
ployed. The tendon was wrapped around the hook and secured with a double knot using
a suture thread, as can be seen in Figure 3.4. This technique worked well in previous
experiments from the department with mouse tail tendons, which were thinner. However,
the slipping of the knots has been a persistent issue since the beginning of the present
experiments. As soon as the machine starts stretching, the knots tend to slip, resulting
in elongation­force graphs that do not accurately reflect the real behaviour of the tendon
(showing more elongation and less force). To overcome this challenge, a technique for
attaching the tendons to the hooks was developed during the initial phases of the project
to achieve more reliable fastening. Through trial and error, it was discovered that adding
a drop of glue to the knot significantly strengthens the attachment, mitigating to some
degree the slipping problem.
In all experiments, the initial step involved establishing a zero force value, which is set at
0.1 N in order to prevent the noise from dropping below zero and consequently impeding
data recording, resulting in gaps in the curve. Also, if the force goes below zero, the
software may show an error of ”signal out of range” and the test is forced to stop. It
should be noted that this is a small limitation of the software employed by the machine.
Also, it was important to ensure that the clamps were fully closed prior to preparing the
tendon because the machine’s travel distance is limited to 10 mm.
Prior to conducting the tests, a pre­conditioning process is important for the samples. This
pre­conditioning involves two steps. The first step is to apply a force of 1 MPa or approx­
imately 0.05 N, which ensures that the sample is fully straightened before the actual test
begins. This step helps detect any potential issues with the sample, such as slipping or
previous damage that may have occurred during handling (e.g., with the use of tweez­
ers). The second step of the pre­conditioning involves subjecting the sample to 10 cycles
of loading, applying a stress of 5 MPa in each cycle. The purpose of these cycles is to
expose the sample to repetitive loading and unloading conditions. This step can be found
in other scientific papers that have adopted similar pre­conditioning procedures [14, 26,
16
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4: Tendon setup in the tensile test machine. The write element is the tendon and
the black element is the suture thread attached to the hooks.
27, 28]. These cycles help identify any additional problems or instabilities in the sample
and ensure that all tests start from the same stretching condition.
In order to characterise the samples, the dimensions (length, width and thickness) are
measured using the stereo dissection microscope at various magnifications, as can be
seen in Figure 3.6. The thickness is measured through a 45º mirror. Although the raw data
points in the graphs consist of force (N) and elongation (mm), it is useful to standardise
the mechanical data by converting it into stress­strain curves, as explained in Section 2.3.
Stress σ is defined as the force F per cross­sectional area CSA as shown in Equation 3.1
and is expressed in units of MPa. The CSA is calculated using the area of the ellipse,
which is determined by the width and thickness of the tendon in its relaxed state, i.e.,
without any applied force. This calculation can be performed using the following equation:
CSA = π∗(width/2)∗(thickness/2). On the other hand, strain ϵ refers to the elongation of
the tendon ∆l relative to its original length l, is dimensionless and can be calculated using
Equation 3.2. By converting the data into stress­strain curves, the mechanical properties
of the tendon can be standardised and compared with other samples.
σ =
F
CSA
(3.1)
ϵ = ∆l
l0
(3.2)
Damage experiments
The next step involved establishing three categories for tendon damage: low, moderate
and high damage. The initially considered option to define the categories of damage was
to establish a maximum value of force or stress that each of the groups had to undergo.
This value was taken as a percentage of the maximum force that the tendon is able to
withstand before failure. For instance, the low damage would be around 20% of the max­
imum force, the moderate damage would be 50% and the high damage around 80%. To
get the maximum force, several failure tests were conducted, as detailed in Section 3.2.1.
However, it was difficult to establish an accurate number of cycles for each of the groups
to correctly cause the desired damage. Thus, this force threshold may not provide the
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Length
(b) Width
(c) Thickness
Figure 3.6: Measures of tendon’s size with different magnifications. (a) x0.8 and (b) (c)
x5.6.
most accurate damage evaluation, also due to the variability between the samples. It
would be necessary to examine images to analyse the extent and nature of the resultant
damage prior to the realisation of the real testing.
To further investigate the tendon damage categorisation, several trials were made in the
laboratory that focused on familiarising with the handling of rat tail tendons and software
tools that were to be used. The mechanical software allowed for the testing using two
different types of cycles: force and displacement cycles. In force cycles, the load cell
applies a specific maximum and minimum force during each cycle, while the correspond­
ing elongation of the tendon is measured over the course of the experiment. The aim
of these cycles is to observe how the elongation of the tendon changes under different
force conditions. In the displacement cycles, the elongation of the tendon is incrementally
increased by a specific value in each cycle. The main focus of this test is to observe how
the force required by the tendon changes in response to the elongation. It is particularly
interesting in these displacement cycles how the elastic modulus varies in each iteration.
Subsequent trials focused on displacement cycles, where the sample was incrementally
stretched by 0.1 mm in each cycle. These displacement cycle graphs exhibit a distinctive
pattern that might be used to estimate the levels of high, moderate, and low damage.
However, one challenge associated with this method of studying mechanical properties
is reproducibility. It can be difficult to consistently produce the same type and level of
damage across all samples. The section of the curve that might be representative due
18
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:27==
to damage is wider and highly inaccurate in determining the precise extent of damage.
Moreover, the displacement cycles rely on a controlled deformation to cause the dam­
age, but in this case, the deformation is inaccurate due to the mentioned slippage of the
samples. Furthermore, the setup of the device for the displacement cycles was tedious
to perform, which could potentially lead to human errors.
The decision to utilise force cycles instead of displacement cycles is based on several
factors. Firstly, using the same stress value ensures greater reproducibility across all
tendons, making the experimental results more consistent. Due to the natural variabil­
ity between the animals, force cycles ensure that they are all loaded in the same way.
Secondly, it was more precise to determine the appropriate number of cycles required
to induce damage when using force cycles. In displacement cycles, the area of damage
tends to be more diffuse, making it challenging to quantify and determine the extent of
damage in each sample. Moreover, slippage of the samples affects determining accu­
rately the length that the tendon actually increments in each cycle in the displacement
cycle tests.
In order to define the extent of damage, it was ultimately decided to utilise force cycles,
loading the samples to a specific stress value and varying the number of cycles for each
category. The maximum stress value was calculated from several failure tests (explained
in Section 3.2.1). It was used to establish a threshold for loading the samples in the three
damage categories, and it ended up being 25 MPa, 70% of the maximum stress in the
failure tests. The determination of the number of cycles corresponding to high, moderate
and low damage resulted in 100 cycles, 50 cycles, and 10 cycles, respectively. Results
from other studies [25, 26] established a lower threshold (lower percentage of the failure
maximum stress), with more cycles needed to produce the wanted damage. In this case,
due to the limitations of the setup (see Section 4.8), it was decided to use a higher value for
stress and a lower number of cycles. In addition to the damaged samples, it was important
to include a failure sample that did not experience complete rupture or separations of the
fibres. This sample allows for an examination of the most damaged fibres of the tendon
and a comparison with the different levels of damage in the other samples. Furthermore,
a control sample with no loading was necessary to compare the condition of undamaged
fibres. These samples were taken directly from the animal in its natural state and pierced
in wax to continue with the rest of the procedure.
Therefore, from the previous categorisation, each set of animal samples consisted of one
control sample, three damaged tendons and one failure sample. After obtaining the ten­
don samples from the animals, they were prepared and examined under the microscope
for characterisation. The experiments made from these sets of samples will be referred
to in the present research as ”core” tests.
The tendons used in the first batch were obtained from RAT 4 tail. For the subsequent
batches of experiments, tendons from RAT 6 and RAT 5 were utilised. However, it was
observed from the graphs of the failure test, that the tendons from RAT 6 were stronger,
so the number of cycles for the high­damage sample was adjusted to 200 cycles while
maintaining the same stress value of 25 MPa. This modification was made to ensure that
the high­damage sample reached the wanted damage effect on the tendon tissue. Nev­
ertheless, it was observed that the tendons obtained from RAT 5 were relatively weaker
compared to the previous tendons (see Section 4.1.3). As a result, the tendons from RAT
5 experienced failure before reaching the expected number of cycles for the high­damage
sample (200 cycles). In response, new samples were considered, reaching 142 cycles
and 68 cycles, both resulting in failure. Finally, considering the weaker nature of the ten­
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
19
==PAGE:28==
dons from RAT 5, the number of cycles for the high­damage sample was re­evaluated
and set at 100 cycles.
To enhance the variability in the samples and ensure all the options were covered, tendons
from RAT 2 were included in the experiment. The same procedure as before was followed,
where 100 cycles were considered high damage, 50 cycles moderate damage, and 10
cycles low damage. Additionally, control and failure samples were included in this batch
of samples from RAT 2. The following Table 3.1 provides an overview of the number of
cycles that each sample from different animals underwent in the experiments.
Table 3.1: Number of cycles on each animal’s tendon samples. *Goal was 200 cycles but
the sample failed prematurely.
Control
Low
Moderate
High
Fail
RAT 4
0
10
50
100
1
RAT 6
0
10
50
200
1
RAT 5
0
10
50
68*, 142*, 100
1
RAT 2
0
10
50
100
1
Failure tests
In the initial phase of the experiments, several failure tests were conducted in PBS so­
lution. A minimum of three successful trials to be statistically significant was required to
determine the maximum stress that these tendons can withstand. The initial trials encoun­
tered difficulties as the tendon samples slipped at both ends, so the obtained data was
unreliable. However, some adjustments and refinements mentioned before were made
to address this issue, such as glue drop in the suture thread knot. Eventually, three tri­
als were satisfactory. Other two trials were performed pulling the sample to failure after
loading 100 and 50 cycles to 20 MPa. The average maximum stress value across all
these five trials was calculated to be 35.88 MPa. Based on these results, to determine
the maximum stress in the ”core” damage experiments, 70% of this average value was
used, which was calculated to be 25 MPa. It was a concern to establish a too low­stress
value so the resultant samples did not have enough damage to analyse.
During the testing of the different animals (”core” tests), additional failure tests were con­
ducted on the RAT 2, 4, 5, and 6 samples, which later would be processed for histological
staining and visualisation of the extent of the damage.
Lastly, to validate the reliability of these values, an additional set of six failure tests were
conducted. Three samples were taken from RAT 6 and three from RAT 5.
In addition to the maximum stress values, other important parameters analysed here are
the strain at which the sample fails and the maximum slope, or elastic modulus, observed
in the linear elastic region of the stress­strain curve. Calculating the strain and elastic
modulus was challenging due to the slipping of the sample. In the trials where the sam­
ple underwent multiple cycles of loading, the elastic modulus was more reliable. This is
because, at this stage, the sample was no longer slipping during the pulling process until
failure. All this data will be analysed in the results section (see Section 4.1.3).
3.2.2
PEG procedure
Part of the experimental process was to conduct trials using different buffer solutions in
order to investigate their effects on the mechanical properties of the tendon. The standard
20
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:29==
buffer solution used in the experiments was PBS 0.15M, but it is interesting to explore how
other solutions may alter factors such as hydration and solute diffusion within the tendon.
In this particular research, an extreme concentration of PEG was tested because it has
been studied to cause tendon shrinkage as a result of water being drawn out [31].
It is known from previous studies [31] that PBS increases the water content of the tissue,
while PEG in concentrations higher than 8% reduces it. Therefore, to examine the effects
of different buffers on tendon behaviour, the next set of trials focused on the failure test
using a PBS + 25% PEG solution.
To conduct the test using the PBS + 25% PEG solution, the initial conditioning and pre­
loading cycles of the tendon sample were performed in PBS. This was done because the
tendon submerged in PBS is more malleable and allows for easier manipulation of the
sample. Once the conditioning and pre­loading cycles were completed, the sample was
then submerged in the PEG solution.
One important question that arose during these experiments was how long it would take for
the tissue to fully regulate its water content in the PEG solution. To investigate this, width
measurements of the tendon sample were taken from microscope pictures at specific time
intervals. The method for measuring the width was visual, so there are slight fluctuations
due to human error. In the results section (see Section 4.2), the graph illustrating the
reduction in water content on four different samples is presented. Based on the results,
it was concluded that after 150 seconds (2,5 minutes) of immersion in the PEG solution,
the water release process is complete, and the sample achieves a stable size for the
subsequent tests.
The ultimate properties of the tendons extracted from the failure tests performed with
these samples are analysed in Section 4.2.
3.2.3
Damage induction on myotendinous junction in mouse legs
For this part of the project, the legs of a mouse were used to extract the muscle ­ tendon
unit. The region of interest for failure analysis is the myotendinous junction, specifically
the detachment of tendon fibres from the muscle. If this detachment was seen to be
in the middle of the muscle tissue, the sample was discarded, as it indicated that the
rigor mortis phase had ended, the contraction was not strong enough or the muscle had
become weaker due to natural degradation.
In the initial approach, the mouse muscle was dissected, and the longest tendon on the
posterior side, referred to here as T1, is selected for testing. The end of T1 is attached
to one of the hooks on the testing machine, while the other end of the muscle is securely
knotted and attached to the opposite hook. In this case, the attachment method differed
from the previous tendon experiments. The suture was directly knotted to the tendon at
one end and attached to the hook at the other end (see Figure 3.7). Concerns were raised
regarding the potential impact of the suture on the mechanical test. However, according
to the literature [39], the silk suture’s contribution is minimal due to its higher stiffness.
It is not expected to deform significantly compared to the muscle and tendon, therefore
minimising its influence on the test results.
The samples were subjected to failure by applying a tensile force at a speed of 4 mm/min,
and the corresponding data was recorded following the same testing protocol as previ­
ously described (see Section 3.2.1). Subsequently, the second longest tendon, T2, was
used for testing, and the same with T3 and T4. Two control samples were taken from T4
of MOUSE 3 and 4. These samples were taken directly from the dissection of the mice
and pierced into a wax to be fixated.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.7: EDL attachment to the mechanical testing device with the suture. Only one
tendon in the lower side of the myotendinous unit was attached to the device (T1) but the
rest are still present (top left of the image). Magnification x0.8
The aim was to determine the optimal approach to studying the location of fibre break­
age at the myotendinous junction. For achieving it, several different approaches were
considered and tested. These approaches are outlined below:
• The idea to introduce a calcium solution to facilitate muscle cell contraction was
explored. The activating calcium solution was composed of HEPES, EGTA, MgO,
CaCO3, Na2ATP (trihydrate) and Na2 creatin phosphate (tetra hydrate) in different
concentrations. Although the activating calcium solution may lead to differences in
muscle contraction, quantifying the exact impact is challenging.
• To slow tissue degradation and prolong the rigor mortis phase, the second leg of the
mice was kept in a cold environment, i.e. fridge.
• Efforts were made to separate the interconnected muscles completely while min­
imising damage to the other muscles during the separation process. However, this
was a difficult task and some adjacent muscles, particularly T2 (the first target was
T1), were damaged during the dissection.
• The knot on the upper side was strategically positioned between different muscles
to ensure that the pulling only affected one muscle­tendon unit. This allowed for
working with one muscle at a time.
• Electrostimulation using an external device, specifically the Chattanooga Theta, was
attempted but resulted unsuccessful. The reasons for the electrostimulation not
working as intended were difficult to determine with certainty.
However, from a
physiological perspective, it is likely that the machine, which is typically applied to
nerves, was ineffective in this case due to possible damage to the nerve during the
muscle dissection process. This approach was tried in literature [30], which stated
a clear difference in the site of lesion of the MTU in stimulated and unstimulated
22
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:31==
samples.
• An alternative approach involved manual pulling without the testing machine to sim­
ulate rapid breakage, similar to real­life scenarios. However, this method was not
accurate in applying the same force on both sides simultaneously, as it is with the
testing machine.
It remains unclear whether the selected muscle exhibits the expected breakage behaviour,
where the tendon releases the fibres from the muscle, as hypothesised. This hypothesis
comes from the previous experiments in the department where it was used a chemical
treatment that perforated the lipid membrane of muscle cells, allowing direct access of cal­
cium to the cytoplasm. However, this chemical treatment may alter the natural properties
of muscle cells, making it uncertain whether the natural releasing mechanism follows the
same pattern. The releasing mechanism observed in that previous experiment is shown
in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Detachment of muscle ­ tendon from previous experiment with chemical treat­
ment. Source: René Svensson
Consequently, another muscle, the soleus (SOL), was also chosen for testing, aiming
to determine if it exhibits the hypothesised pattern of fibre breakage. Although drawing
conclusions from just two samples is challenging, further histological analysis of these
samples was conducted.
Overall, the most interesting trials were subjected to mechanical analysis, histological
treatment and staining protocols for visualisation under the microscope. All the results
are shown and discussed further in Sections 4.3 and 4.6.
3.3
Post­processing of mechanical data
The mechanical data from the mechanical testing were analysed to investigate the param­
eters that could reflect induced damage: strain and stress curve, maximum strain, mod­
ulus and hysteresis [27]. It was investigated using a Python script written from scratch
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
23
==PAGE:32==
for evaluating the different experiments. To see the different codes, force cycles, dis­
placement cycles and failure tests, see Appendix C. The code was written using Jupyter
Notebook.
All the scripts share a common initial section, which involved the input of the data, visu­
alising the data points and performing normalisation. The force­elongation data is nor­
malised to stress­strain using the CSA and length, following the equations described in
Section 3.2.1. Subsequently, the data was manually segmented to select the specific
region of interest for each curve. This manual segmentation is necessary because the
data file contains recorded information about the initial stretching of the sample and the
pre­conditioning cycles, which are not relevant to the study.
3.3.1
Failure tests
The failure curve consists of different regions, including a toe region, a linear region, and
a plastic region, as described in Section 2.3. In the initial part of the data processing,
the maximum peak of stress is identified. Afterwards, only the linear region of the curve,
starting from the first point up to the maximum peak, is considered for calculating the
slopes and modulus.
To determine the modulus, the algorithm calculates the slope between points that are 20
data points apart. This is made by dividing the difference in the y­axis (stress) by the
difference in the x­axis (strain). The modulus value is obtained by calculating the slopes
at regular intervals. The specific steps followed for each curve are illustrated through
example images in Figures 3.9.
(a) Force elongation curve
(b) Stress strain curve
(c) Maximum stress
(d) Calculation of the slope every 20 data points
Figure 3.9: Steps followed in the failure test script.
3.3.2
Force cycles
The force cycles curves represents the loading and unloading cycles of the tendon until
reaching a maximum value of 25 MPa. Each file contains a different number of cycles,
24
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:33==
requiring the identification of the maximum and minimum points to distinguish each of the
cycles. For each of the files, the number of data points required to identify the maximum
points and consider them as maxima for each cycle had to be manually adjusted.
One important parameter studied is hysteresis, which measures the energy loss during
the loading and unloading cycles. It is calculated as the difference between the area
under the loading curve (energy in) and the area under the unloading curve (energy out),
expressed as a percentage, namely, energy loss. A plot showing the change in hysteresis
over the cycles is also generated.
The modulus of the force cycles are also computed as part of the analysis in the same
way as in the failure tests. However, during the script execution, several challenges were
encountered, resulting in less reliable data extraction in some cases. A plot illustrating
the change in modulus over the cycles was also generated.
The specific steps followed for each curve are illustrated through example images of RAT
2 50 cycles in Figures 3.10.
(a) Force elongation curve.
(b) Stress strain curve.
(c) Identifying maximum values in the cycles.
(d) Identifying minimum values in the cycles.
Figure 3.10: Steps followed in the force cycles script.
3.3.3
Displacement cycles
The displacement cycles curves illustrate the relationship between force and elongation
(or stress­strain) for each cycle, where elongation is incrementally increased. The focus
of this curve is to observe the changes in modulus and maximum stress as the cycles
progress. Initially, both the modulus and maximum stress increase until reaching a peak,
after which they start to decrease over subsequent cycles.
During the coding process, there were challenges in identifying the minimum values of
certain cycles due to the unloading of the sample. Additionally, one of the experiments
had a horizontal line with a constant force but increased elongation, which caused errors
in data analysis. To visualise the changes in modulus and maximum stress over the
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
25
==PAGE:34==
cycles, corresponding graphs were generated. The procedures followed in the script are
summarised in Figure 3.11.
(a) Force elongation curve.
(b) Stress strain curve.
(c) Identifying maximum values in the cycles.
(d) Identifying minimum values in the cycles.
Figure 3.11: Steps followed in the displacement cycles script.
3.4
Sample preparation for microscopy
Following the mechanical testing, the tissue samples were fixed using Formaldehyde 4%
aqueous solution (formalin 10%) for 30 minutes while maintaining them in the stress po­
sition, at the maximum stretch of the force cycles. After the first fixation, the sample was
cut and placed in 4% formaldehyde. The protocol for sample preparation involved freez­
ing the samples embedded in Tissue­Tek using liquid nitrogen and isopentane (2­methyl
butane). The isopentane is frozen with liquid nitrogen, and the Tissue­Tek embedded
samples were immediately submerged in the frozen isopentane, allowing for rapid freez­
ing. The frozen samples were then stored in the freezer at ­20ºC.
To prepare the tissue samples for microscopy, the cryo­sectioning process was performed
using a cryotome, the CryoStar NX70. The samples were cut into slices with a thickness
of 16 µm, which was determined as the optimal thickness to prevent the fragile tendon
tissue from folding or creasing during the cutting process. It is important to note that the
machine only allows adjustments in thickness in increments of 2 µm. The orientation of the
sample during cutting was also key to prevent folding and creasing, with the perpendicular
alignment of the tendon to the knife found to be the most effective. In cases where the
sample was too long, a slight angle compared to the knife was preferred. All cutting
procedures, including the knife, were carried out at a temperature of ­21ºC to maintain
the frozen state of the samples.
Following the cryo­sectioning, the samples underwent histological treatment for staining
and were then analysed under a microscope as explained in Section 3.5.
26
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:35==
3.5
Staining techniques for microscopy
To see the samples under the light of the fluorescent microscope, two types of staining
method were used: Picro­Sirius Red method (PSR) and CHP (collagen hybridising pep­
tide), also known as denatured collagen staining.
PSR is a histochemical staining technique used to localise collagen in the tissues. It con­
sists of staining molecules such as collagen and tissues belonging to elastic membranes
and capillaries in deep red. Other structures, such as muscle tissue, stain yellow with
this process. The dye employed in the staining process is Sirius Red F3B, which dis­
tributes a red colour to the collagenous tissue. To prevent non­collagenous tissue from
being stained by the dye, picric acid is used. In addition, Fast Blue is utilised as a counter
stain to prevent the staining from spreading into the cytoplasm of the cells [40]. When
examining the samples under the microscope, it is necessary to use normal light, known
as bright field (BF), in the visible spectrum. This staining technique is used to visualise
collagen alignment and general organisation of the fibres.
The CHP method utilises specific peptides and antibodies, that selectively bind to dam­
aged collagen, particularly the loose alpha chains of the collagen triple helix.
These
molecules specifically target regions of the tissue where collagen fibres have undergone
damage or structural changes. The molecules used in the staining process include Dena­
tured Collagen (3Helix/R­CHP) peptide [41] and laminin from rabbit (PA170) as primary
antibody. The antibodies are selected for their ability to specifically bind to their respective
target molecules in the tissue samples. To ensure proper binding, different concentrations
of antibodies are applied to the samples. In addition to the primary antibodies, a secondary
antibody, specifically Chicken anti­rabbit antibody (SA36), is used. The secondary anti­
body is designed to recognise and bind to the primary antibody.
The fluorescent microscope utilises specific wavelengths of light to excite the fluorescent
molecules of the samples. This excitation causes the molecules to emit light at different
wavelengths, which can be captured and observed with the microscope. During the ex­
amination of the CHP­stained samples, three light channels were used, namely red, blue
and green. Under the fluorescent microscope, the damaged collagen stained with CHP
appears in the red channel of the light spectrum. The green channel of the fluorescent mi­
croscope shows the membranes or blood vessels that are stained with the laminin in this
method. To enhance the overall visualisation of the tissue, a fluorescent marker called
DAPI is also employed. DAPI has a strong affinity for DNA regions within cells, and it
emits blue fluorescence when excited with the appropriate light wavelength. This allows
for the visualisation of cellular nuclei, i.e. DNA­containing structures, in the blue channel
of the light spectrum.
For visualisation of the samples under the microscope, different exposure times were
used for each of the channels. At a magnification of 10x, the exposure times for the blue,
green, and red channels were set to 100 ms, 800 ms, and 800 ms, respectively. At a
magnification of 20x, the exposure times were adjusted to 100 ms, 1500 ms, and 1500
ms, respectively. These variations in exposure times optimised the imaging quality.
All the images presented in Sections 4.4.2 and 4.6.2 are a merged combination of the
three channels. The merging of the channels was performed using ImageJ software. To
provide a reference for the size, a scale bar was added to the images by establishing a
relation between the pixel dimensions and the corresponding real length in micrometres.
For further analysis of the damage caused in the tendon and MTJ samples, the quantifica­
tion of the intensities of the red channel in the CHP images was made. This quantification
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
27
==PAGE:36==
was performed using ImageJ software, and the results are shown in Section 4.4.2
3.6
Electron microscopy procedure
This section describes an additional experiment for studying the surface of tendon sam­
ples that underwent different levels of damage. Three samples were selected for this ex­
periment: a control sample from RAT 2, a high­damage sample from RAT 2, and a failure
sample from RAT 4. The purpose was to compare these samples with the other methods
used in the project and evaluate the literature’s replicability [7]. In this experiment, only a
few samples were considered due to cost constraints.
The article used [7] investigates the progressive damage in tendon fibres using scan­
ning electron microscopy. It focuses on the morphology of fibres under repeated over­
loading, particularly the development of kinks, termed ”discrete plasticity.” The study was
conducted on bovine tail tendons, known to withstand up to 25 N. After mechanical test­
ing, scanning electron microscopy analysis was performed on selected samples. The
results revealed severely damaged collagen fibrils in all the samples, attributed to the ob­
served kink pattern. Overloaded samples exhibited more significant damage compared
to samples pulled to rupture (macroscopic tearing). The presence of D­bands was also
examined, showing a complete loss of D­bands in the overloaded samples. Additionally,
some fibrils were observed to disintegrate into sub­fibrils. The current section partially
addresses and presents these findings.
To prepare the samples for scanning electron microscopy, the same mechanical testing
procedure described for tendons earlier was followed. However, a stronger fixative, 2%
glutaraldehyde in phosphate buffer, was used to ensure increased stiffness and facili­
tate the production of a clean crack in the samples. The preparation process involved
the use of the Leica EM MED020 [42], a specialised system for freeze­fracture, coating,
and sample transfer. The samples were cracked using a knife to expose their internal
structure, followed by freeze etching to remove ice layers through sublimation. Next step
was coating with Platinum/Carbon and the VCT100 shuttle facilitated contamination­free
transfer to the Quanta FEG 3D SEM [43] for cryo observation. The scanning electron mi­
croscopy analysis was performed using the Quanta FEG 3D, a high­resolution dual­beam
SEM capable of 2D and 3D characterisation. It operated in high vacuum mode, utilising
an electron field emission gun and a secondary electron detector. The scanning electron
microscopy images were captured using dedicated software.
Working with small tendon samples, measuring only a few hundred micrometres, was a
challenge when attempting to make a clean crack using a knife to separate the sample
into two parts. Initially, the transverse direction was tested for cutting the samples, but
this approach proved unsuccessful. Instead, a trial using the longitudinal direction gave
better results. The cracking process involved quickly applying the knife to push and sep­
arate the sample. Subsequently, a 10­minute period was left for the water to evaporate,
which occurred slowly thanks to the temperature disparity between the sample’s surface
(­166ºC) and the knife (­90ºC). Following evaporation, the sample was coated with a 6.5
nm thick layer of carbon­platinum and transported into the scanning electron microscopy
to capture the images of RAT 2 CONTROL shown in Section 4.7.
In an attempt to improve the reproducibility of the method, an alternative setup was ex­
plored. While the initial method showed promising, the actual cracking process relied to
some extent on luck. The new approach involved placing the sample between two small
metallic pieces. When pressure was applied to one of the pieces with a knife, the sam­
ple would be cracked in the middle of the metal pieces. To secure the sample in place,
28
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:37==
1­hexadecene, acting as glue, was used to attach it to the metal pieces. However, one
inconvenience of this method was the uncertainty of whether the sample remained in
place during the cracking process. Consequently, the sample had to undergo the same
subsequent procedures of evaporation, coating, and transportation, even if it could not
be visually confirmed (resulting in resource loss). Unfortunately, in this case, the sample
was found to be displaced. Subsequent samples were therefore treated using the initial
method once again.
The next trial was in RAT 2 100 cycles. As mentioned, the method of cracking was the
first one described. The crack seemed successful so it was decided to go on with the
next steps of the process, evaporating and coating. The evaporation time in this case
was increased until 15 minutes to allow the ice to show more parts of the morphology.
The time of evaporation plays a significant role because the structures are more clear,
but it is dangerous because at some point the sample can collapse. After the coating and
transport, the sample was investigated in the Quanta microscope.
For the final trial, in RAT 4 Failure, the sample was decided to be mounted at 45 degrees
so the direction was not longitudinal nor transversal. Also, the most interesting part was
located in the part most far from the knife so there were more chances of having a good
crack in that area.
3.7
Statistics
In this project, two primary statistical methodologies have been employed: linear regres­
sion and T­test. Linear regression is used to establish a suitable linear model fit for the
data points. The R2 value is a statistical parameter for linear regression and is used to
assess the quality of the estimation, considering the standard deviation of the data points.
The R2 value ranges between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates that the linear regression model
does not explain any of the variability in the data points, and 1 indicates that the linear
regression model explains all of the variability in the data points. A higher R2 value sug­
gests a better fit of the linear regression model to the data. According to literature [44],
it is considered a low model if the R2 is below 0.1, so the linear regression would not be
acceptable. A value of R2 between 0.1 and 0.5 is considered acceptable under certain
statistical conditions, while a value above 0.5 can be considered acceptable depending
on the circumstances of the test. In this study, a value above 0.6 is considered as a good
fit for the linear regression.
The T­test, on the other hand, is a statistical method used to compare the means of two
different groups of data. It determines the probability (p­value) that the two means follow
the same t­distribution under the null hypothesis. Two types of T­tests can be employed:
paired and unpaired. The unpaired T­test is utilised when there are two independent sets
of identically distributed data, and the variables are compared between the two sets. In
the paired T­test, the data is matched in pairs, meaning that one experiment is tested
repeatedly [45]. In this study, a significance level or p­value of 0.05, equivalent to 5% was
chosen.
To visually analyse the normality of the tendon size data, a quantile­quantile plot (QQ
plot) was created using the volume of the samples (CSA * Length). If the data points fall
approximately along the diagonal line, it suggests that the data is normally distributed. Ad­
ditionally, to quantitatively evaluate the normality of the samples, a Kolmogorov­Smirnov
(KS) test was performed. The KS test is employed to compare the data points of the
sample with a reference probability distribution. The null hypothesis of this test is that
the collection of data points follows a normal distribution. The data points are standard­
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
29
==PAGE:38==
ised and compared with the normal distribution. By considering the critical values of the
empirical distribution F(x) followed in the KS test (table shown in Figure D.1 in the Ap­
pendix D), differences between the data distribution and normality can be observed with
a significance level of 0.05 [46].
3.8
Explanation of experimental names
This section introduces the naming convention employed in this research. Tendon exper­
iments are designated with an underscore (”_”) to separate the animal number (RAT2,
RAT4, RAT5 and RAT6) from either the number of cycles (10C, 50C, 100C, 200C, FAIL­
URE and CONTROL) or the specific type of experiment conducted (TRIAL1, TRIAL2,
etc.). It is important to note that 10C corresponds to low damage, 50C to moderate dam­
age, and 100C (or 200C) to high damage.
In the muscle experiments, the underscore (”_”) separates the animal number (MOUSE 1,
2, 3, 4), the dissected leg (LEG1 or LEG2), and the specific myotendinous unit employed
(T1, T2, T3, T4 or SOL).
In the microscopy sections, the naming convention also includes the magnification (10x,
20x or 40x) and a unique numerical identifier for different samples or regions within the
glass­slide. It is worth mentioning the PEG experiments, which include ”PEG” in the
sample name, followed by the type of experiment (TIME), and the trial number (TRIAL1,
TRIAL2, etc.).
30
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:39==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Mechanical data from rat tail tendon experiments
The mechanical data were exported to an Excel file for studying all the samples and getting
some statistical information.
4.1.1
Analysis of the sample’s dimensions
As explained in the methodology sections, the samples were characterised prior to the
testing, which included measurements of the initial length, width and thickness. The re­
sulting measurements group all the samples from damage and failure experiments. Table
4.1 summarises the collected data.
Table 4.1: Sample’s sizes
Sample
Length (mm)
Width (mm)
Thickness (mm)
CSA (mm2)
Volume (mm3)
02/03_TRIAL1
7.931
0.384
0.210
0.063
0.502
02/03_TRIAL3
7.922
0.332
0.237
0.062
0.490
06/03_TRIAL1
5.883
0.304
0.199
0.048
0.280
06/03_TRIAL2
6.292
0.304
0.184
0.044
0.276
06/03_TRIAL3
7.290
0.257
0.181
0.037
0.266
RAT2_100C
8.495
0.312
0.215
0.053
0.448
RAT2_10C
8.834
0.453
0.223
0.079
0.701
RAT2_50C
9.998
0.293
0.225
0.052
0.518
RAT2_FAILURE
8.050
0.431
0.213
0.072
0.580
RAT4_100C
6.193
0.393
0.174
0.054
0.333
RAT4_10C
6.056
0.250
0.176
0.035
0.209
RAT4_50C
8.236
0.353
0.214
0.059
0.489
RAT4_FAILURE
5.985
0.339
0.239
0.064
0.381
RAT5_100C
8.477
0.299
0.168
0.039
0.334
RAT5_10C
4.398
0.269
0.196
0.041
0.182
RAT5_50C
5.236
0.372
0.257
0.075
0.393
RAT5_FAILURE
5.160
0.267
0.205
0.043
0.222
RAT5_FAILURE4
8.916
0.427
0.287
0.096
0.858
RAT5_FAILURE5
7.236
0.465
0.240
0.088
0.634
RAT5_FAILURE6
8.628
0.454
0.212
0.076
0.652
RAT6_10C
6.074
0.311
0.186
0.045
0.276
RAT6_200C
5.195
0.377
0.192
0.057
0.295
RAT6_50C
6.917
0.372
0.260
0.076
0.525
RAT6_FAILURE
6.648
0.311
0.201
0.049
0.326
RAT6_FAILURE1
9.614
0.310
0.192
0.047
0.449
RAT6_FAILURE2
10.574
0.325
0.181
0.046
0.489
RAT6_FAILURE3
9.405
0.296
0.212
0.049
0.464
The normality of the data was studied using a quantile­quantile plot (QQ plot), and the
results are presented in Figure 4.1.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.1: QQ plot made from the sizes data.
The data points in the QQ plot fall approximately along the diagonal line (45º), indicating
that the data is normally distributed. Additionally, the high R2 value of 0.98 suggests that
the linear regression is a very good fit to the data points, further supporting that the data
follows a normal distribution [47].
However, to quantify the normality of the size data, a KS­test was performed [48]. The
data set consists of 27 values, and a significance level of 0.05 was chosen. The utilised
guide [48], shows the steps to calculate the actual values and compare them with the
expected values from the normal distribution. The maximum difference between the actual
and expected values is then compared to the critical value from the Kolmogorov­Smirnov
Table, with n = 27 and P = 1 −α, where α is the level of significance of 0.05. The
maximum difference was calculated to be 0.086 while the critical value from the table
is 0.25438 (see Appendix C). Since the maximum difference is smaller than the critical
value, the null hypothesis would not be rejected, indicating that the data can be assumed
to follow a normal distribution.
4.1.2
Displacement cycles
The first approach to cause damage overloading the tendon samples was with displace­
ment cycles, i.e. increasing the displacement in each cycle with a specific step. For
the analysis of this type of cycles, only two samples were used. In the first sample, an
overview of the maximum stress and modulus values over the cycles is shown in Figure
4.2.
(a) Overview of the maximum stress.
(b) Overview of the modulus.
Figure 4.2: Displacement cycles parameters over the cycles.
32
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:41==
Both graphs exhibit a similar pattern over the cycles. Both parameters increase as the
displacement increases, reaching a peak and then gradually decreasing.
However, in the second sample, an error occurred in the recording of the data. The soft­
ware recorded a horizontal line with a constant force but varying elongation, making all the
results highly unreliable, as can be seen in Figure 4.3. This issue severely affected the
identification of the minimum values of the cycles and the calculation of the slopes. Con­
sequently, this particular sample was excluded from further analysis due to the significant
errors in the data.
Figure 4.3: Displacement cycle test in the second sample.
Nonetheless, despite the issues with the data recording, the graph still exhibits a percepti­
ble pattern in terms of the maximum stress values. It can be observed that the maximum
stress initially increases, indicating a phase of low damage. This is followed by a pe­
riod where the maximum stress remains relatively constant (plateau phase), representing
a moderate damage area. Finally, the maximum stress starts to decrease, indicating a
high­damage region. Although the exact values may be unreliable, the overall trend in
the pattern of maximum stress provides a good understanding of how the damage pro­
gresses during the cycles. The slope of the curve can also be observed in the graph.
It appears to be steeper at the beginning of the cycles, increasing until a certain point.
However, without reliable quantitative data, it is not possible to know the exact variations
of the modulus over time.
Also, it can be observed how the slope of the force­elongation curve decreases before
reaching the maximum force, typically around 50% to 70% of the maximum in Figure
4.3 (also in Figure 3.11). This decrease in slope indicates the occurrence of the yield
point, which corresponds to the point where the tendon experiences irreversible damage
or plastic deformation.
4.1.3
Failure tests
Failure tests were performed in order to establish the ultimate properties of the tendons
and set a basic scenario for the damage experiments. The results from the failure tests are
presented in the following table (see Table 4.2), showing the maximum stress, maximum
strain and maximum modulus obtained for each test sample. The failure tests were divided
into three groups, as described in Section 3.2.1. These groups corresponded to different
parts of the project and involved various samples: initial failure experiments, ”core” tests
and additional failure tests.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.2: Failure tests
SAMPLE
MAX_STRESS (MPa)
MAX_STRAIN (%)
MODULUS (MPa)
02/03_TRIAL1
23.79
80.86
88.17
02/03_TRIAL3
31.96
44.53
152.81
06/03_TRIAL1
36.36
80.25
189.36
06/03_TRIAL3
43.78
23.98
572.16
06/03_TRIAL2
43.51
22.17
529.06
RAT2_FAILURE
35.03
26.56
153.18
RAT4_FAILURE
24.47
31.90
112.60
RAT5_FAILURE
49.10
39.94
168.26
RAT6_FAILURE
63.54
68.77
333.04
RAT6_FAILURE1
46.89
45.42
455.26
RAT6_FAILURE2
53.98
36.36
487.62
RAT6_FAILURE3
51.89
47.05
199.59
RAT5_FAILURE4
25.53
84.07
196.95
RAT5_FAILURE5
26.37
50.98
95.07
RAT5_FAILURE6
29.89
63.41
178.91
Examining the raw data, it becomes clear that the samples from RAT 6 in particular ex­
hibit significantly higher stress values, which is quite surprising. For instance, the failure
sample from RAT 6 in the ”core” tests group had a stress value of 63.54 MPa, significantly
exceeding the stress values of the other samples within the same group. Similarly, in the
third group, the three samples from RAT 6 also exhibited higher stress values compared
to the three samples from RAT 5. The average stress value for the samples from RAT 6
was determined to be 50.92 MPa, whereas for RAT 5, it was 27.26 MPa. A T­test was
performed between the mean values of both RAT 5 and RAT 6 experiments, with a p­
value of 0.001. This value means that the difference between the two compared means
are significantly different.
These findings give an explanation to why it was possible to reach 200 cycles of 25 MPa
in RAT 6 but not in the other animal samples. This discrepancy in stress levels may
also contribute to variations in the damage observed in these samples. The images from
the two staining procedures will provide more light into the extent of the damage on the
samples.
To summarise and compare the results obtained from the three groups, Tables 4.3 and 4.4
were generated. The table includes the mean, standard deviation of the samples (STD),
and the standard error of the mean (SEM) for the maximum stress, strain, and modulus
parameters. Additionally, the table presents an overall summary with the combined mean,
STD and SEM for all the groups.
34
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.3: Failure test table ­ maximum values of stress and strain in the three different
groups.
MAX_STRESS (MPa)
MAX_STRAIN (%)
MEAN
STD
SEM
MEAN
STD
SEM
GROUP_1
35.88
7.51
3.36
50.36
25.88
11.57
GROUP_2
43.04
14.71
7.36
41.79
16.29
8.14
GROUP_3
39.09
12.09
4.93
54.55
15.46
6.31
TOTAL
39.07
11.94
3.08
49.75
20.39
5.26
Table 4.4: Failure test table ­ modulus values in the three different groups.
MODULUS (MPa)
MEAN
STD
SEM
GROUP_1
306.31
202.54
90.58
GROUP_2
191.77
84.06
42.03
GROUP_3
268.90
147.69
60.29
TOTAL
260.80
162.08
41.85
The analysis of the maximum stress values revealed a notable variability among samples
in the second and third groups of samples, as indicated by the STD and SEM.
The average maximum stress value for the ”core” test samples (RAT 2, 4, 5, and 6 failure
samples) was found to be 43.04 MPa, with a SEM of 7.36. This average value was ap­
proximately 20% higher than the first group’s calculated average. The reason behind this
discrepancy could be the pre­conditioning process that the ”core” samples experienced
prior to the failure. This pre­conditioning make the fibres align and have a minimal stretch
that leads to an initial deformation and a potential increase in the maximum stress before
failure.
For the third group, the average maximum stress value was determined to be 39.09 MPa,
with a SEM of 4.93. This value was approximately 9% higher than the initially calculated
average. It is worth mentioning that the threshold value of 25 MPa for the force cycles
corresponded to approximately 64% of the maximum stress value in this group.
Analysing the maximum strain values obtained in the experiments, it becomes apparent
that they are relatively high compared to values reported in the literature [24]. Typically, the
literature [49, 24] suggests a maximum strain up to approximately 20% of the initial length
until failure. However, in these experiments, the average maximum strain is determined
to be 49.75%, which is considerably higher. This increment can be explained with the
slippage of the tendon in the hooks, which represents a great limitation of the present
study.
The elevated strain values align with the lower values of the modulus observed in the sam­
ples. These two parameters are directly related, with strain being inversely proportional
to the modulus. If the strain exceeds the expected value for a given stress level, it results
in a lower modulus. In the literature [24, 49], the elastic modulus is typically reported to
be between 500 MPa and 1 GPa. However, the average elastic modulus obtained from
these experiments is 260.80 MPa, which falls below the values reported in the literature.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
35
==PAGE:44==
This value is inversely proportional to strain, and thus, is the strain value is higher due to
slippage, the elastic modulus would be decreased the same extent.
Next, Figure 4.4 presents a comparison between the size parameters (length and CSA)
and the maximum values of stress and strain obtained from the failure tests. The linear
regression was used to establish a good fit for the data, and the resulting R2 value was
calculated.
(a) CSA vs maximum stress
(b) Length vs. maximum stress
(c) CSA vs. maximum strain
(d) Length vs. maximum strain
(e) CSA vs. modulus
(f) Length vs. modulus
Figure 4.4: Size of the samples (CSA and length) plotted with the ultimate properties
maximum stress, maximum strain and modulus.
The R2 values indicate that none of the presented graphs exhibit a strong fit with the linear
regression model (Figures 4.4b, 4.4c, 4.4d and 4.4f). However, Figure 4.4a stands out
among the linear graphs, with an R2 value of 0.51. This suggests a potential relationship
between the CSA and the maximum stress, where larger CSA may correspond to lower
maximum stress values. Figure 4.4e is presented with an logarithmic trend­line following
36
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:45==
the literature [50], which gives a relatively good fit to the data, with a R2 value of 0.46.
This observations aligns with findings from literature [50], which state a non­linear de­
crease in elastic modulus with increasing specimen CSA. Since the elastic modulus is
proportional to stress, it is reasonable to speculate in this study that the maximum stress
is influenced by the CSA of the samples. Other literature [49] stated a clear dependence
of the maximum stress value on the CSA of the sample. It should be noted that due to
the mentioned issues related to slippage during testing, no definitive conclusions can be
taken regarding maximum strain. According to Atkinson et al [50], this behaviour can be
due to the influence of different structures of the tendon other than the sub fascicle, such
as the epitenon. However, this explanation is not applicable in the present study as rat tail
tendons do not have such a complex structure. According to Legerlotz et al. [49], smaller
stress values in larger CSA samples, could be related to differences in the internal organ­
isation of fibres, interaction between structures or relative contribution of collagen fibres
and sheaths.
Another possible explanation could be the difference in the gripping between the inner
and outer parts of the tendon during testing, leading to uneven stress distribution [49].
It is possible that the outer part has a stronger grip compared to the inner part. This
difference in gripping could result in higher modulus values for smaller samples, because
all the length experience the same stress. In certain samples stained with CHP there is
a higher intensity in the outer part, meaning that there is more damaged collagen (see
Section 4.4.2). This observation supports the explanation that the stress distribution is
uneven in the width of the tendon.
The article by R. C. Haut [51], studied the relation between length and the mechanical
properties of rat tendons. According to the study, tensile strength did not show a pre­
dictable pattern with specimen length. However, strain was found to vary significantly
with length, particularly in samples shorter than 50 mm. This variation in strain also af­
fected the modulus, as the stress remained relatively constant while the strain decreased
with increasing sample length. All the mentioned results are also supported by Legerlotz
et al. [49]. Comparing the findings of the present study with the observations from the
mentioned article, both suggest that stress does not vary predictably with changes in ten­
don length. Moreover, as previously discussed, due to the errors in strain measurement,
the data in the present study does not align with the conclusions of the mentioned articles.
4.1.4
Force cycles
As described in Section 3.2, the purpose of force cycles is to induce three different levels
of damage in tendon samples, loading them to 25 MPa but with different number of cycles.
These levels of damage were categorised into low, moderate and high, with 10,50 and
100 cycles, respectively. RAT 6 had an exceptional number of 200 cycles for the high­
damage sample. One example from a low and moderate damage samples from RAT 5 is
shown in Figure 4.5.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Stress­strain curve RAT5_10C.
(b) Stress­strain curve RAT5_50C.
Figure 4.5: Force cycles from low and moderate damage samples from RAT 5.
The resulting strain­stress graphs show the loading­unloading pattern of each cycle, reach­
ing a maximum value of 25 MPa. During the script execution, several challenges were
encountered, resulting in less reliable data extraction in some cases. The Appendix A
provides a visual representation of the errors observed in the curves. One issue arose
when the software recorded a line at approximately 0.25 N (see Figure E.1 in Appendix
E), where elongation increased while the force remained constant. This led to artificially
higher slopes to compensate the force. Another challenge occurred when the sample
was completely unloaded, the software recorded the curve to approach the vertical po­
sition (see Figure E.2 of Appendix E). If the data points used for slope calculation were
too close together, an infinite slope was calculated. Adjustments were made to the num­
ber of points considered for slope calculation but the accuracy decreased considerably.
Another inaccuracy in the extraction of mechanical parameter from the curves was the
identification of the maximum and minimum values of each of the cycles. It was observed
that when the number of cycles was lower, the identification was more successful than in
the experiments with hundred cycles.
Hysteresis in force cycles
As mentioned in Section 3.3.2, hysteresis was one important parameter used to evaluate
the extent of the damage in each sample. It corresponds the energy loss by the system
during each cycle, expressed in percentage. The hysteresis was calculated in each cycle
and the values above 100% were discarded as they were likely the result of recording
errors or inaccuracies in identifying the maximum and minimum values of the cycle. Ex­
amples of the variation in hysteresis value over the cycles for RAT 4 50C and RAT 6 50C
are illustrated in Figure 4.6.
(a) RAT4 50C
(b) RAT6 50C
Figure 4.6: Hysteresis variation over the duration of the experiments, measured in %.
38
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:47==
Over all the hysteresis curves, it is observed that the first and last cycles may exhibit
significant discrepancies in hysteresis values. The first cycle’s error is attributed to ex­
cessive elongation to reach for the first time the 25 MPa, potentially caused by slippage
or reorganisation of the fibres. In the last cycle, the error is due to the absence of a proper
unloading curve in the ending of the recording, because the sample is fixated in the stress
position. Consequently, these two cycles were excluded from subsequent analysis.
The average values,STD and SEM for each of the samples were calculated and are pre­
sented in Table 4.7a. These values are graphically illustrated in Figure 4.7b, i.e. the
average values with the corresponding error bar that represents the SEM.
(a) Table for average hysteresis values
in the ”core” tests
SAMPLE
MEAN (%)
SEM
RAT2_100C
39.26
1.17
RAT2_50C
34.55
0.53
RAT2_10C
34.80
4.02
RAT4_100C
40.64
0.75
RAT4_50C
48.74
0.86
RAT4_10C
52.76
2.24
RAT5_100C
36.18
0.80
RAT5_50C
52.46
0.60
RAT5_10C
57.23
2.03
RAT6_200C
41.73
0.54
RAT6_50C
48.42
1.01
RAT6_10C
47.62
2.94
(b) Overview hysteresis values
Figure 4.7: Average hysteresis values in the different experiments, expressed in percent­
age.
According to literature [52], the expected hysteresis in these cycles is around 60%. How­
ever, it is important to note that the hysteresis can be influenced by various factors related
to these specific experiments. These include biological and technical factors. It is impor­
tant to note that viscoelastic properties, including hysteresis, are complex and difficult to
predict accurately.
One biological factor that can influence hysteresis is the presence of cross­links [53] be­
tween collagen fibres. In these rat tails, the number of cross­links is generally lower com­
pared to mature or weight­bearing tendons. These cross­links provide structural stability
and restrict the sliding movement between fibres. With fewer cross­links, the fibres can
slide more easily, resulting in reduced energy loss during loading and potentially lower
hysteresis. However, with a higher number of cross­links, the tendons have less slippage
between the fibres that can result in limited relative motion between the fibres and thus,
decreased energy loss.
Another biological explanation for the observed changes in hysteresis could be attributed
to the use of PBS during the experiments. The presence of PBS can cause swelling of
the tendon samples, which may play a role in the hysteresis values. During loading, water
is released from the tendon, and during unloading, it needs to be reabsorbed. This water
exchange process can contribute to changes in the energy loss.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
39
==PAGE:48==
Another technical factor that could contribute to the change in hysteresis is the position
sensor used in the equipment. The sensor is located slightly behind the sample, which
can also introduce a small amount of movement or bending that result in a delay in de­
tecting the precise changes in the sample’s movement during the transition from loading
to unloading and vice versa.
The speed of loading is another technical aspect that can influence hysteresis. In this
experiment, a slower loading speed was used, leading to have more time to readjust
the tendon’s fibres after the applied force. In general, very slow loading speeds enable
the fibres to slide and realign, interfering in the energy loss and thus in hysteresis. On
contrary, very fast loading speeds can also influence the tendon’s energy loss, resulting
in variations in hysteresis. These phenomena can be explained following a theoretical
viscoelastic model.
Furthermore, the length of the tendon sample can also impact hysteresis. Variations in
tendon length can affect the degree of fibre slippage. This relation was analysed with the
data from these experiments and it can be seen in Figure 4.8. In the graph, it is shown
how the length of the samples, measured in mm, and the hysteresis are related.
Figure 4.8: Length vs. Hysteresis.
In Figure 4.8, with a value R2 of 0.58 (slightly lower than 0.60), it exists a clear decrease
pattern in the data points. Following the literature [51], it can be stated that the initial
length of the sample influences the hysteresis. In the article, the modulus was studied
in relation to the initial length, and the results show higher modulus in longer samples.
Generally, the modulus is inversely proportional to the hysteresis because stiffer tendons
have higher modulus and exhibit lower energy loss. The article argues that this behaviour
is due to the strain decrement with the increment of the sample’s length.
Regarding the CSA (shown in Figure 4.9), it appears that there is no significant rela­
tionship with hysteresis in the present study. The literature [50] suggests a non­linear
decrease in modulus (which is inversely proportional to hysteresis) with increasing CSA,
indicating that there might be a relationship between these variables. However, none of
the regression models (polynomial, exponential or logarithmic) resulted in a satisfactory fit
with a maximum R2 value of 0.08. This indicates that the data points do not align well with
any reasonable regression curve, and no meaningful relationship can be taken between
CSA and hysteresis based on the obtained data.
40
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.9: CSA vs. Hysteresis.
Next, two T­tests were conducted to compare mean values between the different cate­
gories of damage. The first T­test compared the mean values of the ”core” tests presented
in Table 4.7a, while the second T­test compared the first and last cycles of the same ex­
periments. These T­tests were performed in two different cases: paired and unpaired
samples. In the paired case, the comparison was made between adjacent damage levels
within the same animal (low­mod and mod­high). In the unpaired case, the comparison
was made without considering individual animals.
For comparing the first and last cycles of the experiments, different averaging methods
were used for different levels of damage. For low damage (10 cycles in total), the averages
of the first 2 and last 2 cycles were calculated. For moderate damage (50 cycles in total),
the averages of the first 3 and last 3 cycles were calculated. And for high­damage (100
or 200 cycles in total), the averages of all 4 cycles were calculated. The comparisons
were then made between the averages of the first and last cycles within the same level
of damage, as well as between the same type of cycle across different levels of damage.
These comparisons were done both for paired and unpaired samples, according to the
individual animals.
In the first case, in the T­test comparing the averages between different categories of
damage in Table 4.7a, there were no significant differences observed in both the paired
and unpaired comparisons. This suggests that there is no significant difference between
the average values of hysteresis. However, when comparing the first and last cycles,
significant differences were found with p­values below 0.05. This indicates that there is
a significant difference between the hysteresis values of the first and last cycles within
each level of damage. Specifically, the hysteresis values were lower in the last cycles
compared to the first cycles. This pattern of decreasing hysteresis over the cycles can be
attributed to the viscoelastic properties of the material and may also serve as an indicator
of the damage produced in the samples. On the other hand, when comparing the same
type of cycle (first and last) across different levels of damage, no significant differences
in the hysteresis values were observed.
In conclusion, the T­test revealed a significant difference in hysteresis values between
the first and last cycles, considering individual animals. This indicates that each animal
exhibited a consistent pattern of decreasing hysteresis over the cycles.
Modulus in force cycles
Another important parameter to evaluate the extent of damage in the samples is the mod­
ulus. It is calculated as the maximum slope in each cycle of the experiment, representing
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
41
==PAGE:50==
the ratio of stress to strain and measured in MPa. The variation over the cycles of the
modulus serves as a good indicator of the tendon’s state and the changes in its mechan­
ical properties. The hypothesis suggests that the modulus increases progressively over
the cycles until it reaches a maximum value, after which it stabilises and then starts to
decrease. However, as mentioned in previous sections, due to errors in data record­
ing, there may be inaccuracies in calculating the maximum slope of the curve. This can
impact the accuracy of the modulus values and may affect the precise analysis of the
tendons’ viscoelastic behaviour. It is important to keep in mind these limitations and po­
tential inaccuracies when interpreting the modulus data. In order to improve the reliability
of the analysis, a small number of values that deviated from the normal behaviour of the
curve were excluded from further analysis. These values were considered outliers that
potentially affect the overall results (see Appendix E to understand the deviation of these
outliers within the rest of the values). Examples of the variation of the modulus value over
the cycles for RAT5 50C and RAT6 10C are illustrated in Figure 4.10.
(a) RAT5 50C
(b) RAT6 10C
Figure 4.10: Modulus variation over the cycles, measured in MPa.
The hypothesised pattern for the modulus is visible in the RAT5 50C and RAT6 10C exper­
iments, as shown in Figure 4.10. However, it is important to note that this pattern may not
be consistent across all the experiments. The unreliable data, particularly in some of the
cases that can be seen in Appendix E, make it challenging to draw definitive conclusions
about the modulus parameter in the study of the mechanical behaviour of the damaged
tendons.
In many of the experiments, the modulus values exhibit a relatively big standard deviation,
indicating high variability within the data. Table 4.5 presents the average, STD and SEM
for all the experiments. It is worth noting that two experiments, RAT4 100C and RAT4
50C, displayed unusually high modulus values that are most likely due to recording errors
during data collection. These errors could have affected the accurate identification of the
cycles in the script used for calculating the slope. As a result, the calculated modulus
values for these experiments are not reliable and do not reflect the true mechanical prop­
erties of the tendons. These two experiments were excluded from further analysis. Figure
4.11 provides an overview of the average modulus data from the remaining experiments
with the corresponding error bars representing the SEM.
42
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:51==
Table 4.5: Table for average modulus values in the ”core” tests.
SAMPLE
MEAN (MPa)
STD
SEM
RAT2_100C
803
178
17
RAT2_50C
699
279
39
RAT2_10C
472
57
18
RAT4_100C
2601
1270
132
RAT4_50C
4275
1636
236
RAT4_10C
423
21
6
RAT5_100C
705
248
35
RAT5_50C
406
34
4
RAT5_10C
507
36
12
RAT6_200C
563
71
5
RAT6_50C
425
31
4
RAT6_10C
533
88
26
Figure 4.11: Overview modulus values, without the two samples that had incoherent val­
ues.
Literature [49] establish the values for modulus ranging from around 500 MPa to 1 GPa.
The values from the ”core” tests modulus range in between those values except for RAT4_100C
and RAT4_50C which presented errors in the analysis of the data file.
According to literature [50, 51] , the size of the sample is directly related to the modulus,
as previously discussed in Section 4.1.3. The relation was analysed with the data from
these experiments and it can be seen in Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13. In the graph it is
shown how the length of the samples, measured in mm, and the CSA, measured in mm2,
are related to the modulus, in MPa.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.12: Length vs. Modulus.
Figure 4.13: CSA vs. Modulus.
For the relation with length, even though the R2 value is 0.36 (lower than 0.60), it exists
a slight increase pattern in the data points. According to the literature [51], the modulus
is higher in longer samples. In this research, it can be confirmed that the initial length of
the sample influences the modulus as it can be seen with the positive trend of the linear
regression in Figure 4.12.
Regarding the relationship between CSA and modulus, the findings of the present study
do not align with the conclusions of the referenced literature [50]. The data from the
present study do not have the expected non­linear decrease in modulus with increasing
CSA as reported in the literature. Additionally, the observed pattern in the present data
does not match the findings obtained in the failure tests in Section 4.1.3. It is important to
consider that the mean values of the loading­unloading cycles may not necessarily reflect
the same trend as the ultimate properties of the material. This discrepancy could explain
the mismatch between the different findings. Furthermore, it should be noted that the
calculation of the slope in the cycle files was less reliable compared to the failure tests
due to the potential errors in the identifications of the cycles.
Next, the same type of T­tests than in the previous Section 4.1.4 were performed, i.e.
comparison between the mean values of different categories of damage in Table 4.5 and
between first and last cycles. In this case, only the comparison between the first and last
44
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:53==
cycles of the low damage experiments generated a significant p­value, both in the paired
and unpaired tests. This indicates that the modulus values in the low damage samples
had a consistent increasing trend between the first two cycles and the last two cycles.
In contrast, in the moderate and high damage samples, the last cycles are heavily influ­
enced by the strength of the tendon. It is a possibility that the comparison was between
the increasing and decreasing parts of the modulus curve, giving no significant difference.
Another possible explanation for the lack of significant differences in modulus is the po­
tential decrease in accuracy during the calculation of the slope with a higher number of
cycles. As the number of cycles increases, there may be more variability in the data,
leading to less precise calculations of the slope.
4.2
Mechanical data in PEG
The experiments performed to investigate the the effects of the buffer solution in the me­
chanical properties of tendons were made with an extreme concentration of PEG (PBS +
25% PEG). The first addressed question was the time needed to regulate the water con­
tent in the tendon. Next, some failure and the three different damage tests were performed
in the samples.
In order to investigate the regulation of tendon water content in the PEG solution, a series
of images were captured over time in four samples, as seen in Figure 4.14.
(a) 0 seconds
(b) 90 seconds
(c) 150 seconds
(d) 270 seconds
Figure 4.14: Width reduction of the tendon when submerged in PEG solution over time.
This sample corresponds to PEG_TIME_TRIAL2_RAT5.
From the images in Figure 4.14, it can be measured a reduction in the size from the first
moment of 0 seconds to 270 seconds after submerging. It can also be observed that the
sample gets darker over time due to the water release from the tissue.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.15 presents the variation in width over time as the samples are submerged in the
PEG buffer. The data was processed by calculating the percentage of the initial size of
each sample at different time intervals. It can be observed variability between the differ­
ent samples, potentially due to the differences in original width or the previous hydration
in PBS. The average results from the four experiments revealed that after 30 seconds of
submersion, the tendon maintained approximately 92.76% of its initial size. This percent­
age gradually decreased to around 87.67% after 60 seconds, 84.14% after 90 seconds,
and approximately 80% after 150 seconds, with slight fluctuations due to the subjective
visual measurement method. These findings indicate that the tendon tissue reaches a
stable water content after approximately 150 seconds of being submerged in the PEG
solution.
Figure 4.15: Variation in width over time as the four samples are submerged in the PEG.
The line with X symbols is the average of all four experiments.
The next step was the completion of failure test in the three different samples submerged
in the 25% PEG solution that resulted in maximum stress values of 38.96 MPa, 35.90
MPa, and 36.72 MPa. The average value of these maximum stress values is 37.19 MPa.
Comparing this average value to the average maximum stress obtained from the samples
submerged in PBS (35.88 MPa), it can be observed that the PEG solution led to a slight
increase of approximately 3% in the maximum stress. Based on literature [31], it was
hypothesised that submerging the sample in PEG would result in around 40% increase
in the maximum stress and modulus. However, due to the limited number of experiments
submerged in PEG, it is challenging to establish a clear connection between the mechan­
ical properties of the samples and their water content. The slight increase in maximum
stress can be attributed to the stiffness that the tendon experiences due to the reduction
in water content caused by the PEG solution. The release of water from the tendon fibres
can lead to a higher resistance to deformation and an increase in the maximum stress
that the tendon can withstand.
Regarding the elastic modulus, it was seen that the samples submerged in the PEG so­
lution exhibited an elastic modulus of around 300 MPa, which is lower than the elastic
modulus of the samples in PBS. However, without additional information or confirmation,
it is difficult to determine the exact accuracy and reliability of these numbers. Further ex­
periments for verification would be necessary to establish the precise values of the elastic
modulus for the PEG­submerged samples.
46
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:55==
4.3
Mechanical data from mouse leg muscle experiments
These mechanical tests focused in the detachment of the muscle­tendon junction, where
the samples were pulled until failure. Table 4.6 displays the maximum force and elongation
values and stiffness that each sample could withstand before failure occurred obtained
from the mechanical testing. The data was not normalised and converted to stress and
strain due to the heterogeneity on the dimensions of the myotendinous unit where, for
instance, the tendon width ranged around 0.1 mm and the belly of the muscle was around
2 mm.
Table 4.6: Mechanical parameters of the muscle samples.
SAMPLE
MAX_FORCE (N)
MAX_ELONG (mm)
STIFFNESS (N/mm)
MOUSE1_LEG1_T1
0.26
8.844
0.12
MOUSE1_LEG1_T2
0.09
6.486
0.13
MOUSE1_LEG2_T1
0.12
5.701
0.09
MOUSE1_LEG2_T3
0.02
2.929
0.05
MOUSE2_LEG1_T1
0.20
5.173
0.08
MOUSE2_LEG2_T1
0.10
5.623
0.05
MOUSE3_LEG1_T1
0.22
7.185
0.08
MOUSE3_LEG2_T1
0.18
7.807
0.23
MOUSE3_LEG2_T3
0.02
2.133
0.04
MOUSE4_LEG1_SOL
0.10
7.925
0.10
MOUSE4_LEG1_T1
0.13
6.146
0.08
MOUSE4_LEG2_SOL
0.13
8.171
0.05
In general, the mechanical data obtained from these experiments is not the primary focus
as it is difficult to directly compare between different samples due to the different conditions
of each of them. According to literature [30], there could be a difference in the site of failure
depending on the animal model, the muscle used, the different strain rate and the state
of activation of the muscle. Nonetheless, in order to apply a more scientific approach and
analyse the data statistically, several T­test were performed.
The T­tests were conducted to compare the force, elongation, and modulus values of the
experiments listed in Table 4.6. The samples were divided into T1, T3, and SOL (soleus)
experiments, and unpaired samples were used for comparison. When comparing T3 to
T1, there were significant differences in all three parameters. T3 muscles exhibited lower
force, elongation, and modulus values compared to T1 muscles. This suggests that T3
muscles were weaker and less able to withstand force and elongation, and they also
displayed lower stiffness (as indicated by the modulus) compared to T1 muscles. When
comparing SOL to T1, a significant difference was found only in the elongation parameter.
This could indicate that SOL muscle had different elongation characteristics compared to
T1.
4.4
Microscopy images of rat tail tendon experiments
After the completion of the mechanical tests, further analysis of the extent of damage was
needed to validate the proposed protocol. The samples were fixated, fast­frozen and cut
prior to histological staining with PSR and CHP.
One of the major issues faced in the staining process of the samples was the detachment
and loss of tissue samples from the glass­slides. The issue arises when the glass­slides
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
47
==PAGE:56==
are submerged in different chemical baths. Some attempts were made to address this
issue. One of the approaches was to clean the cutting knife with ethanol to avoid any
possible fat that could influence the sticking process. The samples were also dried with
acetone for 30 minutes before the chemical baths [54]. Regardless, a substantial amount
of detachment still occurred and therefore, the results were unsatisfactory.
After the staining treatment, the remaining samples were studied under the microscope.
The most representative areas of the samples were captured and analysed. The main
findings are explained in the following sections.
4.4.1
Results from Piro­Sirius Red staining
This staining technique allows the visualisation of the structure of the sample in the longi­
tudinal direction, revealing the pattern that the fibres follow after been exposed loading ­
unloading cycles. The red colour in the stained samples corresponds to the presence of
collagenous molecules within the tissue.
The following images (see Figure 4.16) correspond to the control, moderate damage, high
damage and failure samples of RAT 6 stained with Picro­Sirius Red protocol.
(a) PSR staining in the control sample.
(b) PSR staining in the 50C sample.
(c) PSR staining in the 200C sample.
(d) PSR staining in the failure sample.
Figure 4.16: PSR staining in RAT 6.
The aim with this staining method was to be able to investigate the damage looking at the
rupture or morphological changes of the fibres compared to the control sample. There is
a considerable variability in the images due to the cutting process of the sample. Each
samples had a different insertion angle on the knife due to the embedding in Tissue Tek
and subsequent fast freezing, which limited the controlled placement of the sample. As a
result, the appearance of the fibres changes across the images. For example, in Figure
4.16b, the fibres appear somewhat disordered. In the control sample (Figure 4.16a), the
48
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:57==
fibres exhibit a more wavy pattern, which can be attributed to their natural waviness in
the relaxed state. On the other hand, in the failure sample (Figure 4.16d), the fibres also
show a wavy pattern, but this is more likely due to the spring­like effect of the fibres after
complete failure. The high­damage sample in Figure 4.16c have a consistent pattern with
all the fibres aligned, but it does not show any damage characteristic.
In the study by Lee et al. [13], the hierarchical structure and cell morphology of rat tail
tendons were also investigated using Picro Sirius Red staining on longitudinal samples.
The results of this study suggest that the separation observed between structures within
the tendon corresponds to individual fibres. It is proposed that this separation is likely
caused by the dehydration and removal of non­collagenous matrix during the sample
processing.
4.4.2
Results from collagen hybridising peptide staining
CHP staining technique is used to detect and quantify denatured collagen molecules by
the hybridisation of a triple­helical with unfolded collagen α chains [28]. The following
images in Figure 4.17 correspond to the control, moderate damage, high damage and
failure samples of RAT 6 that have been stained using the CHP protocol. As a reminder,
the images are merged between the three channels, where the red colour corresponds to
the damaged collagen, green to membranes and blood vessels and blue to cell­nuclei.
(a) CHP staining in the control sample.
(b) CHP staining in the 50C sample.
(c) CHP staining in the 200C sample.
(d) CHP staining in the failure sample.
Figure 4.17: CHP staining in RAT 6.
It can be observed from the resulting images the differences in intensity of the three chan­
nels. The green channel presented very low intensity, indicating the absence of blood
vessel in the samples. The blue channel shows the localisation of the cells along the
tendons. The intensity of the red channel varies among the different damage samples.
These intensities were quantified and presented in the following Table 4.7. The images
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
49
==PAGE:58==
captured using a 10x magnification were taken with an exposure time of 800 ms on the
fluorescent microscope while for the images taken with a 20x magnification, the exposure
time was extended to 1500 ms.
Table 4.7: Intensity of red channel of the remaining samples after the staining process.
SAMPLE
INTENSITY (AU)
RAT2_10C_10x_1
20.98
RAT2_50C_10x_1
25.39
RAT2_CON_10x_1
9.56
RAT2_CON_10x_2
11.88
RAT4_100C_10x_1
33.57
RAT4_100C_10x_2
25.65
RAT4_50C_10x_1
23.44
RAT4_FAIL_10x_1
71.50
RAT4_FAIL_10x_2
36.96
RAT4_FAIL_10x_3
62.85
RAT5_10C_10x_1
11.71
RAT6_10C_10x_2
6.41
RAT6_200C_10x_1
20.40
RAT6_50C_10x_1
5.57
RAT6_CON_10x_1
3.85
RAT6_CON_10x_2
5.14
RAT6_FAIL_10x_1
47.93
The data were grouped into the five categories of damage, divided in the different animals,
as shown in Table 4.8. As mentioned earlier in this section, a lot of samples were missed
in the chemical process, presented in the table as blank gaps. The variations in the
intensities over the animals are shown graphically in Figure 4.18.
Table 4.8: Average values of intensity in all samples measured in AU.
CONTROL
LOW
MOD
HIGH
FAIL
RAT2
10.72
20.98
25.40
RAT4
23.44
29.61
57.11
RAT5
11.71
RAT6
4.49
6.41
5.57
20.40
47.93
50
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.18: Variations on the intensities within animals to quantify the damage analysis.
A clear increasing trend in the intensity of the red channel can be observed from the
control samples, with no loading, to the failure samples, showing the most amount of
damaged collagen molecules. However, when performing the T­test statistics on the data
from Table 4.8, no significant differences were found between the groups. Only between
the high­damage group and failure, the p­value is below 0.05. In order to make clear the
ascendant tendency, the average values of all animals were plotted in Figure 4.19, with
error bars representing the standard deviation within each level of damage.
Figure 4.19: Average intensities within categories of damage.
Unfortunately, due to the lack of samples left after the chemical treatment, the results are
not completely reliable. Even though the tendency of the data aligned with the hypoth­
esis, no clear conclusions can be taken from them with this amount of samples and the
insignificant statistical difference taken from the T­tests.
4.5
PEG microscopy images
The samples from the PEG tests were further analysed with the histological staining. The
PEG set was made by control, low, moderate and high damage and failure samples.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
51
==PAGE:60==
Unfortunately, only three samples from the PSR staining were left in the glass­slides.
These three are control, 200C and failure from RAT 6 PEG experiments, shown in Figure
4.20.
(a) PSR staining in the control sample
(b) PSR staining in the 200C sample
(c) PSR staining in the failure sample
Figure 4.20: PSR staining in RAT 6 PEG.
It can be observed that the control sample has a more wavy pattern, which is consistent
with the result found in Section 4.4.1. This pattern can be attributed to the natural waviness
of unloaded tendon fibres. Additionally, in all the samples there are fewer holes visible in
between the fibres due to the lower amount of water inside the tendon. This observation
suggest that the presence of holes might basically be due to swelling or higher water
content in the tendon when submerged in PBS. The structure in the high­damage sample
and the failure look similar, with aligned longitudinally fibres. Comparing with the samples
in PBS, it seems like the fibres are more compact due to the water content difference.
Unfortunately, the samples from the CHP are not available to compare them with the
results of the CHP staining of RAT 6 in Section 4.4.2.
4.6
Microscopy images of mouse leg muscle experiments
The importance of the study of the myotendinous junction is the application of the two
staining methods and imaging techniques to investigate the extent of damage in this par­
ticular area.
4.6.1
Results from staining method PSR
The images taken from the PSR staining show the amount of collagen molecules present
in the samples. Tendons, that are mainly collagen, appear as bright red colour. The
muscle tissue, which has a lower collagen content, appears with yellow colour. In Figure
4.21, a selection of images from the experiments has been made to illustrate the structural
52
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:61==
characteristics of the samples and the connection between the muscle and the tendon.
Figure 4.21d corresponds to a control sample without any loading.
(a) PSR staining in MOUSE 1 LEG 2 T1
(b) PSR staining in MOUSE 2 LEG 2 T1
(c) PSR staining in MOUSE 3 LEG 1 T1
(d) PSR staining in MOUSE 4 LEG 1 T4, control
sample
Figure 4.21: PSR staining in muscle samples.
The first two images, captured at a lower magnification, show how the tendon and the
muscle are attached to each other. The circular shapes within the muscle tissue indicate
that the fascicles were cut in a transverse direction rather than longitudinally. Also, the
method for cutting the samples may not be the optimal as the fascicles tend to separate,
as seen in Figure 4.21b. There is some red coloration between the muscle fascicles but
it is difficult to definitively conclude that it originates from tendon or it corresponds to the
myotendinous junction.
In the third and fourth images, a higher magnification was used to examine the muscle
structure and provide a closer look at the attachment between the tendon and muscle. It is
important to note that the sample was not completely flat, which explains the slight lack of
focus in the image. In the control image (Figure 4.21d) it can be clearly seen the sarcom­
eres in the muscle, which are the repeated bands between two Z­bands. Additionally, the
attachment of the tendon inside the muscle is evident, which appears as a highly folded
muscle membrane containing invaginations of collagen fibrils from the tendon. This struc­
tural arrangement is consistent with findings described in the literature [11]. In the third
image, the sarcomeres are also visible in the structure of the muscle but the attachment
of the tendon and muscle remains slightly less clear, possibly due to the induced damage
to the sample.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
53
==PAGE:62==
4.6.2
Results from staining method CHP
Damaged collagen is found looking at the images with CHP staining. The most repre­
sentative samples have been analysed and merged the three channels, and they are
shown in Figure 4.22. The exposure times of the fluorescent microscope were the same
as the ones used in the tendons. Figure 4.22a corresponds to an overloaded sample
from MOUSE 1, Figure 4.22b is a control sample without any loading, Figure 4.22c is an
overloaded sample from MOUSE 3 and Figure 4.22d is the soleus from MOUSE 4.
(a) CHP staining in MOUSE 1 LEG 2 T1
(b) CHP staining in MOUSE 3 LEG 1 T4, control
sample
(c) CHP staining in MOUSE 3 LEG 2 T1
(d) CHP staining in MOUSE 4 LEG 1 SOL
Figure 4.22: CHP staining in muscle samples.
The images were selected in order to be able to see part of the tendon and muscle, as
the focus area is the connection between the tissues. Moreover, these images are from
relatively intact samples where the cut was made longitudinally along the fibres. Unlike
the tendon samples, the green channel in this images reveals the presence of membranes
within the muscle tissue. It can be perceived a higher concentration of cells at the junction
between the tendon and muscle, both at the actual border and with some infiltration into
the muscle tissue. In the higher magnifications, there is a slight indication of how the
tendon folds into the muscle, suggesting a complex structural interaction between the two
tissues.
If the samples had detached as expected, it would have been interesting to quantify the
intensity of the image specifically at the MTJ area. This analysis could have been inter­
esting to see extent of damage to the collagenous fibres in that region. However, in this
research, the samples did not break at the MTJ, and the tendon itself contains a signifi­
cant amount of signal that makes it challenging to differentiate and quantify specific areas
accurately.
54
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:63==
Unfortunately, the muscle experiments did not generate the desired outcomes, resulting
in inconclusive results and insufficient conclusions.
4.7
Electron microscopy results
The samples that were taken for scanning electron microscopy analysis underwent all the
process mention in Section 3.6. After all the trials, the three ones that were taken images
from were RAT 2 control and 100 cycles and RAT 4 failure.
Figure 4.23 is comprised by the representative images from the control sample using
scanning electron microscopy.
(a) Control sample. Image number 7.
(b) Control sample. Image number 11.
Figure 4.23: Images from scanning electron microscopy control sample.
The resulting images from the control sample describe how the fibres are aligned in a
longitudinal cut from a tendon that had not being stretched or suffered any tensile stress.
It can be observed the straight line that the fibres draw. In Figure 4.23a there is a slight
depth in the tendon, where it can be also seen the straight fibres. In Figure 4.23b is
visible the GAGs that connect the different fibres to each other, that are the horizontal
lines between the fibres. In Figure 4.23a, it can also be seen the D­banding or crimping
in the tendon as a result of the wavy pattern of the collagen fibres in a relaxed state.
Figure 4.24 is comprised by the representative images from the high­damage sample
using scanning electron microscopy.
In the resulting images it can be clearly seen the presence of kinks, as a result of the dam­
age in the fibres. As seen in literature [7], the repeatedly overloaded samples show kinks
along their length that is dependant in the amount of damaged caused and indicates the
presence of denatured collagen fibres. Moreover, there is a complete loss of D­banding,
which also indicated the loss of molecular packing and its denaturalisation [7].
Figure 4.25 is comprised by the representative images from the failure sample using scan­
ning electron microscopy.
In Figure 4.25b it can be seen a little bit of kinks in the bottom part of the image, that
means that it could have suffered damage, but nothing compared with the high­damage
sample. As seen in literature [7], there were more kinks repeatedly overloaded samples
than in the samples that suffered from a complete failure. It can also be seen the GAGs
between the fibres, potentially in less amount than the control sample.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) High­damage sample. Image number 3.
(b) High­damage sample. Image number 15.
(c) High­damage sample. Image number 19.
(d) High­damage sample. Image number 22.
Figure 4.24: Images from scanning electron microscopy high­damage sample.
4.8
Limitations of the study
The aim of the present study was to develop a mechanical model of tendon and muscle
damage and characterise it with images at the microscale. To carry out this research,
different procedures were used leading to some limitations to the final outcome. This
section will try to find and summarise all the obstacles found in the realisation of the
project, in chronological order.
In the first place, regarding the used tissue in the tendon experiments, the tendons had
freezing and thawing cycles once prior to the start due to the usage in another previous
project (in total two freezing and thawing cycles minimum per sample). According to
literature [55], these freezing cycles affect the viscoelastic and structural properties of the
material after the third cycle, which can play a role in all the results, from the mechanical
data to the structures in the imaging. Moreover, the rat tail tendons have high variability in
dimensions, which is reflected in differences between animals in some of the mechanical
parameters.
The mechanical testing device also presented some limitations that conditioned the gen­
eration of the damage in the samples. The pulling speed was a determinant parameter
that changed the course of the damage extent because the real­life failures of the tendon
occur at a higher speed, which cannot be reached with this setup. The speed was also im­
portant for the duration of the experiments because time was a limiting factor. Depending
56
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:65==
(a) Failure sample. Image number 11.
(b) Failure sample. Image number 14.
Figure 4.25: Images from scanning electron microscopy failure sample.
on the length of the sample, each cycle could be around 30 seconds, which made some
of the experiments really long. One minor issue arose with some long samples because
the travel length of the machine only allowed 10 mm.
The slippage of the samples was a recurrent problem that had to be faced. The best
approach was to use glue to stick the knot of the tendon and make it immovable, but it had
the disadvantage of potential interference with the location where the stress was applied
within the tendon (the outer layer of the tendon’s ends could be glued). Even with the glue,
the slippage was still a problem, so the data about the strain properties, and therefore the
modulus, was not accurate or reliable. In order to compare to the literature, displacement
cycles would have been an interesting approach, but as mentioned previously it was not
possible due to the uncontrollable elongation of the sample.
Regarding the data taken from the testing device and subsequent analysis in the Python
script, several problems were encountered. As mentioned in Section 4.1.4, the device
recorded some errors that were difficult to handle in Python. This led to problems in
the maximum and minimum cycle values, and therefore in the calculation of the slope.
Also, due to the great amount of data recorded for the high­damage samples (100 or 200
cycles), the program failed in the correct recognition of the cycles.
For the samples that underwent the histological staining process after the mechanical
testing, some limitations were also associated. In the process of cutting the samples
embedded on Tissue Tek, was hard to make a clean cut of a thickness of 10 µm because
the sample curled and did not stick to the glass­slide. That is the reason why in the end 16
µm thickness was used, which led to a thicker layer sample for the imaging. But, without a
doubt, the biggest problem of this research was the release of the samples from the glass­
slides when doing the chemical baths in the protocol of both the stainings. This resulted
in the loss of a lot of data that could not be used for imaging and damage comparison,
which was the main objective. Several solutions were tried but without success.
The muscle experiments also encountered some difficulties in causing damage in the
desired site of failure of the myotendinous unit. At the time of stretching the muscle and
tendon, the speed was also lower than wanted, which could also make a change in the
location of the failure. Electrostimulating seemed like a good option according to literature
[30], but the setup was not optimal and the results were not successful. In this case, in
the staining process, the sticking of the samples to the glass was satisfactory, probably
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
57
==PAGE:66==
because of the presence of the muscle.
4.8.1
Possible improvements
After analysing the data obtained in the tendon experiments, some improvements can be
taken into account. In the first place, make the animal model with a more consistent type
of tendon, which could help to compare easier the samples. Also, the way the samples
were attached to the mechanical testing machine could be an improvement, using clamps
or other attachment methods to the pulling machine, without glue or elements that can in­
fluence the properties. The attachment method could also have an impact on the slippage
of the sample, which was an issue throughout the experiments.
The Python script can also be improved with more sophisticated functions to manipulate
the data and make a better analysis of the mechanical data. It is true that an expert in
Python could deal better with this type of data, or just it could have been used more time on
fixing this issue, which was discarded because it was not the main focus of this research.
Regarding the loss of samples in the chemical baths, it is difficult to come up with an
approach to solve this issue. However, it is important to rectify it to preserve all the data
for further analysis.
From the muscle experiments using the mice, several conclusions were identified, lead­
ing to potential improvements in the experimental method. One suggestion is to explore
the possibility of electrostimulating the muscle directly in the mouse through nerve stimu­
lation, which could offer more controlled and precise muscle contractions during testing.
Furthermore, other improvements to the methodology, such as exploring the method with
other muscles in the leg such as the soleus (not enough investigated here), the tibialis
anterior or gastrocnemius. The attachment to the mechanical device can also be studied.
Moreover, the speed of the pulling also plays an important role and more investigation on
it can be done.
58
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:67==
5
Conclusion
The main objective of this project was to establish a protocol for in vitro testing of tendon
and muscle tissues, focusing on creating different levels of damage to mimic tendinopathies
and acute disorders. Additionally, a model for causing partial tearing in the MTJ was also
developed. Staining procedures and optical microscopy techniques were employed to
evaluate the accuracy of the proposed model, while scanning electron microscopy was
used to examine the surface morphology of the samples and observe the changes due to
damage.
Overall, the objectives of the project were successfully achieved, despite encountering
several limitations throughout the research. The protocol for mechanical testing was de­
veloped using the available resources at Bispebjerg Hospital, allowing for the character­
isation of failure and various levels of damage in the tendon. However, an issue with
slippage occurred during the attachment of the tendon to the mechanical testing device
that led to inaccuracies in the results. Nonetheless, the extent of damage in the sam­
ples was evaluated, and the viability of the methodology was confirmed. Mechanical data
was analysed to extract the tendon’s mechanical properties, further validating the testing
method with related literature. Regarding the MTJ, the focus was on simulating the site
of lesion to closely imitate a real tearing situation. Staining and optical microscopy were
used to examine the tendon and muscle samples. However, an important issue arose
due to the loss of samples during the staining process, leading to gaps in the research
and reducing the reliability of the results.
Despite these limitations, the successes and failures of this study serve as a foundation
for future research on tendons in the department. Additionally, the hypothesis formulated
at the beginning of the research for the experiments was indeed observed during the
course of the study, leading to a good validation outcome. In general, the results provide
a solid baseline for exploring more complex models and advancing the understanding of
musculoskeletal disorders in tendons and the myotendinous junction.
Future research
This research covered various aspects of tendon studies from the existing literature, open­
ing up different directions for future investigations. Depending on the specific area of
interest, several lines can be followed.
In terms of tendon research, studying the extent of damage in human tendons could give
hints into the pathophysiology of overloading conditions, such as tendinopathies. Addi­
tionally, developing a model that incorporates the presence of tenocytes, the specialised
cells in tendons, could contribute to a better understanding of tendon disorders. Previ­
ous studies have reported cellular changes in response to damaging conditions, which
could be further explored to comprehend these disorders. Understanding the underlying
disease mechanisms will lead to develop targeted and more effective treatments.
Exploring the influence of water content on tendon properties is another important area,
especially in human tissue. Accurately modelling the tendon environment requires con­
trolling the water content within the tissue, as it has been demonstrated to significantly
affect the mechanical properties.
The site of lesion in the myotendinous junction is also a promising area for future research.
Although less studied, investigating this aspect can allow to understand the associated
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
59
==PAGE:68==
pathologies and to test different treatment modalities. However, studying the myotendi­
nous junction in animal models can be challenging due to the variations in tissue structure,
dimensions, and function compared to in vivo human tissue.
Overall, further research in these areas has the potential to enhance the understanding
of tendon disorders, improve treatment strategies, and bridge the gap between animal
models and human tissue.
60
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Carlo Loiacono et al. “Tendinopathy: Pathophysiology, Therapeutic Options, and
Role of Nutraceutics. A Narrative Literature Review”. In: Medicina (2019). DOI: 10.
3390/medicina55080447.
[2]
Sara Steinmann et al. “Spectrum of Tendon Pathologies: Triggers, Trails and End­
State”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences (2020). DOI: 10.3390/ijms21030844.
[3]
Brett M. Andres and George A. C. Murrell. “Treatment of Tendinopathy: What Works,
What Does Not, and What is on the Horizon”. In: Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
Research (2008). DOI: 10.1007/s11999-008-0260-1.
[4]
David Shier, Jackie Butler, and Ricki Lewis. Hole’s Essentials of Human Anatomy
and Physiology. Ninth Edition.
[5]
Matthew M. Counihan and Louis J. Soslowsky. Tendons and Ligaments. 2020. URL:
https://musculoskeletalkey.com/tendons-and-ligaments-2/.
[6]
Gian Luigi Canata, Pieter d’Hooghe, and Kenneth J. Hunt. Muscle and Tendon In­
juries. Eavluation and Management. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-54184-5.
[7]
Samuel P. Veres, Julia M. Harrison, and J. Michael Lee. “Repeated Subrupture
Overload Causes Progression of Nanoscaled Discrete Plasticity Damage in Tendon
Collagen Fibrils”. In: Wiley Online Library (2012). DOI: 10.1002/jor.22292.
[8]
Chavaunne T. Thorpe and Hazel R.C. Screen. “Tendon Structure and Composition”.
In: Metabolic Influences on Risk for Tendon Disorders (2016). DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-33943-6_1.
[9]
Bruno Bordoni and Matthew Varacallo. “Anatomy, Tendons”. In: StatPearls (2022).
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK513237/?report=reader.
[10]
M. Kaya, N. Karahan, and B. Yılmaz. “Tendon Structure and Classification”. In: Ten­
dons. IntechOpen (2019). DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.84622.
[11]
Jens Rithamer Jakobsen and Michael Rindom Krogsgaard. “The Myotendinous
Junction—A Vulnerable Companion in Sports. A Narrative Review”. In: Frontiers
in Physiology (2021). DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.635561.
[12]
Davide Curzi. “Ultrastructural study of myotendinous junction plasticity: from disuse
to exercise”. In: Sport Sciences for Health (2016). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11332-016-0301-1.
[13]
Andrea H. Lee and Dawn M. Elliott. “Comparative multi­scale hierarchical structure
of the tail, plantaris, and Achilles tendons in the rat”. In: Journal of Anatomy (2018).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/joa.12913.
[14]
Tino Stauber, Ulrich Blache, and Jess G. Snedeker. “Tendon tissue microdamage
and the limits of intrinsic repair”. In: Matrix Biology (2019). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.matbio.2019.07.008.
[15]
David L. Butler et al. “Biomechanics of ligaments and tendons”. In: Exercise and
Sport Sciences Reviews (1978). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1249/00003677-197800060-
00005.
[16]
Taisei Hosoido et al. “Qualitative Comparison between Rats and Humans in Quadrupedal
and Bipedal Locomotion”. In: Journal of Behavioral and Brain Sciences (2013). DOI:
10.4236/jbbs.2013.31013.
[17]
Darin Bloemberg and Joe Quadrilatero. “Rapid Determination of Myosin Heavy
Chain Expression in Rat, Mouse, and Human Skeletal Muscle Using Multicolor Im­
munofluorescence Analysis”. In: (2012). DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035273.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
61
==PAGE:70==
[18]
Chris M. Gregory et al. “Human and rat skeletal muscle adaptations to spinal cord
injury”. In: Canadian journal of applied physiology (2003). DOI: 10.1139/h03-036.
[19]
Neal L. Millar et al. “Tendinopathy”. In: Disease Primers (2021). DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41572-020-00234-1.
[20]
Kuno Weise. “Tendon Injuries”. In: 2014. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-
88124-7_16.
[21]
Jeff M. Barrett and Jack P. Callaghan. “A one­dimensional collagen­based biome­
chanical model of passive soft tissue with viscoelasticity and failure”. In: Journal of
Theoretical Biology (2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2020.110488. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002251932030343X.
[22]
Claire O’Brien, Neil Marr, and Chavaunne Thorpe. “Microdamage in the equine su­
perficial digital flexor tendon”. In: Equine Veterinary Journal (2020). DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1111/evj.13331.
[23]
Marie Sand Traberg and Rene B. Svensson. “Viscoelastic Properties of Tendons.
Experiment and data analysis”. In: 22475: Tissue and movement biomechanics
(2022).
[24]
Vito Burgio et al. “Mechanical Properties of Animal Tendons: A Review and Compar­
ative Study for the Identification of the Most Suitable Human Tendon Surrogates”.
In: Processes (2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/pr10030485.
[25]
Jared L. Zitnay et al. “Accumulation of collagen molecular unfolding is the mecha­
nism of cyclic fatigue damage and failure in collagenous tissues”. In: Science Ad­
vances (2020). DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aba2795.
[26]
Anas K. Al Makhzoomi, Thomas B. Kirk, and Garry T. Allison. “A multiscale study
of morphological changes in tendons following repeated cyclic loading”. In: Journal
of Biomechanics (2021). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2021.110790.
[27]
Stephen J. Ros et al. “Multiscale mechanisms of tendon fatigue damage progres­
sion and severity are strain and cycle dependent”. In: Journal of Biomechanics
(2019). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2019.01.026.
[28]
Jared L. Zitnay, Allen H. Lin, and Jeffrey A. Weiss. “Tendons exhibit greater resis­
tance to tissue and molecular­level damage with increasing strain rate during cyclic
fatigue”. In: Acta Biomaterialia (2021). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2021.
07.045.
[29]
James G. Tidball. “Myotendinous junction: morphological changes and mechanical
failure associated with muscle cell atrophy”. In: Experimental and Molecular Pathol­
ogy (1983). DOI: 10.1016/0014-4800(84)90060-1.
[30]
J. G. Tidball, G. Salem, and R. Zernicke. “Site and mechanical conditions for failure
of skeletal muscle in experimental strain injuries”. In: Journal of applied physiology
(1993). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1993.74.3.1280.
[31]
Babak N. Safa et al. “Exposure to buffer solution alters tendon hydration and me­
chanics”. In: Journal of biomechanics (2017). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbiomech.2017.06.045.
[32]
ratbehavior. The Rat’s Tail. 2003. URL: http://www.ratbehavior.org/RatTails.htm.
[33]
James P. Price, Glen O. Njus, and Ted A. Conway. “Ultrastructural Properties of
Rat Tail Tendon”. In: Proceedings of the 1996 Fifteenth Southern Biomedical Engi­
neering Conference (1996). DOI: 10.1109/SBEC.1996.493275.
[34]
Sara Capas Peneda Vieira Pereira. “Estimating the time of death in rodent animal
house facilities”. In: (2016).
[35]
Deben UK. URL: https://deben.co.uk/tensile-testing/optical/mini-tensile-tester-200n-
compression-horizontal-bending-stage/.
62
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:71==
[36]
Wikipedia contributors. Strain Gauge. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Strain_gauge.
[37]
Wikipedia contributors. Linear variable differential transformer. 2023. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_variable_differential_transformer.
[38]
URL: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/product/sigma/p4417.
[39]
C. C. Chu and Z. Kizil. “Quantitative evaluation of stiffness of commercial suture
materials”. In: Surgery, gynecology and obstetrics (1989).
[40]
John A. Kiernan. Sirius Red Staining Protocol for Collagen. URL: https://www.
ihcworld.com/_protocols/special_stains/sirius_red.htm.
[41]
Collagen Hybridizing Peptide, Biotin Conjugate for Automated Staining (Auto­CHP).
URL: https://www.3helix.com/product/auto-chp/.
[42]
URL: https://cfim.ku.dk/equipment/equipment/med020/.
[43]
URL: https://cfim.ku.dk/equipment/electron_microscopy/quanta/.
[44]
Peterson K. Ozili. “The acceptable R­square in empirical modelling for social sci­
ence research”. In: Munich Personal RePEc Archive (2023). URL: https://mpra.ub.
uni-muenchen.de/115769/.
[45]
Wikipedia contributors. Student’s T­test. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Student%5C%27s_t-test&oldid=1161250646.
[46]
Wikipedia contributors. Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=Kolmogorov%5C%E2%5C%80%5C%93Smirnov_test&oldid=
1136951675.
[47]
Steven Bradburn. How To Create A QQ Plot In Microsoft Excel. 2021. URL: https:
//toptipbio.com/qq-plot-excel/?utm_content=cmp-true.
[48]
Zach. How to Perform a Kolmogorov­Smirnov Test in Excel. 2021. URL: https://
www.statology.org/kolmogorov-smirnov-test-excel/.
[49]
Kirsten Legerlotz, Graham P. Riley, and Hazel R.C. Screen. “Specimen dimensions
influence the measurement of material properties in tendon fascicles”. In: Journal
of Biomechanics (2010). DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.04.040.
[50]
Theresa S. Atkinson, Benjamin J. Ewers, and Roger C. Haut. “The tensile and stress
relaxation responses of human patellar tendon varies with specimen cross­sectional
area”. In: Journal of Biomechanics (1999). DOI: 10.1016/s0021-9290(99)00089-5.
[51]
Roger C. Haut. “The Influence of Specimen Length on the Tensile Failure Properties
of Tendon Collagen”. In: Journal of Biomechanics (1986). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0021-9290(86)90190-9.
[52]
Taija Finni et al. “Viewpoint: On the hysteresis in the human Achilles tendon”. In:
Journal of Applied Physiology (2012). DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01005.2012.
[53]
David R. Eyre, Mercedes A. Paz, and Paul M. Gallop. “Cross­linking in collagen
and elastin”. In: Annual review of biochemistry (1984). DOI: 10.1146/annurev.bi.53.
070184.003441.
[54]
Preventing Tissue Sections From Falling/Coming Off Slides. URL: https://www.
ihcworld.com/_technical_tips/section_falloff_tips.htm.
[55]
Martyna Ekiert et al. “The effect of multiple freeze­thaw cycles on the viscoelastic
properties and microstructure of bovine superficial digital flexor tendon”. In: Journal
of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials (2021). DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmbbm.2021.104582.
[56]
Prashant Dahal. Sarcomere: Definition, Structure, Diagram, and Functions. 2023.
URL: hhttps://thebiologynotes.com/sarcomere/.
[57]
B6.129S6­Per2tm1Jt/J. URL: https://www.jax.org/strain/006852.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:73==
A
Sarcomere structure
Sarcomeres are fundamental units responsible for the contraction and relaxation of stri­
ated muscle cells. Structurally, they consist of thick and thin protein filaments, primarily
composed of myosin and actin proteins respectively. Additional proteins such as troponin
and tropomyosin are also present within the sarcomere. The coordinated interaction be­
tween actin and myosin proteins enables the contraction and relaxation of muscle fibers,
facilitating mechanical work in our bodies [56].
Within a sarcomere, the thick filaments (composed of myosin) are centrally positioned,
while the thin filaments (composed of actin) extend from both sides of the thick fila­
ments. The thin filaments are anchored to the Z­disc, a structural component. Elastic
titin molecules connect the myosin filaments to the Z­disc. Each sarcomere is defined by
the space between two adjacent Z­discs [56].
The function of a sarcomere is regulated by a complex system involving the troponin and
tropomyosin proteins present on the thin filaments. These proteins inhibit the binding of
actin and myosin filaments, preventing the formation of cross­bridges, until a signal for
muscle contraction is received and energy in the form of ATP hydrolysis is available [56].
Figure A.1: Structure of the sarcomere. Taken from Dahal et al. [56]
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
65
==PAGE:74==
B
Mice type
The mice used in this study were genetically modified to express a gene called ”Lu­
ciferase” in conjunction with the ”Per2” gene. Luciferase, derived from fireflies, causes
the tissue to emit light when the Per2 gene is active. Per2 is a clock gene responsible
for regulating the body’s internal clock, exhibiting high activity during the night and low
activity in the morning [57].
The genetic modification was introduced into a common laboratory mouse strain known
as C57BL/6 [57]. However, it is important to note that in this particular study, the focus was
on mice without the genetic modification. Although the mice were offspring of ”mPer2Luc”
parents, they did not possess the genetic modification and were essentially considered
normal C57BL/6 mice.
66
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:75==
C
Processing Scripts
The scripts used in this study were written in a separate file, which has been included as
supplementary material. This additional file contains all the necessary code for running
the scripts and reproducing the analysis conducted in the study.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
67
==PAGE:76==
D
Kolmogorov­Smirnov test table
Figure D.1: Table Kolmogorov­Smirnov.
68
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:77==
E
Force cycles
Processing errors
Figure E.1: Error horizontal line.
(a) Slope calculus
(b) One loop
Figure E.2: Errors in slope calculus.
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
69
==PAGE:78==
(a) Slope calculus
(b) One loop
Figure E.3: Errors in slope calculus.
(a) Slope calculus
(b) One loop
Figure E.4: Errors in slope calculus.
Modulus overview in all the experiments
(a) RAT2_10C
(b) RAT2_100C
(c) RAT4_50C
(d) RAT4_100C
Figure E.5: Modulus over the cycles, with outliers.
70
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
==PAGE:79==
Structural damage in overloaded tendon and muscle tissue
71
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
