==PAGE:1==
Learning and Generalizing Polynomials in Simulation
Metamodeling
Jesper Hauch
DTU Management
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Abstract
The ability to learn polynomials and generalize out-of-distribution is essential
for simulation metamodels in many disciplines of engineering, where the time
step updates are described by polynomials. While feed forward neural networks
can fit any function, they cannot generalize out-of-distribution for higher-order
polynomials. Therefore, this paper collects and proposes multiplicative neural
network (MNN) architectures that are used as recursive building blocks for approx-
imating higher-order polynomials. Our experiments show that MNNs are better
than baseline models at generalizing, and their performance in validation is true to
their performance in out-of-distribution tests. In addition to MNN architectures, a
simulation metamodeling approach is proposed for simulations with polynomial
time step updates. For these simulations, simulating a time interval can be per-
formed in fewer steps by increasing the step size, which entails approximating
higher-order polynomials. While our approach is compatible with any simulation
with polynomial time step updates, a demonstration is shown for an epidemiology
simulation model, which also shows the inductive bias in MNNs for learning and
generalizing higher-order polynomials.
1
Introduction
Inductive learning is a fundamental task of machine learning models describing the process where pat-
terns are induced from data. In the field of machine learning, multilayer feed forward neural networks
(FFNNs) have been shown to be powerful inductive learners, as they are universal approximators
capable of approximating any measurable function to any desired degree of accuracy [16]. However,
the high flexibility of neural networks makes them prone to overfitting the data on which they are
trained, indicating that they cannot properly generalize to unseen data. There exist approaches to
avoid overfitting during training [40], but even when these are successfully applied, models can
still struggle to generalize to unseen data, especially when the unseen data come from a different
distribution than the training data. In this case, additional biases are critical for neural networks to
generalize, since an unbiased program, which uses training data as its only source of information,
cannot outperform programs that use rote learning [30]. To enable neural networks to generalize to
unseen out-of-distribution data, inductive biases can be introduced by making reasonable assumptions
about the underlying patterns of the data on which induction is performed.
Inductive learning is closely related to how progress is made in the field of natural sciences, where
empirical evidence from experimentation and observation is used to understand the world. More
specifically, the aim is to understand a process and its underlying mechanisms to model the outcome
in different situations, for example, using simulation. Simulation models are a popular tool for
exploring the behavior of a process over time, given a set of parameters and state variables. The
state variables describe the state of the process at some given time step, and their behavior over time
are expressed as differential equations in many disciplines of engineering. As a result, a simulation
==PAGE:2==
(a) In and out-of-distribution performance for
f(x) = x + 1.
(b) In and out-of-distribution performance for
f(x) = x2 −x.
Figure 1: Multilayer FFNN with ReLU activation learning low-order polynomials with samples from
N(0, 1) distribution.
run is performed by solving the system of differential equations that describes the process [25].
Unfortunately, solving this system for high-complexity processes can be computationally expensive
to an extent that renders simulation almost useless in practice. An approach to this problem is to
use metamodeling, where a simpler mathematical model is introduced to approximate the behavior
induced by the differential equations of the computationally expensive simulation model. In discrete
event simulation, these differential equations can be expressed as polynomials that relate the current
values of state variables to the past values. The order of these polynomials is determined by the
number of discrete time steps that are approximated at a time, where approximating multiple time
steps entails approximating higher-order polynomials. Therefore, a simulation metamodel should
be able to approximate both low- and high-order polynomials to be successful in many engineering
applications. Neural networks are popular metamodels for this purpose, as FFNNs should be able to
approximate any function if enough neurons and layers are used [16].
As an example, consider the two simple low-order polynomial functions f(x) = x + 1 and f(x) =
x2 −x. These polynomials are approximated using a multilayer FFNN with ReLU activation that
learns from samples drawn from a conditional standard normal distribution. If the multilayer FFNN
has learned the underlying polynomials, it should be able to generalize to samples outside of the
training distribution. The polynomial f(x) = x + 1 is closely approximated within the training
distribution, as seen in Figure 1a by the near perfect fit between the lines in the red area. As samples
further away from the training distribution are used, the error between the true values and predictions
starts to grow but remains relatively low. Likewise, for the quadratic polynomial f(x) = x2 −x in
Figure 1b, the fit is also near perfect within the training distribution, but errors begin to occur as soon
as samples outside the training distribution are used. When samples are used that lie even further
away from the training distribution, the error between the true values and predictions is large.
The example shows that FFNNs, which are architectures without inductive biases, can learn polyno-
mials in-distribution but struggle with out-of-distribution generalization, especially for polynomials
of second-order. It is reasonable to assume that the polynomials describing real-world processes are
much more complex than the simple ones in the example, which implies that FFNNs perform even
worse when modeling these processes out-of-distribution. Therefore, in this thesis, we focus on the
development of neural network simulation metamodels that can learn polynomials and generalize
out-of-distribution. The following contributions are made:
• Collect and repurpose multiplicative neural network (MNN) architectures, which are building
blocks that can be used recursively to model polynomials of arbitrary order. This thesis
proposes the PDCLow architecture based on MNNs in the literature.
• Performance evaluation is done out-of-distribution from the training distribution to test
whether MNNs are able to generalize. Across all experiments, MNNs outperform baseline
models in out-of-distribution tests, and their performance in validation is true to their
performance in out-of-distribution tests.
2
==PAGE:3==
• A novel metamodeling approach for discrete event simulations with time step updates
described by polynomials. The approach is demonstrated in this work for an epidemiology
simulation model.
• The code is available for open source use at https://github.com/jesperhauch/
polynomial_deep_learning.
The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follows. In Section 2, the relevant literature is
reviewed. Section 3 describes how higher-order outputs can be produced for polynomial learning
and presents the proposed simulation metamodeling approach. The experimental setup and the
experiments themselves are thoroughly described in Section 4, while their results are evaluated in
Section 5 with an emphasis on out-of-distribution generalization. Limitations and ideas for future
work are discussed in Section 6 before the paper is concluded in Section 7.
2
Literature Review
This section reviews the literature on simulation metamodeling and the literature that bridges the
gap between neural networks and polynomials. The first section describes the machine learning
models used in the metamodeling literature, where emphasis is placed on their generalization
capabilities. Some of this literature is implicitly concerned with polynomial fitting, which creates a
natural transition to the second section that focuses solely on approaches that explicitly approximate
polynomials. The final section explains the development and use of polynomial neural networks.
2.1
Machine learning metamodels
This section reviews the use of machine learning models that approximate the input-to-output
function of simulators, also known as simulation metamodels. Focus is placed on the advantages and
disadvantages of using certain machine learning models for metamodeling, especially in terms of
their out-of-distribution generalization capabilities.
Random Forest (RF) is a machine learning model that generates a set of decision trees to make a
prediction collectively. They are capable of fitting non-linear data using a small number of samples,
which can be useful when only a limited amount of data from the simulator is available [9]. Diverse
applications have seen RF act as a decision support in design optimization [9, 34] and as predictors of
soil emissions [28] and drainage fraction in water resource management [2]. RF models are powerful
but can be computationally expensive to train, depending on the size of the ensemble and the depth
of the decision trees. Furthermore, RF models can be undesirable for metamodeling, as they do not
generalize well beyond training data if testing is performed out-of-distribution [2].
The lack of generalization capabilities is also a problem for Bayesian networks, despite the widespread
assumption that they are good at out-of-distribution detection [8]. Nevertheless, Bayesian networks
have been applied in metamodeling with great success in terms of interpretability and computational
efficiency. In discrete event simulation, Bayesian networks can track the probability distribution of
the simulation state over the duration of the simulation. This enables in-depth analysis in individual
time steps and what-if analyzes, where state variables can be fixed in a certain time step to investigate
their influence [35]. Although Bayesian networks are highly interpretable models, implementing
them successfully can be tedious. Their structure is determined by the cause-effect relationship
between variables, which is difficult to assess for complex processes [39], and cyclical relationships
between variables cannot be dealt with [19]. These factors, among others, result in Bayesian networks
not being commonly used for metamodeling.
A common machine learning metamodel is the Gaussian process, which is also referred to as a
kriging model in the literature. Ordinary kriging can be applied in deterministic simulation [24], but
extensions have enabled applications in stochastic simulation [1]. Unfortunately, kriging models scale
poorly, since an unknown correlation function has to be approximated with maximum likelihood
estimation [24]. As a result, the number of input variables and the amount of training data must be
low to reduce the computation time. Although the latter is an acceptable limitation in metamodeling
(due to often slow simulation tools), the number of input variables may need to be high depending on
the process at hand, making this a challenge. On the other hand, a benefit of kriging models compared
with other approaches is that the uncertainty of the predictor is quantified by default, which facilitates
transparency of performance if kriging is applied in out-of-distribution scenarios in practice. As
3
==PAGE:4==
an extension to the default uncertainty estimation, the work of Lam and Zhang [26] even combines
stochastic kriging with neural networks to provide prediction intervals that quantify the uncertainty
of a prediction with greater precision.
Neural networks are also widely used for metamodeling because of their flexible architectures. The
work by Kasim et al. [20] proposes a method based on neural architecture search, which enables the
acceleration of scientific simulations up to 2 billion times using limited training data [20]. Simpler
neural networks, such as FFNNs, have also been successfully applied to accelerate simulation time
[37, 38], but their out-of-distribution generalization capabilities are rarely explored. However, the use
of convolutional neural networks has shown promising results in generalization to unseen data [29].
This is likely to be attributable to the inductive biases of convolutional neural networks, which are
useful for computer vision applications.
2.2
Polynomial Approximation
The machine learning metamodels covered in the previous section are implicitly learning the often
underlying polynomial input-to-output functions of simulators. In contrast, this section reviews the
literature explicitly learning polynomial functions. Recent work by Zhu et al. [41] proposes how
common neural networks can adhere to physical laws by representing them as Taylor polynomials of
arbitrary order and placing constraints on their state predictions. While their work assumes that the
true polynomials that model dynamical systems are unknown from a learning perspective, the work
of Pei et al. [33] attempts to approximate the terms of known polynomials with neural networks. By
assuming that the polynomial is known, they design neural network architectures that are specific
for a single polynomial term, e.g. approximating the third polynomial term alone. Unfortunately,
their architectures are isolated to one-variable and two-variable cases up to the third-order. However,
designing neural networks to approximate known mathematical functions is the first step toward
understanding how neural networks can be designed to solve unknown problems [33].
2.3
Polynomial Neural Networks
The combination of polynomials and neural networks happened in the late 1960s with the Group
Method of Data Handling algorithm, which can automatically determine the best performing neural
network structure for a specific application. The structure is generated by selecting a subset of two
input variables in each neuron, termed partial descriptions (PDs), and treating them as quadratic
regression polynomials [17]. The highly systematic design approach means that the layers and neuron
connections change dynamically during training. Unfortunately, self-organizing networks following
this approach tend to generate complex polynomials for simple systems, produce overly complex
models, and lack flexibility if there are fewer than three input variables [31]. These problems are
alleviated in another approach to self-organizing networks called polynomial neural networks (PNNs)
[31], where the PDs can have a different number of input variables and exploit polynomials of
different order. The structure of the PNN is selected based on the number of input variables and the
order of the PDs in every layer. In the basic PNN structure shown in Figure 2, the number of input
variables is the same in every layer, while the modified PNN structure can have varying numbers of
input variables from layer to layer. These two structures are applied in simulations of gas furnaces,
sewage treatment, and non-linear static systems, where they outperform baseline models in mean
squared error and stability index. The stability index expresses the performance deterioration of the
model in the test data and is a good indicator of the approximation and generalization capabilities of
the PNN. As PNNs are self-organizing, their structure is automatically determined for an application,
whereas another study considers PNNs as FFNNs equipped with a polynomial activation function or
transfer function to accommodate polynomial approximation [22].
3
Methodology
This section concerns the methodology that comprises the main contributions of this thesis. The first
section describes the multiplicative neural networks (MNNs) used to produce higher-order outputs
from input. The second section covers the simulation metamodeling approach, compatible with
simulations where state updates are described by polynomials.
4
==PAGE:5==
Figure 2: Basic polynomial neural network (PNN) structure [31]. The partial descriptions (PDs) are
subsets of the input variables.
3.1
Producing Higher-Order Outputs
The introduction of this paper highlights why unbiased estimators, such as an FFNN, require inductive
biases to generalize beyond the training data. Our introductory example in Figure 1 shows how a
multilayer FFNN is able to generalize well for a first-order polynomial, but struggles for a quadratic
function. In contrast to the unbiased architecture of such models, this section concerns architectures
aiming at producing higher-order outputs. These architectures are termed multiplicative neural
networks (MNNs) because of their use of multiplications to raise the input to higher-order output.
The first architecture is highly inspired by the work on deep PNNs [22], which defines PNNs as
FFNNs with a polynomial activation function. The polynomial activation function simply applies a
selected exponent to the input, as shown in Figure 3, to facilitate the approximation of higher-order
polynomials. However, this architecture only facilitates fitting the highest-order term in a polynomial
and neglects lower-order terms, which is problematic depending on the polynomial at hand.
Figure 3: Polynomial Activation Neural Network (PANN). PANN is a FFNN with polynomial
activation, which raises input to the ith order.
While the PANN uses a polynomial activation function to produce higher-order outputs, the Coupled
CP decomposition (CCP) from the Π-Nets paper [5] uses a special kind of skip connection instead.
Their work focuses on applications that require convolutional layers in the CCP architecture, such as
image generation and classification, whereas this thesis models input-output functions using linear
layers. A visualization of a CCP architecture that can generate third-order output is found in Figure
4, where the linear layers are shown as white boxes, the mathematical operations are shown as gray
boxes, and the different colored areas indicate the polynomial order of the output produced by that
area. The green area produces first-order output using the linear layer U1, which performs a linear
transformation of the input. The output of the green area is multiplied by the first-order output of
U2 in the red area, which raises the output to the second-order. To preserve a term of first-order, the
output from the green area is added to the second-order output via a skip connection. The concept
of using the same first-order output to both represent the first-order term and raise the input to the
second-order is called weight sharing, since the weights in U1 are shared between these two use cases.
5
==PAGE:6==
When the weights are shared, the number of parameters that need to be trained is reduced, increasing
the computational efficiency of the training process. The aforementioned procedure for the red area
is repeated for the yellow area with the output of the red area, where a third-order output is generated,
and is repeatable to generate output of any desired order.
Figure 4: Third-order Coupled CP (CCP) model [5]. The architecture can be used recursively to
achieve higher-order output than shown here. The output of the green area is of first-order, red area is
second-order, and yellow area is third-order.
The work on Π-Nets is extended with a more expressive model in a separate work, the Polynomial
Deep Classifier (PDC) [6], which also produces a higher-order output of the input. The main
difference between PDC and CCP is that weight sharing is no longer assumed across the different
orders in the architecture, which allows for higher expressiveness but increases model size. In practice,
this means that the special skip connection used in CCP is no longer present. The applications of the
two models are similar, although PDC is mainly applied in image and audio classification problems,
where different variants of the PDC architecture are embedded in baseline models, which consistently
outperform baseline models without PDC embedded. The different PDC variants are achieved by
changing the number of channels in the convolutional layers and the depth of the model. In this thesis,
the generic PDC model is applied, since the different variants can only be created if convolutional
layers are used. A third-order PDC is shown in Figure 5a, where linear layers are shown as white
boxes, mathematical operations are shown as gray boxes, and the different colored areas indicate the
polynomial order of the output produced by that area, as for the CCP. The absence of weight sharing
in PDC is apparent by the increase in the number of U layers, which are multiplied together within
each colored area in the figure. For example, raising to second-order is done by multiplying the output
of U2,1 and U2,2 independently of the first-order output from U1. Furthermore, the introduction of
hidden layers V , significantly increases the depth and number of parameters in PDC compared to
CCP. Therefore, to allow comparisons of models without weight sharing and a similar number of
parameters, this thesis proposes an architecture in which the V layers are absent, called PDCLow,
visualized in Figure 5b. PDCLow is essentially a CCP without weight sharing and a low-parameter
version of PDC.
3.2
Simulation Metamodeling Approach
Polynomials are an important tool in simulation, where they are used to relate the values of state
variables over time. In discrete event simulations, the state values in the next time step are approxi-
mated by polynomials of the previous state values, which have varying order depending on the size
of the time step. The size of the time step denotes the time increment from progressing a single step
in a simulation. If the size of the time steps is increased, the metamodel approximates state values
further ahead in time in the same number of time steps, and the order of the polynomials describing
the time step updates increases. Therefore, simulating a given time interval can be done in fewer time
steps by modeling higher-order polynomials. Decreasing the number of time steps in a simulation is
useful in machine learning, as there are fewer time steps for approximation errors to accumulate. The
approach is general to all simulations that use polynomials for time step updates, but the following
shows a demonstration for an epidemiology simulation model to better illustrate it.
Epidemiology models represent the spread of an infectious disease in a population over time and
consider the population in three different categories or compartments: Susceptible, Infected and
Recovered (SIR). Susceptible individuals can contract a disease from infected individuals, whereafter
they can recover and are then considered immune to reinfection [12]. The SIR model in this
experiment is a Kermack-McKendrick (KM) model [21], which models the spread of disease in
a closed population. The KM model uses parameters β and γ to model the rate of infection and
recovery, respectively. The infection rate β controls the rate of transition from susceptible to infected,
whereas the recovery rate γ controls the rate from infected to recovered. The transitions between
6
==PAGE:7==
(a) Third-order PDC model [6].
(b) Third-order PDCLow model, obtained
from PDC in Figure 5a by removing the V
layers.
Figure 5: Third-order examples of Polynomial Deep Classifier (PDC) models. The architectures can
be used recursively for higher-orders than shown here. Our proposal, PDCLow, is essentially a CCP
without weight sharing and a low-parameter version of PDC. The colored areas denote the order of
the output, where green represents first-order, red is second-order, and yellow is third-order.
compartments are expressed in terms of the preceding time step, as seen in Equations 1-3.
st+1 = st −βstit
(1)
it+1 = it + βstit −γit
(2)
rt+1 = rt + γit
(3)
The three state variables st, it and rt describe the fraction of a population N that is susceptible,
infected and recovered at a certain time step t. The transition equations clarify that there exist two
transitions in the KM model, where βstit determines the fraction of newly infected people in time
step t + 1 and γit determines the fraction of newly recovered people in time step t + 1. The state in
the time step t + 1 is fully explained by the state values of the previous time step t, which means that
the KM model has the memoryless property or the Markov property. Another important property
of the KM model for this experiment is that future states can be directly calculated in a recursive
manner. For example, if the state of the population in time step t is known, this information can be
used to directly calculate the state in time step t + 2 shown in Equations 4-6.
st+2 = st+1 −βst+1it+1
= β3s2
ti2
t −β2γsti2
t + β2sti2
t −βs2
tit + βγstit −2βstit + st
(4)
it+2 = it+1 + βst+1it+1 −γit+1
= −β3s2
ti2
t + β2γsti2
t −β2sti2
t + β2s2
tit −2βγstit + βstit + γ2it −2γit + it
(5)
rt+2 = rt+1 + γit+1
= βγitst −γ2it + 2γit + rt
(6)
These equations are obtained by inserting the definitions from Equations 1-3. When doing so, two
time steps are approximated at a time, which means that a lag size of two is used. As the lag size
increases, the polynomial order of the transition equations increases. For example, with a lag size
of two, the state variable s is described by a seventh-order polynomial as opposed to a third-order
polynomial using a lag size of one. In general, as the lag size L increases by one, the polynomial
order of the transition equations for s and i increases to 2nL−1 + 1 and for r increases to 2nL−1,
where nL−1 is the polynomial order when using a lag size of L −1.
The learning problem for the metamodel essentially consists of predicting the next state given a
previous state. To do this, a model is fed all relevant information about a state, st, it, and rt, as well
as exogenous variables, that are general across all time steps, β and γ. This is illustrated in Figure 6,
where all the aforementioned values are concatenated into a vector and fed to three neural networks,
7
==PAGE:8==
where the superscripts indicate which compartment they are learning. A neural network is used for
each compartment since the influence of the previous state values on the next state values is different
for each of them. The influence of the previous state is also largely determined by the lag size, as
seen in the transition equations. For example, the transition equation for r with a lag size of one
(Equation 3) depends only on r and i from the previous state. For a lag size of two (Equation 6), r
depends on all previous state values. The next state predictions are the concatenated scalar outputs of
the neural networks, which also describe fractions of a population that sums to one. This property
makes the softmax function useful to ensure that the output has the same property as the input, which
is helpful for this specific application in training, validation, and testing. In general, the output of
the softmax function is the next state predictions, which are used to calculate the loss along with
the true values. However, while validation and testing use the previous state predictions as input for
the next state predictions, the true values are used in training. Therefore, errors accumulate for each
simulation time step in validation and testing. In addition to the state values, β and γ are also used to
model future time steps, and the above procedure repeats itself throughout the simulation.
Figure 6: The simulation metamodeling approach and training process of machine learning metamod-
els. The NN boxes indicate neural networks or other machine learning models and their superscript
denotes which compartment they are trying to learn. In simulation with multiple state variables that
sum to one, using softmax is useful for regularization of the state value predictions.
4
Experiments
The experiments in this thesis explore the viability of MNNs learning polynomials out-of-distribution
and show how MNNs can be used as metamodels for a simulation model with polynomial time step
updates. In the first experiment, polynomials are iteratively selected to identify characteristics that
make them difficult to learn. The second experiment models synthetic functions from a literature
benchmark and compares MNNs with baseline models. The third experiment concerns the use of
MNNs as metamodels for an epidemiology simulation model, where transitions between time steps
are described by polynomial functions. To carry out these experiments, the following experimental
setup is used.
Evaluation metrics are essential for evaluating experimental results, where this thesis uses the root
relative square error (RRSE), which is relative to predicting the mean of the true values [13]. This is
apparent from Equation 7, where the squared error of a predictor is divided by the squared error of
the average predictor. In other words, the RRSE is similar to the root mean square error (RMSE),
but scaled by the variance in the output domain. An RRSE of zero is the lowest possible score and
means that the true values and predictions match exactly. There is no upper limit to the metric, but an
RRSE greater than one indicates that the predictor is worse than an average predictor. Therefore, the
relativeness of the RRSE allows performance comparisons between experiments and a perspective in
the form of an average predictor. Note that for the RRSE used in the out-of-distribution tests, the
average predictor based on the training distribution likely results in an RRSE higher than one on
the test set, as the two distributions are different. A description of the additional logged metrics is
8
==PAGE:9==
provided in the Appendix A.3.
RRSE =
sPn
i=1(ˆyi −yi)2
Pn
i=1(yi −¯y)2
(7)
where ¯y = 1
n
n
X
i=1
yi
Baseline models are introduced to put the performance of MNNs into perspective. They are simple
but powerful machine learning models implemented using the scikit-learn library [32]:
• Linear Regression (LR)
• Gradient Tree Boosting (GB)
• Random Forest (RF)
Linear regression (LR) is the most simple baseline model, which is fitted by minimizing the residual
sum of squares between the targets and predictions from a linear approximation [32]. The LR baseline
model only considers first-order polynomials, since the feature matrix created by incorporating higher-
order interactions between the features can become extremely wide and lead to high computational
complexity. In addition to LR, the ensemble methods GB and RF are used. They are both tree-based
methods, but are separated by their procedure for creating and aggregating their weak learner trees.
GB is a boosting algorithm, where trees are built sequentially based on the previous one. The purpose
of building a new tree is to correct the errors of the previous tree and to achieve a strong learner
collectively [32]. In contrast, RF is a bagging method, which builds its trees in parallel and aggregates
its output by averaging its trees [32]. This thesis uses the default hyperparameters defined in the
scikit-learn documentation [32].
Hyperparameters are determined on the basis of an initial experimental analysis, where the choice
of a mean squared error loss function, Adam optimizer [23], learning rate of 0.001, batch size of 32
and 64 hidden neurons showed good results.
Models are the four MNNs described in Section 3.1, which are ideal for generating higher-order
output. The number of input layers of CCP, PDC, and PDCLow is determined by the order of
the polynomial being learned norder, whereas PANN only has one input layer with a polynomial
activation function following it. Hidden layers are omitted from PANN because an initial experimental
analysis showed sufficient flexibility to learn higher-order polynomials without them. Further tuning
of the aforementioned hyperparameters is not conducted due to limitations on computational resources.
In summary, the model architectures used are:
• PANN: Two-layer FFNN with 64 hidden neurons and norder polynomial activation between
the input and output layers. A general example is shown in Figure 3.
• CCP: Architecture with weight sharing, 64 hidden neurons, and norder input layers. A
third-order example is visualized in Figure 4.
• PDC: Architecture without weight sharing and with 64 hidden neurons, Pnorder
i=1
i input
layers and norder −1 hidden layers. A third-order example is visualized in Figure 5a.
• PDCLow: PDC architecture without hidden layers. A third-order example is visualized in
Figure 5b.
Despite using similar mechanics, MNNs have a vastly different number of parameters, depending on
the number of input variables, output variables, and the order of the polynomial being learned, which
varies greatly in the experiments. Therefore, the expressions to calculate the number of parameters
9
==PAGE:10==
for each MNN are provided below.
PANN parameters = ni · nh + nh + nh · no + no
CCP parameters = norder (ni · nh + nh) + nh · no + no
PDCLow parameters =
norder
X
d=1
d
X
j=1
(ni · nh + nh) + nh · no + no
PDC parameters =
norder
X
d=1


d
X
j=1
(ni · nh + nh) + n2
h + nh

+ nh · no + no
The expressions are sorted in ascending order, which means that PANN always has the lowest number
of parameters, while PDC always has the highest regardless of the polynomial order. PANN has the
same number of layers throughout this thesis, which means that the number of parameters depends
only on the input size ni, the number of neurons nh, and the output size no. For the remaining three
models, the number of parameters also depends on the order of the polynomial norder. In the special
case where a first-order polynomial is modeled, PANN, CCP, and PDCLow have the same number of
parameters.
4.1
Learning Polynomials
The experiment on polynomial learning is carried out to obtain an indication of the performance of
using MNN to learn polynomials in-distribution and generalize out-of-distribution. Polynomials are
selected to have additions, subtractions, and multiplications between an arbitrary number of variables
of arbitrary degrees. The experiments do not include polynomials with negative exponents or division
by variables. The selected polynomials with a varying number of variables, polynomial order, and
variable interactions are provided in Table 1. The order of the polynomial is reported as the maximum
exponent of the function terms, whereas the degree refers to the exponent of individual terms. Variable
interactions are the number of distinct variables multiplied, regardless of their exponent. For example,
two variables multiplied together denote two interactions, three variables multiplied are denoted as
three interactions, and so on. The polynomials in Table 1 are selected in an iterative manner, where
the performance of the models learning the "previous" polynomial is taken into account for the next
polynomial. The complexity of a polynomial is increased by adding more variables, increasing the
order of the polynomial, or the number of interactions.
Table 1: A selection of polynomials for experiments with MNNs. Order is the maximum exponent in
a polynomial and interactions determines the number of interactions between distinct variables.
Polynomial
# of variables
Order
Interactions
a
1
1
1
a2
1
2
1
5a2 + 6b2
2
2
1
2a36b2
2
5
2
2a3b2 −3c
3
5
2
2a3b3 −3c
3
6
2
2a2b2c2 −3d
4
6
3
2a3b2c2 −d6
4
7
3
a3b2c3 −d3e3
5
8
3
a3b3c3 −d4e4
5
9
3
a3b2c2d3 −e5f 5
6
10
4
abcdefg
7
7
7
abc + d −e −f −g
7
3
3
a10 −b9
2
10
1
The experiment is carried out using MNNs to learn each polynomial for 30 epochs with samples from
a Gaussian distribution N(0, 5). To determine whether a model can generalize out-of-distribution, it
10
==PAGE:11==
is tested on samples from nine different distributions. The distributions are all Gaussian with their
mean and standard deviation given by every combination of µ = [−50, 0, 90] and σ = [1, 5, 25]. The
choices of mean and standard deviation are chosen to ensure nonoverlapping distributions and high
numerical diversity in the test sets. An additional small-scale experiment is carried out by training
with samples from a Gaussian distribution N(0, 1) to explore the implications of using a different
training distribution than N(0, 5).
4.2
Modeling Synthetic Functions
In this experiment, synthetic functions are modeled using MNNs and baseline models. This class
of functions has previously been used as benchmark functions in engineering problems, such as
optimization and metamodeling tasks. The learning problem is to model the input-output functions
with the MNNs and the baseline models using samples from their constrained input domains.
The advantages of using these benchmark functions as opposed to the polynomials of the previous
experiment is two-legged. First, by using standard functions, the domain of the input variables
is predefined, and the output for this domain does not cause numerical overflow. Second, the
complexity of each function is well studied and documented from an engineering perspective. For
example, a literature survey comprises the most complete set of global optimization problems [18].
Although complexity is not reported in the survey, Gavana [14] does this through their website on
global optimization algorithms. Their work reports not only the performance of global optimization
algorithms, but also the share of successful optimizations on particularly tough functions. The subset
of functions used in this thesis is selected to include only terms with multiplication(s), addition(s), and
subtraction(s) of variables, as in the previous experiment. Furthermore, the functions are selected to
have varying polynomial order and complexity in the form of optimization success rates. In addition
to the functions of the benchmark set, the functions of Lim [27], Currin [7], and Dette-Pepelyshev [11]
are included. An overview of the selected benchmark functions, along with their number of variables,
polynomial order, and variable input domain(s) is shown in Table 2. The functions themselves are
left out of the table for brevity, but are found in Appendix A.1 (Equations 8-16).
Table 2: Benchmark functions used for experiments with MNNs and baseline models. If input
domain is described with xi, the specific domain counts for all input variables of the function, i.e.
∀i ∈(1 . . . n) where n is the number of variables.
Author
# of variables
Polynomial order
Input domain
Currin [7]
2
2
xi ∈(0, 1)
Bukin 6 [4]
2
2
x1 ∈(−15, 5), x2 ∈(−3, 3)
Price 3 [36]
2
4
xi ∈(−500, 500)
Dette-Pepelyshev [11]
3
4
xi ∈(0, 1)
Colville [18]
4
4
xi ∈(−10, 10)
Lim [27]
2
5
xi ∈(0, 1)
Camel Three Hump [3]
2
6
xi ∈(−5, 5)
Beale [18]
2
8
xi ∈(−4.5, 4.5)
Goldstein-Price[15]
2
8
xi ∈(−2, 2)
The experiment is carried out by learning the functions in Table 2 over 100 epochs with the four
MNNs and the three baseline models. The data is generated by drawing 100,000 samples for each
variable from a uniform distribution with minimum and maximum according to their input domain,
sorting the samples, and using the 5-95 percentile range for training and the remaining for testing.
Outside the 5-95 percentile range, the input-output behavior of the synthetic functions is often
significantly different from that inside the range, which can be viewed in Appendix A.2. The different
input-output behavior in training compared to testing serves the same purpose as testing with samples
from a different distribution. Therefore, this is still considered an out-of-distribution test.
4.3
Epidemiology Simulation Model
The third experiment concerns the task of MNNs being metamodels for the SIR simulation model,
which is described along with the metamodeling approach in Section 3.2, while this section focuses
11
==PAGE:12==
on how the experiment and the out-of-distribution tests are carried out. In this experiment, the
metamodels are trained with SIR simulation data generated with a set of parameters, where the aim is
to be able to generalize out-of-distribution when different parameters are used. The parameters of the
SIR simulation are considered to be the starting state consisting of s0, i0, r0, the infection rate β, the
recovery rate γ, the duration of the simulation T, and the lag size L.
The starting state values s0, i0, and r0 represent the fraction of the population that is susceptible,
infected, or recovered in the first time step of the simulation. Therefore, the starting state values are
between zero and one, summing to one within a single time step. A set of starting state values is
randomly generated for each simulation run by sampling values from Uniform(0, 100) and dividing
each of them by their sum, which is considered the population size. The division by population size
ensures that fractions of the population are modeled instead of absolute counts. This is mandatory,
as transition equations described in Section 3.2 would end up modeling negative counts of people
otherwise.
In relation to the transition equations, the infection rate β and the recovery rate γ control the transition
rate between the three compartments and are sampled in each simulation run like the starting state val-
ues. Likewise, β is sampled from Uniform(0.02, 0.09) and γ is sampled from Uniform(0.022, 0.01)
in training, while being sampled from Uniform(0.1, 0.25) and Uniform(0.05, 0.1) in test, respec-
tively. The two distributions for each parameter are nonoverlapping, implying that models are tested
with out-of-distribution β and γ values. Simulations with the lower and upper limits of the values of
β and γ in training and testing are visualized in Figure 7. The four subplots in the figure show the
evolution of the three compartments, Susceptible, Infected, and Recovered, over a duration of 120
time steps from the same starting state. The first simulation in Figure 7a shows a simulation with
very low values of β and γ. Thus, the rate of transition between the three compartments is slow, as
seen by the small change in the simulation from its starting state. The second simulation in Figure
7b shows a rapid decrease for the susceptible, a rapid increase for the infected, and a slow increase
for the recovered. This indicates that the value of β is high compared to the value of γ. The third
simulation in Figure 7c shows a slow decrease for the susceptible and a slow increase for the infected
and recovered. The infected decreases toward the end of the simulation, which could indicate that the
value of γ is relatively high. Finally, the fourth simulation in Figure 7d shows high values of β and γ
seen by a sharp decrease in susceptible and a sharp increase in recovered. These simulations show
that varying β and γ values can lead to different transition behaviors. Therefore, models are required
to learn a range of input-output behaviors in this experiment.
The final parameters (T and L) are essential to test the viability of MNNs in metamodeling. The
duration of the simulation T defines the time interval, which the simulation spans over, while the lag
size L describes the size of the time steps. These parameters are closely related, as the number of
modeled time steps decreases if the lag size is increased for a fixed duration. To be exact, the number
of time steps modeled for a simulation is given by T//L, where // is the integer division operator.
The number of modeled time steps must be above one for the learning problem to be meaningful,
which entails that the duration and lag size must be chosen such that T//L > 1. This experiment is
carried out by varying the duration of the simulation T and the lag size L to explore its implications
on the performance of MNNs and baseline models. First, the impact of the simulation duration is
tested for the values T = [2, 6, 12, 24, 30, 40, 60, 120] with a fixed lag size of L = 1. For this lag
size, an MNN is constructed with a polynomial order of three for each of the three compartments.
In terms of the duration, it is expected that performance worsens as the duration increases, as there
are more time steps for errors to accumulate. For the second part of this experiment, the duration is
fixed at T = 120 and the lag size is tested for the values L = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Increasing the lag size
decreases the number of modeled time steps in a simulation, as explained by the expression T//L.
Consequently, the number of modeled time steps for these lag sizes and a duration of 120 are found
to be T//L = [120, 60, 40, 30, 24], respectively. Therefore, the tested values of duration and lag size
are chosen in a way that allows comparison of runs with the same number of modeled time steps but
with different lag sizes, and thereby different polynomial order. Conducting this experiment involves
modeling polynomials of orders 3, 7, 15, 31, and 63, respectively. The downside to modeling such
high-order polynomials is that the number of model parameters increases drastically, as seen in Table
3, where the models are sorted in increasing order by their number of parameters.
For each experimental run, 100,000 simulations are generated and a batch size of 32 is used. As
a result, the feature matrix has dimension [B, T//L −1, F] = [32, T//L −1, 5], since the same
batch size B and the same number of features F are used for all runs. The features include the three
12
==PAGE:13==
(a) SIR simulation using the lower
bound training values for β and γ.
(b) SIR simulation using the upper
bound training values for β and γ.
(c) SIR simulation using the lower
bound testing values for β and γ.
(d) SIR simulation using the upper
bound testing values for β and γ.
Figure 7: SIR simulations with the same starting state of s0 = 0.99, i0 = 0.01 and r0 = 0. and
varying β and γ values. The graphs in the upper row use the training parameter values, and the
bottom row uses the testing parameter values.
Table 3: Model parameters for when using MNN building blocks in SIR simulation model for different
lag sizes L. The numbers in parentheses denote the polynomial order incurred by the corresponding
lag size.
Building Block
L = 1
(3)
L = 2
(7)
L = 3
(15)
L = 4
(31)
L = 5
(63)
PANN
1.3K
1.3K
1.3K
1.3K
1.3K
CCP
3.6K
8.2K
17.4K
35.9K
72.7K
PDCLow
7.1K
32.4K
138K
571K
2.3M
PDC
44.5K
119K
325K
958K
3.1M
state variables and the two transition rates β and γ. The middle dimension of the feature matrix is
subtracted by one as the objective is to predict the next state from a previous one. Naturally, this
means that the target matrix has a similar dimension [B, T//L −1, Fstate] = [32, T//L −1, 3],
where Fstate denotes the three state variables in the simulation.
5
Results
The results of the three experiments described in the previous section are presented and interpreted
in this section. The first experiment aims to identify the characteristics of polynomials that make it
difficult to learn in-distribution and generalize out-of-distribution. The second experiment consists
of modeling a set of synthetic functions with MNNs and baseline models, which further tests the
viability of MNNs learning polynomial functions out-of-distribution. The third experiment uses
MNNs and baseline models as metamodels for an epidemiology simulation model, where duration of
the simulation and lag size are varied.
13
==PAGE:14==
5.1
Polynomials
The polynomials in Table 1 are ordered in terms of the iterative process in which they were chosen.
As a result, the complexity of the polynomials gradually increases until performance starts to decrease
drastically. Up until the sixth-order, the performance is great in validation and remains satisfactory
in the tests. Beyond the sixth-order, MNNs perform worse than an average predictor in validation,
and the results in the tests are even worse, as seen in the Appendix A.1. To avoid redundancy in
this section, evaluation is done for four selected polynomials shown in Figure 8, where performance
is visualized as box plots of the RRSE scores in the test distributions. The colored boxes denote
the interquartile range (IQR) of the RRSE test scores for each MNN in the nine test distributions.
Moreover, the whiskers extend to 1.5 × IQR and all scores beyond this are considered outliers and
marked with diamonds.
Figure 8a shows the RRSE test scores for the polynomial 2a2b2c2 −3d, which is a sixth-order
polynomial with four variables. The IQR of the models are located between zero and one, with
the exception of CCP, whose RRSE score is high in the test distributions N(−50, 1), N(0, 1), and
N(90, 1) compared to the rest of the test distributions. This is the case for all models, but the
difference in RRSE is less significant than for CCP. In general, PDC has the lowest RRSE scores,
indicated by the low placement of the IQR, but it has an outlier with an RRSE score greater than four,
which is recorded in the Gaussian N(0, 1) distribution.
The results of a more complex polynomial are shown in Figure 8b, where the RRSE scores have
increased drastically, as seen by the range of the y-axis. As the polynomial order increases, the
chance of numerical overflow and producing a "not a number" (NaN) increases as well. In this
case with a tenth-order polynomial, only five of the nine test distributions are usable, as the rest
produce NaNs. Therefore, the performance is likely worse than what the figure shows, which is
already terrible. However, PDCLow performs well in most test distributions, with the exception of
a worse performance in N(0, 5) and a terrible performance in N(0, 1). PDCLow and CCP have
much greater overall performance than the much larger PDC model for the complex, tenth-order
polynomial, whereas PDC has better performance than PDCLow and CCP in the less complex,
sixth-order polynomial previously seen.
As NaNs are encountered for the tenth-order polynomial, the order of the polynomial decreases
and the number of variables increases. The performance in Figure 8c shows that the RRSE has
similar magnitude as the previous polynomial, but longer whiskers and more outliers are present.
This is potentially attributed to the fact that none of the test distributions produce NaNs and that the
performance is more true to reality than previously seen. In terms of their RRSE scores, it is difficult
to separate the models. The median and lower quartile are very close for CCP, PDCLow, and PDC,
whereas the median for PANN is slightly lower, but the lower quartile is higher than the three other
models. PANN also has a surprisingly narrow IQR, which indicates that it performs consistently for
this polynomial. This is likely a result of the PANN architecture, which only uses multiplication
to generate higher-order output, where the remaining MNNs use both multiplication and addition,
which preserves modeling of lower degree terms. As this polynomial contains only multiplication,
PANN can have a stronger inductive bias towards learning polynomials of this type. Outliers for this
polynomial are produced by the test distributions N(−50, 1) and N(90, 1), but the performance is
generally unsatisfactory.
In an attempt to get around this, the number of variables remains fixed, but the polynomial order
is significantly decreased. Figure 8d shows the RRSE scores of the MNNs for a seven-variable
third-order polynomial, where the magnitude of the y-axis has decreased greatly. It is evident that
PDC and PDCLow are superior to CCP and PANN, as seen by their narrow IQR close to zero, which
is a perfect performance in RRSE. The outliers of PDC and PDCLow are below an RRSE of 0.5,
which is very low compared to the RRSE outliers of CCP and PANN recorded on the N(90, 1) test
distribution.
From the results presented above and shown in Appendix A.1, some patterns in terms of MNN
performance in learning and generalizing polynomials are becoming apparent. The number of
variables alone has no significant impact on the ability to learn a polynomial out-of-distribution.
The order of the polynomial seems to have an effect, as models struggled for polynomials above
sixth-order. A possible cause is that MNN models, with the exception of PANN, grow larger as
the polynomial order increases, which requires them to be trained for longer before learning starts
to converge. However, this has not been pursued in this experiment due to limited computational
14
==PAGE:15==
(a) Sixth-order polyno-
mial with four variables.
(b) Tenth-order polyno-
mial with six variables.
(c) Seventh-order polyno-
mial with seven variables.
(d) Third-order polyno-
mial with seven variables.
Figure 8: Performance of MNNs - PANN, CCP, PDCLow, and PDC - for four different polynomials
from Table 1. Values for each box-plot are the RRSE scores when tested with the nine test distributions.
The whiskers extend to 1.5 × IQR and the outliers are marked by diamonds.
resources. Furthermore, in higher-order polynomials, small changes in the input variables can lead
to outputs numerically far from each other, which is more difficult to learn for neural networks.
Another issue with higher-order polynomials is the increasing chance of numerical overflow as seen
for some of the test distributions in this experiment. While the polynomial order has a clear impact
on out-of-distribution performance, it is difficult to identify the impact of the number of interactions
between variables, since it is closely related to the polynomial order. In terms of testing distributions,
it is apparent that distributions with a standard deviation of one caused many outliers of RRSE. This
could be explained by the properties of the training distribution N(0, 5), which is a wider distribution
than the test distributions with a standard deviation of one. The additional small-scale experiment
showed that when training is conducted with a Gaussian N(0, 1), outliers are present in different test
distributions than training with a Gaussian N(0, 5). While this is an interesting problem to explore
further, it is not pursued in this thesis.
5.2
Synthetic Functions
In the previous experiment with polynomials, numerical overflow is encountered in the test distri-
butions of tenth-order polynomials. Additionally, for these polynomials, small changes in the input
lead to large output ranges, which are harder for MNNs to learn and generalize to. These issues are
addressed in this experiment by using synthetic functions, where constraints are placed on the domain
of the input variables. In most of the functions, this entails function output that is also constrained to
a reasonable range. The results of using MNNs and baseline models to learn the synthetic functions
of Table 2 are shown in Table 4. The table shows the RRSE in testing for the models in each function,
where the first four columns are the results of the baseline models and the last four columns are for
the MNNs. The numbers in bold indicate which model has the lowest RRSE for a specific synthetic
function.
Table 4: Out-of-distribution testing RRSE of baseline and MNN models for all the synthetic functions.
Bold indicates the lowest RRSE score for a specific function.
Baseline
MNN
Author
Avg.
LR
GB
RF
PANN
CCP
PDCLow
PDC
Currin [7]
1.282
8.78e-01
1.89e-01
1.61e-01
4.52e-06
1.06e-05
4.25e-06
4.11e-07
Bukin 6 [4]
1.301
1.189
0.158
0.121
0.660
0.660
0.667
0.652
Price 3 [36]
9.162
9.067
2.620
2.611
11.211
11.132
11.124
11.120
Dette-Pepelyshev [11]
3.184
3.109
0.802
0.815
0.208
0.040
0.412
0.031
Colville [18]
5.044
5.021
1.685
1.613
0.213
0.114
0.036
0.020
Lim [27]
1.002
0.241
0.138
0.138
0.033
0.018
0.018
0.009
Camel Three Hump [3]
4.695
4.686
1.891
1.878
0.168
0.040
0.126
0.055
Beale [18]
5.170
5.227
2.388
2.284
0.064
0.074
0.023
0.022
Goldstein-Price [15]
1.271
1.168
0.310
0.299
0.102
0.150
0.134
0.107
In addition to the MNNs and baseline models already introduced, the RRSE of the average predictor
based on the training data (Avg. in Table 4) is also shown to highlight the severity of the out-of-
distribution test and the fluctuations of each function. When MNNs are tested on this set of synthetic
functions, the PDC has the lowest RRSE for five of the nine functions, while PANN and CCP have the
lowest RRSE for one function each, both having a polynomial order greater than six. PDCLow falls
15
==PAGE:16==
closely behind the best performing models, but does not have superior performance for any function.
Interestingly, the baseline RF model has the lowest RRSE for two of the functions, both of which
have a relatively low polynomial order of two and four. From these results, there is no indication that
higher-order polynomials are harder to learn than lower-order polynomials. For example, low RRSE
scores of the MNNs are seen for the eight-order Beale function, whereas significantly higher RRSE
values are seen for the second-order Bukin function. While the Bukin function is reported as the
toughest function and the Beale function is reported as the simplest in terms of optimization success
rate, there are no other similar relationships between the optimization success rate and the test RRSE.
Furthermore, high RRSE scores are reported for all models in the Price 3 function, where none of the
MNNs are better than an average predictor based on the training data. The consistently high RRSE
for this function could be due to the wide range of function output, which ranges from 0 to 2e+13. In
comparison, the next-widest output range in the Beale function ranges from 0 to 1.8e+5, where most
models have low RRSE scores.
Table 5: In-distribution validation RRSE of baseline and MNN models for all the synthetic functions.
Bold indicates the lowest RRSE score for a specific function. The average predictor is omitted from
this table as it is has an RRSE of one for all functions.
Baseline
MNN
Author
LR
GB
RF
PANN
CCP
PDCLow
PDC
Currin [7]
5.04e-01
3.67e-02
3.85e-03
3.15e-06
6.61e-06
3.67e-06
5.35e-07
Bukin 6 [4]
0.702
0.136
0.009
0.488
0.496
0.489
0.486
Price 3 [36]
1.000
0.026
0.007
1.424
1.415
1.418
1.417
Dette-Pepelyshev [11]
0.919
0.086
0.026
0.090
0.018
0.109
0.009
Colville [18]
0.986
0.068
0.050
0.062
0.021
0.015
0.006
Lim [27]
0.620
0.029
0.004
0.032
0.009
0.009
0.005
Camel Three Hump [3]
1.000
0.016
0.003
0.038
0.005
0.015
0.007
Beale [18]
0.999
0.113
0.016
0.038
0.015
0.006
0.005
Goldstein-Price [15]
0.861
0.065
0.007
0.120
0.089
0.106
0.086
MNNs generally have considerably lower RRSE scores than baseline models in testing. However,
in validation, baseline models often outperform MNNs in terms of RRSE, as seen in Table 5. From
validation to testing, the RRSE of the baseline models increases greatly, whereas the RRSE scores
for MNNs in validation are much closer to the RRSE scores in testing. Therefore, the validation
performance of MNNs is more representative of the out-of-distribution testing performance than
it is for the baseline models. The fact that baseline models struggle in testing and that the average
predictor based on the training data generally has much higher RRSE than one, indicates that testing
is out-of-distribution and highlights the inductive biases of MNNs towards generalizing polynomials.
5.3
Epidemiology Simulation Metamodels
In both of the previous experiments, it is found that polynomial functions are harder to learn
when their output range is extremely wide. Additionally, it is found that increasing the order of
polynomials does not lead to increasing complexity by itself. The first finding is addressed in this
experiment by having constrained input and output ranges, and the latter is further investigated by
modeling polynomials up to 63rd order. The results of varying the duration of the simulation by
T = [2, 6, 12, 24, 30, 40, 60, 120] and keeping the lag size fixed at L = 1 are the first to be presented
in this section. The next results presented are achieved by keeping the duration fixed at T = 120 and
varying the lag size by L = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The final results of this experiment come from comparing
simulations with the same number of modeled time steps (T//L) but with a different lag size and,
therefore, with a different polynomial order.
The first results are shown in Figure 9, where two graphs show the performance of RRSE in validation
and testing for all models and baselines. Validation results are shown in Figure 9a, where baseline
models (dotted lines) outperform MNNs (solid lines) for all durations. The MNNs are grouped
in terms of their performance with a large gap to the baseline models. Moreover, the RF baseline
model has the lowest RRSE across all durations, whereas PDC surprisingly has the highest RRSE of
the MNNs. These validation results correspond well with the validation results from the previous
experiment, where the baseline models outperformed the MNNs in modeling synthetic functions. The
results of the out-of-distribution tests are shown in Figure 9b, where the takeaway from validation to
testing is quite similar to the previous experiment. The MNNs are also grouped together here, but
16
==PAGE:17==
have lower RRSE scores than the baseline models. For durations up to 12, the LR baseline model
has the lowest RRSE narrowly beating the PDC. However, for the remaining durations, the RRSE
of LR steadily increases and PDC has the lowest RRSE. PDC is closely followed by PDCLow and
CCP, while PANN seems to consistently have a higher RRSE than the other MNNs. The RRSE of
the baseline models exceeds one when a duration of 30 and greater is used. In contrast, this is only
true for MNNs with a duration of 120. In general, it is observed that the performance of MNNs
in validation is true to their performance in the out-of-distribution test. This is not the case for the
baseline models, which have great performance in validation, but end up with terrible performance in
test for higher durations.
(a) Validation performance where MNNs are
outperformed by baseline models.
(b) Testing performance where MNNs out-
perform baseline models.
Figure 9: Experiment with fixed lag size of one and varying length of simulation. Baseline models
are shown with dotted lines and MNNs are shown with solid lines. The y-axis shows the RRSE score,
which means lower scores are better.
In the second part of these results, the lag size is increased, while the duration is kept fixed at T = 120.
As the lag size increases, the polynomial order of the transition equations increases and the number of
modeled time steps decreases, which should entail lower RRSE values, as there are fewer time steps
for errors to accumulate in validation and testing. The results of increasing the lag size are visualized
in Figure 10, where the validation results in Figure 10a show a general pattern of decreasing RRSE
scores as the lag size increases. The two exceptions are the LR baseline, which has nearly identical
performance across all lag sizes, and PANN, which has an increasing RRSE using a lag size of four
and five. The lowest RRSE score are seen for the baseline RF in all lag sizes, closely followed by the
CCP, PDCLow, and the baseline GB with a lag size of five. The test results in Figure 10b show how
the MNNs outperform the baseline models in the out-of-distribution test in terms of RRSE, as in the
first results of this experiment. PANN follows the same pattern as in validation, where the RRSE
increases using a lag size of four and five. However, the RRSE score decreases for the remaining
MNNs as the lag size increases. In contrast, the test RRSE of the baseline models is constant or
increases slightly as the lag size increases. From these results, it is obvious that CCP, PDCLow, and
PDC are capable of learning polynomials up to the 63rd order and generalize better than baseline
models for these higher-order polynomials.
The final results of this experiment in Figure 11 combine the results of Figures 9 and 10 to allow
further interpretation of MNN performance. The two graphs show the lowest RRSE score of the
MNNs at a specific number of modeled time steps. The blue line consists of the RRSE scores obtained
using a fixed lag size L = 1 and varying the duration by T = [24, 30, 40, 60, 120], whereas the orange
line comes from using a fixed duration T = 120 and a variable lag size of L = [5, 4, 3, 2, 1], that
is, T//L = [24, 30, 40, 60, 120]. Therefore, RRSE is recorded at the same number of modeled time
steps for both approaches, but the difference between the lines is the order of the polynomials that
are modeled. For example, at 24 modeled time steps, a comparison can be made between modeling
a third-order polynomial (blue) and a 63rd-order polynomial (orange). The RRSE scores at 120
modeled time steps come from the same run, but is shown for both lines for interpretability. In Figure
11a, the validation results show that modeling higher-order polynomials is more desirable, as it results
in lower RRSE scores than modeling third-order polynomials. The difference is most notable at 60
modeled time steps at a polynomial order of seven and least notable at 24 modeled time steps at a
polynomial order of 63. For the testing, shown in Figure 11b, the interpretation is similar to that in
17
==PAGE:18==
(a) Validation performance where the MNNs
are comparable to baseline models in RRSE.
(b) Testing performance where MNNs con-
sistently outperform baseline models.
Figure 10: Experiment with fixed duration and varying lag size. Baseline models are shown with
dotted lines and MNNs are shown with solid lines. The y-axis shows the RRSE score, which means
lower scores are better.
the validation but with a smaller difference when higher-order polynomials are modeled. However,
the largest difference is still found at 60 modeled time steps.
(a) RRSE scores in validation showing that
modeling higher-order polynomials (orange
line) results in lower RRSE than modeling
third-order polynomials (blue line).
(b) RRSE scores in testing. The difference
between modeling higher-order polynomials
(orange line) and third-order polynomials is
less significant than in validation.
Figure 11: RRSE performance of MNNs as a function of the number of modeled time steps. The
blue lines are a result of keeping lag size fixed while varying duration and vice versa for the orange
line. Each point is the lowest RRSE score of the MNNs at a given value of T//L.
6
Discussion
The results presented in this paper have a number of limitations, which stems from a lack of
computational resources. First, the results come from a single experimental run, which ideally should
be an aggregation of multiple runs with different seeds. Therefore, the robustness of the results and
conclusions is unknown. Second, hyperparameters are selected manually and used universally for
all models and runs, where automated hyperparameter tuning for each model and learning problem
is more desirable. A third limitation related to using universal hyperparameters is that models are
trained for the same number of epochs despite varying greatly in number of parameters. Ideally, each
model should be trained until the validation loss has converged. However, better performance in
validation does not necessarily lead to better performance in out-of-distribution tests.
Out-of-distribution is a central concept in this work, as it is used to test generalization capabilities
of the models. In this aspect, nonoverlapping training and test distributions have been considered
sufficient, but it has not been quantified how far these distributions should be apart from each other
for testing to be considered out-of-distribution. This is especially a limitation to the experiment in
simulation metamodeling, as distributions for multiple parameters have to be considered. Furthermore,
18
==PAGE:19==
for this experiment, polynomials of very high order are modeled, leading to significantly different
training times of the metamodels. Although these training times could influence whether MNNs are
more suitable metamodels than the baseline models considered, they have not been reported in this
work. A final limitation is the absence of kriging or Gaussian processes as a baseline model, given its
importance and popularity in the metamodeling literature.
For future work, it would be interesting to experiment with additional variations of MNN architectures.
An obvious extension to the MNN models considered in this work, would be a deep version of CCP
implemented by adding hidden layers, in the same spirit as the V layers of PDC. This would enable
comparisons of whether deeper models perform better in generalizing polynomials and simulation
metamodeling. Moreover, the proposed simulation metamodeling approach should be applied for
more simulation models, and preferably for simulations that are computationally expensive, as
opposed to the SIR simulation considered in this work.
7
Conclusion
This thesis highlights the importance of being able to learn and generalize polynomials for simulation
metamodels. For this purpose, MNN architectures are used, which can raise input to higher-order out-
put through multiplication. PANN, CCP, and PDC were collected from the literature and repurposed,
while PDCLow was proposed based on these. Experiments on polynomial learning showed that
MNNs are capable of generalizing out-of-distribution for sixth-order polynomials, while struggling
for higher-order polynomials. From this experiment alone, it could not be determined whether this
was the case due to the high order of the polynomial or the wide output range incurred from increas-
ing the polynomial order, which increased the chances of numerical overflow in out-of-distribution
tests. To account for this, the second experiment modeled synthetic functions with constrained input
domains, where it was evident that the width of the output range, rather than the polynomial order,
influenced the ability of MNNs to learn and generalize a polynomial. Additionally, the validation and
out-of-distribution testing performance of MNNs was more similar than that for the baseline models.
This was further confirmed in the experiment that metamodeled an epidemiology simulation.
The proposed simulation metamodeling approach showed how increasing the size of the time steps
entailed approximating higher-order polynomials for simulations with time step updates described by
polynomials. A useful property of this approach is that the number of time steps, where approximation
errors can accumulate, is lowered while simulating the same time interval. The third experiment
exemplified this by showing decreasing RRSE scores for MNNs as a result of increasing the lag size.
Furthermore, the third experiment showed better performance for MNNs approximating higher-order
polynomials as opposed to lower-order polynomials, which supports the presence of an inductive
bias in MNNs towards learning and generalizing polynomials. An inductive bias for generalizing
higher-order polynomials is critical to simulation metamodels, as it allows simulations further ahead
in time in the same amount of time steps.
References
[1] B. Ankenman, B. L. Nelson, and J. Staum. Stochastic kriging for simulation metamodeling.
Operations Research, 58(2):371–382, 2010. ISSN 0030364X, 15265463. URL http://www.
jstor.org/stable/40605923.
[2] E. Bjerre, M. N. Fienen, R. Schneider, J. Koch, and A. L. Højberg. Assessing spatial transfer-
ability of a random forest metamodel for predicting drainage fraction. Journal of Hydrology,
612:128177, 2022. ISSN 0022-1694. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2022.128177. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022169422007508.
[3] F. H. Branin. Widely convergent method for finding multiple solutions of simultaneous nonlinear
equations. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 16(5):504–522, 1972. doi: 10.1147/rd.
165.0504.
[4] A. D. Bukin. New minimization strategy for nonsmooth functions. INSPIRE HEP, 10 1997.
URL https://inspirehep.net/files/1b29add4ea1e13332c1f8adc2f0e5246.
19
==PAGE:20==
[5] G. Chrysos, S. Moschoglou, G. Bouritsas, J. Deng, Y. Panagakis, and S. Zafeiriou. Deep
polynomial neural networks. CoRR, abs/2006.13026, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2006.13026.
[6] G. G. Chrysos, M. Georgopoulos, J. Deng, and Y. Panagakis. Polynomial networks in deep
classifiers. CoRR, abs/2104.07916, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.07916.
[7] C. Currin, T. Mitchell, M. Morris, and D. Ylvisaker. Bayesian prediction of deterministic
functions, with applications to the design and analysis of computer experiments. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 86(416):953–963, 1991. ISSN 01621459. URL
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2290511.
[8] F. D’Angelo and C. Henning. Uncertainty-based out-of-distribution detection requires suitable
function space priors. CoRR, abs/2110.06020, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
06020.
[9] S. K. Dasari, A. Cheddad, and P. Andersson. Random forest surrogate models to support
design space exploration in aerospace use-case. In J. MacIntyre, I. Maglogiannis, L. Iliadis,
and E. Pimenidis, editors, Artificial Intelligence Applications and Innovations, pages 532–544,
Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-19823-7.
[10] N. Detlefsen, J. Borovec, J. Schock, A. Jha, T. Koker, L. Di Liello, D. Štancl, Q. Changsheng,
M. Grechkin, and W. Falcon. Torchmetrics - measuring reproducibility in pytorch. The Journal
of Open Source Software, 7, 02 2022. doi: 10.21105/joss.04101.
[11] H. Dette and A. Pepelyshev. Generalized latin hypercube design for computer experiments. Tech-
nometrics, 52(4):421–429, 2010. ISSN 00401706. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
40997249.
[12] A. B. Downey. Modeling and Simulation in Python, chapter 11. No Starch Press, 2023. URL
https://allendowney.github.io/ModSimPy/index.html.
[13] C. Ferreira. Genexprotools, 2006. URL https://www.gepsoft.com/gxpt4kb/Chapter10/
Section1/SS07.htm.
[14] A. Gavana. Tough functions and boring tables, 2021. URL http://infinity77.net/go_
2021/scipy_extended.html#tables-tough-functions-and-boring-tables.
[15] A. A. Goldstein and J. F. Price. On descent from local minima. Mathematics of Computation, 25
(115):569–574, 1971. ISSN 00255718, 10886842. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
2005219.
[16] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal
approximators. Neural Networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0893608089900208.
[17] A. G. Ivakhnenko. Polynomial theory of complex systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, SMC-1(4):364–378, 1971. doi: 10.1109/TSMC.1971.4308320.
[18] M. Jamil and X. Yang. A literature survey of benchmark functions for global optimization
problems. CoRR, abs/1308.4008, 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1308.4008.
[19] F. Jensen and T. Nielsen. Bayesian Networks and Decision Graphs. Springer, 01 2001. ISBN
978-1-4757-3504-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4757-3502-4.
[20] M. F. Kasim, D. Watson-Parris, L. Deaconu, S. Oliver, P. Hatfield, D. H. Froula, G. Gregori,
M. Jarvis, S. Khatiwala, J. Korenaga, J. Topp-Mugglestone, E. Viezzer, and S. M. Vinko.
Building high accuracy emulators for scientific simulations with deep neural architecture search.
Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 3(1):015013, dec 2021. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/
ac3ffa. URL https://doi.org/10.1088%2F2632-2153%2Fac3ffa.
20
==PAGE:21==
[21] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and
Physical Character, 115(772):700–721, 1927. ISSN 09501207. URL http://www.jstor.
org/stable/94815.
[22] J. Kileel, M. Trager, and J. Bruna. On the expressive power of deep polynomial neural networks,
2019. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1905.12207.
[23] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017. URL https:
//doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980.
[24] J. Kleijnen. Kriging metamodeling in simulation: A review. European Journal of Operational
Research, 192:707–716, 02 2007. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2007.10.013.
[25] G. Korn. Advanced dynamic-system simulation: Model-replication techniques and monte carlo
simulation. Advanced Dynamic-system Simulation: Model-replication Techniques and Monte
Carlo Simulation, pages 1–2, 05 2006. doi: 10.1002/0470085169.
[26] H. Lam and H. Zhang. Prediction intervals for simulation metamodeling, 2022. URL https:
//arxiv.org/pdf/2204.01904.pdf.
[27] Y. B. Lim, J. Sacks, W. J. Studden, and W. J. Welch. Design and analysis of computer
experiments when the output is highly correlated over the input space. The Canadian Journal of
Statistics / La Revue Canadienne de Statistique, 30(1):109–126, 2002. ISSN 03195724. URL
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3315868.
[28] E. Lugato, L. Paniagua, A. Jones, W. Vries, and A. Leip. Complementing the topsoil information
of the land use/land cover area frame survey (lucas) with modelled n2o emissions. PLoS ONE,
12, 04 2017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176111.
[29] M. Messner. Convolutional neural network surrogate models for the mechanical properties of
periodic structures. Journal of Mechanical Design, 142:1–8, 10 2019. doi: 10.1115/1.4045040.
URL https://www.osti.gov/pages/servlets/purl/1632185.
[30] T. M. Mitchell. The Need for Biases in Learning Generalizations by The Need for Biases
in Learning Generalizations. Rutgers CS Tech Report CBM-TR-117, 1980. URL https:
//www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom/pubs/NeedForBias_1980.pdf.
[31] S.-K. Oh, W. Pedrycz, and B.-J. Park. Polynomial neural networks architecture: analysis and
design. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 29(6):703–725, 2003. ISSN 0045-7906. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0045-7906(02)00045-9. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0045790602000459.
[32] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher,
M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[33] J.-S. Pei, J. P. Wright, and A. W. Smyth. Mapping polynomial fitting into feedforward neural
networks for modeling nonlinear dynamic systems and beyond. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 194(42):4481–4505, 2005. ISSN 0045-7825. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cma.2004.12.010. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0045782504005316.
[34] A. Pillai, P. Thies, and L. Johanning. Mooring system design optimization using a surrogate
assisted multi-objective genetic algorithm. Engineering Optimization, 51:1–23, 10 2018. doi:
10.1080/0305215X.2018.1519559.
[35] J. Poropudas and K. Virtanen. Simulation metamodeling with dynamic bayesian networks.
European Journal of Operational Research, 214(3):644–655, 2011. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2011.05.007. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0377221711004127.
21
==PAGE:22==
[36] W. L. Price. A controlled random search procedure for global optimisation. The Computer
Journal, 20(4):367–370, 01 1977. ISSN 0010-4620. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/20.4.367. URL
https://doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/20.4.367.
[37] M. Shahriari, D. Pardo, B. Moser, and F. Sobieczky. A deep neural network as surrogate
model for forward simulation of borehole resistivity measurements. Procedia Manufacturing,
42:235–238, 2020.
ISSN 2351-9789.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2020.02.075.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2351978920306399.
International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing (ISM 2019).
[38] S. M. E. Sharifnia, S. Amrollahi Biyouki, R. Sawhney, and H. Hwangbo. Robust simulation
optimization for supply chain problem under uncertainty via neural network metamodeling.
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 162:107693, 2021. ISSN 0360-8352. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cie.2021.107693. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0360835221005970.
[39] L. Uusitalo. Advantages and challenges of bayesian networks in environmental modelling.
Ecological Modelling, 203(3):312–318, 2007. ISSN 0304-3800. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ecolmodel.2006.11.033. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0304380006006089.
[40] X. Ying.
An overview of overfitting and its solutions.
Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, 1168(2):022022, feb 2019. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1168/2/022022. URL https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1168/2/022022.
[41] F. Zhu, D. Jing, F. Leve, and S. Ferrari. Nn-poly: Approximating common neural networks
with taylor polynomials to imbue dynamical system constraints. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 9,
2022. ISSN 2296-9144. doi: 10.3389/frobt.2022.968305. URL https://www.frontiersin.
org/articles/10.3389/frobt.2022.968305.
22
==PAGE:23==
A
Appendix
A.1
Preliminary Experiments with Arbitrary Polynomials
Preliminary experiments with arbitrary polynomials are conducted to test the viability of learning
polynomials with MNNs in-distribution and out-of-distribution. Selected results are shown in the
paper while the rest are shown here. The validation results from the use of a Gaussian N(0, 5)
training distribution are shown in Table 6. The test results are visualized as box plots from the
RRSE scores of nine test distributions, which are Gaussian distributions with mean and standard
deviation composed of all combinations between µ = [−50, 0, 90] and σ = [1, 5, 25]. The results for
all polynomials are shown in Figure 12.
Table 6: Validation RRSE for all arbitrary polynomials and models using samples from a Gaussian
N(0, 5) distribution. Bold indicates the lowest RRSE score for a polynomial.
Polynomial
PANN
CCP
PDCLow
PDC
a
5.555e-08
5.216e-08
5.471e-08
5.094e-08
a2
9.245e-08
9.067e-04
7.731e-05
9.453e-08
5a2 + 6b2
0.008
0.005
0.008
0.001
2a36b2
0.400
0.045
0.220
0.014
2a3b2 −3c
0.457
0.193
0.038
0.027
2a3b3 −3c
0.722
0.487
0.206
0.045
2a2b2c2 −3d
0.834
0.349
0.350
0.387
2a3b2c2 −d6
0.861
0.522
0.451
0.465
a3b2c3 −d3e3
1.741
1.229
1.368
1.167
a3b3c3 −d4e4
1.904
0.932
1.295
1.090
a3b2c2d3 −e5f 5
4.690
2.672
1.862
2.249
abcdefg
2.561
1.636
1.510
1.522
abc + d −e −f −g
0.046
0.042
0.003
0.059
a10 −b9
1.237
0.975
1.050
0.793
A.2
Synthetic Functions
The synthetic functions of Table 2 are shown in Equations 8-16 and the ones with two input variables
are visualized as surface plots in Figure 13. The first synthetic function has two variables, a low
polynomial order of two, and a narrow input domain for its variables. The Currin function is
considered the simplest of the synthetic functions, although it does not have the difficulty reported
[14]. The second synthetic function is reported to be the toughest, with an overall success of 0.31%
using a wide range of optimizers. Although the Bukin function uses both the square root and absolute
value operators, it is included to determine whether functions that are deemed extremely difficult
to optimize are also difficult to learn out-of-distribution. The function is visualized in Figure 13b,
where the function plane is similar to that of a paper plane. The third synthetic function, the Price 3
function, has a reported optimization success of 70.77%, but the output of the function ranges greatly
in magnitude, as seen in Figure 13c. Additionally, the input domain is the widest of all synthetic
functions. The Dette-Pepelyshev function is the fourth synthetic function, has a polynomial order of
four, and a narrow input domain. Like the Bukin 6 function, this function uses the square root operator,
but is much simpler. The fifth function, the Colville function, has the largest number of variables in
the synthetic functions. It has a reported optimization success of 59.31%, which is the second lowest
of the synthetic functions used in this experiment. The sixth synthetic function, the Lim polynomial
function, has a polynomial order of five, but is considered one of the simpler synthetic functions.
The input domain is narrow, and the function hyperplane does not have unexpected behavior in the
extremes of the input domain. The ThreeHumpCamel function is the seventh synthetic function and is
shown in Figure 13e. It is not evident from the figure, but the three humps come from the three local
minima that occur around (0,0). However, this cannot be viewed from the figure, as the fluctuations
are much smaller than the overall magnitude of the function output. It is a relatively simple function
23
==PAGE:24==
(a) Shown in paper.
(b) Shown in paper.
(c) Shown in paper.
(d) Shown in paper.
Figure 12: Test results from learning arbitrary polynomials with MNNs. Models are tested on nine
distributions where eight are out-of-distribution from the training.
with an optimization success of 95.54%, although extreme behavior occurs in the extremes of the
input domain. Likewise, the eighth synthetic function, the Beale function, has extreme behavior in
the extremes of the input domain compared to the rest of the input domain. Despite this, Beale is
reported to be one of the least tough functions with an optimization success of 96.69%. The final
and ninth synthetic function is visualized in Figure 13f. The function shows extreme behavior in one
corner of its hyperplane and is comprised of many terms compared to the other synthetic functions. It
is still a simple function with an optimization success of 96.15%.
24
==PAGE:25==
fCurrin(x) = 4.9 + 21.15x1 −2.17x2 −15.88x2
1 −1.38x2
2 −5.26x1x2
(8)
fBukin6(x) = 100
q
|x2 −0.01x2
1| + 0.01|x1 + 10|
(9)
fP rice3(x) = 100(x2 −x2
1)2 + 6
 6.4(x2 −0.5)2 −x1 −0.6

(10)
fD&P (x) = 4(x1 −2 + 8x2 −8x2
2)2 + (3 −4x2)2 + 16
√
x3 + 1(2x3 −1)2
(11)
fColville(x) = 100(x1 −x2
2)2 + (1 −x1)2 + 90(x4 −x2
3)2 + (1 −x2
3)
(12)
+ 10.1((x2 −1)2 + (x4 −1)2) + 19.8(x2 −1)(x4 −1)
fLim(x) = 9 + 5
2x1 −35
2 x2 + 5
2x1x2 + 19x2
2 −15
2 x3
1 −5
2x1x2
2 −11
2 x4
2 + x3
1x2
2
(13)
fCamel(x) = 2x2
1 −1.05x4
1 + x6
1
6 + x1x2 + x2
2
(14)
fBeale(x) = (1.5 −x1 + x1x2)2 + (2.25 −x1 + x1x2
2)2 + (2.625 −x1 + x1x3
2)2
(15)
fGoldstein−P rice =

1 + (x1 + x2 + 1)2(19 −14x1 + 3x2
1 −14x2 + 6x1x2 + 3x2
2)

(16)

30 + (2x1 −3x2)2(18 −32x1 + 12x2
1 + 48x2 −36x1x2 + 27x2
2)

A.3
Experiment Metrics
Metrics are recorded for all experiments in the Python TorchMetrics library Detlefsen et al. [10]
and root relative squared error (RRSE) as defined in the GeneXproTools 4.0 software Ferreira [13].
Training and validation loss is implemented as the mean squared error (MSE) of the error between
true values and predictions, as shown in Equation 17. For diagnostics during model training, the R2
score and RRSE are logged in validation after each epoch. The R2 score represents the proportion
of variance of the target y explained by the independent variable(s) in the model. Therefore, R2
cannot exceed one, as the independent variable(s) cannot explain more variance than there is. This
is consistent with the fact that a perfect model would result in the numerator in Equation 18 being
zero and thereby subtracting zero from one. R2 should not be below zero, but it is possible if the
model is worse than predicting the average of the target y. RRSE is largely similar to R2 as seen by
comparing Equations 18 and 19. A subtle but big difference is that the target y is subtracted from
the prediction ˆy in the RRSE and not the other way around for R2. RRSE ranges between zero and
infinity, where being closer to zero indicates better performance in contrast to R2. In addition to R2
and RRSE, models are evaluated in the out-of-distribution tests with mean absolute error (MAE) as
seen in Equation 20.
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(17)
R2 = 1 −
Pn
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
Pn
i=1(yi −¯y)2
(18)
RRSE =
sPn
i=1(ˆyi −yi)2
Pn
i=1(yi −¯y)2
(19)
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(20)
Absolute metrics, such as MSE and MAE, allow meticulous comparisons of model performance
within the same polynomial and data distribution. MSE is recorded to be able to directly interpret
the learning process of the neural networks. However, the MSE is on a different scale than the
data, and it can be hard to distinguish unsatisfactory MSE values from satisfactory ones. This is
the main motivation behind including MAE since this is directly comparable to the scale of the
data. Unfortunately, comparisons with absolute metrics cannot be made across polynomials and data
distributions, which introduced the need for relative metrics in this project. As a result, the relative
metrics, R2 and RRSE, are included for this reason. For really simple learning problems, it can be
25
==PAGE:26==
(a) Currin function[7].
No re-
ported optimization success rate.
(b) Bukin 6 function [4].
Suc-
cessful optimization rate of 0.31%
[14]
(c) Price 3 function [36]. Success-
ful optimization rate of 70.77%
(d) Lim polynomial [27]
(e) Camel Three Hump function
[3]. Successful optimization rate
of 95.54%
(f) Goldstein-Price function [15].
Successful optimization rate of
96.15%
(g) Beale function [18]. Success-
ful optimization rate of 96.69%
Figure 13: Contour surface plots of synthetic functions with two variables. The values along the
z-axis are the output of f(x1, x2), where the function f is the synthetic function as described in the
caption of each subplot.
relatively easy to achieve a perfect R2 of one. If multiple models reach this score, it is impossible to
separate them in evaluation. Fortunately, it is rare to train a model that has perfect predictions, which
means that RRSE might be more appropriate when comparing great-performing models. Absolute
and relative metrics complement each other and are used on a shifting basis.
A.4
Learning Objectives
This paper has been written as part of a thesis at the Technical University of Denmark. It is common
practice to have learning objectives that highlight the objectives that the author is expected to achieve
in a successful project. The learning objectives are formulated as:
• Define polynomials and their usefulness in modeling real-world phenomena and processes
through simulation
• Describe the relationship between neural networks and polynomials
26
==PAGE:27==
• Conduct small-scale experiments with neural networks that learn polynomials
• Formulate neural network architectures with inductive bias for learning polynomials
• Demonstrate performance of formulated architectures compared to baseline machine learn-
ing models
• Apply formulated architectures as a simulation metamodel
• Organize code in an efficient way for reproducibility and shareability
• Be able to present findings and methodology clearly in a report
27
