==PAGE:1==
 
 
Robustness of allometric relationships across different popula-
tions of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) and its implications for fish 
length estimation using electronic monitoring 
Sissel Kolls Bertelsen 
Master’s Thesis 
==PAGE:2==
Robustness of allometric relationships across diﬀerent populations of Atlantic
cod (Gadus morhua) and its implications for ﬁsh length estimation using elec-
tronic monitoring
Thesis for the MSc in Aquatic Science and Technology
Sissel Kolls Bertelsen
Supervised by Valentina Melli, Tiago Alexandre Matias da Veiga Malta and Martin Mathias Nielsen.
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU)
DTU Aqua - National Institute of Aquatic Resources
Section for Fisheries Technology
Hirtshals, Denmark
Juli 23, 2023
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Monitoring ﬁsh catches is an essential part of eﬀective ﬁsheries management and marine resource
conservation. Electronic monitoring (EM) has emerged as a promising technology to improve the
existing monitoring programs. An important parameter for the potential of EM, is its ability to au-
tomatically record ﬁsh lengths, yet no reliable methods exist to predict the total length of ﬁsh that
are occluded on EM footage. This study aimed to evaluate the use of allometric relationships for
length predictions with EM, in relation to the risk of these being aﬀected by regional bias. This was
investigated by assessing the robustness of seven diﬀerent allometric relationships across distinct
populations of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) occupying four diﬀerent areas across the North At-
lantic. The allometric relationships were constructed by relating the total length to seven morpho-
metric measurements, respectively: Head length, pectoral ﬁn length, pectoral ﬁn width, caudal
peduncle height, preorbital length, postorbital length, and horizontal eye diameter. All allometric
relationships were aﬀected by regional bias for one or more of the four areas. However, the head
length, preorbital distance, and postorbital distance exhibited high robustness across areas and
were identiﬁed as potentially suitable for EM purposes. By introducing area-speciﬁc allometric
relationships or similar in some areas, pectoral ﬁn length and pectoral ﬁn width would also be
promising for EM predictions. The two remaining measures were identiﬁed as being too inconsis-
tent and variable across areas. Meaningful further research would involve testing the allometric
relationships using EM with reliable automated methods for measuring ﬁsh. Conclusively, this
study provides important insights into the aspect of ensuring consistent length predictions across
areas when applying allometric relationships to length predictions of occluded ﬁsh with EM.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Catch monitoring in ﬁsheries
1
1.1
Why monitor ﬁsheries? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Challenges in today’s catch monitoring programmes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Electronic Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Allometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Aim
5
3
Project Delineation
6
3.1
Research species - Atlantic cod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Sampling areas and populations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.1
The Baltic Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.2
The North Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.3
Skagerrak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.4
The Barents Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Materials and Methods
11
4.1
Data Collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.1
Morphometric Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.2
Sampling Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Data Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1
Comparison of two observers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.2
Comparison of two areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.3
Identifying the appropriate modeling approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.1
Robustness of allometric relationships across areas . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.2
Area Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Results
20
5.1
Comparison of two observers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2
==PAGE:5==
5.2
Comparison of two areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Robustness of allometric relationship across areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Area Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Discussion
27
6.1
Measures with potential observer bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Measures with high variability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.3
Robustness of allometric relationships across areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4
Implications for length predictions with EM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
Conclusion
32
==PAGE:6==
1
Catch monitoring in ﬁsheries
1.1
Why monitor ﬁsheries?
Monitoring of ﬁsheries is vital to ensure the sustainable exploitation of marine resources and to
provide guidance for eﬀective ﬁsheries management. Monitoring implies the collection and anal-
ysis of data related to ﬁshing activities. This includes catch data such as the species- and length-
composition of catches, including bycatch and discards. Additionally, parameters such as ﬁshing
eﬀort, ﬁshing area, ﬁshing gear, etc. are also being monitored (Williams and Corral, 1999).
These data are collected for several purposes. One of these purposes is the yearly assessments of
commercially important ﬁsh stocks. These form the basis of next year’s ﬁshing quotas with the aim
to minimize the risk of the stocks becoming depleted and thereby ensure a sustainable future for
the ﬁshery resources (Lart, 2022). Furthermore, ﬁsheries data is used for scientiﬁc purposes as it
provides valuable information on population dynamics, the spatial distribution of ﬁsh populations,
and changes in marine ecosystems that are not necessarily linked to ﬁsheries. Finally, monitoring
of ﬁshing practices is an important tool for the ﬁshing authorities to enforce regulations, as this
contributes positively to ﬁshers’ compliance (Williams and Corral, 1999).
1.2
Challenges in today’s catch monitoring programmes
Fish catches are monitored on both commercial ﬁshing vessels and scientiﬁc research cruises (Lart,
2022). The scientiﬁc surveys are ﬁshery-independent and provide insight into the entire ﬁsh popu-
lation. In contrast, commercial catch data are related to the species and sizes targeted by a ﬁshery
and reﬂect the existing ﬁshing eﬀort and regulations (Lart, 2022). Commercial catches are mon-
itored with landing records, self-reporting by ﬁshermen, or by observers onboard ﬁshing vessels
(Cooper and Weir, 2006; Lart, 2022). Landing records are sampled by observers at the landing
sites, and self-reportings are acquired from the ﬁshermen’s logbooks. The quality of the data
obtained from these two sources may be aﬀected by the current management framework (ICES,
2022g). For example, the Landing Obligation (LO) which was implemented as a part of the Com-
mon Fisheries Policy (CFP) in 2015, has had unexpected negative eﬀects on the data quality (ICES,
2022g). The LO stated that all catches of quota- or size-regulated species should be landed, and
1
==PAGE:7==
counted against the ﬁsherman’s quota (Uhlmann et al., 2019). This has increased the economic
incentive for the ﬁshermen to under-report e.g. unwanted catches or catches of quota-limited
species (Plet-Hansen et al., 2015; ICES, 2022g).
The use of on-board observers is a method used for monitoring ﬁshing activities directly on the
ﬁshing vessels (Benoît and Allard, 2009). However, observer programmes are costly as they re-
quire observers to be sent to sea. Additionally, they involve logistical challenges with ﬁnding an
adequate number of ﬁshing vessels available to take an observer onboard (Needle et al., 2015).
Consequently, the coverage by on-board observers is limited to a small proportion of ﬁshing trips
annually (Benoît and Allard, 2009). Another factor limiting the coverage by on-board observers is
that the methods used to monitor catches are highly manual. These involve counting and weigh-
ing the catch, including bycatch and discards, and measuring the ﬁsh with measuring boards or
rulers (Lart, 2022). These methods often require handling of each individual ﬁsh making it a highly
labour-intensive and time-consuming process. Hence catches are often monitored in sub-samples
that are assumed to be representative of the entire catch (Maunder and Piner, 2015). As catches
are highly variable in species and sizes, today’s monitoring programmes can not properly capture
this variation due to the low coverage. Without suﬃcient coverage of ﬁshing activities, several
assumptions need to be made (Maunder and Piner, 2015) (e.g. unobserved ﬁshing vessels are as-
sumed to behave similarly to the observed vessels), and the discard estimates have to be based on
observations of less than 1% of ﬁshing activities (Cooper and Weir, 2006; Benoît and Allard, 2009).
Therefore, the EU aims to increase the coverage and improve the existing monitoring programmes
with the use of new digital technologies (European Commission, 2023).
1.3
Electronic Monitoring
Since the beginning of this century, Electronic Monitoring (EM) of ﬁsheries has emerged as an at-
tempt to increase the coverage of ﬁsheries monitoring programmes (Helmond et al., 2020). EM
involves various technologies, such as sensors, GPS, and cameras placed in diﬀerent locations on
the ﬁshing vessel to remotely record ﬁshing operations (Helmond et al., 2020). This study focuses
on that part of EM which is cameras positioned in the catch sorting area of the vessel, to record
videos of the entire catch. At present, this video material can subsequently be reviewed for control
2
==PAGE:8==
and enforcement purposes by trained video analysts employed by the ﬁshing authorities. Thereby
the authorities can obtain data on the species caught, the number of ﬁsh in each species, and more
recently also ﬁsh lengths (Mortensen et al., 2017;French et al., 2015). Hence EM cameras provide
an alternative method to obtain data on catch compositions (Needle et al., 2015). Today EM pro-
grammes are fully implemented in some ﬁsheries in The United States, Canada, and Australia, and
in the Spanish tuna ﬁsheries in the Indian and Paciﬁc Ocean (Helmond et al., 2020). However, the
majority of these are with the objective to monitor the by-catch of megafauna (dolphins, sea tur-
tles, etc.) and birds. Meanwhile, recent trials have been made to assess the eﬃciency of EM com-
pared to on-board observers to monitor total catches. Several of these trials have demonstrated
the great potential of EM to provide signiﬁcantly higher data coverage (Helmond et al., 2020;
Needle et al., 2015). Most importantly it solves the logistic challenges associated with sending ob-
servers onboard ﬁshing vessels, and several studies indicate that EM has a higher cost-eﬃciency
than on-board observers ( Needle et al., 2015). However, the use of observer personnel to review
the video material is a highly limiting factor for the potential of EM, as this is costly and time-
consuming (Mortensen et al., 2017). As long as data acquisition from EM is dependent on human
observers, the data coverage will not be signiﬁcantly higher than for on-board observers (French
et al., 2015).
There has been much ongoing research on how to automatically extract the data from EM record-
ings for catch estimation (e.g. White et al., 2006; Needle et al., 2015; French et al., 2015; European
Commission, 2022). Currently, innovative and robust methods to automatically identify the ﬁsh
species within a catch are being developed (Vilas et al., 2020). Furthermore, there has been great
progress in developing methods for automated ﬁsh length estimation (Tseng et al., 2020). The
length composition of a catch is an essential parameter to monitor as it can be both used directly
or translated into age or weight (Silva et al., 2013; Lart, 2022). Thereby it provides valuable in-
formation on many biological processes like maturity, growth rate, and predator-prey interactions
(Khan and Khan, 2020). This is crucial information for scientists to determine the ﬁsh’s position
in the food web and role in the ecosystem (Khan and Khan, 2020). Moreover, most commercial
species are regulated according to a minimum conservation reference size (MCRS), which repre-
sents the minimum length at which a ﬁsh can be sold for human consumption, hence it determines
the economic value of a ﬁsh (Valentinsson et al., 2019). Finally, ﬁsh length provides important in-
3
==PAGE:9==
formation for gear selectivity studies, as the retention in ﬁshing gear is often driven by length
(Kasatkina and Ivanova, 2009).
A challenge for the eﬀectiveness of the species and length estimations from EM footage is when
the ﬁsh is not fully in the image. This is very often the reality in many ﬁsheries, especially in
e.g. demersal trawl ﬁsheries, where a mixed catch is brought on deck and sorted at once on a
conveyor belt (Figure 1). Here the ﬁsh are often overlapping and therefore several ﬁsh will be
occluded (Helmond et al., 2015). Additionally, the ﬁsh can be positioned in a way that makes it
diﬃcult to determine the species or length from a 2D image, or the image quality can be disturbed
by e.g. water droplets on the camera lens (French et al., 2015;Tseng et al., 2020). The methods
for automatic species recognition show promising results also when ﬁsh are not fully visible (e.g.
Vilas et al., 2020). In contrast, no robust methods are yet developed to predict the ﬁsh length of
partly occluded ﬁsh (Ovalle et al., 2022). Therefore, a robust and reliable method to predict the
length of ﬁsh that are occluded on EM footage is required for EM to automatically estimate the
length composition of catches.
Figure 1: Mixed catch on a sorting band.
4
==PAGE:10==
1.4
Allometry
The term allometry refers to how diﬀerent biological traits and processes in a living organism scale
with its total body size. These biological traits can both be morphological (e.g. the relationship
between claw size and body size in crabs), physiological (e.g. the relationship between fecundity
and female body size in general), or ecological (e.g. the relationship between dispersal capability
and body size in birds) (Nature Education, 2010). In ﬁsh, morphological allometric relationships
have been investigated to evaluate the length of certain body parts as a proxy for total ﬁsh length.
Despite this being a relatively limited ﬁeld of research, this has resulted in ﬁndings of strong allo-
metric relationships with the potential to predict the total length based on the length of another
body part (Scharf et al., 1998; Karpov et al., 2009; Needle et al., 2015). Additionally, a few studies
have investigated this in the context of estimating the total ﬁsh length from video footage (Karpov
et al., 2009; Needle et al., 2015). Needle et al. (2015) speciﬁcally showed that other morphometric
parameters visible on EM video footage can give approximations of the total length of occluded
ﬁsh with a high level of accuracy.
Allometric relationships are known to vary across populations of the same species (Rawat et al.,
2017). Because the morphology directly reﬂects how an organism interacts with the environment,
it may diﬀer between populations occupying diﬀerent habitats (Rawat et al., 2017). To avoid re-
gional bias in the length estimations of occluded ﬁsh, the allometric relationships used to estimate
the total length must be consistent across populations, or otherwise adapted to the regional dif-
ferences.
2
Aim
The aim of this thesisis to investigate several allometricrelationships inAtlanticcod (Gadus morhua)
and evaluate their robustness across diﬀerent populations in the Northeast Atlantic. The ﬁnal goal
is to identify one or more morphometric measures, suitable to consistently predict the total length
of cod that are occluded on EM footage.
5
==PAGE:11==
3
Project Delineation
This section aims to explain the reasoning behind the delineation of the project, in relation to the
species and areas of study. Initially, the choice of research species is explained. Secondly, this
section provides a brief description of the sampling areas and the cod populations within these.
3.1
Research species - Atlantic cod
This study focuses on asingle species: Atlantic Cod (Gadus morhua). Atlantic cod is abenthopelagic
predatory round-ﬁsh species, feeding mainly on crustaceans and smaller ﬁsh (Link et al., 2008).
Atlantic Cod exists throughout the North Atlantic, from Georges Bank in the southwest to Sval-
bard in the northeast (ICES, 2006; Lilly et al., 2008). Here it is distributed across a wide range of
habitats and ecosystems, from sheltered and low-saline coastal waters and fjords to the open and
highly saline ocean (Lilly et al., 2008). Cod is one of the most important species for commercial
ﬁsheries within its distribution range in the North Atlantic (ICES, 2006).
In the Northeast Atlantic, cod is managed in eleven diﬀerent management units (stocks) (Figure 2)
(Sguotti et al., 2019). Several of these stocks have declined dramatically since the 1970s (Lilly et al.,
2008). Currently, the majority of the stocks are below sustainable levels, with some depleted to an
extent that ICES is advising a total allowable catch (TAC) of zero in 2023 (ICES, 2022b; ICES, 2022c)
and 2024 (ICES, 2023). Among the zero TAC stocks in the Northeast Atlantic are the Eastern Baltic
and the Kattegat stock. While there is currently no ﬁshery targeting cod in Kattegat, the Kattegat
stock is still caught as bycatch in the ﬁshery for Norway Lobster (Nephrops norvegicus), which is a
mixed demersal trawl ﬁshery (ICES, 2022d). Cod is additionally a common target species in mixed
ﬁsheries (ICES, 2022f), but due to low TACs for many cod stocks, cod often becomes the limit-
ing stock ("choke-species") (ICES, 2022f). In mixed ﬁsheries, ﬂeets are often constrained by the
catches of cod, leading them to stop ﬁshing when their cod quota is reached. This prevents ﬁsh-
ermen from fully utilizing their quota of other species targeted in the mixed ﬁshery (ICES, 2022f).
This limitation may create an economic incentive for the ﬁshermen to discard cod at sea if they
cannot lower their catches of cod by improving the selectivity of their ﬁshing gear (Kraak et al.,
2013; Ulrich et al., 2015). Due to these challenges cod is a highly regulated species, hence improv-
6
==PAGE:12==
ing the monitoring of cod stocks with EM is a high priority.
Figure 2: Stocks of Atlantic cod in the North Atlantic. Pink circles (1-11) correspond to the Northeast Atlantic
stocks (Reprinted from: Sguotti et al., 2019).
As mentioned, a stock refers to a group of individuals within a species that is considered a unit
for management purposes (Cooper and Weir, 2006). On the other hand, a population is deﬁned
as a group of individuals of the same species who are to some degree reproductively isolated
from other individuals within that species (Bekkevold, 2022). The division of ﬁsh stocks aims to
reﬂect the current knowledge of distinct population units, to ensure that populations are man-
aged separately. This enables managers to adapt the ﬁshing pressure to the production of the
given population to lower the risk of overﬁshing (Reiss et al., 2009). Extensive genetic research
has shown how several populations and sub-populations of cod occur across the North Atlantic,
despite the large connectivity and possibility for dispersal in marine ecosystems (Barth et al., 2017;
Roney et al., 2018). Additionally, several of these genetic studies indicate that there may be more
distinct populations than the number of management units (Reiss et al., 2009). Besides diﬀerent
genetic proﬁles, studies have shown that these populations can exhibit diﬀerent morphology, be-
havior, growth rates, etc. These diﬀerences possibly occur as a result of local adaptations to the
diﬀerent areas and environments that the populations occupy (Lilly et al., 2008).
7
==PAGE:13==
3.2
Sampling areas and populations
This study investigated the robustness of allometric relationships across four diﬀerent areas in
the Northeast Atlantic: The Baltic Sea, Skagerrak, the North Sea, and the Barents Sea (Figure 3).
These areas were selected with the aim to get wide geographical coverage in order to capture
some of the variation across the diﬀerent populations in the Northeast Atlantic. Genetic studies
have found that cod populations in these areas are generally distinct (except for the North Sea
and Skagerrak) (Reiss et al., 2009; Barth et al., 2017). This section provides a description of the
environmental characteristics of the four areas and of the populations within these.
Figure 3: The four sampling areas: Baltic Sea (red), Skagerrak (blue), North Sea (yellow), and Barents Sea
(green).
3.2.1
The Baltic Sea
The Baltic Sea is covering a total surface area of 420.000km2 (ICES, 2022a). More speciﬁcally, the
data included in this study were collected in the Eastern Baltic Sea, east of Bornholm (ICES area
3.d.25 and 3.d.26). The Baltic Sea is almost enclosed, with the only inﬂow of saline water through
8
==PAGE:14==
the narrow and shallow Belt Sea, making this an ecologically unique marine system (Link et al.,
2008). Due to the large input of freshwater from the surrounding land, the Baltic Sea is highly
brackish with a salinity generally around <20 psu, and with a strong declining salinity gradient from
southwest to north (Link et al., 2008; ICES, 2022a). Due to a high load of nutrients in the water
runoﬀfrom land, the input of nutrients to the Baltic Sea has been very high since the beginning
of the 20th century (Link et al., 2008). This has led to eutrophication, which is causing large algae
blooms, increased water turbidity, and oxygen depletion in the deepest areas (HELCOM, 2018).
Within the Baltic Sea, two genetically divergent populations occur; one in the Eastern and one in
the Western Baltic. These populations are mixing in the area of the Arkona Sea (ICES area 3.d.24),
while the areas to the east and west of the Arkona Sea are exclusively composed of the western
and eastern population, respectively (Hemmer-Hansen et al., 2019; Weist et al., 2019). Hence
the cod sampled in this study are presumably belonging to the eastern Baltic population. This
population is shown to have a slower growth rate, a lower weight at a given length, and a shorter
length at maturity than the western population (Köster et al., 2017). Studies suggest that these
diﬀerences are due to adaptations to the unique environment in the Baltic Sea (Berg et al., 2015).
Additionally, an increasing prevalence of parasitic infections in the liver of cod has been observed
in the Baltic Sea, causing negative eﬀects on their nutritional condition and growth (Köster et al.,
2017).
3.2.2
The North Sea
The North Sea is a semi-enclosed sea on the continental shelf of northern Europe, covering a
total area of 570.000km2 (ICES, 2022e). More speciﬁcally, the sampling area was northeast of the
Shetland Islands in the northern North Sea (ICES area 4.a). This part of the North Sea is connected
to the Atlantic Ocean through a large open boundary to the north, hence it is inﬂuenced by a strong
inﬂux from the Atlantic Ocean with warmer waters and salinities around 35 psu (ICES, 2022e). It is
on average 150m deep, with the deepest areas (700m) in the Norwegian trench to the northeast
along the coast of Norway (Madsen, 2009). Towards the east, the North Sea is connected to the
Baltic Sea through Skagerrak and Kattegat (Madsen, 2009). In ICES area 4.a. around Shetland,
two reproductively isolated population units of cod have been found to occur, referred to in the
9
==PAGE:15==
literature as the Dogger and Viking Unit (Heath et al., 2013; ICES, 2020). The Viking population is
localized east of Shetland towards the Norwegian coast, while the Dogger unit is localized around
the Shetland islands, extending towards the southern North Sea and the English Channel (Heath
et al., 2013). These two distinct populations have been found to exhibit signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
rates of growth and maturity, with the Viking population being longer at maturity than the Dogger
population (Heath et al., 2013; González-Irusta and Wright, 2015).
3.2.3
Skagerrak
Skagerrak is a rather narrow strait between Denmark and Norway (ICES area 3.a.20), connecting
the North Sea and the Baltic Sea. It has a total surface area of 32.000km2 and a mean depth of
210m (Jansen et al., 2003). The Norwegian Trench is stretching into the northern part of Skagerrak
towards the coast of Norway, with depths down to more than 500m. The water in Skagerrak is less
saline than in the North Sea, as it is aﬀected by the inﬂux of low-salinity water from the Baltic Sea.
From genetic studies, it is known that no signiﬁcant genetic diﬀerences exist between the cod in
Skagerrak and the North Sea (Barth et al., 2017) and that most cod in Skagerrak belong to the Viking
population (ICES, 2020). However, due to high connectivity between the North Sea and Kattegat
through Skagerrak, Skagerrak is also known to be a mixing area for the North Sea and the Kattegat
populations (Hemmer-Hansen et al., 2020). The proportions of the two populations occurring in
Skagerrak/northern Kattegat vary seasonally and with the age/size of the ﬁsh (Hemmer-Hansen
et al., 2020).
3.2.4
The Barents Sea
The data from the Barents Sea used in this study was collected in ICES area 2.a.2. The Barents
Sea is covering a total area of 1.6 million km2 north of Norway and Russia. It is surrounded by the
Norwegian, Arctic, and Kara Sea and has an average depth of 230m (ICES, 2021). The Barents Sea
is a boreal (temperate) ecosystem in the south and an arctic ecosystem in the north. The northern
part is covered by sea ice most of the year, while the southern is ice-free all year round (IMR,
2022). The temperature, salinity, and currents in the Barents Sea are aﬀected by the inﬂux from
adjacent seas (ICES, 2021). The Atlantic cod found in the Barents Sea is known as the Northeast
10
==PAGE:16==
Arctic population. During spawning, this population migrates long distances to the waters along
the northern coast of Norway. Here they are mixing with a distinct and more stationary population
that inhabits the coastal areas throughout their entire life cycle (Reiss et al., 2009). This long
migration south for spawning may be driven by the arctic conditions in the Barents Sea being
unfavorable for juvenile cod (Höﬄe et al., 2014).
4
Materials and Methods
4.1
Data Collection
4.1.1
Morphometric Measures
Seven allometric relationships were evaluated in this study. Each allometric relationship was de-
scribing the relationship between the total length (TL) of the cod, and the size of a diﬀerent body
part (morphometric measure). The seven morphometric measures used in the allometric rela-
tionships are shown in Figure 4. These speciﬁc morphometrics were chosen as they were found
in a recent study to give the most accurate predictions of TL across length classes of Atlantic cod
(Nielsen et al., unpublished data). Additionally, these morphometrics were chosen as they were
relatively easy to measure from EM footage and due to their limited seasonal variability, among
other considerations (Nielsen et al., unpublished data). Several measures were tested and evalu-
ated, as the preferred scenario is to have more than one alternative measurement to TL, in case
one or more are occluded on the camera footage.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 4: The morphometric measures used in the allometric relationships with TL. The morphometric
measures were: head length (HL), pectoral ﬁn length (PCFL), pectoral ﬁn width (PCFW), caudal peduncle
height (CPH), preorbital length (PROL), postorbital length (POOL) and the horizontal eye diameter (HED).
4.1.2
Sampling Procedure
Cod from the Baltic Sea were collected with the 78m research vessel Dana IV, as part of the yearly
Baltic International Trawl Survey (BITS). Data from the Barents Sea was collected with the 64m
research vessel R/V Helmer Hanssen on a scientiﬁc cruise. In the North Sea, data was collected
onboard a 28m commercial ﬁshing vessel from the Shetland Islands. Measurements from Skager-
rak were collected on a scientiﬁc cruise with the 17m research vessel Havﬁsken (Figure 3). For
further details on the data collection see Table 1.
Diﬀerent observers were responsible for measuring the cod in each area, except for the North Sea
and Baltic Sea, where the data were collected by the same observer, referred to as Observer A
(who is also the author of the present study). The observer collecting data in the Barents Sea is
referred to as Observer B and the observer in Skagerrak as Observer C (Table 1). To standardize
the data collection procedure, all observers received training before the data collection.
12
==PAGE:18==
Table 1: Summary table of the data collection activities. The total number (n) and range of length classes
(TL range) of the measured cod are given for each area.
Area
Date
n
Gear
Vessel type
Observer ID
TL range [cm]
Skagerrak
June 2022
427
Demersal Trawl
Research
C
14.5 - 80.5
Baltic Sea
March 2023
421
Demersal Trawl
Research
A
8.5 - 52.5
Barents Sea
March 2023
430
Demersal Trawl
Research
B
19.5 - 125.5
North Sea
April 2023
200
Scottish Seine
Commercial
A
26.5 - 110.5
The cod were measured as quickly as possible after being caught, while they were still fresh, and
before they were eviscerated. If individuals could not be measured shortly after capture, they were
stored in ice water to delay the onset of rigor mortis. TL was initially measured with a measur-
ing board or ruler and rounded down to the nearest cm. Subsequently, the seven morphometric
measures were collected with a digital caliper and rounded down to the nearest mm. To capture
some of the morphological variation within length classes, the aim was to measure 10 individu-
als within each observed 1 cm length class if possible. However, the highest priority was given to
obtaining data from as many diﬀerent length classes as possible, rather than measuring many indi-
viduals within each length class. For all areas combined, a total of 1478 cod were measured over a
wide range of diﬀerent length classes (Figure 5). Individuals with severe rigor mortis, barotrauma
(popped-out eyes), damaged ﬁns, or other morphological deformities (Figure 6) were not mea-
sured, as this was expected to aﬀect the measurements. However, if these individuals were from
rarely observed length classes, they were measured with a note describing the type of deformity.
13
==PAGE:19==
Figure 5: The length distribution of the cod caught during data collection in each area. Each bar represents
one length class with an interval of one cm (for example, the length class 55-56 cm is denoted 55.5). Fre-
quency refers to the number of individuals measured for each length class.
Figure 6: Example of the diﬀerent morphological deformities observed during data collection. From the top
right: Rigor mortis, pectoral ﬁn bent in the wrong direction, barotrauma (popped-out eye), and an example
of another observed deformity.
14
==PAGE:20==
Furthermore, two observers were compared to assess the presence of bias in the measurements
caused by observer-related diﬀerences. This observer check was conducted on a sub-sample of
the Baltic Sea cod with 52 individuals in 25 diﬀerent length classes ranging from 12.5cm to 45.5cm
(Figure 7).
Figure 7: The length distribution of the cod included in the observer comparison. These individuals were
from a subset of the cod caught in the Baltic Sea. Each bar represents one length class and Frequency refers
to the number of individuals measured for each length class
To assess the eﬀect of diﬀerent observers on the measurements, each individual in this subset
was measured independently by two diﬀerent observers: Observer A and a fourth observer re-
ferred to as Observer D. The two observers were measuring completely autonomously, ensuring
independence between the two groups of measurements. The cod measured for this observer
check were measured in groups of approximately ten individuals. These ten cod were each given
a unique ID for identiﬁcation before the measurements were collected (Figure 8). When the cod
had been assigned an ID, they were measured by the ﬁrst observer. Subsequently, the measure-
ments were repeated by the other observer. If the second observer was prevented to measure the
cod immediately after the ﬁrst observer, the cod were stored on ice to delay rigor mortis (Figure
8).
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 8: Labeling of the cod during data collection for the observer comparison.
4.2
Data Exploration
After data collection, the dataset contained the following: The parameter Fish ID, with a unique
ID for each cod; the eight numerical variables TL, HL, PCFL, PCFW, CPH, PROL, POOL, and HED rep-
resenting each morphometric measure; the categorical variable Observer specifying the observer
collecting the data; and Area representing the area where the data was collected. The analyses
described in subsections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 were made to evaluate whether some results should be
interpreted with extra caution. Subsection 4.2.3 describes the preliminary data analysis made to
determine the appropriate method to model the allometric relationships. All data treatment was
done in R studio (R Core Team, 2021), and all essential steps are described in Appendix A-F.
4.2.1
Comparison of two observers
To investigate the potential for observer bias in the measurements between Observers A and D
the ratio between the two sets of measurements was calculated, by dividing the measurement
collected by Observer D by the measurement taken by Observer A. The ratio was used instead of
the absolute diﬀerence, to eliminate the fact that larger measures (e.g. HL) would naturally give
the numerically largest diﬀerences, and thereby facilitate comparison across the diﬀerent mea-
sures. The ratio for each individual ﬁsh was plotted against TL for each morphometric measure.
Also, the mean and standard deviation of the ratios were calculated for quantitative comparison.
16
==PAGE:22==
Furthermore, simple linear models were ﬁtted to the data, with TL as response and the mor-
phometric measure as the explanatory variable. One model was ﬁtted to the data collected by
Observer A and another to the data collected by Observer D. The two observers were compared
visually by plotting the two model ﬁts including 95% conﬁdence intervals for each morphometric
measure.
4.2.2
Comparison of two areas
The allometric relationships were compared between the two areas sampled by Observer A (The
Baltic Sea and the North Sea) to investigate the diﬀerence between areas when observer bias could
be excluded. The two areas were compared visually by plotting TL against each morphometric
measure for each area. The observations were plotted together with regression lines ﬁtted to
the data, describing the relationship between the morphometric measure and TL. The ﬁtting of
these regression lines were following the same procedure as all the study areas, which is further
described in subsection 4.3.2.
4.2.3
Identifying the appropriate modeling approach
Initially, the dataset was examined for outliers. This was done visually with boxplots of each mor-
phometric measure, where observations that appeared as outliers were displayed outside the
boxplot and required further investigation (Zuur et al., 2010). For more detailed visualization,
Cleveland dot plots of each morphometric measure ordered by TL were made to check whether
the observations identiﬁed in the boxplots were extreme values (sample minimum and sample
maximum). In that case, they represented natural variation in the data and were therefore not
further examined. Observations that considerably deviated from the rest of the values were evi-
dent as clear outliers in the Cleveland dot plot and would thus be further checked in the raw data
(Zuur et al., 2010).
Subsequently, pairwise plots were made to visualize the relationship between TL and all the mor-
phometric measures. These plots clearly revealed a linear relationship between TL and each of
the morphometric measures, therefore linear modeling was chosen as the appropriate method to
model the allometric relationships. In the models, TL was set as the response variable, and each
17
==PAGE:23==
morphometric measure was set as the explanatory variable. This choice was made because the
study aimed to evaluate the ability of the morphometric measures to predict TL, in case the TL
is occluded on EM footage. Since the morphometric measures demonstrated linear correlation
with each other, individual models were constructed for each morphometric measure to avoid
multicollinearity (Zuur et al., 2010).
In total, three diﬀerent models were made for each allometric relationship: M0 with the morpho-
metric measure as the only explanatory variable; M1 with Area as an additional factor and; M2
with Observer as an additional factor. Because each area was measured by a speciﬁc observer,
except for the Baltic and the North Sea, Area and Observer were highly correlated. Therefore, it
was necessary to test the eﬀect of Area and Observer, respectively, with two diﬀerent models.
As these included both numerical and categorical explanatory variables, they were ﬁtted as linear
mixed-eﬀects models using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS).
For linear models, the model residuals are assumed to have homogeneous variance (Homoskedas-
ticity) that is independent of location, with a mean variance of zero. Furthermore, they are as-
sumed to be normally distributed (Zuur et al., 2010). Homoskedasticity was checked by plotting
the residuals against the ﬁtted values and was additionally tested with a Breusch-Pagan statistical
test for each model. From visual inspection of the residual plots, heteroscedasticity seemed to be
present in the data for all morphometric measures. This was seen as the data points for all mea-
sures (except HED) were creating a megaphone shape, with the residual variance increasing with
the size of the ﬁtted value. For HED, however, the data points were distributed in a "V-shape", with
positive residuals for small and large ﬁtted values, and negative residuals for intermediate values.
The presence of heteroscedasticity was further conﬁrmed with the Breusch-Pagan test, which was
highly signiﬁcant for all models (p < 0.001). Hence it was concluded that heteroscedasticity was
present in the residuals.
The heteroscedasticity wasaccommodated by re-ﬁtting the model withthe Weighted Least Squares
(WLS) method. This method adds weights to the residuals so that less weight is added to the resid-
uals with larger variance (Statology, 2020). The weights were calculated as the reciprocal of the
variance of the ﬁtted values:
w =
1
σY 2
18
==PAGE:24==
where w is the weight and σY 2 is the variance of the ﬁtted values, Y . The WLS models were tested
with the Breuch-Pagan test, which turned out insigniﬁcant for all 21 models (p > 0.5), hence it was
concluded that heteroscedasticity was no longer present in the residuals. Fitting the models with
WLS resulted in a higher R2 for all models, hence the WLS model resulted in a better ﬁt for all the
allometric relationships. The WLS models were compared to the OLS models with AIC (Akaike’s
Information Criterion). A model ﬁt was considered signiﬁcantly better if the AIC was at least 2
values lower than another model. Based on the ∆AIC, the WLS method signiﬁcantly improved
the model ﬁt for all models. Finally, normality in the residuals was checked with histograms of the
residuals. This revealed no violations against the normality assumption.
4.3
Statistical Analysis
4.3.1
Robustness of allometric relationships across areas
Based on the data exploration, the following three ﬁnal models were ﬁtted to the data for each
morphometric measure. All models were ﬁtted with WLS:
M0 : TL = α + β1 · X + ε
M1 : TL = α + β1 · X + β2 · Area + ε
M2 : TL = α + β1 · X + β2 · Observer + ε
where X is the speciﬁc morphometric measure, α, β1 and β2 are model parameters and ε is the
error term. M0, M1, and M2 were compared with AIC to identify the best model to describe
the variation in TL for each allometric relationship. With M1, the eﬀect of Area on the allometric
relationship was tested, to investigate the robustness of the seven allometric relationships across
areas (i.e. whether the allometric relationships varied between areas).
4.3.2
Area Comparison
The sampling areas for which the M1 model was found to be the best model were compared pair-
wise. This was done for all morphometric measures, to test which of the areas were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent.
19
==PAGE:25==
Furthermore, the aim was to compare the allometric relationship within a given area to an over-
all allometric relationship that did not take the area into account. To achieve this, area-speciﬁc
allometric relationships were compared visually to an overall allometric relationship ﬁtted with
M0. To establish the area-speciﬁc allometric relationships, the datasets from each area were ana-
lyzed individually. Initially, the data was explored following the same steps as described in section
4.2.3. For each area, seven allometric relationships similar to M0 were ﬁtted with WLS to ac-
count for heteroscedasticity. Additionally, linearity in the allometric relationships was assessed by
comparing the AIC between the simple linear models and models with second-degree polynomi-
als. In cases where the inclusion of a second-degree polynomial signiﬁcantly improved the model
ﬁt, this non-linear model was used to ﬁt the area-speciﬁc allometric relationship. Finally, for vi-
sual comparison, the area-speciﬁc allometric relationships were ﬁtted across the entire range of
length classes obtained from all areas combined and plotted together with the overall allometric
relationship for each morphometric measure.
5
Results
5.1
Comparison of two observers
Visual inspection of the data collected by Observers A and D indicates that some of the morpho-
metric measures are possibly aﬀected by observer bias. The mean ratio is greater than 1 for all
measures, indicating a systematic diﬀerence between the two observers (with Observer D gener-
ally measuring larger values for the morphometric measures than Observer A) (Table 2; Figure 9).
The largest systematic diﬀerence between observers was observed for PROL and CPH, as these
exhibited the mean ratio furthest from 1 (Table 2). The measures with the lowest observer bias
between the two observers were HED, HL, and POOL, as these had a mean ratio closest to 1 (Table
2).
20
==PAGE:26==
Table 2: The diﬀerence in slope between the models ﬁtted to the data collected by Observer A and D
respectively, and summary statistics of the ratio (Q) between the two observers.
Measure
∆Slope
Mean (Q)
s.d. (Q)
HL
0.14
1.03
0.03
PCFL
0.22
1.06
0.07
PCFW
0.81
1.08
0.17
CPH
4.41
1.11
0.13
PROL
0.79
1.11
0.08
POOL
0.19
1.03
0.07
HED
4.16
1.00
0.11
The standard deviation indicates the consistency in measurements (i.e. to what extent the ob-
server is consistently measuring the same HL for a speciﬁc TL). The standard deviation of the ratio
is the largest for PCFW, CPH, and HED (Table 2). This is additionally seen in Figure 9 as the data
points for these three measures are more widely scattered around both the ﬁtted lines and the
horizontal line for Q=1. In contrast, the measures that are measured most consistently by the two
observers are HL, POOL, and PCFL (Table 2; Figure 9). Furthermore, the model slopes for several of
the morphometric measures diﬀer between observers (Figure 9). The highest diﬀerence in slope
between observers is seen for CPH and HED (Table 2).
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 9: Left plot: The ratio (Q) between the measurements conducted by Observer A and Observer
D, plotted against TL. Each point represents one individual. The horizontal line at Q = 1 represents equal
measurements. Right plot: TL plotted against each morphometric measure for Observer A (green) and
Observer D (light-red). Lines are simple linear models ﬁtted to the data. The grey shade represents the 95%
conﬁdence interval.
22
==PAGE:28==
5.2
Comparison of two areas
From the visual comparison of the Baltic Sea and the North Sea, it is seen that the morphometric
measures that diﬀer the most between the two areas are HED, and CPH (Figure 10). Also, these
two measures are, together with PCFW, the morphometric measures with the highest variability.
This is seen as the data points are more widely scattered around the ﬁtted lines. Based on the
visual comparison, no clear diﬀerentiation between areas is seen for HL, PROL, POOL, and PCFL
(Figure 10).
Figure 10: TL plotted against each morphometric measure for the two areas sampled by the same observer.
The lines represent the modeled allometric relationship between the speciﬁc morphometric measure and
TL. The grey shade represents the 95% conﬁdence interval.
5.3
Robustness of allometric relationship across areas
Both Area and Observer and all morphometric measures were shown to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on TL (p > 0.05) (Table 3). For ﬁve out of seven measures, M1 was found to explain signiﬁcantly
more of the variation in TL than M2, based on ∆AIC . However, for the remaining two measures,
23
==PAGE:29==
PROL and POOL, M1 and M2 performed equally well with a ∆AIC < 2. Therefore, for all seven
allometric relationships, M1 was either the best model or performed equally well compared to
the best model (Table 3).
Table 3: Model evaluation criteria for all models. All models shown in the table were ﬁtted with WLS. The
best model for each morphometric measure is written in bold.
∆AIC
R2
Model:
M1
M2
M0
M1
M2
M0
HL
0.00
127.27
665.15
1.00
0.99
0.99
PCFL
0.00
36.38
454.57
1.00
0.99
0.98
PCFW
0.00
138.01
567.98
0.99
0.97
0.97
CPH
0.00
388.42
943.55
1.00
0.98
0.97
PROL
1.02
0.00
165.58
1.00
1.00
0.99
POOL
1.24
0.00
350.86
1.00
1.00
0.99
HED
0.00
63.82
348.13
0.99
0.95
0.94
5.4
Area Comparison
According to M1 being the best model (or performing equally as well as the best model) for all
measures, pairwise comparisons between areas were conducted for all allometric relationships.
The allometric relationships with HL, PCFW, and CPH were found to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for all
pairwise combinations of areas (Table 4). All seven allometric relationships were signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent between the Barents Sea and the other three areas. Between Skagerrak and the North Sea,
only three allometric relationships with HL, PCFW, and CPH were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, whereas
additionally PCFL and HED were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the Baltic Sea and Skagerrak, and
the Baltic Sea and the North Sea. No signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found for PROL and POOL be-
tween the Baltic, North Sea, and Skagerrak (Table 4).
24
==PAGE:30==
Table 4: Pairwise comparison between the four diﬀerent areas. All the morphometric measures that were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the two compared areas (p < 0.05) are listed for each pairwise comparison.
Baltic Sea
Skagerrak
North Sea
Skagerrak
HL; PCFL; PCFW; CPH; HED
North Sea
HL; PCFL; PCFW; CPH; HED
HL; PCFW; CPH
Barents Sea
HL; PCFL; PCFW; CPH; PROL; POOL; HED
HL; PCFL; PCFW; CPH; PROL; POOL; HED
HL; PCFL; PCFW; CPH; PROL; POOL; HED
For approximately half of the allometric relationships in each area, the model ﬁt was signiﬁcantly
improved by including a second-degree polynomial, based on ∆AIC. Therefore, both linear and
non-linear models were used for ﬁtting the area-speciﬁc relationships in Figure 11.
From the visual comparison of the allometric relationships between areas, considerable variations
between areas were observed for some of the measures. The highest divergence between areas
was observed for CPH and HED. Additionally, clear divergence was observed between the area-
speciﬁc and the overall allometric relationship for these measures (Figure 11). Speciﬁcally, the
Barents Sea and the Baltic Sea displayed high deviations from the overall allometric relationship
for both HED and CPH. In contrast, the area-speciﬁc allometric relationships for Skagerrak and the
North Sea were very close to the overall allometric relationship for both of these measures.
The measures HL, PROL, and POOL exhibit a low divergence between areas for the Barents Sea,
Skagerrak, and the North Sea, with the overall allometric relationship closely aligning with the
area-speciﬁc relationships. However, for these three measures, the Baltic Sea showed consider-
able divergence from the other areas and the overall allometric relationship, for ﬁsh with a TL
above approximately 55cm (Figure 11).
PCFL and PCFW demonstrated high robustness across all areas (Figure 11). Nevertheless, the area-
speciﬁc allometric relationship for PCFW in the North Sea diverged from the overall allometric re-
lationship for length classes above approximately 100cm. For PCFL, clear divergence was observed
between the Baltic Sea and the Barents Sea, with the area-speciﬁc relationship being clearly dif-
ferent from the overall allometric relationship.
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 11: Area-speciﬁc allometric relationships for each morphometric measure and area. The black curve
represents an overall allometric relationship based on data from all areas. The grey shade represents the
95% conﬁdence interval.
26
==PAGE:32==
6
Discussion
This study aimed to assess the robustness of allometric relationships across diﬀerent areas. This
was investigated in the context of evaluating the use of allometric relationships to predict the
total ﬁsh length when ﬁsh are occluded on EM footage. Because the length estimations with EM
should not be regionally biased, this study aimed to further identify allometric relationships that
demonstrated the least variability between areas and to evaluate their implications for EM.
6.1
Measures with potential observer bias
Since the data in each sampling area was collected by a unique observer, except for the Baltic Sea
and North Sea which were collected by the same observer, it was necessary to assess whether
some morphometrics would potentially be aﬀected by observer bias. If detected, this would po-
tentially undermine the ability to assess the diﬀerences between areas.
The comparison of two observers measuring cod from the same area detected evidence of ob-
server bias for the morphometric measures CPH and PROL (Figure 9; Table 2). For CPH it was
observed during data collection that the exact measurement location (i.e. at the thinnest point of
the caudal peduncle) could be challenging to determine relative to some of the other measures.
Additionally, the size of this measurement appeared to depend on the pressure used with the
caliper, because it was more a measure of thickness, rather than a distance between two ﬁxed
points (e.g. as for PCFL which is from the most anterior point of the pectoral ﬁn to the tip of the
longest ﬁn ray). Similarly for PROL, the caliper was challenging to place at the exact measurement
location due to the curvature of the ﬁsh’s head from the nose to the eye. These challenges may
have caused higher variability in how POOL and CPH were measured, resulting in a systematic vari-
ability between the two observers. However, diﬀerences in CPH were also found between the two
areas measured by the same observer (Figure 10). Additionally, for CPH, Area was shown to be a
better predictor of TL than Observer, due to M1 being signiﬁcantly better than M2 for this measure
(Table 3). These results suggest that despite observer bias being a potential source of variability
in CPH, there is substantial evidence that actual diﬀerences between areas are present for this
measure. In contrast, no diﬀerences between the two areas were identiﬁed for PROL (Figure 10),
27
==PAGE:33==
and M1 and M2 were equally good, hence Observer explained the same amount of variation in TL
as Area. This suggests that caution should be taken when interpreting any diﬀerences between
areas for PROL, due to these diﬀerences being potentially induced by observer bias.
6.2
Measures with high variability
Besides robustness across areas, the allometric relationships used for length prediction with EM
should also demonstrate low variability, as this would reduce the precision of length predictions
(Needle et al., 2015). However, if the main source of variability is induced by inconsistencies in the
manual measuring method (e.g. where exactly the measurement is taken or how much pressure
is applied with the caliper, etc), this variability is not expected to be detected with the automated
measuring methods applied with EM (Gilman et al., 2019). On the other hand, if the variability is
induced by natural morphological variation, this measure would not be suitable as a proxy for TL,
because this type of variability will be present regardless of the measuring method.
Among the seven morphometric measures investigated in this study, the largest variability was
observed in PCFW, HED, and CPH. This was evident from both the high standard deviation in the
observer comparison (Table 2) and from visual inspection of the allometric relationships, where
the observations for these three measures, relative to the other measures, were more widely scat-
tered around the ﬁtted regression lines (Figure 11). A common characteristic of PCFW, HED, and
CPH is that they are the smallest of the seven morphometric measures. Small measures would be
expected to demonstrate a higher variability when compared to larger measures. For example, a
diﬀerence of one mm would only have a minor impact on a longer measure like HL, but a more
substantial impact on a smaller measure like PCFW. Furthermore, the inconsistency in CPH may be
due to the challenges related to locating the least caudal peduncle height, hence the same issue
possibly causing the observer bias in this measure. The high variability in HED could be due to
the instances of barotrauma which were observed in several of the cod included in the analysis.
This may have aﬀected the eye measurements and thus made them less consistent. Other stud-
ies comparing diﬀerent allometric relationships and have similarly identiﬁed the horizontal eye
diameter to give more variable and inconsistent indications of TL in Atlantic cod (Needle et al.,
2015; Scharf et al., 1998). The study by Needle et al. (2015) used measurements acquired from
28
==PAGE:34==
both manual measurements and EM CCTV systems. This indicates that despite the reason for the
high variability in HED, this variability may also be captured with EM and may therefore not be
solely caused by inconsistency related to the manual measuring procedure. However, there is not
enough evidence to conclude that the observed variability in HED, PCFW, or CPH will have substan-
tial negative eﬀects on the accuracy of length predictions with EM, and it is therefore still relevant
to investigate their robustness across areas.
6.3
Robustness of allometric relationships across areas
In alignment with the primary aim to assess the robustness of allometric relationships across ar-
eas, and possibly identify morphometric measures without regional bias, measurements from the
North Sea, Baltic Sea, Barents Sea, and Skagerrak were compared. From the pairwise comparison
of the four areas, PROL and POOL exhibited the least variability between areas, as both measures
were only signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for the cod in the Barents Sea (Table 4). For PROL, however, this
diﬀerence could be due to potential observer bias as previously established. Nevertheless, all
the allometric relationships were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for the Barents Sea, which indicates that
the cod in the Barents Sea may generally exhibit morphological diﬀerences from the other areas.
These diﬀerences could be induced by the fact that the Barents Sea is the area furthest away
geographically and environmentally from the other areas, and the only area experiencing arctic
conditions (ICES, 2021). On a wide scale for the entire Northeast Atlantic, several studies have
found signiﬁcant genetic diﬀerentiation between Atlantic cod in the Barents Sea and all other ar-
eas in the Northeast Atlantic (Reiss et al., 2009). Furthermore, the Northeast Arctic population
inhabiting the Barents Sea exhibits unique life history traits, compared to the cod in other areas.
The extensive migrations that this population undertakes between spawning and feeding areas
are not observed in other of the more southern populations in the Northeast Atlantic (Thorsen et
al., 2010). This distinct migratory behavior may have contributed to morphological diﬀerentiation
between this population and other more southern populations in the North Sea, Skagerrak, and
Baltic Sea.
The low variation between the areas for POOL and PROL was visually conﬁrmed in Figure 11. Ad-
ditionally, despite HL being signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between all areas in the pairwise comparison
29
==PAGE:35==
(Table 4), the four area-speciﬁc allometric relationships for HL were relatively similar (Figure 11).
However, for the allometric relationship with both HL, PROL, and POOL the Baltic Sea clearly de-
viated from the other three areas for cod with TL above 55 cm. Speciﬁcally the cod population in
the Eastern Baltic Sea where the samples were taken, is characterized by small individuals (Köster
et al., 2017). Also, this study recorded no individuals above 55cm during data collection in the
Eastern Baltic (Figure 5). This indicates that there will be a low probability of encountering cod
above 55cm in the Eastern Baltic Sea, hence this regional bias will probably not have important
implications for EM. Taking this into account, this study provides evidence that the allometric re-
lationships for PROL, POOL, and HL, despite not being completely area-independent, exhibit high
robustness across the four areas.
The area-speciﬁc allometric relationships for PCFL and PCFW did also not exhibit major diﬀerences
(Figure 11). Additionally, PCFL did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly between Skagerrak and the North Sea in
the pairwise area comparison (Table 4). Across most of the morphometric measures, the area-
speciﬁc allometric relationships for the North Sea and Skagerrak were very similar. This is not
surprising as studies have found signiﬁcant genetic similarities for the cod in the North Sea and
Skagerrak, suggesting that the cod inhabiting these areas are from the same population (Barth
et al., 2017). This is also reﬂected in the fact that the cod in these two areas are assessed as one
stock (ICES, 2020). Some of the allometric relationships were, however, still signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
between the Skagerrak and the North Sea (HL, PCFW, and CPH) (Table 4). This could be caused by
the fact that a proportion of the cod caught in Skagerrak originates from the genetically distinct
Kattegat population, which is also found to occur in Skagerrak (Hemmer-Hansen et al., 2020).
Furthermore, the delineation of the Dogger and Viking populations is believed to be around 0◦
longitude (ICES, 2020), which is exactly where the North Sea samples were taken for this study
(Figure 3). Hence the cod caught in the North Sea may be from the Dogger unit, which is unlike
the Viking population, not occurring in Skagerrak (ICES, 2020; Heath et al., 2013). However, for
CPH (and to some extent PCFW) the observed diﬀerences between the North Sea and Skagerrak
could also be to some extent induced by observer bias.
The measures with the least robustness across areas were CPH and HED. For these measures, the
area-speciﬁc allometric relationships diﬀered the most (Figure 11), and signiﬁcant diﬀerences were
30
==PAGE:36==
observed between nearly all areas (Table 4). These two measures were additionally showing clear
variations between areas when observer bias was excluded, in the comparison of only the North
Sea and Baltic Sea (Figure 10). This indicated that HED is larger for cod in the eastern Baltic Sea,
compared to cod of the same TL in the northern North Sea. Because the Baltic Sea suﬀers from
eutrophication leading to reduced water clarity (HELCOM, 2018), the larger eyes could be a result
of the cod adapting to conditions with reduced visibility. Furthermore, the results indicate that
cod in the North Sea have a larger CPH than cod in the Baltic Sea, for the same TL (Figure 10).
Due to the northern North Sea being more exposed to ocean currents than the eastern Baltic Sea,
which is a much more enclosed area (ICES, 2022e; Link et al., 2008), this may have resulted in a
larger caudal peduncle height for the cod in the northern North Sea, as these may need a stronger
tail to move around.
6.4
Implications for length predictions with EM
This study investigated the risk of obtaining regionally biased length predictions, by applying al-
lometry to EM for facilitating automatic length estimation of occluded ﬁsh. A comparison of al-
lometric relationships in Atlantic cod across distinct geographic regions revealed varying degrees
of regional bias for diﬀerent morphometric measurements. These results are raising important
implications for the use of EM to accurately predict ﬁsh length.
If a general allometric relationship was ﬁtted based on data from the four research areas, the
relationship would look like the black curve in Figure 11. If this general allometric relationship was
applied to EM, it is clear that using the relationships with CPH or HED would result in severe under
and overestimations of TL across areas. Additionally, these allometric relationships would show
clear regional bias around MCRS for cod in e.g. the Baltic Sea (total length of 35 cm (Valentinsson
et al., 2019)). It is essential to consider that over and underestimations of TL will have more severe
implications, particularly for length predictions around MCRS. If the ﬁsherman catches ﬁsh that
are actually above MCRS but are estimated to be below, the ﬁsherman will lose valuable catch
(Valentinsson et al., 2019). On the other hand, it would undermine conservation eﬀorts if TL is
overestimated to be above MCRS when it is actually below. Due to CPH and HED demonstrating
low robustness across areas, also for smaller length classes, and due to the additional fact that
31
==PAGE:37==
these were aﬀected by high variability, this study shows evidence that allometric relationships for
CPH and HED may be less suitable for length predictions with EM.
If the allometric relationships for PCFL and PCFW were applied to EM, the regional bias would
be substantially lower (Figure 11). The general allometric relationship for PCFW would lead to an
overestimation of TL of cod above 100cm from the North Sea by approximately 100mm (equivalent
to ten length classes). Given that cod of these length classes are frequently captured in the North
Sea, this issue would likely have an impact on the length predictions. Similarly, the allometric
relationship for PCFL would result in an underestimation of the TL for the largest cod captured
in the Barents Sea. However, since PCFW and PCFL are relatively consistent, the regional bias
could potentially be accommodated by introducing correction factors or using the area-speciﬁc
relationships, for example when using PCFW for length predictions in the North Sea and similarly
for PCFL in the Barents Sea. Area-speciﬁc relationships are commonly used when converting length
to age or length to weight, as these types of relationships are also spatially varying (Berg and
Kristensen, 2012).
The results of this study show evidence that the allometric relationships with HL, PROL, and POOL
would demonstrate the lowest regional bias of all seven measures. These allometric relationships
could possibly be applied to cod captured both in the Baltic Sea, Skagerrak, and the North Sea,
without correction factors. However, this study indicates that introducing a correction factor or
using the area-speciﬁc allometric relationship in the Barents Sea for these measures would be
favorable to ensure the accuracy of length predictions in this area. Conclusively, this study suc-
cessfully identiﬁed allometric relationships in cod with the potential to predict total length across
diﬀerent areas without severe regional bias. Furthermore, this study suggests that applying cor-
rection factors or using area-speciﬁc allometric relationships in certain areas, would further en-
hance the applicability of allometric relationships for automated length estimation with EM.
7
Conclusion
This study emphasizes the importance of investigating potential regional bias when applying allo-
metric relationships for predicting the length of occluded ﬁsh with EM. However, this study iden-
32
==PAGE:38==
tiﬁed the head length, preorbital length, and postorbital length as potentially suitable measures
for consistently estimating the total length of cod across diﬀerent areas. Furthermore, we recom-
mend the use of area-speciﬁc allometric relationships in certain regions, as this could further facil-
itate the use of pectoral ﬁn length and pectoral ﬁn width as predictors of total length. Speciﬁcally,
the Barents Sea exhibited signiﬁcant diﬀerences from the other areas, highlighting the need for
area-speciﬁc allometric relationships or correction factors in this area. The horizontal eye diame-
ter and the caudal peduncle height were found to give poor predictions of TL with high variability
across areas and potential measurement inconsistency. Future studies should explore to what
extent the variability in especially these two measures is related to the manual measuring proce-
dure. A potential approach could be to re-test the allometric relationships using EM as a measuring
method. This would be meaningful for all of the seven allometric relationships, to assess their ro-
bustness in a scenario that is representative of real-world applications. This would require reliable
methods to automatically record the diﬀerent measurements with EM, which would possibly fur-
ther open up the opportunities for machine learning to reﬁne and test the allometric relationships
with the high input of data recorded automatically. This would be expected to further increase the
accuracy of the length predictions with allometric relationships across areas. Finally, the ﬁndings
of this study emphasize the need to investigate the robustness of allometric relationships across
areas for other commercially important and highly regulated species known to occur in several
distinct populations.
33
==PAGE:39==
References
Barth, J. M. I., Berg, P. R., Jonsson, P. R., Bonanomi, S., Corell, H., Hemmer-Hansen, J., Jakobsen,
K. S., Johannesson, K., Jorde, P. E., Knutsen, H., Moksnes, P.-O., Star, B., Stenseth, N. C.,
Svedäng, H., Jentoft, S., & André, C. (2017). Genome architecture enables local adaptation
of atlantic cod despite high connectivity. Molecular Ecology, 26(17), 4452–4466. https :
//doi.org/10.1111/mec.14207
Bekkevold, D. (2022). Population genetics - a basic introduction [Technical University of Denmark].
Benoît, H. P., & Allard, J. (2009). Can the data from at-sea observer surveys be used to make gen-
eral inferences about catch composition and discards? Canadian Journal of Fisheries and
Aquatic Sciences, 66(12), 2025–2039. https://doi.org/10.1139/F09-116
Berg, C., & Kristensen, K. (2012). Spatial age-length key modelling using continuation ratio logits.
Fisheries Research, 129-130, 119–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2012.06.016
Berg, P. R., Jentoft, S., Star, B., Ring, K. H., Knutsen, H., Lien, S., Jakobsen, K. S., & Andre, C. (2015).
Adaptation to low salinity promotes genomic divergence in atlantic cod (gadus morhua l.)
Genome biology and evolution, 7(6), 1644–1663.
Cooper, A. B., & Weir, K. (2006). A guide to ﬁsheries stock assessment: From data to recommen-
dations.
European Commission. (2022). Fully documentedﬁsheries: Action plan [Accessed: 14-06-23]. https:
//oceans-and-ﬁsheries.ec.europa.eu/news/fully-documented-ﬁsheries-action-2022-01-
31_en
European Commission. (2023). Sustainable ﬁsheries agreement: Revision of ﬁsheries control sys-
tem [Accessed: 14-06-23]. https://oceans-and-ﬁsheries.ec.europa.eu/news/sustainable-
ﬁsheries-agreement-revision-ﬁsheries-control-system-2023-05-31_en
French, G., Fisher, M., Mackiewicz, M., & Needle, C. (2015). Convolutional neural networks for
counting ﬁsh in ﬁsheries surveillance video. Proceedings of the Machine Vision of Animals
and their Behaviour (MVAB), 7.1–7.10. https://doi.org/10.5244/C.29.MVAB.7
Gilman, E., Legorburu, G., Fedoruk, A., Heberer, C., Zimring, M., & Barkai, A. (2019). Increasing
the functionalities and accuracy of ﬁsheries electronic monitoring systems. Aquatic Con-
servation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 29(6), 901–926. https://doi.org /https:
//doi.org/10.1002/aqc.3086
34
==PAGE:40==
González-Irusta, J., & Wright, P. (2015). Spawning grounds of atlantic cod (gadus morhua) in the
north sea. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 73. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsv180
Heath, M., Culling, M., Crozier, M., Fox, C., Gurney, C., Hutchinson, W., Nielsen, W., O’Sullivan, E.,
Preedy, K., Righton, K., Speirs, D., Taylor, D., Wright, P., & Carvalho, P. (2013). Combination of
genetics and spatial modelling highlights the sensitivity of cod (gadus morhua) population
diversity in the north sea to distributions of ﬁshing. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 71.
https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fst185
HELCOM. (2018). Eutrophication. state ofthe baltic sea[Accessed: 30-06-23]. http://stateofthebalticsea.
helcom.ﬁ/pressures-and-their-status/eutrophication/
Helmond, A. T. van, Chen, C., & Poos, J. J. (2015). How eﬀective is electronic monitoring in mixed
bottom-trawl ﬁsheries? ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72(4), 1192–1200.
Helmond, A. T. van, Mortensen, L. O., Plet-Hansen, K. S., Ulrich, C., Needle, C. L., Oesterwind, D.,
Kindt-Larsen, L., Catchpole, T., Mangi, S., Zimmermann, C., Olesen, H. J., Bailey, N., Bergs-
son, H., Dalskov, J., Elson, J., Hosken, M., Peterson, L., McElderry, H., Ruiz, J., ... Poos, J. J.
(2020). Electronic monitoring in ﬁsheries: Lessons from global experiences and future op-
portunities. Fish and Fisheries, 21(1), 162–189. https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12425
Hemmer-Hansen, J., Hüssy, K., Baktoft, H., Huwer, B., Bekkevold, D., Haslob, H., Herrmann, J.-P.,
Hinrichsen, H.-H., Krumme, U., Mosegaard, H., Nielsen, E. E., Reusch, T. B. H., Storr-Paulsen,
M., Velasco, A., Dewitz, B. von, Dierking, J., & Eero, M. (2019). Genetic analyses reveal
complex dynamics within a marine ﬁsh management area. Evolutionary Applications, 12(4),
830–844. https://doi.org/10.1111/eva.12760
Hemmer-Hansen, J., Hüssy, K., Vinther, M., Albertsen, C., Storr-Paulsen, M., & Eero, M. (2020).
Sustainable management of kattegat cod; better knowledge of stock components and mi-
gration. DTU Aqua.
Höﬄe, H., Solemdal, P., Korsbrekke, K., Johannessen, M., Bakkeplass, K., & Kjesbu, O. (2014). Vari-
ability of northeast arctic cod (gadus morhua) distribution on the main spawning grounds
in relation to biophysical factors. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 71(6), 1317–1331.
ICES. (2006). Ices ﬁshmap species factsheet: Cod. https://www.ices.dk/about-ICES/projects/
EU- RFP/EU%5C%20Repository/ICES%5C%20FIshMap/ICES%5C%20FishMap%5C%
20species%5C%20factsheet-cod.pdf
35
==PAGE:41==
ICES. (2020). Workshop on Stock Identiﬁcation of North Sea Cod (WKNSCodID). https://doi.org/
10.17895/ices.pub.7499
ICES. (2021). Barents sea ecoregion – ecosystem overview. https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.advice.
9438
ICES. (2022a). Baltic sea ecoregion – ecosystem overview. https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.advice.
21725438.v1
ICES. (2022b). Cod (Gadus morhua) in Subdivision 21 (Kattegat). https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.
advice.19447865.v1
ICES. (2022c). Eu standing request on catch scenarios for zero tac stocks 2022; cod (gadus morhua)
in division 6.a (west of scotland); cod (gadus morhua) in division 7.a (irish sea) and whiting
(merlangius merlangus) in division 7.a (irish sea). https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.advice.
20170970.v2
ICES. (2022d). Eu standing request on catch scenarios for zero-tac stocks: Cod (gadus morhua) in
subdivision 21 (kattegat). https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.advice.21458106.v1
ICES. (2022e). Greater north sea ecoregion – ecosystem overview. https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.
advice.21731912.v1
ICES. (2022f). Greater north sea mixed ﬁsheries considerations. https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.
advice.21532941.v2
ICES. (2022g). Workshop on research needs and a roadmap for further research on cod in the
northern shelf seas (including cod in the celtic seas) (wkrrcod). https://doi.org/10.17895/
ices.pub.21740090.v1
ICES. (2023). Cod (Gadus morhua) in subdivisions 24–32, eastern Baltic stock (eastern Baltic Sea).
https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.advice.21820497.v1
IMR. (2022). Klimaet i barentshavet [Accessed: 20-06-2023]. https://www.hi.no/hi/temasider/
hav-og-kyst/klimaet-i-havet/klimastatus/barentshavet
Jansen, D., Lundqvist, D., Christiansen, C., Lund-Hansen, L., Balstrøm, T., & Leipe, T. (2003). Sedi-
ments nutrients deposition gis.
Karpov, K., Kogut, N. J., & Geibel, J. J. (2009). Estimating ﬁsh length from vertical morphometric
parameters. Calif Fish Game, 95, 161–174.
36
==PAGE:42==
Kasatkina, S., & Ivanova, V. (2009). Modelling study of catchability properties of research and com-
mercial trawls to identify sources of uncertainty in resource surveys indices. ICES CM, 1, 13.
Khan, S., & Khan, M. A. (2020). Importance of age and growth studies in ﬁsheries management. Re-
viewed Proceedings of National Seminar on NGSV. Next Generation Sciences: Vision, 194–
201.
Köster, F. W., Huwer, B., Hinrichsen, H.-H., Neumann, V., Makarchouk, A., Eero, M., Dewitz, B. V.,
Hüssy, K., Tomkiewicz, J., Margonski, P., et al. (2017). Eastern baltic cod recruitment revis-
ited—dynamics and impacting factors. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 74(1), 3–19.
Kraak, S. B., Bailey, N., Cardinale, M., Darby, C., De Oliveira, J. A., Eero, M., Graham, N., Holmes, S.,
Jakobsen, T., Kempf, A., et al. (2013). Lessons for ﬁsheries management from the eu cod
recovery plan. Marine Policy, 37, 200–213.
Lart, W. (2022). Guide to ﬁsh stock assessment and ices reference points. https://www.seaﬁsh.
org/document/?id=23a69338-21d2-4617-adf5-58099360daeb
Lilly, G., Wieland, K., Rothschild, B., Sundby, S., Drinkwater, K., Brander, K., Ottersen, G., Carscad-
den, J., Stenson, G., Chouinard, G., Swain, D., & Niels, D. (2008). Decline and recovery of
atlantic cod (gadus morhua) stocks throughout the north atlantic.
Link, J., Bogstad, B., Sparholt, H., & Lilly, G. (2008). Trophic role of atlantic cod in the ecosystem.
Fish and Fisheries, 10, 58–87. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00295.x
Madsen, K. S. (2009). Recent and future climatic changes in temperature, salinity, and sea level of
the north sea and baltic sea. University of Copenhagen. Niels Bohr Institute.
Maunder, M. N., & Piner, K. R. (2015). Contemporary ﬁsheries stock assessment: Many issues still
remain. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72(1), 7–18.
Mortensen, L. O., Ulrich, C., Olesen, H. J., Bergsson, H., Berg, C. W., Tzamouranis, N., & Dalskov, J.
(2017). Eﬀectiveness of fully documented ﬁsheries to estimate discards in a participatory
research scheme. Fisheries Research, 187, 150–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2016.
11.010
Nature Education. (2010). Allometry: The study of biological scaling [Accessed: 14-06-23]. https:
//www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/allometry- the- study- of- biological-
scaling-13228439/
37
==PAGE:43==
Needle, C. L., Dinsdale, R., Buch, T. B., Catarino, R. M., Drewery, J., & Butler, N. (2015). Scottish
science applications of remote electronic monitoring. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72(4),
1214–1229.
Ovalle, J. C., Vilas, C., & Antelo, L. T. (2022). On the use of deep learning for ﬁsh species recognition
and quantiﬁcation on board ﬁshing vessels. Marine Policy, 139, 105015. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.marpol.2022.105015
Plet-Hansen, K., Bergsson, H., Mortensen, L., Ulrich, C., Dalskov, J., Jensen, S., & Olesen, H. (2015).
Final report on catch quota management and choke species - 2014. https://doi.org/10.
13140/RG.2.2.11883.95524
R Core Team. (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/
Rawat, S., Benakappa, S., Kumar, J., Naik, K., Pandey, G., & Pema, C. (2017). Identiﬁcation of ﬁsh
stocks based on truss morphometric: A review. Journal of Fisheries and Life Sciences, 2,
9–14.
Reiss, H., Hoarau, G., Dickey-Collas, M., & Wolﬀ, W. (2009). Genetic population structure of marine
ﬁsh: Mismatch between biological and ﬁsheries management units. Fish and Fisheries, 10,
361–395. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00324.x
Roney, N. E., Oomen, R. A., Knutsen, H., Olsen, E. M., & Hutchings, J. A. (2018). Fine-scale popula-
tion diﬀerences in atlantic cod reproductive success: A potential mechanism for ecological
speciation in a marine ﬁsh. Ecology and Evolution, 8(23), 11634–11644. https://doi.org/10.
1002/ece3.4615
Scharf, F. S., Sunninner, A. P., & Juanes, F. (1998). Enhancing diet analyses of piscivorous. Fishery
Bulletin, 96, 575–588.
Sguotti, C., Otto, S., Cormon, X., Werner, K., Deyle, E., Sugihara, G., & Möllmann, C. (2019). Non-
linearity in stock-recruitment relationships of atlantic cod: Insights from a multi-model ap-
proach. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 77. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsz113
Silva, J., Ellis, J., & Ayers, R. (2013). Length-weight relationships of marine ﬁsh collected from
around the british isles. Science Series Technical Report, Cefas Lowestoft, 150(150), 109.
Statology. (2020). Weighted least squares in r [Accessed: [28-03-23]]. https://www.statology.org/
weighted-least-squares-in-r/
38
==PAGE:44==
Thorsen, A., Witthames, P. R., Marteinsdóttir, G., Nash, R. D., & Kjesbu, O. S. (2010). Fecundity and
growth of atlantic cod (gadus morhua l.) along a latitudinal gradient. Fisheries Research,
104(1), 45–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2010.03.020
Tseng, C.-H., Hsieh, C.-L., & Kuo, Y.-F. (2020). Automatic measurement of the body length of har-
vested ﬁsh usingconvolutional neural networks. Biosystems Engineering, 189, 36–47. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2019.11.002
Uhlmann, S. S., Ulrich, C., & Kennelly, S. J. (2019). The european landing obligation: Reducing dis-
cards in complex, multi-species and multi-jurisdictional ﬁsheries. Springer Nature.
Ulrich, C., Olesen, H. J., Bergsson, H., Egekvist, J., Håkansson, K. B., Dalskov, J., Kindt-Larsen, L., &
Storr-Paulsen, M. (2015). Discarding of cod in the danish fully documented ﬁsheries trials.
ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72(6), 1848–1860.
Valentinsson, D., Ringdahl, K., Storr-Paulsen, M., & Madsen, N. (2019). The baltic cod trawl ﬁsh-
ery: The perfect ﬁshery for a successful implementation of the landing obligation? In S. S.
Uhlmann, C. Ulrich, & S. J. Kennelly (Eds.), The european landing obligation: Reducing dis-
cards in complex, multi-species and multi-jurisdictional ﬁsheries (pp. 197–218). Springer In-
ternational Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-03308-8_10
Vilas, C., Antelo, L., Martin-Rodriguez, F., Morales, X., Perez-Martin, R., Alonso, A., Valeiras, J.,
Abad, E., Quinzan, M., & Barral-Martinez, M. (2020). Use of computer vision onboard ﬁsh-
ing vessels to quantify catches: The iobserver. Marine Policy, 116, 103714. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103714
Weist, P., Schade, F., Damerau, M., Barth, J., Dierking, J., André, C., Petereit, C., Reusch, T., Jentoft,
S., Hanel, R., & Krumme, U. (2019). Assessing snp-markers to study population mixing and
ecological adaptation in baltic cod. PLOS ONE, 14, e0218127. https://doi.org /10.1371/
journal.pone.0218127
White, D. J., Svellingen, C., & Strachan, N. J. (2006). Automated measurement of species and length
of ﬁsh by computer vision. Fisheries Research, 80(2-3), 203–210.
Williams, M., & Corral, V. (1999). Fisheries monitoring: Management models, compliance and tech-
nical solutions. Proceedings of the International Conference on Integrated Fisheries Moni-
toring.
39
==PAGE:45==
Zuur, A. F., Ieno, E. N., & Elphick, C. S. (2010). A protocol for data exploration to avoid common
statistical problems. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 1(1), 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.2041-210X.2009.00001.x
40
