==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Assessment of the loan performance in households
using supervised machine learning utilizing demo-
graphic and real estate data
Maja Ørslund (s203109)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores the use of supervised machine learning algorithms to assess the credit risk of
Danish households using features that solely represent demographic and real-estate data from the Danish
data company Geomatic. The objective was to develop a tool that could generate leads for banks by
predicting households’ probability of defaulting on a loan. However, the analysis revealed significant
challenges in dealing with data noise, imbalanced data, and weak features. The available features lacked
discriminative power and did potentially not provide a comprehensive representation of the factors
influencing credit risk. Moreover, the statistical nature of the data introduced label noise, making it
diﬀicult for models to accurately classify observations with similar important features but different true
classifications. Despite using ensemble models like random forest and XGBoost, as well as a neural
network, the predictive performance of the models was only slightly better than random. Surprisingly,
logistic regression, often considered a baseline model in the field of credit risk assessment, performed
similarly to the more advanced models. The models’ learning plateaued after processing only a portion
of the training data, indicating limited benefits from a large training set size. The confusion matrices
indicated that all models exhibited similar prediction patterns, further suggesting the presence of outliers
and randomness in the data. Although the performance of the models did not meet expectations, they
can work as a tool for generating suitable leads for banks as the models provide more qualified leads
than the current situation. Overall, this thesis highlights the challenges of credit risk assessment using
limited statistical data. The results implicate that there indeed is a trade-off between a generalized
credit risk assessment tool and performance and consequently the foreseen advantages of using the
non-linear and less interpretable classifiers were mitigated by the generalization.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This M.Sc.Eng thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of
Science in Engineering degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2023
Maja Ørslund (s203109)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors Hiba Nassar and Tommy Sonne Alstrøm for agreeing to do this thesis
with me. The weekly meetings with Hiba functioned as a much needed discussion forum which I am very
grateful she made time for. Additionally, I would like to acknowledge the efforts it required by both
to manage the puzzle of having my oral defense before their summer vacation, I am looking forward to
sleep again.
Furthermore, I want to thank my external supervisor Lars Dideriksen and my other co-workers at
Geomatic for always guiding me, keeping me company and lending me an ear to vent.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
Nomenclature
1
1
Introduction
3
2
Tools, software, and programming language
6
3
Data
7
3.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Feature engineering and selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
EDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methods
22
4.1
An introduction to machine learning for supervised learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Decision Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.7
XGBoost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.8
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.9
Final models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results
40
5.1
Benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Learning curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Confusion matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6
Further hypothesis testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Discussion
52
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Conclusion
55
A
An Appendix
56
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
The following table describes the most common abbreviations, acronyms, math symbols, and relevant
Geomatic terms used throughout this thesis.
DST
Statistics Denmark. Central authority on Danish statistics
One-to-one Data that can be traced down to a specific address
Statistic data Data that has been anonymized to prevent the identification of individual households
Real-estate data Publicly available data obtained through Bygnings- og Boligregistret (BBR). This data
is one-to-one
Demographic data Variables obtained through Statistics Denmark. This data is statistical
Micro cluster Approximately 6-11 of the most similar Danish households within a municipality. This
cluster is made by Geomatic using publicly available data. The households are the same through-
out the different demographic variables
DST cluster Aggregated micro clusters. Contains approximately 400 of the most similar Danish house-
holds within a municipality based on their micro cluster average. The households can change
depending on the demographic variable
Enrich The process of linking real estate or demographic data to an address
0
Negative class = good households
1
Positive class = bad households
FN
False negatives. Bad households that are classified as good households
TP
True positives. Bad households that are classified as bad households
TN
True negatives. Good households that are classified as good households
FP
False positives. Good households that are classified as bad households
FN
False negatives. Bad households that are classified as good households
N
Total number of observations
n
One instance of an observation
X
Design matrix. Dimensions are NxD where D is the number of features
x
Column vector
xn
Column vector with dimension Dx1 corresponding to the features at the n’th observation
yn
Binary classification at the n’th observation, yn ∈{0, 1}
pn
The probability of being the positive class at the n’th observation, pn ∈[0, 1]
==PAGE:9==
Contents
2
ˆyn
The predicted binary classification at the n’th observation
ˆpn
The predicted probability of being the positive class at the n’th observation
Weights The trainable model parameters
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Risk management is an important tool for decision-making.
The more information one can gather
about the consequences of a decision the better. One way to gather this information is by modeling
the outcome of the decision. In order for this to be a useful method, the model must naturally be
accurately able to simulate real-life data. This is one of the many reasons why the development of
data mining has gained interest. Previously the models relied on several assumptions about the data
such as normality, linearity, etc., however, now machine learning algorithms have the advance that
they rely less on these assumptions and are thus more robust and distribution-free [GT00]. Machine
learning algorithms as a tool for data-driven decisions have become more accessible with the technology
advancement throughout the years. The approach is driven by the possibility of storing and accessing
huge amounts of data in equally huge databases, the development of machine and statistical models
that handle non-linear effects, and affordable computing resources. These factors together make data
mining a suitable choice for decision-making [GT00; Sch22].
Financial intermediaries such as banks are one of those businesses for which risk management is
essential. Banks’ business models rely heavily on the revenue generated from the interest of the loans
issued to consumers.
It is a liability to banks if the loans are defaulted and subsequently become
nonperforming assets. To limit this liability, credit risk assessment of the customers is an essential leg
within risk management for banks. Credit risk assessment is the task of scoring loan applicants. The
scoring is measured as the applicant’s probability of defaulting on their loan. Based on the probability
of default, the applicants are either classified as ”bad” applicants, which are likely to default on their
loan, or ”good” applicants, which are likely to repay the loan. This classification task is suitable for a
model to carry out. The first studies in credit risk assessment were motivated by the financial crisis
in the 80s and 90s [GT00]. The aftermath of the financial crisis in the late 2000s further resulted in a
boom in credit risk research [BMR20] and today the interest in developing better-performing models
to predict the probability of default is still unbroken [Les+15]. The credit risk assessment is carried
out on consumers that have already applied for a loan, using personal data about the applicant. Thus
another business opportunity for banks could be to assess consumers’ credit risks, that have not applied
for a loan, to target marketing to ”good” consumers only. Target marketing has the benefit of only
advertising to consumers that the banks are interested in issuing loans to. These consumers that fulfill
the targeted segmentation, i.e. the ”good” customers are called leads. This project will aim to build a
model that assesses a household’s credit risk, for the purpose of generating suitable leads for banks.
The earliest studies of credit risk assessment [GT00; BMR20] includes both traditional and modern
statistics such as logistic regression and k-nearest-neighbors (k-NN). The research employs single classi-
fier supervised machine learning algorithms such as decision trees and neural networks, but only a few
to no ensemble or hybrid models. Galindo et al. compares four models (decision tree, probit, neural
network, and k-NN) within different model groups and finds that based on the error rate of the classi-
fication error as the performance metric, decision trees achieve the best result out of the models. The
data set the models were trained on was rather small, and the authors predict that on a larger data set,
the decision tree will perform equally and neural networks will perform better. These predictions are
verified by later research [Gun+21] where a multiple-layer perceptron (MLP) outperforms decision trees
to a great extent across an average training of 10 data sets. Later research [Sch22; Gun+21; BMR20]
pays more focus to the difference in performance between ensemble models such as Random Forest, and
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
4
Gradient Boosting and deep learning models such as neural networks. Most papers agree that ensemble
and hybrid models prove to outperform single classifiers in the task of default predictions and especially
boosting models show good results [Les+15; Gun+21; Sch22; BMR20]. The one type of model that
can compete with boosting, is neural networks. The researchers do not quite agree on which method is
better. The benchmark model for all the papers is the generalized linear model: logistic regression. Of
all the models investigated, no paper finds a model worse than logistic regression, despite it being the
model often used in practice. This irony, the paper [LZF22] addresses by improving logistic regression
to handle nonlinear data, such that the model does not trade-off interpretability with accuracy. In
general, the credit risk assessment models achieve relatively high performance across several metrics.
Although the advancement in machine learning models has provided models that consistently are
superior in their predictions to simpler statistical models, logistic regression remains the choice for as-
sessment in practice [Sch22; Dum+22; Les+15]. Deciding on a loan agreement with a customer is a
non-trivial task and involves personal risk to the person requesting the loan. For banks, it is just a
matter of profit, but for the person requesting the loan, it is a matter of life. In Denmark, it is even
prohibited by law to have such a decision fully automated. Consequently, the decision of the bank needs
to be explainable. For the decision to be explainable, the model must be interpretable, and logistic
regression is unbeaten compared to other machine learning algorithms.
The research on credit risk assessment utilizes publicly available data sets to benchmark models.
The data sets vary in the record- and feature size and different features are present for different data
sets. Some data sets rely more heavily on financial data, and some are a more balanced mix of demo-
graphic and financial features. The difference in available features makes creating a global or even a
domestic model diﬀicult, especially if the country has several competing banks [GT00]. To overcome
this obstacle and generalize the model to domestic use, this project aims to use variables that exist
across the entirety of Denmark and are indifferent to the local differences in banks.
In addition to the different sizes and features, the credit data sets used in the research come with
other challenges. Firstly they are all imbalanced in favor of the good applicants. Researchers take a dif-
ferent approach to how to deal with imbalances. Some papers undersample the data to create balanced
data sets, and some keep the data as is, arguing that this approach reflects the models’ performance
ability to handle this issue. Since data is imbalanced, research argues that one should compare models
across several metrics [Les+15]. Secondly, the data are often high-dimensional. Although most papers
reduce dimensions before training, [Sch22] argues that gradient boosting methods are to be preferred
over neural networks since they are more computationally effective.
The metrics discussed by Lessman et al. complement each other. The paper stresses the importance
of choosing metrics that measures different performance indicators. Lessman et al. divides the metrics
into three overall performance indicator groups: one group for assessing the discriminatory ability of
the predictions, one for assessing the accuracy of the predictions, and one for assessing the correctness
of the predictions. Metrics with discriminatory abilities are especially important for an imbalanced data
set since accuracy will be biased. The six metrics the paper uses are the percentage correctly classified
(PCC), the area under the curve (AUC), a partial Gini index (PG), the H-measure, the Brier Score
(BS), and the Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic (KS). However, the paper concludes that the three metrics
AUC, PG and BS is suﬀicient to compare results. The metrics suggestion has been employed in later
research, e.g. by [Gun+21].
1.0.1
Objective
This thesis aims to create a tool that provides value to banks through the third-party business Geo-
matic. Geomatic is a business that handles and sells data companies in various fields. Its high-quality,
GDPR-compliant data lake counts more than 800 3rd party variables - structured and ready to plug and
==PAGE:12==
1 Introduction
5
play. The company is B2B and assists other businesses in enhanced risk prediction, and lead generation
by locating all potential available consumers in their market, customer segmentation, etc. Geomatic
is interested in a machine learning data-driven based classification tool it can offer as a service to e.g.
banks in identifying good/bad consumers as the leads it provides now are derived from hard-coded
filters. Geomatic’s data lake accounts for variables on different data-level. For this project, data on a
household level will be used.
The bank’s customer journey starts with the enlightenment of targeted marketing as a strategic
business move to mitigate credit risk. They possibly have a list of potential addresses they would like
to approach, but before spending resources on contacting the households, or potentially contacting a
high-risk household they want to know which households are the most feasible choice. They send the list
of addresses to Geomatic. Geomatic enriches the addresses with demographic and real estate variables
from the data lake and thus the addresses have become a full data set. Geomatic predicts with the tool
whether the given household will be a ”good” or ”bad” customer and returns the addresses to the bank
with the default score. Another possible scenario is that the bank do not have a list of addresses, but
would like x amount of leads. Geomatic will use the tool to generate the x amount of leads for the bank.
One possible disadvantage of this approach is the absence of financial variables. However, the use
of demographic variables to classify something out of the range of demographic variables is not unseen.
The medical field especially has investigated the possibility of predicting numerous diseases without any
specific information about the patient’s health or physiology [Kan+15].
1.0.2
Problem definition
The current obstacles to the development of a generalized and more accurate credit risk assessment
are the low interpretability of the high-performing models and the feature differences across the banks.
The obstacle for lead generation for Geomatic is the hard-coded filters which do not take relationships
between variables into account.
The motivation to create a model that works for more than one bank is the easy implementation
and accessibility. This project aims to solve the generalization problem by constructing a prediction
tool that assesses households’ probability of default only based on demographic and real estate data
known for the address of the household. Thus the model will work for all Danish households.
The low accuracy on logistic regression models for the credit scoring task is significant because banks
have many loans, and thus an improvement in the accuracy, means less risk and consequently better
return on investment on the loan for the banks. The high standards of interpretability are not necessary
in this project, as the Geomatic tool is for lead generating and marketing only, and consequently does
not directly impact a customer’s loan agreement. For this reason, more advanced and accurate models
will be considered as a suitable choice for this classification task.
For these reasons, this thesis will investigate the prediction performance of the ensemble models
Random Forest and XGBoost as well as a feed-forward neural network, as these are the models that
the research has found to yield the best results. The models will be compared to each other and the
baseline model logistic regression across the two suggested metrics AUC and BS. The models will fur-
ther be evaluated on a third metric which is the F1. The F1 metric is commonly used for imbalanced
data as the gives the harmonic mean between the recall and precision [Mur22]. We expect to possibly
receive unfavorable results using only demographic and real estate data as opposed to also incorporating
financial variables. Additionally, some data from Geomatic is of statistic nature. This is the trade-off
of aiming to create a generalizing tool.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Tools, software, and
programming language
The software and programming languages used in this project are listed below:
• Python
• SQL
• Alteryx
SQL is used to extract data from Geomatic’s data lake. Alteryx is a software tool developed to sort
and group data to make it ready for analysis. Alteryx is used to clean, rename and regroup the features.
Python is the programming language used to implement machine learning algorithms and visualize data
and results. The library used to implement the Logistic Regression and Random Forest algorithms is
Scikit-learn. For the Neural Network the library Keras is used and for XGBoost the library XGBoost is
used. The supervised machine-learning algorithms used and a reference to the algorithm documentation
is listed below.
• Logistic Regression [Ped+23b]
• Random Forest [Ped+23a]
• XGBoost [Che22]
• Feedforward neural network [Cho+15]
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 3
Data
The objective of this thesis is twofold: a) to determine the feasibility of accurately assessing the risk
of a household defaulting a bank loan using demographic and real estate data only, and b) to identify
the supervised machine learning classification algorithm most suitable to perform this task. The data
collection, preparation, pre-processing, feature engineering, and exploratory data analysis will be pre-
sented in this chapter.
3.1
Data collection
3.1.1
Description of the data set and data collection
The data set to be used in this thesis is obtained through Geomatic in collaboration with a Danish
bank. The bank assisted by providing a data set of addresses with the classification target ”1” for
bad households that are likely to default on their loan and ”0” for good households that are likely to
repay their loan. The bank classified the households associated with the addresses around 2012. The
classification was done by a human employee of the bank. Given that an address alone likely provides
insuﬀicient data, we need to enrich the address with additional predictive features. This task is done
in collaboration with the Danish data company Geomatic.
An address occupied by a household is referred to as a unit. Currently, Geomatic assumes that
Denmark is occupied by approximately 3 million units, each of which has a unique ID, called a key.
Each household is associated with characteristics, such as the size of the house, family structure, and
ownership situation, all of which are linked to the unit address key. The characteristics can be parti-
tioned into two main groups: real estate data and demographic data.
Real estate data is publicly available and encompasses variables such as the size, ownership status,
and usage of the home. As the data is publicly available, the data level is one-to-one, i.e. Geomatic can
locate the exact data value for each variable for a given address. While the data is one-to-one, there is
a possibility of bias as the responsibility for reporting the information lies with the homeowner.
Demographic data is not publicly available. This type of data encompasses features such as the
age of the oldest person, wealth, and number of children in the household. As the data is not publicly
available, Geomatic gains access to the data through Statistics Denmark (DST). DST has access to
vast amounts of sensitive data for all Danish citizens. However, due to the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR), no company is allowed to access this non-publicly available information one-to-
one. To ensure data privacy, DST anonymizes the data such that it cannot be traced back to a specific
household. This level of delivery of anonymous data is the lowest level (i.e. most precise level) of
aggregation of personal data that is possible in Denmark. As a result, Geomatic is capable of providing
various demographic statistical data on a household related to a specific address.
DST’s anonymization process is a two-step procedure. In the first step, Geomatic clusters similar
units into microclusters (GMC) of 6 to 11 households based on the publicly available real-estate data.
==PAGE:15==
3.1 Data collection
8
The clustering is carried out semi-manually using a Geomatic-made decision tree with categorized vari-
ables and a hierarchical structure. One crucial factor of the clustering process is that units cannot cross
municipality boundaries because DST has data only on a municipality level.
After all expected inhabited addresses in Denmark have been clustered by the decision tree, the
final clustering to obtain only 6 to 11 households in each microcluster is carried out using a constrained
k-means algorithm based on the geographical locations of the households within the municipality. Ge-
omatic thus assumes that households that are geographically close, will also share similar demographic
characteristics, conditioned that they also share similar real-estate characteristics. The first step thus
is finalized with microclusters of 6-11 units that Geomatic assumes are inhabited and the most similar
within the municipality.
Figure 3.1: The process from Geomatic microclusters (GMC) to DST clusters. OBS: for illustrative
purposes, it looks like the households are close geographically, however, they are only geographically
bounded by the municipality. The 6-11 most similar households are clustered
In the second step, the microclusters are sent to DST to enrich each address with the most accu-
rate data for a given variable while staying within the boundaries of the GDPR regulation. For each
variable, DST computes the average value within each microcluster and sorts the clusters descending,
for that variable. DST then expands the clusters to contain approximately 400 of the most similar
households within each variable. This 400-household cluster is called a DST cluster and each household
in the DST cluster is assigned the same data for the average value for the given variable. An example
of how a value is shared across households because they belong to the same DST cluster can be seen in
table 3.1 As the values are computed for each variable, it is possible that households are in the same
DST cluster for one variable, but not another. Consequently, larger municipalities will have cleaner
data, as the likelihood of enough similar households in every 400-unit cluster increases. As the units are
on an address level, individual apartments in apartment complexes are treated separately. The process
is illustrated in figure 3.1.
Some variables are additionally turned into categorical variables. For the variable ”Age of the old-
est person in the household”, the categories would reflect different age spans such as 0-22, 23-29, etc.
DST returns the number of households within each category. Geomatic computes a distribution of the
household across the categories of the variable to obtain the probability of the household belonging to
==PAGE:16==
3.1 Data collection
9
Cluster ID
UNADR_KEY
Age of oldest person
851_000092
20729468
57.02
169_000018
20729469
60.02
360_000002
20729470
84.18
169_000018
20729471
60.02
410_000004
20729472
79.12
169_000018
20729473
60.02
Table 3.1: Example of how an average value for a variable is shared across several households because
they belong to the same DST cluster for that demographic variable. The cluster ID is interpreted as
{municipality code}_{cluster number within the municipality}. Hence, a small cluster number means
a high value within the municipality
the specific category within the variable. An example of the data returned from DST can be seen in
figure 3.2. In the case that more than 400 households belong to the same category, more households
are added to the DST cluster until at least one household is in another category to avoid tracking data
down to individual households.
The real estate- and demographic variables are part of Geomatic’s data lake and are used for various
purposes, including aiding other businesses in targeting the correct customer segment. Geomatic only
requires an address from the customer, which is then linked to the specific unit address key, that con-
tains the information for each variable. Although using Geomatic enables business customers to gain
insight into a household quickly and at a low cost, the trade-off is the decreased accuracy of the data
compared to obtaining it directly from the household.
Cluster ID
0-22 years
23-29
30-35
...
60-65
66-75
76+
Households
Avg
751_000001
0
0
0
...
0
3
401
404
90,715
461_000001
0
0
0
...
0
0
403
403
90,687
851_000001
0
0
0
...
0
1
399
400
90,14
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
851_000280
381
123
2
...
0
0
0
506
21,184
751_000430
331
94
0
...
0
0
0
425
21,045
Table 3.2: Overview of data that is returned from DST for the variable ”AGE_OLDST”. The variable
describes the oldest person in the household. Each DST cluster contains at least 400 households. The
clusters are sorted from highest value to lowest value.
3.1.2
Conzoom
Geomatic utilizes these variables in different ways. One is the Conzoom segmentation model, which
classifies households into 9 groups, or 39 types. It describes households and the people living in them as
consumers and citizens. The segmentation model does not identify individuals, but traits or tendencies
that can be found and measured across Denmark through data modeling, statistics, and interviews.
The Conzoom-groups and types are used as a business tool for e.g. targeted marketing. In a way, they
are more or less correlated with every other variable, as they try to encapsulate all the characteristics,
in a single variable.
In summary, Geomatic receives demographic variables from Statistics Denmark aggregated on house-
holds through a careful clustering process and extensive anonymization method to achieve the most
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Data preprocessing
10
accurate GDPR-reliant data. The demographic variables are either represented as distributions or as
the average value.
3.2
Data preprocessing
This thesis utilizes real banking data that is incomplete and requires preprocessing prior to use for train-
ing and testing models. The data consists of two databases, each containing only the target variable
”good”/”bad”, observation ID, and address. The good/bad classification obtained through the bank is
not based on a model but by a human. The initial step involves merging and cleaning the datasets to
eliminate duplicate addresses. This step is necessary to facilitate subsequent Geomatic data enrichment
at the address level. The resulting dataset comprises 185.756 unique addresses.
The next stage involves querying Geomatic’s database to match each address in the data set with
the corresponding unique address key (UNADR_KEY), to which the Geomatic variables are linked.
However, not all addresses in the dataset will be successfully linked to an UNADR_KEY due to errors
in spelling or punctuation or the absence of the address in the Geomatic database. Out of the initial
185.756 unique addresses, 177.552 (a match rate of 94.4%) were successfully Geocoded. The 175.552
addresses are then again cleaned for duplicates based on their UNADR_KEY since some duplicates may
have been overlooked in the address cleaning due to minor spelling variations. Thus, after eliminating
UNADR_KEY duplicates, the dataset comprises 168.407 records, of which 27.322 are labeled as ”bad”
and 141.085 as ”good”.
Following the second step, we drop the rows that are missing values in any column. The reason for
this is, that due to the data collection process, if a household is missing a value for a variable in either
category (real-estate or demographic), the household will be missing values for the remaining variables.
Consequently, we cannot replace the missing value with an appropriate alternative. We obtain a re-
fined dataset comprising 164.356 records with the features ”UNADR_KEY”, ”Street”, ”ZIPCode”, and
”Target”. Minus the ”Target”, this is likely how the data will be delivered in the future for the model to
predict the target. Considering this, now the data will be split into a train- and test set. The previous
default rate of the dataset is 16 %, i.e. 16 % of the households in the dataset have the true target as
bad loaners. As a consequence of the data set being imbalanced with a 16/84 ratio between bad and
good, a random split might not be suitable. To eliminate this, a stratified approach is implemented, en-
suring that the default rate is consistent across both sets. The train-test ratio is set to 75-25 respectively.
Finally, we obtain a training set only containing three features and the response variable. These
features alone are insuﬀicient for predicting the target value of ”good”/”bad”. Thus, we proceed to
join the UNADR_KEY with relevant features from Geomatic’s extensive data lake. As the data lake
encompasses over a thousand variables, we need to identify the initial variables best suited for assessing
a household’s credit risk. To do so, we draw inspiration from publicly available datasets used for credit
risk assessment. Moreover, we compare ”good” and ”bad” households across several variables using an
index-based calculation to obtain a tentative overview of which variables can differentiate between the
groups. This comparison helps to alleviate potential bias in the sample dataset, such as the fact that
most samples were collected from the eastern region of Denmark. The index is computed by dividing
the ratio of ”bad” households across a given variable by the ratio of ”good” households. For instance,
to determine the index for a particular municipality, such as 101-Copenhagen, the following calculating
is carried out:
MUNI_BAD101 =
SUM_MUNI_BAD101
SUM_MUNIC_BADtotal
= 0.133
(3.1)
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Data preprocessing
11
MUNI_GOOD101 = SUM_MUNI_GOOD101
SUM_MUNI_GOODtotal
= 0.124
(3.2)
INDEX_MUNI = 0.133
0.124 · 100 = 108
(3.3)
An index above 100 means the investigated group is more likely to share the variable than the base
group.
For this example, it means that bad households are 8 % more likely found in Copenhagen.
However, indexes between 90-110 are typically not worth highlighting as they are too close to 100. A
visual representation of the indexes for the municipalities can be seen in figure 3.2. As seen in the figure,
there is a significant difference between the municipalities. It is more likely that bad households are
living in Guldborgsund municipality on Falster than Rudersdal municipality. Hence, this variable will
be included in the first iteration of the training dataset.
(a) The municipalities in Denmark
(b) Index color chart
Figure 3.2: Distribution of index across municipalities comparing bad to good customers.
Following the process of index calculations and investigating features in publicly available datasets
used for credit risk assessment, 21 variables are chosen as baseline feature representation. As some of
the variables are categorical, this gives a total of 139 features. The variables are presented in table 3.3.
The baseline representation is made to reduce the extensive Geomatic data lake to a feasible amount
of variables to explore. However, before finalizing which features to train on, and how they should be
represented, the baseline feature set is investigated.
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Feature engineering and selection
12
Name
Type
Description
HOU_HOLHOMOWNR
Boolean
Does the household also own holiday house?
MUNICIPALITY
Category
Municipality location of address
CNZTYP
Category
Geomatic customer segmentation conzoom type
OWNSHIP
Category
Ownership status of the house
USAGE
Category
Type of house e.g. villa, apartment, etc.
AREA
Int
Area of the house
ROOMS
Int
Number of rooms in the house
BUSINESS_ON_ADRESS
Boolean
Is there a registered business on the address?
AGE_OLDST_AVG
Float
Average age of the oldest person in the household
CAR_AVG
Float
Average number of cars owned by the household
CHL_AVG
Float
Average number of kids living in the household
EDU_AVG
Float
Average years of education
EMPL_SELF
Float
Probability of employment being self employed
EMPL_TOP
Float
Probability of employment being top leader
EMPL_HIGH
Float
Probability of employment being with high wages
EMPL_MED
Float
Probability of employment being middle wages
EMPL_BASE
Float
Probability of employment being with basic wages
EMPL_OTHER
Float
Probability of employment being other forms of employment
EMPL_UNEMPL
Float
Probability of employment being unemployed
EMPL_STUDENT
Float
Probability of employment being a student
EMPL_RETRMT_EARLY
Float
Probability of employment being early retirement
EMPL_PENSNR
Float
Probability of employment being retired
EMPL_CHL
Float
Probability of employment being a child below 16 years
EMPL_OTH
Float
Probability of employment being other forms of unemployment
HOU_INCO_AVG
Float
Average yearly household income pr person
MARSTA_COUPLE
Float
Probability of the household being a couple
MARSTA_SINGLE
Float
Probability of household being single
MARSTA_OTH
Float
Probability of household being other
SOCGRP_AVG
Float
Average social group level (1-5) where 1 is the highest
WEALTH_AVG
Float
Average net wealth in DKK the household possess. Assets-debts
PER_INCO_AVG
Float
Average highest yearly personal income in the household
Target
Boolean
1 = bad customers, 0 = good customers
Table 3.3: The features chosen to represent the dataset. This is an initial feature representation based
on research and tentative discriminative behaviour
3.3
Feature engineering and selection
To address the challenge of the high dimensionality of the data set, a feature engineering process is em-
ployed to extract relevant information from the raw data. The baseline representation of the variables
was obtained by selecting the average value where possible, as it provides a simple yet effective repre-
sentation of the variables. The use of the average value as a representation is deemed appropriate given
that it reflects the most probable value associated with the household. However, for variables such as
”Employment” and ”Marital Status”, no average value exists. Given the expected importance of these
variables in the analysis, alternative approaches are explored. These variables are only represented by
their distribution across variable-specific categories. The categories can be seen in 3.3. At this stage, we
choose not to represent the variables using the distribution, as this representation may add unnecessary
complexity to the analysis. Instead, the variables will be made into categorical variables based on the
probabilities.
==PAGE:20==
3.3 Feature engineering and selection
13
3.3.1
Regrouping variables
In terms of the ”Marital Status” variable, the available categories are limited to ”single”, ”couple”, and
”other”. This variable is represented as a distribution, i.e. each category will hold a probability that the
household belongs to the given category. Given the relatively low likelihood of the ”other” category, it is
deemed appropriate to model the variable using a binary categorical approach, assigning the households
to either ”Married” or ”Not married”, thus reducing the complexity of the variable representation. If
the cumulative probability of ”single” and ”other” exceeds the probability of ”couple”, the household is
assigned to ”Not married”. In contrast, the ”Employment” variable presents a higher level of complexity,
as it consists of 12 different categories. As such, the probability distribution across categories is less
pronounced, making it more challenging to assign a category to each household.
To address this
issue, the categories are grouped into two simplified categories: ”Employed” and ”Unemployed”. This
approach aims to reduce the complexity of the variable representation while still capturing the relevant
information related to the employment status of the households.
The following categories become
”Employed”:
• EMPL_SELF
• EMPL_TOP
• EMPL_HIGH
• EMPL_MED
• EMPL_BASE
• EMP_OTHER
And the following categories become ”Unemployed”:
• EMPL_UNEMPL
• EMPL_STUDENT
• EMPL_RETRMT_EARLY
• EMPL_PENSNR
• EMPL_CHL
• EMPL_OTH
Besides altering the variables ”Marital status” and ”Employment”, to further reduce the dimensions
of the data set, the categories ”Ownship” and ”Usage” also need pre-processing. ”Ownship” currently
has 5 categories:
• Own
• Partly owned
• Public rent
• Private rent
• Other
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Feature engineering and selection
14
Figure 3.3: Ownership status
Upon examination of the ratio of good to bad customers within each category in figure 3.3 it can be
argued that the partial or full ownership of the household’s home does not appear to have a significant
impact. Similarly, no difference is observed between households in publicly rented or privately rented
homes. Therefore, to simplify the variable representation, two categories are created: ”Owned” and
”Not owned”, similar to the approach taken with the employment and marital variable. The ”Other”
category is allocated to the ”Not owned” category.
The variable ”Usage” currently has over 20 categories. These can be greatly reduced by grouping
together the categories into these seven most common categories:
• Apartment building
• Villa
• Institution
• Farmhouse
• Dorm
• Attached house
• Other
The variable ”Municipality” has 98 categories- one for each municipality in Denmark. As seen in
figure 3.2a, geographically close municipalities do not necessarily have the overrepresentation of bad
households. To regroup this variable we use the index computations to allocate each municipality into
one of the six groups as seen in the index color chart 3.2.
After the feature engineering process, the data set is reduced to the features in table 3.4. The non-
ordered categorical variables are treated with a one-hot encoding which results in a total of 64 features.
==PAGE:22==
3.4 EDA
15
Name
Type
Description
HOU_HOLHOMOWNR
Boolean
Does the household also own a holiday house?
MUNICIPALITY
Category
Level 0-5 where 5 is a municipality with mostly bad, 0 is mostly good
CNZTYP
Category
Geomatic customer segmentation conzoom type
OWNSHIP
Boolean
Ownship status. Not owned = 0, Owned = 1
USAGE
Category
Type of house e.g. villa, apartment, etc.
AREA
Int
Area of the house
ROOMS
Int
Number of rooms in the house
BUSINESS_ON_ADRESS
Boolean
Is there a registered business on the address?
AGE_OLDST_AVG
Float
Average age of the oldest person in the household
CAR_AVG
Float
Average number of cars owned by the household
CHL_AVG
Float
Average number of kids living in the household
EDU_AVG
Float
Average years of education
EMPL_STATUS
Boolean
Employment status. Unemployed = 0, Employed = 1
MARI_STATUS
Boolean
Marital status. Unmarried = 0, Married=1
HOU_INCO_AVG
Float
Average yearly household income
SOCGRP_AVG
Category
Average social group level (1-5) where 1 is the highest
WEALTH_AVG
Float
Average total net wealth in DKK the household possess. Assets-debts
Target
Boolean
1 = bad customers, 0 = good customers
Table 3.4: The features to represent the data set after feature engineering with the exception of the
target variable
3.4
EDA
Before proceeding with modeling, the current set of features is explored to get an insight into the under-
lying characteristics and relationships of the data. Although we have already decided which machine
learning algorithms the data will be modeled with based on research, the data analysis will help to pro-
vide insight into how we may expect the algorithms to perform in the task of classifying the households
into good or bad. To visualize and summarize the data a principal component analysis is carried out.
A principal components analysis aims to transform a high-dimensional dataset into a lower-dimensional
space while retaining the most important information or patterns in the data. To do so, the data is
reduced to principal components that are linear combinations of the original features to capture the
most variance in the data. The technique works best with continuous data that have a linear rela-
tionship with the target variable.
The visualization of the features reduced to two dimensions 3.4
indicates that the data is not linearly separable. The first two principal components only capture 31
% of the variance in the data set further indicating that the relationship between the variables is non-
linear. Although the data is not linearly separable, a trend with more bad households in the bottom
left corner can be observed, however, this signal is distorted by a significant amount of negatives as well.
==PAGE:23==
3.4 EDA
16
Figure 3.4: Principal component analysis of the features using two principal components. Using two
components only explains 31 % of the variance in the data set.
To further explore the data in two dimensions, the observations are plotted as the wealth against the
average household income. This plot 3.5 indicates that some signal can be found, e.g. the households
with lower wealth and lower household income in general with tend to be the positive case of bad house-
hold, however, from this plot it is also clear that the data is noisy and contains several observations
that defy that observation. Additionally, it can be observed that several observations share identical
values, despite the variable being continuous.
Figure 3.5: The distribution of the target variable on a scatterplot with wealth on the first axis and
household income on the second axis
==PAGE:24==
3.4 EDA
17
When examining the distribution of the continuous variables 3.6 with respect to the target classi-
fication, it is observed that the distributions exhibit similar patterns. Ideally, the distribution for the
variable for each target would not overlap.
Figure 3.6: The distribution of the continuous variables in the data set with respect to the target
value given as a density plot. The plot is normalized since the negative target has more observations.
The box plots in figure 3.7 provide a different visualization of the distribution by incorporating ob-
servations that fall outside the normal range. From both types of distribution plots, it is observed that
there is a predictive signal between the targets. However, for some variables, it might be insignificant.
In general, the models might experience diﬀiculty distinguishing the classes as distributions appear vi-
sually similar. From the box plots, it can also be seen that outliers can be found in the data. However,
as earlier mentioned, this data is from Statistics Data, which accurately represents the demographics in
Denmark, hence it would be wrong to remove the outliers as they are likely present in the test set as well.
The same pattern is observed for the categorical variables in figure 3.8. There can be observed
differences between the classes for some of the features, where the ownership status, marital status, and
type of home have the most dominant difference between the classes. There is a greater percentage of
the good households that are married, own a house, and live in a villa than the bad households. Inves-
tigating the USAGE variable in the figure, it is noted that all households living in dorms are classified
as bad households, however, there are only a few households in the data set in total that are living in
dorms. Similar visualizations for the remaining categorical variables can be found in the appendix.
==PAGE:25==
3.4 EDA
18
Figure 3.7: The distribution of the continuous variables in the data set with respect to the target
value given as a box plot. The plot is normalized since the negative target has more observations.
To further investigate the relationship of the data, the correlation between the features is computed.
The Conzoom types have been left out of the correlation heatmap due to easier visualization, but they
are mildly correlated with several features. Looking at the correlation heat map in figure 3.9 it is seen
that some multicollinearity can be observed. Especially the variable for social group is correlated with
several other features which is not surprising as the variable is aggregated using other features. Fur-
thermore, it is interesting to see that the features ”WEALTH_AVG” and ”HOU_INCO_AVG” do not
have a stronger correlation. The reason might be that the income cannot stand alone as we can’t see
the expenses and the wealth includes debts as well. The multicollinearity only affects the predictions
of the logistic regression, hence we choose to keep the variables as they are. Finally, it is noted that
the target does not have a strong correlation with any of the features. This implies that the classes do
not have a strong linear relationship with any of the features.
==PAGE:26==
3.4 EDA
19
(a) Type of home. USAGE variable
(b) Ownership status. OWNSHIP variable
(c) Marital status. MARI_STAT variable
Figure 3.8: Distribution of target for categorical variables with most difference between classes
==PAGE:27==
3.4 EDA
20
Figure 3.9: Correlation between the features and target
3.4.1
Outlier detection
Upon inspection of the variables ”Rooms” and ”Area” respective statistics, it is evident that there are
outliers that need to be removed. For instance, a house cannot have an area of 0 sqm, and it is highly
unlikely for a house to have 999 rooms. Focusing on the ”Rooms” variable first, it is worth noting
that all observations with 999 rooms are located in the Copenhagen district known as ”Christiania”.
This district operates as a self-governing entity, and homeowners are responsible for declaring their real
estate data. Therefore, it is not unlikely that false information has been provided for these observations.
Upon examining the remaining features of these observations, it is evident that the ”Rooms” variable is
the only outlier. Therefore, the observations will be retained, but the value of ”Rooms” will be replaced
using the mean approach for a building of that size.
To narrow the search for true outliers, we filter out the observations categorized as ”Institution” or
”Farmhouse”. These categories typically have many rooms and a large area, so they are not necessarily
outliers. For institutions, the households living there will be modeled as individual households when con-
==PAGE:28==
3.4 EDA
21
structing the clusters in the anonymization process described in an earlier section, so the demographic
variables still hold. After this filtering process, about 1100 observations still exhibit outlier behavior
with a large number of rooms categorized as ”Apartment” or ”Villa”. Further investigation reveals that
some of these observations are actually misclassified institutions, and the demographic variables are
unreliable as they have not been modeled individually during clustering. Other observations with large
areas and many rooms are due to the household having a business at the address, while other households
might have large villas. Due to the manual effort required to investigate the cause of 1500 potential
outliers, it is decided to filter out all observations that have the usage type ”Villa” or ”Apartment” with
more than 9 rooms, except for those with a business.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, only a few observations have a room value of 0. These observa-
tions seem to lack information in general on the real estate variables with usage code ”Other”, ownship
”Unknown” and Area also 0. Looking at the target value for these observations, the default rate is 37.5
%, i.e. 3/8 are classified as ”bad”. This default rate is higher than the average for the full data, hence
it is decided to keep these observations as it might mean that the households which do not have proper
information on their homes are less likely to be good customers.
Although the continuous demographic variables have observations that lie within the range of out-
liers as seen in the boxplot, the data is from Statistics Denmark and is therefore likely to be observed
in the test set as well.
To summarize, to choose a feasible amount of predictive features from Geomatic’s extensive data
lake, inspiration was found through features used in research as well as index-based computations that
yielded a tentative overview of which features might be able to discriminate between the two classes. To
further reduce the dimensions, the variables with many categories were regrouped into smaller categories.
The exploratory data analysis provided the insight that the features might lack predictive abilities as
the variable distributions with respect to the target are similar. Consequently, the analysis did not
help to further reduce the features. The training set will thus use the features presented in table 3.4 to
classify the data. Given the nonlinearity of the data, it is expected that the logistic regression will be
outperformed by the nonlinear classifiers. Besides the nonlinearity, the data is furthermore imbalanced
with the positive class being the minority class with only 16% of the observations being bad households.
This will likely pose an obstacle to the algorithms if the limited observations are not enough for the
model to learn the data patterns of the positive class. Finally, the addresses were classified by the
bank about 10 years ago whereas the Geomatic data is from 2021. It is argued that the credibility
of the data is not compromised enough to be unfair due to the way Geomatic enriches the addresses.
The geographical location and the real estate data are the core of how the addresses are clustered, so
it is argued that the household living at a certain address 10 years ago, will likely demographically
approximate the household living at the address now, as areas do not change that drastically within
that time span. However, the data is possibly noisy, and combined with the limited number of positive
cases, it might affect the generalization abilities of the models
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
When undertaking any predictive task, several considerations must be taken into account. Different
model algorithms are appropriate for different tasks, as they rely on varying assumptions regarding the
data and the relationship between the target and features. In this case, the task involves supervised clas-
sification with a dataset containing numerous categorical features. Moreover, the relationship between
the target variable and several features is nonlinear. Additionally, the statistical nature of the data
and the age of the data set are likely to introduce noise to both the labels and the data, necessitating
careful evaluation of the models. This chapter serves to introduce the models, metrics, and relevant
terms used in this thesis.
4.1
An introduction to machine learning for supervised learning
The purpose of this section is to familiarize the reader with the fundamental concepts of machine learn-
ing. It is assumed that the reader has previous knowledge in the field, and thus this section aims to
refresh their memory and introduce the terminology used in subsequent chapters.
Machine learning is the concern of developing a computer algorithm that is able to improve its
performance in relation to a task with increased experience. The task, experience, and performance
vary across different use cases. In this project, the task is to classify Danish households as either good
or bad bank customers. The algorithm is provided with a labeled data set and its objective is to learn
the mapping function f from x ∈X to y ∈Y, i.e. the mapping to the target labels ”good” and ”bad”
from the X features described in the previous chapter. The task of learning a mapping between labeled
data and features is called supervised learning. The experience is given as the N input-output pairs
D = (xn, yN
n=1) called the training set where N represents the sample size [Mur22]. For a classification
task, the output space is a set of classes Y = 1, 2, .., C. In this case, we only have two classes, y ∈{0, 1},
where 0 represents the negative class (i.e., good customers) and 1 represents the positive class (i.e., bad
customers). When dealing with only two classes, it is referred to as binary classification. The goal of
supervised learning is to automatically create a classification model that can reliably accurately predict
the labels for any given input [Mur22].
Several algorithms exist for binary classification, including parametric and non-parametric, as well
as linear and non-linear methods. An aspect of this project is to investigate in a fair experiment which
model works best for this given problem. However, due to the scope of this project, it is not feasible
to benchmark all binary classification algorithms. Therefore, a few selected algorithms were chosen to
reflect the performance of other models in the same decision category based on prior research. The
algorithms to be compared in this project are Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Feedforward Neural
Network, and XGBoost. The algorithms will be explained in detail in subsequent sections.
The pipeline for developing a machine learning algorithm starts by training the model on a subset
of the entire data set known as the training data set. During the training process, the model learns
the trainable parameters which will be referred to as weights in this thesis. For instance, in logistic
regression, the weights correspond to the coeﬀicients. The model learns the weights by optimizing a
loss function w.r.t the weights. In binary classification, the commonly used loss function is the binary
==PAGE:30==
4.1 An introduction to machine learning for supervised learning
23
cross-entropy loss.
The capacity of the model depends on its trainable parameters. In supervised learning, with a suﬀi-
ciently high-capacity algorithm, the model can achieve a training loss of zero by simply memorizing the
correct output for each input. However, this is not desirable for real-life implementation. The model
should be able to generalize what it has learned to accurately predict the labels for new inputs as well.
A model that is doing a great job predicting the correct labels for the training data, but is not able to
generalize new inputs is overfitting. On the contrary, underfitting occurs when a model has both high
training and test errors, indicating that it is not complex enough to capture the patterns in the training
data. Consequently, assessing the performance of the model on both the training and test data sets
is crucial. Overfitting can be mitigated using different means depending on the model but all aim to
reduce the capacity of the model [GBC16].
Bias and variance are two terms closely related to the concepts of capacity, overfitting, and under-
fitting. Bias and variance measure two different aspects of how a model may be wrong. A critical
task in selecting and fitting a model is balancing the two types of errors. Bias measures how far off in
general the model’s prediction is from the true value. A high-bias model typically exhibits underfitting,
meaning it fails to capture the complexity of the data and performs poorly on both the training and
test set. Variance captures the model’s sensitivity to fluctuations in the training data. A high variance
model tends to overfit the training data, meaning it learns the noise and random fluctuations in the
data rather than the true underlying patterns. A good model will have both low bias and low variance,
however, in practice most models will tend to either have low bias and high variance or high variance
and low bias. This relationship can be altered by introducing some bias in the model in exchange for a
lower variance or vice versa. Thus, the fit of the model is related to the trade-off between the magnitude
of the bias and variance [Has+09].
Figure 4.1: Example of test error as function of capacity
The next step in the pipeline is to tune the hyperparameters of the model. Hyperparameters refer
to parameters in the model’s architecture that are chosen by the designer. The choice of hyperparame-
ters can affect the number of trainable parameters in the model and consequently the capacity. When
tuning the models, one should among others refer to the learning curves of the train and test set to
assess the fit of the model as a function of the experience and compare across several metrics.
The model should then be finally tested against the unseen test set to assess the performance of the
model in production.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Evaluation metrics
24
4.2
Evaluation metrics
In binary classification, the model initially predicts the probability of a sample belonging to either
the positive or negative class. Given the decision boundary for when the sample should be labeled as
the positive or negative class, the sample will then be classified accordingly. Consequently, there are
four possible outcomes of the classification process. A positive sample can be correctly identified as a
positive case, which is referred to as a true positive, or wrongly identified as a negative case, referred
to as a false negative. A negative case can likewise either be correctly identified as a negative case or
falsely classified as a positive case. This is a true negative or false positive respectively. The quantity
of these four cases can be summarized in a confusion matrix as seen in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Example of confusion matrix
Ideally, we want the true positives to be equal to the total number of positive samples in the data set,
and the false positives to be 0. Likewise for the negative case. The task of evaluating the performance
of the binary classification is essential to try and interpret the confusion matrix into fair comparable
metrics.
4.2.1
Accuracy
There are several metrics available to evaluate the performance of binary classification algorithms.
One of the most commonly used metrics when evaluating a model’s capability of performing binary
classification is accuracy. Accuracy is defined as:
Accuracy = TP + TN
N
Where TP = true positives and TN = true negatives. However, this metric has a significant draw-
back in the case of an imbalanced data set like the one treated in this project. If the model fails to
learn how to classify the minority class (in this case, the bad customers) because of a lack of data and
instead classifies all samples as good customers, the accuracy metric can be misleading because the TP
for imbalanced data sets is insignificant in the equation. For this specific case, if the model classified
all samples as negatives, the accuracy would be approximately 84 % as only 16 % of the samples are
positive. This would result in many false negative cases and equally a huge risk for the bank. For this
reason, accuracy is not a metric this project will consider.
Fortunately, there are other more reliable ways to evaluate the performance of binary classification
with imbalanced data sets, however, they can rarely stand alone. For this reason and considering prior
research, four metrics are chosen for the evaluation of the models: the F1 score, the area under the
receiver operator curve, the Brier score, and the log-loss. Furthermore, the share of FNs is also consid-
ered since these are the predictions with the highest risk to the bank. By considering these metrics, a
more comprehensive evaluation of the model’s performance can be achieved.
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Evaluation metrics
25
4.2.2
F1 score
To understand the F1 score, we first need to introduce the metrics recall and precision.
Precision
provides insights into the success probability of making a correct positive classification and measures
what fraction of our classifications are actually positive. The precision is often compared to the recall.
Recall measures what fraction of the positives we actually successfully detected which explains how
sensitive the model is towards identifying the positive class [Mur22]. In the previous scenario where the
model classifies all samples as negative, both precision and recall would be zero. This situation offers a
more comprehensive evaluation of the model’s performance compared to accuracy.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
Ideally, we would want the precision and recall to both be 1, indicating that the model identifies
all the positive cases while avoiding any false positives. However, in a real-world scenario, this is not
realistic. For instance, by setting a highly conservative threshold where observations with a very low
probability of being positive are classified as positive, the recall will tend to converge towards 1. This is
because the model will likely detect all true positives and avoid false negatives. However, in that case,
the precision will decrease, as the conservative model will result in many false positives. In evaluating
a combination of precision and recall, the aim is to find the classification threshold that yields both
optimal recall and precision, depending on the objective of the problem. This threshold may be found us-
ing a precision-recall curve, where the precision and recall are evaluated for a threshold between 0 and 1.
A metric that provides the nuanced evaluation is the F1 score. The individual points on the precision-
recall curve can be computed for a fixed threshold, and the F1 score is then the harmonic mean between
the precision and recall at that fixed point. The F1 score weights the recall and precision equally and
is defined as [Mur22]:
F1 = 2 · P · R
P + R
F1 =
TP
TP + 1
2(FP + FN)
4.2.3
Area under the ROC curve
Besides the F1 score, we also consider the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC
curve). The receiver operator characteristic curve is computed as the function between the true positive
rate, TPR, which is the same as the recall, and the false positive rate (FPR) also called the false alarm
rate.
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
As stated earlier, for a conservative model with a low classification threshold of being positive, the
TPR/recall will converge to 1. Equivalently the FPR will increase, as we will detect many false positives
and no true negatives if all observations are classified as positive. Thus, similarly to the precision-recall
curve, we can compute the TPR and FPR as a function of the threshold and plot the rates against each
other. This function is the ROC curve and can be used to choose the threshold for which the TPR is
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Evaluation metrics
26
greatest and the FPR is lowest. Likewise, we can summarize this metric into a scalar by computing
the area under the curve. The area summarizes the points for all thresholds, the higher the score the
better, and the perfect model will have an area of 1. For a random classifier, the area under the ROC
curve would be 0.5 [Mur22].
4.2.4
Log loss
The last two metrics are the Brier score and the log loss. They differ from the previous scores by not
computing the actual label but rather by using only the predicted probabilities of the samples. The
goal is to achieve a predicted distribution of probabilities similar to the true distribution. The log loss
indicates how close the prediction probability of an observation is to the corresponding true value. The
log loss is also known as the binary cross entropy loss function and is often used as the objective function
for the optimization of weights in binary classification problems. The function is given as:
log loss = −1
N
N
∑
n=1
((pn · ln(ˆpn) + (1 −pn) · ln(1 −ˆpn))
(4.1)
N = total number of samples
pn = the true probability of the positive class which is equivalent to the label
ˆpn = the predicted probability of the positive class
In this formula, for each instance, the log loss measures the deviance between the true probability
and the predicted probability (ˆp) of belonging to the positive class. A lower log loss value indicates a
better fit between the predicted probabilities and the true labels.
4.2.5
Brier score
Finally, we have the Brier score. The Brier score also measures the difference between the true and
predicted probability. The score takes the mean squared difference between the true and predicted
probability, similar to mean squared error in regression problems:
Brier score = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
((pn −ˆpn)2)
The Brier score only takes values between 0 and 1, where 0 is the best score. A Brier score for a
random model that assigns a 0.5 probability to every prediction, will have a brier score of 0.25. The
advantage of the Brier score is that the performance is more interpretable than the log loss. The disad-
vantage of the Brier score is that the metric does not differ between the positive and negative class, thus
it is diﬀicult to interpret which class it is confident in predicting. This can bias the score for imbalanced
data sets.
In conclusion, there is no ideal metric for imbalanced classification problems and one should be
careful when interpreting the performance of the models and how each model and sample size affects
the computation of the metrics. The probabilistic measurements help to investigate the confidence
of the model predictions, whereas the label-encoded measurements can provide insights into how the
probabilities and thresholds affect the final classification and results.
==PAGE:34==
4.3 Methods
27
4.3
Methods
In this section, an overview of the most important theory as well as the algorithm for each method will
be presented. This section should provide the reader with enough basic understanding of the models
that the subsequent results and discussion are easily followed.
The methods presented are either parametric or non-parametric. A parametric model assumes a
finite set of learnable weights that are able to give new predictions independent of the observed data.
This results in a model where the complexity is fixed and cannot grow with more experience. A non-
parametric model assumes that the data distribution cannot be defined in terms of such a finite set of
parameters. Hence, the complexity of the model can grow with increased experience.
Besides the way the weights are given in the models, the way the models classify the observations
can also differ. Linear classifiers assume a linear decision boundary between the samples. This makes
them simple, but less flexible. Non-linear classifiers do not assume a linear boundary but rather can
differ in the classification of observations that are closely related in the feature space.
Figure 4.3: Linear separable data vs non-linear separable data. A classifier that can classify non-linear
separable data implements a function that transforms the data. Figure is from [Ras14]
4.4
Logistic Regression
Logistic regression is a parametric linear classifier. The algorithm estimates the probability of a house-
hold being bad, by making the log-odds for the household being bad, a linear combination of the
predictive features.
4.4.1
Theory
Logistic regression is a type of generalized linear model. A generalized linear model assumes the response
variable to be identically and independently distributed but does not require the target variable to
follow a normal distribution. Unlike linear regression, which assumes the expected value to be a linear
combination of the features, the logistic function assumes the expected value to be a function of the
combination. The function that links the linear relationship to the expected value is called the logit
function. The logit function is given as:
logit : g(ˆpn) = xT
nθ = ln(
ˆpn
1 −ˆpn
)
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Logistic Regression
28
xn = n’th observation, Dx1
θ
= the weights
ˆpn = the predicted probability of the positive class
The expected value for the Bernoulli distribution is equivalent to the probability of being a positive
class [Mur22]. The predicted probability for the positive class is then given as:
ˆpn =
1
1 + e−xT
n θ
σ(zn) =
1
1 + e−zn
σ(z) = ˆpn is the probability of the positive class, 1
zn
= log odds xT
nθ
Which is also known as the logistic function. The function follows a sigmoid shaped curve and only
takes values between 0 and 1.
The task of logistic regression is to estimate the weights θ that maximizes the likelihood of observing
the true labels, y_n given the features X. The objective function we want to optimize is given by the
negative log-likelihood [Mur22]. This function has already been introduced as the binary cross entropy
loss function 4.1 in the section about log loss and is given by:
arg min
θ −1
N
N
∑
n=1
((yn · ln(ˆpn) + (1 −yn) · ln(1 −ˆpn))
The loss function is strictly convex, which means that the local minimum will also be the global
minimum for any input vector. Proof of convexity, can be found in [Mur22] in the chapter on Logistic
Regression. The loss function needs to be minimized using a gradient descent method, or a numeric
solver, such as Newton’s method as it has no closed-form solution. The estimators for the weights are
unbiased, thus the model typically has low bias and high variance. Hence, in practice, a regularization
term is often added to the loss function to reduce the variance and reduce overfitting. The logistic
regression hyperparameters are tuned by the choice of regularization parameters. The weights can be
interpreted as the change in the log odds of the target for a one-unit increase in the predictive feature
holding all other features constant.
To classify new observations, the following formula is used with the optimal weights found by
minimizing the negative log likelihood:
ˆpn =
1
1 + e−xT
n θ∗
4.4.2
Algorithm
==PAGE:36==
4.5 Decision Trees
29
Algorithm 1 Logistic Regression
for iteration in range(num_iterations) do
Compute the logits, z by taking the dot product between the design matrix, X and the weight
vector, θ: z = Xθ
Apply the sigmoid function to the logits σ(z) to obtain predicted probabilities: ˆp =
1
1+e−z
Calculate the loss using the binary cross entropy (log-loss): log_loss = −1
N
∑N
n=1((yn · log(ˆpn) +
(1 −yn) · log(1 −ˆpn)
Compute gradient, and possibly Hessian depending on the choice of the solver of the binary cross
entropy function
Update weights using a choice of solver
end for
Return weights when the solver reaches the number of iterations or convergence
4.5
Decision Trees
Decision trees are a non-parametric and non-linear supervised learning method used for classification
and regression. The goal is to create a model that predicts the value of a target variable by learning
simple decision rules inferred from the data features. It works well with categorical features and is easy
to interpret. In this project the decision tree will not be used as a singular model, but combined into
the ensemble methods Random Forest and XGBoost.
4.5.1
Theory
The decision tree has a hierarchical, tree structure, which consists of a root node, branches, internal
nodes, and leaf nodes. The method receives all the data at once. The three will split the data by evalu-
ating the information gain for all possible splits and then choose the split that results in the highest gain.
Ideally, the splits should be made so all the leaf nodes would only contain the same class. However, in
real life, it is unlikely that all the leaves are pure. The splits will continue until the algorithms reach
a predefined threshold for the minimum amount of observations to be included in each node. When a
classification tree is used, the aim is to split the data set at hand into two parts using the homogeneity
of data as the criterion. As the method potentially can keep splitting until each node only contains
one observation, this is a major red flag for overfitting. This problem can be addressed by pruning the
tree after it has learned in order to remove some of the detail it has picked up. The tree can be pruned
by restricting the depth of the tree, i.e. the number of splits or by restricting the number of samples
allowed in each leaf or internal node. The tree can also be controlled by specifying a threshold on the
general complexity parameter that ensures each split contributes to the minimum improvement. This
way we control the size of the tree. Decision trees are low bias and high variance, indicating that they
are likely to overfit. The following ensemble methods Random Forest and XGBoost try to maintain the
low bias while lowering the variance [Has+09].
==PAGE:37==
4.6 Random Forest
30
Figure 4.4: Example of a decision tree. Figure is from [tir22]
The information gain is computed using the entropy. The entropy is computed as:
Entropy = −
K
∑
k
(pklog2(pk))
K = number of classes
pk = the probability of observing the k’th class
The information gain is given as:
IG = Eroot_leaf −wleft · Eleft_leaf −wright · Eright_leaf
E = entropy
w = observations in leaf node out of observations in internal node
4.5.2
Algorithm
Algorithm 2 Decision tree
while Stopping criteria is not met do
Compute information gain over all splits
Choose the split that results in the highest gain
end while
4.6
Random Forest
Random forest is an ensemble method of the decision tree method. The method uses bootstrap aggre-
gation (bagging) to build multiple noisy low-biased trees to create a forest of classification trees that
are averaged for better stability. The basic concept is that a large number of relatively uncorrelated
trees operating as a committee will outperform any of the individual constituent models as different
models will not all make the same errors on the test set [Has+09].
==PAGE:38==
4.6 Random Forest
31
4.6.1
Theory
The random forest constructs each decision tree using a random subset of the data and a random sub-
set of the features. The random subsets are chosen using bootstrap aggregation (bagging) and feature
selection. The default number of features to choose from is m =
√
D, where D is the total number
of features available. For each split, the method will randomly pick m features. This continues until
a stopping point (like in the decision tree). After having created the first tree, the method will make
a new bootstrap sample to grow another tree using the same number, m, features. This continues
until the method has grown the predefined number of trees allowed in the forest.
Once the forest
is complete, the predictions are made by averaging the predictions of all the individual trees using a
majority vote, i.e. if 9/10 trees have predicted the observation to be 1, then the sample is classified
as 1. The random forest algorithm predicts and outputs the class. To obtain the probabilities, the
predicted class distribution is taken across the trees, i.e. for the previous example, the probability of
obtaining 1 would be 90 %. As the predictions are computed using multiple trees, this method is less
interpretable than the single decision tree method. One may investigate a tree to see an example of how
a prediction is made, but this does not provide the full interpretation of the decision. However, it is still
possible to assess the feature importance using the random forest method by e.g. assessing the mean de-
crease in loss which measures the reduction in loss achieved by the feature in the decision tree [Has+09].
Figure 4.5: Example of a Random Forest. Figure is from [tib23]
The hyperparameters we tune in this method are the number of trees, the number of variables to
create a subset from, and, how many observations should be in each node.
==PAGE:39==
4.7 XGBoost
32
4.6.2
Algorithm
Algorithm 3 Random Forest
for tree in range(num_trees) do
Randomize n ∈N subset of data
while stopping criteria is not met do
Randomize m ∈X subset of features
Compute information gain over all splits given the m set of features
Choose split that results in highest gain
end while
Save tree
end for
Output majority vote
4.7
XGBoost
While the random forest method utilizes and improves the decision trees using bagging, a more so-
phisticated technique for building committees, known as boosting is introduced. XGBoost (eXtreme
Gradient Boosting) is a state-of-the-art machine learning algorithm that belongs to the family of boost-
ing algorithms that uses gradient boosting and regularization to lower the variance of the individual
trees.
4.7.1
Theory
Boosting algorithms combine several weak learners into a strong model to make accurate predictions.
So whereas bagging seeks to regularize the individual models, boosting constructs an ensemble with
higher capacity than the individual models. In XGBoost, the weak learners are decision trees that are
trained sequentially in which each new model is trained to minimize the loss of the previous model
using gradient descent, hence the name ”gradient boosting”. This process continues until the desired
number of trees is reached, or no improvement can be made. In theory, the wrong predictions are able
to be corrected completely by the next learner. However, this could lead to overfitting as it is not
generalizing the predictions. The gradient boosting algorithm mitigates this by scaling the corrections
with a shrinkage factor η between 0 and 1 [CG16].
XGBoost uses gradient boosted trees. In XGBoost the output of the leaves is not a classification
label but a continuous score, where the score depends on the application. For classification, the output
from the leaves is the log odds. Each tree can be perceived as a function that outputs a score. The
goal is to learn the functions that when summed minimizes a loss function. The goal is thus to build
the next tree such that the output scores in each leaf will minimize the loss of the previous tree when
added to the previous prediction. Hence, we want to optimize the output scores w.r.t a loss function
[CG16].
Different from regular gradient boosting, the ridge regression regularization term is added to the
loss function. The general formula for the optimized output score is:
==PAGE:40==
4.7 XGBoost
33
wk
n =
∑N
n (∇L(yn, ˆyk
n))
∑N
n (∇2L(yn, ˆykn)) + λ
Where,
k
= the iteration of tree, not exponent!
N = observations in a leaf
L
= the loss function
yk
n = the true label
ˆyk
n = the prediction for the tree
λ
= L2 regularization parameter
wk
n = output scores for tree k for observation n
As the output is regularized using a learning rate, the final output from the tree is:
f k(xn) = η · wk
n
A new prediction can thus be computed as the sum of the outputs for each tree:
ˆyk
n =
K
∑
k
(fk(xn))
Figure 4.6: Example of XGBoost. Each tree is built differently to improve the loss of the previous
tree. The prediction is thus a function of the sum of the trees. Figure is from [Wan+19]
One advantage of gradient boosted trees is the ability to customize the loss function as it is approx-
imated using second order taylor expansion. However, as this project aims to do binary classification,
the following formulas for how the XGBoost algorithm mathematically works will be introduced for the
binary cross entropy loss function [CG16]. Thus, the output wk
n for the tree for binary classification is:
wk
n =
∑N
n (rn)
∑N
n (ˆpk−1
n
· (1 −ˆpk−1
n
)) + λ
==PAGE:41==
4.7 XGBoost
34
Where,
rn = yn −ˆpk
n
ˆpn = predicted probability
The full extent of the derivation from the general formula to the above-simplified version can be
found here [Sta20].
As the output from the trees for binary classification is log odds, the output is inputted to the logistic
function. This concludes the final formula for classifying a new observation in binary classification:
ˆzk
n =
K
∑
k
(fk(xn))
ˆyk
n =
e(zk
n)
1 + e(zk
n)
zk
n = the predicted logits for the tree
As mentioned, the algorithm trains by computing each tree recursively. At each tree, the probabilities
are computed for each observation, and then the residuals which are used to build the next tree. The
recursive formula for learning the best tree at each iteration is:
zk
n = zk−1
n
+ η ·
∑N
n (rn)
∑N
n (ˆpk−1
n
· (1 −ˆpk−1
n
)) + λ
Where,
zk−1
n
= the predicted logits for the last tree
Normal gradient boosting machines uses fixed-sized decision trees comprised of randomly permuted
features for each tree iteration. On the contrary, XGBoost aims to build the most optimal decision tree
at each tree iteration. The optimal split is computed by choosing the split that clusters the residuals
the best. Mind that the residual belongs to an observation, i.e. when splitting the decision tree, it is
still done by using the features in the design matrix, and wherever the prediction for that observation
is, is where the residual ends as well. Different from Random Forest, XGBoost utilizes the approximate
greedy algorithm. This implies that the algorithm will not check every possible split at each split, but
rather divides the observations in quantiles and bases the best split on the quantiles. This is one reason
why the XGBoost is faster to train. To compute which split yields the greatest reduction in the loss
function, a similarity score is computed for the resulting leaves of the split. The similarity score is
calculated within each leaf [CG16]. The formula for the similarity score is:
S =
∑N
n (rn)2
∑N
n (ˆpk−1
n
· (1 −ˆpk−1
n
)) + λ
(4.2)
The reduction in loss is then given as:
Lsplit = 1
2 · (Sleft_leaf + Sright_leaf −Sroot_leaf) −γ
Where the first term is the gain and γ is the complexity parameter. The complexity parameter
controls the size of the tree by pruning the branches that do not add a positive reduction in the loss.
==PAGE:42==
4.7 XGBoost
35
The depth of the tree decreases when gamma increases. However, pruning of the tree can also happen
even when γ = 0. When λ > 0, equation 4.2, the similarity is penalized and consequently the reduction
in loss can yield a negative number even without γ [CG16].
Besides the extreme way of building trees, the XGBoost algorithm is a fast algorithm which means
gives the advantage that it is feasible to use a slow learning rate and many iterations if needed for the
problem.
XGBoost has several hyperparameters that can be tuned to improve its performance. These include
the number of trees, the learning rate, the maximum depth of each tree, the minimum number of resid-
uals in each leaf, and the regularization parameters.
4.7.2
Algorithm
Algorithm 4 XGBoost
Make initial prediction ˆp0, which by default is 0.5
for k in range(num_trees) or while loss doesn’t improve do
Compute residuals r = y −ˆpk−1
for splits in range(1:num_splits) do
Compute similarity score S in the internal node
for feature split in range(all possible splits) do
Cluster residuals in leaf nodes by splitting the internal node into two leaf nodes
Evaluate gain for split (Sleft_leaf + Sright_leaf −Sroot_leaf)
end for
Choose split with the highest gain
end for
Prune tree by removing branches that do not yield positive reduction in loss, L_split
Compute output wk
Compute new predictions zk = zk−1
n
+ η · wk
Compute probabilities ˆpk =
1
1+e−zk
end for
==PAGE:43==
4.8 Neural Network
36
4.8
Neural Network
A multilayer perceptron (MLPs) or feedforward neural network is a parametric and nonlinear method
that approximates a function that can perform the supervised classification task of mapping xn to yn.
If the true mapping can be expressed as the function y = f(x), then the networks approximation can
be expressed as y = f(x; θ). The network’s goal is to learn the weights that make the best non-linear
transformations of the input such that they give the best approximation of y, i.e. to choose the weights
s.t. f(x; θ) →f ∗(x). The network’s final function can consist of several chained on each other functions
e.g. f(x) = f 3(f 2(f 1(x))) where each function is a layer in the network [GBC16].
4.8.1
Theory
A feed-forward neural network consists of one or more fully connected dense layers that transform the
input dimensions to the desired output dimension. The dense layers are also called the hidden layers
because the computations inside these layers are not being outputted. Each layer consists of a number
of nodes, or neurons. In the fully connected layer, each node is connected to each node in the previous
and subsequent layers. The connecting strings represent a weight that is carried into the nodes for
computation in the next layer. The nodes are where the computations happen. Each node consists of
an activation function that performs the non-linear transformations of the input and the weights. Often
a bias is added as well. There are different activation functions dependent on the application, common
ones are ReLU, sigmoid, tanh, and softmax. A feed-forward network only applies the input in a forward
direction. To reduce the capacity of a model with many layers of fully connected nodes, a percentage
of the nodes can be randomly dropped in between layers. This is referred to as dropout. The dropout
parameter takes a value between 0 and 1 referring to how many percent should be dropped [GBC16].
Figure 4.7: Example of a neural network. Figure is from [GBC16]
For a network with one hidden layer and a ReLU activation function, the first layer for one obser-
vation can be expressed as:
f 1(xn, θ1, c) = g(xT
n θ1 + c)
f 1(xn, θ1, c) = max{0, xT
n θ1 + c}
Where,
==PAGE:44==
4.8 Neural Network
37
θ1 = the weights between the input and the hidden layer
xn = feature vector for one observation
c
= the bias between input and hidden layer
The second layer can be expressed as:
f 2(xn, θ2, c) = θT
2 (f 1(xn, θ1, c))
f 2(xn, θ2, c) = θT
2 (max{0, xT
n θ + c})
The output is then given as
zn = f 2(xn, θ2, c)
zn = θT
2 (max{0, xT
n θ + c})
And the full model can be expressed as:
f(xn; θ1, c, θ2) = θT
2 (max{0, xT
n θ1 + c})
For the binary classification task, there will also be an activation function in the output layer that
will transform the output into a probability using the sigmoid activation function.
The network learns by optimizing the loss function using a gradient descent method and backprop-
agation. The issue with neural networks is they mostly result in concave loss functions, meaning that
the optimization algorithm possibly can get stuck on a local minimum. This makes the tuning of the
network a diﬀicult and time-consuming quest that is not guaranteed to converge.
The learnable parameters of the network are the weights and the hyperparameters are the number of
layers, the learning rate, the dropout rate, the activation functions used in each layer, and the number
of nodes in each layer. We can control the number of learnable parameters, and thus the capacity of
the model, by decreasing the number of nodes and hidden layers or by increasing the dropout.
4.8.2
Algorithm
Algorithm 5 Feedforward neural network
for iteration in range(num_iterations) or while loss does not improve do
Initialize weights for all layers
Feedforward design matrix through first layer of weights and biases to compute input to activation
function in first hidden layer
Transform weighted inputs in activation function
Continue feedforward process through layers until activation function in output layer
Transform input from the last hidden layer in output layer’s activation function
Compute loss given this output
Compute gradient of the loss function w.r.t to the weights in all hidden layers using back propa-
gation
Update weights by performing a step of chosen gradient descent method
end for
==PAGE:45==
4.9 Final models
38
4.9
Final models
A general issue occurring when training the models on imbalanced data is the inability to detect minority
cases. To overcome this obstacle, the data is resampled using three different methods: undersampling,
oversampling, and SMOTE. The performances of the resampling methods are investigated and it is
found that oversampling yields the best result. Hence, the models presented are trained on an oversam-
pled data set.
The models’ hyperparameters are tuned using five-fold cross-validation with grid search for Logistic
regression and random forest and hyperband for the neural network. The XGBoost did not use an
algorithm for tuning. For the tuning AUC ROC is chosen for the internal comparison of the hyperpa-
rameters. The models are tuned using the following CV algorithm:
Algorithm 6 Cross validation
for folds in range(five-fold CV) do
Split train set into a stratified CV-train and CV-test set
Normalize CV-train set
Normalize CV-test set using moments from CV-train set
Oversample CV-train set
Train model on CV-train set
Evaluate model on CV-test set for metric
end for
Output average across folds for each metric
The final models and the choices for hyperparameters are presented below. The parameters marked
with bold text are the parameters that optimize the results, i.e. the final parameters for the models:
Logistic regression
• optimizer:
newton-cholesky, lbfgs, newton −cg
• regularization:
L2, L1, elasticnet, none
• C:
1e −5, 1e −4, 1e −3, 1e −2, 1e −1, 1, 10, 100
Random Forest
• number of trees in the forest:
100, 300, 400, 500, 1250, 1500
• maximum depth of each tree:
5, 10, 15, None
• features considered at each split:
√
D, log2
• minimum number of observations in each leaf node:
1, 2, 5, 10
• minimum number of observations required to split an internal node:
1, 2, 5, 10
==PAGE:46==
4.9 Final models
39
XGBoost and the feed-forward neural network are trained using an iterative process. For the train-
ing process of the XGBoost, each new tree improves the training loss. To avoid overfitting, we can
choose to stop adding trees by implementing an early stopping algorithm. The algorithm evaluates a
validation loss at each iteration and if the validation loss does not improve in relation to the set criteria,
the XGBoost stops growing any further trees. For the neural network, the iteration process is updating
the weights of the network through the optimization process.
XGBoost
• number of trees: 30000
• learning rate: 5e−4
• λ: 0.5
• subsample of observation considered for growing each tree: 0.8
• maximum number of leaf nodes: 10
• early stopping if validation does not improve: yes
• γ: 0.5
Feedforward Neural Network
• First layer:
16, 512
with increments of 48. Optimal = 256, ReLu, dropout=0.2
• Second layer:
16, 256
with increments of 48. Optimal = 112, ReLu, dropout=0.2
• Output layer: 1, sigmoid
• learning rate:
1e −3, 1e −4, 1e-5
• early stopping if validation does not improve: yes
• optimizer: Adam
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This chapter presents the performance results of the models in accurately classifying Danish households
according to their risk of loan default. The households are categorized as either good or bad based on
their likelihood of defaulting. The classification is determined by the probability of belonging to either
class. Multiple supervised classification algorithms are tested, compared, and validated using evaluation
methods specifically tailored for imbalanced datasets, to identify the optimal method for this project.
The logistic regression serves as the baseline results to surpass for this project.
The chapter will begin by presenting the benchmark results for the models across the metrics: F1,
AUC_ROC, and Brier score. The models are trained and evaluated using five-fold cross-validation for
which the results are computed by taking the average of the five folds. Subsequently, the learning curves
and confusion matrices for each method will be presented and discussed. Finally, an interpretation of
the results will be presented, incorporating new hypotheses.
5.1
Benchmark
The four models are evaluated using various metrics through five-fold cross-validation on the training
set. When assessing a classification method, a classification threshold needs to be set for which the
probabilities are partitioned. The Brier score remains unaffected by the classification threshold, as this
metric compares the true and predicted probabilities. Similarly, the AUC_ROC is also unaffected by
the threshold, as it represents the area under the curve evaluated at different thresholds. However,
the F1 score is affected, as the computations depend on the binary classifications. When tuning the
classification threshold with respect to the F1 score, it is observed that the classification threshold for
benchmarking the models remains at 0.5. This is probably due to the training set being balanced.
Upon examining the results in table 5.1, it becomes evident that the models are not performing
well. A dumb model that predicts 1 (positive case) for every observation, achieves a F1 score of 0.28
for this problem. Additionally, a model that fails to discriminate between observations would have an
AUC_ROC of 0.5, indicating that the models’ performances are only slightly better than random.
Surprisingly, the performance is approximately the same across all four models, for all metrics. De-
spite their different learning and classification approaches, they exhibit similar performance. Moreover,
it is unexpected that simple logistic regression can compete with advanced non-linear classifiers. Given
the large and high-dimensional nature of the dataset, along with its lack of linear separability, one
Model
Threshold
Mean AUC
Mean F1
Mean Brier
Logistic Regression
0.5
0.668
0.342
0.229
Random Forest
0.5
0.674
0.352
0.222
XGBoost
0.5
0.675
0.353
0.210
Neural network
0.5
0.663
0.347
0.230
Table 5.1: Benchmark results of the models
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Learning curves
41
would anticipate logistic regression to perform way less effectively compared to the other models.
5.2
Learning curves
The benchmark results provide a brief overview of the performance of the models. However, the results
do not offer any insights into how the models achieved those results. To gain a deeper understanding of
model fit, we examine the learning curves for all models. The learning curves illustrate the performance
as a function of the training size. Initially, the training size starts with 500 samples to ensure the
presence of a few minority cases, and then it increases in increments of 1000 samples. The training set
is initially shuffled to eliminate any order biases in the samples. Additionally, for the iterative gradient
learners XGBoost and the Neural Network, we include a learning curve with the loss as a function of
the epoch, with each epoch corresponding to a weight update. The learning curves for the AUC_ROC
for all models as well as the loss for XGBoost and the Neural Network are presented here, while the
learning curves for other metrics can be found in the appendix.
(a) Logistic Regression
(b) Random Forest
(c) XGBoost
(d) Feedforward neural network
Examining the learning curve for logistic regression in figure 5.1d, we observe that the model con-
verges as the sample size increases. Notably, the learning curve indicates that the training error increases
with more samples. This increase in training error can be attributed to the model’s capacity remaining
constant as the sample size grows. Consequently, when the model is trained and evaluated on only
a few observations, it tends to overfit, resulting in a low training error but a high test error. When
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Learning curves
42
more samples are added, the model’s ability to fit the training data decreases but the model gets better
at generalization, thus closing the generalization gap between the train- and test set. In contrast, the
neural network exhibits a different pattern where the train- and test error is similar for all sample sizes.
This might be because the neural network implements early stopping that stops the algorithm if the
validation error does not improve or because it is highly regularized. Therefore, we do not observe the
same overfitting pattern when training the model on a small subset of the training data, as seen with
logistic regression. The learning curve for the AUC_ROC in both models suggests that the error is
relatively high for both the training and test sets, as also seen by the benchmark table. The relationship
between the train- and test errors indicates high bias and low variance for logistic regression and the
neural network. This suggests that the models are underfitting and not complex enough to capture the
relationship between the features and the target.
The tree ensemble models, XGBoost and Random Forest exhibit a slightly different pattern. The
generalization gap between the training and test errors does not close, indicating that these models have
not fully converged. This suggests a higher variance in their performance. While the training error is
lower, indicating lower bias error, the overall error for these models is likely due to higher variance. It is
highly probable that these models are overfitting. This is further emphasized by the learning curve plot
for XGBoost in figure 5.2, which shows the training error continues to improve beyond the test error.
The models learning seems to plateau with fewer data points that the logistic regression, indicating
that the non-linear decision planes the models use to partition the data find the solution with very few
data points.
Despite the relatively high train error and test error for all four models, it is clear that they are
able to detect certain patterns in the data. The steep initial phase of the learning curves in figure 5.2
indicates early convergence. This suggests that the models are effectively learning from the training
data and quickly reducing training loss. However, as training progresses, the models may have already
converged to a reasonably good solution, and additional experience does not lead to substantial im-
provements. Furthermore, both XGBoost and the neural network require a low learning rate to have
a stable training process, which might indicate that the models are sensitive to weight updates. The
learning curves indicate that the neural network and logistic regression might be underfitting, and the
XGBoost and random forest might be overfitting, despite the parameters being tuned with grid search.
The hyperparameters for optimal capacity were found by grid search due to several parameters to tune
simultaneously. Visualizing the process of performance as a function of the capacity of the model would
be beneficial to gain further insight and verify that the optimal capacity is found. However, the overall
capacity is diﬀicult to assess because several hyperparameters need to be considered simultaneously,
making it equally diﬀicult to assess the performance with respect to capacity. Despite attempts to
increase the capacity of the neural network and logistic regression models and decrease the capacity of
XGBoost and random forest, the results of this process indicate that further tuning of hyperparameters
does not improve performance.
==PAGE:50==
5.3 Feature importance
43
(a) Learning curve for the neural network
(b) Learning curve for the XGBoost
Figure 5.2: Learning curves where the loss is a function of the epoch
5.3
Feature importance
To investigate which features provide the most information to discriminate the observations we investi-
gate the feature importances. For XGBoost and random forest, the feature importance is the computed
based on which features contribute most to the loss. For logistic regression, the coeﬀicients are obtained.
For the XGBoost the most important features are in order of magnitude: wealth, marital status,
ownship, if usage is apartment, and household income. For random forest the order is slightly different:
wealth, household income, ownship, the average number of cars, and social group average. The random
forest is also different in the features in that more features are more important whereas for the XGBoost
the wealth feature is significantly more important than the other features. Without any features, the
logistic regression predicts an 80% probability of being bad. This is however on a model trained on a
balanced data set. One unit increase for wealth means that the odds of being bad decrease by 0.23, i.e.
the odds of being bad decrease by -77 %. The factors that contribute the most to the odds ratio are
area, wealth, household income, and age. Where increasing area increases the odds ratio of being bad,
and increasing wealth, income, and age decreases the odds of being bad.
It is interesting that although the features use to classify the models differ, they still make the same
predictions.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Confusion matrix
44
(a) Logistic regression coeﬀicients transformed to obtain odds ratio
(b) Random Forest feature importance
(c) XGBoost feature importance
Figure 5.3: Feature importance of Random forest and XGBoost. The features are given with numbers
for illustrative purposes, refer to the appendix A.7 for the feature corresponding to the number
5.4
Confusion matrix
Confusion matrices are computed using a hold-out test set with a 0.5 classification threshold. The con-
fusion matrices indicate the models allocate the predictions approximately the same. The false negative
==PAGE:52==
5.4 Confusion matrix
45
rate is greatest for the random forest. However, the ratio of false negatives out of the total negatives
is approximately 9% for all models. This indicates that the false negative rate is compromised by the
false positive rate and not the discriminative ability of the model as also indicated by the AUC_ROC.
The most conservative model is the neural network as it has the lowest ratio of false negatives.
The precision is low, about 0.23, for all models since the classification results in many false positives.
However, as most of the true positives are found, the recall is better, about 0.71. This could result in a
problem because many potential leads are cut off. However, the ratio of false negatives to true negatives
to optimize risk management should be determined by the individual case. Inspecting the observations
in the matrices, it is noted that there is a clear difference between the groups TP and TN. The tables 5.2
and 5.3 shows the descriptions statistics for the most important features of the observations classified
as the true positives and true negatives with a classification threshold at 0.5. The descriptives gives
an indication of what is associated with a good and bad customer respectively. It is noted that the
models have been able to discriminate and accurately predict end point observations for both groups.
The statistics of the group FN are close to TP and equivalently the FP is close to the TN.
Investigating the probability distribution of the groups in figure 5.5 it is noted that the models in
general classify the negative with more confidence with the majority of the probabilities being within
0.6-0.8. For the positive class, the majority of the predictions have the probability of being bad be-
tween 0.5-0.7. Given that the predictions for both the positives and negatives ranges between 0.5-0.8
explains the low brier score. However, inspecting the probabilities for the true- and false negatives
respectively, it is noted that the models are more confident for the true negatives than the false nega-
tives which is good. Decreasing the classification threshold and consequently have a more conservative
model, will thus raise the recall more than it will decrease the precision.
The midrange probabili-
ties is a consequence of using an oversampled balanced data set and might implicate the low Brier and
log loss since the model loses more than it gains by being more confident in predicting the positive class.
Mean
Std
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Ownership (1=own, 0=not own)
0.93
0.25
0
1
1
1
1
Apartment
0.20
0.40
0
0
0
0
1
Area in sqm
136
50.45
26
101
129
162
834
Number of cars
1.26
0.38
0
1.04
1.45
1.56
1.68
Social group (1=high)
2.631
0.67
1.14
2.15
2.65
3.12
3.88
Marital status (1=married, 0=not married)
0.62
0.49
0
0
1
1
1
Wealth
2013723
1547372
-1327098
911333
1608433
2720331
9860191
Household income
856938
396765
178562
588888
808366
1029012
5866190
Length of education
14.30
1.51
10
13.23
14.26
15.33
18
Table 5.2: Descriptive statistics of the most important features for observations classified as true
negatives
Mean
Std
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Ownership (1=own, 0=not own)
0.20
0.40
0
0
0
0
1
Apartment
0.66
0.47
0
0
1
1
1
Area in sqm
88
65.92
16
66
82
99
2603
Number of cars
0.69
0.41
0
0.37
0.62
1
1.68
Social group (1=high)
3.46
0.38
1.58
3.24
3.64
3.72
4.09
Marital status (1=married, 0=not married)
0.14
0.34
0
0
0
0
1
Wealth
59149
413189
-2315725
-103986
28149
189285
6608484
Household income
438476
177807
100300
319459
411678
523353
3335240
Length of education
12.60
1.25
10
11.67
12.45
13.33
17.33
Table 5.3: Descriptive statistics of the most important features for observations classified as true
positives
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Confusion matrix
46
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: Confusion matrices for the class predictions at a 0.5 classification threshold. The top left
corner of the matrix is the true negatives, and the top right is the true false positives. Bottom left is
false negatives and bottom right is true positives
==PAGE:54==
5.5 Interpretation
47
(a) True negatives
(b) True positives
(c) False negatives
(d) False positives
Figure 5.5: Probability distribution of the predictions with respect to the TN, TP, FN and FP
5.5
Interpretation
The metrics and the confusion matrices indicate that the models classify the samples close to random.
The learning curves suggest that the models are effectively learning from the data to some extent but
adding more samples will not improve results. However, it seems that none of the models are able to
detect the more complex underlying patterns as the learning curve quickly plateaus. This could suggest
that the current features are not suﬀicient for the models to make accurate predictions. The results
from the confusion matrix further indicate that there are some easy patterns, as the groups’ TP and
TN have very different means.
For all models, the most important feature is the wealth of the household. For the logistic regression
model, the wealth feature has a linear relationship with the log odds, i.e. decreasing the wealth increases
the odds of being a bad customer. The reason why the logistic regression model is able to compare with
the advanced models might be because of this data structure. Furthermore, it seems that the simple
classification by logistic regression is enough to capture the simple patterns which might indicate that
the decision problem is linear. As the advanced models are not able to capture the complex patterns
either, we do not gain anything by using models that are suited to capture non-linearity in the data.
5.6
Further hypothesis testing
The models have found the best fit with the current hyperparameter settings. However, they are not
performing well, and more interestingly, they are all performing the same. We would like to investigate
why this phenomenon occurs. Concluding the current performance, it may seem that the current set of
features is not suitable for capturing the complex patterns in the data. Furthermore, it seems that the
==PAGE:55==
5.6 Further hypothesis testing
48
models are misclassifying the same observations.
To investigate whether the problem lies within the features, we try to alter the capacity of the mod-
els by altering the data set. We try to reduce the dimensionality of the data set even further to decrease
the capacity with respect to the feature size to increase the capacity elsewhere in the model. We also
try to increase the capacity of the model by adding more features. To improve the performance we thus
try by both dimensionality reduction and increasing the dimensionality of the data set. Furthermore,
the feature engineering that was done earlier in the process was to reduce the dimension of the data set.
This process might have reduced the information as well. As seen by the lack of importance for employ-
ment status, it might be beneficial to try and include the probabilities instead of categorizing the feature.
To further investigate the reason why the models are not performing better, the confusion matrices
are inspected. Investigating the false positives and false negatives might give an explanation of why the
models are not able to classify them correctly and if they are misclassifying the same observations.
5.6.1
Feature engineering revisited
To investigate whether the feature engineering process can be improved, different data sets with dif-
ferent features are investigated using all models. The first thing that is tested is whether the feature
engineering process has made any improvements to the performance of the models or if the most simple
process can be used where no feature engineering is done. For this low-level feature-engineered data set,
the categorical variables are hot encoded, but no outliers are removed and the distribution variables
such as ”employment” are not turned into categorical variables. This results in 147 features.
The second data set to be tested is one where the Conzoom groups are used rather than the Con-
zoom types. This results in 33 features.
The third data set is one that includes more variables from Geomatic’s data lake such as the life
phase, habitation zone, number of people in the household, and more. This data set feature engineers
the municipalities and the ownership status, but keeps the employment similar variables as a distribu-
tion, and thus results in 153 features.
Finally, we test a data set with only the five most important features given by XGBoost.
The results from these tests show that the current data set provides the best results, but the dif-
ference is small ranging for AUC at around 0.2. The lowest performance is obtained using only the
five most important features, which indicates that the extra provided information is important for the
model’s ability to detect more complex patterns.
To conclude, it seems that neither altering the features, the number of samples nor the models
improve the results. Remembering the exploratory data analysis from chapter 2, it is assumed that
the models find it diﬀicult to make predictions as the data are closely related in the feature space. To
investigate why we look into the specific classifications of the models.
5.6.2
Investigation of misclassifications
We would like to investigate if the models make the same wrong classifications. To do so, an inner
join is made between the models FP and FN respectively to get the common misclassifications. This
results in 92% common false observations indicating that the models struggle with classifying the same
==PAGE:56==
5.6 Further hypothesis testing
49
observations.
The investigation of the data for the samples that are classified as false negatives and false positives
respectively suggests that from a human perspective, it is diﬀicult to distinguish between the observa-
tions and to tell from the performance of the models, the models seem to struggle with the distinction
as well. The observations that are found in FP and FN are observations that seemingly belong to
the positive and negative classes respectively, which is reiterated by the group means. From a human
perspective, the explanation of the misclassifications is likely due to data error, because the target label
seems wrong for these observations. The observations display outlier behavior within the groups, which
could be due to different types of data errors.
As the addresses are enriched with statistical demographic data, a potential error could be that
the data does not align accurately with the actual demographics of the household. It is worth noting,
that the majority of the important features for all models are demographic data. Consequently, the
classification given by the bank that has access to the true data, might not correspond with the data
given by Geomatic. Thus, the data reasoning behind the classification might be misleading the model.
The data furthermore have the disadvantage that the households likely share data values across features.
Reiterating the data collection process, each household belongs to a DST cluster that shares the same
value for a variable across the cluster. Although we cannot confirm nor deny this error’s extent, we can
look into the target distribution within each DST cluster for each demographic variable.
Investigating the distribution of the true target variable within the DST cluster for wealth, it is
observed that the same target value is not shared across the cluster as seen in figure 5.4. Households
within a DST cluster have different labels, even though their feature value is the same. This is true
for both the clusters with the highest and lowest wealth. A DST cluster contains at least 400 house-
holds, however, as the bank data set does not contain every household in Denmark, only the subset of
households in the data is given in the table 5.4. It is worth noting, that the wealthiest clusters seem
more clean in their distribution than the poorest clusters. Furthermore, even for the poorest clusters,
the majority class is the good customers. This might indicate that wealth is an important feature to
detect good customers and reiterate the diﬀiculty in predicting bad customers. It might also explain
the big proportion of false positives, as many negatives are found even in the poorest clusters. Wealth
is chosen as the comparison feature, as it is the most important feature for all models.
Cluster ID
Label
Households
157_000001
Good
25
230_000001
Good
9
Good
5
101_000001
Bad
2
147_000001
Good
15
157_000002
Good
11
...
...
...
Good
34
751_000415
Bad
9
Good
22
851_000270
Bad
8
Good
14
101_000770
Bad
1
Table 5.4: DST wealth clusters sorted from highest to lowest in Denmark.
For each cluster, the
good/bad distribution of the true label for the households in the data set is given.
==PAGE:57==
5.6 Further hypothesis testing
50
The collection of the data is based on the assumption that households within a DST cluster are
the most similar households within the municipality. This assumption is based on data that is not
demographic. This could lead to the error that in a neighborhood where six households supposedly
look alike based on the deciding factors, they will be clustered together. However, there is a chance
that in reality only five of the households share the same demographics. This noise might be carried
along and thus the demographic variables for the sixth household are the same as the other households
even though they actually have a different wealth. Thus, when all five households’ target value is 0, the
sixth household will likely be classified as 0 as well even though the true target is 1. This hypothesis
can be tested by investigating the outliers within the cluster and seeing if their unique ID matches with
the observations that have been misclassified. Investigating the households belonging to the top and
bottom clusters within a municipality, it is sure enough the outliers that have been wrongly classified.
For the wealthy clusters, the outliers are more pronounced since fewer bad classes exist in general. For
these, most of the outliers are classified as false negatives. For the poor clusters, not all outliers are
classified as bad since the majority class for the poor clusters is not bad. For these, it seems to depend
on the ownship, as seen in table 5.5. For the poorest cluster in Copenhagen, four observations from this
cluster are in the test set. All four observations have the true class good. Of these, two are classified as
bad and two are classified as good. The ones that are classified as good, own their house, and the ones
that are classified as bad rent their home. This combination makes logical sense, as negative wealth can
indicate a recently obtained mortgage. Whereas a low wealth for someone who is renting their home
will be contributed to other factors.
Cluster ID
101_000770
101_000770
101_000770
101_000770
Target (0=good, 1=bad)
0
0
0
0
Predicted target
0
1
1
0
Holiday homeowner
1
0
0
0
Conzoom type
F3
A1
F2
E2
Ownership of house (1=own, 0=not own)
1
0
0
1
Usage
Apartment
Villa
Apartment
Apartment
Area
132
81
98
109
Rooms
5
3
4
4
Business on address
0
0
0
0
Number of cars
0.78
0.6
0.77
0.37
Length of education
17.0
17.67
14.33
14.67
Household income
766659
1010818
672795
399955
Social group (1=high)
2.1666667
1.21777
2.9825871
3.3208955
Wealth
-1803377
-1803377
-1803377
-1803377
Age of oldest
58.33
32.67
43.0
43.0
Number of children
0.33
0.83
1.17
0.17
Employment status (1=employed, 0=unemployed)
1
1
1
1
Marital status (1=married, 0=not married)
0
1
0
0
Table 5.5: The table shows four negative households from the test set within the poorest DST cluster
in Copenhagen. Two of the households are predicted as true negatives, and two of the households are
classified as false positives. The main difference is the ownership status, where the true negatives own
their home.
The previous only investigates the significance of the outliers within the wealth clusters. However,
the models do not classify according to one feature only. Thus, we investigate the data for the clusters
for some of the most important features (wealth, marital status, and ownship). It is found that almost
1981 households have the exact same data across more than one feature. Furthermore, within that
group of households that share the same data, 1000 has the true classification as 1, and 981 is classified
as 0. I.e. for observations with the exact same data across several important features, the target label is
almost distributed 50-50. Although it is an insignificant portion of the data, as only a small portion of
the features were examined and this was across a set combination of features, it might be symptomatic
for the rest of the data as well. Nevertheless, it might add to the explanation of why the models are not
==PAGE:58==
5.6 Further hypothesis testing
51
able to improve their performance no matter how they are hypertuned or which set of features they are
trained on. This error would explain the limited benefit of resampling the data and the redundancy in
adding more data. The models might learn slightly more complex patterns, but if the error lies within
the data, the benefit of better discrimination between good and bad are small. What is interesting
though, is the models are able to shy away from the wealth variable. Looking at the true negatives for
households in massive debt, the models have been able to capture what other features are important
and since they indicate a negative household, the model classified them accordingly. This could how-
ever also be due to the fact that a negative wealth can be misleading if e.g. the household recently
purchased a house and thus the mortgage is still big adding to the debt. Removing features and only
keeping the most important features decreased the performance of the models. As the households can
share value across features, the extra features might mitigate the errors that are due to similar values
but different targets. More features allow for this discrimination as the likelihood of one of the clusters
being different between the households increases.
Another possible error is a difference in features from the classification done by the bank and the
features Geomatic can access. Data found in the literature that is used for credit risk assessment in
machine learning contains several financial features such as the number of loans, loan amount, inter-
est rates, etc. The only features that directly state something about the economic situation of the
household are the household income and wealth. From domain knowledge, it is known that disposable
income is an important factor for the bank. This feature is not accessible to Geomatic. Noting this, it
was surprising that household income is not a significant feature, despite not being too correlated with
wealth either. This might be because it does not say anything about disposable income so it only tells
half a story about the financial situation of the household. Furthermore, it is speculated that personal
evaluation will be a deciding factor as well.
To summarize, the bad performance of the models is likely due to noisy data leading to noisy data
labels. The non-linearity in the data is likely hidden by the noisy features and additionally, the features
the classification is modeled after might only tell half a story about the true features needed to assess
a household’s default probability.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The objective of the thesis was to investigate the feasibility of using a supervised machine learning algo-
rithm to predict a household’s probability of default using Geomatic data. The investigation suggests
that it is possible but does not come without errors. The errors are contributed to mostly unrepresenta-
tive data due to either missing explainable features, old data, or DST cluster outliers resulting in noisy
labels which extend to randomness in the data. The results obtained from further hypothesis testing
suggest that the models will have a natural cap in performance due to the data noise. This error will
also occur moving forward which raises questions on how this should be handled, which implications it
has for the credit risk assessment, and to what extent the tool can be used.
The data collection and consequently the data structure will not change for future predictions. The
aggregated data is the lowest level available in Denmark. The household clustering process is improved
every year to ensure that Geomatic can provide reliable data to its customers. However, wrongly clus-
tered households in the data are to be expected in the future as well. The purpose of the model is to
provide suitable leads for a bank to minimize the risk of direct marketing to households that potentially
do not repay their loan. This includes either supplying a set amount of households with the greatest
probability of being good, only providing a list of good households, or enriching a set list of addresses
with a good/bad flag. The question is how and if any of the models will be suitable for this. If the
leads are given as only the potential good households, given the models’ performance with the current
threshold at 0.5, the probability of encountering a risky household is 9%. This is the general optimal
threshold for balancing the harmonic mean between precision and recall. If this risk is below what is
allowed for the bank the model can be used which depends on the cost of a bad client compared to
gaining good clients. As the prior default probability of the data set was 16% the risk of obtaining
a bad household has nevertheless been minimized. Furthermore, if we choose the probabilities with
the highest percentage of being good, the recall increases more than the precision decreases. Thus the
conservativeness of the predictions can be altered. Consequently, the banks will benefit from using the
tool rather than randomly marketing households.
At a threshold of 0.5 with the current models, the bank should expect to encounter 1 bad customer
for every 11th good customer. At a threshold of 0.5 the bank should also expect that 44% of the poten-
tial good leads are removed because they are wrongly classified as positives. This could be an issue for
the credit risk assessment for smaller data sets that require conservative predictions. Furthermore, the
data might implicate a biased performance. We cannot be certain that the false classifications are truly
false, as some occur due to noisy data. Geomatic currently provides leads regularly to B2B customers in
various sectors. The leads are generated using hard code filters on relevant variables from its data lake.
The B2B customers are aware that some data is statistical. Hence, when the customers buy the leads,
they expect errors to occur to some extent because of the statistical nature of the data. The customers
can even choose the statistical uncertainty for which they want the leads. Consequently, we can live
with the model carrying some risk when predicting bank customers. The banks should be advised like
the other clients that the data might be untrue for some observations and an after-assessment should
be carried out before deciding on any loans. For the leads to be suitable, however, the risk should not
exceed the profit of only calling suitable households.
The models are good at finding the archetype bad and good customers and are able to detect some
==PAGE:60==
6 Discussion
53
advanced patterns as well. However, the models struggle to discriminate between households that share
data across several DST clusters making the observations inherently the same. The complication is
not made easier by the imbalanced data set. These outliers in the data might explain why the logistic
regression is able to perform equally well as the advanced models as the models misclassify the same
observations. This indicates that there are some patterns in the data that are easily detected, and the
models do not gain anything by being more complex. The non-linearity in the data might actually be
caused by the outliers and not an indicator for a data pattern, which would further explain why the
logistic regression performs equally well.
Compared to previous research this project has not received as good results. The research achieved
an AUC_ROC score in the range of 0.69-0.85 and a Brier score below 0.1 for models similar to the
considered models in this thesis. The research was carried out on one-to-one data sets with various
prior default rates and feature dimensions and for banks in other countries. This signifies that the data
provided by Geomatic does not yield as good results as proper bank data sets. However, whether this
can be attributed to the noise or the limited financial features is not certain. Whether demographic
and real estate data can be used in a stand-alone prediction of a household’s ability to pay back their
loan can not be concluded as the experiment is biased by the statistical nature of the data. Although
models trained on Geomatic data do not perform as well as models trained on real bank data, the
models are still suitable to assess household behavior as the assessment yields better results than ran-
domly. Furthermore, the strict GDPR guidelines as well as the Danish law that states fully automated
credit risk assessment is illegal, indicates that ranking a household’s ability to repay a loan is a sen-
sitive subject. Generating more accurate performance might therefore result in ethical implications.
The advantage of the models being trained on Geomatic data is that any bank can get leads on Dan-
ish households. The disadvantage is that the performance might vary depending on the addresses in
question. The errors attributed the cluster outliers will likely vary depending on the municipalities for
which the credit assessment is carried out. The reason is that big municipalities will have cleaner clus-
ters, as the probability of gathering enough similar households is bigger. Although every municipality is
represented in the assessment in this thesis, more households are located in the eastern part of Denmark.
The models perform equally. The Neural Network yields the lowest number of false negatives. How-
ever, as this just depends on the threshold as the false negatives are on behalf of more false positives,
this does not indicate better performance. The Random Forest takes the longest to train and tune.
XGBoost and the Neural Network take longer time to train than logistic regression, however as they do
not need to be cross-validated in a production setting, their computing time is not an issue. In terms
of stability and tuning, logistic regression has been most stable in receiving good results. The neural
network took the longest to tune to reach proper convergence, which resulted in a heavily regularized
network and is the model that requires the most effort to interpret. Random Forest predictive features
are weighted more equally than XGBoost. This could provide either a disadvantage or an advantage
given the data structure. If one feature is noisy, it carries less weight, however, if several features are
noisy it might be more certain of a wrong prediction. For these reasons, the XGBoost or Random Forest
is suggested for the tool.
When investigating the true positives at the 0.5 threshold, according to the models a stereotype of
the bad customers forms of an unmarried household with low wealth that lives in a rented apartment.
What is interesting, is that some households within this stereotype might be on the verge of being
first-time homeowners. A mortgage is a big loan, which yields equally big revenue for the bank given
that the loan is not defaulted. The most important feature of all the models is the household’s wealth.
However, if this is high it would typically signify you had already bought a house and repaid the loan
or similar. Hence, it would be good for the banks to be able to identify possible new homeowners that
are likely to repay the loan. However, the model is perhaps prone to identifying the households that
have already taken and repaid their loans.
The models are all trained on over-sampled balanced data. This choice was made to improve the
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Future work
54
results, however, the Brier score did not improve. The Brier score on the imbalanced data set is 0.13.
The reason for this was that the models trained on an imbalanced data set were confident in predicting
the majority class, which resulted in low probabilities for the positive class. For the positive class, the
probabilities range between 0.05-0.4. Hence, the model is more rewarded for the negatives. The model
is more penalized for the positives, but since these are the minority class, it will affect the score less.
6.1
Future work
Although the objectives of the thesis have been met, this project can go on forever. In hindsight, several
suggestions and directions can in the future be applied to the project. Although changing the feature
setup did not yield any improvement in the models’ performances, feature combinations might improve
results as the current feature engineering process could be counteracting its purpose. The employment
variable has been processed into ”employed” or ”not employed”. However, when looking at the feature
importance, employment is not important. Looking at Statistic Denmark the people with the highest
wealth include people in retirement and early retirement. These people will of course typically be older
as well. However, as the features are now, this group of people belongs to the category ”unemployed”.
Thus, wealth and employment might counteract each other in some aspects. When applying the raw
employment distribution, we didn’t see a change in performance. The reason might be that other fea-
tures were added as well.
Furthermore, since one cause of a decrease in performance is due to the outliers in the demographic
data cluster, it would be interesting to investigate whether removing these and only using real estate
features would enhance the classification performance. There would be a tradeoff between more descrip-
tive variables to more accurate variables. The investigation of the false negatives and false positives
indicated that some of these classifications can be attributed to the fact they are cluster outliers. This
investigation was based on a sample of clusters, however, it would be interesting to investigate whether
the outliers the models classify wrongly are primarily in the end cluster, with the most extreme values
and hence probably also the most descriptive values, or if the problem also occurs in the middle clusters.
In this regard, it would also be interesting to investigate whether the models are more accurate in pre-
dicting some municipalities than others since the data is supposedly cleaner for bigger municipalities.
Furthermore, the location of the households is grouped as the municipalities. It would be interesting
to investigate whether a more precise location based on zip codes would increase the effect of the location.
For a prediction data set big enough it would be interesting to investigate the possibility of detect-
ing whether an observation is an outlier before delivering the final leads. The potential outliers could
belong to a category for themselves as uncertain predictions.
The models have been trained on bank data. However, for future deployment, Geomatic would like
to also have the model predict for other business environments such as insurance or telecompanies. The
obstacles would likely be the same in those environments, but one should consider how to transfer the
models and learnings from this project into new environments.
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The objectives of this thesis were to investigate whether a supervised machine learning algorithm would
be able to assess the performance of Danish households’ loan performance based on demographic and
real-estate data only and whether using more advanced models on less descriptive data would exceed
the performance of logistic regression on real bank data. An objective that seemed to be a diﬀicult,
but manageable, classification problem turned into be quite diﬀicult due to the statistical nature of
the demographic variables. The problems that were expected to occur were due to imbalanced data
and features that might be less capable of explaining the target value than the features a bank would
use. However, what caused the main problem was the statistical nature of the data which caused label
noise for the algorithms. The models found it troublesome to classify the observations for which the
important features shared the same value but the true classification differed making it diﬀicult to detect
the pattern in the data.
Investigating the data determined that the available features do not hold a lot of discriminative
power which is represented in the results as well. The cause of the weak features cannot likely be
attributed to a single cause. The data is old, statistically uncertain, and lacks financial variables, which
caused data noise. Consequently, choosing Geomatic data that holds the advantage of representing the
entire Denmark, is a tradeoff with accuracy. This thesis suggested using generalized data from Geo-
matic to build a tool for assessing households to the extent of leads only because of the argument that
we could then use more advanced models that proved better results in the research but that banks are
not allowed to use because of low interpretability. The thesis found that the advantages of the advanced
models were mitigated by the generalized data, and thus overall the accuracy of the predictions where
not improved.
Based on the performance metrics, the models are only slightly better than random and have sur-
prisingly no significant differences among them. It was expected that the logistic regression would be
exceeded to great extent by the other models as seen in previous research, but this was not the case
for this project. The confusion matrices revealed that all models have similar prediction patterns. The
performance is biased by these outliers in the data as the data itself appears random at times. The
models learn some patterns quickly, but the learning plateaus after only a third of the total observations.
Consequently, the models do not benefit from the large training set size.
It is clear that the model cannot and should not be used to directly determine a loan for a cus-
tomer, this classification should be reserved to the bank. The thesis found that the models can be used
for credit risk assessment to the extent of determining whether a household is a suitable lead. The
generated leads for the bank can be chosen with varying statistical uncertainty leading to fewer false
negatives on behalf of more false positives. Despite the varying risks, the credit risk assessment tool
will provide the banks with more qualified leads than random marketing.
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
(a) Municipality
(b) Business
(c) Holiday owner
(d) Employment status
Figure A.1: Countplot of categorical variables
==PAGE:64==
A An Appendix
57
(a) Log loss
(b) Brier
(c) F1
Figure A.2: Learning curves for XGBoost for all metrics
(a) Log loss
(b) Brier
(c) F1
Figure A.3: Learning curves for Logistic regression for all metrics
==PAGE:65==
A An Appendix
58
(a) Log loss
(b) Brier
(c) F1
Figure A.4: Learning curves for Random Forest for all metrics
(a) Log loss
(b) Brier
(c) F1
Figure A.5: Learning curves for Neural Network for all metrics
==PAGE:66==
A An Appendix
59
(a) FP
(b) FN
Figure A.6: Descriptives of false negatives and false positives for the most important features
==PAGE:67==
A An Appendix
60
Figure A.7: features from 0-32
==PAGE:68==
A An Appendix
61
Figure A.8: features from 33-63
==PAGE:69==
A An Appendix
62
Figure A.9: logarithmic plot of neural network
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[BMR20]
Siddharth Bhatore, Lalit Mohan, and Y Raghu Reddy. “Machine learning techniques for
credit risk evaluation: a systematic literature review.” In: Journal of Banking and Financial
Technology 4 (2020), pages 111–138. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s42786-020-00020-
3.
[CG16]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data
mining. 2016, pages 785–794.
[Che22]
Tianqi Chen. XGBoost. 2022. url: https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/.
[Cho+15]
Francois Chollet et al. Keras. 2015. url: https : / / keras . io / api / models / model _
training_apis/.
[Dum+22]
Elena Dumitrescu et al. “Machine learning for credit scoring: Improving logistic regression
with non-linear decision-tree effects.” In: European Journal of Operational Research 297.3
(2022), pages 1178–1192.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
[GT00]
J Galindo and P Tamayo. “Credit Risk Assessment Using Statistical and Machine Learning:
Basic Methodology and Risk Modeling Applications.” In: Computational Economics 15
(2000), pages 107–143. doi: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008699112516.
[Gun+21]
Björn Rafn Gunnarsson et al. “Deep learning for credit scoring: Do or don’t?” In: European
Journal of Operational Research 295.1 (2021), pages 292–305.
[Has+09]
Trevor Hastie et al. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and pre-
diction. Volume 2. Springer, 2009.
[Kan+15]
Teerapat Kansadub et al. “Stroke risk prediction model based on demographic data.”
In: 2015 8th Biomedical Engineering International Conference (BMEiCON). IEEE. 2015,
pages 1–3.
[Les+15]
Stefan Lessmann et al. “Benchmarking state-of-the-art classification algorithms for credit
scoring: An update of research.” In: European Journal of Operational Research 247.1 (2015),
pages 124–136.
[LZF22]
Jiaming Liu, Sicheng Zhang, and Haoyue Fan. “A two-stage hybrid credit risk prediction
model based on XGBoost and graph-based deep neural network.” In: Expert Systems with
Applications 195 (2022), page 116624.
[Mur22]
Kevin P Murphy. Probabilistic machine learning: an introduction. MIT press, 2022.
[Ped+23a]
F. Pedregosa et al. 2023. url: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html.
[Ped+23b]
F. Pedregosa et al. Scikit-learn logistic regression. 2023. url: https://scikit-learn.
org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html.
[Ras14]
Sebastian Raschka. Naive Bayes and Text Classification. August 2014. url: https://
sebastianraschka.com/Articles/2014_naive_bayes_1.html.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
64
[Sch22]
Marc Schmitt. “Deep Learning vs. Gradient Boosting: Benchmarking state-of-the-art ma-
chine learning algorithms for credit scoring.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10535 (2022).
[Sta20]
Josh Starmer. XGBoost Part 3 (of 4): Mathematical Details. Youtube. 2020. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVFeW798-2I.
[tib23]
tibco. What is a Random Forest? 2023. url: https://www.tibco.com/reference-
center/what-is-a-random-forest.
[tir22]
tirumalachandraveni. CART (Classification And Regression Tree) in Machine Learning.
September 2022. url: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/cart-classification-and-
regression-tree-in-machine-learning/.
[Wan+19]
Yuanchao Wang et al. “A hybrid ensemble method for pulsar candidate classification.” In:
Astrophysics and Space Science 364 (August 2019). doi: 10.1007/s10509-019-3602-4.
==PAGE:72==
