==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis
Active learning for biomedical image segmentation using U-Net
Selma Elisabeth Haslund Meyer (s163740)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
c
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Advances within deep learning have increased interest in applying these methods to a variety of appli-
cation areas replacing existing manual methods as well as producing faster and more precise results.
One of the application areas is medical image segmentation. This project centers around brain tu-
mor segmentation and utilizes the BraTS 2020 data set. As for other medical image segmentation
tasks, brain tumor segmentation requires to be carried out by expert radiologists, which is a tedious,
time-consuming, and error-prone task. As a consequence manual segmentation of brain tumors is an
expensive process to run. Solving the task using deep learning also has some shortcomings, including
the fact that obtaining the necessary amount of annotated medical data to train a deep learning model
is also an expensive procedure, as annotations need to be created by the above-mentioned highly paid
medical professionals.
This project is twofold and investigates how modified U-net models can solve brain tumor segmen-
tation and how quantifying model uncertainty can work as a substitute for an active learning setup
applying uncertainty sampling. This is examined by a number of experiments, first aiming to train a
U-net model to perform satisfactory segmentation performance. Subsequently, a deep ensemble model
is trained, to see if both segmentation performance can be increased, and uncertainty estimation can
be improved.
The model’s segmentation performance is evaluated using Dice score and uncertainty estimation is
evaluated by measuring the model’s calibration using the expected calibration error (ECE). Results
show that the U-net models used in this project are not able to achieve a good performance and that
more specialized U-net modifications are required to reproduce the segmentation performance obtained
in the literature relevant to this project. The evaluation of model uncertainty yielded a low calibration
error but literature suggests to be critical of using ECE for evaluation of model calibration since it
has numerous flaws. Therefore it can not be concluded whether the models of this project were well
calibrated or not.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
in Engineering degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
The project was supervised by Michael Riis Andersen associate professor at the Department of Ap-
plied Mathematics and Computer Science - Cognitive Systems at the Technical University of Denmark.
Selma Elisabeth Haslund Meyer
(s163740)
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2023
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
BraTS Dataset
5
2.1
Data split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Class distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Data reprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory
9
3.1
Semantic image segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
U-net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Attention U-net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Uncertainty quantification in neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Active learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Method
18
4.1
Initial ideas in the project - Establishing a baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Model architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Experiment setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Experiment results
24
5.1
Architecture and hyperparameter experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Experiments with deep ensembles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Discussion
38
6.1
Class imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
6.2
Evaluation of the U-net models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Performance increase using deep ensembles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Estimating model uncertainty using deep ensemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
44
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
A common method used in biomedical image analysis is semantic segmentation. The method can, among
many application usages, be applied as a way of distinguishing between organs, lesions, tumors, healthy
tissue, and background in medical images. Because of this semantic segmentation plays a crucial role for
doctors when analysing patient conditions, providing accurate diagnosis, as well as creating treatment
plans [Li+21]. Moreover, this method offers an alternative to other methods used for diagnosing which
can be potentially harmful for the patients. In the specific case of diagnosing brain tumors, doctors
can either take a biopsy and/or diagnose merely by using medical images. The biopsy is an invasive
procedure where the surgery can have a potentially fatal outcome and is compared to the non-invasive
method of image segmentation, also more costly and time-consuming [Bat+22]. For this reason, the
interest in medical image segmentation is great. One of the common methods to obtain medical images
for brain tumor diagnosis is Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The MRI scans are often multimodal,
meaning that different techniques have been applied to the image allowing for each modality to enhance
different features in the image, hereby providing diverse contrast information about the tumor. Mul-
timodal MRI scans are often examined by an experienced radiologist in order to segment the tumor
region as well as tumor subregions namely the necrotic region, active region, and edema, making this
manual task lengthy, and prone to bias and human error. The combination of this task being tedious
and advancements within the field of deep learning has led to extensive research on how to solve this
type of task using deep learning [Bat+22]. These deep learning-based methods for segmentation have
become state-of-the-art across a broad variety of segmentation tasks, such as autonomous vehicles, face
detection, and medical image analysis. However, a key drawback is that deep learning methods often
require large amounts of annotated training data. In the field of deep learning, the size and quality of
data sets are always of the essence when striving to achieve satisfactory model performance [Sha+19].
In spite of big data sets being largely available, obtaining the required and correctly labeled data for
specific tasks can be a costly process. This is especially true for medical image data since annotation
of data is a manual task which requires medical expert knowledge which only a small group of highly
specialized medical professionals possess. Additionally the labeling needs to be on a pixel level, which
is results in the process being time-consuming.
It is clear that there exists a need for optimizing the usage of data sets when working with medi-
cal image segmentation. Due to the nature of deep learning and the requirement for large training data
sets, a lot of research has been carried out investigating how to achieve good accuracy even if data is
sparse. The concept within machine learning, called active learning, offers exactly that. The main idea
behind active learning is that the model is first trained on a small initial dataset, and then by itself is
able to choose additional data from a large pool of data. The model chooses the data that it deems
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Research questions
2
can best optimize the training process. This data is then included in the initial dataset, and the model
is trained again on the newly extended dataset. This process of choosing new data, including it in the
already existing dataset, and retrain the model is carried out in an iterative manner. Due to the method
being iterative the dataset will increase over time as well as contain the data most suited for solving
the model’s task since each data point in the data set is actively selected with the aim of optimizing
the training of the model. Hereby active learning makes it possible to obtain the same level of model
performance using a smaller dataset, as models trained on bigger data sets using standard “passive”
learning methods [Bur12]. Apart from training on less data which is computationally preferable, active
learning also results in cheaper acquisition of data as only the data point selected by the model will have
to be manually annotated. But as one could imagine it is of utmost importance how the model selects
new data points. The active learning method will be less eﬀicient if the model chooses unfavourable
data and vice versa. Therefore, the data selection in active learning is of the essence, if wanting to gain
benefits from the method. The selection of data can be divided into two sub categories; one focusing
on uncertainty sampling, the other on diversity sampling. This project focuses on uncertainty sampling.
Since the data selection process in active learning relies on uncertainty, deep learning models must
be able to capture this uncertainty, in order to select the most optimal data to include in the dataset.
If the uncertainty of the model is more accurate the model can more easily select the data it is the
most uncertain about and which will optimize the training the most. Unfortunately, most standard
deep learning models are only able to capture uncertainty to some degree and not able to capture an
accurate estimate of the uncertainty [GIG17]. To overcome this challenge deep learning models with
approximate Bayesian inference are applied, yielding the uncertainty quantification needed to compute
the uncertainty sampling in active learning. Empirical results show that using approximate Bayesian
method for quantifying uncertainty improves the uncertainty quality and reliability. The quality of
uncertainty can be evaluated by examining the model calibration. When a model is well calibrated it
ensures that the model’s predicted outcome is reliable and can be trusted, which is a crucial capability
for models used within critical application areas, such as medical diagnosis. The question that remains
is whether a model with better uncertainty estimation in practice improves active learning.
1.1
Research questions
The goal of this project is to investigate model uncertainty for a high complexity semantic segmentation
task using medical images. The dataset used is the BraTS 2020 dataset, a semantic segmentation task
of classifying brain tumors divided into 3 classes. The uncertainty quantification can be used as a way
of predicting how beneficial implementing active learning methods will be, working as a kind of proxy
for an actual active learning setup. This can be formulated into the following questions:
1. Is a U-net model able to achieve good segmentation performance on the BraTS dataset?
2. Is the segmentation performance increased when using an ensemble of models?
3. To which degree is a U-net model calibrated?
4. Is a deep ensemble model better calibrated than a single model with corresponding architecture?
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Literature review
3
1.2
Literature review
Model architecture for image segmentation. Since 2015 where U-net was introduced this model
architecture, which is based on convolutional layers organized in an encoder-decoder structure, has
become the new standard for image segmentation tasks. U-Net is designed specifically for biomedical
image segmentation but can be used for various semantic segmentation tasks [RFB15]. Since U-Net
emerged the architecture has been modified and optimized in numerous ways to accommodate new
tasks and improve performance [Sid+21]. An example is the attention U-net which extends the standard
architecture with attention gates which highlight prominent image features. This is specifically beneficial
when segmenting smaller organs like the pancreas [Okt+18].
U-net has also been optimized specifically to improve performance on Brain MRI image tasks often
in relation to the Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation Challenge (BraTS). Some papers propose
incorporating attention blocks in classical U-nets [NBM19], simple lightweight U-Nets [Wal+22], or
extending with Residual extended skips (RES) and customized loss functions [Reh+20], while others use
a 3D U-Net structure [Fut+21], [BM21]. All aim to improve performance on Brain MRI segmentation
tasks.
The original U-Net works with 2D inputs, but more recently papers have proposed to convert the
U-net structure from taking 2D inputs to 3D inputs. This is properly due to the continuous increase in
computer power making this architecture feasible, as well as the obvious fact that MRI scans by default
are 3D and image prepossessing tasks can be significantly reduced by substituting a 2D pipeline for
one handling the natural 3D inputs. In a study comparing the performance difference of using a 2D
U-Net as opposed to a 3D U-Net on brain MRI scans it is argued that the 3D architecture performs
better than the equivalent 2D architecture measured by the Dice coeﬀicient, a metric evaluating spatial
overlap, and in addition requires less training data to reach a higher performance [WL21]. Another
study working with segmentation of MRI scans of abdominal organs such as, kidney, liver etc. argues
that a 2D U-Net is clearly favorable compared to it is 3D counterpart and that the 2D architecture
generally performs better across various organs when measured on Dice coeﬀicient. The study also
takes training time and memory usage into account as an argument for why the 2D U-Net is preferable
[ZM21].
Several parameters have to be taken into consideration when selecting which U-Net architecture to
apply to your task. One aspect which seems to affect the outcome is the data type. Another thing to
keep in mind is the dataset size. When converting 3D MRI scans to 2D slices the dataset size is dra-
matically increased. This is also a determining factor since dataset size frequently impacts performance,
overfitting tendencies and generalization abilities. Finally, the task scope should be considered when
choosing between a 2D and 3D U-Net, since it affects training time and preprocessing tasks.
Active learning and uncertainty. Literature on active learning setups working with brain tumor
segmentation where the models used are modified U-nets are proposed by [Nat+21], [Sha+19]. Both
of these papers find that the size of the training data can be dramatically reduced when applying ac-
tive learning using uncertainty sampling. Active learning methods which rely on uncertainty sampling
require that the models used are able to capture the true underlying uncertainty as closely as possible
since it will result in a more optimal acquisition of additional data to the training set. Different ways of
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Literature review
4
estimating deep neural networks’ uncertainty have been proposed. Popular methods are Monte Carlo
dropout (MC dropout) as proposed in [GG15] and deep ensembles proposed in [HE21]. Both methods
generate more reliable model uncertainty by approximating Bayesian inference. Papers such as [Bel+18]
investigate how the uncertainty quality of models affects the models’ usability in active learning. The
paper compares MC dropout and ensemble methods in an active learning setup and indicates that
applying an ensemble of models improves active learning methods and results in a smaller training data
set being needed to obtain good segmentation performance, as opposed to MC dropout.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
BraTS Dataset
The dataset used in this project is the BraTS 2020 training dataset [Kra20]. The dataset consists of 3D
MRI scans in a nifti file format. The MRI scans are multimodal and consists of four different scanning
methods:
• Native (T1)
• Post-contrast T1-weighted (T1ce)
• T2-weighted (T2)
• T2 Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR)
The MRI scans are obtained using different scanners and clinical protocols from 19 different institutions.
In order to create the associated masks the brain scans have been segmented and labeled manually and
verified by professional neuro-radiologists. The masks are annotated into the following four classes:
• Background — label 0: Healthy tissue and background
• TC— label 1: Necrotic and non-enhancing tumor core
• ED — label 2: Peritumoral edema
• ET — label 4: GD-enhancing tumor, this label is changed from 4 to 3 to ease code implemen-
tation in the project.
The complete dataset consists of 372 multimodel MRI scans each representing a patient. Each vol-
umetric image has a size of 250 × 250 × 155 including all four modalities the dimensions become:
250 × 250 × 155 × 4 [Spy20].
Figure 2.1: Data visualisation for all four modalities and the corresponding mask for a coronal slice.
Data point is from the train set. Notice how it is one a small part of the total mask which attributes
to the foreground pixels (TC + ED + ET). Legend showing which class each color in the mask
belongs to.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Data split
6
Figure 2.2: Visualization of the dataset split
Original
dataset size
Preprocessed
dataset size
Train
237
150,495
Validation
60
38,100
Test
75
47,625
Total
372
236,220
Table 2.1: Table showing dataset split sizes
before and after preprocessing.
2.1
Data split
The full dataset is split into three subsets, namely training, validation (val), and test dataset. Firstly
20% of the dataset is set aside as a test set for which the models can be evaluated after training time.
Of the remaining 80% another 20% is used as validation set and the remainder becomes the training
set, see figure 2.2 and table 2.1 for specifics. The training set is the labeled data from which the model
learns, and the validation set is used to monitor the model’s performance during training, such that
relevant hyperparameters can be tuned. The preprocessing of data points is done after the split.
2.2
Class distribution
When working with classification tasks it is always important to consider the class distribution of
the dataset, since class imbalance can lead to misclassification and a bad generalization ability. The
distribution of background and foreground pixels is found in table 2.5, the distribution among foreground
classes can be found in table 2.2, which also shows how the classes are distributed for each data split.
Figure 2.3: Data visualization for all four modalities and the corresponding mask for a coronal slice
from the train set. This is an example of one of a mask with a large tumor. Legend showing which
class each color in the mask belongs to
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Class distribution
7
Figure 2.4: Data visualization for all four modalities and the corresponding mask for a coronal slice
from the train set. The mask is only containing one class. The legend shows which class each color in
the mask belongs to.
Class
Label distribution
Background
98.9%
TD + ED + ET
1.1%
Figure 2.5: Tabled showing the distribution be-
tween background labels and foreground (TC, ED,
ET) labels in the total dataset. This distribution
is mirrored for each of the data splits train, valida-
tion, and test.
TC
ED
ET
Train
22 %
58%
20%
Validation
24%
55%
21%
Test
20%
61%
19%
Total
22%
58%
20%
Table 2.2: Table showing the class
distribution for each of the dataset
splits based on percentage-wise pixel
representation in the mask (not
including background pixels label 0)
Figure 2.6: An illustration of the three different planes coronal, sagittal, and transversal/axial.
Figure from [Wal+22].
==PAGE:14==
2.3 Data reprocessing
8
2.3
Data reprocessing
Since the chosen neural networks used in the project only handle 2D inputs, the three dimensional MRI
scans will have to be converted to 2D images. This is done by slicing the images and corresponding
masks through all three planes (coronal, sagittal, and transversal/axial) of the brain scans as proposed
in [Wal+22]. Since the image slices from each plane will vary in size a fixed common size for all images
needs to be set. A size of 128 × 128 is used as proposed in [Wal+22]. Hereby reducing inputs from
a size of 250 × 250 × 155 × 4 to 128 × 128 × 4 when including all four modalities. Since each nifti
file is converted to 635 individual data points the complete data set ends up having a size of 236.220
images, see table 2.1. Ideally, it would have been possible to first preprocess the data before dividing it
into training, validation, and test splits. In this way creating more diversity within each dataset split.
Unfortunately, it proved a more diﬀicult task than anticipated, and because of this, the dataset split
is done previously to data preprocessing. When creating the datasets for training, validating, and test
the originally 3D images are converted to 2D images on the fly just before training and evaluating the
models.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
This chapter covers the theoretical foundation on which the project is based. The basis of the project
is a deep learning model which can solve medical image semantic segmentation tasks. For this purpose
variations of the U-net architecture have been used, and both baseline U-net and attention U-net will be
explained. Later deep ensembles and how their ability to approximate Bayesian inference can be used
to predict model uncertainty will be covered, and how uncertainty plays an important role in active
learning.
3.1
Semantic image segmentation
Image segmentation is a concept within computer vision which detects regions of specific texture and
edges between different textures in an image. Semantic segmentation is a classification task. In semantic
image segmentation, the objective is to assign a class label to each pixel or voxel in an image, based
on what the given pixel represents. In practice, this means that given an image input of size, heigth ×
width×channel a segmentation map of the size heigth×width×1 will be created, but where each image
pixel instead of being assigned a color value is assigned a class label value. When working with deep
learning models, the output of the model will have the size heigth×width×class, corresponding to one-
hot encoding the segmentation map [LDY19], [JOR18]. In recent years semantic image segmentation
tasks have mainly been solved using deep learning models, but there also exist classical methods not
involving deep learning. In deep learning the most simple classification task can be described as y = f(x),
where y is the output, x is the input and f is the function the model produces to solve the classification
task: f : Rn →{1, ..., k}, where k is the number of classes. Moreover it is common that the model
predicts a probability distribution over classes instead of a fixed numerical class value. Hence the model
should estimate the probability of each pixel in the image belonging to each class. More formally the
probability that a pixel in the input x ∈RH×W is classified as a given class k for the corresponding
predicted output ˆy ∈{1, ..., k}H×W , can be defined as P(yi,j = k|x) Where yi,j is the pixel at coordinate
i, j. For the specific input xn the predicted output can be expressed as: Pn,i,j,k = P(yn,i,j = k|xn)
To optimize the learning process of the mapping between the input and the output a loss function
is applied. The loss function measures the difference between the predicted output and the target, such
that this value can be decreased during training. For semantic segmentation tasks, cross entropy loss
(CE loss) is widely used and is defined as.
CELoss = −1
n
N
!
n=1
H
!
i=1
W
!
j=1
K
!
k=1
yn,i,j,k · log(Pn,i,j,k)
(3.1)
==PAGE:16==
3.2 U-net
10
Where yn,i,j,k is the target and Pn,i,j,k is the probability of the predicted pixel at coordinate i, j for
image n of size width and height W × H and class k. The loss is calculated for each pixel, not taking
neighboring pixels into account. Because of this, the cross entropy can be sensitive to class imbalance
in the dataset [El +21]. The next sections will explain two specific deep learning models which are
designed for semantic image segmentation tasks.
3.2
U-net
3.2.1
Overall Architecture
U-net is designed specifically to solve biomedical image segmentation tasks and quickly gained popularity
when it was first proposed in 2015.
The U-net is based upon fully convolutional networks and is
structured in an encoder-decoder architecture consisting of multiple convolutional layers with skip
connections [RFB15]. The encoder, sometimes referred to as the contracting path, consists of 4 encoder
blocks, followed by a bridge/bottleneck/baseline convolutional block. Hereafter comes the decoder, or
expanding path, which also contains 4 decoder blocks, mirroring the encoder. This specific symmetrical
encoder-decoder structure is shaped like a U, as seen in figure 3.1 and this is how the U-net got it’s
name. The structure also means that the segmentation can be learned in an end-to-end fashion, such
that the predicted segmentation is corresponding in size to the raw input image. Before going into depth
with the specific encoder and decoder structure the basics of the building blocks, namely convolutional
Figure 3.1: The U-net architecture illustration from the original paper [RFB15].
==PAGE:17==
3.2 U-net
11
layers and pooling layers will be accounted for.
3.2.2
Convolutional layers
Convolutional layers are used in a broad variety of architectures working with image data. Originally
it was designed for 2D images, but later on, it has been expanded to a 3D version applied to 3D images.
The U-net works with 2D images and hence also 2D convolutional layers, which this section will focus on.
Convolutional layers are designed to extract features from images. It does so by applying a convolution
operation on the input image producing an output called a featuremap. In essence, the convolutional
operation can be seen as an element-wise matrix multiplication between the image and a smaller matrix
referred to as the filter or kernel. The filter is passed along the input from left to right and top to
bottom. At each step, a value for the featueremap is computed by multiplying the input and filter’s
corresponding pixel values and subsequently summarizing all values, as visualized in figure 3.2. The
size of the step the kernel convolves over the input is referred to as the stride.
3.2.3
Max pooling
A max pooling layer is one of many pooling layer variations. The principle is similar to that of con-
volution, a computation is carried out on a small subsection of the input with a given stride, yielding
an output of intensified information and reduced dimensionality. Commonly max pooling is of the size
2x2 and with stride 2, effectively halving the image inputs width and height. Instead of computing a
convolutional operation, max pooling computes the maximum value of the selected image pixels as seen
in figure 3.2. By doing so the the feature max is dramatically reduced in size reducing computational
cost, but it also induces translation invariance to the network. This entails that if the inputted values
are translated hereby shifting all values most values outputted by the pooling layer would still represent
the same value as before the translation. In practice, this invariance makes the network able to say if
a feature is present rather than where exactly it is located [GBC16].
Figure 3.2: An illustration of a convolution operation using a 3x3 filter and of a 2x2 max pooling
operation with stride 2
==PAGE:18==
3.2 U-net
12
3.2.4
Encoder
The encoder in the U-net architecture consists of four similar blocks. In each block, the input is fed
through two convolutional layers with kernel size 3x3 and stride 1. The convolution is zero padded,
making the output from the convolution smaller than the original by 2 pixels in both width and height.
For each block the out channels of the convolutional layer are doubled, graduating from 64 to 128,
then 256, and finally 512. In essence, the out channels are an indicator of how many kernels have
been applied to the input during the convolution. Having many different kernels convolve over the
same input ensures that different features are captured and improves the model’s ability to generalize.
The convolution is followed by a ReLU activation function which obtains non-linearity. After the two
convolutions have been carried out the block is finalized by a 2x2 max pooling operation with stride
2, followed by a dropout layer, which according to the original paper should “perform implicit data
augmentation”. The encoder and decoder are connected via a bottleneck block which simply consists
of two convolutional layers with kernel 3x3 and stride 1. Besides this block, the encoder and decoder
are also connected using skip connections. The output from each encoder block is fed into the opposite
corresponding decoder block inducing an improved gradient flow as well as assisting the network in
including features of varying size in the upsampling of the segmentation.
3.2.5
Decoder
The decoder also consists of four blocks each mirroring the opposite encoder block. A block firstly
consists of a transposed convolution using a 2x2 kernel with stride 2, see figure 3.3 for illustration of
transposed convolutions. This convolution, also referred to as an up convolution, expands the output
in both width and height such that it becomes twice as large, as well as halves the number of channels.
This output and the feature map from the corresponding encoder block are then concatenated. Finally,
the feature map is fed to two convolutional layers with kernel 3x3 and stride 1, each followed by a Relu
activation function, just as in the encoder blocks. When the feature map reaches the final decoder
block it has regained it’s original size due to the transposed convolutions. To finalize the segmented
output the feature map is passed through a 1x1 convolutional layer mapping the feature channels into
the desired number of classes.
Figure 3.3: An illustration of a transposed convolution operation using a 2x2 kernel with stride 2
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Attention U-net
13
3.3
Attention U-net
Attention U-net, proposed in 2018, builds upon the standard U-net [Okt+18]. And is originally designed
to handle 3D image inputs, but can also be altered to handle 2D images. It modifies the original U-
net architecture with attention gates. The modifications are designed to capture features of targets
with varying shapes and sizes. This trait is useful when working with medical image datasets such
as cardiac, lung, abdominal CT, and MRI scans, where the target organs/areas differ significantly in
shape and size depending on the patient. The attention gates are inserted before the skip connection is
concatenated with the upsampling feature maps in the expanding path. The attention gates are hereby
able to emphasize the prominent features passed along the skip connection and filter out noisy and
irrelevant features. Before the specifics of the attention gate used in the attention U-net are explained,
a quick explanation of attention types will be covered.
3.3.1
Attention gate
The attention gates proposed in attention U-net are a sort of soft self attention. In essence, the atten-
tion gates work by applying an attention coeﬀicient, denoted α, to the input feature map from the skip
connection. This is done using element-wise multiplication. The feature map from the skip connection
is hereby scaled according to importance, highlighting salient features and diminishing redundant irrel-
evant features. The attention coeﬀicient is computed using additive attention, based on the two inputs
given to the attention gate, namely the gating signal, g, and the feature map from the skip connection,
xl. The additive attention can be mathematically expressed as:
ql
att = ψT (σ1(W T
x xl
i + W T
g gi + bg)) + bψ
(3.2)
αl
i = σ2(ql
att(xl
i, gi; Θatt))
(3.3)
To better understand additive attention let’s start by understanding the inputs given to the attention
gate.
The gating signal is image-grid based, which allows for the attention coeﬀicient to focus on
certain local regions. The actual gating signal is obtained from the previous low layer of the model and
is conditioned on the spatial information of images. Since it is obtained from a lower level in the model
it has better feature representation but is also half the size of the input from the skip connection. This
is why the feature map xl is down-sampled during the linear transformation, Wx ∈RFl×Fint where Fl
is the number of feature maps in layer l, (computed using 1x1x1 convolution with stride) effectively
Figure 3.4: An illustration of the attention gate used in attention U-net from the paper [Okt+18].
==PAGE:20==
3.4 Uncertainty quantification in neural networks
14
halving the size, to match the resolution of the gating signal. The gating signal is also passed through a
linear transformation, Wg ∈RFg×Fint where Fg is the feature maps in the gating signal g, before the two
inputs are summed element-wise. The summarised weights are then passed through a ReLU activation,
σ1 see equation 3.4, and another linear transformation, ψ ∈RFint×F1, reducing the dimension of the
channels to 1. Finally, the weights are passed through a sigmoid activation, σ2 see equation 3.5, before
it is being upsampled to a dimension matching the input, xl, using trilinear interpolation. The feature
map from the skip connection can now be element-wise multiplied with the weighted attention coeﬀicient
α, before being passed on to the network. This element-wise multiplication can formally be described
as: ˆxl
i,c = xl
i,c · αl
i
ReLU:
σ1(x) = max(0, x)
(3.4)
Sigmoid:
σ2(x) =
1
1 + exp(−x)
(3.5)
3.4
Uncertainty quantification in neural networks
The need for quantifying deep learning models’ uncertainty is crucial in many real-world applications,
especially for high-risk tasks such as medical diagnostics [HE21].
When the predictive uncertainty
of a model is available inputs yielding a highly uncertain prediction can be passed on to humans
and handled manually, for instance in a “human in the loop” setting, allowing for safer outcomes,
and better model performance. Bayesian probability theory allows for mathematical understanding
and reasoning regarding model uncertainty. Unfortunately, computing Bayesian inference for neural
networks is troublesome.
Because of this several methods of approximation for Bayesian inference
in neural networks are proposed. Known methods include Laplace approximation and Markov chain
Monte Carlo. This section will cover how dropout and deep ensembles can be interpreted and work as
Bayesian approximations, as well as the basics of Bayesian inference.
3.4.1
Bayesian inference
The essence of Bayesian methods within machine learning is using probability distributions to estimate
and quantify uncertainty. We do so by updating our beliefs about some parameters based on observed
data. In order to do so Bayes rule is used:
p(θ|D) = p(D|θ)p(θ)
p(D)
(3.6)
Where D is the observed data and θ is a hypothesis. p(D|θ) corresponds to the likelihood which is a
distribution that quantifies the data based on the hypnosis θ, p(θ) is the prior which is the belief about
the θ before having seen the data and can be defined based on expert knowledge around the field. p(D)
is the marginal likelihood (evidence) and p(θ|D) is the posterior.
The denominator in Bayes rule can be seen as a constant, when considered as a constant of the pa-
rameters and not dependent on θ, because of this Bayes rule can be simplified as the posterior being
==PAGE:21==
3.4 Uncertainty quantification in neural networks
15
propositional to the likelihood and prior:
p(θ|D) ∝p(D|θ)p(θ)
(3.7)
The predictive distribution, see equation 3.8 is obtained by averaging over the posterior, essentially
integrating over the likelihood multiplied by the posterior.
p(y∗|x∗, D) =
"
p(y∗|x∗, θ)p(θ|D), dθ
(3.8)
In some cases, the predictive distribution can be evaluated exactly and found in a closed form. Un-
fortunately, this is not the case for neural networks. The reason for this is that neural networks are
highly nonlinear and possess weight-space symmetries making it complicated to compute the posterior
[Bis07]. For this reason, the posterior needs to be approximated, leading us to the next sections where
two Bayesian approximation methods will be explained.
3.4.2
Dropout as a Bayesian approximation
Dropout is a well known regularization technique within deep learning and it is widely used as a way
of preventing overfitting in neural networks.
In neural networks, dropout can be seen as a way of
thinning the network by for a period of time removing nodes, and the associated connections. This is
done with a predefined probability, p given by the Bernoulli distribution Bernoulli(p) during training
time[Sri+14]. A visualization of how a network looks before and after dropout can be seen in figure
3.5. The idea of using dropout not only during training but also at test time is proposed in the paper
“Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning” and is
referred to as Monte Carlo drop out (MC dropout) [GG15]. Normally dropout will be disabled at test
time, such that the input will be predicted in a deterministic manner. The opposite is true when doing
MC drop out, in this method dropout is enabled during test time. Predicting the same input a number
of times using MC dropout will hence create a number of different predictions. Because of this MC
dropout can also be viewed as a technique for “approximately combining exponentially many different
neural network architectures eﬀiciently”, meaning that dropout can be seen as a deep ensemble model
Figure 3.5: Figure showing a network with and without dropout. When applying dropout some
nodes and corresponding connections are “turned off”. Figure from [Sri+14].
==PAGE:22==
3.5 Active learning
16
approach [Sri+14]. Each stochastic forward pass through the model creates a prediction y∗based on
some input x∗. Because MC dropout approximates Bayesian inference each prediction y∗can be seen
as a sample from the underlying approximate Bayesian inference distribution given by:
p(y∗|x∗, D) =
"
p(y∗|x∗, θ)q(θ), dθ
(3.9)
Where the random variables for a model with L layers is: θ = {Wi}L
i=1. With a number of samples
representing the predictive distribution one are able to estimate the predictive uncertainty.
3.4.3
Deep ensembles as a Bayesian approximation
Another way to quantify uncertainty in neural networks is by applying deep ensemble methods. In the
field of machine learning ensemble learning is a paradigm which encompass training multiple models,
so called weak learners, on the same problem after which they are combined, hereby improving the
predictive performance. Ensemble methods are often divided into two main categories boosting meth-
ods and randomization-based methods, such as random forest. In addition to improving performance
deep ensembles can also be used to generate calibrated predictive uncertainty quantification for neural
networks, a task which is normally challenging [LPB17]. This property of ensembles has been shown
empirically and has because of its implementation simplicity gained popularity [LPB17]. Uncertainty
quantification obtained using ensembles shows robustness towards out of distribution examples and
outperforms the other uncertainty method when exposed to distributional shift [Ova+19]. Besides it
has been shown that as few as 5 models account for a substantial gain in uncertainty quality [LPB17],
[Ova+19]. The predictive posterior distribution can be approximated as:
p(y∗|x∗, D) ≈1
M
M
!
i=1
p(y∗|x∗, θi)
(3.10)
Where M is the number of models used in the model ensemble, y∗is an output, x∗is an input, and θi
is the parameters in the ensemble model i.
3.5
Active learning
In this section, the active learning methods will briefly be explained as well as how it relates to uncer-
tainty. The core idea behind active learning is that model performance can be increased if the model
is able to decide which data points it should use for training. Further, this property entails that less
data are needed in order to achieve a good performance. Both of these features are of great interest
in the machine learning community. Active learning is performed in an iterative manner consisting of
what can be divided into four simple steps, given that the following criteria are satisfied. Firstly, there
exists a dataset with corresponding labels that can be used for the given task. Secondly, there exists
additional data, which does not have corresponding labels. Finally, there is an expert or oracle who is
able to label the unlabeled data [Bur12]. In practice, it is common to hold back a subset of the labeled
dataset and utilize this as the unlabeled data as well as the oracle, since it both contains the data and
the ground truth. The active learning method can be outlined by the following iterative steps:
==PAGE:23==
3.5 Active learning
17
1. Train the model on the dataset D.
2. The model samples a data point from the unlabeled data.
3. The oracle assigns a label to the data point.
4. The new data point and the corresponding label are added to the dataset D.
3.5.1
Acquisition functions and uncertainty
The manner of where to sample new unlabeled data from can be done in several ways. For practical
applications in active learning, pool-based sampling is the most commonly used, as this applies the
best to real world scenarios compared to the more theoretical sampling methods query synthesis and
stream-based selective sampling [Bur12]. In pool based sampling a large closed pool of unlabeled data is
available for sampling. Each time new samples have to be drawn from the pool the complete pool of data
is evaluated choosing the samples best fit for improving the model. When choosing which data points
to select the model applies an acquisition function to the data pool. These acquisition functions can be
divided into two, functions measuring representativeness or diversity and functions measuring model
uncertainty. The idea of diversity sampling is to select data points which are the most dissimilar from
other data points the model has encountered, hereby more effectively learning a representation of the
data feature space. Different from this strategy is uncertainty sampling where the focus lies on sampling
the data points from the pool which the model is the most uncertain about. Examples of acquisition
functions used for uncertainty sampling include max entropy, variation ratio, least confidence [Bur+22],
[GIG17]
3.5.2
Max entropy
Max entropy is a commonly used uncertainty acquisition function, and is given by:
H(Y ∗) =
W
!
i=1
H
!
j=1
E[−log p(y∗
i,j|x∗, D)]
(3.11)
H(Y ∗) = −
W
!
i=1
H
!
j=1
!
k
p(y∗
i,j = k|x∗, D) log p(y∗
i,j = k|x∗, D)
(3.12)
Where Y is the model output. The entropy will increase as the prediction for Y goes toward a uniform
distribution. If the predictions are uniformly distributed the model is assigning an equal probability
to each class, indicating that the model is very uncertain about which class the output corresponds to.
A data point yielding such uncertainty will be highly informative for the model and a good choice to
train on. If on the other hand, the predictions of one of the classes are very low or high the entropy will
not be large, because it indicates that the model is quite certain whether the predicted output either
belongs or not in a specific class [Bur12].
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 4
Method
This section will cover the methods used in the project.
First, an explanation of the initial ideas
and direction of the project will be reflected upon. Then the specific implementation details of model
architectures will be accounted for, as well as the motivation and background for choosing them. The
metrics used for evaluating the model performance and calibration will also be explained. Finally the
experiment setup will be laid out.
4.1
Initial ideas in the project - Establishing a baseline
Initially in the project a lot of attention was given to the paper “Active Learning with Bayesian UNet
for Eﬀicient Semantic Image Segmentation” [SC21] with the expectation of using it as a baseline. Many
factors in this paper made it compelling to use as a starting point.
First of all, it centers around
semantic image segmentation for biomedical images, applying four different cell segmentation datasets.
Secondly, it implements an active learning setup with a modified U-net model and Monte Carlo dropout.
Finally, the code created in relation to the paper was publicly available on Github 1 making it easy to
obtain implementation specific details. The idea was to implement the exact same pipeline as in the
paper, then reproduce the results, using one of the cell segmentation datasets, hereby verifying that the
U-net segmentation and active learning methods were working correctly. Hereby a baseline for the rest
of the project would have been established. When the pipeline had been verified the simple cell segmen-
tation data would have been switched for the more complex BraTS dataset. The U-net model would
hereafter be hyperparameter tuned in order to obtain good performance on the new BraTS dataset.
After achieving satisfactory model performance, active learning methods and experiments similar to
those of the paper would have been carried out.
First the U-net model was implemented as in the paper. The U-net is essentially a classic U-net
but modified by adding a batch normalization layer after each convolutional layer in both the encoder,
decoder, and bottleneck blocks. Additionally, dropout layers are added after each max pool layer. The
cell dataset PhC-C2DH-U373 was chosen for establishing the baseline after implementing the pipeline.
The dataset is available from the GitHub related to the paper and consists of 156 images and correspond-
ing annotations, including the additional data generated by data augmentation carried out in relation
to the research of the paper. The paper states that 14 classes are represented in the dataset. During the
initial dataset examination, it became apparent that the augmented PhC-C2DH-U373 dataset used in
the paper was quite unlike the original PhC-C2DH-U373 dataset [Kum]. The original dataset includes
both ground truth annotations and silver truth annotations, (annotations generated by a computer)
1https://github.com/charlesity/U_Net_experiments
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Initial ideas in the project - Establishing a baseline
19
Figure 4.1: Distribution overview for the number of different classes represented on each mask. It is
clear that the distribution of classes in each mask is of similar proportions in the original dataset’s
ground truth and silver truth. For the augmented data the class distribution is quite different
compared to the original dataset.
[Maš+23].
Contrary to the augmented dataset which contains 14 classes the original dataset only
contains 7 classes for the ground truth annotations and 8 classes for the silver truth annotation, all
excluding the background class. Upon further manual inspection of the augmented dataset, it became
increasingly more diﬀicult to understand the data. For one the class labels were not in the usual integer
range of Y = 1, ..., k, where k = 14 but were instead what seemed to be arbitrary float values2. When
investigating the class distribution for each mask the augmented data also differed from the original
data set. The original masks contain either 7 or 8 classes, whereas the augmented data also includes
masks with only 4, 5, and 6 classes see figure 4.1. This could though be explained by the shifts and
scaling applied during the data augmentation.
Figure 4.2: Visualisation of a mask from the augmented dataset containing 3 classes, background
class excluded. Notice the outline of the rightmost cell for class 1 and class 2. This cell outlining is
unusual compared to the original dataset.
Upon visual inspection, the augmented data also showed some unexpected features in the segmen-
tation masks. Some of the augmented masks would at first glance seem to contain a specific number
of classes, but when inspecting the pixel values in the mask it would reveal that the mask contained a
higher number of classes. An example of this is given in figure 4.2, when looking at the complete mask
it seems to contain 2 classes, one blue cell and one yellow cell, but when filtering the mask based on
20.00000000e00, 1.52590219e−05, 3.05180438e−05, 4.57770657e−05, 6.10360876e−05, 7.62951095e−05, 9.15541314e−
05, 1.06813153e−04, 3.92156886e−03, 7.84313772e−03, 1.17647061e−02, 1.56862754e−02, 1.96078438e−02, 2.35294122e−
02, 2.74509806e −02
==PAGE:26==
4.2 Model architectures
20
each actual label value it is apparent that the mask contains 3 classes. The first class seems to capture
the complete leftmost cell as well the outline of the right cell. Class 2 captures only the outline of the
right cell, whereas class 3 seems to capture the majority of the right cell. This mask behavior was not
found in the original masks, where classes seemed to only cover complete cells and never capture only
cell outlines. Because of the listed factors displayed by the augmented PhC-C2DH-U373 dataset used
in the paper it was diﬀicult to understand and work with it, mainly because one became uncertain
whether the labels were correctly annotated.
In the end, it was deemed too time-consuming to investigate and understand the augmented PhC-
C2DH-U373 data set, and as a result, the expected baseline was never established. Consequently, the
project work continued with only training segmentation models using the BraTS dataset.
4.2
Model architectures
The project explores four different model architectures, which are all U-net modifications. The first
U-net created is one identical to the one from the paper which was studied for use as a baseline
[SC21].
Since the U-net had already been implemented in the preliminary phase of the project it
was straightforward to use it for training on the BraTS dataset.
Additionally, this modified U-net
architecture demonstrated good performance on simpler image segmentation tasks, and it would be
interesting to see if the same good performance could be achieved when working with more complex
data such as the BraTS dataset. Bearing in mind, that the task of segmenting brain tumors is more
complex than cell segmentation it was anticipated that a simple U-net model might not be able to
perform well enough. For this reason, it was decided to also implement an attention U-net, which
supposedly should extract more prominent features and increase performance. In addition to these two
architectures, it would also be interesting to see how the number of trainable parameters in the network
affects the performance.
In general more complex tasks requires more complex models, with more
trainable parameters, in order to perform well, and because of this both the U-net and the attention
U-net was modified into extended versions. The extended U-net and extended attention U-net is simply
extended by doubling the number of convolutional layers, from 2 to 4, in each encoder, decoder, and
bottleneck blocks, hereby increasing the number of trainable parameters. The doubling of convolutional
layers is visualized in table 4.2 and table 4.1. From now on these four different models will be referred
to as U-net, attention U-net, extended U-net, and extended attention U-net.
Kernel size
Input
Output
Conv_layer 1
3 x 3
in_channel
in_channel
Conv_layer 2
3 x 3
in_channel
out_channel
Conv_layer 3
3 x 3
out_channel
out_channel
Conv_layer 4
3 x 3
out_channel
out_channel
Table 4.1: Overview of the convolutional layers used in the encoder, decoder, and bottleneck blocks
of the extended U-net and extended attention U-net.
==PAGE:27==
4.3 Evaluation metrics
21
Kernel size
Input
Output
Conv_layer 1
3 x 3
in_channel
out_channel
Conv_layer 2
3 x 3
out_channel
out_channel
Table 4.2: Overview of the convolutional layers used in the encoder, decoder, and bottleneck blocks
of the U-net and attention U-net.
4.3
Evaluation metrics
For evaluation purposes the metrics dice score and expected calibration error are used.
4.3.1
Dice score
For evaluating the models’ performances the metric Dice score is used. The Dice score is a commonly
used metric for evaluating image segmentation tasks. The Dice score is based on values derived from
the confusion matrix see figure 4.3 and is given by:
Dice score =
2 · TP
2 · TP + FN + FP
(4.1)
The Dice score essentially measures the overlap between the predicted segmentation and the ground
truth (GT) segmentation. For a binary classification task, the true positives (TP) are the part of pixels
where both the predicted pixel and the GT pixel are classified as the same belonging to the same class.
The false negatives (FN) are the pixels where the predicted pixels fail to capture the true underlying
class of the GT pixel. The false positive (FP) is the pixels where the predictions falsely classify the
pixel as belonging to the class. For evaluating the performance of the models the Dice score function
provided by TorchMetrics is used3, which can both handle multi class and binary classification. In this
project, it is decided to calculate the Dice score individually for each of the three classes, by doing so
tackling each class as an independent binary classification problem. Since the predicted segmentation
outputted by the models solves a multi class task and is represented by probabilities a threshold needs
to be set before computing the Dice score, determining whether a pixel belongs to the class or not.
Actual class
Positive
Negative
Predicted class
Positive
TP
FP
Negative
FN
TN
Table 4.3: Figure showing the confusion matrix.
3Dice: https://torchmetrics.readthedocs.io/en/stable/classification/dice.html
==PAGE:28==
4.4 Implementation details
22
4.3.2
Expected calibration error and reliability diagrams
In general, one can say that a model is well calibrated if the predicted probability ˆp of a class y always
equals the true probability p, given a dataset with inputs x and class labels y ∈{1, .., k}. This can be
formally described as [Nix+20]:
P(Y = y|ˆp = p) = p
(4.2)
The calibration error can then be described as the difference between Y = y and ˆp = p. In this project
for evaluation of whether the models are calibrated or not the metric expected calibration error (ECE)
is used. This calibration error is given by:
ECE =
M
!
m=1
|Bm|
N
|acc(Bm) −conf(Bm)|
(4.3)
where Bm is the samples of predictions in the bin m and N is the total number of predictions. acc(Bm)
is the accuracy of the bin which essentially is just the frequency of positive samples, and conf(Bm) is
the confidence of the bin, which is the average of predicted probabilities. This can formally be explained
as:
acc(Bm) =
1
|Bm|
!
i∈Bm
1(ˆyi = yi)
(4.4)
conf(Bm) =
1
|Bm|
!
i∈Bm
1(ˆpi)
(4.5)
Where ˆyi is the predicted class label for observation i and yi is the ground truth label. ˆpi is the predicted
probability for observation i. The implementation of ECE from TorchMetrics4 is used. ECE is designed
for binary classification problems and the ECE is computed for each class as a binary problem.
4.4
Implementation details
All models are implemented in Python using PyTorch. Most code is first implemented in Jupyter note-
books as a “proof of concept” and for easy debugging, subsequently the code is restructured and moved to
regular Python files, and pushed to GitHub. For training and evaluation purposes the high-performance
computing (HPC) service available at DTU is utilized. The HPC service offers several different nodes
with GPU, which are used for accelerating the training of the models using Cuda, allowing for scripts
to uptil 24 hours. In addition, Hydra is applied to painlessly control configuration settings for each
model run. The code furthermore integrates with Weight and Bias for logging evaluation metrics, and
training and validation losses.
4.4.1
Hyper parameters
The hyperparameters are chosen based on the task and knowledge from papers which addresses similar
issues. Each of the four models contain the exact same hyperparameter settings to make sure results
can be compared properly and conclusions can be drawn. The loss function used is cross entropy loss
and the optimizer used is the Adam, with learning rate (Lr) set to Lr = 0.0005. The PyTorch build in
4ECE: https://torchmetrics.readthedocs.io/en/stable/classification/calibrationerror.html
==PAGE:29==
4.5 Experiment setup
23
Adam optimiser5 and cross entropy loss6 functions are used. The activation function used after each
convolutional layer is ReLu as proposed in the original U-net paper [RFB15]. Initially, the learning
rate, Dice score threshold, epoch number, and batch size are based on the suggestions from the paper
“Effective MRI based Brain Tumor Detection using Modified U-Net Model” [Mad22]. The epoch number
is later set to be epochs = 50, Dice score threshold (th) is kept at th = 0.05 and the initial batch size
of 128 is varied to try out both smaller and larger batch sizes.
4.5
Experiment setup
This project is based on a number of experiments which are designed to answer the research questions
outlined in the introduction. The experiments are twofold, one part mainly focuses on solving the
segmentation task, finetuning the models, and getting satisfactory performance results.
The other
focuses on uncertainty estimation and the effect of deep ensemble models. The experiments setup is
described more in detail below:
• First part of the experiments aims to answer the question: “Are a U-net model able to achieve
good performance on the BraTS dataset?”. The four different models are trained on the BraTS
dataset and evaluated using the Dice score. To investigate a more optimal hyperparameter setting
three different batch sizes are investigated for all four models. The basis is a batch size of 128
which is then both halved and doubled resulting in additional model runs with batch sizes of 64
and 256.
• In addition to the above experiments concerning model architecture and hyperparameter tuning.
The threshold of the Dice score is inspected, since it has an important impact on the evaluation
results. For the best model, the Dice score is investigated as a function of the threshold. The
same could be done for other architectures if time allows.
• The second part of the experiments centers around uncertainty quantification and aims to answer
the questions “To which degree is a U-net model calibrated?” and “Is a deep ensemble model
better calibrated than a single model with corresponding architecture?”. For this experiments an
ensemble of five models are trained. This is done in a parallel way, each model is trained on the
complete training set and a torch seed is set for each model, ensuring the initialized model weights
differ among the models. For evaluation of the model, the expected calibration error is measured.
• The ensemble experiments are in addition able to provide answers to the question “Is the perfor-
mance increased when using an ensemble of models?”, by simply evaluating the Dice score for the
ensemble models, to see how model calibration is affected by the number of models combined in
the ensemble.
5Optimiser: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.Adam.html
6Loss: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss.html
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 5
Experiment results
In this chapter, the results obtained from carrying out the experiments will be presented.
All following plots of model predictions will follow a predefined color code, TC is blue, ED is green, ET
is yellow, see table 5.1 below.
Class
Color
TC
Blue
ED
Green
ET
Yellow
Table 5.1: Table showing class color codes for each class in the prediction plots.
5.1
Architecture and hyperparameter experiments
The initial experiments focused on finding a model architecture and hyperparameter setting which
could solve the brain tumor segmentation task of the BraTS dataset with satisfactory results. This is
done by training a total of 4 different model architectures each using 3 hyperparameter settings where
only the batch size is varied, all other parameters stay identical. To be able to analyze the models’
segmentation performances the Dice score is computed on both the training, validation and test sets.
The true performance of a model can only be assessed using the test set since it is data the model has
never seen before, but evaluation of both the training and validation sets is a useful tool for inspecting
how the model fits the data. The Dice score results for the training set can be seen in table 5.2, corre-
sponding results for the validation set can be seen in table 5.3, and the test set result is found in table 5.4.
In regards of evaluation of the unseen data in the test set see table 5.4 the models which obtain
the best results is the attention U-net with batch size 256 and the extended attention U-net with batch
size 128, which yield average Dice scores of respectively 0.636 and 0.6379. The results of evaluating the
test set are not the only thing to consider when assessing whether a model is good, how the model fits
the data and its ability to generalize is also important. For this evaluation loss curves can be used, the
loss curves for U-net and attention U-net trained on all three batch sizes can be seen in figure 5.1.
In general attention U-nets perform better than U-nets, though an performance increase is not ob-
served from the results of the extended attention U-net and U-net.
==PAGE:31==
5.1 Architecture and hyperparameter experiments
25
Dice score - Train
U-net
Attention U-net
Hyperparameter
TC
ED
ET
Avg
TC
ED
ET
Avg
Batchsize 64
0.3810
0.4159
0.5881
0.4617
0.7134
0.7984
0.8080
0.7733
Batchsize 128
0.3802
0.3778
0.5195
0.4258
0.7420
0.8531
0.8455
0.8135
Batchsize 256
0.4370
0.5236
0.6356
0.5321
0.7490
0.8482
0.8418
0.8129
Extended U-net
Extended Attention U-net
TC
ED
ET
Avg
TC
ED
ET
Avg
Batchsize 64
0.0252
0.0011
0.0231
0.0165
0.6223
0.6667
0.6756
0.6549
Batchsize 128
0.0490
0.0147
0.0524
0.0387
0.7166
0.8115
0.7808
0.7696
Batchsize 256
0.1737
0.2085
0.1896
0.1906
0.6620
0.7944
0.7934
0.7499
Table 5.2: Dice scores across all three classes for the train set. Hyperparameter tuning using
different batch sizes is tried out.
Dice score - Validation
Hyperparameter
U-net
Attention U-net
TC
ED
ET
Avg
TC
ED
ET
Avg
Batchsize 64
0.3559
0.4116
0.5585
0.4420
0.5218
0.6363
0.6938
0.6173
Batchsize 128
0.3252
0.3699
0.4674
0.3875
0.4962
0.6413
0.6834
0.6067
Batchsize 256
0.4053
0.5250
0.6143
0.5149
0.5316
0.6587
0.6978
0.6294
Extended U-net
Extended Attention U-net
TC
ED
ET
Avg
TC
ED
ET
Avg
Batchsize 64
0.0323
0.0001
0.0417
0.0247
0.5020
0.5940
0.6227
0.5729
Batchsize 128
0.0480
0.0150
0.0579
0.0403
0.5346
0.6524
0.6732
0.6201
Batchsize 256
0.1883
0.2212
0.2107
0.2067
0.5158
0.6488
0.6751
0.6132
Table 5.3: Dice scores across all three classes for the validation set
==PAGE:32==
5.1 Architecture and hyperparameter experiments
26
Dice score - Test
Hyperparameter
U-net
Attention U-net
TC
ED
ET
Avg
TC
ED
ET
Avg
Batchsize 64
0.3633
0.4452
0.5864
0.465
0.5015
0.6424
0.7124
0.619
Batchsize 128
0.341
0.4157
0.5135
0.423
0.5064
0.6492
0.7155
0.624
Batchsize 256
0.4041
0.5512
0.6243
0.527
0.5172
0.6646
0.7258
0.636
Extended U-net
Extended Attention U-net
TC
ED
ET
Avg
TC
ED
ET
Avg
Batchsize 64
0.0143
0.0015
0.0167
0.0108
0.5031
0.6059
0.6547
0.5879
Batchsize 128
0.0525
0.0171
0.0558
0.0418
0.5397
0.6635
0.7106
0.6379
Batchsize 256
0.1509
0.2240
0.1764
0.1837
0.5144
0.6643
0.7177
0.6321
Table 5.4: Dice scores across all three classes for the test set
Figure 5.1: Plots showing the training and validation loss curves for U-net and attention U-net for
all three batch sizes. U-net (leftmost) seems to show a good fit for batch size 256, slight overfitting for
batch size 64, and for batch size 128 the model has not yet converged. Attention U-net (rightmost)
shows slight signs of overfitting for all three batch sizes.
Legends explanation: attunet = attention U-net. unet = U-net. b_128 corresponds to a batch size of
128. LR_0005 indicates learning rate of 0.0005 finally th_05 indicates a Dice score threshold of 0.05.
==PAGE:33==
5.1 Architecture and hyperparameter experiments
27
Figure 5.2: Visualisation of predictions from Attention U-net batch size 256. The predictions show
that the model is able to capture the ground truth segmentation. Color codes can be found in table
5.1.
Figure 5.3: Visualisation of predictions from Attention U-net batch size 256. It is clearly seen that
the model is poor at capturing the tumor core (class TC) and often instead classifies the area as ED
which is the most represented class. Color codes can be found in table 5.1.
==PAGE:34==
5.2 Threshold
28
Figure 5.4: Visualisation of predictions from Attention U-net batch size 256. Predictions show that
the model often is not able to capture the true underlying labels of the image and classifies ED as TC.
Color codes can be found in table 5.1.
5.2
Threshold
The previous section clearly showed that extending the U-net architectures with additional convolutional
layers did not result in an increased segmentation performance when evaluating using the Dice score with
a threshold value of 0.05. The threshold is an important parameter when doing evaluation using the Dice
score and can if set to a non-optimal value provide a misleading result, where the actual segmentation
performance of the model is toned down. With this in mind investigating how the threshold affects
the Dice score seemed obvious. To properly evaluate the models’ segmentation performance an optimal
threshold must be chosen. The best model attention U-net with batch size 256 and the corresponding
U-net architecture were selected for the threshold investigation. The threshold should be in the range
between 0 to 1, threshold ∈[0, 1]. The experiment was carried out using the two models and for each
dataset split evaluating the Dice score using 19 uniformly distributed threshold values starting at 0.05
and ending at 0.95. The results of the experiment can be seen in figure 5.6. The plots for the U-net
display a stronger curvature than the plots for the attention U-net, indicating that U-net performance
evaluation is more affected by the selected threshold value compared to the corresponding attention
U-net. The results of the experiments in addition show that the selected threshold of 0.05 is near an
optimal value for both U-net and attention U-net across all data splits.
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Threshold
29
Figure 5.6: Figure showing how the threshold affects the dice score for respectively U-Net and
attention U-net with batch size 256, measured on train, validation and test sets. U-net is to the left,
and Attention U-net is to the right. The Dice score is calculated class wise additionally an average of
all three classes are provided.
==PAGE:36==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
30
5.3
Experiments with deep ensembles
Experiments were set up to both be able to investigate how an ensemble of models could improve the
segmentation performance of the model as well as a method for quantifying uncertainty. Five attention
U-net models (M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5) with batch size 256 were trained. When presenting results
as a function of a number of ensemble models, the models are always combined in the same iterative
manner e.g. for 2 ensemble models M1 and M2 are combined, for three ensemble models M1, M2, and
M3 are combined, and so forth. The ensemble models were initially trained on a subset of the training
data selected using the method bagging, but according to existing literature on the subject it is more
optimal to train each model on the complete training dataset [LPB17], loss curves for this can be found
in figure 5.7.
5.3.1
Segmentation performance using ensembles
To evaluate the segmentation performance of the deep ensemble models the Dice score was computed
class wise like for the architecture and hyperparameter experiments. The results for the test set can be
seen in table 5.5. It is seen that an increase in the number of ensemble models does not affect the Dice
score. As for the previous model evaluation visual inspection of the predicted segmentation masks is
carried out and can be seen in figure 5.9 and figure 5.8. It is observed that the ensemble of 5 models
seems to predict the class TC to a larger extent than a single base attention U-net model see figure 5.9.
When looking at the comparison between a single model and an ensemble of five models in figure 5.12,
5.15, 5.18 and 5.21 it is observed that the base model predicts the class TC with a higher probability.
It should also be noted that in many cases the prediction of the single base model and the 5 model
ensemble was quite alike see 5.8, this is also reflected in the computed Dice scores.
5.3.2
Uncertainty quantification using ensemble models
Deep ensembles are additionally used to quantify model uncertainty.
For evaluation of the model
uncertainty the metric expected calibration error (ECE) was computed. The results for ECE across
an increased number of models in the ensemble can be found in table 5.5. The calibration error dose
not seem to be affected by the increase of ensemble models and is quite low. It could be argued that a
slight trend of the ECE decreasing as the number of models in the ensemble increase is observed.
==PAGE:37==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
31
ECE
Dice score
TC
ED
ET
Avg
TC
ED
ET
Avg
1 Base model
0.001136
0.002041
0.000623
8888
0.5172
0.6646
0.7258
8888
2 Ensemble models
0.001172
0.002099
0.000644
888
0.5101
0.6563
0.7084
888
3 Ensemble models
0.001169
0.002064
0.000637
888
0.5136
0.6598
0.7154
888
4 Ensemble models
0.001137
0.002017
0.000615
888
0.5175
0.6637
0.7156
888
5 Ensemble models
0.001135
0.002002
0.000610
888
0.5192
0.6645
0.7177
8888
Table 5.5: Results for segmentation performance and calibration evaluated on the test set. The
metrics are computed for the best model Attention U-net with batch size 256, as well as an increasing
number of ensemble models.
Figure 5.7: Leftmost: Plot showing the loss curves for all five ensemble models trained on the
complete training dataset. Rightmost: Plot showing the loss curves for all five ensemble models
trained on a dataset selected using the method bagging.
==PAGE:38==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
32
Figure 5.8: Visualisation of predictions after applying a threshold of th = 0.05 from attention U-net
with batch size 256 (Pred Base) compared to predictions of an ensemble of 5 attention U-nets also
with batch size 256 (Pred Ensemble). The visualization shows how the base model prediction and the
ensemble model are quite alike and to some degree can provide satisfactory segmentations. Color
codes can be found in table 5.1.
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
33
Figure 5.9: Visualisation of predictions after applying a threshold of th = 0.05 from attention U-net
with batch size 256 (Pred Base) compared to predictions of an ensemble of 5 attention U-nets also
with batch size 256 (Pred Ensemble). In the two leftmost segmentations the ensemble performs worse
than the single base model predicting a larger area to be of class TC. Opposite to this, the two
rightmost segmentations could indicate that the ensemble is somewhat better at capturing the class
TC. Color codes can be found in table 5.1.
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
34
Figure 5.12: Figure showing predictions before applying threshold from single attention U-net batch
size 256 (Pred base) and the prediction from the ensemble of 5 models (Pred ensemble) filtered based
on class. The predictions correspond to the leftmost mask visualized in figure 5.9.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
35
Figure 5.15: Figure showing predictions before applying threshold from single attention U-net batch
size 256 (Pred base) and the prediction from the ensemble of 5 models (Pred ensemble) filtered based
on class. The predictions correspond to the mask second from left visualized in figure 5.9.
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
36
Figure 5.18: Figure showing predictions before applying threshold from single attention U-net batch
size 256 (Pred base) and the prediction from the ensemble of 5 models (Pred ensemble) filtered based
on class. The predictions correspond to the mask second from right visualized in figure 5.9.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Experiments with deep ensembles
37
Figure 5.21: Figure showing predictions before applying threshold from single attention U-net batch
size 256 (Pred base) and the prediction from the ensemble of 5 models (Pred ensemble) filtered based
on class. The predictions correspond to the rightmost mask visualized in figure 5.9.
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Class imbalance
When analyzing the Dice score results from all four different model architectures it is clear that the
segmentation performance is not equal for all three classes. Overall the trend is that the models achieve
the lowest Dice scores on class TC, and the highest on class ET on both train, validation, and test data
sets. Interestingly TC and ET are the smaller classes, each accounting for approximately 20% of the
labeled pixels in the dataset, background pixels excluded. As explained in [LKG21] imbalanced data
sets risk inferior generalization abilities. An issue arising from the fact that lesser represented classes
tend to overfit during training, hence decreasing the model’s generalization capability. However, when
comparing the Dice scores for the training and validation set for the classes TC and ET it does not
show a general trend of overfitting. If a model was overfitted one would expect a high Dice score on the
training set, indicating the model has learned the data to such an extent it has “memorized” it, and a
significantly smaller Dice score for the validation set, indicating the model has fitted the training data
to such an extent that it captures the noise and is not able to generalize. The imbalance within the
three classes is not the only class imbalance in the BraTS dataset, there exists a significant imbalance
between background class and foreground classes. The attention U-net is specifically designed to tackle
this issue [Okt+18] and this might be the reason why the attention U-nets in general result in a higher
Dice score than the regular U-nets when evaluated on the test set.
6.2
Evaluation of the U-net models
The experiments concerning model architecture and hyperparameter settings aim to answer the question
“Is a U-net model able to achieve good segmentation performance on the BraTS dataset?”. From the
results, we see that the maximum average Dice scores on the test set lie around Dice score ≈0.63.
A good overlap between the predicted segmentation and the ground truth segmentation occurs with a
Dice score of more than Dice score > 0.7 according to [Zou+04], but as this is a general, and not task
specific, observation it might not apply to this project. Therefore it is essential that comparisons to
similar studies are made. One such study is “Attention-Guided Version of 2D UNet for Automatic Brain
Tumor Segmentation” [NBM19]. This study, unlike most, also utilizes a 2D U-net for solving the BraTS
brain tumor segmentation task, with resulting dice scores of TC = 0.823, ED = 0.895, and ET = 0.813
compared to this project’s results of TC= 0.517, ED=0.665 and ET=0.726 (results from attention U-net
batch size 256). The U-net from this paper is modified differently compared to the U-net of this project,
for one max pooling layers are replaced with convolutional layers, PReLU is used as activation function
and the attention method applied in the skip connections is squeeze and excitation blocks. Other studies
==PAGE:45==
6.3 Performance increase using deep ensembles
39
such as [Ise+21], [BM21] and [Ise+18] also produce results of Dice score ≈0.80−0.88 but use modified
3D U-nets and are therefore less straightforward to use as comparisons to this project, never the less it
is clear that the Dice score results obtained in this project do not meet the benchmark provided by other
studies. In order to obtain better segmentation performance a number of initiatives could be applied,
most importantly would be to modify the U-net architecture. Brain tumor segmentation is a complex
task and evidently, simple U-nets are not optimized enough to tackle the task properly. Another factor
which could improve performance is the choice of loss function.
Cross entropy loss, which is used
for all models in this project, is sensitive to class imbalance. Many of the papers researching brain
tumor segmentation propose new loss functions or combinations of loss functions designed specifically
for solving the task [NBM19], [Fut+21]. Additionally, data augmentation could be implemented as in
[NBM19], this could prevent the slight overfitting seen in the attention U-nets.
Furthermore, the evaluation of models should have included additional results from other metrics
such as IoU, sensitivity, or specificity hereby contributing to evaluating slightly different aspects of
the overlap between prediction and ground truth segmentation and therefore providing a more reliable
evaluation.
When evaluating models one can not only take into consideration the final metric result on the test set.
The model fit also needs to be assessed, as discussed in section 6.1. From the loss curves of the models
the attention U-nets seem to be slightly overfitting. In spite of this attention U-net with batch size 265
is deemed the best model out of all 12 models evaluated. This is because of its relatively high Dice
score on the test set and the fact that it compared to other models converges somewhat satisfactorily,
in addition the architecture’s parameter size are smaller than the otherwise similar extended attention
U-net with batch size 256 and therefore more computationally eﬀicient. Hence attention U-net with
batch size 256 is used for carrying out the uncertainty experiments.
6.3
Performance increase using deep ensembles
By using ensemble models the research question “Is the segmentation performance increased when us-
ing an ensemble of models?” can be accounted for. The visual inspection of the ensemble of 5 models
showed that the ensemble model predicted the class TC to a larger extend than the corresponding single
model. This leads to poorer results for the ensemble model when the TC class is not present in the
actual ground truth mask compared to the single base model, but better segmentation when the TC
class is present in the ground truth mask. Another interesting factor was that a single model seemed
more confident in its prediction of class TC compared to an ensemble of 5 models, which predicted
the class TC for a larger area but with less confidence. When looking at the Dice score for class TC
there is not any significant difference between the base model and the 5 ensemble model, indicating
that the fact that the ensemble sometimes captures the class TC better is balanced out due to the
fact that it, on the other hand, tends to predict segments as belonging to class TC even though it is
not the case. Except for the ensemble model having a tendency of predicting segments as class TC
compared to the single base model, the ensemble model predicts segmentation mask very similar to
a single model, this is also shown when evaluating the ensemble models using the Dice score. These
results show that the Dice score is not affected by combining several models into an ensemble and
==PAGE:46==
6.4 Estimating model uncertainty using deep ensemble
40
that an improved segmentation performance is not achieved in this project when applying ensemble
methods. A reason that the ensemble method did not could be if some of the models had not converged,
but when inspecting the loss curves for all five ensemble models all of them are converged to a point
similar to that of the attention U-net 256, which produced the best obtained results. As the attention
U-net with batch size 256, all five ensemble models also show an overfitting tendency, this is expected
since, the only difference between the models is the seed selected for initializing the model parameters,
interestingly enough the ensemble models trained on a dataset constructed using bagging seems to over-
fit just as much, despite bagging originally being a method used in ensemble models to reduce overfitting.
In spite of this project not being able to verify the improvement ensemble models can induce, others have
shown that ensembles can be successfully implemented and achieve better segmentation performance.
This is demonstrated in papers such as [Zei+22], which also addresses the task of solving the brain
tumor segmentation task of the BraTS dataset and achieves an impressive Dice score ≈0.88 −0.92.
In contrary to this project the ensemble method implemented in the paper only aims to improve seg-
mentation performance, whereas this project followed the ensemble methods for improving uncertainty
quantification as proposed in [LPB17]. The main difference is whether an ensemble of several different
models is used compared to an ensemble of models with identical architectures, the latter being the
case for this project. It is easy to assume that an ensemble of different model architectures could more
easily improve predictive accuracy since each model would contribute to capturing different features
from the input, hereby making the ensemble more robust and better at generalizing and hence improve
the predictive performance.
6.4
Estimating model uncertainty using deep ensemble
A substantial part of this project revolves around quantifying model uncertainty. The project aims to
answer whether a single U-net model is well calibrated and how this model calibration is affected by
using an ensemble of models. When observing the results obtained by the ECE evaluation for both
a single attention U-net model and an increasing number of ensemble models it is clear that the cal-
ibration error is quite low. Usually, this indicates a well calibrated model. Furthermore, the ECE is
generally not significantly decreased as a function of the number of models in the ensemble. But when
only comparing the single model and the ensemble with 5 models the ECE seems to decrease, though
experiments with more models than five would be necessary to conclude the trend. All in all, it could
be simple to deem that the single U-net model is well calibrated and that the ensemble models show
a vague trend of ensembles being more well calibrated as the number of models used for the ensemble
increases. Nevertheless, the ECE metric is not this simple to evaluate and it requires more thought to
asses the ECE score obtained. The ECE metric has according to the paper “Measuring Calibration in
Deep Learning” [Nix+20] various flaws that make it unsuitable for model calibration estimation. One
issue is that ECE is designed for binary classification tasks and therefore lacks the ability to evaluate
calibration over several class predictions. To overcome this challenge the paper suggests class condi-
tionality, which computes the ECE for each class independently and subsequently averages the class
ECEs to obtain the final ECE score, which is exactly how this project computes the ECE. Another
issue with ECE is that it attributes more weight, and therefore importance, to the larger bins. Since
==PAGE:47==
6.5 Future work
41
models are often confident, the distributions of bins tend to be screwed leftward, with the majority of
predictions accumulating in the higher confidence bins. As a consequence, the ECE scores are mainly
based on very confident predictions and do not estimate calibration for less confident predictions as
much. Finally and very relevant to this project is the fact that it is possible to get a very low ECE
score and still have a badly calibrated model. Due to the bins being static, the predictions can cancel
each other out by including positive and negative predictions in the same bin. All these factors make if
diﬀicult to draw a conclusion of whether a model is actually calibrated by only looking at the ECE score.
Since the ECE metric can be diﬀicult to interpret on its own it is often supported by other evalua-
tion tools such as reliability diagrams. It was the intention to include such diagrams in this project, but
because of ineﬀicient code implementation, the scripts which were run on DTU’s HPC service reached
the maximum run time of 24 hours and were terminated before having computed the needed numbers
for creating the plots. Reliability diagrams provide a visual representation of a model’s calibration, by
plotting the accuracy (frequency of positive examples in the ground truth) against the confidence (the
averaged prediction probability), this is done for a predefined number of bins. If the plotted values
follow an exact diagonal line, the model is well calibrated. Other metrics such as Maximum Calibration
Error, Brier score, or negative log likelihood could also have been explored for a broader evaluation
basis. Besides choosing good evaluation metrics there exist methods which can improve model calibra-
tion. According to [Guo+17] temperature scaling, is the simplest and most effective method for making
models better calibrated.
In this project, it was not possible to show that by applying Bayesian approximations in an ensem-
ble manner model calibration could be improved and hereby providing better uncertainty estimation.
Still, it remains a question whether well calibrated models actually would be of advantage in active
learning setups. The paper [Bel+18] centers around this matter and concludes that ensemble mod-
els outperform other methods such as MC dropout in regards to uncertainty estimation and provide
excellent results when applied to an active learning setup.
6.5
Future work
If time allowed this project could be improved and extended in numerous ways. This section will briefly
propose some of the methods and additional experiments which could be carried out as a natural con-
tinuation of the project.
Firstly it would be interesting to experiment more with different model architectures.
The results
of this project showed that more simple U-net architectures were not able to perform well on the BraTS
data set. It would be clear-cut to implement some of the U-nets which have already proved to produce
good segmentation results such as the one proposed in [NBM19]. Another way to try and improve
segmentation performance would be to implement a modified 3D U-net, which literature has shown
is very popular when solving the BraTS segmentation task. This would also make sense with a view
to the application area of brain tumor diagnosis where the data from the start are in a 3D format.
Additionally, it is easy to assume that the neighboring pixels on all axes are relevant when segmenting
==PAGE:48==
6.5 Future work
42
brain tumors, which naturally are 3D structures.
After obtaining a model with satisfactory segmentation performance one could try and further im-
prove it using ensemble models. It would though be more interesting to investigate uncertainty and
model calibration more in-depth. Implementing both an ensemble and a MC dropout version of a good
model and subsequently evaluating the calibration of these models could be done. Papers suggest that
deep ensembles are outperforming MC dropout models in regards to uncertainty quantification, and
experiments examining this could be set up. Evaluation should be carried out using several calibration
metrics as well as visualizations of the result with reliability diagrams. In accordance with the literature
methods such as temperature scaling would also be implemented to see how it affects the calibration.
When the uncertainty of two different Bayesian approximation methods and a single corresponding
model has been established next step could be to implement an active learning setup. The active learn-
ing setup should focus on uncertainty sampling and apply a number of acquisition functions which are
based on uncertainty such as max entropy. These experiments would uncover whether models with
reliable uncertainty estimates actually provide a better foundation for active learning using uncertainty
sampling based acquisition functions.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This project addresses the problem of solving the task of brain tumor segmentation using deep learning,
as well as quantifying the uncertainty for such models in order to try and predict how eﬀicient these
models would be in an active learning setup.
To solve the task of semantic segmentation of brain tumors modified U-net models were trained on
different parameters to experiment and find the model providing the best segmentation performance,
evaluated using the Dice score. The best model yielded an average score of Dice score ≈0.63 which
is way below the Dice scores reported in various papers. When inspecting predictions visually it was
seen that the best model was able to capture the true underlying segmentation mask to some degree,
especially for masks containing all classes. Visual inspections verified the Dice score trend of TC being
the class with the lowest Dice score, by showing that even the best model was poor at capturing large
segments of class TC. In addition, the segmentation performance was not improved by applying an
ensemble of 5 models to solve the task. It can be concluded that good segmentation performance was
not achieved for the modified U-net models applied to this project.
As for the uncertainty estimation, the Bayesian approximation method deep ensembles were used, based
on extensive literature indicating that this will improve model calibration and work as an uncertainty
estimation. In spite of obtaining a low calibration error, it was questioned whether a simple evaluation
of the ECE was basis enough for concluding the models to be well calibrated. Additionally, it was not
possible in this project to show that deep ensembles resulted in more well calibrated models, as expected.
In conclusion, this project did not achieve the results anticipated based on existing literature. A number
of methods to improve and extend the project were proposed including; experimenting with different
U-net architectures, increasing the number of ensemble models, and implementing active learning.
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[Bat+22]
Dheerendranath Battalapalli et al. “An optimal brain tumor segmentation algorithm for
clinical MRI dataset with low resolution and non-contiguous slices.” In: BMC Medical Imag-
ing 22 (May 2022). doi: 10.1186/s12880-022-00812-7.
[Bel+18]
William H. Beluch et al. “The Power of Ensembles for Active Learning in Image Classifica-
tion.” In: 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2018,
pages 9368–9377. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00976.
[Bis07]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science
and Statistics). 1st edition. Springer, 2007. isbn: 0387310738. url: http://www.amazon.
com / Pattern - Recognition - Learning - Information - Statistics / dp / 0387310738 %
3FSubscriptionId%3D13CT5CVB80YFWJEPWS02%26tag%3Dws%26linkCode%3Dxm2%26camp%
3D2025%26creative%3D165953%26creativeASIN%3D0387310738.
[BM21]
Syed Talha Bukhari and Hassan Mohy-ud-Din. E1D3 U-Net for Brain Tumor Segmentation:
Submission to the RSNA-ASNR-MICCAI BraTS 2021 Challenge. 2021. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.2110.02519. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.02519.
[Bur+22]
Josafat-Mattias Burmeister et al. Less Is More: A Comparison of Active Learning Strategies
for 3D Medical Image Segmentation. 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2207.00845. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2207.00845.
[Bur12]
Settles Burr. Active Learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning Vol. 18. Springer, 2012. isbn: 9781608457250. url: https://search-ebscohost-
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=467776&site=
ehost-live.
[El +21]
Rosana El Jurdi et al. “High-level prior-based loss functions for medical image segmentation:
A survey.” In: Computer Vision and Image Understanding 210 (2021), page 103248. issn:
1077-3142. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2021.103248. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1077314221000928.
[Fut+21]
Michał Futrega et al. Optimized U-Net for Brain Tumor Segmentation. 2021. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.2110.03352. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.03352.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.
org. MIT Press, 2016.
[GG15]
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing
Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning. 2015. doi: 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 1506 . 02142. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02142.
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
45
[GIG17]
Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Deep Bayesian Active Learning with
Image Data. 2017. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1703.02910. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1703.02910.
[Guo+17]
Chuan Guo et al. On Calibration of Modern Neural Networks. 2017. arXiv: 1706.04599
[cs.LG].
[HE21]
Lara Hoffmann and Clemens Elster. “Deep Ensembles from a Bayesian Perspective.” In:
CoRR abs/2105.13283 (2021). arXiv: 2105.13283. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.
13283.
[Ise+18]
Fabian Isensee et al. “Brain Tumor Segmentation and Radiomics Survival Prediction: Con-
tribution to the BRATS 2017 Challenge.” In: Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke
and Traumatic Brain Injuries. Edited by Alessandro Crimi et al. Cham: Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2018, pages 287–297. isbn: 978-3-319-75238-9.
[Ise+21]
Fabian Isensee et al. “nnU-Net for Brain Tumor Segmentation.” In: Brainlesion: Glioma,
Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries. Edited by Alessandro Crimi and
Spyridon Bakas. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pages 118–132. isbn: 978-
3-030-72087-2.
[JOR18]
JEREMY JORDAN. An overview of semantic image segmentation. 2018. url: https://
www.jeremyjordan.me/semantic-segmentation/ (visited on 11 June 2023).
[Kra20]
Kraggel. BraTS2020 Dataset (Training + Validation). 2020. url: https://www.kaggle.
com/datasets/awsaf49/brats20- dataset- training- validation (visited on 8 June
2023).
[Kum]
Dr. S. Kumar. 2D+Time Datasets. url: http : / / celltrackingchallenge . net / 2d -
datasets/ (visited on 11 June 2023).
[LDY19]
Xiaolong Liu, Zhidong Deng, and Yuhan Yang. “Recent progress in semantic image segmen-
tation.” In: Artificial Intelligence Review 52 (2019), pages 1089–1106.
[Li+21]
Yuanyuan Li et al. “X-Net: a dual encoding–decoding method in medical image segmenta-
tion.” In: The Visual Computer 39 (November 2021), pages 1–11. doi: 10.1007/s00371-
021-02328-7.
[LKG21]
Zeju Li, Konstantinos Kamnitsas, and Ben Glocker. “Analyzing Overfitting Under Class
Imbalance in Neural Networks for Image Segmentation.” In: IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 40.3 (2021), pages 1065–1077. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2020.3046692.
[LPB17]
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and Scalable Pre-
dictive Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles. 2017. arXiv: 1612.01474 [stat.ML].
[Mad22]
Sumithra Devi K A Madhu M Nayak. “Effective MRI based Brain Tumor Detection using
Modified U-Net Model.” In: (2022), pages 1–7.
[Maš+23]
Martin Maška et al. “The Cell Tracking Challenge: 10 years of objective benchmarking.” In:
Nature Methods (May 2023), pages 1–11. doi: 10.1038/s41592-023-01879-y.
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
46
[Nat+21]
Vishwesh Nath et al. “Diminishing Uncertainty within the Training Pool: Active Learning
for Medical Image Segmentation.” In: CoRR abs/2101.02323 (2021). arXiv: 2101.02323.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.02323.
[NBM19]
Mehrdad Noori, Ali Bahri, and Karim Mohammadi. “Attention-Guided Version of 2D
UNet for Automatic Brain Tumor Segmentation.” In: 2019 9th International Conference
on Computer and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE). IEEE, October 2019. doi: 10.1109/
iccke48569.2019.8964956. url: https://doi.org/10.1109%2Ficcke48569.2019.
8964956.
[Nix+20]
Jeremy Nixon et al. Measuring Calibration in Deep Learning. 2020. arXiv: 1904.01685
[cs.LG].
[Okt+18]
Ozan Oktay et al. “Attention U-Net: Learning Where to Look for the Pancreas.” In: CoRR
abs/1804.03999 (2018). arXiv: 1804.03999. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.03999.
[Ova+19]
Yaniv Ovadia et al. Can You Trust Your Model’s Uncertainty? Evaluating Predictive Un-
certainty Under Dataset Shift. 2019. arXiv: 1906.02530 [stat.ML].
[Reh+20]
Mobeen Ur Rehman et al. “BU-Net: Brain Tumor Segmentation Using Modified U-Net Ar-
chitecture.” In: Electronics 9.12 (2020). issn: 2079-9292. doi: 10.3390/electronics9122203.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/12/2203.
[RFB15]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for
Biomedical Image Segmentation. 2015. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1505.04597. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
[SC21]
Isah Charles Saidu and Lehel Csató. “Active Learning with Bayesian UNet for Eﬀicient
Semantic Image Segmentation.” In: Journal of Imaging 7.2 (2021). issn: 2313-433X. doi:
10.3390/jimaging7020037. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2313-433X/7/2/37.
[Sha+19]
Dhruv Sharma et al. “Active Learning Technique for Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation
Using Limited Labeled Images.” In: October 2019, pages 148–156. isbn: 978-3-030-33390-4.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-33391-1_17.
[Sid+21]
Nahian Siddique et al. “U-Net and Its Variants for Medical Image Segmentation: A Review
of Theory and Applications.” In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pages 82031–82057. doi: 10.1109/
access.2021.3086020. url: https://doi.org/10.1109%2Faccess.2021.3086020.
[Spy20]
Ph.D Spyridon (Spyros) Bakas. Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation Challenge 2020:
Data. 2020. url: https://www.med.upenn.edu/cbica/brats2020/data.html (visited on
11 June 2023).
[Sri+14]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting.”
In: The journal of machine learning research 15.1 (2014), pages 1929–1958.
[Wal+22]
Jason Walsh et al. Using U-Net Network for Eﬀicient Brain Tumor Segmentation in MRI
Images. 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2211.01885. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
01885.
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
47
[WL21]
Boyeong Woo and Myungeun Lee. “Comparison of tissue segmentation performance be-
tween 2D U-Net and 3D U-Net on brain MR Images.” In: 2021 International Conference
on Electronics, Information, and Communication (ICEIC). 2021, pages 1–4. doi: 10.1109/
ICEIC51217.2021.9369797.
[Zei+22]
Ramy A. Zeineldin et al. Multimodal CNN Networks for Brain Tumor Segmentation in MRI:
A BraTS 2022 Challenge Solution. 2022. arXiv: 2212.09310 [eess.IV].
[ZM21]
Nico Zettler and Andre Mastmeyer. “Comparison of 2D vs. 3D U-Net Organ Segmentation
in abdominal 3D CT images.” In: (2021). doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2107.04062. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2107.04062.
[Zou+04]
Kelly Zou et al. “Statistical Validation of Image Segmentation Quality Based on a Spatial
Overlap Index.” In: Academic radiology 11 (February 2004), pages 178–89. doi: 10.1016/
S1076-6332(03)00671-8.
