==PAGE:1==
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy stor­
age in future energy systems
Tanja Christensen, s192694
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
Master Thesis
16th of June, 2023
By
Tanja Christensen
Supervisors from DTU:
Daniel Møller Sneum, Postdoc
Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen, Assistant Professor
Supervisors from HOFOR:
Jakob Thanning, Manager, Department of District Cooling
Niels Præstegaard Hendriksen, Manager, Department of
Heat Planning
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must in­
clude the customary bibliographic citation, including author
attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Eco­
nomics, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den­
mark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been at the Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mathematical mod­
elling.
Tanja Christensen ­ s192694
Signature
Date
ii
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the potential of an aquifer thermal energy storage (ATES) in the
Greater Copenhagen Area as a basis for up­ or down scaling. Climate changes are affect­
ing the globe, whereas smart thinking, energy efficiency and sector coupling is needed to
lower the greenhouse gas emissions from energy production. Many initiatives has already
been conducted and planning of future energy is still a moving area. When considering
the district heating and district cooling networks in Copenhagen, not many technologies
provide a synergy effect between those two areas. The ATES facility can produce both
heat and cooling, either separately or simultaneously, whereas it is an ideal candidate for
at synergy effect between these energy sectors. The thesis analyses the flexibility the
ATES facility can provide for both cooling and heat, by investigating the operations of the
facility on an hourly basis. This shows, that the imbalance between heating and cooling
are an advantage as neither has peak demand at the same time. But the ATES facility
continues to be a more expensive technology, whereas a full investment has to be inves­
tigated further since it is not found to be feasible as only producer of heat, considering the
circumstances of the provided data has some uncertainty.
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis statement/objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Cooperation with HOFOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Limitations of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Balmorel ­ energy system modelling tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Analysis of Aquifer Thermal Energy Storage in the Greater Copenhagen Area 11
3.1
Characteristics of Aquifer Thermal Energy Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Case area and the district cooling and district heating networks . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Regulations for district cooling and district heating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Modelling in Balmorel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Analysis of results from Balmorel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.6
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Discussion
35
5
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
A Interview of CEO/Partner in ATES A/S
41
B Groundwater wells for case area
43
C Calculations for costs of ATES
47
D Calculations for costs of conventional propane cooler from HOFOR Depart­
ment of District Cooling
48
E
Results from Balmorel
49
iv
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The emission of greenhouse gasses (GHG) and the accelerating climate changes empha­
sises the need for a change. Particularly larger cities have a major role in the pollution
from the great amount of energy consumption, whereas finding alternative technologies
for heating, electricity, cooling etc. in urban areas are an essential part of solving the
problem [1]. Nations are aware of the growing problem and several initiatives have been
constructed to oppose unfortunate development in the environmental conditions and lower
the emissions of GHG. European Commission is a main actor of the initiatives with their
Roadmap 2050 where the ambitious goal of a carbon emission reduction 80 % is enacted
[2]. One of the focus points are energy efficiency whereas both optimising the technolo­
gies and enhancing synergy effect between energy sectors are considered. As district
cooling is a growing sector, the synergy effect between this and district heating is an ob­
vious solution to a part of the problem. An aquifer thermal energy storage (ATES) might
be a possible solution to this part of the problem, as the technology produces both cool­
ing and heating, depending on the demand [3]. As the Greater Copenhagen Area has
both an existing yet expandable district cooling network and a district heating network,
which are both owned by the Greater Copenhagen Utility (HOFOR), the company and its
consumers might benefit from the possible advantages of implementing an ATES facility.
1.2
Thesis statement/objective
The objective of this thesis is described by the research question,
From a system point of view, how can implementing an ATES facility facilitate the synergy
in the Greater Copenhagen Area between district heating and district cooling?
Furthermore, the thesis will investigate these additional questions to focus on more spe­
cific parts of the research question,
1. How can the ATES facility provide the necessary flexibility to supply both the District
Cooling and the District Heating consumers?
2. To which extend would it be feasible to invest in an ATES facility to enhance the syn­
ergies between the district cooling and district heating systems, considering scale
of demand and capacity?
1.3
Cooperation with HOFOR
This thesis have been conducted in collaboration the the Municipality of the Greater
Copenhagen Area (HOFOR), with the departments of ’District Cooling’ and ’Planning of
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
1
==PAGE:7==
Heat’. The managers and employees of those two departments in HOFOR have been
a crucial part of the execution of this report, providing data and guidance, and inspiring
for this very particular topic which is the scope of the thesis. HOFOR suggested the in­
vestigation of the possibilities of a synergy effect between the two energy sectors, and
a possible closer companionship between the departments. The two sectors are mostly
separated in the Greater Copenhagen Area, since most technologies provide either only
heat or cooling. But the development of more synergies between the sectors have already
started with a combined Energy Central in Nordhavn in Copenhagen, which will contain
both district heating, district cooling and sewage [4]. Thus, an analysis on a possible
expansion of the collaboration is highly relevant for the company to exploit all possible
opportunities.
1.4
Limitations of the thesis
This thesis only considers a limited area as a case­study, which is the Greater Copen­
hagen area, to answer the research question. Is is assumed, that the results of this case­
study scenario will provide an initial assessment of the flexibility and synergy effects in a
district heating and district cooling network by ATES.
As the ATES facility is a complex technology with multiple aspects of both soil conditions,
drilling and groundwater quality etc. the geological entities are not included in this thesis.
This would require a large analysis and investigation of the ground and actual flow of wa­
ter, which is not possible to conduct, especially as the case area is theoretical.
Furthermore, the storage function of the ATES facility has been excluded in the modelling
of the technology in the energy modelling tool. This function is too complex to implement
within the scope of this thesis, as the modelling tool does not distinguish between heat
and cooling, whereas cooling is modelled as heat. Thus, modelling a storage that only
receives excess heat when cooling is produced and vice versa, and only uses the stored
cooling in the district cooling network is a far too complex task. Hence, only the synergy
effect of production of heat and cooling from the ATES facility is considered, disregarding
the storage unit.
Finally, data has not been sufficient to determine the actual GHG emissions from neither
ATES or the conventional propane chiller used as a reference technology. Since the exact
model of the two technologies cannot be determined based on the case­area, no suffi­
cient data was extracted for the purpose GHG emissions. Both technologies consume
electricity for production, whereas some of the GHG emissions depends on the electricity
source. For the conventional propane chiller this uses propane as cooling agent, but as
model and type is not specifically determined it is decided to disregard the GHG emissions
of both technologies.
2
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:8==
2
Methodology
In this thesis both literature studies and a case­study has been used, as well as an en­
ergy modelling tool. The literature used to understand and construct an informative foun­
dation has mainly been secondary literature from scientific articles, legal documents and
webpages. With regards to the data used for modelling as well as information closely
connected to the technologies primary literature as interviews and direct data provision
has been used. To investigate the potentials of an ATES facility in the Greater Copen­
hagen area, focusing on the flexibility and synergy effect a case­area has been selected
to validate the implementation of ATES. But a major part of this thesis is connected to the
modelling tool, which provides a scenario of the future potential of the ATES facility from
an energy planning perspective.
2.1
Balmorel ­ energy system modelling tool
2.1.1
Different energy system models
Multiple different energy analysis modelling tools exist, and they each provide different
approaches and solution methods. No such thing as the correct energy system analysis
tool exist, it depends on the scope of the analysis. As to, which parameters must be in­
vestigated, what is the resolution of time, which energy technologies and sectors must be
included etc. The need of energy system modelling tools are increasing due to the major
change in the energy production from a fossil fuel based system to a more renewable en­
ergy mix. The scenarios the modelling tools can provide can be used both for prediction
of continuing the current path, or possible impacts by changing to renewable resources.
Hence, the modelling tools can shape the future energy system by scenario generation,
where different criteria are fulfilled. Since scenarios can be just as different as nations,
the choice of energy system modelling tool would be based on the investigation. [5].
In Connolly et. al. 37 different energy system modelling tools have been compared and
investigated, whereas a decision making based upon various criteria has been performed,
in order to choose a suiting model for the analysis. It should be noted that none of the en­
ergy system models considered contains the possibility of choosing cooling as an energy
sector [5].
In Connolly et. al. 7 different categories of tools of energy system models were defined,
[5]
1. Simulation tool which models a simulation to supply the demand of an energy sys­
tem. The simulation tool is often in an hourly resolution and has a shorter time­
span, most commonly a year. Examples of the simulation tools are EnergyPlan and
Stream, which can only model one year in each simulation. Several model simula­
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
3
==PAGE:9==
tions for different years can of course be performed, but the previous years would
then not be a part of simulation.
2. The scenario tool can almost be considered the opposite of the simulation tool. The
scenario model usually runs long­term models of the energy system, 20­50 years,
and normally has a higher resolution of 1 year. The yearly results are the foundation
of the long­term scenario, whereas all years are considered in the same model, and
not divided as in simulation tool. Most of the considered tools in Connolly et. al. are
considered scenario tools, although examples are Balmorel and LEAP.
3. The equilibrium tool has a more economical aim, and focuses on demand, supply
and prices. The assumption of the model is a competitive market with producers as
price takers, whereas an equilibrium can be found. The assumptions can be that the
prices, supply and demand are either a whole part of the economy (general) or that
only parts of the energy system is a focused part of the economy (partial equilibrium),
as heat, power, etc. An example of a partial equilibrium tool is the Balmorel model
which only considers heat and power markets, although both hydrogen and electrical
vehicles (EV’s) has since been modelled in Balmorel as well.
4. Then there is the top­down modelling tool, which are most commonly equilibrium
tools as well. The top­down tool is based on macroeconomics, and seeks to show
tendencies in demand and prices of demand in the energy system, ie. growth. As
an example LEAP uses a top­down approach and TIMES uses a partial top­down
approach.
5. The approach of the Bottom­up tools are to evaluate the different generation tech­
nologies in the energy system, which are the foundation for the analysed investment
options in the model. Thus, the model identifies the technologies in the energy sec­
tors and aims for a low cost energy system. Most of the energy system models in
the analysis by Connolly et. al. [5] are bottom­up modelling tools, an especially
equilibrium or partly equilibrium tools are also bottom­up models as Balmorel and
TIMES.
6. The operation optimisation results in an optimised operation of an energy system.
Most simulation tools as EnergyPlan and HOMER are operation optimisations tools.
But also some equilibrium tools are operation optimisation tools, ie. Balmorel (which
is only partial equilibrium), due to the hourly time step resolution which allows for
optimisation of generation production pr. hour.
7. Finally the investment optimisation tool is defined, as a tool that allows the model
to optimise the investments in generation technologies in the energy system. Of­
ten scenario tools are investment optimisations tools as well, as energyPRO and
Balmorel.
Although the above distinction of different energy system modelling tools are defined, a
great share of the tools are part of several categories, not always being a part of the most
4
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:10==
common trends of the models. Thus, the above given examples and correlations might
not always be the case for all energy system modelling tools [5].
2.1.2
Choice of energy system modelling tool
The amount of energy system modelling tools are quite large, each possessing different
strengths, weakness’s and modelling approaches. The great amount of tools are just as
large as the variety in aim of the models and the type of questions they will try to provide
an answer to. Thus, the scope of this thesis, to which the research question is the cen­
ter, will be the foundation for selecting a suitable model. The research question seeks to
analyse the sector coupling of district heating and district cooling as well as flexibility in
the production of heat and cooling (Section 1.2). Thus, the main focus is to find an en­
ergy system modelling tool, which can optimise and choose the most optimal generation
technologies as well as allowing the modelling of cooling as a separate energy sector.
Since the case area is the Greater Copenhagen area, and the scope is to investigate the
potentials of synergy effects between district cooling and district heating, the model must
contain or be able to model the district heating network in Copenhagen as well. Hence,
the scope of the thesis leads to the following of the categories of modelling tools to be
important,
• The tool needs to be an investment optimisation tool as well as and operation op­
timisation tool. Since the scope investigates the feasibility of investing in the ATES
facility, it is crucial that the model optimises the investment in technologies and al­
lows endogenous variables to clarify if the ATES facility should be part of the energy
generation. Furthermore, it is important that the model optimises the operation of
the generation technologies in the energy system, as the performance of the ATES
facility needs to be compared to other technologies to determine the flexibility of
supply and the potential synergy between the heating and cooling sectors. This
characteristic also implies a high time resolution as well as the possibility of long­
term planning, whereas both scenario and simulation tools are required.
• In continuation a suitable model should also be a bottom­up tool, as the scope of
this thesis is to investigate the feasibility of the ATES facility in the entire system.
Thus, the tool should be able to detailed model the energy system based on the
available generation technologies aspiring a low cost energy system.
• Eventually a partial equilibrium tool is important to ensure a balance in the energy
market of supply and demand, which is required in the case area, being HOFOR’s
supply network. Both heat and electricity sectors and corresponding markets should
be included, as the existing case area in Copenhagen uses generation which are
dependent on those. Furthermore, the geographical resolution has to include the
surrounding countries of Denmark to enhance the accuracy in the markets, i.e. the
energy market. Simultaneously it is required that the model can be divided into mul­
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
5
==PAGE:11==
tiple small areas in Denmark, specifically to model the district heating and cooling
networks of Copenhagen, preferably with an already existing district heating area.
Based on the listed requirements, Balmorel is the choice of energy system modelling tool,
as it has all the necessary characteristics and possibilities.
2.1.3
Balmorel as energy system modelling tool
As earlier stated the Balmorel model is a partial equilibrium tool, considering the electricity
and heat sectors and aiming to maximize welfare in the countries surrounding the Baltic
Sea [6]. This is of course a rough description of a very complex model, containing a huge
amount of data inputs and outputs, equations etc. But the scope of this thesis is not to
expound and elaborate the entire entities and functions of the model. Only the relevant
parts of the model will be included and explained briefly, to provide an understanding of
how these part works and contribute to answering the research question (Section 1.2).
The objective function
The Balmorel model by default seeks to maximize welfare in the objective function, thus
maximizing the utility of the consumer by minimizing the cost of the producer, i.e. the
objective function minimizes the cost of generation, transmission etc. This is of course a
simplified explanation, but it is the overall idea and aim of the objective function [7]. The
model considers much more aspects, and overall the objective consists of the following,
min Objective Function =Fuel costs + O&M costs + Hydro with storage
+ Transmission costs + Investment costs
+ Taxes (investment, fuel, emission, etc.)
+ Consumers utility relative to consumption
(2.1)
Thus, the objective function is limited by the constraints in the sets related to the inputs
mentioned in Equation 2.1. This could be the available generation technologies and trans­
mission lines, capacity of both, efficiency of fuels or generation, as well as the consump­
tion of both heat and electricity.
A very important aspect of the objective function is the assumption of a perfect competi­
tion in the market. The perfect competition assumes, that all producers supply the market
at their marginal costs to ensure the cheapest possible production [6]. This will most
certainly not always be the case in a real market, whereas this should be considered an
uncertainty in the model.
Geography
As previous mentioned Balmorel includes the countries surrounding the Baltic Sea, i.e.
the Northern countries, the Baltic countries, Germany etc. Over time the countries in­
cluded has been expanded, whereas it also includes United Kingdom, Spain and more of
6
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:12==
the southern European countries. All the countries are the main set of the geographical
resolution. Within the countries are regions, and within the regions are areas. Thus, from
the set of countries are a subset of regions, and from the subset of regions are yet another
subset of areas. This is better illustrated in Figure 2.1,
Figure 2.1: Entities in geography in Balmorel, showing the sets and subset of countries,
regions and areas respectively. Electricity transmission lines between regions are also
shown, as well as transmission of heat between areas. The heat transmission is not
default in the model, but activated in an addon. Based on illustration from Ravn 2016 [7].
As illustrated in the figure, areas are within a region and regions are within a country. Be­
tween the regions there can be transmission lines for electricity, as electricity consumption
is only on a regional level, which is a basic part of the original model. As an addition on
the illustration, the transmission lines for heat is also shown, as these have an essential
part in this thesis. The transmission lines for heat is not a default function in Balmorel,
but has later been added as an addon ­ a function in the model, which can be activated
or deactivated as wanted [7]. The addon is described here as it is used in this thesis, to
connect the district cooling area with the existing district heating area.
Time resolution
With regards to the resolution of time, Balmorel contains both the high resolution of hourly
time steps as well as the possibility of modelling 30+ years [7], as the model is categorised
both a scenario and simulation tool [5]. Time is as the geographical resolution divided into
subsets from a set, having years as the primary set. Any years can be chosen and spec­
ified in the model. Within these years, a subset of seasons exist. The seasons represent
the 52 weeks over an entire year, whereas one season is one specific week of a year.
Finally, the season of one week is divided into hours, containing 168 hours for one week.
Thus, the hours are yet again a subset of the seasons [7]. This provides a great flexi­
bility which can be modified for the purpose of the desired model and analysis, as both
long­term and short­term planning is possible. If the aim is to optimise the operation of
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
7
==PAGE:13==
the generation a very detailed operation model can be provided on an hourly basis for
a year. Simultaneously, a long­term scenario can be modelled providing some foresight
into potential scenarios 20­30 years or more into the future [5].
The demand in the model is specified for each hour in each season, and can be modi­
fied by a specific yearly demand. This creates further flexibility, and creates the different
hours of a day as well as actual seasons for summer, winter etc. Some entities of the
model change within the year as demand, generation production (both endogenous and
exogenous), transmission change for electricity and heat between regions and areas re­
spectively, etc. Other entities are the same throughout the year but might change from
one year to another, as generation capacity, taxes, fuel prices etc. And some entities are
consistent in the model as most generation technology data (few exceptions), annuity,
characteristics of transmission etc [7]. It should be noted, that the higher the time resolu­
tion the more processor power is required from the computer in order to run all equations
of the complex linear model that Balmorel is.
Energy sectors and generation technologies
As Balmorel is a partial equilibrium model it by default only contains the heat and electricity
sectors, and as previous mentioned the optimisation of social welfare [7]. Over the years
both hydrogen and EV’s have been added to the model, but the cooling sector which is a
great part of the scope of this thesis, is not a part of the model. As the thesis investigates
the properties of a district cooling network and the potentials of this, the cooling sector
has been modelled as a heat area since most of the characteristics are the same. Fur­
thermore, it is needed to create a connection between the heating and cooling area, to
properly investigate the potential of the ATES facility and possible synergy effect between
the district heating and district cooling network.
When implementing the ATES facility it is important to create it as an endogenous vari­
able, to create the proper conditions for the model to assess the compatibility of the ATES
facility in the heat and/or cooling area. The model should be analyse if ATES is a feasible
investment, how much and when the facility should produce either cooling or heat, the
impact on the heat prices and objective value, etc.
Heattrans addon
To create a suitable model, a connection between areas is necessary. This feature is not
standard in Balmorel, but has been developed amongst several other addons over the
years. The addon can be activated or deactivated as needed, whereas not too many ad­
ditional parameters have to be included in to model, except the necessary ones chosen
by the user. The addon Heattrans allows for transmission between areas, either in both
directions or in just one direction [7]. The transmission is needed as a one directional
line, only able to send production from the ATES facility to the the heat or cooling area, as
ATES can produce both heat and cooling simultaneously (appendix A). The ATES facility
is stated as an endogenous variable in a ’dummy’ area with no demand, which only serves
8
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:14==
as a transmission island between ATES and cooling or heating areas. This will be further
elaborated in the analysis, in Section 3.4.
2.1.4
Limitations of Balmorel
Although the Balmorel model has many advantages and flexible options the model is, as
all other models, not without limits. This does not mean that the model cannot yield a
good model with a decent accuracy, but the disadvantages the model contains needs to
be considered as well, when analysing results.
An inevitably limitation of all models are the uncertainty of the data input for the model.
No model can yield a better and more valid model than the accuracy of the input data,
which might be difficult to obtain. Especially the long­term scenarios are connected with a
higher uncertainty based on present data input, as it cannot be predicted how i.e. inflation
impacts investment costs and O&M costs or which new generation technologies will exist
20 years from now. In general data input which impacts the future of the model, yields a
considerate uncertainty to the model both long­term and short­term.
Furthermore, the model is based on perfect competition, which is a very theoretical as­
sumption for a market. Perfect competition does not exist in the real world, as the condi­
tions for such market will never be fulfilled. Some markets are closer than others, i.e. the
stock market, agricultural industries, trucking and others. But most commonly, no market
structure contains all the conditions of a perfect competition; many buyers and sellers,
homogeneous products, perfect mobility of resources and perfect knowledge of market
conditions for the economic agents [8].
The first condition of many consumers and suppliers prevent these from affecting the price
of the commodity. In the energy market a great part of consumers exist for both heat and
electricity, since more or less every citizen and industry consumes from the energy mar­
ket. The amount of suppliers is not equally high and also depends on the structure in each
separate area and nation, i.e. when a local municipality of supply exist for district heating
the suppliers of heat are significantly reduced. Thus, the fist conditions is fulfilled to some
extent on the energy market [8].
As for the second condition of homogeneous products, this can almost be considered
fulfilled, as the main difference of the heat or electricity as a commodity on the markets
are the amount of greenhouse gas emissions. It is still power for the fridge or heat in the
heater [8].
The third condition of perfect mobility of resources cannot be obtained for this market,
since at least a high investment costs has to be made to enter the market (generation
technologies are not cheap), and employees cannot easily change job if monetary condi­
tions change [8].
Lastly, the fourth condition of perfect knowledge of market conditions for both suppliers
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
9
==PAGE:15==
and consumers of future prices and costs, does not exist. With the higher penetration
of variable renewable energy (VRE) as wind and solar power in the energy system, the
prices are much more volatile as well. Furthermore, this condition assumes that price
makers will not be strategic in their market bidding and solely sell at their marginal costs,
and price takers will buy only at the necessary cost and nothing more or less [8].
Despite the above uncertainties regarding the theoretical market structure of Balmorel,
this does not make the model invalid. The predictions of the model can still be used, al­
though they might yield a more ’rough’ explanation of the conditions in the energy market,
that might actually be the case for the future [8].
10
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:16==
3
Analysis of Aquifer Thermal Energy
Storage in the Greater Copenhagen
Area
3.1
Characteristics of Aquifer Thermal Energy Storage
The Aquifer Thermal Energy Storage (ATES) is a growing technology most commonly
used in the Netherlands, but is also used more often in the rest of Europe and Northern
America [3]. It is deliberately used for individual space heating in buildings, but the usage
has in few places been expanded for a larger purpose in district heating networks [9].
ATES is a seasonal groundwater storage unit which produces either heat or cooling or
both simultanously depending on the demand of the consumer. It contains a storage
function, which store heat when the facility produces cooling and vice versa. Usually the
facility consist of one or more drilling pairs for groundwater wells, and has bidirectional
construction. ATES exploit the imbalance in heat and cooling demand which makes it ideal
to enhance synergy effects between the two energy sectors [10]. The ATES facility can
be operated as a single unit using only groundwater for either cooling or low temperature
heating, or it can be used in combination with a heat pump for further heating or cooling
if necessary. Most of the year ATES should be able to use the groundwater directly for
cooling, but the groundwater temperature might be to high for direct cooling in the summer,
if e.g. the desired temperature is 4­6 °C [10]. The illustration in Figure 3.1 gives an
overview of how an ATES facility can work in summer and winter,
Figure 3.1: Illustration of how an ATES facility might work including ground and network
temperatures. In this illustration a heat pump (HP) is only used for winter purposes, and
the facility only produces one type of energy in each season; production of cooling in
summer with storage of excess heat in the subsurface and vice versa. Illustration taken
from Bloemendal 2018 [11].
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
11
==PAGE:17==
In Figure 3.1 the concept of ATES are displayed for the seasons of summer and winter. In
summer, cold water at 5­10 °C (in warm summers the temperature will most likely be in the
high end of the rang) is pumped from the ground from the cold­well and used for cooling
the building with the same temperatures. When the energy from the cold groundwater is
used, the excess heat at 15­18 °C from this operation is pumped down the warm­well into
the ground, which function as a storage unit. In winter the process is reversed, with heat
being pumped from the storage ind the ground or directly from the ground water. The
heated water is then sent through a heat pump which increases the temperature to 40­50
°C for space heating. Unless a very low­temperature heat can be used, at 15­18 °C, the
heat pump has to be used. As in the summer, the excess cooling in form of cooled wa­
ter is then stored in the ground in the cold­well. The groundwater is in cycle between the
two wells, and is not used directly in the district heating nor the district cooling network [10].
The system in Figure 3.1 is just an example of how the ATES facility can work, it illustrates
the overall concept and possible synergy effects. A great variety of different ATES facilities
exist, but the units can be adapted to the present needs in each case as well as the
limitations of the environment. For the needs in the district cooling and district heating
networks of Copenhagen, based on the demand profile of cooling and possible locations
of case area, the following characteristics of a facility was provided by CEO/Partner from
ATES A/S Lars Hjortshøj Jacobsen,
Unit
Value
Prerequisite
Investment cost C
Mio. DKK/MW
10
500 kW heat pump
+ 500 kW groundwater cooling
Investment cost D
Mio. DKK/MW
15­17
1 MW heat pump
+ 1 MW groundwater cooling
Reports and water analysis
DKK/MW
50­60,000
Service
DKK/MW
20­25,000
Operation
and maintenance
DKK/year
15­20,000
Lifetime,
mechanical
Years
+ 50
Lifetime,
electrical
Years
20
Efficiency
COP
40­60
Cooling, Groundwater
COP
2­3
Cooling, Heat pump
COP
15­20
Cooling, Aggregated
COP
3­4
Heat, Heat pump
Relation of heat
and cooling production
60/40
Heat/Cooling
Table 3.1: Data overview of ATES facility, provided by ATES A/S, Appendix A.
The data in Table 3.1 is an overview of the data estimates provided by ATES A/S. As can
be seen in the Table, investment cost A and B from Appendix A were excluded form the
12
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:18==
overview, as data was not sufficient to choose any of those options. The specifications of
these to cases were to detailed for the case, as actual volume of groundwater are out of
the scope of this area (Section 1.4). Since the actual costs, efficiencies etc. are very case
specific and highly dependent on environmental conditions, operation and demand pro­
files, the data included in Table 3.1 is general and based on average values (Appendix A).
But they still represent a valid data source to provide an appropriate estimate of the en­
tities of an ATES facility, which can be used in the analysis. Thus, a sensitivity analysis
will be conducted in Section 3.6to accommodate the uncertainties.
For the analysis in Balmorel, the choice has been to make a more conservative analysis
by using Investment cost C in Table 3.1 which has a higher cost pr. MW, but also has a
smaller nominal capacity which yields for more flexibility in the investment. The operation
costs, including service and report and water analysis costs, all have a range, for which
the average value will be used in the analysis. For the lifetime the average value of 35
years would have been desired to use as well. But lifetime was set to 30 years based
on the existing values in Balmorel, which does not contain a similar technology having a
lifetime of 35 years. This affects the annuity calculation in Balmorel, thus the lifetime of
ATES is set to 30 years in the calculations.
Lastly, the efficiency of an ATES facility have a very wide range between a coefficient of
performance (COP) of 2 and 60, depending on the operation of the facility. The COP is
initially divided into cooling and heat, where the COP of the aggregated cooling operation
is used. Thus, the average between the values in the range of cooling and heating is
obtained, which yields a COP of 17.5 and 3.5 respectively. But as the ATES facility will
be modelled as one unit for production of both heat and cooling, and just one efficiency
factor is needed in Balmorel, the average of the efficiencies are found to be 10.5. These
input values for Balmorel will be further presented in Section 3.4.
3.2
Case area and the district cooling and district heating
networks
Another important part of the scope of the thesis is the choice of case area. Several op­
tions have been suggested by HOFOR from a system point of view, which has to coincide
with the actual possibilities of the environment in the ground. Since an in depth analysis
of soil conditions are out of the scope of this thesis, the choice of case area are mainly
based on the system point of view conditions provided by HOFOR. Some basic soil condi­
tions have been included as well, based on recommendations from CEO/Partner of ATES
A/S Lars Hjortshøj Jacobsen. The recommendations are based on the case area being
located in Copenhagen, and will mostly be considered in the final selection of a suitable
cadastre.
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
13
==PAGE:19==
3.2.1
Technical overview of district cooling and district heating
The technical specifications of district cooling and district heating will not be firmly elabo­
rated, as it is considered out of the scope of this thesis, to explain in depth the thermody­
namics of the two systems. But a brief description of the concepts will be included, as a
basic understanding of the network and supply are considered necessary.
The heating network is based on a transmission network and a distribution network con­
sisting of a piped water system underground. The transmission network distributes the
heat from the production sight to exchanger­ or pumping centrals, and from there the
pressure in the water is altered to enter the distribution network and the consumers [12].
The distribution network is owned and operated by HOFOR, whereas the transmission
network is owned and operated by Central Kommunernes Transmissionsselskab/Trans­
mission company of the Central Utilities (CTR) and Vestegnens Kraftvarmeselskab/Heat
and Power Company of Vestegnen (VEKS). This collaboration and title as the largest dis­
trict heating system in Northern Europe ensures the flexibility and supply of demand, as
multiple producing units are connected to the network. The producing units consist of
various different generation technologies, representing both waste and sewage plants,
combined heat and power plants (CHP) using biomass and natural gas, heat pumps and
a variety of peak generation using fossil fuels of gas and oil [13]. Thus, it is desirable to
use alternative and fossil free technologies for production of heat during peak hours.
The existing three cooling centrals produce cooling form either free cooling using water
from the sea or compression cooling using electricity and a cooling agent, i.e. propane or
ammonia. Thus, the cooling technologies requires either to be close to an ocean or the
usage of cooling agents to produce cooling for the network. When considering distribu­
tion, it is based on the same concept as of district heating with a large system of pipes
underground transporting the chilled water to the consumer, where a cooling exchanger
allows the customer to use the energy for cooling as air conditioning or server cooling
[14]. HOFOR aims at sending water at temperatures of 6 °C to the consumer, and expect
them to return water at 16 °C, thus with a ∆T of 10 °C. It should be noted, that the cooling
network is not divided into transmission and distribution network but consist only of one
system owned and operated by HOFOR.
3.2.2
District cooling and district heating network of Copenhagen
Before determining the case area, an overview of the existing district cooling network
is required. The district heating network is so developed and covers the entire entity of
the municipality with a supply of 98 % [15]. Thus, regardless of the location in HOFOR
the district heating network is always within range. This is not the case for the district
cooling network which is both newer and smaller. In addition, the district cooling network
only supplies professional and industrial customers and not regular citizens. The map in
Figure 3.2 shows the current and potential areas of district cooling in Copenhagen,
14
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: Map of the current district cooling network in Copenhagen. Green represent
existing areas with possibility of connection. White represent potential areas with possible
future connection. Illustration taken from HOFOR.dk [12].
As seen in the map the existing areas does not cover the entire entity of Copenhagen,
but is mainly centered around central Copenhagen. This leaves several potential areas in
the remaining Copenhagen, i.e. Østerbro, parts of Amager, Nordvest and Sydhavn. The
recommendation from the Department of District Cooling in HOFOR is to choose either
Østerbro or Sydhavn, as those areas contain a suitable amount of corporations, public
buildings and hotels, which are the main clients of the cooling network. Simultaneously,
the existing areas are supplied by relatively new cooling centrals which does not need to
be replaced within the closest future.
3.2.3
Choice of case area
From the reduction of possible case areas in the previous section, and as HOFOR has
mainly investigated and clarified the potential in Sydhavn, Sydhavn is chosen to be the
case area.
Segment
Hotel
Office
Warehouse/
production
Sum
Potential MW
1.1
7
1.9
10
Table 3.2: Approximated potential of customer segments in Sydhavn. Data is provided
by HOFOR, Department of District Cooling.
The potentials of the area are approximated as not all potential customers are inclined to
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
15
==PAGE:21==
connect to the network; some does not have the need for cooling and other might already
have local, newer cooling facilities in their buildings. Furthermore, the potential of the area
was made a few years ago, whereas new potential customers could have arrived of left
the area. The uncertainty regarding the potentials of the area will be further investigated
by a sensitivity analysis.
Since the case area has to possibly install an ATES facility, some requirements with re­
gards to drilling sights, water quality and groundwater well has to be accommodated. As
previous mentioned, an in depth analysis will not be performed with regards to those en­
tities, but a brief, preliminary analysis will be conducted. The analysis of a potential are
will be conducted on the foundation of prerequisites provided by Lars Hjortshøj Jacob­
sen from ATES A/S. GEUS’ Jupiter database will be used in Google Earth to conduct the
analysis and selection of a suitable area [16]. The most important characteristics are,
• It should be categorised as; water supply drilling, other drilling or scrapped drilling.
• The depth of the drilling should be at least 30 m.
• Groundwater recession should maximum 10 m.
• The performance of the groundwater should be 50­60 m3/h, with possibility of up­
scaling as long as the recession of the groundwater does not exceed the 10 m.
Based on these assumptions, a thorough investigation of possible drilling sights was con­
ducted in Jupiter National Drilling database in the area of Sydhavn. Inspection of the
attached data files of each possible area in the above categories lead to the following
area, as the case area,
Figure 3.3: Map showing drilling 208.63 in GEUS. Illustration taken from Google Earth,
Jupiter [16].
16
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:22==
Drilling 208.63 fulfills all the above criteria in the drilling report, which makes it a suitable
case area. It is categorized as a water supply drilling, with a depth of drilling at 57.8 m.
It has a groundwater recession of 3.6 m and a performance of groundwater at 25.5 m3/h
(Appendix B). When upscaling the performance to the range of 50­60 m3/h, in this case
doubling the performance and thus the groundwater recession, the groundwater reces­
sion only increases to 7.2 m which is well within the range of 10 m. Further maps showing
the drilling and area can be seen ind Appendix B. Thus, the cadastre containing drilling
208.63 with an address at Skandiagade in Sydhavn is the case area, with the possibility
of installing an ATES facility.
3.3
Regulations for district cooling and district heating
When considering the regulatory perspective, both district cooling and district heating are
well regulated. The regulatory of heating is far more extensive than for cooling, thus this
energy sector is comprehensive larger in Denmark. The regulations contains rules of in­
vestment and consumer prices, as well as generation technologies and a goal of higher
VRE penetration in both sectors [17] [18]. The local municipality is obligated to include
energy planning in local plans for the area of the municipality, and the board of the munic­
ipality serves as an approving agency of new projects or larger renovations or changes
of existing facilities with regards to heat [18]. The main purpose of the Law of Supply of
Heat is to accommodate a feasible social economic with respect to the environment, while
minimising the usage of fossil fuel based technologies in the district heating networks, §1,
stk. 1 [18]. The district heating sector is highly regulated in all perspectives, i.e. there is
an entire chapter regarding prices, which can only contain the cost of defined aspects of
the regulation [18].
The Law of Supply of Cooling is on the contrary not equally defined for all aspects and
details as the heating sector. By default the district cooling sector is commercial, whereas
the district heating sector by default is owned or at least subject to the municipalities. The
commercial business model also applies to the district cooling department in HOFOR,
which might also be an additional reason for the more regulated law of heating. The reg­
ulations has a stated focus on enhancing synergy effects between heat and cooling in
Law of Supply of Heating §2 stk. 1 nr. 3 [18]. This paragraphs specifies that synergy
effects are both allowed an considered part of the heating system, and in Law of Supply
of Cooling it directly states that municipalities can entertain commercial district cooling
business to enhance energy efficient cooling using synergy effects with district heating,
§2 [17]. Thus, the regulations enhances the synergy effects of the two sectors to improve
the energy efficiency and lower the usage of fossil fuels in both district heating and district
cooling.
3.4
Modelling in Balmorel
The characteristics and functions of Balmorel has been briefly introduced in Section 2.1,
with main focus on the relevant parts of analysing the impact on ATES and possibilities
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
17
==PAGE:23==
of a synergy effect in a district cooling and district heating system. The objective func­
tion has been presented, the entities of geography, time resolution and energy sectors
as well as the implementation of generation technologies and possibility of adding trans­
mission lines between areas by the heattrans addon. But all these entities are merely a
small representation of the complexity of the entire model. Thus, for the modelling part
in Balmorel the main foundation will be included with the perspective of implementing a
reasonable representation of an ATES facility and its connection to the district cooling and
district heating systems. Based on available resources and knowledge in Balmorel some
features of ATES has been omitted.
There will be performed no changes to the equations and function in the main Balmorel
file, as this has not been necessary for the implementation of ATES in Balmorel.
3.4.1
Implementation of ATES in Balmorel
Initially, an overview of the basic entities which would be desired to conform to Balmorel
is shown in Figure 3.4,
Figure 3.4: Model of ATES facility. Based on Section 3.1.
The graphic representation is simplified, showing the overall big parts of the system from
electricity or groundwater to the consumer. The model shows a flow from the ATES facil­
ity, which have the input of water and electricity AND recieves the return water from heat
or cooling consumers, to either the cooling exchanger or the heat pump, depending on the
operation mode. From the cooling exchanger cold water flows to the district cooling (DC)
network as excess heat is stored in the heat storage, which would be the warm well in
reality (Section 3.1). From the consumer of cooling the return water can flow either to the
heat pump for further heating and usage in the district heating (DH) network, or back to the
cooling exchanger for direct reuse in the DC network again or as a last option the water
18
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:24==
can flow to the ATES facility. The same applies for the district heating network, as heated
water flows from the heat pump to the DH network and excess cooling flows to the cooling
storage in the cold well. From the district heating network the war water is supplied to the
heating consumer. From the consumer of heat, the chilled DH water returns either to the
heat pump, cooling exchanger or to the ATES facility for recirculation depending on the
current operation of the system. The above is information obtained from Lars Hjortshøj
Jacobsen from ATES A/S. As illustrated in the model, several different possibilities exist
for the either cooled or heated water, depending on the need in the system.
But when implementing ATES in Balmorel, the complexity of Balmorel lead to an exclusion
of some functionalities. The model in Balmorel does not contain this specific level of detail
for each generation technology ­ it would take days or weeks to run the simplest models if
it did ­ whereas the overall characteristics of the system has only been included. The main
goal of the analysis is to investigate and answer the research question of this thesis, which
is analyse if the ATES facility can enhance the synergy effect between district heating and
district cooling. Thus, the main element is to implement ATES to produce both heat and
cooling either simultaneously or separately, and analyse the results. And since ATES
has to be modelled as heat in Balmorel, the modelling tool will not be able to distinguish
heat or cooling areas, consumers or production, whereas the modelling has to be more
conservatively divided Section 2.1.
Figure 3.5: Model of ATES facility in Balmorel. Based on Section 3.1 and Section 2.1.
As can be seen the model in Figure 3.5 the model is adapted to the basis of Balmorel,
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
19
==PAGE:25==
thus the geographical entities. Groundwater has been ’disregarded’ as input since only
one input is needed in the model. As the groundwater circulates back to the ground and
during the right circumstances should have no impact on the groundwater, it has been
excluded from the model as input. Simultaneously the electricity has a cost and possible
emissions depending on the source of electricity, whereas it is crucial to include in the
model.
Since the model does not distinguish between heat and cooling, as cooling is modelled as
heat, the division of the ATES facility into its own separate area was deemed necessary.
In reality, the ATES facility is placed in a district cooling central, connected to the district
heating network as well, to provide cooling and heat as needed. Thus, ATES has its own
separate area in Balmorel with one­directional heat transmission lines to both the DC
and the DH area. The DH area is the default DH area from Balmorel which represents
Copenhagen, whereas the DC area was implemented with a cooling profile of one year
on an hourly basis provided by the Department of District Cooling in HOFOR. For the
transmission lines between heat areas the heattrans addon is used, as this functionality is
not a part of the original model (Section 2.1). Furthermore, the storage function has been
omitted from the model, as the configuration of Balmorel only including heat and electricity
as sectors made this very difficult. The connection from ATES to two storage units would
not be able to distinguish between heat and cooling production, and store the correct
energy form when the opposite was used. Thus, the storage function is disregarded in
the model (Section 2.1).
3.4.2
Characteristics for ATES as a generation technology in Balmorel
The generation technologies in Balmorel have several options for input data. Unit com­
mitment, investment cost, variable and fixed O&M costs, 4 types of fuel emissions etc.
All these different data inputs are not equally relevant for all generation technologies, i.e.
ATES is not a large CHP unit which has a certain time and cost for start­up, whereas the
unit commitment data is irrelevant. It is of course also given, that some information is
crucial to the analysis; investment costs, O&M costs, capacity, efficiency, lifetime (for an­
nuity calculation) and division into technology categories and sub­categories. The latter
is necessary for the annuity calculation and for Balmorel to recognize the type of tech­
nology. Most of this data was provided by CEO/Partner from ATES A/S Lars Hjortshøj
Jacobsen, but since most of it was in ranges the average of the range was chosen, as
described in Section 3.1. The below table shows calculated values, which are used as
input in Balmorel for ATES,
20
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:26==
Unit
Value
Prerequisite
Investment cost
(CAPEX)
Mio. DKK/MW
10
500 kW heat pump
+ 500 kW groundwater cooling
Operation
and maintenance (O&M)
DKK/year
95,000
Capacity
MW
1
Lifetime
Years
30
Efficiency
COP
10.5
Annual maintenance
Hours
100
Table 3.3: Table showing the input values for Balmorel, based on Section 3.1. A more
detailed table showing an overview of the underlying calculations is to be found in Ap­
pendix C.
The O&M costs have been summarized from the previous divided costs, and an average
value of both lifetime and efficiency has been found Appendix C. As for the CAPEX, the
scenario of a 500 kW heat pump + 500 kW groundwater cooling has been selected, to
ensure an uspcaling in 1 MW. But as Balmorel uses million euro pr. MW (MEUR/MW),
CAPEX and O&M costs have been exchanged to this using an exchange rate of 0.134268
from the European Central Bank [19].
Unit
Value
Investment cost
(CAPEX)
MEUR/MW
1.34268
Operation
and maintenance (O&M)
MEUR/MW
0.0127555
Table 3.4: Final CAPEX and O&M costs in correct units of MEUR/MW. For further steps
of calculation see Appendix C.
Thus, the costs in Table 3.4 are input data in Balmorel for the ATES facility.
3.4.3
Implementation of conventional propane unit in Balmorel
When analysing the possible synergy effect from the ATES facility, a reference scenario or
alternative technology is provided, such that the model cannot only choose ATES for pro­
viding cooling in the district cooling area. In collaboration with the Department of District
Cooling in HOFOR, the most likely alternative to the ATES facility, if a district cooling cen­
tral is to be build in Sydhavn, is found to be a conventional propane chiller. The specific
characteristics of the conventional propane machine was not to be obtained directly from
HOFOR except from a final investment cost including drilling, piping etc. for an entire new
central. Thus, the remainder of the data has been estimated from a case produced by
Dansk Fjernvarme, Rambøll and University of Aalborg in Dansk Fjernvarmes FU­Konto
­ Køleplan Danmark 2016 [20]. The case performs an economic business case analysis
of a new district cooling central and calculates the gains and losses of the district cooling
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
21
==PAGE:27==
company. The data from this case is used as an approximation of the costs of implement­
ing a conventional propane cooler. Simultaneously, the efficiency has been approximated
from a ’compressor cooling unit’, as the propane cooler can be categorized as this type
of technology using a cooling agent and electricity. The COP of a compressor cooling
unit has been estimated to be between 3­8 depending on the desired temperature of the
cooling water, with a higher consumption when the temperature needs to be lower [20].
Unit
Value
Investment cost
(CAPEX)
DKK/MW
7,661,084.42
Operation
and maintenance (O&M)
DKK/Year/MW
141,750.00
Efficiency
COP
5,5
Capacity
MW
1
Lifetime
Years
20
Table 3.5: Approximated data for conventional propane cooling machine. More elaborate
steps of calculation can be seen in Appendix D. Data is from HOFOR, [20] and [1].
The data in Table 3.5 consist of a CAPEX provided by HOFOR, which was originally an
investment cost of a case with 8 MW propane cooling machines. This has been scaled
to an investment cost pr. MW, which is presented in the Table 3.5. The O&M cost and
COP is as previous described from a case from Dansk Fjernvarmes FU­Konto ­ Køleplan
Danmark 2016 [20]. The COP has been approximated as an average of the range 3­8.
Lastly, the lifetime of the propane cooler has estimated from Comprehensive Assessment
2020 by the Danish Energy Agency [1].
As for the ATES facility, the monetary values has to be changed into million euro pr. MW,
see Table 3.6,
Unit
Value
Investment cost
(CAPEX)
MEUR/MW
1.02863848
Operation
and maintenance (O&M)
MEUR/MW
0.01903249
Table 3.6: Final CAPEX and O&M costs in correct units of MEUR/MW. For further steps
of calculation see Appendix D.
As shown in Table 3.6, the investment cost of the conventional propane chiller is smaller
than the investment cost for the ATES facility with approximately 300,000 EUR/MW, where
the O&M cost is slightly higher with a difference of approximately 70,000 EUR/MW.
3.4.4
Entities for the Balmorel model
As previously mentioned, a district heating area for Copenhagen already exist in Balmorel
as DK2_Large. In addition the cooling area DK2_COOL as been added, modelled as a
22
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:28==
heat area, as well as a ’dummy’ area for the ATES facility DK2_ATES which has no con­
sumption, but only serve the purpose of producing from the ATES facility and supply the
consumers in either the DH area or DC area. This is to ensure, that cooling and heating
consumers will only receive the correct energy, as only ATES can produce both utilities.
Simultaneously, a reference alternative of a conventional propane cooling machine has
been added to the model, only allowed for investment in DK2_COOL. The transmission
lines needs a maximum capacity in Balmorel, but since all of the possible capacity from
the ATES facility should be available to answer the research question properly, the max­
imum capacity is higher than the consumption at all times. Furthermore, both the ATES
facility and the conventional propane chiller is defined as endogenous variables, to allow
the model to invest in the most optimal option.
Regarding time and years, a fairly detailed model is desired to provide a valid estimate
for a short­term planning. Thus, the model needs to contain a highly hourly resolution,
represented in all seasons of the year; summer, autumn, winter and spring. Furthermore,
a long­term scenario is desired as well to determine the possible synergy effects and
flexibility in the future, where demand changes for both heating and cooling. As the heat
consumption is decreasing by default in the model, the cooling demand increases slightly
over the years as more customers are expected to connect to the network (HOFOR).In
the model, the following entities for time is used,
• Years: 2020, 2025, 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045, 2050
• Seasons: S02, S08, S15, S21, S28, S34, S42, S42
• Times: T001, T003, T005, T007, T009, T011, T013, T015, T017, T019, T021, T023,
T025, T027, T029, T031, T033, T035, T037, T039, T041, T043, T045, T047, T049,
T051, T053, T055, T057, T059, T061, T063, T065, T067, T069, T071, T073, T075,
T077, T079, T081, T083, T085, T087, T089, T091, T093, T095, T097, T099, T101,
T103, T105, T107, T109, T111, T113, T115, T117, T119, T121, T123, T125, T127,
T129, T131, T133, T135, T137, T139, T141, T143, T145, T147, T149, T151, T153,
T155, T157, T159, T161, T163, T165, T167
Ideally all years, all seasons and all time­steps was used in the scenario to conform both
the operational as well as the long­term results. But as this require a great amount of
computer power and time, this was not an option for this thesis. Instead, every 5th year
from 2020 to 2050 is considered allowing investment for ATES and demand of cooling from
year 2025, as the year 2020 has already passed. The seasons considers only 8 seasons,
i.e. 8 weeks, of each year as more seasons would also require to much computational
power. Thus, the seasons in the model is scattered over the year with the aim of covering
all actual seasons as this shifts the demand for heat and cooling (Section 3.1). Instead,
a very high resolution of time has been modelled to emphasise the operational entities
of ATES, as every 2nd time­step of an entire season is included in the model. Thus, the
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
23
==PAGE:29==
model contains the characteristics of both a simulation and scenario tool with regards to
time, whereas bot long­term and short­term planning can be investigated [5].
3.5
Analysis of results from Balmorel
When analysing the results, the perspective is with regards to answering the research
question, of how the implementation of ATES can contribute to a synergy effect in the
Greater Copenhagen Area between district heating and district cooling, as declared in
Section 1.2. The first interesting part with regards to answering the research question is,
if the model chooses to invest in the ATES facility at all, given the data input declared
earlier in Section 3.4.
Figure 3.6: Annual generation capacity of the heat and cooling sector in the district heating
and district cooling area of Copenhagen as well as the ATES area, for the years 2020,
2025, 2030 and 2035.
24
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.7: Annual generation capacity of the heat and cooling sector in the district heating
and district cooling area of Copenhagen as well as the ATES area, for the years 2040,
2045 and 2050.
In the graph in Figure 3.6 and Figure 3.7 the annual generation capacity for the three
areas of cooling, heat and the dummy area is presented. The division of the years have
been made, as the generation in DK2_COOL cannot be seen if all years are together, as
the generation capacity of DK2_Large increases rapidly when a heat storage is installed
in year 2040. As can be seen, the model invests in the ATES facility over all years with
a capacity of approximately 1.2 GW. This might seem small considering the expected
demand from Section 3.4, but as not all seasons and times are included this can explain
the behaviour. When investigating Figure 3.7 it appears, that a small investment has been
made in the conventional propane cooler in DK2_COOL of 667,31 kW. Thus, the model
as chosen to not purely rely on ATES although the invested capacity in the propane chiller
is marginal.
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.8: Aggregated production of all years over all seasons and timesteps.
As seen in Figure 3.8 the aggregated production of all years in each season shows, that
the propane cooler has peak supply when the ATES facility has peak supply as well. If i.e.
considering S15 for both technologies (the grey line), this shows a similar fluctuation for
both technologies, thus the production capacity of the invested ATES facility has reached
a maximum whereas the propane cooler produces the remainder. The production from the
propane cooler is rather small compared to the ATES facility with a maximum of 4 MWh
and approximately 7350 MWh respectively, but apparently a need for more production
is present. Especially in seasons 02, 08 and 52 the production from the propane chiller
is almost linear at its maximum. These are the winter seasons of the year, whereas
most of the production from the ATES facility might be transmitted to the district heating
area, either to substitute a production from a more expensive heating technology, or a
technology with higher emissions.
26
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.9: Aggregated flow of all years over all seasons and timesteps.
In the graphs of Figure 3.9 the aggregated flow of all years in all seasons are shown from
the ATES area to both district heating and district cooling. The ATES facility transmits
almost all the production to the district heating network in the winter seasons, S02, S08
and S52. The rest of the seasons the flow from ATES to DH is more fluctuating, which is
suitable with a lower demand of heat during the summer seasons. As a contradiction to
this, showing the imbalance between heat and cooling [10], the flow to the district cooling
network is at its highest in the summer seasons S23 and S28. Of course the consumption
in both areas has quite a gap in size, and it can be seen that almost half of the consumption
in the winter seasons in the district cooling network is produced by the propane cooler, as
ATES flows approximately 4 MWh as well in i.e. S52. With regards to the flow, i.e. the
production, from the ATES facility to the district heating network, the heat prices are,
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.10: Annual average heat price of years 2020, 2025, 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045 and
2050 for all 3 areas.
The values presented in Figure 3.10 show an overall resemblance of all values over all
years. Since all the areas are connected, it would be surprising if otherwise was the
case. Despite the resemblance in prices, the heat price in the district heating area starts
decreasing in year 2040, probably due to the installation of the heat storage in that ex­
act year, which applies additional flexibility to the district heating heat balance. Thus,
the district heating area can use stored heat in peak hours to prevent the usage of of­
ten expensive or polluting technologies, whereas the heat price can decrease. For both
the ATES dummy area and the district cooling area the price increases from 2040­2050,
probably due to the expected higher demand in these last years, which is also shown in
the flow from ATES to DC when comparing year 2035 to year 2050, see Appendix E.
For comparison of the heat prices with an without ATES, a model has been performed
without ATES or the cooling area. This to investigate, whether the ATES facility provide
any savings and synergy effect of substituting more expensive, and often fossil based,
peak demand technologies.
Figure 3.11: Annual average heat price of years 2020, 2025, 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045 and
2050 for district heating only.
28
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:34==
When comparing those prices to the scenario with ATES there is a larger gap between
most of the prices, as shown in Figure 3.11 where the difference of each year between the
heat price in the two scenarios are calculated. In year 2020, the model was not allowed to
invest in ATES, whereas the heat price is equal in both scenarios. In 2035 the difference
is 5.45 EUR/MWh which is a significant difference. This difference is decreasing from the
years 2040 where the heat storage is installed with increasing capacity, but ATES still has
an influence on the price of heat in the district heating area. ATES also has an influence
on the energy mix in the district heating area, as both the capacity of lightoil, fueloil and
natural gas boilers and coal etc. are decreased if not removed from the energy mix. Thus
the more expensive or fossil fuel based heat technologies are to some extent substituted
by the ATES facility, see Appendix E.
3.5.1
Operational aspects of ATES
When considering the operational perspective of the ATES facility, the hourly flow in each
season can be considered a representation of this, as this represents the production from
the ATES facility to either district heating or district cooling. In order to determine the
operational entities of the ATES facility, year 2025 has been selected as an example,
considering the flow to both district heating and district cooling, whit emphasis on the
differences in seasons an timesteps. Initially, the flow from ATES to district cooling is
considered in Figure 3.12,
Figure 3.12: Flow from ATES area to District Cooling area in 2025.
As shown in Figure 3.12 the production of cooling (heat transmission in the graph, as this
is how it is modelled in Balmorel), is larger in the summer and early fall seasons in S21,
S28 and S34. It has peak values in T09­T011 as an example, and approximately 20­24
timesteps after this. Thus, the peak hours are around midday as is usually the warmest
time of the day in the summer. The peak demand reaches 6 MWh in season S28, whereas
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
29
==PAGE:35==
the lowest values can be found at approximately 4 MWh in the winter seasons.
These characteristics of the cooling demand close to the reverse of the heating demand,
the previous mentioned imbalance between heating and cooling demand [10], as can also
be depicted in Figure 3.12,
Figure 3.13: Flow from ATES area to District Heating area in 2025.
When disregarding the fragmented flow from ATES to district heating in Figure 3.13, it
appears that the ATES facility supplies the heating network with the maximum value of
1200 MWh in seasons S52, S02, S08 and S15 which are all weeks in winter and early
spring. This emphasizes the imbalance in heating and cooling demand, and yields a
certain flexibility of the ATES facility, as it produces a great amount of heat in the winter,
and a great amount of cooling in the summer, as peak demand of both energy sectors
does not overlap.
3.6
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis is conducted, to determine the robustness of the model and chal­
lenge the uncertainties of the input data. A large amount of the input data is connected
with some uncertainty, as it has not been possible to determine the actual investment
costs of ATES, efficiency and actual current and future demand for cooling (Section 3.1).
Scenarios are always connected to some uncertainty as it is not possible to predict the
future [5], but since most of these values have been provided in ranges these parameters
are considered to be a weak point of the analysis. Thus, a sensitivity analysis has been
conducted of the investment costs of the ATES facility and the annual demand.
30
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:36==
Investment cost
change
Annual Demand
change
Scenario High
+ 50 %
+ 40 %
Scenario Low
­ 20 %
­ 40 %
Table 3.7: Change in investment cost and annual demand in % for the sensitivity analysis.
Investment cost is based on range provided in Appendix A, and the change in demand i
provided by HOFOR (Section 3.4.
The changes of investment costs area based on the data provided by ATES A/S, where
several different possibilities of size, cost and type was suggested (Appendix A, Sec­
tion 3.1). The range of the costs are quite high, from 8­17 mio. DKK., and the sensitivity
analysis aims at embracing these differences by a high scenario with + 50 % and a low
scenario with ­ 20 % of the investment cost used in the analysis of 10 mio. DKK. Further­
more, the investment cost is highly dependent on soil foundations, archaeological findings
and other obstacles as well.
The annual demand has been estimated by HOFOR, but is very dependent on possible
customers and location of those close to the cooling central or other customers. Thus, a
slightly conservative range of +/­ 40 % has been applied to determine the uncertainty of
future consumers of cooling.
3.6.1
Sensitivity analysis of investment cost
When performing the sensitivity analysis on the investment costs, the generation capacity
is the most important part to analyse, to detect the influence of an either more expensive
or cheaper solution.
Figure 3.14: Generation capacity of + 50 % investment cost scenario.
The graph in Figure 3.14 only shows the generation capacity in the ATES and DC area,
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
31
==PAGE:37==
as the values are far to small to appear properly in a graph also containing the DH area.
As depicted in Figure 3.14, the investment in ATES has been less attractive for the model
as the investment cost has increased by 50 %. The model has only invested in a capacity
between 5­11 MW from 2025­2050 of ATES. This is a significant reduction from the previ­
ous investment of 1.2 GW in the initial model. Thus, the investment cost cannot align with
the most expensive solution of ATES facility (Appendix A) without significantly decreasing
the feasibility of the investment. Simultaneously, the capacity of the conventional propane
chiller has increased slightly from previous 667.31 kW to a range of 800­1000 kW, in order
to supply the missing production from the ATES facility.
The opposite is the case when the investment cost is decreased by 20 %, as seen in
Figure 3.15
Figure 3.15: Generation capacity of ­ 20 % investment cost scenario.
The propane chiller has no capacity in any years, and the capacity of ATES has increased
to the range of 1.7­2 GW over the years. The investment in ATES is far more attractive
at the lower investment cost, whereas cooling is only supplied by ATES.
Based on these results of the sensitivity analysis of the investment cost, the model is
significantly volatile to changes of the investment cost of the ATES facility. + 50 % might
be considered a high change for a sensitivity analysis, but based on the inflation of the
last 2 years from the war in Ukraine, COVID­19 and the following scarcity of resources for
building projects, this might not be an irrelevant factor to investigate [21]. Furthermore, the
addition of 50 % is still within the possible range of the actual investment costs if the type of
facility is changed (Appendix A). Simultaneously, the decrease of 20 % had a great impact
on the capacity as the model choose to only invest in ATES and not in the conventional
32
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:38==
propane chiller. Thus, if the prices were to decrease with a % of +/­ 20 (or the range
from the initial investment cost to ­ 20 %), the ATES facility would be feasible as single
technology for supplying the district cooling network, while simultaneously supplying the
district heating network during peak hours or otherwise necessary.
3.6.2
Sensitivity analysis of change in annual demand
The second part of the sensitivity analysis investigates if the model is sensitive to changes
in the annual cooling demand. Firstly, the scenario with a 40 % increase in annual cooling
demand is investigated as depicted in Figure 3.16,
Figure 3.16: Generation capacity of + 40 % annual cooling demand scenario.
In this scenario the capacity of the ATES facility is the same as the baseline model of
1.2 GW for all years. The capacity of the conventional propane chiller is slightly higher
at 818.72 kW, which is close to the capacity of the high investment cost. Thus, when the
price of the ATES facility is 10 mio. DKK an increase in demand will result in an increase
in the conventional propane chiller.
Considering the low annual demand scenario with a decrease of 40 % in Figure 3.17
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.17: Generation capacity of ­ 40 % annual cooling demand scenario.
In this scenario, the capacity of the ATES facility remains at 1.2 GW whereas the capacity
of the conventional propane chiller decreases to 353.28 kW. From this sensitivity analysis
of the annual cooling demand it can be deducted that the investment in the ATES facility is
not sensitive to demand decreases or increases, within a range of +/­ 40 % as the capac­
ity of ATES remains the same in either scenario. Instead the capacity of the conventional
propane chiller decreases, as it is continuously more feasible to invest in the ATES facil­
ity. This result yields a certain flexibility to the future investment of an ATES facility in the
Greater Copenhagen Area, as the annual demand has a wide range for which ATES is
still a feasible investment. This could very well be due to the unchanged demand in heat,
for which ATES supply a larger amount than cooling.
An important aspect to remember when considering the results of both the analysis and
the sensitivity analysis is the discard of the storage, which will be an actual part of the
system in an ATES facility was installed. 80­90 % of either excess heat or excess cooling
is stored in the underground, which has an energy preserving function whereas the losses
are minimized. Of course there will be losses, but if excess heat could be stored during
summer or early fall for usage in the winter season the actual capacity and production of
the ATES facility would be higher than presented in the above results. Perhaps not high
enough to compensate for the 50 % increase in investment cost, but the actual amount
of energy for usage will be higher in reality when the storage is present as well.
34
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:40==
4
Discussion
Although the results of the analysis are promising with regards to creating a synergy ef­
fect between district cooling and district heating, the analysis is not without uncertainties.
These uncertainties will be discussed and analysed, initiating with the demand profile.
The demand profile was provided by HOFOR as an aggregated example of a cluster of
cooling customers. But the profile is based on old data, and in a rapidly changing city
as Copenhagen the demand in the case­area Sydhavn might have changed since the
data gathered for the profile was collected. This might yield a higher or lower demand
of cooling, whereas some of the reliability of the model can be questioned. But although
the demand profile and the annual demand are encumbered by uncertainty, a change
in demand did not have a significant impact on the capacity of the ATES facility, thus a
great amount of the production from ATES is supplied to the district heating network (Sec­
tion 3.6). Only the investment cost had a significant impact on the investment of ATES,
whereas it is more volatile to economic changes in society than infrastructural. And the
investment costs are quite uncertain as well, since they depend on multiple factors and a
more specific case to determine properly. This has not been possible in this thesis, but
that also yields a significant uncertainty to the results of the model, especially considering
how volatile the model is to changes in investment costs. Thus, before actually imple­
menting an ATES facility anywhere the investment costs should be settled with a degree
of certainty to prevent economic losses of the investment.
Another uncertain data input is the efficiency of both the ATES facility and the conven­
tional propane chiller, as the range of 3.5­60 in COP is quite large for the ATES facility.
No efficiency was reported for the propane chiller, whereas the COP was estimated by
the category of a compression chiller [20]. With such a high range as for the ATES facility,
the result of the model might have been much different if the COP was just 20 % higher or
lower than the depicted COP of 10 used in the model. This would have been an interesting
subject for a sensitivity analysis, which was not conducted due to resources. The higher
efficiency of the ATES facility is probably a major reason for the preferred investment in
ATES instead of the propane chiller, as the propane chiller has a lower investment cost.
Thus, the high COP compound for the higher investment cost, as the yield of the ATES
facility outweighs the savings of investing in the propane chiller. In reality, the COP of
the ATES facility would most likely change during the seasons depending on the type of
production, see Appendix A. The COP is very high when using the groundwater directly
for cooling, when groundwater temperatures are adequately low, whereas it is quite low
when producing either cooling or heat using the heat pump. This would most likely be
in the winter season as well as in the middle and end of the summer. Thus, considering
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
35
==PAGE:41==
the length of winter and the amount of heat produced by the ATES facility using the heat
pump, the COP might actually have been too high with an average of 10, whereas the
results can be ’falsely’ positive with regards to the feasibility of the technology. When con­
sidering the feasibility, the lack of storage in the model might also have a certain impact,
and should somehow be considered before installing an ATES facility, if the investment
should rely on the modelled results. The storage function could enhance the efficiency
of the facility, and possibly justify the usage of a COP of 10 in the model. It would yield
a more beneficial analysis, as the facility would have to produce less to supply the same
amount. In this case also electricity prices could be considered if the applied control sys­
tem was smart enough, to avoid production when electricity prices are high.
36
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:42==
5
Conclusion
In order to make a proper conclusion of the results of the analysis and discussion, and to
answer the research question, it is here presented again,
From a system point of view, how can implementing an ATES facility facilitate the synergy
in the Greater Copenhagen Area between district heating and district cooling?
From the analysis performed in Section 3.5, it has been determined that Balmorel chooses
to invest in an ATES facility with a capacity of 1.2 GW, with the data input clarified in Sec­
tion 3.1 and Section 3.4. The ATES facility produces both cooling and heat; it supplies
cooling to the district cooling area in all considered season, whereas the supply of heat
is fragmented in the summer seasons and at maximum capacity in the winter seasons.
Due to the this high supply in the district heating area in winter seasons, the model also
chooses to invest in a very small capacity of the conventional propane cooler of 667.31
kW. This investment has been considered advantageous by the model, instead of using
another alternative for the production of heat, in order to supply the cooling area only from
ATES. The investment in the ATES facility lowers the heat prices, i.e. heat prices in the
cooling area is price of cooling, compared to a system where no ATES is allowed for in­
vestment. In the years with the largest difference, the distinction between the heat prices
are 5.45 EUR/MW. The average of heat prices for each year are between 8.7 EUR/MW
and 13.5 EUR/MW for the district heating area when ATES is implemented, and between
11.98 EUR/MW and 18.66 EUR/MW when ATES is not implemented in the model. As
for the operational entities, the imbalance of heat and cooling demand and the ability of
ATES to produce either heat, cooling or both simultaneously provide a flexibility to the
system which reduces the heat prices. Furthermore, the ATES facility produces energy
throughout the entire year instead of only in summer or winter, as heat­only or cooling­
only technologies most commonly do (except for base load technologies which produces
all year).
In the sensitivity analysis it is clear, that the ATES facility is volatile to changes in in­
vestment cost, as the capacity decreased significantly when the investment costs were
increased. The opposite was the case when the investment costs were decreased, where
the model invested in only ATES and no conventional propane chiller, In this case, the
capacity of the ATES facility was increased so to supply all the demand in the cooling
area. In the performance of a sensitivity analysis on the annual cooling demand, no ma­
jor oscillations of capacity was depicted. The capacity remained the same for the ATES
facility, and the model decreased the capacity of the conventional propane chiller instead
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
37
==PAGE:43==
when demand was decreased. When the annual demand was increased, the capacity of
the propane chiller was increased as well. This robustness with regards to the demand
implies, that the ATES facility is a feasible investment to a certain capacity, given the
current investment cost in the model of 10 mio. DKK.
To summarize the above the implementation of an ATES facility can be a feasible so­
lution so enhance synergy effects between the district heating and district cooling area
in Greater Copenhagen, when considering the case­area in Sydhavn. The implementa­
tion yields a flexibility ind the heat supply and substitutes several peak load technologies
during peak hours. Due to the imbalance between the heating and cooling demand, the
ATES facility can supply both areas in opposite seasons while functioning as a base load
for cooling. But, the model invests in a conventional propane cooler, and although the
capacity of the propane chiller is quite small this questions the current feasibility of ATES.
When prices are lowered the conventional chiller is removed, but an additional investiga­
tion should be depicted to determine at which exact price the ATES facility is feasible as
single cooling supplier at a cooling central, as a range of 0 to ­ 20 % is quite large. But as
to the operational aspects, the ATES facility implies flexibility an lower the average heat
prices of the district heating area.
As the case­area has such a high demand for heat, which is the main consumer of the pro­
duction from ATES, the investment might not be scaled to an area with less heat demand.
This can not be concluded from this thesis, and would require further analysis since a
sensitivity analysis of the district heating demand is out of the scope of this thesis.
38
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
[1]
Danish Energy Agency. Comprehensive Assessment 2020. 2020. URL: https://
energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-01/dk_ca_2020_dk_0.pdf.
[2]
European Commission. Energy Roadmap 2050 ­ Impact assessment and scenario
analysis. 2011. URL: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2014-10/roadmap2050_
ia_20120430_en_0.pdf.
[3]
M. Bloemendal, T. Olsthoorn, and F. Boons. How to achieve optimal and sustainable
use of the subsurface for Aquifer Thermal Energy Storage. 2013. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421513011415.
[4]
HOFOR. Ny energicentral huser både varme, kulde og spildevand. 2022. URL:
https://www.hofor.dk/pressemeddelse/ny-energicentral-huser-baade-varme-kulde-og-
spildevand/.
[5]
D. Connolly et al. A review of computer tools for analysing the integration of renew­
able energy into various energy systems. 2010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0306261909004188.
[6]
H. Ravn. The Balmorel Model: Theoretical Background. 2001. URL: http://www.
balmorel.com/images/downloads/the-balmorel-model-theoretical-background.pdf.
[7]
H. Ravn. The Balmorel Model Structure (Revised 2018.04.15). 2016.
[8]
D. Salvatore. Managerial Economics in a Global Economy. Oxford University Press,
Incorporated, 6th edition, 2006.
[9]
Grøn Energi, Rambøll, and Dansk Fjernvarme. Inspirationskatalog ­ 10 eksempler
på samarbejde mellem fjernvarme og industri. 2020. URL: https://danskfjernvarme.
dk/gronenergi/projekter/inspirationskatalog-for-samarbejde-mellem-virksomheder-og-
fjernvarmeselskaber.
[10]
S. Schüppler, P. Fleuchaus, and P. Blum. Techno­economic and environmental
analysis of an Aquifer Thermal Energy Storage (ATES) in Germany. 2019. URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332623109_Techno- economic_and_
environmental _ analysis _ of _ an _ Aquifer _ Thermal _ Energy _ Storage _ ATES _ in _
Germany.
[11]
M. Bloemendal and T. Olsthoorn. The effect of a density gradient in groundwater
on ATES system efficiency and subsurface space use. 2018. URL: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/326866500_The_effect_of_a_density_gradient_in_
groundwater_on_ATES_system_efficiency_and_subsurface_space_use.
[12]
HOFOR. Her leverer HOFOR fjernkøling. URL: https://www.hofor.dk/erhverv/
fjernkoeling/bliv-fjernkoelekunde/leverer-hofor-fjernkoeling-2/.
[13]
Varmelast. Fjernvarmesystemet. URL: https://www.varmelast.dk/fjernvarmesystemet/
transmissions--og-distributionsnet.
[14]
HOFOR. Bliv klog på fjernkøling. URL: https://www.hofor.dk/erhverv/fjernkoeling/
bliv-klog-paa-fjernkoeling-2/.
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
39
==PAGE:45==
[15]
HOFOR. Her leverer HOFOR fjernvarme. URL: https : / / www . hofor . dk / privat /
fjernvarme/bliv-klog-paa-fjernvarme/leverer-hofor-fjernvarme/.
[16]
GEUS. National Drilling database Jupiter. URL: https://www.geus.dk/produkter-
ydelser-og-faciliteter/data-og-kort/national-boringsdatabase-jupiter.
[17]
The Danish Energy Agency, Energy Ministry of Climate, and Utilities. Bekendt­
gørelse af lov om fjernkøling. 2021. URL: https : / / www . retsinformation . dk / eli /
lta/2021/1944.
[18]
The Danish Energy Agency, Energy Ministry of Climate, and Utilities. Bekendt­
gørelse af lov om varmeforsyning. 2021. URL: https://www.retsinformation.dk/
eli/lta/2021/2068.
[19]
European Central Bank and Eurosystem. Danish krone (DKK). 2023. URL: https:
//www.hofor.dk/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Tekniske_bestemmelser_HOFOR_
Fjernvarme_fra_2023.pdf.
[20]
Dansk Fjernvarme, Rambøll, and Aalborg Universitet. Dansk Fjernvarmes FU­Konto
­ Køleplan Danmark 2016. 2016. URL: https://dbdh.dk/wp-content/uploads/2015-
04-K%C3%B8leplan-Danmark-2016.pdf.
[21]
Danmarks Nationalbank. Tema ­ Inflation og prisudvikling. n.d. URL: https://www.
nationalbanken.dk/da/temaer/inflation.
[22]
HOFOR. Tekniske bestemmelser for fjernvarme. 2023. URL: https://www.hofor.
dk/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Tekniske_bestemmelser_HOFOR_Fjernvarme_fra_
2023.pdf.
40
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:46==
A
Interview of CEO/Partner in ATES A/S
Mail­interview with CEO/Partner in ATES A/S, Lars Hjortshøj Jacobsen.
Red marks the answers from CEO/Partner in ATES A/S Lars Hjortshøj Jacobsen.
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
41
==PAGE:47==
42
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:48==
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
43
==PAGE:49==
B
Groundwater wells for case area
Udskrevet 11/5 2023 Side 1
DGU arkivnr: 208.   63
BORERAPPORT
De Nationale Geologiske Undersøgelser for Danmark og Grønland
Borested : KBH SV SKANDIAGADE DANSK ILT OG BRINTFABRIK
2450 København SV
Kommune : København
Region
 : Hovedstaden
Boringsdato : 1/1 1921
Boringsdybde : 57,8 meter
Terrænkote : 1,3 meter o. DNN
Brøndborer : 
MOB-nr
 : 
BB-journr
 : 
BB-bornr
 : 
Prøver
- modtaget  : 
- beskrevet  : 
- antal gemt : 
af : B
Formål
 : Vandforsyningsboring
Anvendelse  : 
Boremetode : 
Kortblad
 : 1513  ISØ
UTM-zone  : 32
UTM-koord. : 722730, 6172850
Datum
 : ED50
Koordinatkilde
 : 
Koordinatmetode : Dig. på koor.bord
25,5 m³/t
3,6 meter
(seneste)
4,5 meter u.t.
24/6 1951
(første)
1,9 meter u.t.
1/1 1921
Indtag 1
Ro-vandstand
Pejledato
Ydelse
Sænkning
Pumpetid
dg
ml
zk
0 (grus, sand og grus).
6 (ler).
6,6 (kalk, kridt kalksten (generelt for kalk og kridt)).
meter u.t.
ø ukendt
ø152
8,2
Uforet
0
5
10
15
20
f ortsættes..
Figure B.1: Drilling report for drilling 208.63 found at Jupiter National Drilling database,
GEUS [16].
44
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:50==
Figure B.2: Drilling sight for drilling 208.63 found at Jupiter National Drilling database,
GEUS by usage of Google Earth [16].
Figure B.3: Drilling sight for drilling 208.63 found at Jupiter National Drilling database,
GEUS by usage of Google Earth [16].
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
45
==PAGE:51==
Figure B.4: Drilling sight for drilling 208.63 found at Jupiter National Drilling database,
GEUS by usage of Google Earth [16].
46
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:52==
C
Calculations for costs of ATES
Figure C.1:
Table of calculations and results converting costs to million EUR/MW
(MEUR/MW), including sensitivity analysis of the investment costs (CAPEX). Sources
vary, but most are from ATES A/S, see Appendix A or [22] or [19].
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
47
==PAGE:53==
D
Calculations for costs of conventional
propane cooler from HOFOR
Department of District Cooling
Figure D.1:
Table of calculations and results converting costs to million EUR/MW
(MEUR/MW). Sources vary but are mostly from HOFOR Fjernkøling A/S or [20] or [19].
48
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:54==
E
Results from Balmorel
Figure E.1: Graph presenting the flow from ATES to DC in year 2035.
Figure E.2: Graph presenting the flow from ATES to DC in year 2050.
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
49
==PAGE:55==
Figure E.3: Graph presenting the energy mix in GW in 2035 for a scenario without ATES.
50
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
==PAGE:56==
Figure E.4: Graph presenting the energy mix in GW in 2035 for a scenario with ATES.
Potential role of aquifer thermal energy storage in future energy systems
51
==PAGE:57==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
