==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Multi-objective optimization of wind farm 
layouts considering electricity generation 
and power variability
Yanpu Chen
DTU Wind-M-0671
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0671 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Ju Feng
Lesia Mitridati
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Yanpu Chen
Title:
Multi-objective optimization of wind farm 
layouts considering electricity generation 
and power variability
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Multi-objective optimization of wind
farm layouts considering electricity
generation and power variability
Author:
S212381 Yanpu Chen
Supervisor:
Ju Feng
Lesia Mitridati
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Constantly changing wind conditions during wind farm operation lead to erratic
power fluctuations. With the continuous expansion of wind farm scale and the improve-
ment of wind power penetration rate, how to reduce the variability of power has become
a concern of wind farm designers and operators. This research will introduce an index
to measure the variability of the wind farm, and at the same time, the index and the
mean power of the wind farm will be used as the optimization target, the layout of the
wind farm will be optimized by random search method. The results show that it is fea-
sible to design wind farms to produce power with high mean values and low variability.
At the same time, using the 2018 electricity market data, in the corresponding layout of
the optimized Pareto solution, select the wind farm layout that achieves the maximum
electricity sales revenue. This result is slightly higher than the annual income of the
original wind farm.
I
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
I
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Wind turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Current status and challenges of wind power generation . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Wind farm layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Wind farm optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Wind farm modelling
7
2.1
Power output
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Variability of power output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Constraint functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Optimization algorithms
13
3.1
MORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Definition of dominance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
MORS combined with power-priority
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Layout Optimization
17
4.1
Pure random search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Power-priority random search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Compare with origin layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Longer iterations of the power-priority approach . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Algorithm Comparison
25
5.1
NSGA-II
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.1
Introducion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2
Influence of parameters on results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
AGE-MOEA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
PSO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Performance comparison of multi-objective algorithms . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Electricity market trading
35
==PAGE:6==
6.1
Description of Electricity Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Formulation of the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Optimized layout revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Conclusion
47
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
1.1
Wind turbine
Wind energy, as a renewable energy source, has made significant progress in the
past few decades with the development of technology and the improvement of environ-
mental protection awareness, and the most representative use of wind energy is wind
power generation. The principle is that wind turbines convert wind energy into mechan-
ical energy through rotating blades and then convert mechanical energy into electrical
energy through generators. With the continuous advancement of wind power genera-
tion technology, from the initial small wind turbines to the current large wind turbines,
from fixed-pitch wind turbines to variable-pitch wind turbines, wind power generation
technology has undergone many technical upgrades and improvements [1].
Among them, blades, as an essential medium for converting wind energy into me-
chanical energy, play an important role in wind turbines. A variety of blades with more
complex aerodynamic shapes [2] [3]have been developed. Different shapes will bring
unique lift and drag coefficients to the blades, thereby affecting the efficiency of ab-
sorbing wind energy. And as the wind turbine’s size increases, the blades’ length also
increases.
Carbon fiber materials are gradually used to manufacture large wind turbine blades
to meet the performance requirements such as strength and stiffness brought about by
the increase in length. The use of carbon fiber makes the large blades have good char-
acteristics lightweight, which is convenient for transportation and installation and also
reduces the load on the tower and axle.
At the same time, current wind turbines generally adopt variable pitch technology.
Unlike traditional fixed-pitch wind turbines that can only stall passively through blades,
variable-pitch technology can automatically adjust the blade angle and speed according
to wind speed and direction to ensure that the wind turbine is always in the best working
status and improve power generation efficiency and stability.
The transmission system of a wind turbine focuses on efficiently transferring the
blades’ mechanical energy to the generator. Conventional wind turbines use a gearbox
drive system, which is relatively heavy and expensive to maintain, and the gearbox is
also prone to failure. However, in recent years, direct-drive wind turbines [4] have been
widely used. It directly connects the generator to the wind wheel without a gearbox
and has a simple and compact structure, dramatically improving the whole machine’s
reliability. While improving the operating efficiency, the failure rate of the unit is sig-
nificantly reduced, and the maintenance cost is reduced.
The introduction of steady flow technology to solve the problem of voltage and
frequency fluctuations of wind turbines caused by wind speed changes is also an im-
portant innovation. The electric energy output by wind turbines is generally alternating
current, and the current stabilization technology stabilizes the electric energy input to
the grid by controlling parameters such as the phase and amplitude of the generator
output current. As a result, the grid can receive electricity stably, increasing the overall
efficiency and reliability of the wind turbines.
What is more noteworthy is that in order to meet various environmental and mar-
1
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
ket demands, the design of wind turbines has gradually shown a diversified development
trend. Wind turbines are being designed for different wind speed environments and off-
shore locations, and there are variations in the shape of wind turbines, such as horizon-
tal and vertical axis turbines. At the same time, as technology develops, wind turbines
become more reliable and cost-effective; advances in high-tech material technology,
advanced manufacturing, and maintenance techniques help to increase the efficiency of
wind turbines, making them more economical and competitive. Additionally, develop-
ments in IoT [5] and artificial intelligence [6] are making wind turbines smarter. They
can now monitor their operating status in real-time through sensors and optimize power
generation efficiency and maintenance schedules through intelligent algorithms. This
results in increased operational efficiency and reliability.
In general, the development trend of wind turbines is to increase power density,
diversify design, improve reliability, reduce cost, and be intelligent. The development
of these trends will help wind turbines be more widely used in the field of renewable
energy and further promote energy transformation and sustainable development.
However, wind power also has its distinct disadvantages. The most intuitive man-
ifestation is its instability. Wind power generation depends on wind speed, wind direc-
tion, and other weather conditions, and power generation is mainly affected by wind
speed. At low wind speeds, wind turbines may experience a decline in power genera-
tion or even shut down, which will have a negative impact on the stable operation of
the power grid. In order to alleviate this problem, energy storage equipment [7] is de-
veloped in conjunction with wind power generation. Wind farms equipped with energy
storage systems can control power output to a certain extent to reduce the impact on
power quality. Moreover, wind turbines will generate unavoidable noise during opera-
tion, which will have a particular impact on the surrounding environment and residents’
lives. At present, there are related papers [8] [9]on how to reduce the working noise of
wind turbines. In terms of energy density, compared with traditional fossil energy, wind
energy has a lower energy density, so more wind turbines are required to generate the
same energy. This could lead to more wind power facilities taking up more space and
resources.
1.2
Wind farm
With the increasing demand for sustainable energy power generation, planning and
constructing wind farms is necessary to make more efficient and reasonable use of wind
resources. A wind farm usually consists of multiple wind turbines, divided into onshore
wind farms and offshore wind farms according to its construction area, and its scale
can vary from a few wind turbines to hundreds or even thousands of wind turbines. The
construction of a wind farm usually requires careful consideration and evaluation of var-
ious aspects, such as terrain, wind speed, environmental impact, and safety, to ensure
its safety, reliability, and efficiency. Traditional onshore wind farms are usually located
in open areas such as plateaus, mountains, and grasslands because these areas have rel-
atively high wind speeds and are suitable for wind power generation. The advantages of
traditional onshore wind farms include low construction costs, low maintenance costs,
and ease of construction and maintenance. However, with the saturation of onshore
wind power construction and the limitation of land resources, offshore wind farms are
2
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
gradually attracting attention in the current wind farm construction.
Offshore wind farm refers to offshore wind power generation built on the ocean
with a water depth of about 10 meters and usually uses substantial wind resources at
sea to generate electricity. The advantages of offshore wind farms are that they do
not occupy land resources, are not affected by terrain, have higher wind speeds, have
more abundant wind energy resources, have a larger single-unit capacity of wind tur-
bines ranging from 2MW to 10MW, and higher annual utilization hours. Offshore wind
farms are also significant for the electricity demand in coastal areas. Typically, densely
populated coastal areas are unsuitable for building large onshore wind farms, while
offshore wind farms can effectively alleviate local power demand by utilizing coastal
wind resources. However, the construction of offshore wind farms is also technically
challenging, and the construction cost is generally 2 to 3 times that of onshore wind
farms.
The construction of offshore wind farms must consider the complexity and harsh-
ness of ocean environments such as waves, storms, and currents. For wind turbines,
moisture-proof and salt-fog-proof measures must be taken during long-term offshore
operations to avoid unit accidents caused by material corrosion. These factors will im-
pact the construction and operation of offshore wind turbines, and corresponding tech-
nical measures must be taken to deal with them. Hence, the technical and investment
costs are relatively high. And its maintenance and operation must be carried out at sea,
and issues such as personnel safety and equipment care need to be considered. In addi-
tion, since offshore wind farms are far from the land if the equipment fails or needs to
be repaired, it is also necessary to consider the difficulty of rescue and transportation.
From the perspective of power transmission, offshore wind farms need to lay submarine
cables to transmit power to land, which also increases construction costs.
The generator sets of offshore wind farms are generally relatively large, usually
using large-scale wind turbines with a blade length of more than 50 meters. Currently,
Vestas [10] has launched a 15MW wind turbine. These wind turbines are usually in-
stalled in shallow seas, such as shallow seas and offshore seas. In addition, offshore
wind farms also need to consider protecting the marine environment and the impact on
the ecological environment, such as by reducing noise and the effect on fish and marine
life.
The development of offshore wind farms has received widespread attention and
promotion worldwide. Denmark is one of the pioneers of offshore wind power in the
world, and its offshore wind power development has gone through several stages:
Early test stage (1991-2002): Denmark established the world’s first commercial
offshore wind farm, "Vindeby" in 1991, with 11 wind turbines installed, with a total
capacity of 4.95 MW. Since then, Denmark has successively established several offshore
wind farms and has continuously promoted technological innovation and equipment
upgrades to improve power generation efficiency and reliability.
Large-scale development stage (2003-2015): During this period, Denmark suc-
cessively established several large-scale offshore wind farms, including Horns Rev 1,
Nysted, Horns Rev 2, Anholt, etc., with a total installed capacity of nearly 2 GW. At the
same time, the Danish government has also introduced several policies and measures to
promote the development and promotion of offshore wind power, including formulating
preferential policies and providing financial support.
3
==PAGE:10==
1
INTRODUCTION
Super-large offshore wind power stage (2016-present): Denmark began to build
larger-scale offshore wind farms during this period, such as Horns Rev 3, Kriegers Flak,
etc., and the total installed capacity is expected to reach 8.4 GW. The Danish govern-
ment also set more ambitious goals during this period, planning to increase Denmark’s
wind power generation capacity to more than 50% by 2030 and gradually achieve 100%
renewable energy. Its development has benefited from policy support, technology in-
novation, and Denmark’s excellent natural conditions, including abundant wind energy
resources, suitable water depth, and other factors. The development of offshore wind
farms is also considered an essential means to promote the development of renewable
energy, which can significantly contribute to transforming the low-carbon economy
worldwide.
1.3
Current status and challenges of wind power generation
According to the data of the International Energy Agency (IEA) [11], by the end
of 2021, the cumulative installed capacity of wind power in the world will reach 743.7
GW, among which China, the United States, and Germany are the three largest wind
power countries in the world. In recent years, the installed capacity of wind power has
multiplied, especially in China and Europe, mainly due to the support of government
policies, continuous innovation of wind power technology, and cost reduction.
However, with the increase of wind power installed capacity, the power system
is facing a stability challenge. On the one hand, wind power itself has characteristics
such as randomness and volatility, which means that when the wind speed changes
considerably, the power generation of wind power will also change sharply, which will
inevitably affect the power balance of the grid.
On the other hand, high penetration will affect the frequency and voltage stabil-
ity of the grid. Rotary generators are used in conventional thermal power plants. This
type of generator has a moment of inertia, which is the resistance of a rotating object
to changing its rotational speed. Conventional generators typically have large rotor and
generator assemblies, which give them a high moment of inertia, enabling them to pro-
vide good frequency stability. When the frequency of the power grid has a tendency
to change, the moment of inertia can inhibit the development of this tendency and en-
sure the stability of the frequency. However, modern wind turbines use direct drive
or partial direct drive designs, which improve efficiency and reduce maintenance costs
by lowering mechanical components in the drive train. This design reduces the mass
and moment of inertia of the rotating parts. In addition, modern wind turbines often
incorporate electronic control equipment such as frequency converters and rectifiers to
convert wind power into electrical energy and synchronize it with the grid. The faster
response of these electronics allows for better control of the generator’s output, but they
do not provide the exact moment of inertia as traditional rotating components. There-
fore, if the high penetration rate of wind power exceeds the load capacity of the grid, the
frequency and voltage of the grid may fluctuate violently, thereby affecting the stability
of the grid.
Therefore, in the case of high wind power penetration, adequate measures need
to be taken to ensure the stability of the power grid. From the perspective of power
grid regulation, these measures include: strengthening grid dispatch control to ensure
4
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
that wind power matches grid load; adopting modern grid technologies and equipment
such as energy storage and power electronics technology to improve grid flexibility and
reliability; formulating sound policies and standards, to ensure that the connection and
management of wind farms meet the grid stability requirements. In terms of wind farm
design, a more stable wind farm output can be achieved by optimizing the layout of the
wind farm.
1.4
Wind farm layout
Many factors affect the overall performance of a wind farm, among which the
layout of wind turbines in the wind farm has a more significant impact on the wind
farm’s performance. Wind farm layout refers to how to reasonably arrange the location
of wind turbines to achieve maximum power generation efficiency and minimum cost.
The primary considerations for wind farm layout include wind energy resources, terrain,
environmental protection, grid access, construction and operation, maintenance, etc.
Ideally, we naturally hope that as many wind turbines as possible can be placed in a
fixed area. However, the reality is that as the wind blows past the wind turbine, it
absorbs energy from the wind and creates a wake zone downstream where the wind
speed drops. In traditional onshore wind farms, the distance between wind turbines is
relatively small, so the wake effect is more pronounced. The wake effect will cause the
rear wind turbines to be blocked and interfered with by the front wind turbines, thereby
reducing the efficiency of the back wind turbines. Therefore, in the layout of traditional
onshore wind farms, it is necessary to reasonably arrange the spacing and location of
wind turbines to reduce the wake effect and improve the power generation efficiency of
the entire wind farm.
For offshore wind farms, due to the complexity and unpredictability of the marine
environment, the distance between wind turbines is relatively large, so the wake effect
is relatively small. However, offshore wind farms still need to consider the impact of
wake effects on power generation efficiency because mutual interference and influence
between wind turbines still exist. When the wake effect is severe, it may cause an oper-
ation accident of the wind turbine, so there is a requirement for a safe distance between
wind turbines in the wind farm design. In this context, in wind turbine technology, to
reduce the wake effect, modern wind turbines adopt various technologies, such as vari-
able wind blades, curved blades, pitched blades, etc., so that wind turbines can be more
efficient. To better capture wind energy and reduce the wake effect, and from the per-
spective of macro wind farm layout, research on wind farm layout optimization based
on multi-objective is also gradually carried out.
1.5
Wind farm optimization
Wind farm layout optimization refers to the scientific and reasonable wind turbine
layout design to minimize the mutual influence between wind turbines and improve the
power generation efficiency and economic benefits of wind farms under the premise of
ensuring the power generation of wind farms. After understanding the distribution of
wind energy resources, it is necessary to design a wind turbine layout scheme according
to the actual situation to maximize the utilization of wind energy resources and improve
5
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
the power generation efficiency of wind turbines. The layout scheme design should
consider factors such as the distance between turbines, layout form, and arrangement
density and use numerical simulation and other methods to optimize and verify.
Its main content is to adjust the position or number of wind turbines to meet one or
more expected goals under certain constraints. Typically, the purposes of such layout
optimization include greater power output/annual energy production. With the contin-
uous development of sustainable energy power generation, its power generation pene-
tration rate continues to expand. While reducing carbon emissions, sustainable energy
power generation cannot provide inertia to the grid, resulting in a decline in grid fre-
quency regulation and risk resistance capabilities.
In 2019, affected by lightning strikes and voltage disturbances, the Hornsea wind
farm in the United Kingdom reduced its output from 799MW to 62MW within 300ms.
At the same time, a 244MW steam unit in Little Barford’s gas-fired power plant also
accidentally went out of the grid, causing grid frequency severe decline. The combina-
tion of the two eventually led to the blackout [12] in the UK. This example is a concrete
manifestation of the problems faced by the current power system, from traditional high-
inertia grids to distributed and high-renewable energy grids. Therefore, reducing the
fluctuation range of wind farm output is also a primary goal of current layout optimiza-
tion.
Although we can use statistical methods to predict wind resources, this method is
usually based on historical wind speed and wind direction data. It predicts future wind
conditions through statistical analysis and model fitting. Standard techniques include
time series analysis, regression analysis, and probability density function appropriate.
Of course, there are also methods based on numerical simulation, which usually use
numerical weather prediction models to predict future wind conditions. Numerical sim-
ulation models include general atmospheric dynamics, thermodynamics, and turbulence
models, which can simulate future weather elements such as wind speed, wind direc-
tion, and air pressure. Usually, when predicting wind conditions, a combination of
methods is used to improve the accuracy and reliability of the forecast results. Still,
the forecast results are also affected by many factors, such as geographical environ-
ment, seasonal changes, meteorological conditions, etc. Therefore, the output of wind
farms exhibits inherent variability, which is something that any power system operator
must consider to mitigate problems, especially as the grid faces increased wind power
penetration.
Therefore, in combination with the above situation, the Horns Rev wind farm is
taken as the original target in this research, and the wind condition parameters in this
area are used to formulate a multi-objective wind farm layout optimization problem. By
adjusting the position of the wind turbines in the preset wind farm, setting constraints
to maximize the expected power generation while minimizing power variability, and
applying a suitable algorithm, such as MORS or NSGA-II etc., get the Pareto optimal
layout solution set, and provide a reference for wind farm design layout.
6
==PAGE:13==
2
WIND FARM MODELLING
2
Wind farm modelling
2.1
Power output
For simulating the stable and reliable operation of the wind power generation sys-
tem, it is necessary to model the wind farm correctly and reasonably, and its content
should include detailed information about the wind farm, including data on wind speed,
wind direction, and meteorological conditions. These data can be used to predict the
power generation capacity and efficiency of the wind power generation system and pro-
vide a basis for the design and optimization of the wind power generation system. In
addition, the wind farm model should also accurately calculate the influence of the wake
effect on the output power. Therefore, in this simulation, Pywake, developed by DTU
will be used to calculate the relevant parameters.
PyWake is a Python library for wind resource assessment and wind turbine design,
aiming to provide a simple and efficient method for assessing the wind resource of wind
farms and evaluating the performance of wind turbines. PyWake supports a variety of
wind resource assessment methods, including flow field simulation-based methods and
statistical-based methods, and provides a flexible framework for evaluating the perfor-
mance of different wind turbines, which can use different models and parameters to
describe the performance characteristics of wind turbines.
For a given location, reference wind speed and direction, pywake provides the local
wind conditions in terms of wind direction and wind speed based on wind speed, wind
direction, turbulence intensity, and the probability of each combination.
Wind is a random natural phenomenon, the speed and direction of it may change
at different times and locations. To better understand and predict the characteristics
of the wind, it is necessary to model the wind speed, and the Weibull distribution is a
distribution function used to describe the wind speed. It is a commonly used probabil-
ity distribution and can describe some physical systems in lifespan or durability under
different conditions. The shape of the Weibull distribution depends on two parameters:
the scale parameter and the shape parameter. The scale parameter represents the mean
or expected value of the distribution, while the shape parameter controls the shape of
the distribution. In wind modeling, the scale parameter is usually used to represent the
mean value of wind speed. The shape parameter reflects the skewness and kurtosis of
the wind speed distribution.
The probability density function and cumulative distribution function at different
wind speeds can be obtained through the Weibull distribution to better understand the
distribution characteristics of wind speed. According to the probability density function
PDF pd f(v,θ), it can be used to predict the wind speed and estimate the wind farm’s
output power to improve the wind farm’s operating efficiency and economy. Therefore,
in this simulation, the probability density function PDF pd f(v,θ) is introduced to form
the joint distribution of wind speed and direction. The joint wind probability distribution
[13] in Pywake is used in this research based on measurements on actual data from
Horns Rev.
7
==PAGE:14==
2
WIND FARM MODELLING
Figure 1: Joint distribution of wind speed and wind direction at Horns Rev
Because the generation of the wake will have a specific impact on the wind tur-
bine, reducing the power generation capacity of the rear wind turbine. Therefore, in the
design of wind turbines, the influence of wake flow needs to be considered. The usual
method minimizes the wake’s impact by adjusting the wind farm’s layout and the tur-
bine blades’ design. For example, the distance between wind turbines can be increased,
or unique rotating blade shapes can be used to reduce wake generation. In the wind field
optimization problem, the engineering wake model has the advantage of low calculation
cost and is widely used. In this research, Bastankhah Gaussian wake model [14] has
been used. The Bastankhah Gaussian wake model is commonly used. It is based on
the form of Gaussian functions. It describes the wake’s velocity distribution and vor-
ticity characteristics by considering the aircraft’s size, velocity, and configuration. The
expression of the Bastankhah Gaussian wake model is as follows:
U(x,y,z) = U∞(1−k
2e−r2
2σ2 )
(1)
Among them, U(x,y,z) represents the velocity component at the coordinate point
(x,y,z), U∞represents the far-field free flow velocity, and k is a wake diffusion coeffi-
cient, r represents the horizontal distance from the wake source, and σ is the standard
deviation of the wake. The model is based on the form of Gaussian distribution. The
wake velocity distribution can be flexibly adjusted by adjusting the parameters of k and
σ. A larger value of k corresponds to a stronger wake diffusion effect, while a smaller
value of σ indicates the concentration of the wake. However, it should be noted that the
Bastankhah Gaussian wake model is still a simplified mathematical model, and there
may be certain errors for complex wake phenomena. Therefore, in practical applica-
tions, it is necessary to combine experimental data and other models for verification
and correction to improve the accuracy and reliability of the model.
For the calculation of the total power, when the inflow condition (v,θ) is fixed, all
wind speeds and wind directions can be combined to calculate the power under various
8
==PAGE:15==
2
WIND FARM MODELLING
combination conditions, and then corrected according to the influence of the wake on
the power under the current layout situation by pywake, and finally multiply its power
by the corresponding joint distribution probability to obtain the total power output of
the wind farm.
Ptot =
Nwt
∑
i=1
ZZ
P(vi)× pd f(v,θ)dvdθ
(2)
Figure 2: Power surface
2.2
Variability of power output
In the early wind power generation, due to the small power of a single wind tur-
bine and the low proportion of wind power in the grid, the power fluctuation of wind
turbines caused by wind conditions will not affect the grid’s stability. However, with
the development of wind turbines, the increase of their single power and the continuous
improvement of the penetration rate of wind power in the grid have put forward chal-
lenges to the stability of the system, and the variability of wind power generation has
begun to be considered in the design of wind farms. Since wind power cannot provide
the moment of inertia to the system to resist frequency changes like traditional thermal
power generation, alleviating the fluctuation of wind farms caused by rapid changes in
wind conditions has crucial practical significance under the current situation that the
proportion of sustainable energy power generation continues to increase. Most studies
on the variability of wind power generation have solved this problem by collecting local
historical wind speed and direction and studying the time series of wind power genera-
tion. However, the disadvantage of this method is that it is challenging to implement in
the early stage of wind farm construction. Usually, at this stage of wind farm construc-
tion, the final type and layout of wind turbines have not been determined, and there is a
possibility that the distribution of wind resources may change in the future time series.
9
==PAGE:16==
2
WIND FARM MODELLING
In this research, the subject of wind power variability will be focused on analyzing
the variability of wind farm power output to short-term wind conditions. From the
perspective of defining variability, the variability of wind farms can be understood as the
joint result of the variability of wind conditions and the sensitivity of wind farm output
to changes in wind conditions. In a specific geographical location, the variability of
wind conditions can be accurately described by the joint distribution of wind speed and
wind direction mentioned above. The comprehensive parameters of wind farms mainly
determine the sensitivity of wind farm output power to wind conditions, and it includes
the characteristics of the wind turbine (including the aerodynamic characteristics of the
blades and the height of the hub), the layout of the wind field, the surrounding terrain
characteristics, and the operating status explicitly. Obviously, the variability of wind
conditions is a relatively fixed set of parameters that human beings cannot interfere with.
Therefore, to adjust the variability of wind farms and thus change the power output of
wind farms, the method of controlling the sensitivity of wind farms is dominant.
In order to express this sensitivity more intuitively and quantify the power fluctua-
tions of wind farms caused by short-term changes in wind conditions, Feng J introduced
the Power Surface Roughness Index (PSRI) in research [15] to describe the power of
wind farms under short-term changes in wind conditions fluctuation. The "ruggedness"
of the output is a measure derived from the terrain ruggedness index (TRI) [16], an
objective quantitative measure of terrain heterogeneity.
Imagine a three-dimensional coordinate axis, the x and y axes represent wind speed
and wind direction, respectively, and the z-axis represents power. For traditional coal
and natural gas power stations, since their power generation is entirely independent of
wind conditions, or in other words, the sensitivity to changes in wind conditions is 0, so
its power surface on the z-axis will be a completely undulating flat surface. However,
for wind farms, the power output will reflect any slight changes in wind speed and
direction. From the perspective of terrain, there will be irregular bulges and depressions
in the power plane. The steeper the rise and fall represent the more significant power
fluctuations here. Our optimization goal is to smooth the power plane of the wind farm
and reduce the sensitivity of power output to changes in wind conditions.
The value of TRI is calculated based on the data contained in its central cell and the
adjacent cells. The calculation method of PSRI is similar to that. First, dimensionless
the corresponding parameters: power, wind speed, and wind direction.
P =
P
Prated
,v =
v−vin
vout −vin
,θ =
θ
360°
(3)
Here Prated represents the rated power of the wind farm, and vin and vout represent
the cut-in and cut-out wind speeds of the wind turbine, respectively, and the cut-in wind
speed represents wind power generation The minimum wind speed for power generation
of the unit. Below this wind speed, the wind turbine will not be able to start. The cut-out
wind speed represents the maximum wind speed for the wind turbine to be connected
to the grid. If the wind speed exceeds this limit speed, the wind turbine will be cut out
of the grid. Modern wind turbines can be cut in or cut out through the pitch function,
which can assist the turbine easier to start when the wind speed is low, and it also allows
a higher cut-out wind speed, which improves the tolerance of the wind turbine to the
wind speed. At the same time, it can be noticed that since the wind speed and wind
direction become dimensionless quantities vrated, θrated, the joint distribution of wind
10
==PAGE:17==
2
WIND FARM MODELLING
conditions mentioned above can also be converted into dimensionless quantities:
Pd f(v,θ) = Pd f(v,θ)
(4)
Then it is to establish a power grid to calculate PSRI. For a selected grid, set 8
adjacent grids around it as shown in Fig.3.
Figure 3: Grid cell of wind condition (v,θ) and its surrounding cells
The adjacent grids will be slightly different from the central grid in terms of wind
speed and direction according to their orientation differences, which means that they
each represent a certain dimensionless power, and the wind condition difference be-
tween each grid is set to ∆v=1m/s and ∆θ=1°. The formula for calculating PSRI is as
follows:
PSRI(v,θ) = {[(PC −PW)2 +(PC −PE)2
∆v2
+ (PC −PN)2 +(PC −PS)2
∆θ 2
+
(PC −PNW)2 +(PC −PSW)2
∆v2 +∆θ 2
+ (PC −PNE)2 +(PC −PSE)2
∆v2 +∆θ 2
]/8}
1
2
(5)
Based on this, the corresponding PSRI can be obtained from all combinations of
wind speed and direction. However, for designing and optimizing a wind field, it is not
enough to focus solely on specific power fluctuations under changing wind conditions.
It should also consider the variability of local wind conditions, that is, the probability
distribution of wind, and combine the two to obtain a comprehensive and overall wind
field variability. Hence, need to combine those two to define a new measurement unit,
the variability of power (VOP) [15], to quantify the overall change in power output to
short-term wind changes.
VOP =
ZZ
PSRI(v,θ)Pd f(v,θ)dvdθ
(6)
11
==PAGE:18==
2
WIND FARM MODELLING
2.3
Objective function
As mentioned in previous parts, two objectives were considered in this research,
which include maximizing total power output(Ptot) and minimizing variability of power
output(VOP).
According to the requirements of the algorithm and the better observation of the
change trend of the Pareto solution set, the two objectives are transformed into the
objective maximization function, namely power maximization and negative VOP max-
imization. So the objective function can be written as follows:
f1(X,Nwt) = Ptot(X,Nwt)
f2(X,Nwt) = −VOP(X,Nwt)
)
(7)
2.4
Constraint functions
Two kinds of constraints will be considered in this research. The first type of
constraint is the boundary constraint, which requires that all wind turbines must be
within the boundary, that is, the parallelogram boundary of the Horns Rev wind farm.
Here it is called Sfeasible, and any attempt to exceed or violate the boundary constraint
is considered invalid.
g1 can be regarded as the first constraint, wind turbine coordinates (xi,yi) represents
the serial number and location of wind turbines (taking Horns Rev as an example, i is
up to 80). In the algorithm, the constraint g1 must be less than or equal to 0; if it is
greater than 0, the constraint is violated. Its expression can be written as follows:
g1 =
(
0,if(xi,yi) ∈S feasible
1,if(xi,yi) /∈S feasible
(8)
Figure 4: Horns Rev origin WF layout
12
==PAGE:19==
3
OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
The second constraint g2 is the distance constraint of wind turbines. The distance
between wind turbines must exceed the set minimum safety distance requirement Dmin
which equals to 400m in this research. This constraint can be called g2, assuming
that the number of wind turbines is Nwt, (xi,yi) and (xj,yj) respectively represent the
coordinates of two wind turbines, then there are Nwt(Nwt−1)
2
inequality constraints in g2:
g2 = Dmin −
q
(xi −xj)2 +(yi −yj)2
(9)
It can be clearly seen from the above formula that once the distance between turbines
is less than the minimum safety requirement, g2 will be greater than 0, that is, the
constraint condition is violated, and the degree of constraint violation can be intuitively
expressed.
Therefore, combined with the above two constraints, the position of the random
moving fan must meet the following below conditions to be regarded as correct move-
ment:
g1 ≤0
&
g2 ≤0
(10)
and if any constraint is violated, random movement will be performed again.
3
Optimization algorithms
3.1
MORS
In this simulation, the MORS algorithm was introduced. MORS is a multi-objective
random search method developed based on a single-objective RS algorithm [17]. Dif-
ferent from the traditional genetic algorithm, which optimizes by producing offspring
with better performance, MORS algorithm starts from the initial feasible solution, that
is, the original layout of the wind field, and gradually iteratively optimizes in the limited
feasible solution space.
In this research, the specific implementation method is that one of the 80 wind tur-
bines in the Horn Rev wind farm is randomly selected(uniform distribution probability.)
as the current target wind turbine. Then take the coordinates of this turbine as the center
of the circle, and move in a random direction and a random distance in a circular area
with a radius of 160m. After moving, two constraint checks are required:
1:Whether it exceeds the original wind field boundary
2:Whether the minimum distance between wind turbines is less than the limit
When the two constraints are not violated, calculate the wind field total power and
VOP under the current layout as a new feasible solution. The next step is to compare the
new solution with the existing solution set. The algorithm will update the existing Pareto
solution set or maintain the status according to the dominant relationship between the
solutions and then repeat the above steps until the stop condition is met.
13
==PAGE:20==
3
OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
Figure 5: Flow chart of the random search algorithm.
3.2
Definition of dominance
There may be conflicts between the objective functions of a multi-objective op-
timization problem, i.e., improving the value of one objective function may lead to
worsening the value of other objective functions. Therefore, it have to find a set of op-
timal solutions when weighing the conflicts between these goals, which is the concept
of the Pareto solution.
The Pareto optimal solution means that another solution in the feasible space does
not dominate the current solution. There is no better solution for all considered goals,
and the dominance relationship is used to describe the Pareto solution’s pros and cons.
To further describe the dominance relationship, it has to understand the domination
relationship of the two solutions.
The dominance relationship means that in the multi-objective optimization prob-
lem, individual A has at least one objective that is better than individual B, and all
objectives of individual A are not worse than individual B, and individual A is said to
dominate individual B.
Let’s take an example to illustrate that if both objectives are maximization ob-
jectives, the bigger the objective function value, the better. Then assume that given
individual x0, the objective function value F(x0) = (f1(x0), f2(x0)) = (1,1), and given
another individual x1, the objective function value F(x1) = (f1(x1), f2(x1)) = (2,2). It
can be find that, in the two objective function directions, the objective function value
(1,1) of x0 is smaller than the objective function value (2,2) of x1. Under the condition
that both objective functions are maximized it can say that the solution of x1 is better
than x0, that is, x1 dominates x0.
14
==PAGE:21==
3
OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
Figure 6: Dominance relationship
But usually another situation is encountered during the optimization process, such
as F(x2) = (f1(x2), f2(x2)) = (1,2) and F(x3) = (f1(x3), f2(x3)) = (2,1), obviously in
the x-axis direction, the component of F(x3) is greater than F(x2), and the component
of F(x2) in the y-axis direction is greater than F(x3). There is obviously no dominant
relationship between the two. That is, when the two parties cannot dominate each other,
the relationship between the two is a non-dominant relationship.
By applying the dominance and non-domination relations, the solutions of the ob-
jective function can rank and find the Pareto optimal solution. For multi-objective op-
timization problems, the Pareto optimal solution is only an acceptable solution to the
problem. Generally, there are multiple Pareto optimal solutions. In practical situations,
the final solution needs to be determined according to specific requirements.
3.3
MORS combined with power-priority
The wind field optimization steps based on the MORS algorithm should be shown
in the figure above. However, in the initial simulation, it is difficult to increase the power
in the random search, which is mainly related to the fact that the power of the original
layout of the wind farm is already at a reasonable level. While VOP has experienced
a rapid decline, the reason is that compared with the regular layout of wind turbines
in the original wind farm, the position of the wind turbines constantly moving in the
random search makes the wind farm layout present an irregular pattern. When the wind
blows through a certain pre-sequence turbine from any direction, the number of turbines
affected by the wake effect in this direction is lower than in the original layout, making
reducing the VOP easier.
Therefore, during optimization with the random search without additional condi-
tions, the Pareto solution set will always develop toward lower variability. Since power
and VOP do not exhibit strict orthogonality most of the time, this results in states where
most solutions of the solution set have lower variability compared to the original lay-
out but, at the same time, may also have lower power. Reducing the variability of the
15
==PAGE:22==
3
OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
wind farm and improving the stability of the power grid is indeed the one goals of op-
timization, but the power output is the main performance parameter of the wind farm,
optimization should find a balance between these two optimization goals.
To solve this problem, combining single-objective and multi-objective optimiza-
tion was tried at first. In the early stage of iteration, the optimization goal is only
greater power, which is called power-priority here.
Figure 7: Simulation with single-objective optimization
As shown in the figure above, the power of the improved algorithm did increase
significantly in the early stages of iteration. However, as the algorithm enters the stage
of multi-objective optimization, a large number of solutions generated by the random
search are concentrated in the low VOP area, resulting in fewer Pareto solutions to
choose from in the high power area.
Therefore, to choose a higher degree of freedom for the movement of wind tur-
bines and to better observe the changing trend of the Pareto solution set during the
optimization process, it was decided to conduct the random search without a target be-
fore optimization, disrupting the original layout of the wind farm, it will reduce VOP
and power significantly. Secondly, aiming at the trend that solutions always tend to de-
velop towards low VOP, a specific weight coefficient is added to random search so that
the selection of random search is more likely to occur in high-power layouts, thereby
avoiding too many new solutions generated in low-VOP areas. At the same time, opti-
mizing the high-power layout also provides more possibilities for pursuing the goal of
higher power.
Based on the above algorithm improvements and adjustments, two control groups
will be set up in the research, and power weights will be added to both random search
methods. The former is wholly based on the MORS algorithm for 20,000 iterations
which is pure multi-objective optimization. The latter changes the goal of the first
10,000 iterations to only pursue a layout with greater power than the previous iteration,
directly ignoring the variability of the goal, that is, single-objective optimization. In the
following 10,000 times, the optimization target returned to the original multi-objective
16
==PAGE:23==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
optimization scheme, and finally, the results of the two methods were compared to
observe the performance.
4
Layout Optimization
4.1
Pure random search
(a) 5000 iterations
(b) 10000 iterations
(c) 20000 iterations
Figure 8: The solution set of simple random search at different iteration times
The above figure shows the corresponding changes in the Pareto solution set as
the number of iterations increases. It can be seen that the initial 5000-step random
search achieves faster power growth after perturbing the original layout. However, in
the subsequent iteration steps, it can be observed that although the Pareto solution set
continuously selects a better solution to update itself, its power growth rate is getting
lower and lower, and it becomes more difficult to obtain more power. In principle, with
this method, as the number of iterations increases, it can finally approach the theoret-
17
==PAGE:24==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
ically optimal layout that satisfies our preset dual goals. Still, the computational time
cost will be astonishing.
At this point, it is worth noting that due to randomly disrupting the wind farm
layout before the algorithm starts and the strong randomness in the selection and move-
ment of wind turbines during the optimization process, there may be a particular gap in
the Pareto optimal solution under multiple identical iterations.Therefore, to verify the
reliability of the previous results, this research simulated three sets of 10000 iteration
results.
Figure 9: Discrete simulation
It can be observed that all three groups have different Pareto optimal solutions, but
the overall volatility is not significant. An important reason for this gap is that the wind
farm layout was disrupted before optimization, resulting in different initial wind farm
powers.
It can be seen from the above figure that the maximum power of the Pareto solution
set should be Round2 (77.522MW) <Round1 (77.527MW) <Round3 (77.66MW) from
small to large. The initial power of these three solutions rounds is 76.85MW, 76.95MW,
and 77.07MW, respectively. For the same number of iterations, the higher power of the
initial solution affects the final Pareto optimal solution. Still, the development trend of
the solution set has remained the same. And it can be noticed that although there are
differences in the Pareto solution, the power increase range of the three algorithms is
similar, all between 0.5-0.6MW. Also, as the power growth slows down, the difference
between such solution sets will become smaller and smaller.
Therefore, based on the above analysis, it can be considered that the results ob-
tained by the MORS algorithm in the wind field layout optimization simulation have
universality and low dispersion.
18
==PAGE:25==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
4.2
Power-priority random search
Figure 10: 10000 iterations
As mentioned earlier, this method combines power-priority and random search. It
can be seen from the Fig.10 that in the first 10,000 iterations, when the optimization of
VOP is ignored, and only the pursuit of a higher power is taken as the optimization goal,
compared with the simple random search method, the power of the wind field increases
very rapidly. After returning to multi-objective optimization, it can be seen in the Fig.11
that a set of optimal Pareto solutions is derived from the maximum power point as the
starting point. Compared with the simple random search method, in the case of the same
VOP, the former solution has greater power than the latter, and there are many solutions
with greater power, which provides more abundant layout optimization options.
Figure 11: 20000 iterations
The figure below shows a layout with the highest power (P=78.07MW) in the se-
lected Pareto optimal solution. It can be seen that although its distribution is slightly
19
==PAGE:26==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
chaotic compared to the original regular layout, however, it can still be seen that its
layout follows the original parallelogram boundary of the wind farm and the minimum
restricted distance between wind turbines.
Figure 12: Maximum power layout(P=78.07MW)
4.3
Compare with origin layout
Through the simulation of the above two methods, it can be found that increased
power generation becomes more challenging under the combined effect of wind re-
sources and wind field constraints. At the same time, a decrease in VOP is relatively
easy. Such characteristics determine that in the process of finding the Pareto solution
set, if there are no additional conditions, even if the power weight is set during random
selection, the solution set will be more inclined to move toward low VOP. There is no
strict orthogonal relationship between the power and the VOP; when the VOP of the
feasible solution is too low, the corresponding power may be small.
Based on the above reasons, this research prioritizes finding a method with the
higher power so that the solution set can quickly diverge to the high-power solution
without too many restrictions and then derive a set of Pareto solution sets at the high-
power solution. Comparing the solution sets of the two methods, it can be found that
the performance of power priority is better under the same number of iterations than
that of a simple random search.
In pure random search, the optimal Pareto solution set is in the upper left corner of
the original solution, they all have lower power and variability than the original solution,
and the solution set and the original solution are in a state of mutual domination. The
optimization of the power has not reached a satisfactory level.
20
==PAGE:27==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
Figure 13: Compare with origin layout
Even if extend the iterations steps, as shown in the figure below when the number
of iteration steps increases to 70,000, the front of the Pareto solution set has achieved a
certain advancement in the direction of a higher power, but the maximum power in the
solution set is still lower than the power corresponding to the original layout. And at
this point (up to 70,000 iterations), the solution set grows more slowly towards greater
power.
Figure 14: Comparison of Pareto solution sets under different iterations
21
==PAGE:28==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
In the power priority method, in the optimal Pareto solution set, most of them are
in the upper right of the original layout solution, and they all have greater power and
less variability than the actual solution. This means that these solutions dominate the
original solution, achieving the goal of two-objective optimization.
Figure 15: Compare with origin layout
Figure 16: The performance comparison of the two methods
22
==PAGE:29==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
4.4
Longer iterations of the power-priority approach
The above comparison shows that the MORS algorithm combined with power pri-
ority random search is superior in finding a larger power layout. This makes it feasible
to use this method to find the theoretical maximum power layout of the Horns Rev wind
farm. Therefore, a more vast number of iterations for the power-priority random search
was implemented to observe the trend of maximum power changes.
Table 1: Maximum Power at Different Number of Iterations
Iterations
Maximum power[MW]
Iterations
Maximum power[MW]
10000
78.078
70000
78.164
20000
78.127
80000
78.167
30000
78.141
90000
78.172
40000
78.153
100000
78.173
50000
78.158
110000
78.176
60000
78.163
120000
78.177
A target of 120,000 iterations is set, and as shown in the above table, it can be
observed that when the iteration reaches 90,000, adding another 10,000 iterations will
only add a tiny power gain. In the last 10,000 random searches, the power has yet to
improve significantly.
(a) 10000 iterations
(b) 120000 iterations
Figure 17: The solution set of simple random search at different iteration times
Although the precise value will be affected by the wake model used and the ac-
curacy of the wake model when calculating the power, the wake model will have a
relatively significant impact on the results, and the calculation difference in the model
accuracy will not be pronounced. Based on such results, it can be roughly consid-
ered that under the Bastankhah Gaussian wake model, the wind farm’s power is about
78.177MW, its theoretical maximum power. After 120,000 iterations, 10,000 iterations
of multi-objective optimization were performed to obtain a new set of Pareto optimal
solution sets, and compared with the power-priority results of 20,000 iterations before,
it can be observed that at the same VOP level, the former has better performance on
power than the latter.
23
==PAGE:30==
4
LAYOUT OPTIMIZATION
Figure 18: Multi-objective optimization solution set after power is close to convergence
Figure 19: Pareto solution of MORS algorithm with different iteration steps
24
==PAGE:31==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
(a) P=76.88MW,VOP=-1.68
(b) P=78.00MW,VOP=-1.70
(c) P=78.17MW,VOP=-1.80
Figure 20: Layout of longer iteration
5
Algorithm Comparison
The following algorithm model that used in this research is based on a Python code
written by Julian Blank [18].
5.1
NSGA-II
5.1.1
Introducion
NSGA-II is one of the most popular multi-objective genetic algorithms developed
by Deb et al.in 2002 [19]. It reduces the complexity of non-inferior sorting genetic
algorithms, has the advantages of fast running speed and good convergence of solution
sets, and has become the performance benchmark of other multi-objective optimization
algorithms. This method is also widely used in multiple fields, such as optimizing
off-grid multi-energy microgrid [20], water distributing network design [21], and aero-
engine heat exchanger design optimization [22].
25
==PAGE:32==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
Compared with NSGA, NSGA-II solves the problem of high computational com-
plexity to a certain extent, reducing the complexity from O(MN3) to O(MN2) (M is the
number of targets, N is the number of populations). In each generation, two parents are
selected through binary tournament selection. Some judgment methods are added to
prevent the two parents from being identical by using crossover and mutation operators
to generate a set of offspring of the same population size. The combined population
(parent and offspring) is then sorted according to the non-domination level of each so-
lution. For the solutions with the same dominance level, use the crowding degree to
sort them (multiple solutions are too concentrated, choose a solution that can represent
these solutions), and finally select a group of optimal N solutions as the next generation
population, and repeat the above steps until the stopping condition is met.
Algorithm 1 NSGA-II Algorithm
1: Initialize population P0 with random solutions
2: Evaluate the objective functions and constraints for each individual in P0
3: Set generation counter t to 0
4: while Termination condition not met do
5:
Create an empty offspring population Qt
6:
Perform binary tournament selection on Pt to select parents
7:
Apply crossover and mutation operators to generate offspring
8:
Evaluate the objective functions and constraints for each individual in Qt
9:
Merge Pt and Qt to create combined population Rt
10:
Sort individuals in Rt based on non-dominated sorting
11:
Assign crowding distance to individuals in Rt
12:
Select the best individuals from Rt to form the next population Pt+1
13:
Increment generation counter t
14: end while
15: Output: Final non-dominated solution set Pt
Among them, crossover means that two parents cross to produce new offspring,
which simulates the gene exchange process in nature, and the crossover operator se-
lected here is simulated binary crossover (SBX). The mutation is to randomly change
the obtained offspring to increase the diversity of the population. The mutation oper-
ator chosen here is a polynomial mutation (PM). In NSGA-II, crossover and mutation
are alternate operations to generate new individuals. The usual order of operations is
to perform crossover and then mutate according to the probability of mutation. Each
generation will crossover and mutate the parent individuals to generate the same num-
ber of offspring individuals as the parent individuals. These offspring individuals will
form the next generation population together with the parent individuals. They will be
selected and retained through strategies such as non-dominated sorting and crowding
distance calculation to realize the evolution process of multi-objective optimization.
Research defined the variables in the algorithm as the coordinates of 80 wind tur-
bines. However, in the initial simulation, it was found that due to the initial utterly
random population distribution, the wind turbines’ positions easily violated the min-
imum distance between wind turbines. It is difficult to obtain a convergent solution
even with a more significant number of populations and more descendants. Finally, this
problem is solved by defining the coordinates of the initial population.
26
==PAGE:33==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
5.1.2
Influence of parameters on results
The introduction mentioned that if the population number in the genetic algorithm
is N, the same number of N offspring should be produced. However, to observe the
influence of the crossover probability and the mutation probability on the genetic re-
sults more quickly, In the case of a population of 40, temporarily set the number of
descendants of each generation to 10, thereby reducing the total number of populations
evaluated.
Table 2: Parameters for NSGA-II
Parameter
Value
Crossover probability
0.9
Mutation probability
0.1
Distribution index for crossover operator
20
Distribution index for mutation operator
20
Population
40(10)
Generation
500
According to the set parameters, the results shown in the figure below are obtained.
It can be seen that the maximum power in the Pareto optimal solution is about 77.6MW,
which means that the current maximum power is lower than the original layout power.
Part of the reason should be attributed to the smaller number of populations. The solu-
tion set is similar to the Pareto solution set obtained by 20000 iterations of pure random
search, and the calculation time is relatively close.
Figure 21: Performance of SBX=0.9,PM=0.1
To further analyze the factors affecting the Pareto optimal solution in the NSGA-
II algorithm, research calculated the high crossover probability combined with a low
27
==PAGE:34==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
mutation probability scheme (SBX=0.9, PM=0.1) and a low crossover probability com-
bined with high mutation probability (SBX=0.1 ,PM=0.9) scheme as a comparison.
The results are shown in Figure 22, the latter not only obtains a maximum power close
to 78MW (which means exceeding the power of the original layout) but also under
the same VOP condition, the power of the latter is greater than the former, which fully
shows that increasing the mutation probability has a positive effect on obtaining a better
Pareto optimal solution.
(a) SBX=0.9,PM=0.1
(b) SBX=0.1,PM=0.9
Figure 22: Comparison of High Crossover Probability and High Mutation Probability
And to further confirm this relationship, it also set up a group of programs with
the same crossover probability, but different mutation probabilities for comparison, and
the same conclusion was obtained. After that, the control group with fixed mutation
probability and adjusted crossover probability was completed. The results show that in
the case of a high mutation rate, although a higher crossover probability is also more
likely to produce better performance solutions, the magnitude of its influence on the
solution is not significant.
(a) SBX=0.7,PM=0.3
(b) SBX=0.7,PM=0.7
Figure 23: Comparison of different mutation probabilities under the same crossover
level
28
==PAGE:35==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
(a) SBX=0.3,PM=0.7
(b) SBX=0.7,PM=0.7
Figure 24: Comparison of different crossover probabilities under the same mutation
level
As mentioned above, to quickly analyze the impact of crossover operators and
mutation operators on the results, the number of offspring in the algorithm has been
reduced from 40 to 10. This aspect reduces the time cost, but the disadvantage is that the
performance of the solution set obtained by the algorithm is not suitable due to the lack
of a sufficiently large offspring population. Therefore, when the conclusion that high
mutation probability has a positive effect on the performance of Pareto solution sets, to
obtain high-performance solution sets, algorithms with high crossover probability and
mutation probability and complete offspring population parameters were implemented,
as follows:
Table 3: Parameters for NSGA-II
Parameter
Value
Crossover probability
0.7
Mutation probability
0.7
Distribution index for crossover operator
20
Distribution index for mutation operator
20
Population
40
Generation
500
Usually, if the sum of crossover and mutation probabilities exceeds 1, it means that
in each generation, each individual will experience more than one crossover or mutation
operation on average. This may lead to excessive genetic manipulation, resulting in
impacted algorithm performance. However, judging from the algorithm’s performance
under the above(SBX=0.7, PM=0.7)parameter settings, better results can be obtained,
and convergence is maintained, so this parameter is selected for iteration with a more
significant population number.
29
==PAGE:36==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
Figure 25: SBX=0.7, PM=0.7, complete 500 generations
It is evident that a more significant number of populations brings a solution with
better performance. The value of the solution with the most considerable power in the
Pareto optimal solution reaches 78.18MW, which is close to the value of 78.17MW
obtained after 120,000 iterations of the MORS algorithm.
The reason why the result of NSGA-II is slightly larger than that of MORS is that
it may be that the boundary constraint method in the NSGA-II algorithm sets upper and
lower limits for each independent variable, so the parallelogram boundary conditions
of the original wind field cannot be strictly followed, but a rectangular boundary larger
than the original boundary is used.
Figure 26: Layout of NSGA-II(P=87.186MW)
30
==PAGE:37==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
The above figure shows that due to the limitation of the program constraint method,
the movement range of the turbine is slightly larger than the prescribed layout (parallel-
ogram boundary).
It allows wind turbines to have more movement options and wider wind turbine
spacing, so the Pareto optimal solution obtained by this algorithm has certain advan-
tages compared with the MORS algorithm.
However, judging from the data, the gap between the two algorithms is very small,
and the gap between their respective maximum power points is only 0.01MW. It fur-
ther proves the assertion above that the MORS algorithm is close to convergence after
120,000 iterations.
5.2
AGE-MOEA
AGE-MOEA [23] is a multiobjective evolutionary algorithm, which is the abbre-
viation of Adaptive Grid Encoding Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithm. This algo-
rithm follows the general outline of II but with a modified crowding distance formula.
The latter is done through a ranking-based approach by comparing the scores of indi-
viduals on each objective.
Another difference is that although both use crossover and mutation operators,
AGE-MOEA also introduces an adaptive genetic operation strategy, which adjusts the
crossover according to the fitness and diversity of individuals in the current population.
And the probability of variation.
In summary, the differences make them perform differently when solving multi-
objective optimization problems, and the pros and cons of the algorithm results may
depend on specific issues.
(a) SBX=0.2,PM=0.8
(b) SBX=0.5,PM=0.5
Figure 27: Comparison of AGE-MOEA results with different parameters
The comparison of two groups of different crossover and mutation probabilities
is still carried out first, and a similar conclusion is obtained as in NSGA-II, that is, a
higher mutation rate will get a higher power solution, and the probability of crossover
operator have limited impact on the performance of the solution.
On this basis, in order to compare the performance of the two algorithms under
31
==PAGE:38==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
large population numbers, it used the same parameter settings in the AGE-MOEA algo-
rithm as in the NSGA-II algorithm in the previous section.
Table 4: Parameters for AGE-MOEA
Parameter
Value
Crossover probability
0.7
Mutation probability
0.7
Distribution index for crossover operator
20
Distribution index for mutation operator
20
Population
40
Generation
500
Figure 28: 500 iterations of the AGE-MOEA algorithm with the same parameters as
NSGA2
As shown from the figure above, the offspring solution of AGE-MOEA has a sim-
ilar growth trend to NSGA-II. However, after the same number of iterations, in the
Pareto optimal solution of AGE-MOEA, the value of the maximum power point is lower
than that of II, the former is only 78.09MW, while the latter is 78.18 MW. In terms of
power optimization, the optimal power obtained by the algorithm is similar to that of
the MORS algorithm after 10,000 single-objective optimizations. The latter got a power
of 78.07MW, but the time spent was only one-third of the former.
5.3
PSO
Since MORS was used for single-objective optimization in pursuit of higher power
in this research, it is possible to compare its performance with other single-objective
optimization algorithms. The comparison algorithm used here is Particle Swarm Op-
timization (PSO), which was proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart [24] in 1995 on the
32
==PAGE:39==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
basis of simulating social behavior. The PSO algorithm is one of the evolutionary al-
gorithms similar to the simulated annealing algorithm. It also starts from a random
solution, finds the optimal solution through iteration, and evaluates the quality of the
solution through fitness. But it is simpler than the genetic algorithm rules, and there are
no "crossover" and "mutation" operations of the genetic algorithm. It finds the global
optimum by following the currently searched best. This algorithm has attracted atten-
tion for its advantages of easy implementation, high precision, and fast convergence,
and it has demonstrated its superiority in solving practical problems.
PSO simulates the predation behavior of birds. Imagine the scenario: a flock of
birds is randomly searching for food. There is only one piece of food in this area, and
none of the birds know where the food is. But they know how far away the food is from
their current location. So what is the optimal strategy for finding food? The simplest
and most effective is to search the area around the bird that is currently closest to the
food.
During the entire search process, the flock of birds lets other birds know their
current position by passing on their information to each other, and through such co-
operation, they can judge whether they have found the optimal solution. At the same
time, the information about the optimal solution is also transmitted to the entire flock of
birds, and finally, the whole flock of birds can gather around the food source. That is,
the optimal solution is found.
In PSO, the solution to each optimization problem is a bird in the search space,
which we call "particles." All particles have a fitness value determined by an optimized
function, and each particle also has a velocity that determines the direction and distance
they fly. Then the particles follow the current optimal particle to search in the solution
space and find the optimal solution through iteration. In each iteration, the particle
updates itself by tracking two "extrema." The first one is the optimal solution found by
the particle itself, which is called the personal best positions Pi. Another extremum is
the optimal solution currently seen by the entire population, and this extremum is the
global best position G.
In order to ensure that the algorithm performs well in various optimization prob-
lems, the author of pymoo has determined two weight values c1 and c2 in pymoo ac-
cording to the suggestion in [25], so the default parameter settings in the algorithm are
used for this research.
ω, c1, c2, these three weight factors have a significant influence on the algorithm.
ω makes the particles maintain the inertia of motion, which makes them have a tendency
to expand the search space and have the ability to explore new areas.
c1 and c2 represent the weights of the statistical acceleration terms that push each
particle toward the positions of Pi and G. Lower values allow particles to wander outside
the target area before being pulled back, and higher values cause particles to suddenly
dash toward or over the target area.
33
==PAGE:40==
5
ALGORITHM COMPARISON
Algorithm 2 Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) Algorithm
1: Initialize particle positions xi and velocities vi for each particle i
2: Initialize personal best positions Pi for each particle as current positions
3: Initialize global best position G as the best position among all particles
4: while Termination condition not met do
5:
for each particle i do
6:
Update particle velocity: vi = w·vi+c1·rand()·(Pi−xi)+c2·rand()·(G−
xi) # rand(): random number between (0,1)
7:
Update particle position: xi = xi +vi
8:
Evaluate the fitness of particle position xi
9:
if Fitness of xi is better than fitness of Pi then
10:
Update personal best: Pi = xi
11:
end if
12:
if Fitness of xi is better than fitness of G then
13:
Update global best: G = xi
14:
end if
15:
end for
16: end while
17: Output: Global best position G
Table 5: Parameters for PSO
Parameter
Value
Generation
250
Population
40
ω(Inertia weight)
0.9
c1(Cognitive constant)
2.0
c2(Social constant)
2.0
Figure 29: PSO Algorithm Result
34
==PAGE:41==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
It can be observed from the above figure that the PSO with power as the optimiza-
tion goal does not get a solution with outstanding performance after a large population
iteration, and the maximum power value in the solution is only 77.75MW which even
lower than the original layout. And it is easy to observe that when there are no other
restrictions and the optimization goal is only power, during the iterative Pareto solution
process, there is still a phenomenon of concentration in the low VOP area. Part of the
reason for this characteristic is that the PSO algorithm is easily trapped in a local op-
timum. The number of populations in the algorithm is 40, and a total of 250 iterations
of offspring are generated. The benchmark is to use the MORS algorithm to perform
10,000 single-objective optimizations on power.
5.4
Performance comparison of multi-objective algorithms
Table 6: Algorithm result
Algorithm
Iteration
Population
Pmax[MW]
VOPmin
MORS
70000
77.68
1.67
MORS-Power priotiry
130000
78.17
1.68
NSGA-II
20000
78.18
1.66
AGE-MOEA
20000
78.09
1.67
Comparing the results of the three multi-objective optimization algorithms used
above, it can be seen that with appropriate parameter settings, NSGA-II achieved the
maximum power among the three algorithms in population iteration based on slightly
relaxed constraints and good algorithm performance.
The algorithm combining MORS with single objective optimization of power fol-
lows closely. Although more time is spent during the iteration process, considering the
weak power growth in the later stage of the iteration, the performance of this algorithm
is similar to NSGA-II under the same simulation time.
The evolution algorithm represented by AGE-MOEA performs the worst, as the
maximum power obtained by NSGA-II with the same population size is only 78.09MW.
If a more reasonable parameter combination can be found in the future, the algorithm
performance may be improved.
6
Electricity market trading
6.1
Description of Electricity Market
The electricity markets refer to mechanisms in which electricity producers and
users trade electricity and related products through negotiation, bidding, etc. They en-
sure a cost-effective match between supply and demand bids. Power pools in each
region have unique rules that define how electricity is sold or bought, how prices are
settled, and the obligations of participants. With the vision of developing renewable
energy generation, some power pools introduced special rules for wind power, such
35
==PAGE:42==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
as guaranteed price or no planning responsibility, Rel. [26] describes the wind energy
integration regulatory framework in some European countries. The electricity market
transactions are divided into medium and long-term electricity transactions and elec-
tricity spot markets. Long-term transactions refer to wholesale electricity transactions
carried out by market entities for years, seasons, months, weeks, and days. With the
increase in renewable energy power generation, PPA (Power Purchase Agreement), a
long-term trading method suitable for renewable energy and independent power plants,
has been derived.
This agreement is to trade electricity at a fixed price for a fixed period, usually over
ten years and sometimes 20 years or more. The purpose is to ensure the stable income
of power suppliers and provide price and quality protection for power buyers.
Medium and long-term transactions are essential for a stable and healthy electricity
market. However, the electricity market is highly unpredictable, and users must adjust
their purchasing strategies according to the situation. If the power contracted in the
medium and long-term market cannot be met, it is necessary to supplement the actual
power demand through the spot market. If surplus electricity is in the medium and long-
term market, it can be sold through the spot market. Spot transactions mainly carry out
day-ahead, intraday, and real-time energy transactions. In this article, we mainly focus
on the day-ahead market. To participate in the day-ahead electricity trading market,
buyers and sellers must submit bids for the quantity and price they intend to deliver
before the closing of the upcoming trading session. This transaction period is divided
into program time units (PTU) [27], each considered a separate time unit. All bids are
then matched through a single auction process to determine the market clearing price
(the spot price) and each participant’s plan for each PTU. Participants are financially
responsible for any breach of contract. Additionally, some power pools also have intra-
day markets where corrective action can be taken, as there can be a significant delay of
up to 12-14 hours between the closing of the gates and the start of energy delivery.
Transmission system operators (TSO) manage regulation markets to maintain a
real-time balance between power generation and load. Each country has its mecha-
nism for resolving imbalances in prices, but the following principles:1 generally guide
them)No regulation is necessary when there is a perfect match between power produc-
tion and consumption;2)If production is inadequate to meet consumption, power gen-
eration needs to be increased (or consumption needs to be decreased);3)If production
exceeds consumption, generation needs to be reduced (or consumption increased).
If the power grid is well interconnected with other systems, excess power can be
transmitted to neighboring regions by constructing long-distance or transnational power
grids. However, more often than not, power producers are curtailed to reduce genera-
tion.
For electricity producers, electricity sales are determined in the day-ahead market.
However, wind power generation itself has certain uncertainties. When the power gen-
eration imbalance occurs in the system, the power output by the wind farm is different
from the original bid quantity, which will simultaneously impact the power system and
power producers. When the power is lower than expected, you need to pay the penalty
to the system (insufficient power multiplied by the raised price). When the generated
power is higher than predicted, you may get benefits (excess power multiplied by dump
regulation price). With such a premise of affecting economic income, it becomes a
36
==PAGE:43==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
strategic issue for wind power producers to participate in power pool dispatch, that is,
how to be more strategic in bidding the day-ahead market to reduce potential regulatory
costs and maximize benefits.
Typically, methods to achieve this require forecasting future wind generation, typ-
ically hourly wind data for the next one to three days, which can be generated from
historical time series references or using advanced methods as data science advances.
So far, several studies [28] [29] on wind energy participation in electricity markets
have been carried out, considering different market mechanisms and various forecast-
ing methods.
Since this paper studies the layout optimization of wind farms rather than the pre-
diction of wind resources or market behavior, we will focus on the difference in elec-
tricity sales revenue between wind farms after layout multi-objective optimization and
the original wind farms and how VOP affects income.
6.2
Formulation of the Problem
The power producer will have a corresponding contract energy Et+k for any PTU.
Among them, the t index represents the bid at time t, and the k index represents the
time elapsed after the quotation. Then for power producers, when the total amount of
proposed electricity is Ec
t+k and the actual production of electricity is E∗
t+k, the income
Rt+k can be expressed as:
Rt+k = πc
t+kEc
t+k +T c
t+k
(11)
where πc
t+k is the spot price for this PTU,and T c
t+k is the imbalance cost on the regulation
market. The imbalance d∗
t+k can be defined as
d∗
t+k = E∗
t+k −Ec
t+k
(12)
Since there will be two situations of excess and deficiency in electricity production, T c
t+k
has two expressions:
T c
t+k =
(
πc+
t+kd∗
t+k,
d∗
t+k ≥0
πc−
t+kd∗
t+k,
d∗
t+k ≤0
(13)
Where πc+
t+k is the up-regulation price and πc+
t+k represents the down-regulation price,
these two prices depend on the regulatory mechanism considered, here we used the
electricity price data from NordPool in 2018, and the time series of wind data is from
Høvsøre wind turbine test center at the same year. It is worth noting that if the hourly
wind speed and wind direction of the year are matched with the electricity price at this
time, it can be observed that there is a specific correlation between the electricity price
and the wind speed.
It can be noticed from the wind speed-price relationship diagram that when the
wind speed is low, the corresponding electricity price is more likely to be on the high
side, and presents more excellent dispersion. For example, when the wind speed is 5m/s
and 15m/s, the power price distribution of the latter is more convergent and stable.
37
==PAGE:44==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
Figure 30: (a)Wind speed-Price (b)Wind direction-price
It is easy to understand such a distribution situation from the perspective of power
balance. The power market is a market in which supply and demand are balanced.
In the case of low wind speed, it is bound to bring about a significant drop in power
generation. When generation declines while demand stays the same or increases, supply
and demand imbalances push electricity prices up to incentivize more generation or
reduce the need. And there is also insufficient power generation, which leads power
suppliers to purchase more expensive fuel for power generation, increasing electricity
prices.
The next step is to forecast the wind conditions, and since the historical time series
of wind conditions have been used, there is no pure forecast. Therefore, to show the
randomness of the wind, the predicted wind data ew will fluctuate randomly based on
historical dataw, expressed as follows:
f
ws = ws +λ ·ws
f
wd = ws +λ ·wd
(14)
For λ, it represents the error between the wind data predicted by various methods and
the actual wind data. Here, λ is set as a random number that obeys the normal distribu-
tion. The probability distribution of the random number is shown in the figure below.
Figure 31: Normal distribution probability
38
==PAGE:45==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
To prevent the predicted data from being too steep due to random changes, the data
for each hour is not predicted, but an interpolation method is used. For example, the
wind data of the first and third hours are predicted, and the wind data of the second hour
are obtained by interpolating their values.
(a) 10% fluctuation
(b) 30% fluctuation
Figure 32: Wind Speed Prediction under Different Fluctuation Degrees
The two figures below represent the normal distribution of different parameters,
and the time series is from the 96th hour to the 172nd hour. The former has a random
range between -10% and 10%, and the latter is -30% to 30%. It can be seen that the
former forecast wind data is closer to the actual data.
6.3
Optimized layout revenue
Figure 33: Optimize layout plan revenue
Based on the existing measured wind data and the simulated forecast data based
on the measured wind data, it is first substituted into the original layout of the Horns
39
==PAGE:46==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
Rev wind field to obtain a total revenue of 166.7 million DKK in 2018. Then, based
on the Pareto optimal solution set in MORS, the optimal layout corresponding to each
solution in the solution set is substituted into the calculation of its total revenue.
The X-axis in the figure above represents the number of solutions in the Pareto
optimal solution set, and the solutions are sorted so that the power becomes larger from
left to right. In a total of 118 solutions, the annual income of most of the optimized
layout schemes is higher than that of the original layout, and only two solutions have a
lower annual income than the original layout due to the low power of their correspond-
ing layout schemes. They form a non-dominated relationship with other high-power
solutions due to their lower VOP than other solutions. However, low variability did not
lead to better annual income for the case where the power gap was more significant than
other solutions.
Figure 34: Compared with the original layout annual income
And it can clearly see in the figure that in the process of sequentially increasing
the corresponding power of the layout, the income curve has two obvious jump points.
The first jump point is to increase the power from two low power points (76.88MW,
76.91MW) to 77.56MW, and the annual income has increased by about 2 million DKK.
The second jump point also occurs when there is a relatively significant increase in
power (77.77MW to 77.87MW). In the process of changing from the lowest power point
to the second jump point, for every 0.1MW increase, the annual income will increase
by about 0.3 million DKK. In this process, since there is no significant VOP increase,
the annual income of the wind farm is positively correlated with the power.
When the power exceeds the second jump point, the trend of its income changes.
An important reason is that its VOP also begins to increase significantly with the in-
crease of power. And as the power increases gradually, the closer to the convergent
solution, the more significant the increase in variability will be. The results show that
the annual income of this group of solution sets is similar, and they all fluctuate around
the income line slightly higher than 168.2 million DKK. Among them, the largest an-
nual income appears in the 82nd solution, and its specific value is 168.3 million DKK.
40
==PAGE:47==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
Based on the above results, a conclusion can be drawn that the existence of vari-
ability has a negative effect on the wind farm’s revenue. This constraint becomes more
robust with increasing power, thereby offsetting the increase in revenue due to the in-
creased power.
In order to further explore the universality of this conclusion, two sets of simulation
data were generated again under the previously set wind data prediction parameters,
and similar results and income curves were obtained. The maximum annual income
was 168.5 million DKK and 168.6 million DKK, respectively, appearing in the 61st
solution and the 57th solution.
Although the position of the maximum income solution has changed, by observing
the data and curves, it can be found that the position of the maximum income solution
is usually concentrated between the 60th and 80th solutions, and the annual income
corresponding to this part of the solution is generally very high. Therefore, it is very
likely that the layout of the maximum income solution due to fluctuations in wind data
forecasts will be different.
Figure 35: Forecast the annual income under the condition that the wind data fluctuates
by 10%
Then adjust the predicted fluctuation range to a random number between 0 and
±30%, and its distribution still obeys the normal distribution.
Figure 36: Normal distribution probability(30%)
41
==PAGE:48==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
Under this condition, the solution corresponding to the layout of the maximum
income point is very similar or even identical to the solution of the layout of the top
income point within the fluctuation range of 10%, which appear in the 82nd solution.
However, at this time, due to the reduction in forecast accuracy, revenue has dropped
significantly, and the maximum income reduced to 162.6 million DKK. This is mainly
because the up-price (the penalty unit price per MWh when the power is insufficient) is
usually larger than the down-price (the additional revenue unit price per MW when the
power is inadequate). Due to the normal distribution, theoretically, the probability of
over-expectation and under-expectation is the same. Therefore, in terms of the expecta-
tion corresponding to the likelihood, the worse the prediction accuracy is, the lower the
income will be.
Figure 37: Forecast the annual income under the condition that the wind data fluctuates
by 30%
Figure 38: The corresponding layout solution of the maximum income under different
forecasting degrees
42
==PAGE:49==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
After continuing to reduce the accuracy of wind data prediction, the maximum
income has further dropped to 153 million DKK, and it still appears in the 82nd solu-
tion. Due to the poor prediction accuracy and the method of interpolation to generate
intermediate values, there has been a relatively apparent deviation between the current
predicted wind speed and the actual wind speed.
Figure 39: Wind Speed Prediction under 40% fluctuation
Figure 40: Forecast the annual income under the condition that the wind data fluctuates
by 40%
Based on the above results, it can conclude that if the wind prediction accuracy is
at a relatively good level, then for the pursuit of maximum electricity sales revenue, the
Pareto optimal solution obtained through the MORS algorithm, the wind field layout
scheme of the 81st solution can be used as a reference.
43
==PAGE:50==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
Based on this, it can be found that in the case of high power, VOP and power form
an orthogonal relationship, and the phenomenon of mutual restriction becomes more
apparent. The highest income does not exist in the low VOP solution, nor the maximum
power solution, but a relatively balanced position between the two. Any solution with
greater power than this solution (and a larger VOP) will bring negative earnings. This
is similar to economics, which relies on marginal income to determine the optimal sales
volume.
However, assuming that there is no error between the forecast data and the actual
data, that is, when the electricity sales revenue is only related to the real-time electricity
price of the current power, the results have significantly changed.
Figure 41: No prediction error case
The results show that in the case of no prediction error. The income corresponding
to the 82nd solution and its nearby solutions is still high in the optimized layout scheme.
The annual income of Horn Rev’s original wind farm layout is higher than that of all
optimized layout schemes. This is in sharp contrast to previous data. Most of the
solutions in the Pareto optimal solution set have higher average power than the original
layout solutions, which seems inconsistent with the multi-objective optimization results.
However, this phenomenon can be explained if the wind speed-wind power dia-
gram before and after optimization is visualized.
In some specific wind directions, the power of the original layout shows a signif-
icant drop, while in other wind directions, the power of the original layout is usually
slightly better than that of the optimized layout. Since the goal of multi-objective opti-
mization is a larger average power and less variability, it leads that under the condition
of no prediction error, the advantage of reducing the mitigation power in a specific di-
rection in the optimization scheme does not play a role, resulting in the situation that
the annual income of the original layout is greater than that of the optimized layout.
44
==PAGE:51==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
Figure 42: power outputs for all wind directions with different wind speeds (from bot-
tom to top: v =5, 7, 9, 11, 13 m/s) of the original (solid lines) and optimized (dash lines)
WFs.
This can also explain why the best revenue layout does not appear in the maximum
power layout, although they have better average power, the VOP also increases with
power, resulting in increased power drop in some wind directions, limiting revenue
growth.
Also, note that the realistic wind distributions used in this chapter will likely differ
from those used in previous wind resource modeling. It can be clearly seen from the
figure below that the average wind speed of the wind distribution composed of three-
year data from 2018 to 2021 is lower than the Hornsea Weibull distribution preset in
Pywake. Therefore, based on the above questions, this research conducts wind resource
modeling based on the three-year wind data from 2018 to 2021, and since the previous
Pareto optimal solution with power and VOP as the optimization goal did not show an
advantage in electricity sales revenue, in this section, the single-objective optimization
method will be used to achieve the purpose of maximizing revenue.
Figure 43: (a)New Weibull distribution (b)Weibull distribution based on measured data
To explore whether there is a more obvious relationship between power and elec-
45
==PAGE:52==
6
ELECTRICITY MARKET TRADING
tricity sales revenue, two groups of single-objective optimization will be compared un-
der the same iteration times. The first group is to pursue more extraordinary power and,
at the same time, calculate the corresponding electricity sales revenue for each power
increase. The second group uses the random search method to directly pursue more
significant income and calculates the corresponding power for each income increase.
Both groups are optimized based entirely on the original layout.
The figure below shows that, from the overall trend perspective, the power increase
still positively impacts electricity sales revenue. However, due to the complexity of
changes in wind resources, there will also be a phenomenon that power increases and
electricity sales revenue decreases during the growth process. Under the same 30,000
iterations, the optimization to maximize revenue has obtained more electricity sales
revenue. However, there is little difference between the two in terms of the increase
ratio. Compared with the original layout revenue, the revenue has only increased by
1‰.
Figure 44: Maximize power
Figure 45: Maximize revenue
46
==PAGE:53==
7
CONCLUSION
7
Conclusion
Based on the goal of mitigating the power variability caused by rapid wind changes
during wind farm operation and pursuing greater average power, this research uses a
variety of multi-objective algorithms, including random search methods represented by
MORS and the genetic algorithm represented by NSGA-II is used to optimize the lay-
out of the Horns rev wind farm. In MORS, obtaining a satisfactory multi-objective
optimization solution is difficult using the random search method alone. Combining the
single-objective optimization method with power as the goal can significantly improve
the performance of the algorithm results. Among various multi-objective optimization
algorithms, the NSGA-II algorithm has also obtained satisfactory results through multi-
generational large population genetics. Among the algorithms used in the current wind
field optimization problem, the performance of the NSGA-II is the best, followed by
MORS, and AGE-MOEA is the worst.Although performance varies between optimiza-
tion algorithms, the overall results show that it is feasible to design a better layout to
generate electricity with high average power and low variability.
At the same time, in order to further explore the impact of the VOP index on
the operating income of wind farms and to choose the layout scheme that maximizes
revenue in the optimized layout, this research uses the actual Hornsea wind data in 2018
and the electricity price and regulatory price in the DK1 area. Through the comparison
of various layout schemes, it was discovered how VOP has a negative impact on revenue
under high power, and the optimal layout scheme was selected as a practical reference.
Finally, the unique situation of no error in wind resource prediction is simulated,
and the Weibull distribution of wind is reconstructed based on the local wind resource
data from 2018 to 2021 to optimize the annual income of wind farms.At the same time,
single objective optimization was set with wind farm revenue and wind farm power as
the goals. The results show that in the case of no error, regardless of whether power or
income is used as the optimization goal, the final increase in income is feeble.
47
==PAGE:54==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Mohammad Rafiqul Islam, Saad Mekhilef, and Rahman Saidur.
Progress and
recent trends of wind energy technology. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views, 21:456–468, 2013.
[2] Gabriele Bedon, Stefano De Betta, and Ernesto Benini. Performance-optimized
airfoil for darrieus wind turbines. Renewable Energy, 94:328–340, 2016.
[3] Ronit K Singh, M Rafiuddin Ahmed, Mohammad Asid Zullah, and Young-Ho
Lee. Design of a low reynolds number airfoil for small horizontal axis wind tur-
bines. Renewable energy, 42:66–76, 2012.
[4] Geerten van de Kaa, Martijn van Ek, Linda M. Kamp, and Jafar Rezaei. Wind
turbine technology battles: Gearbox versus direct drive - opening up the black
box of technology characteristics. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
153:119933, 2020.
[5] Shivaji Karad and Ritula Thakur. Efficient monitoring and control of wind en-
ergy conversion systems using internet of things (iot): a comprehensive review.
Environment, development and sustainability, 23:14197–14214, 2021.
[6] Joyjit Chatterjee and Nina Dethlefs. Scientometric review of artificial intelligence
for operations & maintenance of wind turbines: The past, present and future. Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 144:111051, 2021.
[7] Francisco Díaz-González, Andreas Sumper, Oriol Gomis-Bellmunt, and Roberto
Villafáfila-Robles. A review of energy storage technologies for wind power appli-
cations. Renewable and sustainable energy reviews, 16(4):2154–2171, 2012.
[8] M Maizi, MH Mohamed, R Dizene, and MC Mihoubi. Noise reduction of a hor-
izontal wind turbine using different blade shapes. Renewable Energy, 117:242–
256, 2018.
[9] Con J Doolan, Danielle J Moreau, and Laura A Brooks. Wind turbine noise mech-
anisms and some concepts for its control. Acoustics Australia, 40(1), 2012.
[10] Farid Khazaeli Moghadam and Nils Desch.
Life cycle assessment of various
pmsg-based drivetrain concepts for 15 mw offshore wind turbines applications.
Energies, 16(3):1499, 2023.
[11] Birte Holst Jørgensen and Hannele Holttinen. Iea wind tcp annual report 2021.
IEA, 2022.
[12] OFGEM. Technical report on the events of 9 august 2019. pages 1–37, 2019.
[13] Feng J. Shen WZ. Modelling wind for wind farm layout optimization using joint
distribution of wind speed and wind direction. Energies, pages 3075–3092, 2015.
[14] Majid Bastankhah. Fernando Porté-Agel. A new analytical model for wind-turbine
wakes. Renewable Energy, 70:116–123, 2014. Special issue on aerodynamics of
offshore wind energy systems and wakes.
48
==PAGE:55==
REFERENCES
[15] Ju Feng and Wen Zhong Shen.
Wind farm power production in the changing
wind: Robustness quantification and layout optimization. Energy Conversion and
Management, 148:905–914, 2017.
[16] S.J. S.D. DeGloria Riley and R. Elliot. A terrain ruggedness index that quanti-
fies topographic heterogeneity. Intermountain Journal of Sciences, 5(1-4):23–27,
1999.
[17] Ju Feng. Wen Zhong Shen. Solving the wind farm layout optimization problem
using random search algorithm. Renewable Energy, 78:182–192, 2015.
[18] J. Blank and K. Deb.
pymoo: Multi-objective optimization in python.
IEEE
Access, 8:89497–89509, 2020.
[19] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. A fast and elitist multiobjective
genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii.
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation,
6(2):182–197, 2002.
[20] Zhiming Lu. Yan Gao. Chuanbo Xu. Youting Li. Configuration optimization of
an off-grid multi-energy microgrid based on modified nsga-ii and order relation-
todim considering uncertainties of renewable energy and load. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 383:135312, 2023.
[21] Ali Haghighi and Arezoo Zahdei Asl. Uncertainty analysis of water supply net-
works using the fuzzy set theory and nsga-ii. Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence, 32:270–282, 2014.
[22] Zhe Xu, Xin Ning, Zongling Yu, Yufeng Ma, Zhiyong Zhao, and Binghao Zhao.
Design optimization of a shell-and-tube heat exchanger with disc-and-doughnut
baffles for aero-engine using one hybrid method of nsga ii and mopso. Case Stud-
ies in Thermal Engineering, 41:102644, 2023.
[23] Annibale Panichella. An adaptive evolutionary algorithm based on non-euclidean
geometry for many-objective optimization. In Proceedings of the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO ’19, page 595–603, New York,
NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[24] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart.
Particle swarm optimization.
In Proceedings of
ICNN’95 - International Conference on Neural Networks, volume 4, pages 1942–
1948 vol.4, 1995.
[25] Zhi-Hui Zhan, Jun Zhang, Yun Li, and Henry Shu-Hung Chung. Adaptive particle
swarm optimization. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part
B (Cybernetics), 39(6):1362–1381, 2009.
[26] Wind prediction in electricity markets.
ANEMOS Project Deliverable Report
D8.2,, 2005.
[27] Pierre Pinson, Christophe Chevallier, and George N. Kariniotakis. Trading wind
generation from short-term probabilistic forecasts of wind power. IEEE Transac-
tions on Power Systems, 22(3):1148–1156, 2007.
49
==PAGE:56==
REFERENCES
[28] John Bjørnar Bremnes. Probabilistic wind power forecasts using local quantile
regression. Wind Energy: An International Journal for Progress and Applications
in Wind Power Conversion Technology, 7(1):47–54, 2004.
[29] Ulfar Linnet. Tools supporting wind energy trade in deregulated markets. Master’s
Thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2005.
50
==PAGE:57==
Acknowledgement
I was exceptionally fortunate to complete a wind energy-related research project in
the final stage of my master’s degree, and to complete this thesis, I would like to thank
my supervisors, Ju Feng and Lesia Mitridati, who gave me selfless guidance and careful
teaching throughout the process of my master’s thesis.
Special thanks to Ju Feng for your comprehensive help during my research and
guidance when I got stuck. Your expertise, patience, and guidance have played a vital
role in my research. I would also like to thank Lesia Mitridati for her valuable advice,
comments, and support for the paper in the Electricity Markets section.
Thanks to everyone who cared about me.
