==PAGE:1==
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
Design of An Emotion Regulation Application In­
terface for Improving Mental Wellness and Re­
silience of University Students
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
Design of An Emotion Regulation Application Interface for Improving Mental Wellness and
Resilience of University Students
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Bufan Deng
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Human­centered Ar­
tificial Intelligence, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Sci­
ence in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Bufan Deng ­ s212400
Signature
Date
ii
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
30th June 2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The issue of mental health among young people has become a widely discussed topic
in recent years, particularly among university students who face numerous pressures,
including academic performance, independent living in a new environment, and social
isolation. These challenges have a significant impact on students’ mental health, high­
lighting the need to prioritize mental wellness in university students. With the increasing
popularity and development of applications and technologies in the mental care field, this
study aims to create a user­friendly emotion regulation mHealth app that is easy, satis­
factory, and enjoyable for students to use. We intend to answer four research questions
regarding psychological models, needs and expectations, UX design requirements and
usability of our app MindSpace for university students.
To gain a deeper understanding of the needs and expectations of university students, this
study employs participatory co­design methods, involving both university students and
professional experts in the design process. Ethical issues in the design cycle are taken
into consideration during design and evaluation, ensuring the successful implementation
of the study. Overall, this research contributes to the development of effective emotion
regulation and mental health interventions for university students, ultimately improving
their mental wellness and quality of life.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Bufan Deng, MSc Human­centered Articifial Intelligence, DTU
iv
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ACT Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. 6, 7
AI Artificial Intelligence. 3, 9, 10, 14, 16, 51
AR Augmented Reality. 8, 9
CBT Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. 1, 6–8, 24, 26
DBT Dialectical Behavior Therapy. 7
ER Emotion Regulation. 25, 26
ERT Emotion Regulation Therapy. 3, 6, 24, 34
GPT Generative Pre­trained Transformers. 29, 31
HCD Human Centered Design. 12
HCI Human Centered Interaction. 15
LLM Large­scale Language Model. 10, 13, 26, 29, 31, 51, 53
mHealth Mobile Health. 1–3, 12, 25, 51, 52, 54
PD Participatory Design. 12
UCD User Centered Design. 12, 52
uMARS user version of Mobile Application Rating Scale. 2, 16, 17, 40, 43, 53, 54
UX User Experience. 1, 16, 35, 40–42, 52, 54
VR Virtual Reality. 8, 9
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Results and contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
4
2.1
Emotion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Emotion Regulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The state­of­the­art technologies for mental health . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
12
3.1
Participatory Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
User Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Evaluations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Design Process
17
4.1
Identify
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Define . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Design & Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.4
Results: Final Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Discussion
51
5.1
Answers to research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.2
Strengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Conclusion
54
Reference
55
A Appendix
63
A.1 Design Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.2 Initial survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.3 Design probe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.4 Naming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.5 1st Co­design workshop:ChatGPT as counselor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.6 Think aloud testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
A.7 Content development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.8 3rd iteration: reframing gamification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
A.9 4th iteration: uMARS & ethical check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context and motivation
Mental health has emerged as a significant global public health issue in recent years. Ac­
cording to the World Health Organization (WHO), 1 in every 8 people in the world live with
a mental disorder, which is the leading cause of disability worldwide [1]. Among various
populations, university students face a multitude of challenges during the transitional age,
which makes them particularly vulnerable to mental health issues [2]. Noticeably, 75%
of mental health conditions develop before age 24 [3]. Poor mental health not only can
exert a negative impact on student’s well­being, but it can also have a detrimental effect
on their social life and academic performance [2]. Additionally, the COVID­19 pandemic
has further exacerbated mental health issues among university students, with rates of
anxiety and depression soaring [4]. Many label the current state of university student
mental health as a ”crisis” due to the increasing demand for mental health services on
university campuses and the rising severity of symptoms among university students [5,
6]. Universities are facing high pressure due to rising funding needs for mental health
services, a lack of mental health counselors, and an increase in caseloads. As a result,
there has been a growing interest in Mobile Health (mHealth) solutions, which provide
flexible mental health care services anytime and anywhere.
Previous studies tend to focus on technological aspects, utilizing ubiquitous devices and
intelligent technologies to facilitate self­management and intervention of mental health [7,
8]. Mindfulness­based therapies and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) methods, such
as behavior activation, are commonly used in mHealth applications to encourage behav­
ior change and promote healthy activities [9]. However, few studies focus on the student
perspective. Many mental health apps have low adherence rates due to poor design,
concerns about privacy, reliability and effectiveness [10]. Current university students,
mostly from Generation Z, are known for their familiarity with mobile and wearable tech­
nology [11]. They are particularly drawn to creative, inclusive, and personalized digital
experiences [9]. This project aims to design a student­centered mHealth app for emotion
regulation that leverages evidence­based psychotherapy techniques. Methodologically,
the project will focus on the design of the User Experience (UX) rather than technological
implementation and performance. This is achieved by conducting a participatory design
process that prioritizes student needs and expectations, while also evaluating ease of use
and satisfaction towards the design with an expert panel.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Research questions
The primary goal of this study is to apply participatory co­design methods to design a user­
friendly self­emotion regulation mHealth app for students with mental health problems.
Based on this goal, we listed three research questions:
RQ1 What are the psychological models of emotion regulation and what is the state­of­
the­art in supporting this for university students in handling mental health issues,
including technological support?
RQ2 What are university students’ needs and expectations for self­emotion regulation?
RQ3 What are the UX design requirements for an emotion regulation app for mental
health of university students?
RQ4 To what extent does this UX design provide usable and satisfactory mental health­
care services for university students?
Definitions of terms
• Emotions: See Related Work 2.1.
• Psychological model: a psychological model is a theoretical framework or concep­
tual framework that helps to explain and understand human behavior, cognition,
and/or emotions. Psychological models provide a way to organize and make sense
of complex psychological phenomena by breaking them down into smaller, more
manageable parts [12].
• Usability: extent to which a system, product or service can be used by specified
users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a
specified context of use (ISO 92411).
1.3
Research goals and methods
The primary objective of this study is to design a user­friendly self­emotion regulation
mHealth application that caters to the needs of university students facing mental health
problems. To achieve this overarching goal, the following research questions have been
identified:
RQ1: A comprehensive literature review is conducted to explore various psychological
models of emotion regulation. The review will also focus on examining existing tech­
nological interventions and their effectiveness in supporting university students’ mental
health.
RQ2, RQ3: To address these two RQs, a participatory design process is employed.
Also, user­centered approaches is conducted, including surveys,design probe, and focus
groups etc., to gather both qualitative and quantitative data. Co­design workshops involv­
ing university students are conducted to engage them actively in the design process. The
data collected are analyzed by mixed­methods to identify the key design requirements
and with expert panel to develop psychotherapy strategies and content for an effective
emotion regulation app.
RQ4: To evaluate the effectiveness of the designed app, a quantitative analysis is per­
formed using the revised user version of Mobile Application Rating Scale (uMARS). This
1https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:9241:­11:ed­2:v1:en
2
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:13==
scale provides a systematic and objective assessment of the app’s quality and user sat­
isfaction. The analysis will provide insights into the app’s usability and its ability to de­
liver satisfactory mental health care services to university students. Moreover, a self­
evaluation ethical checklist is used to evaluate MindSpace’s ethical design and improve­
ment areas.
1.4
Results and contributions
The findings of this study contribute valuable insights to the research field of student men­
tal health and mHealth interventions. The primary contribution is the concept and design
of MindSpace, a gamified mobile app that helps university students learn regulatory strate­
gies and counsel professional psychological advice in a fun and engaging way.
MindSpace’s essence lies in its innovative use of a chatbot for personal emotional guid­
ance, offering unique value to stressed students. Moreover, the core benefit for users is
the 21­day program grounded in Emotion Regulation Therapy, which teaches emotional
regulation in an engaging manner. Unlike existing solutions, MindSpace turns the journey
to emotional mastery into a rewarding, gamified and motivating experience. Moreover, the
inclusion of mental health assessments allows users to track their progress, further en­
hancing their sense of empowerment and self­growth. This blend of AI technology, gam­
ified educational content makes MindSpace a good tool for building emotional resilience
among students.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Related Work
2.1
Emotion
Definition.
The Cambridge Dictionary defines emotion as “a strong feeling such as
love or anger, or strong feelings in general”. However, the definition of emotion varies
across history and different perspectives (e.g. philosophical and affective). There is no
scientific consensus on what emotion entails [13]. According to the Internet Encyclopedia
of Philosophy [14], emotion is a type of affect, which also includes mood, temperament,
and sensation (e.g. pain). Researchers have proposed various theories of emotion [15,
16, 17, 18], ranging from basic and universal states to cognitive appraisal and recent
social constructivist models, emphasizing the role of cognition, culture, and context. In
general, emotion can be understood as either state (e.g. being angry) or as a process.
As a mental state, emotion is elicited by a particular event and gives rise to behavioral
response tendencies relevant to that event [19] and associated with thoughts, feelings,
behaviors, and a degree of pleasure or displeasure [13, 20, 21, 15].
Why are emotions important for university students?
Neuropsychology recognized
that emotions exert causal effects on mental health
[22] and overall well­being
[23],
playing a critical role in the evolution of consciousness and the operations of all mental
processes [16]. For example, positive emotions can broaden our attention and increase
our creativity, while negative emotions can narrow our focus and impair our cognitive
abilities. Positive emotions can be particularly beneficial for university students, as they
are at the stage of developing new skills and knowledge. Additionally, emotions can affect
our behavior and social interactions by influencing how we communicate with others and
how we respond to social cues [24]. Given that university students interact with peers
and faculty members on a regular basis, emotions can have a significant impact on their
social dynamics and behaviors. Most importantly, recent studies proved that emotions
play a critical role in academic achievement, with positive emotions predicting subsequent
achievement and negative emotions negatively predicting achievement, controlling for
gender, intelligence, and family socioeconomic status [25, 26, 27].
2.2
Emotion Regulation
Emotion regulation is a multifaceted construct, which includes the awareness, under­
standing, and acceptance of one’s emotions [28], the ability to control impulsive behaviors
when experiencing negative emotions [28], and the ability to modify strategies for man­
aging emotions according to situational demands and goals [29]. Numerous researchers
have identified emotion regulation as a crucial aspect of mental health, enabling individ­
uals to maintain well­being and resilience during challenging experiences [30, 31, 32].
Several studies have shown that self­emotion regulation skills are related to essential out­
comes such as health and well­being, better learning motivation, target positioning and
academic achievements [33, 34, 35], better quality interpersonal relationships [24], and
basically, a happier life [36, 37]. This implies that effective emotion regulation can have
a positive impact on both academic success and personal growth of university students.
2.2.1
Psychological models of emotion regulation
The Modal Model of emotion is a psychological model that explains how people respond
to stressors [32]. The model consists of four stages: Situation, Attention, Appraisal, and
Response. Building on this, Gross proposed the Process Model of emotion regulation [30,
4
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:15==
19], which involves strategies and techniques that individuals use to manage their emo­
tions (See Figure 2.1). These regulation strategies can be categorized into five main types
as shown below:
1. Situation selection ­ involves choosing which situations to enter or avoid based on
their emotional consequences.
2. Situation modification ­ involves changing the situation to alter its emotional impact.
3. Attentional deployment ­ involves directing attention towards or away from emotional
stimuli to regulate emotions.
4. Cognitive change ­ involves modifying thoughts and beliefs about the situation to
regulate emotions.
5. Response modulation ­ involves changing physiological or behavioral responses to
regulate emotions.
Figure 2.1: Process Model of Emotion Regulation. Reproduced from ”Emotion
Regulation: Conceptual Foundations,” by J.J. Gross and R.A. Thompson, 2007, in J.J.
Gross (Ed.), Handbook of Emotion Regulation, p. 10, Guilford Press.
In terms of the effectiveness of different emotion regulation strategies, Gross highlights
the advantages of cognitive reappraisal over expressive suppression [30] and empha­
sizes the importance of considering distinct strategies within each of the three processes
of emotion regulation(attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modula­
tion). Moreover, recent studies discovered that effective strategies for promoting men­
tal health among university students may include problem­solving, cognitive reappraisal,
perspective­taking, and active distraction [38, 39]. Various evidence­based therapies
systematically teach and address emotion regulation strategies with cognitive reappraisal
as an integral part of their framework, such as cognitive­behavioral therapy [40] and di­
alectical behavioral therapy [41].
2.2.2
Psychotherapies
According to the American Psychological Association, approaches to psychotherapy fall
into five broad categories: psychoanalysis and psychodynamic therapies, behavior ther­
apy, cognitive therapy, humanistic therapy and integrative or holistic therapy [42]. See
Table 2.1.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
5
==PAGE:16==
Table 2.1: Main types of psychotherapies with their description, techniques and representatives
Types
Description
Representatives
Main techniques
Psychoanalysis and
Psychodynamic Therapies
Focuses on unconscious
processes and past experiences
to improve current mental health
symptoms.
Freudian Psychoanalysis,
Adlerian Therapy, Jungian
Analytical Psychology
Free Association, Dream
Analysis, Transference Analysis,
Interpretation, Active Listening,
Empathy
Behavior Therapy
Focus on changing problematic
behaviors through conditioning
and reinforcement.
Classical Conditioning, Operant
Conditioning, Systematic
Desensitization, Exposure
Therapy
Behavioral Rehearsal, Modeling,
Reinforcement, Token
Economies, Relaxation
Techniques, Thought Stopping,
Cognitive Restructuring
Cognitive Therapy
Focus on changing negative or
distorted thoughts and beliefs to
improve emotional and
behavioral functioning.
Rational Emotive Behavior
Therapy (REBT),
Mindfulness­Based Cognitive
Therapy (MBCT), Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy (CBT),
Acceptance and Commitment
Therapy (ACT)
Cognitive Restructuring,
Identifying Automatic Thoughts,
Challenging Negative Thinking
Patterns, Thought Recording,
Socratic Questioning,
Meditation, Mindfulness
Humanistic Therapy
Focuses on self­exploration and
personal growth to improve
mental health.
Person­Centered Therapy,
Gestalt Therapy, Existential
Therapy
Unconditional Positive Regard,
Empathy, Authenticity,
Congruence, Self­Exploration,
Encouraging Self­Actualization,
Mindfulness
Integrative/Holistic Therapy
Therapies blend elements from
different approaches and tailor
their treatment according to
each client’s needs.
Integrative Psychotherapy,
Mind­Body Therapy, Emotion
Regulation Therapy (ERT)
Eclectic Approach Combining
Various Theoretical Models,
Mindfulness­Based Stress
Reduction (MBSR), Yoga,
Meditation, Acupuncture,
Nutrition Therapy, Art Therapy
6
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:17==
It is hard to decide which psychotherapy approach is the most suitable for university
students as each person’s needs, preferences, and presenting issues are unique, while
the evidence­based practice is primarily oriented toward cognitive­based therapies [43],
which has developed over three waves, with the third wave emphasizing mindfulness, ac­
ceptance, and the development of psychological flexibility. Compared to previous waves,
the third­wave CBT was found to improve treatment outcomes by addressing deeper cog­
nitive and emotional processes [44]. Table 2.2 provides a summary of the third­wave CBT
approaches. Accumulating evidence provides empirical support for the effectiveness of
third­wave therapies across a range of psychological disorders, such as depression [45,
46, 47], anxiety disorders [48, 49], and stress [50, 51, 52].
Table 2.2: Third wave evidence­based therapies. The strength of research support is
from Society of Clinical Psychology [53] and evaluated based on 1998 Criteria [54].
Therapy
Strength
Introduction
Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy [40, 55]
Strong
CBT aims to identify
maladaptive patterns of
thinking, emotional
responses, or behaviors
and replacing them with
more desirable patterns.
Mindfulness­Based
Cognitive Therapy [56]
Strong
MBCT aims to cultivate
mindfulness, encouraging
patients to both become
acquainted with
depressive modes of
thinking and feeling while
at once developing a new
(and less reactive)
relationship with these
experiences.
Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy [57,
58]
Modest ­ Strong
ACT aims to help
individuals develop
psychological flexibility,
which refers to the ability
to be in the present
moment and change
behavior based on
personal values.
Dialectical Behavior
Therapy (DBT) [41]
Modest ­ Strong
DBT focuses on teaching
clients skills in four main
areas: mindfulness,
emotion regulation,
distress tolerance, and
interpersonal
effectiveness.
2.3
The state­of­the­art technologies for mental health
The emerging technologies for mental healthcare are applied to tailor the mental needs
of different types of users. This section provides an overview of the state­of­the­art tech­
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
7
==PAGE:18==
nologies in this area, focusing on mobile solutions, immersive technologies, and conver­
sational agents.
2.3.1
Mobile solutions
Mobile solutions, such as smartphone applications and wearable devices, have emerged
as promising tools for mental health support. These solutions offer several advantages,
such as convenience, accessibility, and the ability to provide personalized and real­time
feedback [59]. An increasing effort was into functionality of embedded sensors that can
record movement patterns, social interactions (such as the number of texts and phone
calls), behavior at different times of the day, vocal tone and speed, and more. Recent
studies provide an extensive overview of existing mobile solutions for mental health sup­
port, ranging from mood tracking apps to meditation and mindfulness applications [60,
61]. Haque and Rubya conducted a systematic user review analysis on both Android
apps and iOS apps [60]. They ranked top targeted MH conditions in mobile apps and split
MH apps into five categories, including Evidence­based framework, Therapy, Technology
tools, Continuous assessment and Community support (See Figure 2.5). Mindful med­
itation was most applied in evidence­based mental health intervention programs using
mobile apps [62, 60]. Other intervention programs included cognitive behavioral therapy
apps, complex programs made up of a variety of different components, and apps based
on the stress model and breathing exercises [62, 60]. Current trends in mental health
app development encompass self­management, improving thinking skills, skill­training,
supported care, passive symptom tracking, and data collection to address various mental
health concerns and enhance users’ well­being [63]. Despite their potential, mobile men­
tal health apps also face several challenges, including concerns about usability, privacy,
reliability, and effectiveness [64, 59, 10, 61]. Heuristic evaluations have identified the
most common usability problems of CBT apps as visibility of system status, consistency
and standards, and flexibility and efficiency of use [65].
Figure 2.2: Reproduced from [60] (a)Percentages of targeted MH conditions in MH
mobile applications (2) Techniques and tools used by MH mobile apps
2.3.2
Immersive technologies
Immersive technologies such as Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) have
been increasingly explored for their potential in mental health interventions [66]. Re­
searchers discuss how these technologies can create controlled environments that en­
8
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:19==
able users to confront and manage their mental health issues safely and effectively [67].
For example, VR has been used for exposure therapy to treat anxiety disorders and pho­
bias [68, 69], while AR has been utilized to provide real­time coping strategies for individ­
uals experiencing panic attacks [70, 67]. See Figure 2.3. A fully self­guided app­based
virtual reality cognitive behavior therapy (VR CBT) proved its ability on large acrophobia
symptom reductions at home without the intervention of a therapist [71].
Figure 2.3: PHOBOS AR: an app for people who suffer from specific phobias. Left: User
interface of AR view; Right: User interface of phobia menu.
2.3.3
Conversational agent
Conversational agent is a personal, intelligent assistant (also known as a chatbot) that
provides healthcare through natural conversation. The main reason is to make existing
services more user­friendly ­ an agent takes a patient through a turn­taking dialog, ex­
changing questions and answers to complete a task, similar to how doctors do [72]. A
good example is Woebot [73] (See Figure 2.4), a conversational agent designed by a team
of Stanford psychologists and AI experts, can accurately identify the patient’s emotional
needs through conversations and provide self­guide resources.
Figure 2.4: Woebot: Your Self­Care Expert
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
9
==PAGE:20==
A systematic review [74] illustrates various characteristics of chatbots in clinical psychol­
ogy and psychotherapy, including their technical implementation, underlying approaches,
goals and endpoints, performance, and areas of use. See Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Characteristics of chatbots in clinical psychology and psychotherapy.
Reproduced from [74].
Although chatbots designed to promote mental health hold promise, a scoping review
conducted in 2019 contends that their benefits have yet to be effectively translated into
psychotherapeutic contexts [74]. Users complain that chatbots are useless due to not
providing helpful/practical solutions and failing to understand context and provide per­
sonalized responses [60], which emphasizes the playing role of empathy (the capacity to
place oneself in another’s shoes [75]) in the psychological consulting conversation expe­
rience. Previous research supported that this empathic ability can increase user satis­
faction [76] and affinity for the agent [77]. To achieve this goal, the agent may need to
express shared understanding, offer new perspectives, and generally take into account
the unique situation and feelings experienced by the user [78].
This expectation gives an opportunity for generative AI developed by Large­scale Lan­
guage Model (LLM). ChatGPT 1, instills optimism concerning the practical implementa­
tion of chatbots for therapeutic contexts. Some netizens have spontaneously attempted
to use ChatGPT as a psychological counselor or therapist, and many have provided posi­
tive feedback of their experiences (see Figure 2.6). However, the relevant paper in terms
of LLM for psychological healthcare remains empty.
1A chatbot based on GPT LLM developed by OpenAI. Current GPT­4 excels in tasks such as language
translation, text completion, and conversation generation, demonstrating considerable potential for diverse
applications [79]
10
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.6: Left: A TikTok video gained more 34.5k likes for using ChatGPT as a
therapist. Right: A tweet by @Aishwarya, sharing her thoughts on the potential of
ChatGPT for therapy.
2.3.4
Gamification
Gamification is a technology intervention that has recently gained popularity. Researchers
have found that interventions are most effective when people like them, are engaged, and
want to continue using them [63]. Reasons for applying gamification can be broadly di­
vided into 2 themes: promoting engagement and enhancing an intervention’s intended
effects [80]. The most common gamification elements applied to mental health apps in­
clude feedback on progress, points and scoring, rewards and prizes, narratives or themes,
personalization, and customization [80]. By incorporating game elements and mechan­
ics into mental health interventions, designers aim to make these apps more enjoyable,
accessible, and effective. For example, MIT Media Lab developed a mobile game called
”The Guardians”, which rewards users for doing real­life activities to improve their mental
health [81, 82] (see Figure 2.7). Another study by Fish and Saul found that gamification of
a mobile mindfulness app was shown to reduce college students’ depression, highlighting
the potential benefits of incorporating game elements in mental health interventions.
Figure 2.7: User interfaces of “The Guardians”
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
11
==PAGE:22==
3
Methodology
3.1
Participatory Design
Limited uptake, engagement, adherence, and dropout rates are significant challenges
for current technology­based mental health interventions [10]. Many patient end users
stop using a health app two weeks after download it [83]. The development of mental
health apps requires careful consideration of design methodologies to ensure that they
are both effective and engaging for the target population. Within mental health design
research [84], common design methodologies include community­based participatory re­
search (CBPR), participatory action research (PAR), Participatory Design (PD), and User
Centered Design (UCD).
UCD is a broad term originated by Donald Norman and it puts users’ needs first and
allows end­users to influence how a design takes shape [85]. Researchers suggested
that user­centered design methods should be employed to ensure that the app is useful
and usable and that it fits into the fabric of the person’s life, not producing unnecessary
burden to the end user [10, 86]. Presently, UCD has a trend to switch to Human Centered
Design (HCD), which expands the perspective of users to all stakeholders. In the field of
mental health, interdisciplinary collaboration with mental health professionals is advisable
for the development team [87, 10]. Patient­Clinician­Designer Framework outlines key
principles of user­centered design in the context of designing for mental illness with related
stakeholders in a Participatory Design (PD) process to find appropriate solutions [88].
PD originated in Scandinavia during the 1960s and 1980s as workers demanded their par­
ticipation in the design process of technology being introduced into their workplaces [89,
90]. This approach prioritizes the involvement of users in the design and development
of products, systems, or services to ensure that they meet the needs and preferences of
the people who will be using them [89]. The central idea of PD is to promote democracy
and empower people. In contrast to traditional design processes, it includes important
stakeholders. PD has since been adopted and implemented in mental health technolo­
gies, especially for the young group [91, 92, 93]. Therefore, MindSpace was designed
according to the participatory guidelines of Young and Well [94]. Australian researchers
proposed this PD design guideline and suggested resource toolkits for mental health so­
lutions targeted at young people. The guideline suggested a design process that includes
four stages: Identify, Define, Design (Position, Concept, Create and Use) and Evaluate.
This thesis follows the Young and Well PD process. An overview of the app design and
iterations is shown in Figure 4.1.
Before the design process, a thorough literature review was conducted towards the the­
oretical background of psychological models and therapies to the mental health of uni­
versity students; and state­of­the­art mHealth technologies so as to identify opportunity
space and experience gaps that could benefit the solution ideation and development.
3.1.1
Expert Panel
In the creation of our mental health app utilizing a participatory design method, an expert
panel was established to provide comprehensive expertise and guidance. The panel (see
Table 3.1), consisting of a professor in health technology(EX1), a psychologist and medi­
tation therapist (EX2), and a psychology practitioner(EX3), contributed to all stages of app
development: from ideation and design, through testing, to refinement. Their collective
12
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:23==
understanding of mental health needs, therapeutic strategies, and user­centric technol­
ogy ensured the app’s features were clinically appropriate, technologically feasible, and
user­friendly. Additionally, their ethical guidance informed respectful and inclusive design
processes, ensuring paramount considerations such as data privacy and confidentiality.
Therefore, the expert panel played an integral role in developing a mental health app that
was both clinically effective and user­centered.
Table 3.1: The formulation of MindSpace’s expert panel, with contact and professional
background
ID
Contact
Professional background
EX1
jakba@dtu.dk
Prof. of Computer Science, DTU Health Tech, Techni­
cal Univ. of Denmark | Adjunct Prof. of Public Health,
Univ. of Copenhagen | Director, Copenhagen Center
for Health Tech (CACHET)
EX2
yanmingvivi@163.com
Bachelor of Psychology Minor at Indiana University­
Bloomington | Master of information engineering at
University of Melbourne | Business Manager at a psy­
chological consultation start­up, sideline life coach
and meditation therapist.
EX3
Questionmarks@163.com
Podcaster of a Chinese psychology podcast“问题不
大NoBigDeal”1, which ranks in the top 3% of pod­
casts worldwide.
3.1.2
Co­design Workshops
Co­design workshops enable the immersion of MindSpace stakeholders throughout the
design and iteration process, spanning ideation, solution selection, and evaluation. These
workshops can be implemented early to probe issues, generate or prototype concepts,
each tailored to address specific project objectives and stimulate creative insights. Knowl­
edge, prior experience, and previous research findings are collectively shared among
student participants, experts, and designers, fostering a rich environment of collaborative
ideation and evaluation.
We utilize artifacts like slides, revised personas, knowledge cards, and user story maps to
facilitate knowledge sharing, grounding the process in the experiences and perspectives
of young people. This approach promotes a deeper understanding of potential position­
ing, promotion and distribution strategies, as well as success criteria. Two co­design
workshops were conducted, focusing on different aspects of the MindSpace app:
1. Chatbot Counselor: This workshop aimed to evaluate the feasibility of a LLM chatbot­
empowered psychological counseling service on MindSpace, taking the recently
emerging ChatGPT as an example. See Section 4.3.1.
2. Reframing Gamification: This workshop was designed to improve MindSpace’s gam­
ified elements and explore ideas to seamlessly integrate a narrative treatment plan
with storytelling, chatbot engagement, and a rewarding system in the user journey.
See Section 4.3.3.
To enable meaningful participation from the young students, we meticulously planned
ahead, framing our approach and preparing necessary resources. Care was taken to
ensure participants felt prepared and rewarded in the participatory process, including suf­
ficient breaks and benefits (skill teaching, food etc.). To ensure workshop accessibility,
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
13
==PAGE:24==
participants were recruited through various online platforms, with a detailed consent form
outlining the workshop’s goals, procedures, and rewards. Following each co­design work­
shop, feedback was collected and analyzed for refining the design and functionality of the
MindSpace app, especially to meet the needs of accessible counseling service and en­
gaging experience.
3.1.3
Role­play
Role­play is a representation technique often used during co­design sessions; it allows
to explain a service or product idea by acting out an exemplification scenario of use [95].
Role­playing has been used in the design process to generate new concepts, to test de­
sign ideas on potential users and as a technique for designers to help them “imagine
better⋯to empathize better”[96]. This participatory technique involves designers assum­
ing the roles of different users, interacting with prototypes or conceptual design elements
to explore and understand the user experience from multiple perspectives. By simulat­
ing the user’s context, behaviors, and potential challenges, role­play facilitates nuanced
insights into the user journey, potentially revealing unforeseen obstacles or opportuni­
ties for enhancing usability. Moreover, role­play sessions can be effective in facilitating
communication among stakeholders, enhancing collaborative design decision­making by
highlighting diverse user perspectives. Consequently, role­play contributes to the devel­
opment of more user­centric, accessible, and intuitive design solutions.
In this thesis, we incorporated role­playing into our co­design workshop to evaluate the
feasibility of a popular AI chatbot counselor solution, ChatGPT. Participants were invited
to role­play using persona artifacts interacting with ChatGPT in simulated scenarios rep­
resentative of university students seeking psychological counseling via a chatbot feature
embedded in MindSpace. This allowed us to closely study the usability and acceptance
of the AI chatbot from the user’s perspective and to better understand the context in which
the tool would be used.
Following the role­playing sessions, members of our expert panel analyzed the data, scru­
tinizing the potential effectiveness of ChatGPT as a mental health counselor, identifying its
limitations, and determining areas for improvement. The synthesis of role­playing insights
and expert panel feedback will ensure our AI solution is robustly user­centric, effective,
and ethically sound.
3.2
User Studies
In the preliminary Identify stage of our participatory design process, we utilized a mixed­
methods approach, merging a qualitative design probe with a quantitative survey to collect
exhaustive user data. Our motivation for adopting this mixed­methods approach was to
foster a profound empathy and create a comprehensive understanding of university stu­
dents’ behaviors and attitudes concerning mental health issues within the campus envi­
ronment. This stage is crucial for the divergent collection of abundant data that will serve
to inform decision­making in subsequent stages of product definition and design. Fur­
thermore, this method’s capacity to triangulate between qualitative and quantitative data
enhances the robustness and validity of the insights derived, strengthening the foundation
for the ensuing design process.
3.2.1
Surveys
A survey is an often­used method of gathering information from a selected sample of
individuals, facilitating the collection of data that represents the broader population [97].
Online surveys offer added advantages, such as cost­effectiveness and convenience,
enabling researchers to collect large amounts of data within a short period [98]. The
14
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:25==
structured data derived from surveys facilitate theme prioritization by identifying consistent
patterns and trends [99], hence their wide application in the HCI field. This methodology
is also leveraged in the healthcare domain to uncover the clinical needs of respondents.
In the first stage of MindSpace’s design process (see Section 4.1.1), we employed an on­
line survey disseminated through various online forums and offline posters. Our aim was
to garner user opinions concerning their mental health habits and needs, as well as their
expectations regarding potential solutions. For our co­design workshops, we deployed
surveys to engage our target users, exploring their experiences and views pertinent to
the workshop objectives.
3.2.2
Design Probe
We intend to observe users and understand their behavior in the context of their daily lives.
The goal is to identify user needs and behavior patterns of university students through ob­
servation. However, considering the time constraints, we thought about a more casual
and fun way to gather inspirational data about students’ daily campus lives. Design probe
satisfies the goal of supporting an appealing, flexible and entertaining observation of our
target group, so as to ensure a good quality of data collection. Notably, the design probe
is an efficient diary approach in the practice of co­designing [100]. It is a self­documenting
tool that involves providing research participants with tasks or materials that inspire them
to reflect on their daily lives, emotions, thoughts, and behaviors, and subsequently share
these reflections with researchers. Probes are usually used in the front of the design pro­
cess. Our motivation lies in uncovering users’ emotions during campus life; understanding
their behavioral pattern, especially related to their frequent coping strategies that might
not be immediately apparent in interviews or surveys. These insights will provide a deeper
understanding of our users’ needs and help experts choose treatment plans and explore
design opportunities accordingly. The details of our probe content and design is explained
at Section 4.1.2.
3.2.3
Affinity mapping
The KJ method, or affinity mapping, a prevalent approach in user experience design, was
implemented in our design probe for organizing and analyzing data gathered from user
responses [101]. This method facilitates the categorization of extensive data into groups,
based on shared themes or relationships, thereby generating a visual data representation.
Within the context of our study, we collated raw data from user responses gathered via
design probe and role­playing exercises onto sticky notes within FigJam, an online white­
board (see Section 4.1.2). Each note encapsulated a single idea or feedback. These
notes were subsequently categorized on the board according to inherent relationships
or shared themes, assisting us in recognizing patterns concerning emotions, behaviors,
trigger events, and emotion regulation challenges. The application of the affinity mapping
method enabled us to effectively synthesize user insights and work collaboratively with
our expert panel to identify effective strategies and therapies targeting students’ mental
needs in context. Thus, this served as a robust basis for our design decisions, ensuring
that MindSpace accurately addresses the realities and needs of our target user group.
3.3
Evaluations
3.3.1
Think Aloud Testing
The ”Think Aloud” testing method, first introduced by Lewis in 1982 [102], is a technique
whereby participants verbally express their thoughts and reasoning while performing a
task. In the Design stage of our research, the primary aim of integrating gamification
into the app design was to enhance users’ motivation to complete optional exercises,
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
15
==PAGE:26==
facilitated through rewards and narrative elements. To assess the effectiveness and pop­
ularity of this approach, we utilized a combination of the ”think aloud” method with a post
semi­structured interview. In the thinking aloud activity, participants were tasked with
various interactions with the app, such as understanding the 21­day training plan, experi­
encing the first story exercise, and exploring the rewards system. Upon completion, they
were asked to provide feedback via a post­survey questionnaire comprising both Likert
scale [103] and open­ended questions. See Appendix 4.3.2. The Likert scale questions
evaluated the app’s ease of use, while open­ended questions solicited users’ experiences
and opinions regarding the app’s gamification elements. This methodology allowed us to
gain critical insights into user engagement and plan subsequent iterations of our design.
3.3.2
Ethical Design
As an app that focuses on the emotional and inward values of our users, designing
MindSpace with ethical considerations in mind requires adherence to several key prin­
ciples of AI ethics [104] and avoid dark patterns of ethical design [105]. To facilitate a
more structured evaluation of the ethical aspects of MindSpace, an expert(user) ethical
checklist is employed. The template of this checklist is learnt from DTU course 02809
UX Design Prototyping 2. This checklist includes self­rating items on Choice, Well­being,
Transparency, Diversity and Benefits, with a following question to ask why. See the sur­
vey at Appendix A.9.2.
3.3.3
User Version of the Mobile Application Rating Scale(uMARS)
To answer RQ4: ”How effectively does this UX design deliver usable and satisfactory men­
tal health care services for university students?”, we employed the user version of Mobile
Application Rating Scale (uMARS) as our quantitative assessment tool [106]. uMARS, a
widely recognized tool, is specifically designed by researchers to categorize and evaluate
the quality of mobile health applications. The tool provides a multidimensional measure,
consisting of objective factors such as engagement, functionality, aesthetics, and informa­
tion quality, thereby giving a holistic view of the application’s strengths and weaknesses.
See the link to uMARS PDF file at Appendix 4.3.4. Moreover, uMARS includes a subjec­
tive quality scale and perceived impact queries, thereby enhancing the evaluation of user
satisfaction and the projected effectiveness of the application.
2https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/2022­2023/02809?menulanguage=en
16
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:27==
4
Design Process
The design process for MindSpace primarily begins with understanding the specific pref­
erences and needs of university students. We summarized students’ key mental health
issues and preferences on the design solution through a survey; closely observed how
these students navigate their emotions and coping behaviors within their campus life.
These mixed methods provided a foundation for accurately defining the problems and
potential solutions in the second stage of our process.
Collaborating with an expert panel, we developed therapeutic content tailored towards en­
hancing the students’ emotional regulation skills within the MindSpace application. This
panel’s insights were invaluable in ensuring the relevance and effectiveness of the thera­
peutic content we integrated for the problems identified at the first stage.
Lastly, our design and evaluation process, undertaken as an iterative cycle, facilitates
continuous improvement of the application. We first design, followed by evaluation ses­
sions employing methods including thinking aloud, co­design workshops, and analytic
evaluations, including user version of Mobile Application Rating Scale (uMARS) and an
ethical self­evaluation checklist. These approaches allow us to continuously identify and
address usability issues in the premise of ethical design, while uncovering new design
opportunities. The whole design ensures that MindSpace remains a usable, useful and
ethical application, meeting the dynamic needs of university students effectively. See the
overview of MindSpace’s design process in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The design phases of MindSpace based on Young and Well PD framework.
4.1
Identify
4.1.1
Initial User Study: Survey
For the initial study, we intend to get an overview picture of our target group in an easy
and efficient way. Thus, we choose to send out online surveys on Facebook DTU student
groups, DTU Skylab Wall and hang up posters in main buildings within campus. See
posters on Figure 4.2.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
17
==PAGE:28==
Goal: The purpose of this initial study is to understand the general mental wellness status
of university students, relevant behaviors and expectations on mobile solutions.
(a) Poster design of initial
survey
(b) DTU library board
(c) DTU Skylab online board
Figure 4.2: Initial user study: poster design and some photos of hand out places
Method
The survey is structured with 19 questions, divided into three sections: demographic char­
acteristics of university students, availability of mental care service and expectations for
mental health app design. At the end of the survey, we also include a text field for hiring
potential participants for our co­design workshop.
Results
We collected 85 responses mainly from DTU in two weeks. Responses consist of 40 male,
43 female and 2 non­binary; international students and local students 7:3. See Section
A.2.
Last assessment of mental status. Most of the respondents (65%) have never done
a mental assessment (36%) or have done for more than1 year (29%). Among males,
89% answered that they have never used any mental health app, which could be due to
potential reservation, social expectation or stigma in the role of male on mental health
issues. See Figure A.1.
Causing factors to mental health issues. The top three factors related to emotional
well­being on campus are: academic workload and deadlines, availability and quality of
academic advising and support, access to mental health resources. Academic pressure
and lack of proper guidance are significant contributors to emotional stress among uni­
versity students.
First inclination when experiencing emotional lows. Family and friends are the first
choice for most students (58%) when they were emotional low. Afterward, 39 out of 85
students tend to engage in self­care activities such as meditation. Similarly, 39 students
answered the maladaptive coping strategies, including suppression, alcohol and drugs.
Seeking professional help. Current students generally have an open mind to seek pro­
fessional help, with 15 students are comfortable seeking professional help, 34 are only
somewhat comfortable with the idea. This suggests that while there’s openness to pro­
fessional help, there may be some reservations or barriers. This can be triangulated with
last finding of preference on self­care and a desire to cope independently A.10. According
to Question 11 A.11, we found the biggest barriers to access the professional counselor
service are financial concerns and adequate resources.
Desired features for a mental health app. It’s easy to find that the top four valued fea­
tures by students include mental health assessments, counseling, meditation exercises
18
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:29==
and self­help resources. Students prefer flexible notification systems, with half of respon­
dents(55%) wanting to decide the way of notification by themselves and a preference for
push notifications.
Based on the findings above, we identified some design opportunities for our mental health
app design shown below.
1. Anonymous Usage: Implement features that allow users to engage with the app
anonymously. This can help reduce the perceived stigma, especially among male
users.
2. Affordable Counseling: Collaborate with professional therapists who could provide
low­cost or sliding­scale counseling services through the app. Offering a few free
counseling sessions might also be a good way to encourage users to try the service.
3. Meditation and Self­help Modules: Include meditation exercises, stress manage­
ment techniques, and other self­help resources. These could be interactive and
customizable based on user preferences.
4. Mental Health Assessments: Implement regular, easy­to­understand mental health
assessments that can help users track their mental well­being over time.
5. Flexible Notifications: Allow users to customize the notification settings according to
their preference. This could include the ability to set the frequency of notifications,
the type of content they’re notified about, and the option to turn off notifications
during certain hours.
However, it is hard to target our design direction without identifying students’ main emo­
tional problems; the needs and requirements of our app need to be further discussed
based on more in­depth study of the emotional experience of students on campus. Thus,
we decided to conduct a qualitative user study to gain a deeper understanding of their
emotional experience on campus, from the triggers that induce various emotional states
to the strategies they employ to regulate their emotions. Moreover, we recognize the need
to identify gaps between emotional triggers and effective emotion regulation strategies,
and to understand these processes within the context of students’ daily lives. Therefore,
we need detailed qualitative data that can shed light on their emotional states, daily ac­
tivities, and the effectiveness of their coping mechanisms. This data is crucial to shaping
our user story map and informing our design decisions.
To gather this nuanced information, we’ve conducted a user study using the tool of a
design probe. The reasons why we choose this method and the goal of our design probe
are explained.
4.1.2
Second User Study: Design Probe
Goal: By utilizing a design probe, we aim to uncover hidden aspects of our users’ emo­
tional experiences and coping strategies that might not be immediately apparent in inter­
views or surveys. These insights will provide a deeper understanding of our users’ needs
and help us refine and prioritize our design opportunities accordingly.
The reason we applied a design probe is because personal emotional tracking is private.
This research method allows participants to answer our questions in their own space,
which gives freedom to express themselves in a more relaxing environment. A special
design of documenting tasks and probe protocol in a fun and engaging way also facilitates
participants’ self­expression.
Hypoethesis:
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
19
==PAGE:30==
• H1: Journaling is an effective way to help participants reflect upon their emotions
and personal experience.
• H2: There is a correspondence between students’ coping behaviors and moods.
• H3: Puzzle games are a good gamification feature to allow users to learn coping
strategies.
Method: Design Probe + Survey
Our design probe called a 1­week emotion journey is designed to allow participants to
document their emotions, coping strategies and emotion regulation challenges easily and
entertainingly. See Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: A photo of design probe
This probe is a combination of both quantitative options and qualitative questions, which
includes four main activities: 1. Mood tracking based on a ”wheel of emotions” 1 and
scale rating (1­5 low to high) in three intervals (morning, noon and night); 2. following
open­up questions about participants’ emotional triggers, coping strategies and self­rating
effectiveness in terms of their applied strategies; 3. a daily puzzle game to introduce an
emotion regulation technique. 4. a reflection section on the last day, design suggestions
plus a QR code linked to a feedback survey. See details in Table 4.1.
Analysis: Data Analysis + Affinity mapping
Through this 1­week emotional journey documentation, a data(word frequency) analysis
was used to compare occurrences of different emotions and coping strategies; an affinity
mapping is used to summarize emotional triggers and challenges of university students.
Afterward, members of the expert group write down suggestions on psychotherapies and
mental health care techniques on green stickers and post it up near the challenges.
1. Data Analysis. Statistics of emotion distribution of participants. Clusters of coping
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotionclassification
20
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.1: Activities of MindSpace’s design probe
Number
Activity Name
Description
1
Mood Tracking
Track mood and emotions throughout
the day using a simple scale or emoti­
cons. Record mood at regular intervals
(e.g., morning, afternoon, evening).
2
Emotional Triggers and Responses
Identify three situations during the week
that triggered strong emotions.
De­
scribe the triggering event, the specific
emotion, the reaction/response, and the
helpfulness of the response.
3
Coping Strategies and Techniques
Document currently used coping strate­
gies for managing emotions. Describe
the specific emotion(s) the strategy is
used for, the effectiveness of the strat­
egy, and the challenges faced in using
the strategy.
4
App Feature Wishlist
Brainstorm and list desired features or
functionality for an emotion regulation
app.
Consider features for identifying
emotions, managing emotions, learn­
ing coping strategies, tracking progress,
and social/community support.
strategies and self­reported efficiency. In our analysis of the coping strategies used
by participants, we employed a two­dimensional coordinate system to categorize
and understand these strategies more effectively. On the X­axis, we plotted the fre­
quency of each strategy’s use, indicating how often participants resort to a particular
strategy. On the Y­axis, we represented the perceived effectiveness of each strat­
egy, as rated by the participants themselves. This approach enabled us to identify
patterns and relationships between the frequency and perceived effectiveness of
the different coping strategies employed by the participants.
2. Affinity mapping. Identify users’ main mental problems and challenges for them to
regulate emotions. Find design opportunities for app ideation. Based on collected
probes, we clustered key information and identified themes for students’ challenges
and coping strategies.
Results
Six participants joined the 1­week emotion journey design probe. See participants’ in­
formation in Appendix A.3. We analyzed the frequent emotions that they experienced
during the planned week, highlighting the emotional needs of our target group; we also
identified emotional patterns between students’ internal and external activities (events)
and their emotional responses. Furthermore, we discovered common coping strategies
and challenges faced by university students when regulating their emotions.
For emotion distribution (see in Appendix A.23,A.22), we found the following emotional
patterns among university students:
• Peaceful/joyful and sad/scared emotions are widespread among university students.
The top 5 unpleasant feelings are Sleepy, Bored, Weak, Guilty and anxiety; the top 5
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
21
==PAGE:32==
pleasant emotions are Energetic, Relaxed, Creative, Excited and Thankful, indicat­
ing that they are both strong and weak in a pain­and­gain stage of personal growth.
We can target these five unpleasant emotions, which can be tackled by relaxation
and goal­setting/motivation.
• A considerable number of students experience feelings of sadness and tiredness,
which could be attributed to academic stress, burnout, or a lack of work­life balance.
• Anxiety and insecurity are present among students, which could be associated with
academic pressure, social anxiety, or concerns about their future.
We read through participants’ probes and summarized the main emotional triggers in their
campus life. See Figure 4.4. Triggers lead to poor emotion:
1. Teamwork and Collaboration
2. Social and Recreational Activities
3. Interpersonal Relationships and Social Anxiety
4. Dis­empowerment and Discontent
5. Productivity and Task Management
6. Job and Financial Concerns
7. Course­related Stress
8. Health Concerns
9. Weather­related Emotions
Figure 4.4: Summary of trigger events to negative emotions
Figure 4.5 presents six categories of coping strategies that students utilize, along with
their frequencies and self­rated efficiencies. These categories include ”Self­awareness
and reflection,” ”Self­expression and creativity,” ”Socialization and connection,” ”Self­care
22
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:33==
and relaxation,” ”Distraction and engagement,” and ”Passive coping.” It is obvious that
these categories can be divided to positive and negative behavior patterns. See analysis
data in Appendix A.20.
In terms of frequency, ”Socialization and connection,” ”Self­care and relaxation,” and ”Dis­
traction and engagement” are the most commonly used strategies, with ”Socialization and
connection” activities such as talking with people and asking for help occurring the most
frequently. On the other hand, ”Self­awareness and reflection” and ”Passive coping” are
less frequently used. Notably, the least efficient strategies, such as crying or doing noth­
ing, belong to the ”Passive coping” category.
Considering self­rated efficiency, ”Self­awareness and reflection” and ”Self­expression
and creativity” appear to be the most efficient, with activities like practicing a hobby and
positive thinking scoring highly. In contrast, ”Passive coping” strategies score lower, indi­
cating they may be less effective in dealing with stress.
These findings suggest that active and positive coping strategies involving self­reflection,
creativity, socialization, and self­care are perceived as more efficient and are used more
frequently by students. Conversely, passive coping mechanisms are less efficient and
less frequently used, indicating a potential area for intervention in stress management
programs.
Figure 4.5: Participants’ coping strategies with self­rated efficiency in a coordinate
System
We transcribed and categorized the main challenges students faced in emotion regulation
based on the daily log of all participants (see pink sticky notes in Figure 4.6). Then,
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
23
==PAGE:34==
we invited experts to provide suggestions of therapy techniques and methods for given
challenges (see green sticky notes in Figure 4.6). The main challenges are:
1. Cognitive and Attentional Challenges
2. Lack of emotional regulation skills
3. Low Self­Esteem and
4. Social Anxiety
5. Emotional Awareness and Expression
6. Psychosomatic Symptoms
Figure 4.6: Yellow: summary of challenges that participants faced in emotion regulation.
Green: expert suggestions on strategies or therapies
We found that Emotion Regulation Therapy (ERT) is a comprehensive, individualized ther­
apeutic approach that combines elements of CBT, DBT, Mindfulness, and humanistic ther­
apies to help individuals identify and understand their emotions, foster self­acceptance,
prevent emotional avoidance, and develop better decision­making, critical thinking, and
problem­solving skills.
Summary of Insights:
1. Hypothesis H1 4.1.2 is verified. Participants like the design probe experience and
they believe that journaling feelings, thoughts and experiences allows them to un­
derstand themselves more.
2. Hypothesis H2 4.1.2 is valid. We found that participants with more unpleasant emo­
tions tend to take rather maladaptive regulation strategies (suppression or ignoring
problems), while the self­care and relaxation activities (see Figure 4.5) indicated
that by participating in positive and meaningful activities, can help university stu­
dents improve their cognitive and reflective abilities towards emotions. Similar to
Behavior Activation technique in CBT, by actively engaging in various fun activities
or arrangements for relaxation, can effectively relieve emotional issues.
24
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:35==
3. For hypothesis H3 4.1.2, the puzzle game gains mixed popularity and does inter­
mediate help in learning coping strategies. The effectiveness of this game remains
in doubt.
4.2
Define
The initial survey collected an overview picture of students’ demands and expectations on
mental health mobile solutions. Through a more in­depth Design Probe, we further iden­
tified students’ emotional patterns and challenges they face at regulating their emotions.
Based on the challenges, experts suggested useful psychological techniques that we can
leverage in our app design.
The design probe played a crucial role in driving the answers for RQ3. The findings
summarized from two studies inspired our contemplation of the app design requirements.
Notably, the primary challenges faced by university students are the development of cog­
nitive and awareness abilities, as well as a lack of emotional regulation skills. Although
we received user feedback in the initial survey stage suggesting that mental health as­
sessment is considered top of the most desired features (See Figure A.14), after reading
the probes from users, we found that negative students had negative mentality and often
took passive and negative regulation strategies (see Section 4.1.2). As the saying goes,
’Give a man a fish, and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish, and you feed
him for a lifetime.’ It’s more important to motivate behavior change and help target users
learn ER skills in their favorable way.
Therefore, we constructed several ’How Might We’ (HMW) questions 2 to help generate
creative solutions. Our HMW questions are listed below：
• How might we leverage therapeutic techniques and practices to cultivate the cogni­
tive skills and emotional awareness of university students? See Section 4.3.2.
• How might we integrate accessible and personalized counseling services into our
solution? See Section 4.3.1.
• How might we ensure our solution is engaging and motivating to retain user interest?
See Section 4.3.3.
• How might we design our app in a way that respects their ethical needs, thus in­
creasing their comfort and trust in using our service? See sections 4.3.4 and 4.4.5.
4.2.1
Lean Canvas (LC)
To establish our minimum viable product (MVP), we initially synthesized findings from two
prior user studies and ideated solutions in response to our HMW questions. The primary
challenges identified were: 1) academic pressure and anxiety, which add to mental
and physical strain; 2) the lack of accessible and personalized counseling services; and
3) insufficient knowledge about mental health (MH) resources and techniques. Our po­
tential app features, informed by previous survey results and a design probe, align with
three main directions: mental assessment services, professional psychological counsel­
ing, toolkit of self­care resources.
Despite the variety of feature options, we recognized a common issue in mHealth app
design: high abandonment rates and low adherence. Moreover, we noted that distraction
and passive coping (academically, called Negative self­referential processing [107]) were
significant negative behavior patterns obstructing participants, as highlighted by the de­
sign probe shown in Section 4.1.2. This insight underscored the need to not only provide
resources but also to foster a positive mentality of coping strategies and self­awareness
2https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how­might­we­questions/
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
25
==PAGE:36==
for both self­emotion and emotion regulation methods. Users are suggested to under­
stand the triggers and process of their emotions and most importantly learn how to regu­
late their emotions. Based on these findings, we formulated user stories shown below to
represent the needs and expectations of MindSpace.
As sad university students, they want to ...
1. Cultivate emotional awareness to effectively deal with negative emotions and im­
prove mental well­being.
2. Acquire regulation and coping skills, such as meditation, to relax and reduce anxiety
or stress.
3. Access personalized and affordable counseling services.
Thus, our MVP uniquely proposes to deliver an engaging mobile application that
focuses on the education of emotion regulation and coping strategies so as to build
their self­resilience. By integrating an AI chatbot for free, personalized counseling and
providing a planned daily exercise based on evidence­based therapies, we aim to promote
behavior change. Furthermore, our accessible toolkit module will offer resources and
mental health assessments. Our solution will be available anytime, anywhere, thereby
fostering self­resilience. We also prioritize user privacy and are committed to ensuring
the safety of user data.
For our solution, we intend to leverage the power of AI Chatbot and LLM to provide free
and personal counseling services. For the learning process of coping strategies, we will
not only just provide resources but guide users to find what fits them the most. Specifically,
our MVP solution includes:
1. a customized AI Chatbot that provides free counseling service;
2. an engaging and guided daily exercise schedule based on evidence­based thera­
pies to promote behavior change;
3. an accessible toolkit module for self­care resources and mental health assessments.
4.2.2
User Story Map
We developed a user story map integrated with a simple persona to describe the actions
of achieving three solutions shown in Lean Canvas. This approach allows us to anticipate
and outline the interactions our target users will engage in to achieve their goals within
our app. Following this, we have delineated the specific actions and tasks incorporated
in each iterative version of the app, ensuring continuous refinement and improvement.
Initially, we created two personas: a male international student and a female local student
(see Section 4.4.2). These personas represented combined traits of our target segment,
while they were not mutually exclusive and shared similarities. However, in our user story
map and for the sake of focusing on the MVP app and iterating the user journey efficiently,
we decided to integrate the two personas into one. By doing so, we aimed to prioritize
addressing the top needs and expectations of our users. Differentiating the needs and
expectations based on gender and background may be beneficial in future stages but
was not considered the primary focus of this project, which targeted the general student
population.
We created the user flow in different modules of our app based on our three main solutions
which consist of a counseling chatbot, CBT and Mindfulness daily exercises, and a mental
health assessment module. In the module of CBT and Mindfulness daily exercises, we
provide ER skill learning for different topics, mindfulness practice, and journaling features.
26
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.7: Lean canvas of MindSpace
Figure 4.8: Initial user story map of MindSpace
4.2.3
Communication
Naming
In defining our solution via the Lean Canvas model, we used a participatory approach to
choose an apt name for our app so it’s easier to communicate the idea of our solution.
We brainstormed several names and launched a campus­wide campaign to solicit student
feedback on these suggestions. The campaign involved a poster (see Figure 4.9) with a
QR code, enabling students to vote for their preferred name. This fostered democratic
participation in our naming process. From the results, ’MindSpace’ was chosen as the
app’s name. A majority of students felt ’MindSpace’ intuitively reflected the app’s purpose
and was more memorable compared to other options. See voting statistics in Appendix
A.4.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.9: Poster of naming survey
Mood board
We intend to find a color palette for our app. A mood board3 is a visual tool that commu­
nicates concepts and visual ideas, typically composed of images, text, and samples of
objects in a composition, used to convey the theme or style of a project. Therefore, we
made use of a mood board to visually represent the aesthetic and functional themes of our
mobile app according to our expectation of the vision, allowing us to effectively commu­
nicate design ideas and ensure alignment between stakeholders during the app design
process. Our mood board presents a color palette extracted from aesthetic illustrations or
images that shows an atmosphere of empathy, calm, uplift, and support. See our mood
board in Figure 4.10.
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mood_board
28
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.10: MindSpace’s mood board: color palette and theme vibes
4.3
Design & Evaluation
4.3.1
1st Iteration: Co­design workshop
Goal:
For our solution of AI chatbot counselor, we intend to evaluate the feasibility of a
LLM chatbot for the use of psychological counseling service on a mobile app, by testing the
use of ChatGPT as a mental health counselor for university students through a co­design
workshop, where participants role­play uses our persona artifact with ChatGPT. Afterward,
members from our expert panel will analyze the potential effectiveness, limitations, and
areas for improvement.
Method: Co­design workshop
In this 1.5­hour workshop, participants, who gave their consent, were introduced to the
workshop’s objectives, target user personas and the capabilities of ChatGPT for men­
tal health applications. See Agenda in Appendix A.5.1. Subsequently, participants en­
gaged in a role­play session with ChatGPT, simulating different user personas (see figures
4.21,??). Following a short break, each group presented their experiences and observa­
tions from the role­play, leading to a brainstorming session focused on potential enhance­
ments for ChatGPT as a mental health chatbot. Workshop outcomes and next steps were
recapped in the concluding segment. Afterward, participants filled out a survey about their
overall experience and subjective rating for GPT’s performance on empathizing with users
and the effectiveness of its suggested coping strategies. Post­workshop, two experts
(EX2,EX3) panel scored ChatGPT’s responses for professionalism, discussed strategies
for crafting effective prompts, and considered potential limitations and ethical aspects of
using ChatGPT as a mental health counselor. Finally, a discussion with users explored
the limitations and potential areas of improvement for the ChatGPT counselor.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.11: Photos during the first co­design workshop process. Left:introduction about
the workshop. Right: discussion session about limitations and improvement points of
ChatGPT.
Figure 4.12: Participants communicated with ChatGPT by role­playing with a persona
handout
30
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:41==
Evaluation: Affinity Mapping + Expert check
Upon completion of the workshop, we gathered and analyzed interaction data, compris­
ing prompts and responses, from each participant’s engagement with ChatGPT. They
provided insights into the limitations and suggestions for improvement of utilizing a LLM
chatbot for mental health counseling. Experts EX2 and EX3 critically evaluated and com­
mented on these interactions(prompts and responses) of participants and ChatGPT. See
the original comments in Appendix A.5. Their feedback is instrumental in enhancing spe­
cific aspects of user interaction when this technology is implemented within a mobile ap­
plication setting.
Results
Findings from participants. Five participants answered the post­survey. See results
in Appendix A.5.2. Participants showed moderate satisfaction in terms of the ChatGPT
psychological counselor experience, with an average of 3.2 out of 5 shown in Figure A.27.
Trust in ChatGPT’s responses:
When asked about their trust in ChatGPT’s responses,
the majority of participants (4 out of 5) rated it as ”somewhat well.” (see Figure A.28), indi­
cating a potential of using ChatGPT as a role of psychological counselor as one participant
commented about his/her the most liked part ”It can be helpful but I really think it needs
more improvements.”.
Effectiveness of ChatGPT’s empathy ability and effectiveness on suggestion cop­
ing strategies.
Empathy represents the ability to understand the persona’s frustrations,
and validate the client’s emotions and feelings of experience, instead of solely providing
logical analysis and listing facts. However, opinions varied, with two participants consid­
ering GPT somewhat effective and the rest finding it neutral effective or ineffective.
Based on the comments from respondents, participants highlighted several positive as­
pects of ChatGPT as a psychological consultant, such as its availability and the ability to
tailor the consultant to one’s comfort level. They also appreciated that ChatGPT draws
from a vast amount of data.
”You can tailor the consultant that you feel more comfortable with. It reflects
more than one consultant since it is based on millions of data and not only with
one lifetime experience (pro and con).”
However, some participants expressed concerns about the lengthiness of ChatGPT’s an­
swers, feeling overwhelmed by the amount of information provided. They also mentioned
that ChatGPT doesn’t feel real, lacks empathy, and sometimes asks multiple questions
within a single answer, making it difficult to provide specific/right prompts for desired in­
formation.
”It gives super long answers and can quickly overwhelm a stressed person
with its long lists and stuff to do to get better.”
”It gives very long answers and ask multiple questions in the same answer so
it is hard to give it a prompt with the extra information it wants”
”it doesnt feel real, a lot of reading so i get distracted a lot”
”Non empathic. Most of the answers are common sense or not too much
specific/cathartic.”
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
31
==PAGE:42==
Lastly, we transcribed the discussion notes with participants and summarize the themes
of key findings in the following table:
Table 4.2: Summary of limitations and suggestions for improvement of ChatGPT as a
mental counselor
Limitations
Suggestions for improvement
Empathy:
• Difficulty interpreting indirect ex­
pressions
• Lack of emotional understanding
• Inability to read non­verbal cues
• Hard to establish an emotional bond
Communication:
• Language use feels too formal
• Requires extensive input for optimal
performance
Consistency
and
Performance:
• Inconsistent response times
• Repeats information
Enhance
personalization:
• Ask additional questions, question­
naires
• Fits to personality (e.g. MBTI)
Improve
communication:
• Offer multi modal responses (text,
image, voice)
• Use concise answers
• Optimize response timing (slight de­
lay for reading)
• Provide additional support, guid­
ance to techniques, therapies
Experts comments.
Similar to the participants’ findings, for experts’ feedback on the responses of ChatGPT,
a commonality between the two experts’ opinions revolves around the chatbot’s lack of
empathy and the need for a more question­driven approach to understand and address
user concerns.
Specifically, EX2 found that one response has a sense of confrontation and suggested
receiving users’ permission before giving advice and a therapeutic approach, with an
emphasis on seeking user consent before providing potentially confrontational responses;
while EX3 believes the bot’s responses are viable when providing a weekly plan.
EX2 mentioned, “The response has a sense of confrontation; it might be
better to first seek the user’s consent, such as, ‘I have some guesses, but
these guesses might put pressure on you. Do you want to hear them?’ Only
proceed after getting the user’s permission.”
“The issue ... might not get much help from psychoanalysis/dynamic psychol­
ogy, and the user might not feel much gain. I would suggest adding a round
before: talk about the problem first, then let the bot judge which counseling
approach could help, and then have it emulate that approach.’”
Such feedback accentuates the value of diverse therapeutic techniques and the impor­
tance of adaptability in counseling chatbots, an aspect we’ve considered in our iterative
design process. By integrating these insights with user feedback, we successfully refined
our chatbot counselor’s basic prompt. The resulting iteration showcased a marked im­
provement in the bot’s empathy, communication style, and overall performance, setting a
solid foundation for future developments.
The insights and improvements gained from the expert evaluations and user feedback
make significant enhancements to the ChatGPT counselor’s user interaction. After sev­
eral tests, combined with suggestions from users, we proposed a basic prompt for our
32
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:43==
chatbot counselor. This prompt can be helpful to present the idea and potential content
of human­bot interaction in a later evaluation process.
1
I want you to act as a psychological counselor that I am having a conversation
with. Your name is {{botName}}. You will ask me about my emotions ,
identifying triggers , and providing personalized exercises and coping
strategies , therapeutic
techniques based on Third wave evidence -based
practice therapies and Gross' Process Model of Emotion Regulation.
Refuse
to answer any question not about the info.
2
3
For your response , answer in a concise , professional , caring and emphatic tone
. Limit your response to maximum 6 sentences and please guide users to
identify their mental issues in their mind and change cognitive
distortions. Make sure our conversation is of good quality by following
below dimensions of good counseling dialogue:
4
1. Active listening.
5
2. Empathy and understanding: ability to empathize with the client ,
demonstrate understanding , and validate the client 's emotions and feelings
of experience. Engage in more conversations with users, instead of solely
providing logical analysis and listing facts.
6
3. Clarity and conciseness: The counselor should be able to communicate
complex ideas and concepts clearly and concisely. A counselor has the
ability to present information in a manner that is easy for clients to
comprehend. Try to ask more about users' situations and help them
specifically sort out their concerns to improve the therapeutic effect and
provide more substantial assistance.
7
4. Questioning and probing:
ability to ask open-ended and relevant questions
that encourage clients to share their thoughts , concerns , and experiences.
Effective questioning can help uncover important information and
facilitate deeper understanding.
Before giving advice , ask questions to
confirm users' feelings and details to better understand their issues.
8
5. Adaptability and flexibility:
how well the counselor adapts their
communication style and approach based on the client 's needs, preferences ,
and feedback. This may include adjusting the pace, tone, or content of
the dialogue.
9
6. Goal setting and activity planning:
the counselor 's ability to
collaboratively establish clear, achievable goals with clients and develop
actionable activities \& plans to achieve those goals.
10
7. Seek users' consent: Before giving out guesses or suggestions that may
cause users to feel stressed (confrontation), seek their permission to
ensure they feel comfortable.
11
12
Now, let's begin the counseling!
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
33
==PAGE:44==
4.3.2
2nd Iteration: Gamification
Content development
After collecting enough suggestions about the chatbot counseling feature, we intend to
focus on the entire solution, aiming to build an engaging and meaningful emotion regu­
lation training platform. To help users learn coping strategies, increase self­awareness,
and reflect upon negative thinking patterns in a rational way. The plan is decided to mo­
tivate behavior change by a daily activities check­in agenda based on suggestions by
experts in Appendix A.7, mainly based on Emotion Regulation Therapy (ERT) which inte­
grates components of cognitive­behavioral, acceptance, dialectical, mindfulness­based,
and experiential, emotion­focused, treatments. This mechanism­targeted behavioral in­
tervention focuses on the training of emotion regulatory skills including attentional flex­
ibility, acceptance, cognitive distancing, and cognitive reframing as well as experiential
exposure to contexts of perceived reward and risk [108]. See Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.13: Conceptual Model of Emotion Regulation Therapy(ERT). Reprinted from
[108]
Motivation of utilizing ERT.
The reason for choosing emotional regulation therapy: It
is an evidence­based treatment, especially for anxiety, depression, and emotional disor­
ders which can be beneficial to prominent negative emotions and challenges of students
in their campus context 4.1.2, with focus on motivation, attention, personal value­based
threats/rewards. Specifically, college students are about to enter society after graduation;
it would be very useful to explore their motivation and ideal way of living. ERT allows them
to place attention where it is most relevant to their goals and break the cycle of reactive
responding, learning the right cognition pattern and efficient coping strategies.
Concept of gamification.
To ensure users enjoy and complete the 21­day plan every
day, we aim to increase engagement through gamification. The overall game mechanism
is a learn­practice­reward system that combines daily mission, storytelling, exercise etc.
features.4.14
34
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.14: MindSpace’s game mechanism.
Method: Think aloud testing
The main objective of gamification in our app design is to increase users’ motivation to­
wards completing optional exercises through the use of rewards and narrative. In the
following sections, we describe the design of this UX testing process.
Goal:
1. Test the popularity and effectiveness of the gamification idea at supporting an en­
gaging and intuitive ER learning experience.
2. Gain user feedback about current design and plan iterations.
Tasks
1. Before entering the homepage, read the guidance screens.
2. Find out what phases constitute the 21­day training plan.
3. Find today’s missions.
4. Go to the Chapter page and check the chapters.
5. Experience and pass the first story exercise in Chapter 1.
6. Go to the Profile page and check the rewards.
7. View today’s wise quote and check the chatbot feature.
Post­survey questions
Likert 1­5 scale questions
1. Likert 1­5 scale How easy or difficult was it to understand the main objective of the
app?
2. How easy or difficult do you think it will help you to understand emotion regulation?
3. How effectively do you think the app can help you learn coping strategies?
Open questions
1. Did the gamification elements make the app more engaging and enjoyable? Why
or why not?
2. Were the game mechanics and rewards clearly explained and easy to understand?
3. Did the gamification elements (images, dialogue, rewards etc.) contribute to your
motivation to use the app regularly? Please explain.
4. Did you encounter any difficulties or confusion while interacting with the gamification
components of the app? What additional gamification elements or improvements
would you suggest to enhance user engagement and motivation?
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
35
==PAGE:46==
Results
In the think­aloud testing(see responses in A.6) for our app, complemented by a post­test
survey (see A.6.1), we identified areas of user appreciation as well as facets that could be
improved. Participants conveyed a desire for a more intuitive and less text­heavy interface
on the guidance screens. As one participant mentioned, ”There was too much text and
a big transition. I didn’t like the white background, and the text was not intuitive on the
top” (P1). However, understanding the app’s main objective was less of an issue, with an
average survey rating of 4.3 out of 5 A.31.
Despite an average rating of 4 out of 5 on how well the app facilitates understanding of
emotion regulation strategies A.32, participants critiqued the 21­day training plan for its
technical phases. As one participant noted, ”The phases were a bit technical. However,
I appreciated that the time text set expectations” (P5).
The transition from ”Today’s Mission” to the ”Chapter Page” was criticized as being too
abrupt by some, with one participant stating, ”I wish for an interaction between Today’s
mission and the Chapter page” (P2). Nevertheless, the design, story, and tips on the
Chapter Page received positive feedback. ”I like the design, the story, and the tips, which
explained things well” (P4).
Engagement was significantly influenced by gamification elements, which averaged 4.6
out of 5 in the survey for contribution to enjoyment A.34. However, these elements did not
appeal to all users. One survey respondent revealed, ”I don’t find them that interesting,”
contrasting with another who shared, ”I really liked the persona of the old sage; it felt like
I was embarking on a path of wisdom”.
Users proposed additional gamification elements and improvements such as push notifi­
cations, user customization, short video illustrations, and immersive sound effects. One
user suggested, ”Maybe choosing a little about your character. Not mandatory, just to
improve engagement.” When it comes to gamification elements, the app achieved an av­
erage score of 4.6, pointing to the understanding of its gamification mechanics and reward
design A.35.
In summary, our findings underscore the importance of refining the app’s interface and
gamification elements to enhance user engagement and fulfill the app’s objectives more
effectively.
36
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:47==
4.3.3
3rd Iteration: Reframing gamification
Drawing upon feedback from previous think­aloud testing, it was confirmed by a majority
of participants that the preliminary gamification concept provided an engaging, fun, and
effective way to learn ER skills. However, there were queries about the perceived rele­
vance and sense of empowerment offered by the reward system. As a result, we aim to
enhance our app, focusing specifically on creating a more relevant and smooth gaming
mechanism that integrates a narrative treatment plan content with storytelling, chatbot
engagement, and a rewarding system.
Method: Co­design workshop
This co­design workshop is a brainstorming session, with a focus on engaging and useful
mechanics that help users manage their emotions better. We hire participants by posters
through public boards at the DTU campus (See posters in Appendix A.36). We devised
three pivotal HMW questions rooted in our objectives from thinking aloud session and
conducted a co­design workshop to brainstorm or improve gamification design solutions
with participants, guided by the Octalysis Framework for Gamification & Behavioral Design
4. An introduction to the initial prototype, the concept of gamification, and the Octalysis
Framework marked the beginning of this workshop. Each HMW question session takes
15 minutes.
Figure 4.15: Participants exchanged gamification ideas during workshop.
Workshop Goals:
1. Enhance the game mechanism of the app using the Octalysis Framework to provide
a more meaningful experience, aligning with our objective of promoting engaging
emotion regulation skill learning.
2. Gather ideas for a reminder mechanism that incentivizes users to remain committed
to emotion regulation skill learning and daily task completion.
HMW questions:
1. How might we adjust the gamification elements to make users feel more meaningful
and rewarded, ensuring it aligns with the goals and needs of our target users?
2. How might we incorporate a chatbot into the overall user journey?
3. How might we design a reminder system that keeps users motivated to accomplish
their daily missions?
4https://yukaichou.com/gamification­examples/octalysis­complete­gamification­framework/
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
37
==PAGE:48==
Results
Based on the co­design workshop and subsequent audio transcript analysis A.8, we de­
rived key insights that shaped the further refinement of our emotion regulation app. The
main findings were categorized into three primary domains, each addressing one of the
HMW questions formulated for the session.
1. How might we adjust the gamification elements to make users feel more mean­
ingful and rewarded, ensuring it aligns with the goals and needs of our target users?
The game incorporates aspects of story progression and possibly a ”leveling up” me­
chanic, where users gain certain skills or tools as they progress, making them more
equipped to ”battle” their emotional issues. However, one participant emphasized a pref­
erence for focusing on learning rather than points scoring, particularly in the context of
a personal emotion regulation app. There’s a mention of using points earned through
game­play to gain access to extra resources like special breathing exercises or self­care
resources.
”I’m more interested in what I’m learning, instead of a score or something.
Normally, it’s from a social platform, others will see it. But considering its goal
(of a personal emotion regulation training app), it’s more private (transcribed
from Figure A.37).”
”Instead of leaving points, you just give, like, a portion of a certain tool, a certain
weapon as word or something, that at the end of all the chapters, you have,
like, a set of tools or skills or something that are useful in order to battle or fight
against the emotion, the people who are trying to conquer emotion [00:00 –>
00:27] A.8.”
Participants discussed how they might incorporate various types of equipment or tools
(such as shields and swords), possibly metaphorically, to reward users for learning and
practicing emotion regulation.
Also, one participant suggested that visualizing the chapter learning progress can be more
engaging and goal­oriented for users.
”As soon as I pass the chapter, I can see a map of emotional land is unlocked.
This can be more engaging and relevant to the epic meaning. (transcribed
from Figure A.38)”
2. How can we incorporate a chatbot into the overall user experience?
Among various wireframes displayed on our large canvass A.38, participants generated
connections and annotations to elucidate potential improvements in the chatbot feature’s
interactions throughout the user journey. Emphasizing the merit of integrating data de­
rived from an initial mental health evaluation during onboarding, along with the chat logs
accumulated over time, they proposed this combination as a strategy to amplify the preci­
sion of the personalized chatbot’s self­care resource recommendations. Additionally, the
incorporation of the chat logs and a broader array of psychological assessments could
potentially facilitate the creation of a user persona, providing a richer context for the bot
to customize its responses.
”Like, first do an assessment to know their mental...The level of mental well­
ness and then personalize the stories based on their needs...And then you
can get those information and give it to the chatbot [10:55­11:08] A.8.”
38
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:49==
Additionally, the chatbot figure(sage) can be incorporated into the narrative­driven ER
teaching sessions, functioning as a wise guide that supplies the plot context or relevant
knowledge. This integration of a chatbot into the user’s learning process can further en­
hance the interactive nature of our ER teaching session, making it more dynamic and en­
gaging. Regarding the visual aspect of the app, participants showed a clear preference
for animated or dynamic backgrounds, pointing out that they contribute to a more immer­
sive user experience. As one participant remarked, ”The dynamic background brings the
learning experience to life, making it more relatable and engaging” 4.3.3. This under­
scores the potential role of animation in reinforcing user engagement and promoting a
sense of personal connection with the learning content.
[13:52 –> 13:58] Because it’s so boring if we see the same picture and we
keep reading about a lot of...
[13:58 –> 14:00] Okay.
[14:02 –> 14:04] So you want to see some dynamic...
[14:04 –> 14:08] It’s pretty good the three creation, but I just looking and
think about it.
[14:08 –> 14:10] Okay, so dynamic background.
[14:12 –> 14:15] Something that could be useful, I guess probably.
[14:15 –> 14:21] Kind of the same image, but like getting closer and closer.
[14:21 –> 14:22] Yes, yes, yes.
3. How can we design a reminder system that keeps users motivated to accomplish
their daily?
Participants acknowledged the importance of a reminder system, yet pointed out that this
should not feel intrusive or controlling 4.3.3. Instead, reminders should act as motivators,
encouraging users to complete daily tasks and missions. To fully respect users, it’s cru­
cial to consider the user’s autonomy; they should have the ability to tailor MindSpace’s
notifications to their individual mental health needs.
”21­day plan is forced on continuous days (of check­in). You can visit and do
something to feel better. But having a (daily) notification of losing streak is
stressful(transcribed from Figure A.38)”
In this vein, we propose the introduction of a home screen widget5. Not only can this
subtly encourage users to re­engage with MindSpace, but it can also display critical infor­
mation that users find valuable, thereby strengthening their connection with the app. The
widget serves as a non­intrusive reminder and provides quick access to the app, thereby
promoting more consistent use and potentially enhancing the effectiveness of the emotion
regulation training.
5https://support.apple.com/en­om/guide/iphone/iphb8f1bf206/ios
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
39
==PAGE:50==
4.3.4
4th Iteration: Usability & Ethical check
The objective is to address RQ4: To what extent does this UX design deliver usable and
satisfactory mental healthcare services to university students?. Initially, users and our
expert panel engaged with the application for a duration of at least ten minutes. Sub­
sequently, they evaluated the overall usability and satisfaction derived from MindSpace
by conducting a uMARS questionnaire (see it at A.9.1). Additionally, they completed a
self­evaluation checklist focused on ethical aspects (see the checklist at A.9.2).
Method: uMARS questionnaire + Ethical checklist
The uMARS questionnaire has 26 scoring items including aspects of Engagement, Func­
tionality, Aesthetics and Information. All items are rated on a 5­point scale from “1.Inad­
equate”to “5.Excellent”. Select N/A if the app component is irrelevant. At the end of
uMARS has a comment section. The uMARS score for the app is calculated using a mean
scoring system across four domains, namely Engagement, Functionality, Aesthetics, and
Information. Each of these domains contains different questions relating to specific as­
pects of your app’s performance. The mean score for each domain (A­D) is calculated
by summing the individual scores for each question within the domain and dividing by the
number of questions answered (excluding those marked as ’N/A’).
Followed by an ethical checklist, experts are required to evaluate if the app design fulfills
the ethical needs of Choice, Transparency, Well­being, Diversity and Benefits (see Figure
4.16).
Steps:
1. Use the app and trial it thoroughly for at least 5 minutes;
2. Determine how easy it is to use, how well it functions and does it do what it purports
to do;
3. Review app settings, developer information, external links, security features, etc.
4. Users & experts answer the uMARS surveys; designers and experts answer the
ethical survey.
Figure 4.16: Ethical self­evaluation check dimensions. Reproduced from a slide of
02809 UX Design Prototyping.
40
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:51==
Results
The data gathered provides valuable insight into the overall user experience with the
MindSpace app. The UX factors were divided into subjective quality and perceived im­
pact.
Subjective Quality (see Figure 4.17):
Entertainment, Ease of use, Layout, Visual Ap­
peal, Quality of Information, Quantity of information and Credibility of Source scored high
across users, with a mean rating of 4 or higher. These aspects are considered as strong
points for MindSpace app, indicating a generally positive response in these areas. The
information aspect (high quality information from a credible source) and the visual appeal
of the app were particularly appreciated by the users. This could potentially be attributed
to the robust, evidence­based content of our app, which was developed through a partic­
ipatory design process involving both experts and the target group.
The rest showed mixed results with some lower scores (below 4), but the mean scores are
all above 3.5, suggesting a generally satisfactory level with some room for improvement.
The median score of the rest aspects were all 4 except the aspect of Customisation,
indicating a desire to have more options of learning content or resources according to the
user’s characteristics/preferences. It would be beneficial to delve deeper into the user
feedback on which features to customize for a more accurate picture. Performance and
Visual information are the next two weaker aspects, that might be because our prototype
focus on showcasing the main learning mechanism and chatbot service. We didn’t mean
to realize the interactions of all design (chapters, icons etc.). Thus, it influences the speed
and accuracy to achieve user tasks. Again, gathering more detailed feedback might shed
light on the specifics of these problems.
Figure 4.17: Box plot of app quality subjective ratings of MindSpace from uMARS.
To answer RQ4
, To what extent does this UX design provide usable and satisfactory
mental health care services for university students?, the mean score of four domains
are Engagement Mean Score: 3.84, Functionality Mean Score: 3.83, Aesthetics Mean
Score: 4.11 and Information Mean Score: 4.06. The overall app quality mean score is
3.96 according to the calculation method described at Section 4.3.4. The overall score is
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
41
==PAGE:52==
quite close to 4. This indicates that the UX design is performing well in delivering usable
and satisfactory mental healthcare services for university students.
Perceived Impact (see Figure 4.18):
Knowledge and Help Seeking were rated highly
(average of 4 and 3.89 respectively), indicating that the app is successful in making its
users understand and intend to improve their mental health behavior. This indicates that
the content and features provided are having a strong impact on the users, and is seen
as credible and useful.
Awareness and Behaviour Change also generally received high ratings (average of 3.78),
which signifies that the app successfully raises awareness about mental health issues
and motivates users towards positive change. However, the data also suggests room for
motivating users’ attitudes toward improving health behaviors as Attitudes had the lowest
average rating of 3.44.
Figure 4.18: Box plot of perceived impact of MindSpace from uMARS.
Ethical self­check.
In the evaluation of MindSpace’s ethical considerations, the author
(designer) and experts (EX2, EX3) provided ratings in five categories: Choice, Trans­
parency, Well­being, Diversity, and Benefits. See results in Appendix A.9.2. On average,
MindSpace was most highly rated in terms of Well­being and Transparency, with all ex­
perts assigning these aspects the highest ratings of 4 or 5. The design was also favorably
viewed in terms of Benefits and Diversity, with a mean score of 4. Regarding Choice, there
was more variability, with an average score of 4.33, indicating room for improvement in
this area.
In terms of Choice, responses varied, with ratings of 3, 5, and 5 shown in Figure A.40.
Respondents noted that the system allows users to change their mind and select different
options, particularly with respect to the customization of the chatbot’s tone styles and
42
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:53==
characteristics. However, it was also noted that the training sessions did not offer much
in terms of personalized choices (Author), which aligns with the uMARS survey results
indicating a desire for more options in learning content or resources according to user
characteristics/preferences 4.3.4.
For Transparency, the mean score of 4 shown in Figure A.42 reflects that the design is
generally transparent about how data is used and shared. Both the ethical self­check and
the uMARS survey emphasized the importance of transparency and the credibility of the
source of information. Users highly rated the quality and credibility of information provided
by the app. The ethical self­check also indicated that users are aware of the therapeutic
theories of their learning content and training plan, aligning with the uMARS findings 4.18
that the app was successful in making its users understand their mental health behavior.
When considering Well­being, with the highest possible mean score of 5, this category
shows that the design is highly considerate of users’ emotional well­being, aligning with
the uMARS findings where Help Seeking was rated highly 4.18. The 24/7 availability of a
chatbot counseling service was a particular point of praise.
As for Diversity, the diversity score of 4 suggests that the design does a good job of not
excluding different groups. However, the designer mentioned that it doesn’t specifically
cater to disabled users or differentiate for various races or genders, indicating an area
where inclusivity could be considered in the future.
Benefits The mean score of 4 indicates the design offers significant value to users. How­
ever, one expert rated it a 3, suggesting some users may not perceive the benefits as
directly or significantly as others.
In summary, the insights gathered from both uMARS survey and ethical self­checklist can
be used to refine the design to be usable and better meet ethical considerations. We
found that participants were highly satisfied with the entertainment and visual design of
MindSpace. They also highly rated information Quality & Credibility of MindSpace on
providing evidence­based therapeutic training plans. By bolstering the diversity features
and expanding the choices offered during training sessions, MindSpace could potentially
improve in terms of inclusivity and user autonomy.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
43
==PAGE:54==
4.4
Results: Final Prototype
4.4.1
Concept of MindSpace
The concept and features of MindSpace is defined through a lean canvas as shown in
Figure 4.19. The lean canvas provides a one­page visual representation of the app’s
key functionalities and its unique value proposition. This method allows for easy under­
standing and communication of the app’s design concept, ensures all crucial elements
are addressed, and aids in identifying potential opportunities for enhancement.
Figure 4.19: MindSpace’s concept described from a Lean UX canvas. Compiled by the
author.
MindSpace is specifically targeted at university students aged 18­25. These students
are often under immense academic pressure, leading to elevated levels of worry and
stress. Additionally, they may be at an increased risk for anxiety and depression due to
the challenges of adapting to a new environment. MindSpace aims to cater to those who
wish to regulate their emotions and maintain motivation at a mild­to­moderate level. We
used two personas (see Figures 4.21 and 4.22) after the initial survey to conceptualize
and help empathize with our target group.
The Unique Value Proposition of MindSpace lies in its ability to act as a trustworthy private
mental health assistant, available to users anytime and anywhere. It aims to cultivate self­
resilience by teaching coping strategies in a fun and engaging manner. The guidance
provided is compassionate and personalized, eschewing generalized advice in favor of
targeted emotional support.
The solution proposed by MindSpace is a customized AI Chatbot, designed to act as a
counselor with whom users can confide their thoughts and feelings. The app promotes
engaging and guided emotion regulation and mindfulness practices through storytelling,
making mental health education enjoyable.
Brand Identity
MindSpace is specifically designed to assist university students as they
navigate through one of the most transformative stages of their lives, providing tools and
techniques to enhance their emotional resilience.
The color palette of MindSpace is a deliberate blend of calming and uplifting tones inspired
from our mood board4.10. The soft and soothing pink (ECC3CB) reflects compassion
and empathy, fostering a sense of kindness and support. The tranquil blues (6273B5 and
526184) instill a feeling of calm and serenity, providing a mental space where users can
feel secure and at ease. The clean and bright white (FEFEFE) creates an uplifting and
44
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:55==
clear environment, promoting clarity and positivity. The gentle gray (CDD2DA) ties these
colors together, representing the equilibrium and balance that we aim to help our users
achieve in their emotional lives.
Figure 4.20: MindSpace’s brand elements.
4.4.2
Persona
To ensure an user centered design process, we created personas based on initial sur­
vey results A.2. The artefacts of persona help us focus on the user’s needs and goals,
and ensure that all features and functionality are aligned with these needs. The personas
also provide a common understanding of who the user is and can help facilitate discus­
sions and communication within the participatory process in our workshop 4.3.1. In our
persona design, apart from common used demographic characteristics, simple biogra­
phy and goals and frustrations, we dived into psychological factors and social factors that
influence mental health of the users in accordance to the persona example from Rea­
chOut.com given in Young and Well participatory guidebook [94].
Figure 4.21: Persona of an international male students. Compiled by the author.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.22: Persona of a local female student. Compiled by the author.
4.4.3
User Story Map
In the Define stage, we used user story map to describe the main task flows of our concept
of idea to achieve user goals of improving emotional well­being and awareness, assessing
mental health, seeking professional help and forming a healthy mental training habit. After
four iterations, the user story map has been updated as Figure 4.23 shown, combined with
an integrated persona, and iteration process and features of different versions.
4.4.4
Micro­interaction
Micro­interactions, as Saffer explains in his book ’Microinteractions: Designing with De­
tails’ [109], are the small, often overlooked moments that make up much of our digital (and
physical) lives. These tiny interactions can create a more engaging, user­friendly expe­
rience when thoughtfully designed. We illustrated MindSpace’s interactions according to
four parts of micro­interaction, which are triggers, rules, feedback and loops/modes. The
Trigger initiates the microinteraction. The Rules determine what happens once a microin­
teraction has been triggered. The Feedback is how the user knows what’s happening or
has just happened. Loops and Modes determine the meta­rules of the interaction like how
long it lasts and when it should repeat. Taking Amazon as an example, adding an item
(trigger) to your basket, you would see an increase (feedback) in the number from zero
to one (rule) on the cart icon.
The four parts of micro­interactions are illustrated through annotations and arrows around
MindSpace’s wireframes, as shown in Figure 4.4.4. To ensure readability, repetitive el­
ements such as the ’send’ icon and items on the bottom navigation are annotated just
once. It is noted that not all interactions contain rules and loops.
46
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.23: User Story Map of MindSpace. Compiled by the author.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
47
==PAGE:58==
Depression
Anxiety
Family
Loneliness
Relationship
PHQ-9
Self-assess your emotional and mental 
well-being.
Assessment
All
“You can’t stop the waves, but you 
can learn how to surf.” John Kabat-
Zinn 
Wisdom quote
21-day Master Plan
Phase 1 of 4
Username
LV.01
EXP 0/20
Phase1: Awareness
TODAY
EXP 100
3 sessions
Awareness
DAY 2
EXP 150
3 sessions
Awareness
DAY 3
EXP 100
3 sessions
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Discover
MindSpace
“You can’t stop the waves, but you can 
learn how to surf.”
 John Kabat-Zinn 
MindSpace
MindSpace
“You can’t stop the waves, but you can 
learn how to surf.”
 John Kabat-Zinn 
MindSpace
Done
+
MindSpace
Done
+
MindSpace
Recently Played
Music
Dehd
Flower of Devotion
Folder
Notes
9:15 AM
Attendees: Andrew, 
Aaron, Ben, Brenda
Saladita surf trip
Notes
􀈖
Up Next
Calendar
12:30 – 2:00 PM
Dentist appoint…
9:45 – 11:00 AM
Hike with Tejo
15
tuesday
Watchlist
Stocks
309.54
+1.89
AAPL
MindSpace
“You can’t stop the waves, but you 
can learn how to surf.”
 John Kabat-Zinn 
Search Widgets
􀊫
Recently Played
Music
Dehd
Flower of Devotion
Folder
Notes
9:15 AM
Attendees: Andrew, 
Aaron, Ben, Brenda
Saladita surf trip
Notes
􀈖
Up Next
Calendar
12:30 – 2:00 PM
Dentist appoint…
9:45 – 11:00 AM
Hike with Tejo
15
tuesday
Watchlist
Stocks
309.54
+1.89
AAPL
MindSpace
“You can’t stop the waves, but you 
can learn how to surf.”
 John Kabat-Zinn 
Search Widgets
􀊫
Add Widget
􀁍
Automatically rotates widgets to show the 
most relevant information throughout the 
day and can also be flipped through easlily.
MindSpace
“You can’t stop the waves, but 
you can learn how to surf.”
 John Kabat-Zinn 
Add Widget
􀁍
Automatically rotates widgets to show the 
most relevant information throughout the 
day and can also be flipped through easlily.
MindSpace
Streak
1
Today
Awareness
ABC model
4-2-4 Breathing
“You can’t stop the waves, but 
you can learn how to surf.”
 John Kabat-Zinn 
1/4
Forest 
of
Situation
Intended learning: 
Attention and awareness, Orienting
Navigate through exciting levels, complete 
quests, and learn valuable emotion regulation 
skills along the way.
Chapter
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Emotion Explorer
Complete a story in Chapter 1
1/1
Meditate in 5 countinuous days
0/10
Mindfulness Master
Statistics
Username
Longest streak
Learned skills
Passed stories
Assessment
01
02
05
02
Achievements
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Emotion Explorer
Complete a story in Chapter 1
1/1
Meditate in 5 countinuous days
0/10
Mindfulness Master
Statistics
Username
Mind
Spirit
Body
02/10
02/10
02/10
Achievements
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Awareness
Regulation
Orienting
Emotions and 
motivations
LV.01
Snowball 
metaphor
LV.01
03
Orchestra 
metaphor
LV.01
05
Allowing
Mindfulness of 
Emotions
LV.02
05
02
Mindful Body 
Breathing
LV.3
05
Emotional 
ABC
LV.01
01
Distancing
Acceptance 
and allowance
LV.03
Mountain 
Meditation
LV.03
05
Observer's 
Distance
LV.03
05
Skill
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Awareness
Regulation
Orienting
Emotions and 
motivations
LV.01
Snowball 
metaphor
LV.01
03
Orchestra 
metaphor
LV.01
05
Allowing
Mindfulness of 
Emotions
LV.02
05
02
Mindful Body 
Breathing
LV.3
05
Emotional 
ABC
LV.01
01
Distancing
Acceptance 
and allowance
LV.03
Mountain 
Meditation
LV.03
05
Observer's 
Distance
LV.03
05
Skill
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
“You can’t stop the waves, but you can 
learn how to surf.”
 John Kabat-Zinn 
“Between stimulus and response there 
is space. In that space is our power to 
choose our response. In our response 
lies our growth and our freedom.”
Viktor E. Frankl
"There is a crack in everything, that’s 
how the light gets in."
Leonard Cohen
Wisdom quote
Today
28th/May/2023
27th/May/2023
11 min practice
1.1 Story: Situation 
Selection
5 min
Chapter 1
EXP+3
1.2 Story: Situation 
Modification
3 min
Chapter 1
EXP+7
Orienting: Mindful 
body breathing
3 min
Meditation
EXP+10
Today’s mission
Forest of Situation 
Selection
Chapter 1
1.1 Story
1.3 Practice
Situation Selection
Realize your inner ability to select a
better situation.
5 min
EXP. 3
1.2 Story
Situation Modification
Use your power to change towards a  
comfortable environment.
3 min
Learn to identify situations that may trigger 
negative emotions and learn how to make 
beneficial actions for positive emotions.
ABC model
Train a rational mind
8 min
EXP. 10
Forest of Situation 
Selection
Chapter 1
1.1 Story
1.3 Practice
Situation Selection
Realize your inner ability to select a
better situation.
5 min
EXP. 3
1.2 Story
Situation Modification
Use your power to change towards a  
comfortable environment.
3 min
Learn to identify situations that may trigger 
negative emotions and learn how to make 
beneficial actions for positive emotions.
ABC model
Train a rational mind
8 min
EXP. 10
“When we want to know more about a 
particular problem, we can use a tool called 
the ABC model to understand more about it. 
First, we will think about the behavior we 
want to know more about, and then we will 
think about some specific times that it has 
happened.”
A
B
C
Internal
External
Internal
External
Internal
External
Activated Event
What happened?
Beliefs & Behaviours
What did you think and do?
Consequence
What happened as a result?
ABC Model
Worksheet of ABC Model
Building awareness of the triggers for behavior, and the 
consequences of actions.
Practice
“When we want to know more about a 
particular problem, we can use a tool called 
the ABC model to understand more about it. 
First, we will think about the behavior we 
want to know more about, and then we will 
think about some specific times that it has 
happened.”
A
B
C
Internal
External
Internal
External
Internal
External
Activated Event
What happened?
Beliefs & Behaviours
What did you think and do?
Consequence
What happened as a result?
ABC Model
Worksheet of ABC Model
Building awareness of the triggers for behavior, and the 
consequences of actions.
Practice
“When we want to know more about a 
particular problem, we can use a tool called 
the ABC model to understand more about it. 
First, we will think about the behavior we 
want to know more about, and then we will 
think about some specific times that it has 
happened.”
ABC Model
Building awareness of the triggers for behavior, and the 
consequences of actions.
A
B
C
Internal
External
Internal
External
Internal
External
Activated Event
What happened?
Beliefs & Behaviours
What did you think and do?
Consequence
What happened as a result?
Worksheet of ABC Model
Practice
Ask Sage to explain ...
Ask Sage to explain ...
How can I use the ABC model to develop coping 
strategies?
How can I use the ABC model to develop coping 
strategies?
How can I use the ABC model worksheet?
How can I use the ABC model worksheet?
Type
Type
How can I use the ABC model worksheet?
To use the ABC Model worksheet, follow these 
stepsR
Y> Think of a recent situation that elicited a strong 
emotional response in you and write it down in 
the "A" section>
7> Identify the thoughts or beliefs you had during 
this situation and jot them down in the "B" 
section>
F> Reflect on your emotional and behavioral 
response to the situation and record it under 
"C".
Try by myself
Forest of Situation Selection
Chapter 1
I’m ready!
Back
Tap anywhere to continue >>>
Hi. Welcome to the Forest of 
Situation Selection! A place 
where every decision influences 
your emotional journey. 
This forest is influenced by 
magical power. Each path in the 
crossroads will leading to a 
different emotional experience. 
Sometimes pleasant dreams, 
sometimes can be nightmare...
Only the the pure mind can 
always find the right way to get 
out. Trust your intuition, my child.
Are you prepared to enter this 
trial?
Yes, I’m!
I need some time
In front of you, there are three 
paths, you know that only one 
leads to happiness.
You see an illusion in which you 
seems angry and you could do 
three possible actions and you 
know which one triggers positive 
result ....
A
You drive to the gym to express 
your anger in an appropriate 
way.
You drive to the gym to express 
your anger in an appropriate 
way.
B
You kick down a trash bin fiercely
You kick down a trash bin fiercely
C
You vent your anger on close 
friends and family
You vent your anger on close 
friends and family
Answer
That's what situation selection is all 
about! When you’re at an emotional 
crossroads, please remember that 
based on the 
emotions you desire or want to avoid.
you 
have the power to seek out, avoid, or 
change situations
1.2 Situation modification
Play Again
Chapters
Takeaway
Congrats!
A further step to emotion master.
Emotion Explorer
EXP + 3
Badge
View
Reward
Mind + 2
Spirit + 2
Body + 2
ABC Modeb
e A stands for Activating event or situatio`
e B stands for Beliefs or thoughts about the 
event or situatio`
e C stands for Consequences or emotional and 
behavioral responses to the event or situation
By identifying and challenging negative beliefs 
and thoughts (B), you can change your 
emotional and behavioral responses to a given 
situation (A).
Chapter 2: Desert of Attention
Play Again
Chapters
Takeaway
Well done!
You learnt use ABC model to regulate 
your emotions!
EXP + 3
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
Reward
Skill: ABC Model
View
I'm always here to listen, understand, and 
support you through life's ups and downs. I 
can offer personalized emotional guidance, 
recommend coping strategies, and provide 
resources tailored to your unique needs. 
Together, let's make every conversation a 
step towards a healthier, happier you.
Counsel
Relax
Anxiety
Confidence
Loneliness
My child, I’m happy to help you find emotional wisdom. 
Directly text me or choose below:
Sage
Your mental health mentor
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Of course, my friend. Let's dig deeper into 
what's troubling you. Are there any particular 
worries or emotions you've been feeling 
lately that you'd like to talk about?
Sage
Your mental health mentor
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I had bad team experience with my 
teammates. I feel they ignore me when in 
discussion.
Of course, my friend. Let's dig deeper into 
what's troubling you. Are there any particular 
worries or emotions you've been feeling 
lately that you'd like to talk about?
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I had bad team experience with my 
teammates. I feel they ignore me when in 
discussion.
Of course, my friend. Let's dig deeper into 
what's troubling you. Are there any particular 
worries or emotions you've been feeling 
lately that you'd like to talk about?
I'm sorry to hear you're feeling this way. No 
one likes to feel ignored. What situations or 
behaviors make you feel like you're being 
disregarded? And how does this make you 
feel emotionally?
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I think it's because I'm a foreign student and 
my English is as good as my mother tongue. I 
try to provide advice for the paper. They just 
don't listen to my opinions!
I hear your frustration, and it's valid. It's tough 
when you feel unheard, especially in a team 
setting. With your permission, may we 
explore some strategies to address this issue, 
to improve your communication and feeling of 
inclusivity in the team?
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I had bad team experience with my 
teammates. I feel they ignore me when in 
discussion.
Of course, my friend. Let's dig deeper into 
what's troubling you. Are there any particular 
worries or emotions you've been feeling 
lately that you'd like to talk about?
I'm sorry to hear you're feeling this way. No 
one likes to feel ignored. What situations or 
behaviors make you feel like you're being 
disregarded? And how does this make you 
feel emotionally?
I think it's because I'm a foreign student and 
my English is as good as my mother tongue. I 
try to provide advice for the paper. They just 
don't listen to my opinions!
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I hear your frustration, and it's valid. It's tough 
when you feel unheard, especially in a team 
setting. With your permission, may we 
explore some strategies to address this issue, 
to improve your communication and feeling of 
inclusivity in the team?
Yes, I’d like to try.
Not now
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
Splendid! Let's consider your interaction style 
first. Have you noticed any patterns in how or 
when you share your ideas that might be 
contributing to this situation? And how do 
you usually react when you feel ignored?
Usually just in our group meeting, we have an 
assignment to complete so everyone should 
do some part of job. The thing is I think they 
just like to talk but with no any practical 
progress. So I provide my suggestion but they 
just say yes then keep talking sth else. I felt 
that I'm not welcome and aggrieved even a 
bit angry.
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I see, friend. It must be difficult feeling 
unheard and unappreciated. It seems you're 
seeking respect and acknowledgment. Could 
we brainstorm ways for you to express your 
thoughts more assertively and perhaps 
discuss how to manage these feelings of 
anger?
I see, friend. It must be difficult feeling 
unheard and unappreciated. It seems you're 
seeking respect and acknowledgment. Could 
we brainstorm ways for you to express your 
thoughts more assertively and perhaps 
discuss how to manage these feelings of 
anger?
Okay
Usually just in our group meeting, we have an 
assignment to complete so everyone should 
do some part of job. The thing is I think they 
just like to talk but with no any practical 
progress. So I provide my suggestion but they 
just say yes then keep talking sth else. I felt 
that I'm not welcome and aggrieved even a 
bit angry.
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I see, friend. It must be difficult feeling 
unheard and unappreciated. It seems you're 
seeking respect and acknowledgment. Could 
we brainstorm ways for you to express your 
thoughts more assertively and perhaps 
discuss how to manage these feelings of 
anger?
Great! First, let's think about ways to express 
your opinions more assertively. Could you 
think of some phrases that might help you to 
start these conversations? And when you feel 
angry, have you ever tried any coping 
strategies or exercises to manage this 
emotion?
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
I see, friend. It must be difficult feeling 
unheard and unappreciated. It seems you're 
seeking respect and acknowledgment. Could 
we brainstorm ways for you to express your 
thoughts more assertively and perhaps 
discuss how to manage these feelings of 
anger?
Great! First, let's think about ways to express 
your opinions more assertively. Could you 
think of some phrases that might help you to 
start these conversations? And when you feel 
angry, have you ever tried any coping 
strategies or exercises to manage this 
emotion?
Probably I think ... I suppose it's better ...? I 
just deep breath to make me feel calm.
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
Good start. Those phrases could work well. 
Now, let's try some other phrases like, "I've 
thought about this and my suggestion is...". 
When you feel anger rising, deep breathing is 
a wonderful tool. How about we add another 
tool, like a quick walk or progressive muscle 
relaxation? What do you think?
Probably I think ... I suppose it's better ...? I 
just deep breath to make me feel calm.
Sure. I’ll do later.
Other strategies
Progressive
Muscle
relaxation
Deep Breath
You may want to learn
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
Marvelous! So, next time during the meeting, 
you can try those phrases. Remember, clear 
and assertive communication is key. When 
you feel anger, take a quick walk, or try 
progressive muscle relaxation. You're on a 
good path, my friend. Remember, change 
takes time. Let's touch base soon, alright?
Yes. I understand.
Progressive
Muscle
relaxation
You may want to learn
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
Excellent! I'll be here for you. Keep practicing 
and don't forget, your feelings are valid and 
important. Reach out anytime you need 
support or want to share your progress. Take 
care, friend.
Finish
I still need help
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Home
Chapter
SkillKit
Mentor chat
Profile
Sage
Your mental health mentor
You're very welcome. Remember, it's a 
journey and I'm here for you. Don't hesitate to 
return if you need more assistance or just 
someone to talk to. Until then, take good care 
of yourself, my friend.
Thank you. I'd finish this counseling.
Rate this experience
Start a new conversation
Sage
Your mental health mentor
You're very welcome. Remember, it's a 
journey and I'm here for you. Don't hesitate to 
return if you need more assistance or just 
someone to talk to. Until then, take good care 
of yourself, my friend.
Thank you. I'd finish this counseling.
Start a new conversation
Thank you for the feedback! 
We’ll keep improving 
.
Conversation styles
Characteristics
Chat History & Training
Tone of responses
Exploratory
Motivational
Informative
Conversational
Casual
Serious
empathetic
patient
patient
insightful
reliable
...
compassionate
non-judgmental
adaptable
Setting
Save chats on this device to your history and allow them 
to be used to improve our model. The model can be more 
personalized and accurate. Learn more
Conversation styles
Characteristics
Tone of responses
Exploratory
Motivational
Informative
Conversational
Casual
Serious
empathetic
patient
patient
insightful
reliable
...
compassionate
non-judgmental
adaptable
articulate
article
art
Q
W
E
R
T
Y
U
I
O
P
A
S
D
F
G
H
J
K
L
􀆞
Z
X
C
V
B
N
M
􀆛
123
space
G
o
􀎸
􀊰
􀎸
􀊰
Conversation styles
Characteristics
Tone of responses
Exploratory
Motivational
Informative
Conversational
Casual
Serious
empathetic
patient
patient
insightful
reliable
...
compassionate
non-judgmental
adaptable
articulate
Chat History & Training
Save chats on this device to your history and allow them 
to be used to improve our model. The model can be more 
personalized and accurate. Learn more
History
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Bad team experience
4th
Progressive
Muscle
relaxation
Deep Breath
2023
Phases
I Day 1-7: Awareness Skills Training
III Day 15-18: Power of Values, Unlock Potential
II Day 8-14: Regulation Skills Training
IV Day 19-21: Consolidate Gains and Look Ahead
1
Day
2
3
4
5
6
7
Welcome to 
MindSpace!
Embark an emotional journey 
with our easy-to-use app, 
designed to help you master 
the art of emotion regulation.
Sounds interesting!
Skip
Captivating 
narrative
Learn emotion regulation skills 
in a narrative form of 
storytelling.
Next
Skip
Guided by a wise mentor, you'll 
explore vast landscapes, 
conquer challenging levels, 
and master powerful emotion 
regulation skills along the way. 
Self-care mentor 
chatbot whenever 
and wherever
Next
Skip
By cultivating your emotional 
power and become a true 
Emotion Master.
21-day master 
plan build upon 
evidence-based 
therapy 
Emotion Regulation Therapy
I’m ready!
Skip
*The username should be 6-15 characters.
Step 1: customize your profile
What name do you wish to be called?
What is your gender identity?
Man
Woman
More options
Select your avatar
Next
Step 2: what are your top 3 
goals?
Confirm
Build self-esteem
Reduce social anxiety
Sleep better
Become confident 
Feel balanced
We'll personalize your recommendations based on your 
goals.
Reduce anxiety
Overcome depression
Increase happiness
Master your mental health!
Your 21-day training plan is 
generating ...
Reduce anxiety
Master your mental health!
Your 21-day training plan is 
generating ...
Reduce anxiety
Overcome depression
Increase happiness
What is 21-day Master Plan?
21-day Master Plan is a training 
schedule based on Emotion Regulation 
Therapy. The training plan is especially 
for anxiety, depression and emotional 
disorders which can be beneficial to 
prominent negative emotions, with 
focuses on motivation, attention, 
personal value-based threats/rewards.

The themes for each phase: 
I: Awareness of somatic and emotional 
cues.
II: Courage to be counteractive
III: Life goals and motivational pulls
IV: Consolidation and reflection
Congrats!
Emotion Explorer
Complete first story in Chapter 1.
CONTINUE
You just UNLOCKED a new badge!
UNLOCK
Require:
Snowball metaphor
CANCEL
Small actions can cause bigger 
actions, ultimately resulting in a big 
impact. Learn skills to stop negative 
snowballs once they have started.
LV.01
03
Mind
"Unlock the power of your mind, 
and harness cognitive prowess for 
personal growth and emotional 
intelligence."
Body
"Your body is the vessel of your 
journey, nurture it with care, and it 
will carry you towards balance 
and wellness."
Spirit
"Ignite your spirit, the guiding light 
within you, to inspire compassion, 
connection, and inner peace."
Trigger
Click
Rule
Click blue button to next 
page; Click ‘Skip’ to 
customization page.
Feedback
Navigate to next page in 
smart animation.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click MindSpace’s  icon
Rule
First launch of MindSpace
Feedback
Navigate to onboarding 
screens.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Long press ios home 
screen.
Rule
Long press for 1 second
Feedback
Enter home screen edit 
mode.
Loop/Mode
Tap screen to quit edit 
mode.
Trigger
Click ‘+’ icon
Rule
In edit mode
Feedback
Pop up Widget interface
Loop/Mode
None
Trigger
Click MindSpace’s widget
Rule
In edit mode
Feedback
Pop up Widget interface
Loop/Mode
None
Trigger
Click Add Widget button
Rule
Scroll to view different 
widgets
Feedback
Widget is added to home 
screen
Loop/Mode
None
Trigger
Click MindSpace’s icon
Rule
Not new user
Feedback
Launch app and navigate to 
Home screen
Loop/Mode
From ios home screen to 
app Home
Trigger
Scroll left/right
Rule
Scroll left to attribute;
Scroll right back to 
statistics
Feedback
Change of statistics
Loop/Mode
Scroll to switch
Trigger
Automatic update quote; 
Click the widget.
Rule
The widget updates and 
presents today’s quote. 
Direct to Wisdom quote 
screen on MindSpace app 
when clicking the widget.
Feedback
Launch app and navigate to 
Quote screen
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click the plan square
Rule
The missions/tasks 
depends on the day of plan.
The predicted minutes are 
in accordance to the time of 
given missions. The 
progress dot change after 
completing corresponding 
task.
Feedback
Pop up of the mission 
panel.
Trigger
Automatic update.
Rule
The quote is updated on a 
daily basis from the date 
user registered.
Feedback
The quote is ranked 
new(today) to past.
Loop/Mode
Update on daily basis
Trigger
Click
Rule
Click blue button to next 
page; Click ‘Skip’ to 
customization page.
Feedback
Navigate to next page in 
smart animation.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click the Question mark 
icon
Rule
Pop up 
Feedback
Pop up the blue plan 
introduction overlay. Close 
when clicking outside.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click the skill
Rule
Unlocked skill: enter skill 
training interface
Locked: Pop up intro and 
the user can unlock when 
satisfy the requirement.
Feedback
Lock icon disappear. 
Available for browse.
Trigger
Click the module
Rule
Unlocked: enter learning 
interface
Locked: No response.
Feedback
Navigate into 
corresponding training 
story.
Trigger
Click the screen to see next 
dialogue
Rule
Tap anywhere to continue
Feedback
Navigate into next screen,
Trigger
Scroll to view chapter. Click 
to visit different chapters.
Rule
The pink bar is according to 
unlocked progress in the 
chapter.
Feedback
Click to view chapter 
details,
Trigger
Automatic
Rule
The progress dot turns blue 
if the user finishes all tasks 
on the day. The number of 
days is according to the 
stage of treatment plan 
phases.
Feedback
The color of progress bar 
turns into blue
Trigger
Click Chapter icon
Rule
Click the icon on bottom 
menu to switch to different 
modules
Feedback
Switch to Chapter page. 
Chapter icon turns to blue.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click Chapter button
Rule
Click the bottom menu to 
change to Chapter module
Feedback
Switch to Chapter page. 
Chapter icon turns to blue.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click the button
Rule
Click the bottom menu to 
change to different 
modules
Feedback
Click Play Again to restart
Click next button to next 
story or Chapter
Click home icon to go back 
to home interface
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click Skill icon
Rule
Click the icon on bottom 
menu to switch to different 
modules
Feedback
Switch to Skill page. 
Corresponding menu icon 
turns to blue.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click Next chapter button
Rule
Next story becomes 
unlocked. Go directly to 
next story.
Feedback
Switch to nextl page.
Trigger
Click
Rule
Click blue button to next 
page; Click ‘Skip’ to 
customization page.
Feedback
Navigate to next page in 
smart animation.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click
Rule
Click blue button to next 
page; Click ‘Skip’ to 
customization page.
Feedback
Navigate to next page in 
smart animation.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click
Rule
Click blue button to next 
page; Click ‘Skip’ to 
customization page.
Feedback
Navigate to next page in 
smart animation.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click; Scroll to select avatar
Rule
Username has a limit of 
6-15 characters; Gender 
icon and avatar should be 
single selected; You can 
only go to next page after 
answering requirement. 
Feedback
Navigate to next page in 
smart animation.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click
Rule
Must choose three goals.
Feedback
Navigate to next page in 
smart animation.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Automatic
Rule
After onboarding pages. 
The listed items are from 
user’s choosen goals.
Feedback
Animation of progress bar
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Automatic
Rule
When the process bar is 
finished, navigate to home 
screen.
Feedback
Jump to home screen
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click the module
Rule
Unlocked: enter learning 
interface
Locked: No response.
Feedback
Navigate into next screen,
Trigger
Click the float CTA bot
Rule
Click to see the full bot 
button
Feedback
Full bot is shown on the 
right bottom.
Trigger
Click the full float CTA bot
Rule
When the CTA is fully 
shown
Feedback
Pop up ask float widget
Trigger
Click the question shortcut
Rule
When the Ask widget is on
Feedback
Pop up chat widget where 
user can chat with Sage to 
ask problems
Trigger
Chat, click button or 
outside
Rule
Click outside to close;
Click button to practice;
Click dialog box to type;
Feedback
Enter reward page after 
training.
Trigger
Click the screen to see next 
dialogue
Rule
Tap anywhere to continue
Feedback
Navigate into next screen,
Trigger
Click the screen to see next 
dialogue
Rule
Tap anywhere to continue
Feedback
Navigate into next screen,
Trigger
Click the screen to see next 
dialogue
Rule
Tap anywhere to continue
Feedback
Navigate into next screen,
Trigger
Click the screen to see next 
dialogue
Rule
Tap anywhere to continue
Feedback
Navigate into next screen,
Trigger
Click the button
Rule
First button: next
Second button: exit to 
chapter detail interface
Feedback
Navigate into next screen,
Trigger
Click the volume icon
Rule
Click to switch on/off BGM
Feedback
BGM on/off
Trigger
Select the answer
Rule
Single option. Pass if 
choose the correct answer
Feedback
The option switch color to 
blue when chosen. Answer 
correctly to reward screen.
Trigger
Automatic
Rule
Pop up congrats and 
darken background after 
answering correctly. Click 
outside to hide. The content 
depends on user’s exp. and 
achievement progress.
Feedback
Pop up.
Trigger
Click Mentor chat icon
Rule
Click the icon on bottom 
menu to switch to different 
modules
Feedback
Switch to chatbot page. 
Corresponding menu icon 
turns to blue.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click history icon
Rule
Click the icon on top right 
to view chat history by 
dates.
Feedback
Switch to history page. The 
user can search or browse 
conversation history,
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click setting icon
Rule
Click the icon on top right 
to view setting of tone and 
bot etc.
Feedback
Switch to setting page. The 
user can customize 
conversation style, type of 
responses and 
characteristics of chatbot 
etc.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click Mentor chat icon
Rule
Click the shortcut of 
counseling
Feedback
The bot starts to greet.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user conversation text to 
Mentor Sage
Rule
Type and send to bot
Feedback
Receive feedback from the 
bot. 
Loop/Mode
Send message to continue...
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user conversation text to 
Mentor Sage
Rule
Type and send to bot
Feedback
Receive feedback from the 
bot. 
Loop/Mode
Send message to continue..
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user conversation text to 
Mentor Sage
Rule
Type and send to bot
Feedback
Receive  question &  
feedback from the bot. 
Loop/Mode
Send message to continue..
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user conversation text to 
Mentor Sage
Rule
Type and send to bot
Feedback
Receive question & 
feedback from the bot. 
Loop/Mode
Send message to continue...
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user conversation text to 
Mentor Sage
Rule
Type and send to bot
Feedback
Receive  question &  
feedback from the bot. 
Loop/Mode
Send message to continue..
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user conversation text to 
Mentor Sage
Rule
Consent and choose option 
given by the bot.
Feedback
Chat involves choice. 
Receive feedback and 
question.
Loop/Mode
Choose Not now to restart.
A
Text
Text
A
Text
Text
MindSpace
MindSpace
Trigger
Click the Question mark 
icon
Rule
Pop up 
Feedback
Pop up the pink 
introduction overlay. Close 
when clicking outside.
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Click the switch button
Rule
Click to turn on/off
Feedback
Turn on: the system will 
auto collect chat log to help 
improve the model.
Loop/Mode
Switch between on and off.
Trigger
Click the write icon
Rule
Allow normal adj. to input.
Feedback
Pop up type board. 
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Typing
Rule
Only accept adj. to describe 
characteristics. 
Feedback
A new character will be 
added to the list
Loop/Mode
None.
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user option to Mentor Sage
Rule
Consent and choose option 
given by the bot.
Feedback
Chat involves choice. 
Receive feedback and 
question.
Loop/Mode
Choose Okay to begin.
Trigger
Click button based on 
personal preference
Rule
Choose recommended 
coping strategy or choose 
other strategies to refresh
Feedback
Go to instruction guide
Loop/Mode
Choose other strategies to 
receive new suggestions.
Trigger
Click button based on 
personal preference
Rule
Click or send message to 
continue
Feedback
Click button to see next 
response
Loop/Mode
Click button or send 
message to continue or 
start a new round. 
Trigger
Click button based on 
personal preference
Rule
Click button to end 
conversation or continue.
Feedback
Click Finish to rate 
experience.
Loop/Mode
Click second option to 
continue counseling.
Trigger
Click star
Rule
From left to right, click the 
star to rate from low to 
high.
Feedback
Receive remind on achieved 
rating action.
Loop/Mode
Click button to start a new 
counseling or return home 
interface.
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user option to Mentor Sage
Rule
Type text to continue
Feedback
Receive feedback from the 
bot. 
Loop/Mode
Send message to continue.
Trigger
Automatic according to 
user option to Mentor Sage
Rule
Type text to continue
Feedback
Receive feedback from the 
bot. 
Loop/Mode
Send message to continue.
==PAGE:59==
4.4.5
Ethical Design
Below, we outline how MindSpace achieves an ethical design by addressing five key
aspects of the ethical checklist.
Choice.
We offer multiple options for profile customization (i.e. username, avatar etc.)
and goal selection to create a personalized training plan for our users. Additionally,
users have the ability to set their preferences for chatbot conversation styles and the
tone of responses. Security and privacy protection are viewed as the most important
design principles when developing a mental health app (see Figure A.16). Furthermore,
within the chatbot settings, we provide users with the choice to allow or deny access to
their chat data for more personalized counseling services (see the third screen in Figure
4.24). Moreover, users can unlock the coping skills with their rewards, add different iOS
widgets of MindSpace, i.e. streak, quote and tasks.
Figure 4.24: Some screens of MindSpace’s ethical design for Choice need.
Transparency.
As stated in the Choice design section, we prioritize transparency re­
garding the use of user data and user goals (see the second screen in Figure 4.24).
Furthermore, the training tasks and narrative stories for emotion regulation skill learning
are grounded in evidence­based theories, specifically the Emotion Regulation Therapy
and the renowned Process model of emotion regulation. Users are able to see the intro­
duction on how the training plan works and the meaning of gamification rewards shown
in Figure 4.25.
Diversity.
To care about a diverse group, we provide a third option for a broader non­
binary group shown in first screen given in Figure . This is beneficial to identify different
emotional needs and preferences from their training and counseling history so to adapt
our chatbot model to emphasize with their context.
In order to ensure inclusivity and cater to a diverse group of users, we have introduced
a third option specifically designed for the non­binary group. This can be seen in the
first screen displayed in Figure A.39. By offering this option, we aim to accommodate
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.25: Some screens of MindSpace’s ethical design for Transparency need.
and understand the unique emotional needs and preferences of individuals within this
group. This allows us to adapt our chatbot model and provide personalized support that
empathizes with their specific context.
Well­being.
MindSpace is dedicated to fostering students’ emotion regulation skills,
improving their mental health, and promoting resilience. Our primary focus is on pro­
viding valuable support to users, rather than taking advantage of them through indirect
manipulation. We prioritize the well­being of our users by offering various forms of emo­
tional and health support. One of the ways we achieve this is by providing chatbot
counseling support, which offers a more affordable and accessible counseling service.
Additionally, MindSpace allows users to customize their experience by adding a widget
of daily motivational quotes. This feature aims to motivate users and encourage them
to remain engaged in their learning journey.
Benefits.
Within the app, we not only offer self­care resources and skills but also
enhance the learning process by incorporating gamification elements. Through nar­
rative storytelling and rewarding mechanisms such as badges, levels, and monetary
attributes, we make the learning experience fun and engaging. It is important to note
that MindSpace respects user privacy and data protection. We ensure that user data is
accessed only with their explicit permission, and solely for the purpose of improving the
performance of the chatbot model.
Overall, MindSpace is committed to providing a beneficial and supportive environment
for users, promoting their well­being, and empowering them in their journey towards
mental wellness and resilience.
50
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:61==
5
Discussion
5.1
Answers to research questions
RQ1: What are the psychological models of emotion regulation and what is the
state of the art in supporting this for university students in handling mental health
issues, including technological support?
Our motivation is to provide a helpful and credible solution that is supported by a strong
understanding of student’s mental health and underlying psychological mechanisms.
To achieve this, we conducted a comprehensive literature review 2 covering various as­
pects such as the definition of emotion and emotion regulation, the process of emotion
regulation, evidence­based psychotherapies for mental disorders, and state­of­the­art
technologies for mHealth applications. Based on this review, we described the psycho­
logical models of emotion regulation, specifically focusing on Gross’ Process Model of
Emotion Regulation [30] and third­wave cognitive behavior therapies [44]. These mod­
els provide frameworks and techniques for understanding and addressing emotional
experiences and promoting mental well­being. Gross’ model identifies five emotion reg­
ulation strategies occurring at different points in the emotion experience: situation selec­
tion, situation modification, attention deployment, cognitive change, and response mod­
ulation. These stages are adapted as different gamified chapters consisting of stories
and exercises for MindSpace’s narrative­based emotion regulation skill learning pro­
cess. For instance, the first story revolves around learning and quiz practice related to
the coping strategy of Situation Selection/Modification, highlighting an individual’s abil­
ity to modify their behaviors to seek out, avoid or change situations in order to achieve
their desired emotions or outcomes. Third­wave evidence­based therapies are effective
in targeting various mental issues. We utilized Emotion Regulation Therapy to struc­
ture the four sessions of our 21­day training plan, which aims to enhance individuals’
emotional awareness, foster self­control, and develop better decision­making and value
judgment related to life goals and motivation. The review of technologies shows a trend
in applying immersive technologies or AI chatbots in mHealth applications to enhance
engagement and provide guidance and support for behavior change. What MindSpace
did was to integrate a LLM chatbot into a gamified learn­practice­reward emotion reg­
ulation app. This gamification design received high scores in terms of satisfaction and
engagement from our users 4.3.4.
RQ2: What are university students’ needs and expectations for self­emotion reg­
ulation?
We conducted user studies, including an initial survey with 85 university students (see
Section A.2) and a more in­depth design probe with students who self­identified as hav­
ing low emotions or caring about emotional health (see Section 4.1.2). The survey re­
vealed that university students prioritize mental health assessments, professional coun­
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
51
==PAGE:62==
seling, and meditation exercises in mHealth apps. However, these findings were con­
sidered too broad. The design probe focused on the sad emotions category, identifying
academic pressure, limited access to counseling services, and insufficient knowledge
about mental health resources as the main challenges. Based on these findings, we
developed user stories and proposed solutions targeting their most frequently reported
emotional issues. By integrating two personas into one, we aimed to concentrate on
the needs and expectations of our users in the MVP app, prioritizing the general stu­
dent group. It could be beneficial to differentiate the gender and background variables,
but not considered the primary focus of this project, which targeted the general student
population.
RQ3: What are the UX design requirements for an emotion regulation app for the
mental health of university students?
In our study, we utilized lean canvas, persona, and user story map to present our UX
design requirements for an emotion regulation app targeting university students. Addi­
tionally, insights from our initial survey highlighted the importance of ease of use and
navigation, security and privacy protection, and clear and concise information as key
design considerations for our target users as Figure A.16 shown. While it is common
for fitness and health apps to send push notifications for reminders, our participants
expressed a strong dislike for such notifications during the co­design workshop, con­
sidering them ’annoying’. To address this, we leveraged the home screen widget and
designed features like a daily streak and motivational quotes. This approach serves as
an implicit reminder for users to return to MindSpace when they require assistance in
improving their emotion regulation skills or seeking mental health advice.
5.2
Strengths
Multiple articles [10, 86] have emphasized the important role of User Centered Design
(UCD) in the design process of mental health applications, ensuring that the design
aligns with user needs and creates usable and effective health products. In addition,
researchers highlighted the significance of interdisciplinary collaborations and expert
opinions [87, 10]. By referring to the design process of Young and Well for youth men­
tal health, and collaborating with psychologists, target users, and designers, we shared
knowledge and insights through co­design workshops and other methods. This collabo­
rative approach allowed us to fully address the research questions and design a product
with high user satisfaction and usability, which was validated in iteration 4 (see Section
4.3.4).
Furthermore, considering that mental health is a sensitive and personal domain, we
also took into account the ethical concerns of users. During the discovery phase of
the requirements research, it might be challenging for users to recall and express their
emotions. To gain a deeper understanding of the reasons behind users’ emotional is­
sues and the challenges they face in emotional regulation, we conducted a one­week
observation using more private and gamified design probes. This approach allowed us
52
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:63==
to explore the design requirements of RQ2 more flexible. With the support of the expert
panel, we completed the subsequent design stages.
5.3
Limitations
Sampling and number of participants
The investigation of demand and design features are from international students of dif­
ferent countries, which may lead to a skew due to cultural and societal influence on
the product need and also potential chatbot performance differences due to different
training sets.
During the iterative process, the final uMARS and ethical check is considered quanti­
tative research methods. However, the number of participants involved was relatively
small (<8), which may impact the significance of the final results. Additionally, as our
project output is a prototype design, there may be discrepancies between the under­
standing of new technologies, the actual development challenges, and the final perfor­
mance, which could lead to deviations from real­world application performance testing.
Performance of MindSpace’s chatbot: gaps between a design and a real LLM
model.
While we have developed a base prompt and made adjustments based on participant
and expert feedback, it is important to note that our project does not involve the full de­
velopment and implementation of a Large­scale Language Model (LLM) for the chatbot.
We observed a huge increase of ChatGPT’s empathy ability in conversations with our
base prompt. However, there are limitations to consider. We lack access to a substan­
tial psychological counseling dataset for training and fine­tuning MindSpace’s chatbot
model, which may impact its ability to achieve the predicted performance in terms of cop­
ing skill recommendations etc. Furthermore, without a fully deployed chatbot counselor,
it is challenging to anticipate all user interactions and scenarios.
Gamification is not easy and never just some coins and cool drawings. Gamifica­
tion is a challenging task, and our initial hypothesis that word puzzles during the design
probe section would increase participants’ interest in learning coping strategies proved
somewhat effective but received only moderate ratings on likeness. We realized that
assuming a game’s success in one context would translate to another was naive. As
a result, we explored alternative gamification approaches in the second and third itera­
tions. Using the Octalysis framework from the book Actionable Gamification [110], we
focused on improving the core drives of Epic Meaning, Empowerment, and Empower­
ment, ultimately receiving a satisfactory entertainment score, with a mean score of 4 out
5 in the uMARS questionnaire. See Figure 4.17. Due to time constraints, we focused on
MindSpace’s game mechanisms and were unable to design for all five narrative learn­
ing chapters in the app. Consequently, further exploration is needed to delve into the
details and plots of the emotion regulation training experience in different chapters and
other core drives according to the Octalysis framework.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
53
==PAGE:64==
6
Conclusion
This research study examines the state­of­the­art in supporting mental health for univer­
sity students through emotion regulation theories and technologies. Effective emotion
regulation strategies are crucial for student’s well­being and success, fostering posi­
tive relationships, academic excellence, and personal growth. Advancements such as
mobile solutions, immersive technologies, conversational agents, and gamification tech­
niques play significant roles in this domain.
For design methodology, MindSpace employed the Young and Well participatory co­
design process with an expert panel. At Identify stage, an initial survey and an in­
depth design probe were conducted to identify the behavioral and emotional problems
of university students. Drawing from the lean canvas, persona, and user story map, UX
design requirements for an emotion regulation app targeting university students were
defined.
Two co­design workshops contributed to the development and refinement of MindSpace’s
main features: chatbot counselor and gamified emotion regulation learning. The uMARS
survey revealed high subjective quality ratings for MindSpace, particularly in terms of
entertainment, ease of use, layout, visual appeal, information quality, and source credi­
bility. Perceived impact was also positive, indicating successful knowledge acquisition,
help­seeking, and behavior change. However, customization options for learning con­
tent or resources were identified as an area for improvement. The ethical self­checklist
highlighted MindSpace’s strong performance in terms of well­being and transparency
while indicating the need for enhanced choice and inclusivity features.
In summary, this research offers value for creating and evaluating ethical, user­friendly,
and youth­centered mental health solutions. MindSpace utilized a ChatGPT as a rep­
resentation of large­scale language models for mHealth app, incorporating game ele­
ments into mental health interventions to enhance engagement and effectiveness. It
contributes to the development and advancement of mental health applications for uni­
versity students or younger groups and also holds implications for ERT­based mobile
solutions. The adaptation of Gross’ Process Model of Emotion Regulation and Emo­
tion Regulation Therapy provides insights into crafting interactive mHealth experiences
rooted in evidence­based practice. By integrating evidence­based strategies and thera­
peutic frameworks into app design, we can promote the well­being and emotional regu­
lation skills of this specific population. Further research and development can continue
to refine and improve the effectiveness of such interventions and interactions of mHealth
chatbots, ultimately benefiting university students and their mental health journeys.
54
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:65==
Reference
[1]
Mental disorders. Accessed: February 14, 2023. June 2022. URL: https://www.
who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-disorders.
[2]
Paola Pedrelli et al. “College students: mental health problems and treatment
considerations”. In: Academic psychiatry 39 (2015), pp. 503–511.
[3]
Ronald C Kessler et al. “Lifetime prevalence and age­of­onset distributions of
DSM­IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication”. In: Archives
of general psychiatry 62.6 (2005), pp. 593–602.
[4]
Jeremy F Huckins et al. “Mental health and behavior of college students during
the early phases of the COVID­19 pandemic: Longitudinal smartphone and eco­
logical momentary assessment study”. In: Journal of medical Internet research
22.6 (2020), e20185.
[5]
Zara Abrams. Student Mental Health is in crisis. campuses are rethinking their
approach. 2022. URL: https://www.apa.org/monitor/2022/10/mental-health-
campus-care.
[6]
Marisa Cohen. America’s College Mental Health Crisis. 2022. URL: https://
www.webmd.com/brain/features/college-mental-health-crisis.
[7]
Mladjan Jovanovic, Aleksandar Jevremovic, and Milica Pejovic­Milovancevic. In­
telligent interactive technologies for mental health and well­being. en. arXiv:2105.05306
[cs]. May 2021. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05306 (visited on 02/14/2023).
[8]
Jakob E Bardram and Mads Frost. “The personal health technology design space”.
In: IEEE Pervasive Computing 15.2 (2016), pp. 70–78.
[9]
Rahadian Sri Pamungkas. Designing for generation Z: Engaging today’s tech­
savvy children and teens. Nov. 2022. URL: https : / / bootcamp . uxdesign . cc /
designing - for - generation - z - engaging - todays - tech - savvy - children - and - teens -
90f4de366064.
[10]
John B Torous et al. “Clinical review of user engagement with mental health
smartphone apps: evidence, theory and improvements”. In: Evidence Based
Journals 21 (2018), pp. 116–119.
[11]
Anthony Turner. “Generation Z: Technology and social interest”. In: The journal
of individual Psychology 71.2 (2015), pp. 103–113.
[12]
APA Dictionary of Psychology: psychological model. URL: https://dictionary.apa.
org/psychological-model.
[13]
Michel Cabanac. “What is emotion?” In: Behavioural Processes 60.2 (2002),
pp. 69–83. ISSN: 0376­6357. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376- 6357(02)
00078-5. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0376635702000785.
[14]
Gregory Johnson. Theories of Emotion. URL: https://iep.utm.edu/theories-of-
emotion/.
[15]
Jaak Panksepp. Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal
emotions. Oxford university press, 2004.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
55
==PAGE:66==
[16]
Carroll E Izard. “Emotion theory and research: Highlights, unanswered ques­
tions, and emerging issues”. In: Annual review of psychology 60 (2009), pp. 1–
25.
[17]
Lisa Feldman Barrett. How emotions are made: The secret life of the brain. Pan
Macmillan, 2017.
[18]
Elaine Fox. “Perspectives from affective science on understanding the nature of
emotion”. In: Brain and Neuroscience Advances (2018). DOI: 10.1177/2398212818812628.
[19]
James J Gross. “Emotion regulation: Current status and future prospects”. In:
Psychological inquiry 26.1 (2015), pp. 1–26.
[20]
Antonio R Damasio. “Emotion in the perspective of an integrated nervous sys­
tem”. In: Brain research reviews 26.2­3 (1998), pp. 83–86.
[21]
Paul Ed Ekman and Richard J Davidson. The nature of emotion: Fundamental
questions. Oxford University Press, 1994.
[22]
Ann M Kring. “The future of emotion research in the study of psychopathology”.
In: Emotion Review 2.3 (2010), pp. 225–228.
[23]
Carol D Ryff and Burton Singer. “The contours of positive human health”. In:
Psychological inquiry 9.1 (1998), pp. 1–28.
[24]
Paulo N Lopes et al. “Emotion regulation abilities and the quality of social inter­
action.” In: Emotion 5.1 (2005), p. 113.
[25]
Reinhard Pekrun, Andrew J Elliot, and Markus A Maier. “Achievement goals and
achievement emotions: Testing a model of their joint relations with academic
performance.” In: Journal of educational Psychology 101.1 (2009), p. 115.
[26]
Carlos Valiente, Jodi Swanson, and Nancy Eisenberg. “Linking students’emo­
tions and academic achievement: When and why emotions matter”. In: Child
development perspectives 6.2 (2012), pp. 129–135.
[27]
Reinhard Pekrun et al. “Achievement emotions and academic performance: Lon­
gitudinal models of reciprocal effects”. In: Child development 88.5 (2017), pp. 1653–
1670.
[28]
Michele Cascardi and Ernest N. Jouriles. “Chapter 7 ­ Mechanisms Underlying
the Association of Exposure to Family of Origin Violence and Adolescent Dat­
ing Violence”. In: Adolescent Dating Violence. Ed. by David A. Wolfe and Jeff
R. Temple. San Diego: Academic Press, 2018, pp. 159–188. ISBN: 978­0­12­
811797­2. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811797-2.00007-4. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128117972000074.
[29]
Kim L Gratz and Lizabeth Roemer. “Multidimensional assessment of emotion
regulation and dysregulation: Development, factor structure, and initial validation
of the difficulties in emotion regulation scale”. In: Journal of psychopathology and
behavioral assessment 26 (2004), pp. 41–54.
[30]
James J Gross. “The emerging field of emotion regulation: An integrative review”.
In: Review of general psychology 2.3 (1998), pp. 271–299.
[31]
Matthias Berking and Peggilee Wupperman. “Emotion regulation and mental
health: recent findings, current challenges, and future directions”. In: Current
opinion in psychiatry 25.2 (2012), pp. 128–134.
56
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:67==
[32]
James J Gross. “Emotion regulation: conceptual and empirical foundations.” In:
(2014).
[33]
Angela L Duckworth and Martin EP Seligman. “Self­discipline outdoes IQ in pre­
dicting academic performance of adolescents”. In: Psychological science 16.12
(2005), pp. 939–944.
[34]
Zorana Ivcevic and Marc Brackett. “Predicting school success: Comparing con­
scientiousness, grit, and emotion regulation ability”. In: Journal of research in
personality 52 (2014), pp. 29–36.
[35]
Lisa Linnenbrink­Garcia and Reinhard Pekrun. International handbook of emo­
tions in education. Routledge New York, NY, 2014.
[36]
Wilhelm Hofmann et al. “Yes, but are they happy? Effects of trait self­control on
affective well­being and life satisfaction”. In: Journal of personality 82.4 (2014),
pp. 265–277.
[37]
Tracy TL Cheung et al. “Why are people with high self­control happier? The effect
of trait self­control on happiness as mediated by regulatory focus”. In: Frontiers
in psychology 5 (2014), p. 722.
[38]
Amelia Aldao, Susan Nolen­Hoeksema, and Susanne Schweizer. “Emotion­regulation
strategies across psychopathology: A meta­analytic review”. In: Clinical psychol­
ogy review 30.2 (2010), pp. 217–237.
[39]
Thomas L Webb, Eleanor Miles, and Paschal Sheeran. “Dealing with feeling: a
meta­analysis of the effectiveness of strategies derived from the process model
of emotion regulation.” In: Psychological bulletin 138.4 (2012), p. 775.
[40]
Aaron T Beck. Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. Penguin, 1979.
[41]
Marsha M. Linehan et al. “Two­year randomized controlled trial and follow­up
of dialectical behavior therapy vs therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and
borderline personality disorder.” In: Archives of general psychiatry 63 7 (2006),
pp. 757–66.
[42]
American Psychological Association. Different approaches to psychotherapy.
URL: https://www.apa.org/topics/psychotherapy/approaches.
[43]
Sarah C Cook, Ann C. Schwartz, and Nadine J. Kaslow. “Evidence­Based Psy­
chotherapy: Advantages and Challenges”. In: Neurotherapeutics 14 (2017), pp. 537–
545.
[44]
Lars­Göran Öst. “Efficacy of the third wave of behavioral therapies : A system­
atic review and meta­analysis”. In: Behaviour Research and Therapy 46 (2008),
pp. 296–321.
[45]
Julian J. Miller, Kenneth E. Fletcher, and Jon Kabat￿Zinn. “Three­year follow­
up and clinical implications of a mindfulness meditation­based stress reduction
intervention in the treatment of anxiety disorders.” In: General hospital psychiatry
17 3 (1995), pp. 192–200.
[46]
Jacqueline Pistorello et al. “Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) applied to col­
lege students: a randomized clinical trial.” In: Journal of consulting and clinical
psychology 80 6 (2012), pp. 982–94.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
57
==PAGE:68==
[47]
Crystal Constance McIndoo et al. “Mindfulness­based therapy and behavioral
activation: a randomized controlled trial with depressed college students”. In:
Behaviour research and therapy 77 (2016), pp. 118–128.
[48]
Stefan G. Hofmann et al. “The effect of mindfulness­based therapy on anxiety
and depression: A meta­analytic review.” In: Journal of consulting and clinical
psychology 78 2 (2010), pp. 169–83.
[49]
Jack Apsche, Lucia DiMeo, and Robert Kohlenberg. Mode Deactivation Therapy
for aggression and oppositional behavior in adolescents: An integrative method­
ology using ACT, DBT, and CBT. New Harbinger Publications, 2012.
[50]
Doug Oman et al. “Meditation lowers stress and supports forgiveness among
college students: A randomized controlled trial”. In: Journal of american college
health 56.5 (2008), pp. 569–578.
[51]
Cheryl Regehr, Dylan Glancy, and Annabel Pitts. “Interventions to reduce stress
in university students: A review and meta­analysis”. In: Journal of affective dis­
orders 148.1 (2013), pp. 1–11.
[52]
Erica Sibinga et al. “School­based mindfulness instruction: An RCT”. In: Pedi­
atrics 137.1 (2016).
[53]
Treatments: Society of clinical psychology. URL: https://div12.org/treatments/.
[54]
Dianne L Chambless and Steven D Hollon. “Defining empirically supported ther­
apies.” In: Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 66.1 (1998), p. 7.
[55]
Albert Ellis and Robert A Harper. “A guide to rational living.” In: (1961).
[56]
Zindel Segal, Mark Williams, and John Teasdale. Mindfulness­based cognitive
therapy for depression. Guilford publications, 2018.
[57]
Steven C Hayes, Kirk D Strosahl, and Kelly G Wilson. Acceptance and commit­
ment therapy. Guilford press New York, 1999.
[58]
S Hayes, KD Strosahl, and K Wilson. “Acceptance and Commitment Therapy:
Second addition, the process and practice of mindful change”. In: New york:
Gulford (2012).
[59]
John Torous and Laura Weiss Roberts. “Needed innovation in digital health and
smartphone applications for mental health: transparency and trust”. In: JAMA
psychiatry 74.5 (2017), pp. 437–438.
[60]
Md Romael Haque and Sabirat Rubya. “” For an App Supposed to Make Its
Users Feel Better, It Sure is a Joke”­An Analysis of User Reviews of Mobile
Mental Health Applications”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Human­Computer
Interaction 6.CSCW2 (2022), pp. 1–29.
[61]
Daniela Gifu and Eugen Pop. “Smart Solutions to Keep Your Mental Balance”.
In: Procedia Computer Science 214 (2022), pp. 503–510.
[62]
Won Ju Hwang, Ji Sun Ha, and Mi Jeong Kim. “Research trends on mobile men­
tal health application for general population: a scoping review”. In: International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18.5 (2021), p. 2459.
[63]
National Institute of Mental Health. “Technology and the future of mental health
treatment”. In: (2017).
58
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:69==
[64]
Anna Huguet et al. “A systematic review of cognitive behavioral therapy and
behavioral activation apps for depression”. In: PloS one 11.5 (2016), e0154248.
[65]
Anna Huguet et al. “A Systematic Review of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and
Behavioral Activation Apps for Depression”. In: PLoS ONE 11 (2016).
[66]
Giuseppe Riva et al. “Transforming experience: the potential of augmented re­
ality and virtual reality for enhancing personal and clinical change”. In: Frontiers
in psychiatry 7 (2016), p. 164.
[67]
Irene Alice Chicchi Giglioli et al. “Augmented reality: a brand new challenge for
the assessment and treatment of psychological disorders”. In: Computational
and mathematical methods in medicine 2015 (2015).
[68]
Thomas D Parsons and Albert A Rizzo. “Affective outcomes of virtual reality
exposure therapy for anxiety and specific phobias: A meta­analysis”. In: Journal
of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry 39.3 (2008), pp. 250–261.
[69]
M Carmen Juan and David Pérez. “Using augmented and virtual reality for the
development of acrophobic scenarios. Comparison of the levels of presence and
anxiety”. In: Computers & Graphics 34.6 (2010), pp. 756–766.
[70]
Maja Wrzesien et al. “How technology influences the therapeutic process: a
comparative field evaluation of augmented reality and in vivo exposure ther­
apy for phobia of small animals”. In: Human­Computer Interaction–INTERACT
2011: 13th IFIP TC 13 International Conference, Lisbon, Portugal, September
5­9, 2011, Proceedings, Part I 13. Springer. 2011, pp. 523–540.
[71]
Tara Donker et al. “Effectiveness of Self­guided App­Based Virtual Reality Cog­
nitive Behavior Therapy for Acrophobia: A Randomized Clinical Trial.” In: JAMA
psychiatry (2019).
[72]
Hatice Merve Demirci. “User experience over time with conversational agents:
Case study of woebot on supporting subjective well­being”. MA thesis. Middle
East Technical University, 2018.
[73]
Kathleen Kara Fitzpatrick, Alison M Darcy, and Molly Vierhile. “Delivering Cogni­
tive Behavior Therapy to Young Adults With Symptoms of Depression and Anx­
iety Using a Fully Automated Conversational Agent (Woebot): A Randomized
Controlled Trial”. In: JMIR Mental Health 4 (2017).
[74]
Eileen Bendig et al. “The next generation: chatbots in clinical psychology and
psychotherapy to foster mental health–a scoping review”. In: Verhaltenstherapie
(2019), pp. 1–13.
[75]
Paul S Bellet and Michael J Maloney. “The importance of empathy as an inter­
viewing skill in medicine”. In: Jama 266.13 (1991), pp. 1831–1832.
[76]
Tommy Sandbank et al. “Ehctool: Managing emotional hotspots for conversa­
tional agents”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelli­
gent User Interfaces Companion. 2017, pp. 125–128.
[77]
Scott Brave, Clifford Nass, and Kevin Hutchinson. “Computers that care: inves­
tigating the effects of orientation of emotion exhibited by an embodied computer
agent”. In: International journal of human­computer studies 62.2 (2005), pp. 161–
178.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
59
==PAGE:70==
[78]
Robert R Morris et al. “Towards an artificially empathic conversational agent for
mental health applications: system design and user perceptions”. In: Journal of
medical Internet research 20.6 (2018), e10148.
[79]
Sébastien Bubeck et al. “Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experi­
ments with gpt­4”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712 (2023).
[80]
Vanessa Wan Sze Cheng et al. “Gamification in apps and technologies for im­
proving mental health and well­being: systematic review”. In: JMIR mental health
6.6 (2019), e13717.
[81]
Sara Taylor et al. “Use of in­game rewards to motivate daily self­report compli­
ance: Randomized controlled trial”. In: Journal of medical Internet research 21.1
(2019), e11683.
[82]
Craig Ferguson et al. “The Guardians: Designing a Game for Long­term Engage­
ment with Mental Health Therapy”. In: 2021 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG).
IEEE. 2021, pp. 1–8.
[83]
E Ray Dorsey et al. “The use of smartphones for health research”. In: Academic
Medicine 92.2 (2017), pp. 157–160.
[84]
Simone Kate Orlowski et al. “Participatory research as one piece of the puzzle: a
systematic review of consumer involvement in design of technology­based youth
mental health and well­being interventions”. In: JMIR human factors 2.2 (2015),
e4361.
[85]
Roy D Pea. “User centered system design: new perspectives on human­computer
interaction”. In: Journal educational computing research 3.1 (1987), pp. 129–
134.
[86]
Tanya Malik, Adrian Jacques Ambrose, and Chaitali Sinha. “Evaluating User
Feedback for an Artificial Intelligence–Enabled, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy–
Based Mental Health App (Wysa): Qualitative Thematic Analysis”. In: JMIR Hu­
man Factors 9.2 (2022), e35668.
[87]
Gabriela Marcu, Jakob E Bardram, and Silvia Gabrielli. “A framework for over­
coming challenges in designing persuasive monitoring and feedback systems
for mental illness”. In: 2011 5th International Conference on Pervasive Comput­
ing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth) and Workshops. IEEE. 2011,
pp. 1–8.
[88]
Gavin Doherty, David Coyle, and Mark Matthews. “Design and evaluation guide­
lines for mental health technologies”. In: Interacting with computers 22.4 (2010),
pp. 243–252.
[89]
Joan Greenbaum and Morten Kyng. “Design at work: cooperative design of com­
puter systems”. In: null (1992). DOI: null.
[90]
Douglas Schuler and Aki Namioka. “Participatory Design: Principles and Prac­
tices”. In: null (1993). DOI: 10.1201/9780203744338.
[91]
Elise Sellars et al. “Young people’s advisory groups in health research: scoping
review and mapping of practices”. In: Archives of disease in childhood 106.7
(2021), pp. 698–704.
60
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:71==
[92]
Nicole VanHeerwaarden et al. “The optimization of an eHealth solution (thought
spot) with transition­aged youth in postsecondary settings: participatory design
research”. In: Journal of Medical Internet Research 20.3 (2018), e79.
[93]
Claire Hill et al. “Navigating the development and dissemination of internet cogni­
tive behavioral therapy (iCBT) for anxiety disorders in children and young people:
a consensus statement with recommendations from the# iCBTLorentz Workshop
Group”. In: Internet Interventions 12 (2018), pp. 1–10.
[94]
Penny Hagen et al. “Participatory design of evidence­based online youth mental
health promotion, intervention and treatment”. In: (2012).
[95]
Fanke Peng. “Design Thinking: From Empathy to Evaluation”. In: Foundations
of Robotics: A Multidisciplinary Approach with Python and ROS. Springer, 2022,
pp. 63–81.
[96]
Mark Matthews and Gavin Doherty. “FEATURE The invisible user”. In: Interac­
tions 16.6 (2009), pp. 13–19.
[97]
Fritz Scheuren. “What is a Survey?” In: American Statistical Association Alexan­
dria. 2004.
[98]
Kevin B Wright. “Researching Internet­based populations: Advantages and dis­
advantages of online survey research, online questionnaire authoring software
packages, and web survey services”. In: Journal of computer­mediated commu­
nication 10.3 (2005), JCMC1034.
[99]
Rex Hartson and Pardha S Pyla. The UX book: Agile UX design for a quality
user experience. Morgan Kaufmann, 2018.
[100]
Tuuli Mattelmäki et al. Design probes. Aalto University, 2006.
[101]
Raymond Scupin. “The KJ method: A technique for analyzing data derived from
Japanese ethnology”. In: Human organization 56.2 (1997), pp. 233–237.
[102]
Clayton Lewis. Using the” thinking­aloud” method in cognitive interface design.
IBM TJ Watson Research Center Yorktown Heights, NY, 1982.
[103]
Rensis Likert. “A technique for the measurement of attitudes.” In: Archives of
psychology (1932).
[104]
Anna Jobin, Marcello Ienca, and Effy Vayena. “The global landscape of AI ethics
guidelines”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 1.9 (2019), pp. 389–399.
[105]
Colin M. Gray et al. “The Dark (Patterns) Side of UX Design”. In: Proceedings
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’18.
Montreal QC, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, pp. 1–14.
ISBN: 9781450356206. DOI: 10.1145/3173574.3174108. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/3173574.3174108.
[106]
Stoyan R Stoyanov et al. “Development and validation of the user version of the
Mobile Application Rating Scale (uMARS)”. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 4.2
(2016), e5849.
[107]
Yvette I. Sheline et al. “The default mode network and self­referential processes
in depression”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (2009),
pp. 1942–1947.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
61
==PAGE:72==
[108]
Megan E Renna et al. “Emotion regulation therapy: a mechanism­targeted treat­
ment for disorders of distress”. In: Frontiers in psychology 8 (2017), p. 98.
[109]
Dan Saffer. Microinteractions: designing with details. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2013.
[110]
Yu­kai Chou. Actionable gamification: Beyond points, badges, and leaderboards.
Packt Publishing Ltd, 2019.
62
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:73==
A
Appendix
A.1
Design Materials
Click to see the total Design process documentation.
Video of MindSpace prototype.
Figma wireframes.
Final Figma prototype.
A.2
Initial survey
Link to summary of results
Figure A.1: Gender identity
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.2: Degree distribution
Figure A.3: Major distribution
Figure A.4: Student source
64
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.5: Self­reported mental wellness
Figure A.6: Frequency distribution of stress feeling
Figure A.7: Academic factors lead to emotional low
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
65
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.8: Last examination date
66
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.9: First inclination when in low emotion
Figure A.10: Help seeking attitude distribution
Figure A.11: Barriers to professional mental health service
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
67
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.12: Mental health app usage
Figure A.13: Mental health apps that respondents used
Figure A.14: Desired features
68
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.15: Expected use frequency
Figure A.16: Prioritized design principles
Figure A.17: Way of notification
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
69
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.18: Expected support service
Figure A.19: Advertisement to hire participants
70
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:81==
A.3
Design probe
Link to design probe PDF file.
Link to feedback survey of 1­week emotion journey.
List of participants:
• s223059@student.dtu.dk
• aleksandra13lud@gmail.com
• tarurud@hotmail.com
• s212360@student.dtu.dk
• s230140@student.dtu.dk
• s226760@student.dtu.dk
• tianhaiw785@gmail.com
The main parts of our design probe is shown below:
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
71
==PAGE:82==
Emotion
Emotion
Regulation
Regulation
Explorer
Explorer
A one-Week Journey to
Understand Your
Emotional World
Illustration generated from Stable Diffusion
72
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:83==
to the Emotion Regulation
to the Emotion Regulation
Explorer! Over the next 7 days,
Explorer! Over the next 7 days,
you'll embark on a journey to
you'll embark on a journey to
understand your emotional world
understand your emotional world
better. Your insights will help us
better. Your insights will help us
design an emotion regulation app
design an emotion regulation app
tailored to university students'
tailored to university students'
mental health needs.
mental health needs.
Remember, there's no right or wrong
way to participate. We encourage you
to be open, honest, and creative in
your responses.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
73
==PAGE:84==
Draw or write your favorite emotion-related quote,
song lyric, or word here:
Icebreaker
Before starting
74
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:85==
Emotion Wheel
Little secret: this is a good tool you'll use often
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
75
==PAGE:86==
Be free to
doodling,
sketching, or
using colors to
express your
feelings and
experiences!
The rule is no rule
76
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:87==
Who am I
Draw your cool profile here
Gender:
Name/nickname: 
Age: 
Field of study: 
Year in University:
How would you rate your current
mental health? (1 = poor, 5 = excellent)
Bachelor/Master/PhD?
If you were a color, which color would you be?
Favourite movie:
Biggest hobby:
Favourite song:
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
77
==PAGE:88==
Day 1
Day 1
Rate your mood(1-5) at these times of the day 
Describe your emotion by choosing words from the
"Emotion Wheel" tool
Morning
Afternoon
Evening
😄 😊 😐 😞 😢
Choose an emoji to draw. Represent your
overall mood for the day:
78
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:89==
"What happened today that made you feel a strong emotion?"
"How did you react or respond to this situation?"
"Was your response helpful or unhelpful? Why?"
List your go-to techniques for managing your emotions and rate their
effectiveness on a scale of 1-5 (1 = not effective, 5 = very effective):
"What challenges do you face when trying to regulate your
emotions?"
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
79
==PAGE:90==
D E E P B R E A T H I N G
Tip: a technique that involves
taking slow, with air to calm
the mind and body
Fun Activity: Coping Strategy Word Puzzle
The answer is at the end page
80
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.20: Data analysis on coping strategies and their frequency
Figure A.21: Daily mood tracking log of participants in 1­week probe journey.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
81
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.22: Participants reported emotions in an emotion wheel.
82
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.23: The occurrence of different emotions in 1­week journey.
Figure A.24: Participant ratings of overall experience for the 1­Week emotion
regulation journey.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.25: Participant ratings of the effectiveness of mood tracking and journaling for
emotional self­awareness.
A.4
Naming
Figure A.26: Number of votes for different product name options.
84
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:95==
A.5
1st Co­design workshop:ChatGPT as counselor
Click to view workshop slide, participants’ prompt & responses
Click to see EX2’s comments on participants’ conversations with ChatGPT
Click to see EX3’s comments on participants’ conversations with ChatGPT
List of participants:
• Lauratramm@hotmail.com
• s226767@dtu.dk
• s230140@student.dtu.dk
• niclolo.sguerso@gmail.com
• alenest@dtu.dk
• s223059@student.dtu.dk
A.5.1
Agenda
Introduction (5 minutes)
• Welcome and introductions
• Overview of the workshop objective and agenda
User personas and ChatGPT (10 minutes)
• Presentation of target user personas and simple explanation
• Briefing on ChatGPT and its interesting mental health applications
• Breakout groups for each persona
ChatGPT role­play session (30 minutes)
• Role­play instructions and guidelines
• Participants interact with ChatGPT, taking turns to represent their assigned user
personas
• Write down GPT model+prompt+response on group document
Interval (10 minutes)
Group presentation and reflections (15 minutes)
• Participants summarize on slides by group and share their experiences and ob­
servations from the role­play session
Brainstorming improvements (20 minutes)
• Group brainstorming on potential enhancements to ChatGPT’s functionality, inter­
action design as a chatbot mental consultant
• Prioritization of improvements and ideas
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
85
==PAGE:96==
Wrap­up and next steps (10 minutes)
• Recap of workshop outcomes and key learnings
• Outline of next steps and potential follow­up actions
• Workshop feedback and closing remarks
Post­Workshop Activities
• Show the results and discuss with the expert panel
• Let the experts score and evaluate the professionalism of Prompt responses from
ChatGPT
• Discuss Strategies and Obtain Feedback for Crafting Effective Prompts to Elicit
High­Quality Responses from the GPT Chatbot
• Discuss the potential limitations and ethical considerations of using ChatGPT as
a mental counselor
A.5.2
Post­survey
Click to see the survey.
Figure A.27: Overall experience of ChatGPT as a mental health counselor.
86
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.28: The level of participant trust on ChatGPT’s responses.
Figure A.29: Effectiveness of ChatGPT at understanding participants’ frustrations.
Figure A.30: Effectiveness of ChatGPT at solving participants’ mental issues.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
87
==PAGE:98==
A.6
Think aloud testing
List of participants
• enita.clouds@gmail.com
• lephuonguyeen@gmail.com
• s223054@dtu.dk
• nataliamparka@gmail.com
• ashutoshdhaka17@gmail.com
• s226792@student.dtu.dk
1. P1
1. ”Play to learn: too much text, and big transition. Don’t like white background.
Text is not intuitive on the top.”
4. ”Like the design and story and the tip which explains well.”
7. ”Like the quote, Daily update of quote. Didn’t notice the existence of chatbot
and what can it do. Like the color, loyalty, and calm.”
2. P2
2. ”Wish to have an interaction between Today’s mission with Chapter page
and specific one. Name of title is a bit academic.”
7. ”Chat: setting ­ it can have a bot name customization feature.”
3. P3
1. ”MBCT repeated. Illustration is weird not matching the goal. Don’t like
therapy with emotional empower ­ doesn’t sound serious.”
4. ”Need text below menu icon. Scroll screens to switch (just as default inter­
action in native apps).”
5. ”People know the right thing to do, hard thing is choosing the right to do when
in anger. Answer is obvious.”
7. ”Text in the topic bar is too small.”
4. P4
1. ”Like the figure characterizing the bot. Like explanation of how this design is
made. Like the artistic illustration. Like the story.”
6. ”Try to click the profile picture to enter the profile page. Like the phases it
align with the story. Don’t remember when the badge is unlocked ­ suggest
the rewarding page that the badge bar background should be consistent.”
7. ”Like the preset topics. Question about the similarity of anxiety and relax­
ation.”
5. P5
1. ”Add a bit animation. Amazing pictures. Like the story.”
2. ”A little technical for phases. Like the time text gives expectation.”
5. ”A little strange for font format ­ italic. Animation will rock experience.”
6. ”Better way to describe phases.”
7. ”Like the character of chatbot. Consistency of colors.”
6. P6
1. ”Play to earn: Evidence­based and chatbot different thing, too much. Last
88
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:99==
guidance page: can you save (grammar).”
5. ”Don’t know who is explaining the chapter, expect emotion master (sage).”
6. ”Click avatar to profile.”
7. ”Like the text and wish to have daily update.”
A.6.1
Post­survey
Figure A.31: Easiness of MindSpace to understand Emotion regulation strategies
(content)
Figure A.32: Effectiveness of MindSpace to learn coping strategies.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
89
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.33: MindSpace’s engaging level.
Figure A.34: MindSpace’s engaging level.
Figure A.35: Easiness of MindSpace’s gamefication mechanism.
90
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:101==
A.7
Content development
A.7.1
Phase I: Awareness Skills Training (Session 1­3)
The overarching theme for Phase I is to promote awareness of somatic and emotional
cues.
3 core principles:
1. Increasing understanding of emotions and underlying motivations via psychoedu­
cation and contextualising historical and concurrent events within the ERT model.
2. Improving cue detection to better identify antecedents and consequences (cues)
associated with emotions, motivational pulls, and reactive responses.
3. Increasing mindful awareness to cultivate attentional flexibility, interoceptive aware­
ness, and superior emotional conflict monitoring and adaptation.
2 concepts:
• Snowball metaphor
• The orchestra metaphor
Practice:
• Awareness training
• Learn how to“Catch Yourself Reacting”(CYR): self­monitoring or chain analysis
practices, break the cycle of REACTIVE RESPONDING
• Rate from 1­100 on levels of security and reward motivation pulls
• Training mindfulness exercises
• Diaphragmatic breathing/Belly Breathing
• Body scan (Orienting)
A.7.2
Phase II: Regulation Skills Training
The overarching theme of Phase II is the “Courage to be Counteractive.”
The three main components of Phase II are:
• Acceptance and allowance
• Cognitive distancing (decentring)
• Cognitive change (reframing)
Responding counteractively (acceptance and allowance)
• Cue detection and mindful awareness
• Off­line and on­the­spot practices
• Fr. CBT+MBCT: (off)“Clearing the Air”, imaginal exercise) –(on)Three­Minute
Breathing Space
Cognitive distancing (decentring)
• Off­line and on­the­spot practices
• Fr. MBSR: (Off­line) Mountain meditation ­ (On­spot)Invoking the Mountain
• Fr. ACT: (Off­line) Gaining an Observer’s Distance –(On­spot)Bringing It With You
Cognitive change (reframing)
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
91
==PAGE:102==
A.7.3
Phase III: Exposure to threat­reward contrasts
• Values­based exposure is derived from ACT
• ERT expands values­based exposure to address not only “top­down”decisions
about life goals but also“bottom­up”influences of security and reward motivational
pulls as well as their interaction.
Three main exposure components to promote valued living:
1. Imaginal action related to values­informed goals
2. Experiential dialogue tasks to explore perceived internal conflicts that impede en­
gaging valued actions (Greenberg, 2002)
3. Planned between­session exercises wherein clients engage valued actions out­
side of session
Gardening
• Make sure nothing bad happens to the garden (i.e., security)
• Want the garden to grow and represent an even more enhancing experience (i.e.,
reward).
A.7.4
Phase IV: Consolidating Gains and Looking Ahead (s14­S16)
• First, clients are reminded of a message that has frequently been echoed through­
out ERT. Specifically, experiencing emotions, even ones that are not especially
welcome in our lives (e.g., fear, anxiety, sadness, anger), are a normal part of
being human.
•“Surf the Wave,”From DBT
•“Use It or Lose It.”
•“Taking Larger Steps”
21­day plan
Day 1­7: Phase I ­ Awareness Skills Training
• Day 1: Learn about situation selection and situation modification
• Day 2: Learn about emotions and motivations; earn points for completion
• Day 3: Begin daily self­monitoring of emotional reactions and cues; track
security and reward motivation pulls
• Day 4: Start mindfulness exercises with guided diaphragmatic breathing;
earn points for daily practice
• Day 5: Engage in a body scan exercise; complete an emotional ABC exercise
to identify triggers
• Day 6: Daily challenge: identify the snowball effect in personal experiences;
share findings in a community forum
• Day 7: Weekly review and progress update; earn bonus points for consistent
practice
Day 8­14: Phase II ­ Regulation Skills Training
• Day 8: Introduction to acceptance and allowance; practice ”Clearing the Air”
and the ”Three­Minute Breathing Space” exercises
• Day 9: Learn about cognitive distancing with the ”Mountain Meditation” and
”Invoking the Mountain” exercises
92
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:103==
• Day 10: Explore cognitive change techniques and complete the ”Gaining an
Observer’s Distance” exercise
• Day 11: Daily challenge: practise an on­the­spot decentering technique in a
real­life situation
• Day 12: Engage in a guided cognitive reframing exercise; share experiences
with peers
• Day 13: Daily challenge: practice acceptance and allowance in response to
an emotional trigger
• Day 14: Weekly review and progress update; earn bonus points for complet­
ing challenges and practising skills
Day 15­18: Phase Exposure to Threat­Reward Contrasts
• Day 15: Introduction to values­based exposure; set a values­informed goal
for the week
• Day 16: Engage in an imaginal action exercise related to the chosen goal
• Day 17: Complete an experiential dialogue task to explore internal conflicts
impeding valued actions
• Day 18: Plan a between­session exercise to engage in valued actions outside
the app
Day 19­21: Phase IV ­ Consolidating Gains and Looking Ahead
• Day 19: Reflect on progress and emotional growth; earn points for self­
reflection and sharing insights
• Day 20: Practice ”Surf the Wave” and ”Use It or Lose It” principles; complete
a final emotional check­in
• Day 21: Celebrate the completion of the 21­day challenge; earn rewards
and avatar enhancements for achievements; look forward to ”Taking Larger
Steps” in emotional regulation
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
93
==PAGE:104==
A.8
3rd iteration: reframing gamification
Click to view co­workshop slide
Click to view transcription.
Figure A.36: Poster for hiring participants on public board.
Figure A.37: Hand out of Octalysis Framework with participants rating on core drives
and notes.
94
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.38: A big canvas of MindSpace’s wireframes where participants are allowed
to write and doodle their ideas.
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
95
==PAGE:106==
A.9
4th iteration: uMARS & ethical check
A.9.1
uMARS
Click to download PDF questionnaire file: user version of Mobile Application Rating
Scale
Click to see summary of uMARS questionnaire results
A.9.2
Ethical check
Survey design
1. Choice (select all that apply)
￿The system allows users to change their mind and select a different option
later
￿The system allows users to select their preferences
2. Transparency (select all that apply)
￿The system is transparent about how data is used and shared
￿The system does not hide important information by accident or on purpose
￿There is nothing in the system that users need to know about
3. Well­being (select all that apply)
￿The system takes into consideration how users will feel when using the sys­
tem
￿The system does not make users’ well­being worse (example: by making
them anxious)
￿The system provides direct support to users in case they suffer physical or
emotional harm
￿There is nothing on the system which may decrease or increase well­being
4. Diversity (select all that apply)
￿The system is directly targeted to attend the needs of at least one marginalised
group
￿The system does not exclusively target the already over­represented groups
￿The system does not exclude people of different races, disabilities, gender
and cultures
￿There is no way this system can reach marginalised groups
5. Benefits (select all that apply)
￿The system is useful and offers direct and significant benefits for the users
￿The system does not use manipulation techniques to get users to spend
money
￿The system is not built to take advantage of users for easy profit
￿The system does not provide benefits for neither users nor owners
96
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:107==
Figure A.39: Ethical aspect: Choice
Figure A.40: Rating of Choice criteria
Figure A.41: Ethical aspect: Transparency
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
97
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.42: Rating of Transparency criteria
Figure A.43: Ethical aspect: Well­being
Figure A.44: Ethical aspect: Diversity
98
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
==PAGE:109==
Figure A.45: Rating of Diversity criteria
Figure A.46: Ethical aspect: Benefits
Figure A.47: Rating of Benefits criteria
MindSpace: Level Up Emotional Resilience
99
==PAGE:110==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
