==PAGE:1==
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-
Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand
Assessing the Value in Considering Uncertain Demand when Designing Liner-Shipping
Networks
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Division of Management Science, Section of Operation Research
NOKRS
NOSVG
PLGDY
SEGOT
RUKGD
FIRAU
FIKTK
DEBRV
RULED
NOBGO
NOAES
DKAAR
==PAGE:2==
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network De-
sign with Uncertain Demand
Assessing the Value in Considering Uncertain Demand when Designing
Liner-Shipping Networks
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Frederik Gerner Andreasen, s174423
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must
include the customary bibliographic citation, including au-
thor attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Division of Management Science, Section of Op-
eration Research, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for 5.5 months at the Section for Opera-
tions Research, Department of Management Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with Maersk for the degree
Master of Science in Transport and Logistics Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics
and operations research.
Frederik Gerner Andreasen - s174423
Signature
Date
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis formulates a two-stage stochastic programming model which can adjust a given
network design and deploy container vessels while considering the uncertainty of the commodity
demands. The approach is based on the Liner-shipping Network Design Problem (LSNDP)
and the Fleet Deployment Problem (FDP). The scenarios are generated using a copula that
lets them be individually pairwise correlated and, moreover, let them have distinct probability
distribution functions in their marginals. The resulting arc-ﬂow formulation of the problem
is solved with Gurobi, but the solver neither manages to solve large instances to optimality
within a reasonable time limit of 12 hours nor to prove that the approach brings any value to the
decision-maker in the form of a positive Value of Stochastic Solution (VSS). Only when relaxing
the ﬁrst stage variables is the stochastic solution better than the corresponding deterministic
solution, and this LP-relaxation also enables larger instances to be solved to optimality. Finally,
it’s demonstrated how the choices of demand variance, the correlation between demands, and
the size of the penalty for forfeiting demand signiﬁcantly impact the VSS.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to show my gratitude to Klaus Holst and Ignacio Blanco,
my supervisors throughout this master thesis. Their guidance and expertise have been invalu-
able in the creation of this thesis. I would also like to show my appreciation to Berit Brouer
for providing me with the opportunity to write this thesis in collaboration with Maersk. At
Maersk, I have had the pleasure to work with two diﬀerent departments. Decision Science and
Data Science. The colleagues have both helped me academically, but moreover, it has been a
pleasure to come to the two oﬃces daily and work alongside them. Also, thanks to my family
for showing immense support, especially when it was most diﬃcult. I would have been able to
do it without you. Last but not least, I would like to thank Richard Martin Lusby for being
my DTU supervisor. Richard has been very helpful throughout the duration of the thesis and
has had a lot of patience to assist my understanding of this ﬁeld.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand iv
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
The acronyms and terminology used in the thesis.
Acronyms
Table 1
Acronym
Name
Short Description
EEV
Stochastic Program
The Stochastic Programming Model with a scenario set
containing a single scenario of the expected demands
EVPI
Expected Value
of Perfect Information
The expected increase in objective value if the future could be
predicted
FDP
Fleet Deployment Problem
Deploying a ﬂeet of container vessels onto a set of
predetermined sequences
FFE
Forty Feet Equivalent (unit)
(or Forty Feet Equipment)
An approximate unit for shipping container volumes, 1 FFE
corresponds to a container with a length of 40 feet.
1 FFE = 2 TEU
LP
Linear Program
A mathematical program with only linear variables
LSNDP
Liner-Shipping Network
Design Problem
Planning problem concerning the design of services (rotations)
in a container vessel network
MCF(P)
Multi-Commodity
Flow (Problem)
In this thesis, planning problem concerning the ﬂow of cargo
with the same origin and destination in a network with arcs
repeated with some frequency
MIP
Mixed-Integer Program
A mathematical program with both linear and integer variables
OD
Origin-Destination
The pair of origin and destination ports of a commodity
OR
Operations Research
The ﬁeld in mathematical optimisation that deals with
developing and applying mathematical models to improve
and assess decision-making
SP
Stochastic Program
The Stochastic Programming Model with a scenario set
representing the uncertainty
TEU
Twenty Feet Equivalent (unit)
An approximate unit for shipping container volumes. 1 TEU
corresponds to a container with a length of 20 feet.
1 TEU = 0.5 FFE
UNLOCODE
United Nations LOcation CODE
Unique ﬁve letter code for ports. The ﬁrst two letters indicate
the country of the port. These will be written in the
TYPEWRITTER TYPE
VSS
Value of Stochastic Solution
The expected increase in objective value if an uncertain
parameter is given as input in the form of a set of scenarios
WS
Wait-and-See (Program)
The Stochastic Programming Model with a scenario set
containing one scenario. The network solutions are solved for
each scenario in the scenario set
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand v
==PAGE:7==
Terminology
Table 2
Term
Short Description
Butterﬂy rotation
A rotation (or service) which has a sequence in which one or more ports
are visited multiple times.
Cabotage Rules
Some countries protect their national transportation sector by prohibit
transportation purely within the country by a foreign company. It can also be
disallowing the movement of cargo from a country a to a country b through
a country c.
Capacity
The size of a vessel or a ﬂeet of vessels measured in FFE
Commodity
The total container demand with the same OD-pair as well as revenue and
maximal transit time.
Deferment
If cargo is deferred, it’s delayed in the port until the next port call
Forfeiture
If cargo is forfeited, it’s rejected by the carrier
GitHub
Online platform used to store the LinerLib instances
Instance
An instance of a problem contains numerical values for all the needed
parameters enabling the problem to be solved
Leg
The segment of a voyage between two ports. A sequence will consist of a
number legs
LinerLib
Set of instances used for solving the LSNDP. Consists of regions with port,
commodities and available ﬂeet vessel classes
Network
(or network solution)
In this thesis, a subset of an available ﬂeet allocated on a subset of
sequences. Also known as ﬁrst-stage solution
Sequence (or route)
A list of port calls to be visited in a loop by one or more vessels.
Service (or rotation)
A sequence with an assigned vessel class and a number of vessels. It can also
include a schedule and average speed.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
The LinerLib Instances
5
3.1
Ports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Commodities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Vessel Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Regions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Uncertain Commodity Demand in Liner-Shipping
12
4.1
Sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Mathematical Formulation
25
5.1
Determining Network Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Appropriate Graph Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
The Stochastic MIP-Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Model Size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Model Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.6
Forfeitures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Experimental Results
35
6.1
Evaluation of Stochastic Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Testing the MIP model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Relaxation of the Binary Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
In-Sample Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.5
Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Future Work and Possible Extensions
47
7.1
Including Additional Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8
Concluding Remarks
49
References
51
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demandvii
==PAGE:9==
A Results of the Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
52
A.1 The absolute and relative VSS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.2 Tables of other Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demandviii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The maritime transport sector handles almost 90% of world trade (Christiansen et al. 2020), and
was accountable for around 2% of the world’s CO2 emissions in 2020 (IEA 2020). Container-
ised goods hold a notable share in this sector of 17% in trade volumes and 25% in emissions
(UNCTAD 2022; B. Brouer et al. 2014). This means that even minor improvements in the
operation of container vessels can yield signiﬁcant cost reductions for the carriers, CO2 savings
for the environment, and thus making one of the greenest and most cost-eﬀective modes of
transportation (Christiansen et al. 2020) even greener and more cost-eﬀective.
An analogy to the liner shipping industry is a public transit system. E.g., a bus operator
managing a set of bus lines.
Each bus is part of a line which serves a predeﬁned set of
bus stops. The number of buses deployed on the line determines the frequency of buses at
any given stop. It’s common for bus lines to intersect at a subset of the stops, which makes
transfers between the lines easier. The concept is the same in liner-shipping, where the lines are
called services (or rotations), and transfers are called transshipments. Like multiple operators
compete in a public transit system, the same is evident in liner-shipping where the operators
are referred to as carriers, while the owners of the cargo are called shippers (B. Brouer et al.
2014). The network consists of services; each assigned one or more container vessels (owned or
chartered) sailing on a ﬁxed schedule. To stay in business, the carrier must have an eﬃcient and
competitive network which oﬀers many port-to-port connections, low transit time, low number
of transshipments, as well as low freight rates, similar to a public transit system (B. Brouer
et al. 2014)
The Liner-Shipping Network Design Problem (LSNDP) formulated in B. Brouer et al. 2014 can
help the carrier to design eﬃcient networks. The objective is to ﬁnd a feasible network solution
given a designated ﬂeet of container vessels and a set of so-called commodities with some
estimated demand to be transported. Most existing literature includes tactical subproblems
such as frequency determination, ﬂeet deployment, and to some degree, speed optimisation into
the design problem as these subproblems are strongly tied to network design (Meng, S. Wang,
et al. 2014). The LSNDP can freely decide the number of services and the size and composition
of their sequences. However, this freedom comes with the cost of having exponentially many
combinations as a function of instance size. As a result, this problem is strongly NP-hard (B.
Brouer et al. 2014), and it has yet to be solved to optimality for large global networks with
hundreds of ports and thousands of commodities (Karsten et al. 2015). However, even heuristic
solutions can bring tremendous value to the carrier regarding reduced costs and less forfeited
demand (B. Brouer et al. 2014). The approach to the LSNDP is deterministic in the sense that
the demand between any origin-destination pair (OD-pair) is assumed to be constant in time.
However, the observed demands are highly ﬂuctuating, meaning there could be additional value
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 1
==PAGE:11==
in considering this stochasticity when designing the liner-shipping network. It may be possible
to design a network which is both eﬃcient and competitive but also resilient towards these
unpredictable changes in demand.
However, considering this uncertainty inherently comes with some added complexity to the
current mathematical formulation, making it even more computationally intractable for large
instances.
Moreover, the carrier might already have an existing network and may not be
interested in making signiﬁcant changes as this will come with some overhead.
For these
reasons, the stochasticity is not added directly to the LSNDP but to one of its subproblems,
namely the Fleet Deployment Problem (FDP). The FDP is considered a tactical problem in the
literature and deploys container vessels onto predetermined port sequences. By only relying
on a relatively small set of existing sequences, the problem becomes easier to solve as the
solution space decreases, compared to freely being able to design the sequences. Commodity
demands being uncertain have been considered in the FDP in the literature.
Nonetheless,
the assumptions were that the speciﬁc paths of the commodities were given beforehand and
the ﬂuctuations of the demands were not correlated (Meng and T. Wang 2010), or that all
the sequences should be assigned vessels (Meng and T. Wang 2012). This thesis will develop
another method to address the vessel deployment and, to some extent, the design problem with
uncertain and correlated demands taken into consideration. This may bring additional value
to the carrier compared to the deterministic approach.
Chapter 2 reviews the relevant existing literature in the ﬁeld, while Chapter 3 explains the
data used in the modelling. Chapter 4 accounts for the general sources of uncertainty in the
liner-shipping industry and how they can be modelled. Chapter 5 formulates the MIP problem
and its assumptions. Chapter 6 lists and discusses the experimental results, while Chapter 7
presents possible future work. Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the ﬁndings of the report.
This report has been conducted in collaboration with Maersk, and the student has gained many
insights into the general operation of container vessels which will come to show in the report,
but without any particular citations.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 2
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
Generally, relevant literature in this ﬁeld is sparse, but some articles have been published,
studying the stochasticity of container demands in diﬀerent ways. The terminology and nota-
tion diﬀer substantially from paper to paper, and when presented, the notation used in this
thesis is applied.
The Meng and T. Wang 2010 presents the short-term Liner Ship Fleet Planning (LSFP) prob-
lem, which takes a set of predetermined sequences and available vessel classes (both owned and
chartered) as input to the model. Moreover, a set of estimated demands for all OD-combinations
is given and which sequence(s) the demands will use. This implies that the paths of the de-
mands are known beforehand. The demands are considered stochastic and assumed to follow a
normal distribution, each with a given mean and standard deviation, but not correlated. The
problem then allocates the available vessels onto the sequences by maximising the amount of
cargo to be sent. Chance constraints ensure that the capacity of the vessel(s) deployed on each
sequence is not exceeded more than a predeﬁned number of times. In other words, the chance
constraints ensure the carrier can hold its promise of satisfying the demand within a certain
probability. It solves a hypothetical but still "realistic" instance of eight sequences, ﬁve vessel
classes, ten ports and an unknown amount of demands.
The paper by Meng and T. Wang 2012 studies how ﬂuctuating demands inﬂuence the ﬂeet
deployment problem (FDP). The FDP is integrated into the LSNDP but can also be solved
independently if given a set of predetermined sequences and an available ﬂeet.
The paper
models this tactical-level problem with a time-space graph and considers a time horizon of 6
months. The model can choose to let cargo be transported by its alliance partner, but it will
cost the carrier $2,000 per FFE. A two-level framework is used to solve the FDP where the
deployment is chosen in the ﬁrst level, and subsequently, the routing of demands is done in the
second level for each time period with a rolling horizon. This approach considers the number of
vessels of each sequence to be ﬁxed as well as the schedules of the services, and all the sequences
must be used. The devised global optimisation algorithm using two relaxations of the formal
MIP formulation can solve a real size instance (45 ports) in a few minutes to optimality.
The LSNDP is formulated by B. Brouer et al. 2014, which builds upon a mathematical formu-
lation by Alvarez in (JF 2009). Besides adding the possibility of butterﬂy rotations in their
formulation, B. Brouer et al. 2014 also introduced a benchmark instance set for the OR com-
munity to be able to test and assess various approaches to the LSNDP. These instances serve
as the data foundation in this project and will be explained further in Section 3. As men-
tioned, this problem assumes that the demands are deterministic and constant, which enables
it eﬃciently to use the Multi-Commodity Flow Problem (MCFP) to determine how the cargo
should be routed in the network, which requires that cargo can be split and assume linearity.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 3
==PAGE:13==
As the LSNDP is strongly NP-hard and not solved to optimality for large instances of practical
size, heuristics are typically used to obtain feasible networks.
The arc-ﬂow formulation used to solve the MCFP cannot enforce a maximum transit time of
the commodities, which can be necessary if the carrier wants to oﬀer a competitive product. In
Karsten et al. 2015, the transit time constraints of the commodities in the MCF are enforced,
which is enabled by formulating the MCFP with a path-ﬂow formulation which can be eﬃciently
solved with column generation. The approach doesn’t increase the running times of solving the
MCFP (Karsten et al. 2015). The paper also devises many diﬀerent ways to correctly handle
the transshipments in the graph structure by expanding it with transshipment arcs.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 3
The LinerLib Instances
This suite of instances was created to allow the OR community to benchmark diﬀerent ap-
proaches to solving the LSNDP. They are based on data from Maersk Line, Vereinigung Ham-
burger Schiﬀsmakler und Schiﬀsagenten, Drewry Shipping Consultants, Alphaliner.com, Na-
tional Imagery, and Mapping Agency. The instances and additional information can be found
on a public GitHub library LINERLIB 2017 (last correction).
The library includes data for diﬀerent components, which will be outlined in the following:
3.1
Ports
LinerLib provides data on 293 ports around the world. The following attributes are included.
1. UNLOCODE
This unique ﬁve-letter code is used to identify the individual ports. The ﬁrst two letters
denote the country where the port is located, and the last three letters are the code of
the port. Ports are referred to by this code written in typewriter style.
2. Country
They are used to group the commodities and determine the port’s region and continent.
3. Coordinates
Longitude and latitude of the port location. The coordinates could be used for visualising
the ports but are not used in this context.
4. Distance
The shortest sailing distances to all other ports. Some OD-pair will have multiple dis-
tances depending on whether a canal (Panama or Suez) will be used.
5. Cabotage Region
It could be used in the modelling, but this is not accounted for in this context for sim-
plicity.
6. Draft
This physical restriction of the port is essential to know to determine which vessels can
enter the port.
7. Loading costs
The cost of loading or unloading a container at the port, including potential customs
paperwork.
8. Transshipping costs
The cost of transshipping a container at the port is typically cheaper than two times the
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 5
==PAGE:15==
loading costs as the customs paperwork is not needed.
9. Port call costs
Each vessel calling a port needs to pay a ﬁxed amount and a variable amount based on
the size of the vessel, given its FFE capacity.
3.2
Commodities
In each instance, a set of commodities is also given. A commodity is a unique combination of
OD-pair, revenue per container, and maximal transit time. Each commodity will have some
demand to be transported in FFE per week. A given OD pair may have multiple commodities
with varying revenues and maximal transit times to represent the distribution of cargo being
transported. However, in the LinerLib instances, there is at most one commodity for each OD
pair, while most OD-pairs don’t have a commodity assigned to them. The attributes of the
commodities are:
1. OD-pair
The origin port and destination port of the commodity. Cargo of this commodity must
originate from and terminate in these ports.
2. Demand
The expected demand qk of commodity k given in FFE per week. The model can decide
only to meet a fraction of this demand if needed.
3. Revenue
The revenue per FFE obtained when transporting the commodity. Excludes the load and
unload costs at the origin and destination ports.
4. Maximal transit time
The maximum time allowed for the transportation of the commodity from origin to
destination can be enforced as a hard constraint to restrict the paths of the cargo (B.
Brouer et al. 2014).
5. Distance
The shortest sailing distance from the origin to the destination is referred to as the
distance of a commodity. This attribute is not to be used directly in the modelling, but
it can serve to assess the proﬁtability of a commodity in relation to its revenue.
3.3
Vessel Classes
Each instance has a ﬂeet of vessels available. The vessels are divided into classes depending
on their capacities in FFE. The six classes with their respective capacities are Feeder-450,
Feeder-800, Panamax-1200, Pamanax-2400, Post-Panamax-4200, and Super-Panamax-7500.
They will, in the remainder, be referred to as class 1, class 2, class 3, class 4, class 5, class 6,
and class 7, respectively.
Their attributes are given as follows:
1. Capacity
The capacity or size of the vessel is given in the number of FFE it can carry.
2. Time Charter costs
The daily ﬁxed costs of operating the vessel.
3. Draft
The draft of the vessel restricts which ports it can call and canals it can traverse.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 6
==PAGE:16==
4. Design speed sdesign and bunker consumption at design speed F design
These numbers are used in the modelling when calculating the bunker consumption F(s)
as a function of speed s:
F(s) =

s
sdesign
3
· F design,
(3.1)
where the speed s is in knots, and the consumption F is in ton bunker/day.
5. Minimum and maximum speeds
These numbers, given in knots, place a lower and upper bound on the possible modelled
speed, respectively.
6. Consumption at idling
The fuel consumption when idling in a port, e.g., to run the reefer containers.
7. Canal fees
Only the two most important canals, the Suez and Panama canals, are included in the
modelling. LinerLib also provides the fees which vessels have to pay for using them. The
two largest classes are not able to enter the Panama Canal.
The bunker fuel cost is ﬁxed at $600/ton for all instances.
3.4
Regions
The set consists of 7 regions, from the smallest spanning the Baltic Sea to the largest encom-
passing all seven seas. For each region, three separate instances can be generated: low, base
and high. The low variant of the instances simulates conditions with excess capacity in the
market, and the opposite for the high variant. The variants can be generated by multiplying
the time charter costs and commodity demands by some given multipliers. For simplicity, only
the time charter costs and demands of the base variant will be used. The instances will be
written in small capitals, subject to the abbreviation.
Data on the regions are listed in Table 3.1. The numbers in the two last columns, Total vessel
capacity available in FFE and Total weekly demand in FFE, are only included to give
an overview of the size of the regions and not to be pairwise compared since the demands can
be several weeks underway.
The baltic and west africa instances are designed to model The Feeder Container Shipping
Network Design Problem, in which there is only a single hub. All commodities either originate
or terminate in that hub, meaning that there is no need for transshipments (Meng, S. Wang,
et al. 2014). The commodities of baltic are visualised in Figure 3.1, where it can be seen
that all 22 commodities only go between DEBRV and each of the other 11 ports in the instance.
The demands vary signiﬁcantly and are not necessarily symmetric. The arcs are colour coded
according to their proﬁtability, given as revenue per shortest sailing distance from the origin to
the destination ports. This graph only provides an overview of baltic and is not used further
in the modelling.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 7
==PAGE:17==
Table 3.1: The number of ports, commodities available for each instance in LinerLib
Instance
Name
# of
Ports
# of
Commodities
Share of
OD-pairs
Assigned
a Commodity
# Vessels
Available
for Each
Class
Total Vessel
Capacity
Available
in FFE
Total
Weekly
Demand
in FFE
baltic
12
22
16.7%
4 × class 1
2 × class 2
3,400
4,904
west africa (waf)
20
37
9.7%
14 × class 1
28 × class 2
28,700
8,541
mediterranean (med)
39
365
24.6%
8 × class 1
8 × class 2
4 × class 3
14,800
7,545
pacific
45
722
36.5%
12 × class 1
24 × class 2
22 × class 3
42 × class 4
151,800
44,180
worldsmall
47
1,764
81.6%
24 × class 1
29 × class 2
68 × class 3
74 × class 4
58 × class 5
10 × class 6
611,800
128,281
europeasia
114
4,000
31.1%
38 × class 1
22 × class 2
28 × class 3
25 × class 4
53 × class 5
10 × class 6
425,900
76,944
worldlarge
201
9,622
23.9%
38 × class 1
77 × class 2
124 × class 3
161 × class 4
91 × class 5
10 × class 6
1,071,100
138,914
3.5
Networks
A network consists of a set of services (rotations). Each service has the following features: (B.
Brouer et al. 2014)
1. Port Sequence (or route)
The order of the ports called by the service. An example could be: DEBRV-DKAAR. Note
that DEBRV-DKAAR and DKAAR-DEBRV are identical. The sequence should also state the
number of traversals of the Suez and Panama Canals, respectively.
2. Port Call Frequency
The headway of vessels belonging to the service calling a port in the sequence. In theory,
it can be any number of days, but mostly weekly, bi-weekly (every two weeks), or semi-
weekly (two times a week) are used in practice.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 8
==PAGE:18==
1120$/16days
790$/13days
1050$/14days
1250$/31days
1610$/20days
1040$/10days
760$/10days
2030$/30days
870$/12days
1130$/17days
880$/16days
1150$/20days
1130$/21days
1080$/13days
960$/9days
780$/11days
590$/22days
1150$/20days
1160$/11days
590$/10days
860$/29days
760$/7days
NOKRS
NOSVG
PLGDY
SEGOT
RUKGD
FIRAU
FIKTK
DEBRV
RULED
NOBGO
NOAES
DKAAR
Below 100 FFE per week
Between 100 and 400 FFE per week
Between 400 and 800 FFE per week
Between 800 and 1200 FFE per week
Between 1200 and 1500 FFE per week
Below 1 $ per nautical mile
Between 1 and 2 $ per nautical mile
Between 2 and 3 $ per nautical mile
Between 3 and 4 $ per nautical mile
Between 4 and 5 $ per nautical mile
Figure 3.1: This graph shows the commodities given in baltic with the ports given as nodes
whose locations are not geo-spatially correct. The thickness and colour of each arc denote the
expected demand volumes and proﬁtability of the commodities, respectively. The arcs also
contain the unit revenue and maximal transit time of each commodity.
3. Vessel Class
A service can only be assigned vessels of the same class to keep a consistent network.
4. Number of Vessels and/or Assigned Average Speed
The assigned average speeds of the vessels will decide the number of vessels needed to
cover the service. This only holds to some degree and vice-versa.
5. Schedule
A service may, in some cases, come with a schedule denoting the arrival and departure
times of each port call.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand 9
==PAGE:19==
The time the vessels spend in each port is set to 24 hours, irrespective of the number of
containers to be loaded or unloaded and the size of the vessels.
The LinerLib GitHub Library contains network solutions of all regions, except worldlarge,
for all the three variants, low, base and high (LINERLIB 2017 (last correction)). The weekly
frequency has solely been chosen for all the services in all the network solutions listed on
GitHub. For this reason and due to simplicity, the option to have other frequencies are excluded
in further modelling.
The graph in Figure 3.2 illustrates the network solution of the baltic instance in the base
variant. The solution consists of 3 services colour-coded in the Figure. E.g., service 1 (green)
deploys three vessels of class 1 on the sequence: DEBRV-RULED-FIKTK-DEBRV-RUKGD-PLGDY.
The service is a butterﬂy rotation as it visits a port twice (DEBRV). Note that the arcs in Figure
3.2 don’t represent vessels per se but rather weekly port calls made to ports at the tip of
the arcs. E.g., the arc from DEBRV to NOSVG indicates that every week a vessel of service 2
departs DEBRV heading towards NOSVG, and every week the same or another vessel of service 2
will call NOSVG. The capacities of the arcs are solely determined by the capacity of the vessel
class assigned to it and not the number of vessels deployed on the service (when the port call
frequency is weekly).
As one can see in Figure 3.2, 0.81 vessels are theoretically required to complete the sequence
of service 3, meaning that a vessel sailing at its minimum speed will make the DKAAR to DEBRV
round trip in less than a week. Nonetheless, in practice, only an integer number of vessels can
be deployed on the sequences, so this number is rounded up to 1, meaning that the vessel will
spend some additional time idling in DKAAR and/or DEBRV. It can also be seen in Figure 3.2
that some ports are not visited by the services, meaning that the commodities originating or
terminating at those ports will always be forfeited.
In Table 3.2, one can see information on the number of sequences in the existing network
solutions of the diﬀerent instances. The sequences are especially interesting as they will be
used to build new solutions in the further modelling. In the following, let baltic-base be the
name of an instance in the Baltic region using sequences from the base network solution, in
this case, three sequences. Likewise, let baltic-all be the name when all the sequences of the
Baltic networks are used, in this case, nine. The same notation is used for the other regions.
Table 3.2: The number of ports, commodities and sequences available for each region in
LinerLib. ∗Some sequences may be duplicated as networks for the respective low, base and
high instances may contain the same sequences.
Instance
Name
# of
Ports
# of
Commodities
# of Sequences in
Base Network Solution
# of Sequences
Available in Total∗
baltic
12
22
3
9
waf
20
37
8
25
med
39
365
7
19
pacific
45
722
17
49
worldsmall
47
1764
34
106
europeasia
114
4000
36
76
worldlarge
201
9622
N/A
N/A
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand10
==PAGE:20==
NOKRS
NOSVG
PLGDY
SEGOT
RUKGD
FIRAU
FIKTK
DEBRV
RULED
NOBGO
NOAES
DKAAR
Service 1: 3 x class 1
Service 2: 2 x class 2
Service 3: 1 (0.81) x class 1
Figure 3.2: Graph showing a network solution to the baltic base instance. The nodes are
the ports, and the arcs are the weekly port calls.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand11
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 4
Uncertain Commodity Demand in
Liner-Shipping
4.1
Sources
The commodities ultimately dictate the design of the network, as this is where the revenue
comes from. A vital input parameter of the commodities is their weekly demands, usually
estimated by some demand forecasting methods (Meng and T. Wang 2010). It can be diﬃcult
for the carrier to plan the operations, especially as the shippers can freely book capacity in
advance but then choose not to show with their cargo without being penalised (Meng and
T. Wang 2010). As a response to this, the carrier may overbook their vessels which in turn
incentivises the shippers to book more capacity than needed (B. Brouer et al. 2014) as they
will ultimately only pay for the number of transported containers (Meng and T. Wang 2010).
In the deterministic design problem, the demands are assumed to be constant in time, but
in reality, they are stochastic, either ﬂuctuating based on the season, e.g., Christmas and/or
ﬂuctuating from week to week, independent of time (Meng and T. Wang 2012). Peak seasons
like Christmas, with an exceedingly high demand of some commodities, are typically handled
by increasing the capacity of some of the services in the busiest weeks. E.g., by increasing
the speeds of the vessels or by allocating extra vessels to a service.
The ﬂuctuations can
be handled on a tactical level and are therefore out of scope for this thesis as this concerns
the strategic level.
In the LSNDP, the assumption of the demands being constant can, to
some extent, be justiﬁed by the possibility of being able to defer cargo to the next port call
with available capacity, as this will smooth out the demands seen over many weeks, in reality.
However, the deferments will likely delay the cargo, which will decrease the carrier’s reliability,
and this is not considered in the design problem with the expected demands. The LSNDP do
incur penalties on forfeited demand, i.e., demand that the carrier cannot meet, but this is to
secure the long-term interests of the carrier as lost demand may go to the competitors. The
penalties will, ceteris paribus, incentivise the model to create more extensive networks, which,
in the end, may also enable handling uncertain demand due to the added capacity, but this
is not modelled explicitly. Therefore, it’s essential to examine which eﬀect this assumption
of constant demands has on the performance of the network and how it compares to the
conventional deterministic approach. If the ﬂuctuations are all random, one could hope that if
the demand of one commodity goes down, it might go up for another one, and the ﬂuctuations
will cancel out on a larger scale. But it could also be that if the design problem were given a
set of scenarios of how the demands will turn out, its network solution could better handle this
uncertainty, compared to the deterministic design problem, which is only given one scenario
with the expected demands.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand12
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Modelling
In the following, two diﬀerent methods to take demand uncertainty into account when designing
the network are presented. For the two methods, the following is the same. The design of the
network is a here-and-now decision, meaning that the design has to be decided at the beginning
of the planning horizon and cannot be changed. As mentioned in Chapter 1, it’s deemed too
diﬃcult to solve the LSNDP when stochasticity is also added why an extension of the FDP
is considered in further modelling instead.
Recourse decisions can then be taken after the
uncertainty has been revealed at some later stage in the model, and these decisions will be on
the ﬂow of containers in the network, given the realised demands.
4.2.1
Adjustable Robust Optimisation
One approach to solving the design problem with stochastic demands would be to create a
robust optimisation model to ﬁnd the network solution under the worst possible realisation of
the uncertain demand. The input for such a model would be a deﬁned interval [dlow
k
, dhigh
k
]
for each commodity k, describing how low and high, respectively, the demand can realise in
the extreme case. The robust optimisation model would then ﬁnd a solution which will be
feasible for all possible realisations of the demands using, e.g., the box-uncertainty sets. For
the recourse decisions, a linear decision rule would be used to decide on the ﬂows of containers.
In general, robust optimisation yields very conservative solutions as all the commodities will
likely not take on their highest or lowest values. To handle this, a budget of uncertainty could
be implemented, which limits the number of commodities taking on their worst possible value.
This may give unrealistic scenarios, with some commodities having very high or low demand
while others just have their mean demand, which is given as the midpoint of the interval.
Nonetheless, this will require the demand distribution to be symmetric around its mean and
is not very ﬂexible for demand modelling. Moreover, the linear decision rules will likely create
a lot of additional constraints and variables that could make the ﬁnal model computationally
intractable. For these reasons, this approach is not chosen.
4.2.2
Stochastic Programming
In Stochastic Programming, the uncertainty is approximated by a set of discrete scenarios
containing the possible future outcomes of the uncertain input parameters, in this case, the
demands of the commodities. In reality, the uncertainty space is inﬁnite, but this is impossible
to capture in the stochastic programming framework. The scenarios are a discretized approx-
imation of the uncertainty. The more scenarios, the closer the set will resemble the uncertain
future. The model decides the network in the ﬁrst stage, and the ﬂow of containers is decided
in the later stages, which will be the recourse decisions. Stochastic programming is suitable
for the LSNDP with uncertain demand as it gives a lot of ﬂexibility for creating the scenario
set, much more than is possible with robust optimisation. Figure 4.1 shows the concept of
a stochastic programming model with 3 scenarios. In the ﬁrst-stage decision, the network is
designed by taking all the possible scenarios into account. In the second stage, the demand
is realised, and the ﬂow of the containers is decided based on the ﬁrst-stage decision. Each
scenario has a predeﬁned probability of occurring, and the objective function concerning the
ﬂow is weighted by these probabilities.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand13
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: The general stochastic programming framework. In this case, there are three
scenarios, low, medium and high demand
There are multiple ways to model the recourse decisions when the network has been decided
in the ﬁrst stage. Two of them will brieﬂy be presented below.
An obvious choice is to model the ﬂow as a Multi-Commodity Flow Problem (MCFP), also done
in the LSNDP. Multi-Commodity Flow Problems either concern the transportation of distinct
physical goods in a network and/or goods with ﬁxed origins and destinations (Ahuja, Magnanti,
and Orlin 2014). In Liner-shipping, the last case is applicable as the origins and destinations
of the commodities cannot be changed.
The MCFP is computationally tractable for large
networks as all the variables are linear if the ﬂow can assume linearity, and the demands can
be split across multiple paths in the graph. Moreover, the problem can be path-ﬂow formulated
and solved with column generation, enabling it to potentially solve larger instances and include
maximum transit times constraints as done in Karsten et al. 2015.
In Chapter 3.5, the graph of the network solution for baltic base was shown (3.2), and it
was explained that the arcs in the graph represented the ports being called for every week
by the incoming vessels. The decision variables of the MCFP are xka, which is the amount
of commodity k using arc a.
This means that some fraction of the capacity of the vessel
calling the port is reserved to commodity k for every week going forward, thus creating a static
solution which has the same ﬂow every week, also implying that the demand of commodity k is
constant from week to week. This is very convenient as it eliminates the time dimension in the
modelling and is very suitable for the deterministic LSNDP as it assumes constant demands,
but it also means that demands cannot be deferred to the next week; they can only be satisﬁed
or forfeited.
Nonetheless, one would need a time-space model if the demands should be modelled to ﬂuctuate
from week to week, as it would be necessary to keep track of all ﬂows on all arcs in all weeks.
As described in Chapter 2, Meng and T. Wang 2012 presented a two-level stochastic approach
which would deploy the vessels in the ﬁrst stage and ﬂow the cargo in the subsequent stages
for some given time horizon. A sequential approach like this allows for deferments of demand
which is not possible with the formulation of the MCFP, and also potential seasonal changes
in the demands. Each ﬂow decision is myopic, meaning it would only take the current realised
demands, as well as the design decisions and past ﬂow decisions, into account. This approach
could be changed to be farsighted by including some sub-stages m in each stage where the
ﬂow consideration takes the forecasted demands in the next m periods into account. In the
modelling, the forecast of the demands for the next period could be very certain, and then the
certainty could decrease when looking into the future. The objective function of the model
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand14
==PAGE:24==
will then take all this knowledge into account when deciding on the ﬂow in the current period.
This process would then be repeated for each period, simulating a rolling horizon. However,
the ﬂexibility and realistic nature of the sequential approach also come with the inherent
disadvantage of having to generate many scenarios for all the outcomes. E.g., consider a small
proposed example in Figure 4.2, looking m = 4 periods into the future. The network is decided
in the ﬁrst stage, and in the subsequent stages, the ﬂow is decided. From the current period to
the next, there are only a few possible scenarios (in this case, 2), signifying the high certainty
of the demands, whereas the number of possibilities increases when looking into the future,
going from 2 to 3 to 4 scenarios. The proposed structure quickly results in many scenarios,
all of which a ﬂow problem has to be solved. After the ﬂow has been decided in the current
period, the whole process is repeated for the next period until some stopping criterion.
Figure 4.2: A proposal of the scenario structure of a sequential stochastic optimisation
approach
The sequential approach with multiple stages is not considered as it’s deemed too diﬃcult to
solve for large instances. It can bring a high level of detail into the modelling, e.g., deferments,
seasonal changes, and dependence between scenarios, but this is not deemed necessary on the
strategic planning level compared to the added complexity. Instead, the uncertain demands are
modelled by generating a set of scenarios, each having constant demands of the commodities,
resulting in a series of MCF problems to be solved. The approximation may not be true when
looking at the demands from week to week, as they are still assumed to be constant, but
in the large picture, the chosen network will nonetheless be tested on several realisations of
the demands, which makes a good tradeoﬀbetween computational tractability and a realistic
model. Ideally, both approaches should be developed so that this approximating approach can
be compared to the more realistic multi-level sequential model.
A sketch of this multi-MCFP is shown in Figure 4.3 with three scenarios and three commodities.
E.g., in scenario 1, the commodities take some arbitrary demands of 15, 40 and 110 FFE, and
they will have these demands for the rest of the planning period. Each scenario boils down
to the MCFP, which can easily be solved. The demands of the commodities do vary across
scenarios but not within a single scenario. In Figure 4.3, commodity 1 has the realised demands
of 15, 8, and 12 FFE across the three scenarios, respectively.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand15
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.3: Figure showing a two-stage stochastic program with three scenarios, each having
constant demands for all weeks going forward
4.2.3
Probability Distribution of Demands
The stochasticity of the demand for each commodity k has to be modelled to generate the
scenarios for the stochastic program. As described in Chapter 4.2.2, the demands are modelled
to be constant in time and not ﬂuctuating from week to week but somewhat ﬂuctuating from
scenario to scenario.
Several probability distributions could be candidates for approximating the stochastic demands.
According to the assumptions in the model, continuous numbers of containers can be modelled,
which means that, in theory, both discrete and continuous distributions could be used for the
modelling. On the other hand, negative demands are not possible in reality, which results in
only probability distribution functions with non-negative support being considered. Functions
with negative support could also work if potential negative simulated demands are set to zero,
e.g., the rectiﬁed normal distribution. However, this can be problematic for commodities with
a very low expected demand as it may overestimate the demands too much since zeros replace
the negative demands.
Meng and T. Wang 2010 models the demands to be normally distributed, and the normal and
Poisson distributions are also typically used to model demand distributions, especially when
unmet demand is back-ordered (Agrawal and Smith 1996).
In the liner-shipping business,
unmet demand is back-ordered to some extent, as the containers will be deferred until the next
port call with available capacity. However, as described in Chapter 4.2.2, the MCFP doesn’t
allow deferments, only forfeitures, meaning that unmet demand is lost.
In the article by
Agrawal and Smith 1996, the negative binomial distribution provides a better ﬁt to aggregated
sales data of a major retailing chain, where unmet demand is lost compared to the normal and
Poisson distributions. The data samples and the ﬁts of the three distribution functions can be
seen in Figure 4.4.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand16
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.4: Figure taken from the paper: Estimating negative binomial demand for retail
inventory management Agrawal and Smith 1996
The Poisson distribution would underestimate the demand in the right tail and is too inﬂexible
as the variance has to equal the mean.
In contrast, the variance of the negative binomial
distribution can be chosen more freely. The normal distribution will signiﬁcantly underestimate
the demand in the left tail and shifts its mode to the right.
Only the negative binomial
distribution seems to ﬁt the data samples well. Moreover, the demand proﬁle of the retail
sector assumes to resemble the demand proﬁle of the commodities in a container network to
a reasonable extent due to an overlap of the products being shipped. For these reasons, the
negative binomial distribution function will be used to model the demands of the individual
commodities.
The negative binomial distribution is parameterised with two parameters, r and p. The distri-
bution models the number of failures at the rth success in a sequence of independent Bernoulli
trials, where p is the probability of success and 1 −p is the probability of failure. Its support
is non-negative and discrete, and the shape is skewed towards the right. A random variable X
of this distribution has its mean λ and variance σ2 given as:
λ = r · (1 −p)
p
(4.1)
σ2 = r · (1 −p)
p2
(4.2)
The mean of the distribution is, in this case, the expected demand qk of commodity k, which
means that r can be determined if p is chosen.
λ = qk
(4.3)
qk = r · (1 −p)
p
⇒r = qk · p
1 −p
(4.4)
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand17
==PAGE:27==
The variance σ2 will then be:
σ2 = r · (1 −p)
p2
⇒σ2 = 1
p · qk
(4.5)
The probability p can only assume values on the unit interval. This means that the lowest
variance of a commodity is its expected demand qk, while there is no limit for higher variances.
If the probability p is set to 1, then r is not deﬁned, so p can only go to values close to 1.
Equation (4.5) states the variance of the distribution as a function of the probability p and the
expected demand qk. This suggests that the variance should change depending on the expected
demands of the commodities. Commodities with a high qk will have a higher variance than those
with a low qk if the same probability p is to be used for all commodities. This will be the case
as it simpliﬁes the scenario generation. If the variance should be the same for all commodities,
then the commodity with the highest demand would decide the variance for all commodities,
which would be too inﬂexible. It makes more sense to let the variances of the commodities scale
individually as a function of their expected demands. In the testing, the following probabilities
will be used: p ∈{0.99, 0.5, 0.25, 0.1}, resulting in variances corresponding to approximately 1,
2, 4 and 10 times the demand of the commodities, respectively.
4.2.4
Correlation of Commodities
In Chapter 4.2.3, a way to model the demand of each commodity based on its expected demand
qk and a chosen variance σ2 was proposed. However, the scenario modelling should also take
the correlation of commodities into account. Logically, if a country has low export of goods in
a given scenario, it could also be the case for all other commodities leaving the country in the
same scenario, thus meaning that all these commodities could be correlated to some degree.
The multivariate log-normal distribution could be a candidate since it’s possible to specify
individual correlation factors between any pair of commodities depending on their similarity,
and its support is non-negative.
Another approach to model this dependence structure is to use a multi-dimensional copula
which can combine diﬀerent types of probability distributions F while also allowing the com-
modities to be pairwise correlated with some speciﬁed correlation factors given the in the
correlation matrix S. Using a copula, some commodities can ultimately follow a gamma dis-
tribution, while others can follow a uniform distribution while still being correlated. This is a
very attractive feature in the modelling as the commodities might follow diﬀerent distributions
as they contain diﬀerent types of goods.
A copula C is a joint distribution function where the marginal distribution functions are uni-
formly distributed on the unit interval. The output of the copula is then used with the chosen
probability distributions F of the commodities to simulate the demands. Diﬀerent types of
copulas exist, e.g., the Gumbel, Clayton, Frank, and Gaussian copulas. The latter is the most
widely used copula, and it’s also used in this case. The following explanation is loosely based
on chapter 6: The Multivariate Normal Distribution and Copulas from the book Simulation
(Ross 2013).
The Gaussian copula is the joint distribution of Φ(U 1), Φ(U 2), ..., Φ(U n), where Φ is the stan-
dard normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 1, this is where the name of the copula is
derived since the normal distribution is also known as the Gaussian distribution. The vector
U consists of n variables which follow a multivariate normal distribution with mean vector
0 and a covariance matrix with only 1’s in the diagonal. This means that the distribution of
Φ(U i)∀i ∈{1, 2, .., n} is uniform on the unit interval, thus making this joint distribution a cop-
ula. Let the vector D represent the stochastic demands of n commodities pairwise correlated
with some correlation factor ρij for commodities i and j. Now U has to be chosen so both the
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand18
==PAGE:28==
distribution of Φ(U) is uniform on (0,1), and so Cov(U i, U j) = Cov(Di, Dj) = ρij ∀(i, j) ∈
{1, 2, .., n}.
Let an arbitrary vector X ∈RN be stochastic and with ﬁnite variance σ2(X) = Σ ∈RN×N,
where Σ is the covariance matrix. Let matrix A ∈RM×N. The variance of the matrix-vector
product is then:
σ2(AX) = AΣA⊤∈RM×M
(4.6)
Now we let a vector Y follow the multivariate standard normal distribution and be IID:
Y ∼N(0, I),
(4.7)
where I is the identity matrix. The variance of the product of A and Y is:
σ2(AY ) = AIA⊤= AA⊤∈RM×M,
(4.8)
since the identity matrix cancels out, this means that Y can be transformed, so it will have the
covariance matrix as X if Y is multiplied with some matrix A given AA⊤= Σ. The Cholesky
decomposition can be used to obtain the matrix A from covariance matrix Σ given that the Σ is
symmetric and positive deﬁnite. The correlation matrix S can directly be used as the covariance
matrix Σ since it will be symmetric and positive deﬁnite or close to positive deﬁnite due to
numerical issues. If it’s not positive deﬁnite, positive eigenvalues can be ensured by simply
rectifying non-positive eigenvalues of S to a small positive number ϵ and then recreating S
with its eigenvectors and rectiﬁed eigenvalues. This rectiﬁed correlation matrix is denoted Sr.
Now vector U can be constructed. n numbers are drawn independently from the standard
normal distribution Φ:
Y = Y 1, Y 2, ..., Y n,
where Y ∼N(0, I). The correlation matrix Sr is decomposed into A and A⊤:
Sr = AA⊤
(4.9)
(4.10)
Matrix A is multiplied onto Y which results in its covariance to be Sr:
AY ∼N(0, Sr)
(4.11)
(4.12)
The last step is to project the vector AY onto the unit interval which gives the vector U:
U = Φ−1(AY )
(4.13)
Figure 4.5 shows the joint and marginal distributions of two variables U 1 and U 2 which have
been constructed using the approach described. There are 10,000 samples, and the correlation
factor is ρ12 = 0.9. As can be seen, the marginal distributions are uniform on (0,1), while the
joint distribution is correlated. Figure 4.6 shows the same as Figure 4.5 but just for U 1 and
another variable U 3, where the correlation factor is ρ13 = 0.0.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand19
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.5: Corner Plot of 10,000 samples showing the joint and marginal distributions of U 1
and U 2
Figure 4.6: Corner Plot of 10,000 samples showing the joint and marginal distributions of U 1
and U 3
Finally the variable U k can be used to simulate the demand of the commodity k with inverse
of its marginal distribution F:
Dk = F −1
k (U k)
(4.14)
An example of simulated demands of three commodities are shown.
Let commodities 1, 2, and 3 have the expected demands:
q1 = 10
(4.15)
q2 = 50
(4.16)
q3 = 100,
(4.17)
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand20
==PAGE:30==
let them be correlated with the following correlation matrix:
S =


1
0.9
0
0.9
1
0.5
0
0.5
1

,
(4.18)
and let them all follow a negative binomial distribution parameterised with a probability equal
to 0.5, resulting in the variance equalling two times their expected demands:
σ2(D1) = 1
0.5 · q1 = 2 · q1
(4.19)
σ2(D2) = 1
0.5 · q2 = 2 · q2
(4.20)
σ2(D3) = 1
0.5 · q3 = 2 · q3
(4.21)
Figures 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9 depict the resulting corner plots made with the approach described.
Figure 4.7: Corner Plot of the sampled demands for commodities 1 and 2. The dashed lines
show the expected demands of the commodities
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand21
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.8: Corner Plot of the sampled demands for commodities 1 and 3. The dashed lines
show the expected demands of the commodities
The next question is to determine the correlation factors in S. A simple approach would be to
let all the commodities correlate by the same value: ρij = ρ ∀(i, j). This would give a simple
way to test the sensitivity of the model by changing the value of ρ.
However, this approach could overestimate the correlation of very diﬀerent commodities and
likewise underestimate similar commodities.
Two commodities with the same origin ports
and destination ports close to each other will correlate more than commodities originating
and terminating in diﬀerent places, ceteris paribus. An example of two similar commodities
could be (Shanghai-Rotterdam) and (Shanghai-Hamburg), since the two commodities prob-
ably contain similar goods and originate in the same port. Contrary, the two commodities
(Shanghai-Rotterdam) and (Algeciras-Los Angeles) would have a low correlation as they orig-
inate in diﬀerent continents and will likely transport other goods. The correlation factor of a
given commodity-pair could be based on the ports, countries, regions and continents for both
the origins and destinations of the two commodities. This can be shown in Table 4.1 showing
proposed correlation factors of all combinations of commodity pairs. Commodities with the
same origin and destination ports are not necessarily identical commodities, as multiple com-
modities of the same OD-pair can co-exist, as explained in Chapter 3.2, and they could have
a correlation lower than 1. However, in the instances tested, there is at most one commodity
for each OD-pair, so this entry of the matrix is simply set to 1, which ensures that the Φ(Ui)
is uniform on (0,1) ∀i.
Looking at the ﬁrst column in Table 4.1, commodities originating in the same port will, accord-
ing to the matrix, have higher correlations compared to commodities destined at the same port,
which are given in the ﬁrst row. The assumption is that the destination ports don’t inﬂuence
the ﬂuctuations as much as the origin ports. Commodities with the same origin countries but
diﬀerent ports (entry: [1,2]) may even have a negative correlation as an increase in the demand
from one port a may result from a decrease in the other port b. This could be if there is port
congestion in port b, e.g., due to a strike. In Table 4.1, no negative values are proposed, but
entry (1,2) is set to a lower value of 0.15, compared to the other nearby values, due to this
eﬀect. According to the table, Commodities with diﬀerent origin continents and destination
continents will have a slight positive correlation factor as all commodities are inﬂuenced glob-
ally by the world economy. It should be noted that this way of determining the correlation
factors is only based on intuition and hasn’t been empirically supported, as access to historical
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand22
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.9: Corner Plot of the sampled demands for commodities 2 and 3. The dashed lines
show the expected demands of the commodities
demand data has been very limited. Many other factors inﬂuence the correlation between the
commodities than the origin and destination ports. This can serve as a realistic foundation for
the modelling, but its result will ultimately have to be supported by data if used.
The sensitivity of the correlation between commodities can be evaluated by scaling the values
of the proposed correlation matrix with some ρscale, of course, bounded by the interval [−1, 1].
Table 4.1: This matrix shows how all pair of commodities can be grouped, and what their
corresponding correlation factors could be.
Destination
Origin
Same ports
Same countries,
but diﬀerent ports
Same regions,
but diﬀerent
countries
Same continents,
but diﬀerent
regions
Diﬀerent
continents
Same ports
1
0.15
0.2
0.175
0.15
Same countries,
but diﬀerent
ports
0.8
0.2
0.175
0.15
0.15
Same regions,
but diﬀerent
countries
0.7
0.175
0.15
0.15
0.125
Same continents,
but diﬀerent
regions
0.6
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.125
Diﬀerent
continents
0.5
0.15
0.15
0.125
0.1
4.2.5
Scenario Generation and Reduction
The scenario set can be generated by using the approach presented in Chapter 4.2.4 with the
following input data: 1. some expected demands, 2. a probability p, 3. a correlation matrix
S, and 4. a correlation scaling factor ρscale. For S, the matrix in Table 4.1 will be used.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand23
==PAGE:33==
It may be necessary to reduce the number of scenarios generated as a large scenario set given
as input to the model can increase the running times signiﬁcantly due to the added size, shown
in Table 3.2. Clustering with k-means can be an eﬀective method used for scenario reduction.
A number m is given as input to the clustering algorithm, which determines m clusters, which
can be seen as new scenarios. The algorithm also determines how many scenarios are assigned
to each cluster, and the scenario probabilities can be computed from this. In the end, the
reduced scenario set represents the variation of the demands to the same extent as the original
scenario set, but due to the smaller size, the resulting model becomes much easier to solve. In
the remainder, let a clustered set of scenarios be a set of scenarios that have been reduced from
a larger set, while a unclustered set hasn’t been reduced.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand24
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5
Mathematical Formulation
5.1
Determining Network Costs
As explained in Chapter 1, the deterministic LSNDP is strongly NP-hard when the selection of
sequences is unrestricted. For this reason, the Fleet Deployment Problem (FDP) is to be solved
in the ﬁrst stage instead, as this will limit the solution space drastically, which will let the
model solve potentially larger instances. The main objective of FDP is to allocate a subset of
the available vessels on a subset of the predeﬁned sequences while minimising the ﬁxed network
costs and maximising the expected revenues under uncertainty. Typically in the literature, the
number of vessels for a given sequence is predetermined, but to allow a larger solution space,
the model will consider all possible numbers of vessels which can be deployed on each sequence.
However, this requires additional prior computation, which will be explained in the following:
Let B be the set of predeﬁned sequences from the network solution of the baltic-base shown
in Chapter 3.5.
B = {RULED-FIKTK-DEBRV-RUKGD-PLGDY-DEBRV,
DEBRV-RULED-DEBRV-NOSVG-SEGOT,
DKAAR-DEBRV},
and let b ∈B.
Let Cb be the set of vessel classes that can be deployed on sequence b. A vessel class cannot be
deployed on a sequence if it draws more than the maximum draft lb allowed in any ports visited
or canals traversed in the sequence. The maximum draft of the sequence b can be determined
as:
lb = min{min
p∈b {lp}, (1 −αPan
b
) · max
p∈b {lp} + lPan},
(5.1)
where lp is the maximum draft of port p, lPan is the maximum draft of the Panama Canal, and
αPan
b
is a binary indicator equal to 1 if the Panama Canal is in the sequence b, zero otherwise.
Consider sequence 2 of B, its maximum allowed draft is l2 = 11m. According to the data
in Table 5.1, the two vessels classes 1 and 2, available in baltic-base, can be deployed on
sequence 2.
Hereafter, the number of vessels that can be deployed on a sequence b has to be determined, and
this depends on several factors: speed, distance of sequence, and number of ports in sequence.
The linear number of vessels nlin
b
and the required integer number of vessels nint
b
on sequence
b as a function of speed s are given as:
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand25
==PAGE:35==
Table 5.1: Needed data of the vessel classes to determine which classes and how many vessels
can be deployed on a sequence
Class #
1
2
Capacity in FFE
450 FFE
800 FEE
Number available in baltic
4
2
Draft
8 meter
9.5 meter
Min speed
10 knots
10 knots
Max speed
14 knots
17 knots
Design speed
12 knots
14 knots
Bunker consumption at design speed
18.8 ton/day
23.7 ton/day
Time charter costs per week
$35,000
$56,000
nlin
b (s) =

db
7·s + tp · np
b

7
(5.2)
nint
b (s) =
l
nlin
b (s)
m
,
(5.3)
where db is the distance of sequence, tp is idling time in port p, and np
b is the number of ports
in sequence b. The idling time is set to 1 day for all ports.
The weekly costs of deploying vessels of class c on sequence b as a function of speed s is denoted
cs
bc(s). This quantity has many cost components: bunker cost (sailing and idling), port call
costs, time charter costs and potential canal costs. It can be computed:
cs
bc(s) = cbunker ·

s
sdesign
3
· F design · db
7 · s
|
{z
}
Bunker fuel costs, sailing
+ cbunker · F idle ·

np
b · tport + 7 · (nint
b (s) −nlin
b (s))

|
{z
}
Bunker fuel costs, idling
+
X
p∈b

cpc,fixed
p
+ cpc,var
p
· pc

|
{z
}
Port call costs, ﬁxed and variable
+ nSuez
b
· cSuez
c
+ nPanama
b
· cPanama
c
|
{z
}
Canal costs, Suez and Panama
+
ctc
c · nint
b (s)
|
{z
}
Time charter costs
,
(5.4)
where cbunker is the bunker cost, cpc,fixed
p
and cpc,var
p
are the ﬁxed and variable port call costs of
port p, respectively. pc is the capacity in FFE of vessel class c, nx
b is the number of traversals
of canal x of sequence b, and cx
c is the cost of vessel class c using canal x. Finally, ctc
c are the
weekly time charter costs of vessel class c.
Figures 5.1 and 5.2 show the quantities from Equations (5.2), (5.3) and (5.4) as a function of
speed s for vessel classes 1 and 2, respectively, on sequence 2. It can be noted that a constant
3 vessels of class 1 are needed across the entire speed range of class 1. The lowest weekly costs
are $200,000, approximately. Vessel class 2 has a more extensive range of speed, and when
the vessels go beyond 15.5 knots on sequence 2, only two vessels are required to maintain this
service which can be seen in the decline in the integer number of vessels in Figure 5.2.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand26
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: The total costs and the required number of vessels as a function of speed for vessel
class 1 for sequence 2 in the Baltic instance network solution.
Figure 5.2: The total costs and the required number of vessels as a function of speed for vessel
class 2 for sequence 2 in the Baltic instance network solution.
However, the transit times of the cargo are not considered in the formulation, so there will
not be a reason to model the speeds of the vessels, as there is no need to go faster if the
integer number of vessels is the same. E.g., if vessels of class 1 are deployed on sequence 2,
they should only go at the lowest speed of 10 knots. The model will not achieve anything by
letting them sail faster. Only the diﬀerent possible integer numbers of vessels are necessary for
the formulation. Therefore, let Qbc be the set of the number of vessels of class c that can be
deployed on sequence b. E.g. for vessel class 2 on sequence 2, both 2 and 3 vessels are in that
set, according to Figure 5.2.
Q22 = {2, 3},
while only three vessels of class 1 can be deployed on sequence 2:
Q21 = {3}
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand27
==PAGE:37==
Finally, let cs
bcn be the ﬁxed costs of allocating n vessels of class c on sequence b. These costs
can be calculated prior to the optimisation.
5.2
Appropriate Graph Structure
A graph G with a set of arcs A and a set of nodes N will be needed in the mathematical
formulation in (5.5), and the chosen structure will be explained in the following. Obviously,
the nodes are the ports of the instance, as also shown in the baltic network solution in Figure
3.2. The arcs can be represented by the predeﬁned set of sequences B, in which each sequence
b deﬁnes the number of arcs as there are ports in b.
Consider a small instance I with only 4 ports, and let B be a set of two sequences for I:
B = {DEBRV-NOSVG-DKAAR,
DEBRV-DKAAR-SEGOT
The corresponding graph G for I with the set B is shown in Figure 5.3. Cargo going from,
e.g., NOSVG to SEGOT will need to be transshipped in either DKAAR or DEBRV, but the structure
doesn’t allow to impose the transshipment costs on any of the arcs in G as this will also aﬀect
cargo which is not transshipped. One way to allow this is to extend the graph to accommodate
these transshipment costs as done in Karsten et al. 2015. The extended graph can be seen in
Figure 5.4. For each port p, a number of new sequence nodes are added to G corresponding
to the number of visits to p. They are labelled with the port code and the sequence number
visiting the port. E.g., DEBRV has two visits, so two new nodes are added with the labels: DEBRV
Seq.1 and DEBRV Seq.2. Load arcs are then added between each port node and its associated
sequence nodes on which the load costs of the port can be added.
For ports with multiple sequence nodes, new transshipment arcs will pairwise connect these,
on which the transshipment costs can be imposed. Transshipping cargo can use these arcs to
move from one sequence to another and correctly pay the transshipment costs unless the load
cost of a port p is two times or more than the transshipment cost of p, in which case the cargo
will use the load arcs instead. This is the case in very few ports, and in these cases, additional
ﬂow constraints are included in the modelling preventing this ﬂow.
Figure 5.4 shows the example instance i with the added sequences nodes and load and trans-
shipment arcs. This graph structure is referred to as the complete transshipment structure.
Figure 5.3: Example graph of four ports and two predeﬁned sequences.
The number of transshipment arcs of a single port p increases with O(n2), where n is the
number of times p is visited by the sequences. Consequently, the graph structure around hub
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand28
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.4: Example graph which has been extended to account for transshipments
ports can easily be congested with arcs as they will typically have many visits. An example
of such a port is DEBRV from the network solution of the baltic instance (Figure 3.2). Figure
5.5 shows how the extended transshipment structure would look just for DEBRV where the load
arcs have been omitted. In this network, DEBRV are visited by all three sequences, but two
of them visit the port twice, totalling ﬁve visits. This simple transhipment structure needs
5(5 −1) = 20 transshipment arcs.
Figure 5.5: Graph focusing on the Bremerhaven port of the Baltic network solution. The
green, red and blue arcs correspond to sequences 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The 20 grey arcs
are transshipment arcs. Load arcs are omitted.
Fortunately, the star transshipment structure can be implemented when the number of visits
exceeds 3. This structure adds an auxiliary transshipment node to which all the sequence nodes
can be linked. At the expense of this additional node, the number of transshipment arcs now
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand29
==PAGE:39==
only scales by O(n). The eﬀect can be seen in Figure 5.6 where the number of transshipment
arcs has been reduced to only 10 compared to 20 arcs with the complete structure. For this
reason, this structure will be used when the number of visits is above 3, like in this situation.
Otherwise, the complete structure will be used.
Figure 5.6: Graph focusing on the Bremerhaven port of the Baltic network solution. The
green, red and blue arcs correspond to sequences 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The grey arcs are
transshipment arcs. An auxiliary node has been added in the middle, reducing the number of
transshipment arcs to 10. Load arcs are omitted.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand30
==PAGE:40==
5.3
The Stochastic MIP-Model
The two-stage stochastic programming model of the restricted design problem is a mixed integer
program formulated in the following:
Sets
S = {s1, s2, ..., s|S|} :
Scenarios
K = {k1, k2, ..., k|K|} :
Commodities
B = {b1, b2, ..., b|B|} :
Sequences
C = {c1, c2, ..., c|C|} :
Vessel classes
Cb ⊆C :
Vessel classes applicable to sequence b
Q = {q1, q2, ..., max
q∈Q {q}} :
Number of vessels
Qbc ⊆Q :
Number of vessels of class c applicable to sequence b
P = {p1, p2, ..., p|P |} :
Ports
Pl ⊆P :
Ports where the load costs are more than two times lower
than the transshipment costs
N = {i1, i2, ..., n|N|} :
Nodes
A = {a1, a2, ..., a|A|} :
Arcs
As ⊆A :
Sailing arcs
Al ⊂A :
Load arcs
At ⊂A :
Transshipment arcs
Variables
First Stage:
ybcn =
(
1
if sequence b are assigned n vessels of vessel class c
0
otherwise
Second Stage:
xt
ska ∈R≥0 :
Number of containers of commodity k in scenario s reserved on arc a
xf
sk ∈R≥0 :
Number of forfeited containers of commodity k in scenario s
Parameters
rk ∈R≥0 :
Revenue of transporting 1 FFE of commodity k.
Excludes loading and unloading costs
cf
k ∈R≥0 :
Cost of forfeiting 1 FEE of commodity k
cl
a ∈R≥0 :
Cost of using loading arc a for 1 FFE
ct
a ∈R≥0 :
Cost of using transshipment arc a for 1 FFE
dsk ∈R≥0 :
Demand of commodity k in scenario s in FFE
πs ∈R≥0 :
Probability of scenario s
qc ∈N :
Number of vessels available of class c
cs
bcn ∈R≥0 :
The ﬁxed cost if n vessels of class c are assigned to sequence b
pc ∈R≥0 :
The capacity in FFE of vessel class c
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand31
==PAGE:41==
Functions
δo(k)
The origin node of commodity k
δd(k)
The destination node of commodity k
δa(a, b)
1 if sequence b contains arc a, 0 otherwise
δ+(j)
The set of arcs leaving node j
δ−(j)
The set of arcs entering node j
δp(p)
The port node of port p
δk(p)
The set of commodities originating or terminating at port p
Restricted Network Design Problem with Stochastic Demands
Maximise
−
X
b∈B
X
c∈Cb
X
n∈Qbc
cs
bcn · ybcn
|
{z
}
Fixed network costs
+
X
s∈S
X
k∈K
πs · rk ·
X
a∈δ−(δd(k))
xt
ska
|
{z
}
Revenues
−
X
s∈S
X
k∈K
πs · cf
k · xf
sk
|
{z
}
Forfeiture costs
−
X
s∈S
X
k∈K
X
a∈Al
πs · cl
a · xt
ska
|
{z
}
Load costs
−
X
s∈S
X
k∈K
X
a∈At
πs · ct
a · xt
ska
|
{z
}
Transshipment costs
(5.5)
Subject to:
X
k∈K
xt
ska ≤
X
b∈B
X
c∈Cb
X
n∈Qbc
pc · δa(a, b) · ybcn
|
{z
}
Arc-wise Capacity Allocation
∀s ∈S, a ∈A
(5.6)
X
a∈δ+(i)
xt
ska =
X
a∈δ−(i)
xt
ska
∀s ∈S, k ∈K, i ∈N | i /∈{δo(k), δd(k)}
(5.7)
X
a∈δ+(δd(k))
xt
ska = 0
∀s ∈S, k ∈K
(5.8)
X
c∈Cb
X
n∈Qbc
ybcn ≤1
∀b ∈B
(5.9)
X
b∈B
X
n∈Qbc
n · ybcn ≤qc
∀c ∈C
(5.10)
X
a∈δ−(δd(k))
(xt
ska) + xf
sk = dsk
∀s ∈S, k ∈K
(5.11)
xf
sk ≥0
∀s ∈S, k ∈K
(5.12)
xt
ska ≥0
∀s ∈S, k ∈K, a ∈A
(5.13)
ybcn ∈{0, 1}
∀b ∈B, c ∈Cb, n ∈Qbc
(5.14)
The objective function (5.5) minimises the ﬁxed costs of the vessel allocation while maximising the
revenues, and minimising the forfeiture, loading and transshipment costs.
Constraints (5.6) adjust the capacities for each arc on the RHS according to the allocated vessel classes
onto the sequences while limiting the number of containers that can be sent on each arc on the LHS.
Only this set of constraints binds the ﬁrst and second-stage variables.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand32
==PAGE:42==
Constraints (5.7) ensure that cargo entering a node must leave again unless the node is either the origin
or destination of the cargo.
Constraints (5.8) ensure that cargo cannot originate from its destination node, and thus it can only
originate from its origin node.
Constraints (5.9) ensure that at most one vessel class and one distinct number of vessels can be deployed
on a sequence. The inequality means that not necessarily all sequences have to be assigned vessels.
Constraints (5.10) ensure that the model doesn’t allocate more vessels than are available in each class.
Constraints (5.11) ensure that the demand in each scenario for each commodity is either satisﬁed or
forfeited.
Finally, the constraints (5.12), (5.13), (5.14) are the domain constraints of the variables.
5.4
Model Size
With this arc-ﬂow formulation, the number of variables increases rapidly when the instances become
large, as there must be variables for all combinations of scenarios, commodities, and arcs. Likewise, the
number of constraints also scales rapidly with instance size, especially the ﬂow conservation constraints,
which must be deﬁned for all combinations of scenarios, commodities and nodes. Model sizes for all the
base instances can be seen in Table 5.2. Fortunately, the number of binary variables scales modestly
with instance size.
Table 5.2: Table showing the sizes of the stochastic VAP arc-ﬂow formulation models in
various instances
Instance
name
# of
ports
# of
commodities
# of
sequences
# of
binary variables
# of
linear variables
# of
constraints
baltic-base
12
22
3
7
1,408 · |S|
761 ·|S|
waf-base
20
37
8
36
6,401 · |S|
2,626 ·|S|
med-base
39
365
7
24
9.6 · 104 · |S|
4.6 · 105 · |S|
pacific-base
45
722
17
173
4.3 · 105 · |S|
4.5 · 105 · |S|
worldsmall-base
47
1,764
34
632
2.2 · 106 · |S|
5.9 · 106 · |S|
europeasia-base
114
4,000
36
427
5.2 · 106 · |S|
1.8 ·107 · |S|
5.5
Model Assumptions
The model in (5.5)-(5.14) does come with several assumptions, which are stated below.
1. The number of FFE is the only capacity limit used in the model. The containers are modelled
as homogeneous. Thus there is no distinction between container types, e.g. dry and refrigerated
containers.
2. The number of transported (and forfeited) containers can be continuous. This relaxes the model
considerably, and the paper by B. D. Brouer, Pisinger, and Spoorendonk 2011 has shown that
the integer solutions found by rounding the linear variables down give a solution quality within
0.01% of the optimal LP solution.
3. The operating cost of a vessel is independent of the load of containers on the vessel, although
this is not true in reality (Karsten et al. 2015). It would be possible and straightforward to let
the bunker fuel consumption also be a linear function of the number of transported containers
by subtracting: cb,var · xt
ska summed up for all scenarios, commodities and arcs in the objective
function. The factor cb,var would be the variable marginal cost in bunker consumption for carrying
one additional FFE. For simplicity, this is not modelled.
4. With the chosen graph structure, the cost of storage when transshipping has to be ﬁxed per FFE
and cannot be a function of time. Likewise, the storage capacity can only be every week.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand33
==PAGE:43==
5. Cargo of the same commodity can be split across multiple paths through the network.
6. Only vessels of the same class can be allocated on a given service.
7. Cabotage rules are not considered in the modelling.
8. Empty repositioning of containers is not considered in the modelling, although they can account
for an estimated 27% of the total running cost of the global container ﬂeet (Song et al. 2005).
9. Loading and storing fuel for the vessels are not considered in the modelling. Thus it’s assumed
that the vessels can both store the necessary amounts of fuel to sail any legs considered in the
formulation as well as begin able to be fueled in the ports included in the sequences where it’s
necessary. Moreover, the time set aside for the port calls (24 hours) is enough to handle fueling.
5.6
Forfeitures
If all, or a part of, the realised demand cannot be met in a scenario, it will be forfeited. Practically, the
carrier may let one of its alliance partners handle the excess demand, which is what is described in the
literature (Meng and T. Wang 2012). It could also be that the rejected shipper will have to go to one
of the carrier’s competitors, which is, of course, not in the interest of the carrier.
For these reasons, forfeited demand is penalised in the objective function. B. Brouer et al. 2014 uses
a ﬁxed forfeiture penalty of $1,000/FFE in all instances. This ﬁxed penalty treats the commodities
equally, but this could skew the idea behind the penalty as the model will mostly minimise the number
of forfeited containers by prioritising moving demand of commodities with a short distance and then
forfeit commodities with a long distance as they take up more capacity in the network. This also depends
on the revenue of the commodities, of course. Instead of being ﬁxed, the penalty could also vary from
commodity to commodity and could be a function of the revenue of the commodity. Commodities with
a high revenue should be prioritised; thus, their penalties should be higher than those commodities
with low revenue. However, this might favour commodities with a long distance as they will generally
have higher revenue, but they may not be very lucrative to transport as this will, in turn, create a
ﬂow solution which is not very proﬁtable neither in the long term nor short term. Commodities with a
high revenue-distance ratio are, ceteris paribus, lucrative for the carrier as they bring in more revenue
compared to the distance. It can be argued that the model should penalise based on this metric. The
distance is, in this case, from the origin of the commodity to its destination. At last, the total loading
costs of the commodity can be subtracted from the revenue as they are constant. The forfeiture penalty
cost cf
k commodity k could then be calculated:
cf
k = αp ·
rk −cl
δo(k) −cl
δd(k)
dist(k)
,
(5.15)
where rk is the revenue of commodity k, and cl
δo(k) and cl
δd(k) are the loading costs at the origin and
destination port of commodity k, respectively. αp is a penalty factor adjusting the level of penalisa-
tion, and dist(k) is the overall shortest sailing distance from the origin port to the destination port of
commodity k. Using this penalty for forfeited demand, the model will ﬁnd network solutions which will
increase the reliability for the shippers under uncertain demand. However, due to time constraints and
for the sake of simplicity, the ﬁxed penalty will be used in the testing.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand34
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 6
Experimental Results
6.1
Evaluation of Stochastic Solution
Let the Stochastic Program (SP) be the Stochastic Programming Model formulated in Chapter 5.3 with
a scenario set S as input, representative of the uncertainty. S can either be clustered or unclustered,
but the set has to contain multiple scenarios. The solution of the SP will be evaluated by computing
the quality metric Value of Stochastic Solution (VSS). Optionally, the metric Expected Value of Perfect
Information (EVPI) can also be used to evaluate the SP solution.
Algorithm 1 shows the steps to calculate these metrics. In Line 5, a scenario set S is generated, which
concerns the demand uncertainty, and it can optionally be reduced as explained in Chapter 4.2.5. In
Line 10, the scenario set Sexp containing just one scenario with the expected demands is obtained by
clustering S into one scenario. The Expectation of Expected Value (EEV) solution can now be obtained
by solving the Stochastic Programming Model with the expected scenario set Sexp in Line 13. Hereafter,
the SP is solved in Line 15 using the scenario set S. The EEV is solved before the SP. The order is, in
essence, indiﬀerent, but the latter is a much larger model than the former, and tests have shown that
by using the ﬁrst-stage solution of the EEV, yEEV ∗(also called network solution, or just network), as
a warm-start, when solving the SP, running times are reduced signiﬁcantly. A warm-start means that
the model will use the integer yEEV ∗as a lower bound in the branch-and-bound algorithm.
In Line 17, if the network solutions of the EEV and SP are diﬀerent, the former has to be tested on
all the scenarios to assess its performance for varying demands. The objective value obtained in Line
13 doesn’t contain all the demand variation and is not a representative objective value of the EEV.
Obtaining a valid objective of the EEV can be achieved by either ﬁxing the EEV network solution in
the SP and solving it once, thus obtaining its overall weighted objective value ZEEV ∗, or the EEV
network solution could be ﬁxed in the stochastic model and solved independently for each scenario in
S, corresponding to the MCF problem described in Chapter 4.2.2. The latter method is applied as it
may speed up the process, although the MIP-solver could potentially take advantage of the network
solution being ﬁxed and thus solve the scenarios independently as well. Per the method described,
the valid objective value of the EEV, ZEEV ∗, is determined by weighing the objective values obtained
for each scenario in S by their respective probabilities π (Lines 20-22). Hereafter the absolute and
relative VSS can be computed (Lines 24-25). The former indicates the gain of applying the SP over
the EEV in monetary units, whereas the latter is the gain in percentage increase from the deterministic
approach (EEV). If the network solution of the EEV and SP are identical, there is no value of including
the stochasticity in the form of the scenarios (for that instance, with the given parameters), and the
absolute and relative VSS are both zero (Lines 27-28).
In addition to the VSS, one can also evaluate the solution of the SP based on the EVPI. This metric
is the expected increase in objective value one could theoretically gain if it were possible to look into
the future, see which scenario would come, and then design the ideal network accordingly. This is, of
course not possible in reality, but it can still be valuable to know how much this information is worth
in monetary units, e.g., if the decision-maker considered investing in better forecasting techniques. The
EVPI is determined by solving the Wait-and-See (WS) program for each scenario independently but
without ﬁxing the ﬁrst stage variables (Line 34). Again, to optimise the approach the WS are warm-
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand35
==PAGE:45==
started by the network solution of the SP. The WS solutions yield the best possible objective value
for each scenario by allowing ﬁrst-stage variables to change across the scenarios. Like the EEV, the
objective value of the WS is determined by weighing the objective values found for each scenario with
the corresponding scenario probability (Line 36) and acts as an upper bound of the objective value of
the SP (for a maximisation problem). The metric EVPI, both absolute and relative, can ﬁnally be
computed (Lines 38-39).
Moreover, the second stage variables of the SP xSP ∗(Line 15), (and potentially those of the EEV (Line
20) and/or of the WS (Line 34)) are stored to examine the ﬂow of containers in general, and particularly
the number of containers forfeited. The V SSabs and V SSrel might not apply if the EEV and/or SP
are not solved to optimality. Additionally, due to the subtraction of penalties in the objective function
(Equation (5.5)), the objective value of the EEV can be negative resulting in the V SSrel being negative
in which case it cannot be used in the further analysis. The same goes for the EVPI.
Algorithm 1 Stochastic Program Evaluation
1: I ←LinerLib instance
2: n ←Number of scenarios
3: p ←Probability for variance
4: ρscale ←Correlation scaling factor
5: S ←Generate scenario set using I, n, p, ρscale
6: if clustering is applied then
7:
m ←Number of clusters
8:
S ←Reducing set S down to m scenarios with corresponding probabilities
9: end if
10: Sexp ←Expected scenario set of S, containing one scenario
11: cf ←Universal forfeiture penalty
12: ϕEEV ←Time limit of the EEV
13: yEEV ∗←Solve EEV: I with Sexp, cf and ϕEEV , and only store ﬁrst stage variables
14: ϕSP ←Time limit of the SP
15: ZSP ∗, ySP ∗, xSP ∗←Solve SP: I with S, cf, ϕSP , yEEV ∗(used as warm-start for SP), and store model
output
16: ϕMCF ←Time limit of the MCF
17: if yEEV ∗̸= ySP ∗then
18:
for s ∈S do
19:
ZEEV ∗
s
, xEEV ∗
s
←Solve MCF problem for I
with {s}, cf, ϕMCF , yEEV ∗(ﬁxed in model), and store objective
value and second-stage variables to evaluate the ﬂow
20:
end for
21:
ZEEV ∗←∑
s∈S πs · ZEEV ∗
s
22:
V SSabs ←ZSP ∗−ZEEV ∗
23:
V SSrel ←ZSP ∗−ZEEV ∗
ZEEV ∗
24: else
25:
V SSabs ←0
26:
V SSrel ←0
27: end if
28: if EV PI are to be calculated then
29:
ϕW S ←Time limit of the WS
30:
for s ∈S do
31:
ZW S∗
s
, xW S∗
s
←Solve WS: I with {s}, cf,ϕW S, ySP ∗
(warm-start), and store objective value and second stage
variables to evaluate the ﬂow
32:
ZW S∗←∑
s∈S πs · ZW S∗
s
33:
end for
34:
EV PIabs ←ZW S∗−ZSP ∗
35:
EV PIrel ←ZW S∗−ZSP ∗
ZSP ∗
36: end if
6.2
Testing the MIP model
Initial tests have shown that the running times of the SP scale exponentially with model size given
as the sum of the number of constraints and the number of variables.
A subset of the parameters
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand36
==PAGE:46==
used: cf = $1000/FFE, p = 0.5, ρscale = 1, ϕEEV = ϕSP = 12hours, and ϕMCF = 3hours. The
parameters will be referred to as the standard parameters. According to the various tests conducted,
the conﬁguration of the standard parameters above doesn’t seem to aﬀect the running times of the
model besides the time limits, of course. Scenario reduction was not applied at this stage, and the
EVPI was not calculated due to simplicity. The results can be seen in Figure 6.1. The shapes of the
markers indicate which instance (region) has been solved with the number of scenarios stated inside
the marker. The base and all variants of the instances have both been applied but are not shown
explicitly. The number of sequences included aﬀects the number of binary variables, which is indicated
by the colours of the markers. The y-axis is logarithmic to show the approximate exponential trend,
which in Figure 6.1 is shown with the linear trend line. All of the instances were solved to optimality
except for pacific-base and med-all with gaps of 8% and 78%, respectively. Additional sequences
can be added to an instance to expand the solution space in the ﬁrst stage of the model, but it also adds
additional linear variables and constraints as more arcs are created, which in turn increases the running
time on top of the additional binary variables themselves. All tests were carried out using the High
Performance Computing Cluster at DTU. baltic, waf, med and pacific were assigned 4, 8, 8, and 16
cores, respectively. However, subsequent tests have determined that the number of cores doesn’t have
an impact on the running time, at least for the particular instances tested. Gurobi was the solver for
all tests and utilized the branch-and-bound algorithm to solve the MIP model. The model was coded
in Julia using the JuMP package.
100
200
400
100
200
400
10
30
100
30
100
5
10
Figure 6.1: Plot showing the running times of some selected test runs. Please note that the
running times may change from time to time, and all these tests were only conducted one
time each. The numbers inside the markers state the number of scenarios used in the model,
and this is 5 for the Paciﬁc instance.
Surprisingly, the value of the stochastic solution is zero in all these test cases. Moreover, other combi-
nations of probabilities, forfeiture penalties, correlation scaling factors, and clustering of the scenarios
have been applied but also without any positive VSS.
This could suggest that the ﬁrst stage is too restricted for the SP to ﬁnd a solution which is the same or
worse as in the EEV but better across all the scenarios. To explore this further, a new model is created,
which only consists of the constraints regarding the deployment of vessels and the binary variables of
the stochastic programming model. The objective function is arbitrarily set to 1 because the only goal
is to exhaust the model for all the feasible ﬁrst-stage solutions. Each time a solution is found, it’s added
to the model as a no-good cut, and the model is solved again. This process is repeated until no more
solutions can be found or some limit is reached. Doing this for the baltic-all instance only yields
96 ﬁrst-stage solutions. The WS solutions of the same instance conﬁgured with a high variance of 10
times the demands, and with 100 unclustered scenarios are then obtained to see how many of these 96
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand37
==PAGE:47==
networks would be chosen. The networks of 85 WS solutions are the as the one presented in Chapter 3.5,
while the remaining 15 WS solutions all decide on another network. Of the 96 feasible networks, only
two of them are, in fact, useful in the 100 generated scenarios, with one of them being much more useful
than the other. As with the baltic-all instance, the solution space in the ﬁrst stage is also examined
for the waf-all instance, but the iterative process is stopped after 25,000 iterations. This suggests that
the solution space may be large enough for waf-all instance and thus likely also for all the instances
larger. But why can’t the stochastic model then not bring any value to the decision-maker? The baltic,
waf, and med instances are all modelled as feeder networks with one or a few hub ports and many
feeder ports. This structure may not be suitable for the stochastic approach, which could prove more
useful when solved for instances with several hubs, e.g., over 10. However, apart from designing new
instances, such other structures are only found in larger instances, e.g., pacific, but these will simply
be too diﬃcult to solve as shown in Figure 6.1.
As the models grow in complexity, signiﬁcant amounts of memory are also needed to store them when
being solved. Figure 6.2 shows the apparent exponential trend of the maximum memory usage of the
instances as a function of model size. The exponential trend can be the result of the increased number
of binary variables which causes the models to grow substantially in size due to the many branch-and-
bound nodes to be explored. The pacific instance falls beneath the trend-line, but it should be noted
that it wasn’t solved to optimality and thus its ﬁnal memory usage would be higher. Besides the running
time, memory usage should deﬁnitely also be taken into account when solving the larger instances as it
can be a bottleneck in the hardware chosen.
Figure 6.2: Plot showing the maximum memory usage of each test run. The exponential ﬁt is
based on all the points, but it should be noted that the pacific-base instance was terminated
due to the time limit.
6.3
Relaxation of the Binary Variables
Nonetheless, the solution space can be drastically expanded by solving the LP-relaxation of the model,
which also has the positive eﬀect that the model can more easily solve larger instances. These two
factors may enable the stochastic approach to obtain a positive VSS. This relaxation does come with
the disadvantage that the ﬁrst stage solution is not practical in real life. The domain of the y-variables
in Equation (5.14) of the formulation presented in Chapter 5.3 will have to be relaxed, and is thus
changed to:
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand38
==PAGE:48==
0 ≤ybcn ≤1
∀b ∈B, c ∈Cb, n ∈Qbc,
(6.1)
This means that the model can both deploy a continuous number of vessels of a class to a sequence,
and a mix of vessel classes to the same sequence.
In the following, the LP-relaxation of the SP is denoted linear SP, and likewise binary SP for the model
with the binary ﬁrst stage variables. The same notation is likewise used for EEV and WS.
The immediate eﬀect of relaxing the binary variables is the reduced running times. The pacific-base
instance with 5 scenarios is the largest instance that could be solved to near-optimality with the MIP
model achieving an 8.3% optimality gap after 12 hours. For comparison when relaxing the model, this
instance conﬁguration solves to optimality in just 205 seconds. The Gurobi solver utilises the barrier
method for solving the linear programs.
Figure 6.3 shows the running times of the linear SP for some selected instances. The relaxation has
enabled the solver to tackle much larger instances within the time limit such as the worldsmall-base
instance with 10 scenarios, and pacific-all instance with up to 40 scenarios, the latter resulting in a
model with over 50 million variables and 12 million constraints. When the variables have been relaxed
there doesn’t seem to be an exponential tendency of the running times but instead a linear trend which
is indicated by the trend line. However, later tests have demonstrated that the running times of the
larger models ﬂuctuate highly from test to test, meaning that the trend in the plot may not be linear
after all.
Figure 6.3: Plot showing the running times of some selected test runs. Please note that the
running times may change from time to time, and all these tests were only conducted one
time each.
Due to the relaxation, a positive VSS has been observed in all the conducted tests, meaning that the
network solutions of the linear SP perform better than the corresponding networks of the linear EEV.
Table 6.1 presents the networks of the linear SP and EEV which are slightly diﬀerent compared to each
other. Moreover, the networks of the binary SP (and EEV) are also shown, and not surprisingly, the
binary SP and EEV have the same network solutions as the one from LinerLib presented in 3.2. The
entry in each cell is the number of vessels to deploy, e.g., the binary SP deploys 3 vessels of class 1 on
sequence 1. The solutions of the linear programs deploy the majority of the capacity as in the binary
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand39
==PAGE:49==
solutions but exploit the fact that it can mix the vessel classes on a sequence, e.g., both classes are
deployed on sequences 2 and 3.
Table 6.1: The ﬁrst stage solutions (networks) of baltic-base solved with 100 unclustered
scenarios and the other standard parameters for the binary SP (and EEV), linear EEV, and
linear SP.
Binary SP and EEV
Linear EEV
Linear SP
Vessel Class
Vessel Class
Vessel Class
Sequence
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
3
0
3 · 0.99
0
3 · 0.99
0
2
0
2
3 · 0.005
2 · 0.99
3 · 0.019
2 · 0.98
3
1
0
1 · 0.99
1 · 0.012
1 · 0.96
1 · 0.037
Total
4
2
3.98
1.99
3.94
2.00
Table 6.2: The tests were carried out for 10 unclustered scenarios with the standard parameters.
Binary SP and EEV
Linear EEV
Linear SP
Weighted objective value
of all scenarios
232,192
232,869
233,357
Objective value
in the expected scenario
247,142
249,919
245,548
Network costs in $
943,615
942,341
939,633
Percentage of available
capacity deployed
100%
100%
100%
Weighted revenues in $
3,686,754
3,686,873
3,686,473
Weighted penalties in $
404,330
404,990
407,183
Weighted loading
costs in $
2,106,616
2,106,673
2,106,300
Weighted transshipment
in $
-
-
-
Weighted # of containers
forfeited
404.3
405.0
407.2
Weighted # of containers
moved
4,511.7
4,511.0
4,508.8
Table 6.2 lists some data of the networks found with the binary SP (and EEV) and the linear EEV
and SP solutions as well as the resulting ﬂows. According to theory, the linear SP achieves the highest
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand40
==PAGE:50==
weighted objective value, and the absolute and relative VSS can be computed:
V SSabs = $233, 357 −$232, 869 = $488
V SSrel = $233, 357 −$232, 869
$233, 357
= 0.2%
The value of the stochastic is in both absolute and relative terms insigniﬁcant, but this is also for the
smallest instance, and the value may increase for larger instances. The objective values of the two
network solutions when ﬁxed in the expected scenario are included in Table 6.2 to verify that the EEV
solution is indeed superior to the SP which is also the case here. Compared to the binary programs,
the two linear programs reduce the networks costs while still deploying all the available capacity which
is possible with the added ﬂexibility in the ﬁrst stage. The solution of the linear SP saves more on the
network costs, compared to the linear EEV, and transports fewer containers which result in a higher
penalty to be paid. However, the strategy pays oﬀin the end as the objective value is slightly higher.
Apparently, the SP saves more in the scenarios with low demand with the reduced network, than it loses
in the scenarios with high demand in terms of lost revenue and penalties for unsatisﬁed demand. The
SP will use diﬀerent strategies when the parameters such as correlation, variance and forfeiture penalty
are changed as seen in Chapter 6.5.
Like the running times of the LP relaxation, the corresponding memory usage also seems to be linearly
correlated with model size as can be seen in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: The memory usage of some selected instances of varying sizes.
However, the model size may not be linearly correlated with instance size, especially if many sequences
are included which drives up the number of arcs in the model.
6.4
In-Sample Test
The network solutions of the SP may be changing signiﬁcantly from test run to test run despite all
parameters being kept constant which is due to the stochastic processes in the scenario generation. For
this reason, the stability of the ﬁrst stage solution of the SP is tested by carrying out the approach in
Algorithm 1 a number of times and comparing the networks. The diﬀerence ψ of two network solutions
y∗
i and y∗
j can be computed by summing the absolute diﬀerences of each variable:
ψ(y∗
i , y∗
j ) =
X
k∈y
y∗
i (k) −y∗
j (k)

A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand41
==PAGE:51==
Let Y I be a set of network solutions obtained by testing an instance conﬁguration I with the same
parameters multiple times, and let Ψ be the sum of the pairwise diﬀerences in Y I:
Ψ(Y I) =
X
i∈Y I

X
j∈Y I
ψ(i, j)


To test the method, 10 samples are generated for med-all with 10 unclustered scenarios and the
standard parameters. The Ψ-value of both the EEV and SP solutions are given below:
ΨMed,EEV = 31.7
(unclustered scenarios)
ΨMed,SP = 29.7
(unclustered scenarios)
The EEV solutions are more stable than those of the SP, in this example at least. The network solution
of the EEV is based on only the weighted average values of the demands across the scenarios which in
theory should equal the expected demands qk of each commodity k. However, as only 10 scenarios are
generated, the demands in the expected scenario may be somewhat diﬀerent compared to the expected
demands of each commodity.
The clustering technique could prove useful for obtaining more stable network solutions as the scenario
set, given as input to the model, is reduced from a larger set and is thus more representative of the
overall uncertainty. Again, med-all with the standard parameters is used for the test, but this time
a scenario set of 10 scenarios, reduced from 100, is given as input instead of 10 unclustered scenarios.
The corresponding Ψ-values are given below:
ΨMed,EEV = 16.6
(clustered scenarios)
ΨMed,SP = 13.2
(clustered scenarios)
By generating a large scenario set which subsequently is clustered into a smaller set, it’s possible to
increase the stability of the network solutions of both the EEV and SP, compared to using ten generated
scenarios directly. For this reason, in all further tests conducted, the scenario sets given as input to
the models will be reduced from much larger sets, e.g., ten times the size. The size of Ψ will somewhat
describe the stability of the stochastic programming model, but its value could depend on several factors,
e.g., the size of Y I. Therefore, this method should only be used partly to assess the stability and could
be used in combination with other, e.g., more qualitative approaches.
6.5
Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
The VSS may be sensitive to the choice of variance and correlation used in the scenario generation and
the forfeiture penalty used in the mathematical formulation; why the same instance is tested multiple
times with diﬀerent combinations of these three parameters to assess their impact on the VSS. For
variance, the four probabilities p ∈{0.99, 0.5, 0.25, 0.1} will be utilised, which results in the variances
of the commodity demands being 1, 2, 4, and 10 times their respective demands, respectively. For
correlation, the correlation scaling factor ρscale will take the values 0, 0.5, 1 and 1.5.
The former
indicates that there is no correlation at all, and 1.5 simulates a situation with very correlated demands.
Lastly, for the penalty factor cf, the following four values are considered, $0, $500, $1000, $1500, all per
FFE forfeited regardless of commodity. The pacific-all instance with 20 clustered scenarios was in all
solved 64 times for combinations of variance, correlation and forfeiture penalty as described, and the
obtained objective values of the SP and weighted objective values of the EEV can be seen in the tables
in Figure 6.5. The colour-coding is done wrt the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties like the
borders of the cell outline. Generally, the correlation factor and variance don’t seem to inﬂuence the
objective values, contrary to the forfeiture penalty.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand42
==PAGE:52==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
10,500,511
  
10,501,435
  
10,509,612
  
10,512,969
  
10,492,543
  
10,499,006
  
10,479,167
  
10,489,197
  
500
8,214,112
    
8,219,644
    
8,162,834
    
8,174,603
    
8,110,556
    
8,127,060
    
8,049,937
    
8,079,494
    
1000
7,618,948
    
7,643,060
    
7,484,492
    
7,545,905
    
7,332,747
    
7,442,367
    
7,165,283
    
7,331,252
    
1500
7,391,095
    
7,411,450
    
7,156,701
    
7,247,233
    
6,914,529
    
7,075,595
    
6,684,192
    
6,904,959
    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
10,499,306
  
10,500,724
  
10,508,543
  
10,514,209
  
10,478,966
  
10,491,889
  
10,466,108
  
10,484,081
  
500
8,202,160
    
8,210,805
    
8,122,281
    
8,139,445
    
8,039,955
    
8,067,096
    
7,935,674
    
7,997,907
    
1000
7,588,443
    
7,622,412
    
7,371,669
    
7,465,819
    
7,138,910
    
7,302,459
    
6,894,321
    
7,120,827
    
1500
7,349,244
    
7,376,635
    
6,976,015
    
7,125,590
    
6,637,631
    
6,866,954
    
6,309,398
    
6,594,481
    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
10,496,060
  
10,498,388
  
10,505,159
  
10,515,008
  
10,452,178
  
10,476,090
  
10,439,813
  
10,470,911
  
500
8,184,074
    
8,195,279
    
8,057,953
    
8,086,062
    
7,902,633
    
7,953,906
    
7,753,222
    
7,851,573
    
1000
7,551,778
    
7,592,664
    
7,197,542
    
7,345,649
    
6,819,092
    
7,048,196
    
6,494,808
    
6,802,626
    
1500
7,299,012
    
7,337,494
    
6,732,036
    
6,933,912
    
6,186,425
    
6,513,926
    
5,738,986
    
6,141,490
    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
10,485,473
  
10,491,505
  
10,482,175
  
10,505,411
  
10,392,866
  
10,439,441
  
10,378,206
  
10,437,389
  
500
8,141,044
    
8,157,947
    
7,904,170
    
7,965,281
    
7,621,202
    
7,716,865
    
7,343,562
    
7,536,303
    
1000
7,454,237
    
7,515,548
    
6,828,726
    
7,079,446
    
6,265,453
    
6,579,511
    
5,681,039
    
6,179,719
    
1500
7,165,976
    
7,230,323
    
6,207,867
    
6,529,939
    
5,463,035
    
5,835,880
    
4,611,564
    
5,249,724
    
Variance = 1 times demand
Objective Values ($)
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Forfeiture 
penalty
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure 6.5: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The colour-coding is
done wrt the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties like the borders deﬁned.
Nonetheless, the VSS is more interesting to examine than the objective values as this metric signiﬁes the
importance of applying the stochastic approach over the deterministic approach. Instead of showing the
VSS in a table format, the values are plotted to visualise the eﬀect of the parameters better. Please refer
to the Appendix for the table of the VSS. The computed absolute VSS can be found in Figure 6.6 with
each subplot corresponding to the four diﬀerent variances, each line in the subplot corresponding to the
four penalty factors with the associated legend in the bottom, and ﬁnally, the set of correlation scaling
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand43
==PAGE:53==
factors are displayed on the x-axes. The absolute VSS increases as a function of variance, correlation
and forfeiture penalty without exception for the 64 tests. It gains the highest value of $638,160, as seen
in the lower right subplot.
Figure 6.6: Each coloured line corresponds to a given penalty factor indicated by the legend in
the bottom left.
As can be observed in Figure 6.5, all the objectives of the EEV are positive, meaning that the relative
VSS can also be computed, and the results are shown in Figure 6.7. Please notice the diﬀerent tick
marks on each y-axis in the subplots. Again, the VSS monotonically increases as a function of the
three parameters, and the largest percentage-wise increase is likewise found in the instance when three
parameters take on their highest values in the lower right, where the relative VSS is 13.8%. When the
penalty factor is zero, the relative VSS is almost zero in all cases and only reaches a measly 5.7‰ in
the best case with high variance and correlation.
Please refer to the Appendix for the results of the 64 tests, which include the network costs, the
paid forfeiture penalties, the number of forfeited containers, the number of transported containers, the
revenues, and the loading and transshipment costs. Moreover, the revenue per container transported is
also listed.
When there is no penalty for forfeiting demand, the SP will, in all these test cases, create more expensive
networks than the EEV and, this way, earn a bit more by being able to transport more containers. The
access to the uncertainty set S enables this, and the strategy can be explained by the fat-tailed negative
binomial distribution used to generate the scenario set. However, when unsatisﬁed demand is penalised,
the SP utilises other strategies to obtain a higher objective value. Contrary to before, the SP seeks to
save on the network costs and thus gain less revenue than the EEV in these cases. In the tests with
the high penalty of $1,500, the SP will forfeit fewer containers and therefore pay less forfeiture costs. It
may sound counter-intuitive that a less extensive network can transport more containers than a more
extensive network. However, this is possible as the SP focuses on the commodity demand with a short
distance. In the tests with the penalties being $500 or $1,000 per FFE, the SP will, in most of these
cases, transport fewer containers, save on loading and transshipment costs, and pay the higher forfeiture
penalties.
Figures 6.6 and 6.7 show that the VSS increases as a function of the three parameters for the instance
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand44
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.7: Each coloured line corresponds to a given penalty factor indicated by the legend in
the bottom left.
pacific-all.
Nevertheless, the proﬁts of the carrier will decrease as a function of the parameters,
which can be seen in Figure 6.8. The proﬁts can be computed as the objective values without the
forfeiture penalties since these penalties are hypothetical and not paid to anyone, unlike the other cost
components. In other words, when the carrier strengthens its position in the market in the long run
by penalising forfeitures in the model, this model will simultaneously lose proﬁt in the short run by
building less eﬃcient networks, at least for the pacific-all instance. The proﬁts decrease as a function
of especially the variance, and when it’s high at ten times the demands, the proﬁts are all negative in the
tests with incurred penalties. These speciﬁc results suggest that the ﬁxed penalty structure is not ideal
as the networks created when the penalties are high do move many containers and limit the forfeitures,
but on the other hand, they struggle to turn a proﬁt. However, as mentioned before, the SP will utilise
diﬀerent strategies to obtain the best objective value, and it could be that two very diﬀerent strategies
would yield almost the same objective value but very diﬀerent proﬁts. E.g., in Figure 6.8 in the table
where the variance is four times the demands, both the EEV and SP networks make a decent proﬁt of
several million when the forfeiture penalty is $500. However, when the penalty is increased to $1000,
both suddenly lose money which can be seen with the sharp change of colours from green to red. The SP
and EEV may be switching to another strategy at some point as the penalty increases, and this strategy
sacriﬁces heavily on the proﬁts in exchange for a high objective value. However, one could implement
a bi-objective model which both takes the short-term proﬁt and the long-term forfeiture penalties into
account, and this way controls these two metrics.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand45
==PAGE:55==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
10,500,511
  
10,501,435
  
10,509,612
  
10,512,969
  
10,492,543
  
10,499,006
  
10,479,167
  
10,489,197
  
500
7,339,241
    
7,340,188
    
7,228,171
    
7,213,689
    
7,134,324
    
7,120,596
    
7,027,563
    
7,029,846
    
1000
6,982,080
    
7,012,628
    
6,729,843
    
6,805,412
    
6,471,053
    
6,547,928
    
6,205,427
    
6,268,220
    
1500
6,873,486
    
6,894,095
    
6,457,999
    
6,558,295
    
6,036,047
    
6,219,136
    
5,640,541
    
5,887,176
    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
8,202,160
    
8,210,805
    
8,122,281
    
8,139,445
    
8,039,955
    
8,067,096
    
7,935,674
    
7,997,907
    
500
6,702,919
    
6,725,395
    
6,401,904
    
6,463,063
    
6,111,875
    
6,223,455
    
5,794,854
    
5,974,413
    
1000
6,680,484
    
6,730,890
    
6,139,120
    
6,315,403
    
5,643,849
    
5,817,084
    
5,174,676
    
5,322,328
    
1500
552,907
-       
554,697
-       
842,501
-       
781,530
-       
1,093,611
-    
1,027,106
-    
1,330,728
-    
1,257,301
-    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
7,551,778
    
7,592,664
    
7,197,542
    
7,345,649
    
6,819,092
    
7,048,196
    
6,494,808
    
6,802,626
    
500
6,397,451
    
6,417,532
    
5,701,636
    
5,878,452
    
5,055,900
    
5,300,808
    
4,530,027
    
4,778,054
    
1000
705,024
-       
663,962
-       
956,553
-       
1,019,665
-    
1,208,604
-    
1,326,126
-    
1,394,036
-    
1,609,243
-    
1500
597,320
-       
572,317
-       
1,030,780
-    
929,869
-       
1,444,362
-    
1,320,709
-    
1,738,784
-    
1,583,193
-    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
7,165,976
    
7,230,323
    
6,207,867
    
6,529,939
    
5,463,035
    
5,835,880
    
4,611,564
    
5,249,724
    
500
934,251
-       
955,875
-       
1,141,793
-    
1,183,899
-    
1,284,094
-    
1,433,983
-    
1,436,019
-    
1,696,514
-    
1000
790,929
-       
744,612
-       
1,202,141
-    
1,340,542
-    
1,556,321
-    
1,856,288
-    
1,921,219
-    
2,224,035
-    
1500
703,497
-       
652,760
-       
1,426,785
-    
1,340,270
-    
1,940,765
-    
1,751,225
-    
2,533,492
-    
2,396,206
-    
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Objective Values without Penalties ($)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure 6.8: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The colour-coding is
done wrt the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁned.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand46
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 7
Future Work and Possible
Extensions
7.1
Including Additional Objectives
Many objectives are in play when a carrier is designing its liner shipping network, and the carrier could
have a high interest in including more objectives to maintain a high service level and to stay competitive
(Karsten et al. 2015; B. Brouer et al. 2014). The mathematical formulation in Eqs (5.5)-(5.14) features
the most obvious value proposition, which is maximising proﬁts by maximising the revenues minus
the network, loading, and transshipment costs. Moreover, the model also imposes ﬁxed penalties for
forfeiting cargo. Optimisation with multiple objectives can be implemented in diﬀerent ways, and the
one where the objectives are added in the objective function is considered in the following unless anything
else is stated.
1. Network Costs
The network cost is essential when designing liner-shipping networks (Karsten et al. 2015). How-
ever, this cost is not linear as a large liner-shipping company has a signiﬁcant administrative
overhead of approximately 30% (B. Brouer et al. 2014). With economies of scale, this share may
decrease as a function of network size. If more data is available, the model could consider this
when designing the network.
2. Consistency
Seen from the perspective of the carrier, the main goal of the model is to maximise the expected
objective value over a given set of scenarios. However, it could also be interesting to decrease
the variance between the scenarios as this will provide a network solution whose performance is
more stable from scenario to scenario. This objective may reduce the expected objective value a
bit, but it can be worth it to the carrier. It’s not straightforward to include the variance in the
modelling as this will require quadratic constraints when calculating it. A simple range of objective
values can easily be included by introducing two new linear and unbounded variables zhigh and
zlow, bounding them by the highest and lowest objective value of the scenarios, respectively,
and then minimising their diﬀerence.
The following term is added to the objective function:
−αc · (zhigh −zlow), where αc is some factor controlling the degree of consistency and the sign
is due to the objective function being a maximisation function. The constraints would look like
this:
zlow ≤z(s) ≤zhigh
∀s ∈S,
(7.1)
where z(s) is the value function of scenario s, and S is the set of scenarios.
3. Robustness
As previously discussed in Chapter 4.2.1, a robust network will optimise for the worst possible
realisation of the uncertainty, which was deemed too conservative for this problem. However,
instead of implementing the canonical robust optimisation, one could introduce robustness into
the stochastic programming framework by introducing a new linear variable zrobust, which will
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand47
==PAGE:57==
bound the objectives of each scenario in the scenario set from below. This variable will then be
maximised in the objective function, thus ensuring that the scenario with the minimum objective
is taken proportionally more into account. The decision-maker will likely pay a bit of the expected
objective, but this may be well worth it. Robustness could also be implemented together with
the consistency objective as they can share a variable.
4. Attractive Transit Times
"Time is money", as Benjamin Franklin once wrote, is also true in the liner shipping industry for
several reasons. First of all, the owners of the cargo, the shippers, pay the inventory holding cost
until delivery (B. Brouer et al. 2014). This means that the existing customers should be willing
to pay more for transportation with a reduced transit time since their cargo will bring value to
them faster. This eﬀect may be too small to detect, though, but shorter transit times may also
move some demand from other modes of transportation (road, rail or air) to the ocean as the
shorter transit times can tip the scale in favour of ocean-based transportation (Karsten et al.
2015). Second of all, some products are perishable or relatively quickly becomes obsolete, and in
this case, shorter transit times for ocean transport will better accommodate this kind of cargo,
ceteris paribus. However, the reductions may not be large enough to make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
As described in Chapter 3.2, the LinerLib library has maximal transit times for each commodity,
and they are typically implemented as hard constraints ensuring that all transported containers
of the commodities have to be delivered within the maximal transit times. Otherwise, it will be
forfeited. The transit times could also be implemented as soft constraints meaning that if the
transit time is exceeded, some ﬁxed penalty has to be paid in the objective function, or the penalty
can be a function on the length of the delay, either linear or step-wise increasing. There could
also be a bonus for delivering the cargo before the maximal transit time. All in all, competitive
transit times are crucial for a carrier, and reducing them can bring in more revenue, but the eﬀects
have to be quantiﬁed more in-depth before they can be included in the modelling. Moreover, it’s
very hard to restrict the transit times of commodities with the mathematical arc-ﬂow formulation
and impossible with the current variables in the MCFP as the speciﬁc path or paths of each
commodity cannot be controlled. It’s doable with a path-ﬂow formulation as only paths with a
permitted transit time can be generated in the pricing problem as done in Karsten et al. 2015.
5. Sustainability
Environmentally friendly transportation has received a lot of attention in recent years B. Brouer
et al. 2014. The total amount of fuel bunker utilised by the vessels can be a good metric for the
overall sustainability objective. The amount of bunker fuel could also be weighted by the number
of containers moved and distance carried. Of course, an extensive network with many vessels
deployed will consume more bunker fuel, but it will likely also carry more containers than a small
network with fewer vessels, so this weighted metric will be more fair. However, as with the transit
times objective, the path(s) of the commodities cannot be controlled with the mathematical arc-
ﬂow formulation, and thus the exact distance travelled for each commodity is unknown. Still, one
could use some mean distance or simply the shortest sailing distance in the weighting. This metric
could then be penalised or rewarded for values higher or lower than some standard value. Another
way to limit the amount of bunker fuel is to increase the bunker cost, which is at $600/ton in all
the LinerLib instances. Network Solutions could be found with $100, $200,... etc., increments,
and the weighted bunker fuel consumption impacts could be calculated.
6. Proximity to the Existing Network Solution
New networks are usually implemented by changing an existing network, and this change comes
with some costs which can be hard to quantify. However, deciding between two proposed networks
with the same proﬁt is easy if one network is much more similar to the existing network than
the other. Therefore, if an existing network exists, another objective for the model could be to
ﬁnd network solutions which are similar to the existing network so that any potential changes
would be more cost-eﬀective or even realistic to implement.
To achieve this, the function in
Chapter 6.4 which could quantify the diﬀerence between two network solutions, can be used. A
proposed network solution with a large diﬀerence from the existing network could be penalised
in the objective function. Another approach would be to implement a bi-objective model where
the metric is included in a hard constraint, and the best possible network is calculated for various
values of this metric.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand48
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 8
Concluding Remarks
This thesis presents a mathematical optimisation approach for assessing the value of including uncertain
demand in the liner-shipping network design.
For incorporating the stochastic demands, stochastic
programming is chosen over robust optimisation. The latter method is deemed too inﬂexible, and its
solutions too conservative for this type of planning problem. Due to computational eﬃciency, the design
problem in the ﬁrst stage is restricted to only choosing the sequences from a predeﬁned set which the
existing network solutions of LinerLib provide. This restriction also simulates a setting in which the
carrier already has a network in place and only seeks to make minor changes to it.
Two diﬀerent ways of modelling the ﬂow of demands in the later stages of the stochastic programming
model are discussed. One is a sequential stochastic optimisation model which can accommodate defer-
ments of cargo to the following week, seasonal changes in the demands, and a gradual decrease in the
certainty of the demand forecast as a function of time, inter alia. However, the high level of detail comes
at the expense of having to include multiple additional stages, resulting in a high number of scenarios,
making the corresponding models very diﬃcult to solve. Instead, the modelling can be approached in
a much simpler way by using the MCFP with constant demands, but do it multiple times as this will
approximate the network’s performance under uncertain demand. This way, the demands of each com-
modity cannot ﬂuctuate from week to week but only from scenario to scenario, resulting in a stochastic
programming model with only two stages. The negative binomial distribution models the demands of
the commodities, and a copula is used to let the demands of the commodities correlate pairwise de-
pending on their origin and destination ports. The copula furthermore enables the commodities to be
modelled with distinct demand probabilities if necessary. Again, it should be mentioned that access
to historical demand data has been limited; thus, the demand distribution of each commodity and the
correlation should be revisited if the approach is put to use.
It can be observed from the experimental results that only the three smallest LinerLib instances can
be solved to optimality by a commercial MIP-solver within a reasonable time limit of 12 hours when
using the arc-ﬂow formulation presented in Chapter 5.3. The next large instance, pacific-base, was
solved with an optimality gap of 8.3% after 12 hours. The running times and maximum memory usage
seem to be exponential as the models grow in size, which is determined by the sum of variables and
constraints. Of all tests conducted using the MIP formulation, none of the SP solutions is better than
the corresponding EEV solutions, meaning that the VSS is zero. This is tested for diﬀerent combinations
of instances, the number of scenarios, variance, correlation, and forfeiture penalty.
When applying the LP-relaxation to the model, the solver can solve pacific-base to optimality in
only 205 seconds, and both the running times and memory usage of the SP appear to be linear as a
function of model size, but more tests will be needed to verify this. The relaxation increases the solution
space of the ﬁrst stage, which helps the model achieve a positive VSS for all tests. Still, the ﬁrst stage
solution will likely be fractional, thus not applicable to the carrier. A sensitivity analysis of the three
parameters, variance, correlation and forfeiture penalty, clearly shows that the VSS increases for higher
values of each of these three parameters, both in absolute and relative terms and depending on the
conﬁguration, the SP will use diﬀerent strategies to obtain a higher objective value. Surprisingly, in the
tests with no imposed forfeiture penalties, the SP creates a more extensive network and takes advantage
of the scenarios with high demand but never achieves the objective value to increase by more than 1%
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand49
==PAGE:59==
compared to the EEV in these tests. With penalties, the opposite occurs to some extent. However, when
the penalties are very high, the SP will seek to transport as many containers as possible by designing
networks which cater for commodities with a short distance as they take up less capacity in the network,
ceteris paribus. All in all, if a carrier were to take uncertain demand into account when designing their
liner-shipping networks and would impose penalties on forfeited demand, then, given the assumptions
presented in the thesis and the parameter sensitivity analysis, the carrier should, in general design a
less expensive network which would indeed bring less revenue in, but would, in the end, obtain a higher
objective value due to savings on the transshipment and loading costs and/or forfeiture costs, if the
pacific instance is representative of that carrier.
By restricting the design problem in the choice of sequences, it’s possible to include stochasticity of
the demands and solve medium-sized instances to near-optimality. Still, according to the tests, the
resulting stochastic solutions don’t yield network solutions superior to the networks of the deterministic
counterparts. This may be due to this restriction, or the stochastic approach is not necessary when
considering the design of the liner-shipping networks taking its already high complexity into account.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand50
==PAGE:60==
References
Agrawal, Narendra and Stephen A. Smith (1996). “Estimating Negative Binomial Demand for
Retail Inventory Management with Unobservable Lost Sales”. In: Naval Research Logistics
43 (6), pp. 839–861. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-6750(199609)43:
6<839::AID-NAV4>3.0.CO;2-5.
Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin (2014). “Network Flows”. In: Pearson. Chap. 17.2.
Brouer, Berit et al. (2014). “A Base Integer Programming Model and Benchmark Suite for
Liner-Shipping Network Design”. In: Transportation Science 48.2, pp. 281–312. doi: 10.
1287/trsc.2013.0471.
Brouer, Berit Dangaard, David Pisinger, and Simon Spoorendonk (2011). “Liner Shipping
Cargo Allocation with Repositioning of Empty Containers”. In: INFOR 49 (2), pp. 109–
124. doi: 10.3138/infor.49.2.109.
Christiansen, Marielle et al. (2020). “Liner shipping network design”. In: European Journal of
Operational Research 286.1, pp. 1–20.
IEA (2020). Energy Technology Perspectives 2020. IEA.
JF, Alvaraz (2009). “Joint routing and deployment of a ﬂeet of container vessels”. In: Maritime
Econom. Logist 11.2, pp. 186–208.
Karsten, C. V. et al. (2015). “The time constrained multi-commodity network ﬂow problem
and its application to liner shipping network design”. In: Transportation Research. Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review 76, pp. 122–138. doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2015.01.005.
LINERLIB (2017 (last correction)). url: https://github.com/blof/LINERLIB/.
Meng, Qiang, Shuaian Wang, et al. (2014). “Containership Routing and Scheduling in Liner
Shipping: Overview and Future Research Directions”. In: Transportation Science 48 (2),
pp. 265–280. doi: 10.1287/trsc.2013.0461.
Meng, Qiang and Tingsong Wang (2010). “A chance constrained programming model for short-
term liner ship ﬂeet planning problems”. In: 37 (4), pp. 329–346. doi: https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1080/03088839.2010.486635.
— (2012). “Liner ship ﬂeet deployment with week-dependent container shipment demand”. In:
European Journal of Operational Research 222 (2), pp. 241–252. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ejor.2012.05.006.
Ross, Sheldon (2013). “Simulation”. In: Academic Press. Chap. 6.
Song, Dongping et al. (2005). “On cost-eﬃciency of the global container shipping network”. In:
Maritime Policy and Management 32 (1), pp. 15–30. doi: 10.1080/0308883042000176640.
UNCTAD (2022). REVIEW OF MARITIME TRANSPORT 2022. UNCTAD.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand51
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A
Results of the Parameter Sensitivity
Analysis
A.1
The absolute and relative VSS
The absolute and relative VSS of the pacific all instance from the parameter sensitivity analysis test.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand52
==PAGE:62==
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
924
                    
3,357
                 
6,463
                 
10,030
               
500
5,533
                 
11,769
               
16,505
               
29,558
               
1000
24,112
               
61,413
               
109,620
             
165,969
             
1500
20,355
               
90,532
               
161,066
             
220,767
             
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
1,418
                 
5,666
                 
12,923
               
17,973
               
500
8,645
                 
17,164
               
27,141
               
62,233
               
1000
33,969
               
94,150
               
163,549
             
226,506
             
1500
27,391
               
149,575
             
229,323
             
285,083
             
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
2,328
                 
9,849
                 
23,912
               
31,098
               
500
11,205
               
28,110
               
51,273
               
98,351
               
1000
40,886
               
148,107
             
229,104
             
307,818
             
1500
38,482
               
201,877
             
327,501
             
402,504
             
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
6,032
                 
23,236
               
46,575
               
59,183
               
500
16,903
               
61,111
               
95,663
               
192,741
             
1000
61,311
               
250,720
             
314,058
             
498,680
             
1500
64,347
               
322,072
             
372,845
             
638,160
             
Variance = 4 times demands
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Variance = 10 times demands
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Absolute VSS ($)
Variance = 1 times demands
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Variance = 2 times demands
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Figure A.1: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done for each table
A.2
Tables of other Measures
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand53
==PAGE:63==
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%
500
0.1%
0.1%
0.2%
0.4%
1000
0.3%
0.8%
1.5%
2.3%
1500
0.3%
1.3%
2.3%
3.3%
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%
0.2%
500
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.8%
1000
0.4%
1.3%
2.3%
3.3%
1500
0.4%
2.1%
3.5%
4.5%
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
500
0.1%
0.3%
0.6%
1.3%
1000
0.5%
2.1%
3.4%
4.7%
1500
0.5%
3.0%
5.3%
7.0%
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
0.1%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
500
0.2%
0.8%
1.3%
2.6%
1000
0.8%
3.7%
5.0%
8.8%
1500
0.9%
5.2%
6.8%
13.8%
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Relative VSS (%)
Variance = 1 times demands
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Variance = 2 times demands
Variance = 4 times demands
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Variance = 10 times demands
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
Figure A.2: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done for each table
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand54
==PAGE:64==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,229,621
  
13,269,270
  
13,241,976
  
13,295,167
  
13,231,328
  
13,317,959
  
13,253,920
  
13,376,685
  
500
18,955,856
  
18,939,286
  
18,971,594
  
18,911,566
  
18,958,748
  
18,878,348
  
18,976,718
  
18,879,076
  
1000
20,631,158
  
20,582,276
  
20,686,038
  
20,571,886
  
20,694,430
  
20,410,080
  
20,751,482
  
20,257,688
  
1500
21,251,570
  
21,208,978
  
21,317,554
  
21,171,742
  
21,320,060
  
21,096,438
  
21,365,180
  
21,066,978
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,239,282
  
13,282,326
  
13,258,393
  
13,360,313
  
13,252,607
  
13,394,677
  
13,295,190
  
13,400,888
  
500
18,957,380
  
18,920,614
  
18,987,048
  
18,898,146
  
18,978,570
  
18,848,244
  
19,010,398
  
18,856,664
  
1000
20,631,408
  
20,594,056
  
20,715,674
  
20,563,284
  
20,726,654
  
20,309,712
  
20,824,002
  
20,180,610
  
1500
21,255,090
  
21,187,524
  
21,341,698
  
21,178,046
  
21,346,098
  
21,086,380
  
21,411,828
  
21,089,994
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,261,265
  
13,344,325
  
13,282,127
  
13,428,689
  
13,266,836
  
13,522,815
  
13,304,138
  
13,594,050
  
500
18,959,322
  
18,906,496
  
18,985,786
  
18,882,606
  
18,978,552
  
18,766,342
  
19,105,590
  
18,619,916
  
1000
20,632,612
  
20,606,812
  
20,754,406
  
20,358,818
  
20,778,118
  
20,133,382
  
20,935,842
  
20,044,090
  
1500
21,259,802
  
21,217,968
  
21,366,970
  
21,198,696
  
21,368,824
  
21,060,100
  
21,534,750
  
21,156,714
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,274,866
  
13,369,614
  
13,320,047
  
13,556,132
  
13,302,449
  
13,634,900
  
13,385,581
  
13,803,203
  
500
18,966,028
  
18,889,564
  
19,022,806
  
18,817,764
  
19,059,692
  
18,546,932
  
19,309,364
  
18,419,168
  
1000
20,639,670
  
20,588,486
  
20,840,940
  
20,150,232
  
20,890,236
  
19,807,106
  
21,156,540
  
19,847,396
  
1500
21,275,724
  
21,230,944
  
21,437,714
  
21,083,512
  
21,486,536
  
21,178,700
  
21,787,564
  
21,045,210
  
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Network Costs ($)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure A.3: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done wrt. the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁne.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand55
==PAGE:65==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
874,871
       
879,456
       
934,662
       
960,913
       
976,232
       
1,006,465
    
1,022,374
    
1,049,648
    
1000
636,868
       
630,432
       
754,648
       
740,493
       
861,694
       
894,439
       
959,856
       
1,063,032
    
1500
517,609
       
517,354
       
698,702
       
688,937
       
878,482
       
856,459
       
1,043,651
    
1,017,783
    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
885,524
       
897,017
       
969,765
       
1,002,755
    
1,027,035
    
1,079,004
    
1,099,467
    
1,146,414
    
1000
668,760
       
645,745
       
836,895
       
810,187
       
993,783
       
1,049,869
    
1,134,722
    
1,272,154
    
1500
552,907
       
554,697
       
842,501
       
781,530
       
1,093,611
    
1,027,106
    
1,330,728
    
1,257,301
    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
901,561
       
919,961
       
1,030,400
    
1,055,460
    
1,130,525
    
1,213,118
    
1,208,958
    
1,363,436
    
1000
705,024
       
663,962
       
956,553
       
1,019,665
    
1,208,604
    
1,326,126
    
1,394,036
    
1,609,243
    
1500
597,320
       
572,317
       
1,030,780
    
929,869
       
1,444,362
    
1,320,709
    
1,738,784
    
1,583,193
    
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
934,251
       
955,875
       
1,141,793
    
1,183,899
    
1,284,094
    
1,433,983
    
1,436,019
    
1,696,514
    
1000
790,929
       
744,612
       
1,202,141
    
1,340,542
    
1,556,321
    
1,856,288
    
1,921,219
    
2,224,035
    
1500
703,497
       
652,760
       
1,426,785
    
1,340,270
    
1,940,765
    
1,751,225
    
2,533,492
    
2,396,206
    
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Forfeiture Penalties Paid ($)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure A.4: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done wrt. the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁne.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand56
==PAGE:66==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
12,767
         
12,715
         
12,810
         
12,724
         
12,827
         
12,715
         
12,870
         
12,708
         
500
1,750
           
1,759
           
1,869
           
1,922
           
1,952
           
2,013
           
2,045
           
2,099
           
1000
637
              
630
              
755
              
740
              
862
              
894
              
960
              
1,063
           
1500
345
              
345
              
466
              
459
              
586
              
571
              
696
              
679
              
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
12,763
         
12,693
         
12,834
         
12,694
         
12,865
         
12,666
         
12,935
         
12,757
         
500
1,771
           
1,794
           
1,940
           
2,006
           
2,054
           
2,158
           
2,199
           
2,293
           
1000
669
              
646
              
837
              
810
              
994
              
1,050
           
1,135
           
1,272
           
1500
369
              
370
              
562
              
521
              
729
              
685
              
887
              
838
              
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
12,760
         
12,618
         
12,870
         
12,688
         
12,944
         
12,597
         
13,087
         
12,696
         
500
1,803
           
1,840
           
2,061
           
2,111
           
2,261
           
2,426
           
2,418
           
2,727
           
1000
705
              
664
              
957
              
1,020
           
1,209
           
1,326
           
1,394
           
1,609
           
1500
398
              
382
              
687
              
620
              
963
              
880
              
1,159
           
1,055
           
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
12,791
         
12,623
         
12,981
         
12,642
         
13,132
         
12,647
         
13,361
         
12,775
         
500
1,869
           
1,912
           
2,284
           
2,368
           
2,568
           
2,868
           
2,872
           
3,393
           
1000
791
              
745
              
1,202
           
1,341
           
1,556
           
1,856
           
1,921
           
2,224
           
1500
469
              
435
              
951
              
894
              
1,294
           
1,167
           
1,689
           
1,597
           
Containers Forfeited (#)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure A.5: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done wrt. the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁne.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand57
==PAGE:67==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
37,460,952
  
37,521,544
  
37,489,324
  
37,576,484
  
37,450,132
  
37,584,004
  
37,469,152
  
37,650,768
  
500
45,986,080
  
45,968,348
  
45,995,176
  
45,936,584
  
45,935,184
  
45,856,796
  
45,921,080
  
45,824,684
  
1000
47,448,148
  
47,420,556
  
47,455,896
  
47,374,332
  
47,350,600
  
47,181,248
  
47,305,080
  
47,011,516
  
1500
47,844,212
  
47,824,272
  
47,817,088
  
47,766,040
  
47,680,528
  
47,610,336
  
47,621,988
  
47,523,476
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
37,472,952
  
37,543,316
  
37,512,684
  
37,676,756
  
37,461,296
  
37,682,540
  
37,509,936
  
37,659,660
  
500
45,982,544
  
45,939,212
  
45,996,868
  
45,902,720
  
45,906,228
  
45,779,372
  
45,874,728
  
45,731,772
  
1000
47,432,800
  
47,413,064
  
47,427,456
  
47,325,276
  
47,271,584
  
47,023,860
  
47,228,296
  
46,863,224
  
1500
47,830,876
  
47,795,736
  
47,772,700
  
47,722,828
  
47,591,080
  
47,512,256
  
47,521,200
  
47,419,124
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
37,498,104
  
37,642,720
  
37,546,588
  
37,767,872
  
37,444,584
  
37,845,448
  
37,487,712
  
37,933,836
  
500
45,976,380
  
45,912,264
  
45,973,444
  
45,857,284
  
45,801,308
  
45,616,848
  
45,853,168
  
45,403,952
  
1000
47,419,300
  
47,406,108
  
47,371,152
  
47,123,360
  
47,135,980
  
46,735,464
  
47,126,712
  
46,626,412
  
1500
47,819,456
  
47,804,056
  
47,698,768
  
47,652,120
  
47,426,376
  
47,329,952
  
47,408,748
  
47,274,496
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
37,501,340
  
37,656,768
  
37,564,992
  
37,943,180
  
37,400,536
  
37,939,624
  
37,516,920
  
38,183,580
  
500
45,965,684
  
45,882,232
  
45,908,872
  
45,709,884
  
45,657,904
  
45,209,500
  
45,804,496
  
45,051,380
  
1000
47,384,696
  
47,363,624
  
47,254,960
  
46,843,976
  
46,930,684
  
46,254,828
  
46,955,220
  
46,224,728
  
1500
47,782,776
  
47,777,028
  
47,552,820
  
47,434,232
  
47,222,388
  
47,094,416
  
47,223,532
  
46,924,864
  
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Revenues ($)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure A.6: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done wrt. the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁne.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand58
==PAGE:68==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
31,427
         
31,479
         
31,473
         
31,559
         
31,462
         
31,574
         
31,473
         
31,635
         
500
42,444
         
42,435
         
42,414
         
42,361
         
42,336
         
42,276
         
42,298
         
42,243
         
1000
43,557
         
43,564
         
43,528
         
43,543
         
43,427
         
43,394
         
43,383
         
43,279
         
1500
43,849
         
43,849
         
43,817
         
43,824
         
43,703
         
43,718
         
43,647
         
43,664
         
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
31,436
         
31,506
         
31,492
         
31,632
         
31,472
         
31,670
         
31,500
         
31,677
         
500
42,428
         
42,405
         
42,386
         
42,320
         
42,282
         
42,178
         
42,236
         
42,142
         
1000
43,530
         
43,553
         
43,489
         
43,516
         
43,343
         
43,287
         
43,300
         
43,162
         
1500
43,830
         
43,829
         
43,764
         
43,805
         
43,607
         
43,652
         
43,547
         
43,596
         
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
31,445
         
31,587
         
31,516
         
31,698
         
31,462
         
31,810
         
31,493
         
31,883
         
500
42,402
         
42,365
         
42,325
         
42,275
         
42,145
         
41,980
         
42,162
         
41,853
         
1000
43,500
         
43,541
         
43,429
         
43,366
         
43,198
         
43,080
         
43,186
         
42,971
         
1500
43,807
         
43,824
         
43,698
         
43,766
         
43,444
         
43,526
         
43,421
         
43,524
         
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
31,433
         
31,601
         
31,520
         
31,860
         
31,419
         
31,903
         
31,549
         
32,135
         
500
42,355
         
42,312
         
42,218
         
42,133
         
41,983
         
41,683
         
42,037
         
41,516
         
1000
43,433
         
43,479
         
43,299
         
43,161
         
42,995
         
42,695
         
42,988
         
42,685
         
1500
43,755
         
43,788
         
43,550
         
43,608
         
43,257
         
43,383
         
43,220
         
43,312
         
Containers Moved (#)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure A.7: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done wrt. the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁne.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand59
==PAGE:69==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
1,192.0
        
1,191.9
        
1,191.1
        
1,190.7
        
1,190.3
        
1,190.3
        
1,190.5
        
1,190.2
        
500
1,083.4
        
1,083.3
        
1,084.4
        
1,084.4
        
1,085.0
        
1,084.7
        
1,085.7
        
1,084.8
        
1000
1,089.3
        
1,088.5
        
1,090.2
        
1,088.0
        
1,090.3
        
1,087.3
        
1,090.4
        
1,086.2
        
1500
1,091.1
        
1,090.7
        
1,091.3
        
1,090.0
        
1,091.0
        
1,089.0
        
1,091.1
        
1,088.4
        
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
1,192.1
        
1,191.6
        
1,191.2
        
1,191.1
        
1,190.3
        
1,189.8
        
1,190.8
        
1,188.9
        
500
1,083.8
        
1,083.4
        
1,085.2
        
1,084.6
        
1,085.7
        
1,085.4
        
1,086.2
        
1,085.2
        
1000
1,089.7
        
1,088.6
        
1,090.6
        
1,087.5
        
1,090.6
        
1,086.3
        
1,090.7
        
1,085.7
        
1500
1,091.3
        
1,090.5
        
1,091.6
        
1,089.4
        
1,091.4
        
1,088.4
        
1,091.3
        
1,087.7
        
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
1,192.5
        
1,191.7
        
1,191.3
        
1,191.5
        
1,190.1
        
1,189.7
        
1,190.3
        
1,189.8
        
500
1,084.3
        
1,083.7
        
1,086.2
        
1,084.7
        
1,086.7
        
1,086.6
        
1,087.6
        
1,084.8
        
1000
1,090.1
        
1,088.8
        
1,090.8
        
1,086.6
        
1,091.2
        
1,084.8
        
1,091.3
        
1,085.1
        
1500
1,091.6
        
1,090.8
        
1,091.5
        
1,088.8
        
1,091.7
        
1,087.4
        
1,091.8
        
1,086.2
        
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
1,193.1
        
1,191.6
        
1,191.8
        
1,191.0
        
1,190.4
        
1,189.2
        
1,189.2
        
1,188.2
        
500
1,085.2
        
1,084.4
        
1,087.4
        
1,084.9
        
1,087.5
        
1,084.6
        
1,089.6
        
1,085.1
        
1000
1,091.0
        
1,089.3
        
1,091.4
        
1,085.3
        
1,091.6
        
1,083.4
        
1,092.3
        
1,082.9
        
1500
1,092.1
        
1,091.1
        
1,091.9
        
1,087.8
        
1,091.7
        
1,085.5
        
1,092.6
        
1,083.4
        
Revenues Per Container Moved ($/#)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure A.8: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done wrt. the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁne.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand60
==PAGE:70==
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,730,818
  
13,750,844
  
13,737,735
  
13,768,347
  
13,726,262
  
13,767,041
  
13,736,061
  
13,784,884
  
500
17,941,248
  
17,929,964
  
17,926,086
  
17,889,504
  
17,889,654
  
17,844,922
  
17,872,054
  
17,816,464
  
1000
18,561,166
  
18,564,784
  
18,530,718
  
18,516,058
  
18,461,736
  
18,434,364
  
18,428,466
  
18,359,546
  
1500
18,683,940
  
18,686,484
  
18,644,126
  
18,658,126
  
18,567,460
  
18,581,846
  
18,528,970
  
18,533,762
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,734,358
  
13,760,267
  
13,745,750
  
13,802,229
  
13,729,728
  
13,795,972
  
13,748,638
  
13,774,691
  
500
17,937,478
  
17,910,770
  
17,917,772
  
17,862,372
  
17,860,666
  
17,785,030
  
17,829,182
  
17,730,788
  
1000
18,544,188
  
18,550,858
  
18,503,218
  
18,485,984
  
18,412,234
  
18,361,818
  
18,375,248
  
18,289,638
  
1500
18,673,638
  
18,676,892
  
18,612,484
  
18,637,664
  
18,513,736
  
18,531,820
  
18,469,248
  
18,477,356
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,740,783
  
13,800,006
  
13,759,309
  
13,824,174
  
13,725,572
  
13,846,543
  
13,743,759
  
13,868,871
  
500
17,931,420
  
17,890,528
  
17,899,302
  
17,833,160
  
17,789,596
  
17,683,488
  
17,785,398
  
17,569,030
  
1000
18,529,882
  
18,542,676
  
18,462,656
  
18,399,228
  
18,330,160
  
18,227,760
  
18,302,028
  
18,170,454
  
1500
18,663,324
  
18,676,278
  
18,568,984
  
18,589,648
  
18,426,760
  
18,435,222
  
18,396,230
  
18,393,098
  
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
EEV
SP
0
13,741,002
  
13,795,650
  
13,762,772
  
13,881,635
  
13,705,219
  
13,865,281
  
13,753,129
  
13,942,994
  
500
17,924,362
  
17,878,854
  
17,840,106
  
17,742,940
  
17,692,916
  
17,511,720
  
17,715,546
  
17,399,396
  
1000
18,499,860
  
18,514,984
  
18,383,158
  
18,273,748
  
18,218,670
  
18,011,924
  
18,196,416
  
17,973,578
  
1500
18,637,580
  
18,663,006
  
18,480,450
  
18,480,508
  
18,332,048
  
18,328,610
  
18,290,914
  
18,233,724
  
Variance = 10 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 4 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Variance = 2 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Loading and Transshipment Costs ($)
Variance = 1 times demand
Forfeiture 
penalty
Correlation scaling factor
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure A.9: The four tables correspond to the four selected variances. The color-coding is
done wrt. the same correlation factor for diﬀerent penalties, like the borders deﬁne.
A Two-Stage Stochastic Programming Approach to Liner-Shipping Network Design with Uncertain Demand61
==PAGE:71==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
