==PAGE:1==
 
 
 Near-Infrared Light-Driven Janus Micromotors for 
Treatment of Skin Disease 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
JUNE  27, 2023 
 
Author  
YUYA TANAKA, s212991 
 
Supervisors 
TIJANA MARIC  
PROFESSOR ANJA BOISEN 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
Author 
Yuya Tanaka (S212991) 
 
Project  
Master Thesis 
 
Title  
Near-infrared light-driven Janus micromotors for treatment of skin disease 
 
Supervisors  
Postdoc Tijana Maric  
Professor Anja Boisen 
 
MSc Programme 
Applied Chemistry  
 
ETCS points 
30 
 
Submission Date  
June 27, 2023 
 
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude toward Postdoc Tijana Maric, Postdoc 
Nasim Goafshan, and Professor Anja Boisen. Despite her situation, Tijana guided me to the 
end of my thesis project. Without her, I would have been lost in a great maze of science. At the 
same time, I would love to send my gratitude to Nasim, who alongside her PhD programme, 
assisted me during the investigation of fabrication parameters, gave me the instruction of the 
microplate reader, the supervision of my thesis report, and my mental support. Her 
encouragement kept me going through the project. Also, I am grateful to Anja for providing 
me with a splendid working environment from which I learned many things to work in the 
laboratory. 
 I also gained help from all of the Postdocs who were working for the IDUN group. There were 
countless times they offered their assistance. PhD Carmen Millan Guimera for giving me the 
instruction of μDISS ProfilerTM, and Postdoc Zhongyang Zhang for attempting to make the 
CARS microscopy work.  
 Before closing this section, I would love to express my appreciation to my family and friends 
for listening to my entire story patiently and giving me inspiration.  
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
Abstract 
 Skin disease is one of the most pervasive health issues that put a huge burden worldwide. 
Some of them are caused by infectious or naturally residing bacteria in the skin. When 
conditions meet, they form biofilm. Biofilm is their natural way of survival against external 
stress including antibiotics. This poses a serious threat to the validity of antibiotics humans 
have relied upon for decades to fight against such bacterial infections. Apart from this threat, 
drugs like antibiotics have to reach the target. The simplest method for the registration of drugs 
in the bodies is intravenous (i.v.) administration but even this route requires pharmacokinetic 
considerations. Many chemical reactions can occur from the site of injection to the target. To 
aid the drugs to reach the target site and combat biofilm, a drug delivery system, such as 
micromotors, is a highly effective solution.  
 Micromotors (MMs) are automobile microbots that convert external energy into mechanical 
energy to create their motion. Among them, Janus MMs are spherical microbots with an 
asymmetric structure. Under near-infrared (NIR) light, Au-coated Janus MMs create a thermal 
gradient and gain propulsion from it. As NIR-light can safely reach deeper into human tissue, 
NIR-light-driven MMs have the potential to treat skin diseases if they are composed of a 
biocompatible porous material. CaCO3 meets these requirements and is abundant and thus has 
attracted research interest.  
 In this study, fabrication parameters of CaCO3 microparticles (CCMPs) were optimised. The 
goal of the optimisation was the fabrication of the CCMPs in two different size groups. Thus, 
using electron scanning microscopy (SEM), the size of the MMs was analysed to investigate 
their effect. Fourier-Transfer Near-Infrared light (FTIR) spectroscopy and Energy-Dispersive 
X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy were applied to analyse the composition of the CCMPs. The amount 
of loaded drug was estimated using the microplate reader. Au sputtering was used to construct 
the Janus structure on the CCMPs. The investigation revealed that the only drug concentration 
affected the size of the CCMPs and it was necessary to control the concentration of the raw 
materials to fabricate the device in two different sizes. The resulting sizes were 1.03±0.39 μm 
for the small and 13.4±3.65 μm for the large CCMPs. The capsulation efficiency was up to 
50.2% and the Janus structure was successfully constructed.
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
 
ACC 
Amorphous Calcium Carbonate 
API 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient 
CCMP 
Calcium Carbonate Microparticle 
Cx 
Concentration of metronidazole in an aqueous solution of a raw material 
DOX 
Doxorubicin 
EDS, EDX Energy-Dispersive X-ray 
HMSNPs 
Hollow Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles 
i.v. 
Intravenous   
MEC 
Minimum Effective Concentration 
MET 
Metronidazole 
MET-MM 
Metronidazole-loaded micromotors 
MM  
Micromotor 
MTC 
Minimum Toxic Concentration 
NIR  
Near-Infrared  
NP 
Nanoparticle 
RGOAM 
Reduced Graphene Oxide Aerogel Microsphere 
PDA 
Polydopamine 
PS 
Polystyrene 
SEM 
Scanning Electron Microscope 
Stdv 
Standard deviation 
UV 
Ultraviolet 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
Contents  
 
1 Introduction 
   1-1 i.v. administration and drug delivery system 
 
 
 1 
   1-2 Micromotors (MMs)  
 
 
 
 3 
   1-3 Janus Micromotors (Janus MMs)  
 
 
 3 
   1-4 Motion Mechanism 
  
 
 5 
      1-4-1 Near Infrared Light (NIR) 
 
 
 
 5 
      1-4-2 Self-Thermophoresis 
 
 
 
 6 
      1-4-3 Marangoni Effect 
 
 
 
 7 
      1-4-4 NIR-Light-Driven MMs and their Biological Effect 
 
 8 
   1-5 Materials for the Fabrication of the MMs 
 
 
10 
   1-6 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) 
 
 
10 
      1-6-1 APIs and their Physicochemical Properties  
 
10 
      1-6-2 Metronidazole (MET) 
 
 
 
11 
      1-6-3 Pharmacokinetics of Metronidazole 
 
 
12 
      1-6-4 Pharmacodynamics of Metronidazole 
 
 
12 
   1-7 Analytical Instruments 
 
 
 
12 
      1-7-1 Scanning Electron Microscopy: SEM 
 
 
12 
      1-7-2 Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy: EDX 
 
13 
      1-7-3 Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy: FTIR 
 
14 
      1-7-4 Microplate Reader  
 
 
 
16 
      1-7-5 Sputtering Machine  
 
 
 
18 
   1-8 Aim of this Project   
 
 
 
19 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
   1-9 Hypothesis  
 
 
 
 
19 
 
2 Experiment  
   2-1 Fabrication of CaCO3 Microparticles (CCMPs)  
 
20 
      2-1-1 Fabricatoin Method during the Parameter Optimisation   
20 
      2-1-2 Fabrication of MET-Loaded CCMP during the Parameter Optimisation 20 
      2-1-3 Fabrication of Large CCMPs   
 
 
20 
      2-1-4 Fabrication of Small CCMPs  
 
 
21 
      2-1-5 Fabricatoin of the MET-Loaded CCMPs  
 
 
21 
      2-1-6 Principle of the Fabrication  
 
 
 
21 
   2-2 Characterisation of the CCMPs 
 
 
 
23 
   2-3 Drug Loading Study  
 
 
 
23 
   2-4 Au Sputtering 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
3 Results and Discussion 
   3-1 Optimisation of Fabrication Parameters 
 
 
25 
      3-1-1 Stirring Time 
 
 
 
 
25 
      3-1-2 Crystallisation Time 
 
 
 
28 
      3-1-3 Chemical Compositions of CCMPs 
 
 
30 
      3-1-4 Drug Loading  
 
 
 
 
32 
   3-2 CCMPs in Different Sizes  
 
 
 
34 
      3-2-1 Fabrication 
 
 
 
 
34 
      3-2-2 Drug Loading in Two Sizes   
 
 
37 
      3-2-3 Compositions 
 
 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
      3-2-4 Construction of Janus Micromotor 
 
 
44 
 
4 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
46 
5 Future Perspective 
 
 
 
 
48 
References   
 
 
 
 
50 
Appendix A  
 
 
 
 
60 
Appendix B  
 
 
 
 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
1 
 
1 Introduction  
1-1 i.v. administration and drug delivery system 
  Skin diseases are one of the major concerns that face the well-being of our daily life. [1] In 
2013, excluding mortality, skin diseases were the 4th leading global cause of disability. [2] 
Although the skin is the primal physical protector of our internal organs against external 
hazards, oddly enough, it can also be an entrance for infectious bacteria especially when it is 
injured. [3], [4] There are quite a number of bacteria that can cause negative effects on our 
skin. Starting from acne vulgaris, urticaria, viral, fungal, diseases, keratinocyte carcinoma, 
etc.[2]  Some of them, for example, acne, are even associated with the formation of biofilm. 
[5] Biofilms are a hydrated matrix of bacteria containing protein and polysaccharides and create 
a slimy layer. Its intricate structure protects the internal bacteria from outside stress like 
antibiotics. The summary of possible antibiotic mechanisms is mentioned in Figure 1. [6] 
Therefore, it becomes increasingly challenging for antibiotic drugs to combat biofilms. 
However, even before reaching either target bacteria or their biofilm, they also need to first 
reach the location where the biofilm resides.  
 
Figure 1: Mechanisms of antibiotic reaction with biofilms [6] 
 
==PAGE:12==
2 
 
 There are various methods to administer drugs into the body. Enteral [7], intravascular (i.v.) 
[8], nasal[9], oral [9], and topical [10] administration. Among these routes of administration, 
the i.v. administration is one of the most commonly practised because it circumvents many 
factors; absorption, many changes in the environment surrounding the drug molecules, and 
metabolism. Firstly, as the drug molecules directly enter the bloodstream and are immediately 
absorbed, they avoid the protective layers of tissues in the body which makes the design of 
drug molecules highly challenging [11], [12]. Secondly, as the bloodstream has generally stable 
benign conditions, the drug molecules also avoid the continuously changing conditions 
throughout the gastrointestinal tract, in which not only the presence of enzymes but also the 
pH value changes depending on the location of the drug [13], Thirdly, the direct entrance to 
the bloodstream does not involve organs such as the liver, metabolisms where the drug 
molecules are converted to metabolites in such ways that they get removed from the body even 
before they reach the concentration or site in the body to take their desired therapeutic effect 
[14]. Due to its relative simplicity, i.v. administration is often the first candidate in the early 
stage of drug development to test new drug candidates. [15]–[17] 
 However, i.v. administration has many pharmacokinetic factors to consider in order to safely 
develop a new drug. Here, three of those points are described.  
 Plasma concentration: Once the drug candidate is injected into the body, it enters the 
bloodstream first. As the blood receives the drug candidate, it can be seen as the solvent. And 
when the concentration is concerned, the plasma is brought into consideration.  The minimum 
effective concentration (MEC) is the least plasma concentration at which the drug candidate 
starts demonstrating its intended therapeutic effect. There is also a maximum concentration the 
body can tolerate, called minimum toxic concentration. The range between these two 
concentrations is called the therapeutic window. [18] 
 Half-life: The half-life of drug molecules is the time spent until the plasma concentration of 
the drug falls down to 50% of the initial one. Depending on the molecular structure of the drug 
candidate, the time length in which the candidates remain in the body varies. Some of them are 
easily metabolised and eliminated while others stay in the body due to affinity or binding to a 
specific active site of an enzyme or receptor. In short, the rate of elimination hugely affects 
how long drug molecules stay in the body. On one hand, if the residual time is shorter than the 
desired time even if the concentration reaches within the therapeutic window momentarily, the 
drug cannot fulfil its purpose. On the other hand, if they stay for a long time and if the drug 
==PAGE:13==
3 
 
candidate requires multiple dosages, the concentration can quickly reach the minimum toxic 
concentration. The ability of the drug to be able to remain in its therapeutic window depends 
on the plasma concentration and the residual time. [19] 
Active site: Inside the body, there are many reaction sites where a myriad of chemical reactions 
take place to sustain life. Those sites are usually still active even if there are infectious bacteria. 
In some cases, it is required for the drug candidate to selectively attack the bacteria instead of 
elsewhere. For this reason, it is desirable to consider where the drug candidate is administered 
and most effectively performs its intended purpose. [20] 
 In some cases, it is difficult for the drug molecules alone to satisfy all those three requirements. 
To aid them, a drug delivery system is applied to enhance the performance of those drug 
molecules. As the name suggests, this tool helps the drug molecules to perform their therapeutic 
effect by carrying them to the target active site. [21] Drug delivery system also protects the 
drug molecules from getting caught by transporters and some other molecules in the blood that 
can interact with them. Thus, it becomes easier for the drug molecules to enter the therapeutic 
windows and reach the target. [22]  There are many devices designed for drug delivery, such 
as micromotors, (MMs) [23]–[29] microneedles, [30]–[32] microcontainers, [33]–[35] and 
other protective molecules. [22] Among these devices, MMs are studied with extensive vigour. 
In this project, MMs were selected as drug delivery candidates because of their ability to 
interact with NIR light and produce motion.  
1-2 Micromiotors (MMs) 
 A micromotor (MM) is a device, constructed with various materials such as inorganic crystals, 
polymers and bacteria, which converts one energy form to its mechanical energy to propel 
itself. [36]–[38] Their shape can be tubular, cubic, half-shell, coil, or spherical. [39]–[43] 
Especially, spherical MMs whose hemispherical surface is coated with a component different 
to their core constituent are called Janus MM. This unique structure of Janus MMs can be a 
key factor for their movement mechanism depending on the energy source. The energy source 
includes among others, chemical, magnetic and optical ones. [36], [44], [45] In the following 
sections, examples of Janus MMs that move based on three different energy sources are given.  
1-3 Janus Micromotors (Janus MMs) 
 Janus MMrs are largely seen as a spherical core material whose hemispherical surface is coated 
with other nanoparticles (NPs). The core material can be active to increase the driving speed 
==PAGE:14==
4 
 
of the MM. Since most of the MMs are intended to be applied in an aqueous environment, it is 
preferred that such core materials can react with water. Magnesium is one of the materials that 
satisfy the criterion. (Figure 2A) [46] Together with Ag coating, the MM becomes bactericidal.  
However, as the Mg reacts with the surrounding water, the life-time of the MMs is limited to 
a certain extent. To circumvent this problem, the core materials can be either catalytic or inert 
against the surroundings. Pumera et al applied hematite (α- Fe2O3) and fabricated Janus MM. 
(Figure 2B) [47] Under UV light irradiation, the MM propels by the concentration gradient 
generated by the series of reactions between water and both the hematite side and metallic side 
of the MM as catalysts. Though the core material no longer dissolves in the water as the MM 
moves, UV light is still potentially harmful to be applied against animal bodies. Materials that 
can catalyse reactions under visible light or those with even lower energy are preferred in this 
situation. Dong et al fabricated a Janus MM using bismuth oxylodide with Au partial coating. 
[48] Moreover, the MM can run purely on the water without relying on any other chemical 
species such as H2O2. (Figure 2C) Compared to dense microspheres mentioned so far, porous 
materials have a greater specific surface area that facilitates catalytic reactions further. For 
example, hollow mesoporous silica nanoparticles (HMSNPs) can be applied as the core 
material of a Janus MM. [49] To generate the propelling movement, the HMSNPs are partially 
coated with enzymes thus it is powered by catalase, urease and glucose oxidase. (Figure 2D) 
Also, porous Fe3O4 (p-Fe3O4) mesoparticles have high catalytic activity due to their high 
specific surface area. [50] Additionally, the swarm system consisting of the p-Fe3O4 can be 
navigated by the rotational magnetic field and eliminates biofilms of E. coli and B. cereus under 
NIR light in the presence of H2O2. (Figure 2E) Depending on the application of the MMs, the 
core materials do not necessarily have to be active to facilitate the self-propulsion. Provided 
that the outer layer is active and produces the propelling force, the core material can even be 
peptides. [51] Milosavljevic et al fabricated a Janus MM based on a Pt-attached peptide. 
(Figure 2F) The Pt generates the movement in the presence of H2O2 and the peptide side of 
the MM causes the disruption of the division of cells effectively to both individual bacteria and 
their biofilms. The majority of the MMs mentioned hitherto rely on chemical reactions to gain 
their self-propelling power. However, these reactions often leave by-products. Recently, an 
attempt was made to develop a Janus MM optically controlled by NIR light and leaves no 
wasteful product. Maric et al fabricated such a MM with silica with Au partial coating. [52] Its 
propelling power is derived from thermophoresis induced by the Au asymmetrical coating and 
NIR light irradiation. When it is tested for biofilm removal, it is revealed that longer NIR light 
irradiation increased the eradication rate of a gram-negative PAO1 biofilm. (Figure 2G) 
==PAGE:15==
5 
 
Usually, Janus MMs are spherical but even this is not a mandatory feature as the zeolite-based 
MM fabricated by Wang et al demonstrates. [40] They partially embedded highly reactive Ag+ 
ions in the pores of the zeolite. The resulting square MM generates propulsion by the 
decomposition of H2O2 while the embedded Ag+ ions are slowly released and kill the 
surrounding bacteria such as E. coli. (Figure 2H)  
 
Figure 2: The movement of the Ag/Mg NaHO3 driven by the oxidation of Mg. [46] (B) The 
schematic model of the metal/hematite MM driven by photochemical reaction induced by UV 
light. [47] (C) Illustration of BiOI-metal Janus MMs propelling under visible light. [48] (D) 
Schematic illustration of the enzyme-powered MMs driven by catalase, urease and glucose 
oxidase. [49] (E) (a) Schematic illustration of Fe3O4 and p-Fe3O4 chemically and physically 
killing the bacteria. (b) p- Fe3O4 disrupting the biofilm. [50] (F) Reaction selectivity of 
indolicidin peptide/PM/Pt MMs. [51] (G) The fabrication process of SiO2/Au Janus MMs and 
their biofilm removal. [52] (H) Zeolite-based MM detoxification of bacteria via adsorption 
and/or catalytic reaction.[40] 
 
1-4 Motion Mechanism 
 In this section, a few mechanisms which explain the movement of MMs are explored.  
 1-4-1 Near Infrared Light (NIR) 
==PAGE:16==
6 
 
 NIIR is another type of light whose wavelength is between 700 nm and 1 mm. In this 
wavelength, it is widely accepted that biological materials usually do not absorb the light with 
such wavelength and thus NIR light can penetrate biological tissues by several centimetres 
which is much deeper than UV light can reach. [53] For this reason, NIR has been extensively 
used in health applications, such as imaging for cancer therapy [54], neurostimulant, and 
neuromodulation, which is due to the study that the IR response of nerve cells is high [55], and 
drug delivery[56]. As an external energy source, NIR light is also applied for light-driven MMs. 
In this section, MMs whose stimulant is NIR light are discussed with an emphasis on their 
movement mechanism, thermophoresis and the Marangoni effect.  
1-4-2 Self-Thermophoresis  
 Thermophoresis utilises a type of gradient to generate the propulsion of the MMs. However, 
the main difference is the absence of major chemical products that diffuse or migrate around 
the MMs. Instead, it is a temperature gradient that dictates their motion. A Janus MM, with its 
hemispherical surface coated with NPs whose thermal response is high while the other 
hemisphere does not have the response, can create the required thermal gradient around itself 
due to the asymmetric structure. As the MM gains heat, it begins to move away from the 
hemispherical surface with a high thermal conversion rate. Maric et al constructed the silica-
based Janus MM with Au NPs whose strong NIR absorption is attributed to its distinctive 
plasmon resonance (Figure 3A) [52]. Xuan et al fabricated the Janus MM made of chitosan 
and alginate using a layer-by-layer method and they deposited Au NPs on one hemispherical 
surface of the product. [57] The MM demonstrated different running speeds depending on the 
NIR light intensity (Figure 3B). Li et al fabricated a Janus MM that was based on metal-
phenolic particles with Au hemispherical layer and they successfully propelled their MM under 
NIR light (Figure 3C). [58] CaCO3 is a highly biocompatible and abundant material, which 
implies its low environmental impact. [59] Zhou et al applied the CaCO3-based MM which can 
manoeuvre the complicated biological barriers, penetrate tumour tissues, and release the drug 
while the MM decomposes under the acidic lysosomal microenvironment. (Figure 3D) [60] 
When NIR light irradiated the MMs constructed by polystyrene core spheres covered with the 
polydopamine layer (PS@PDA), the limitation in the penetration of the light created the 
temperature gradient between the surrounding water over on the exposed side and the 
unexposed side of the MMs. They behaved differently whether it was moving individually or 
collectively. (Figure 3E) [61] 
==PAGE:17==
7 
 
1-4-3 Marangoni Effect  
 Apart from thermophoretic propulsion mechanisms, the Marangoni effect is also commonly 
applied when MMs run on NIR light. Unlike thermophoresis, the Marangoni effect does not 
depend on the modification of the particles of interest, instead, it relies on the surface tension 
of the interface surrounding the MMs. [62] The surface tensions along the interface can create 
a type of gradient by temperature because they generally tend to increase as the temperature 
rises. [63] In the case of the MMs whose movement mechanism relies on the Marangoni effect, 
NIR light raises the temperature of the fluid directly surrounding the MMs while the 
temperature of the fluid away from them remains unaffected by the irradiation. As a result, the 
surface tension around the MMs becomes higher than the one away from them, which 
introduces the gradient in the surface tension and creates Marangoni effect. Zhou et al 
demonstrated this mechanism using the MM based on reduced graphene oxide aerogel 
microsphere (RGOAM). [64] As Figure 3F illustrates when NIR light irradiates one part of 
the RGOAM, it creates a temperature gradient between the exposed and unexposed side of the 
MMs, which is due to the photothermal effect of the graphene. The temperature gradient also 
generates different surface tensions between the two sides of the MMs, inducing the Marangoni 
convection. [64] The Marangoni convection is also generated within a droplet of water. [62] 
When MMs are trapped inside the droplet, they swarm following the flow generated by NIR 
irradiation as Figure 3G depicts. When NIR light hits the droplet, it partially increases the B 
(γNIR) and the density (ρNIR) from the initial ones (γ0, ρ0), which generates the Marangoni and 
natural convection.  
==PAGE:18==
8 
 
 
Figure 3: Schematic illustrations of the movement mechanism and MM structures. (A) The 
bare SiO2-based MMs with Au coating move toward NIR light. [52] (B) The multi-layered 
structure of biomolecules forms the MM. [57] (C) The metal-phenolic particles with Au-
coating propels with the NIR light irradiation. [58] (D) The process in which the CaCO3-based 
MM delivers and releases the drug. [60] (E) The phototaxis of the PS@PDA is (a) negative 
when the MM moves individually; (b) positive when it moves collectively. [61] (F) RGOAM 
(The black sphere) propels itself on Marangoni convection induced by NIR light. [64] (G) The 
MMs move along the convection caused by Marangoni and natural convection. [62] 
 
1-4-4 NIR-Light-Driven MMs and their Biological Effect 
 In this section, MMs that have been designed to be applied in biological environments or 
targets under NIR irradiation are briefly introduced.  
 As mentioned earlier, NIR light has superior penetration to UV and visible light. It is widely 
applied in attempts to remotely navigate MMs deep inside tissues or similar biological systems. 
The depth of the penetration depends on the type of NIR light that differs by its wavelength. 
The NIR light whose wavelength is between 700 and 900 nm is first infrared light (NIR-I) 
whereas the one with longer wavelengths (between 1000 and 1700 nm) is categorised as second 
infrared light (NIR-II). The majority of the MMs rely on the NIR-I. [54] The helical aptamer 
MM Wu et al developed ran on NIR at 808 nm wavelengths. It was polydopamine (PDA) that 
==PAGE:19==
9 
 
absorbed the light and created the photothermal effect, generating the source of propulsion. 
The PDA also functioned as a sterilisation agent of pathogens in liquid food while the aptamer 
worked for the MM to selectively recognise target molecules. (Figure 4A) [65] NIR with the 
same wavelength was applied by Shi et al to investigate their MM that was designed to deliver 
and release drugs targeting damaged blood vessels, performing different roles on its way. 
(Figure 4B) [66] Similarly, CaCO3-based MMs loaded with doxorubicin (DOX) performs 
various tasks once they reach the target cell. [60] The navigation is conducted by NIR light 
(808 nm). During the drug delivery, the MM undertakes a series of tasks to reach the target, 
similar. (Figure 4C) Liu et al applied NIR-II to propel their nanomotor made of hydrogel 
containing DOX and Fe3O4@Cu9S8 NPs, which is the cause of the thermophoresis under NIR-
II irradiation. The nanomotor selectively attacked cancer cells in a mouse model. [67]  
 
Figure 4: Schematic illustrations of the mechanism of the respective MMs. (A) The helical 
MM sterilises food liquid with aptamers which are installed on the micromotor surface and kill 
harmful bacteria. [65] (B) The micromotor (the green rod) performs several functions to deliver 
and release the drug at the desired site.[66] (C) The CaCO3-based MM delivers the drug under 
NIR light, employs different tactics to reach the target and releases the drug. [60] (D) NIR-II 
is irradiated from outside the mouse body, penetrating it and reaching the nanomotor 
underneath. The nanomotor kills the cancer cells. [67] 
 
==PAGE:20==
10 
 
 1-5 Materials for the Fabrication of the MMs 
 Research indicates that MMs have great application potential in various fields ranging from 
pollution removal to drug delivery [40], [68]–[72]. Especially, when designing a novel drug-
delivery device, it is important to choose biocompatible materials that also have a small 
environmental impact in case of leakage. Among many materials, CaCO3 is considered as 
abundant yet highly biocompatible and thus possesses huge potential for medical applications. 
[73]–[75] Moreover, the surface of the carbonate is porous, which can load drug molecules 
inside, as Borodina et al demonstrated. [76] To efficiently deliver drugs, high controllability 
over the motion of the drug-delivery device also has to be concerned. The aforementioned 
thermophoresis offers the possibility to remotely control MMs by light irradiation. Au NPs 
satisfy these requirements due to their ability to efficiently convert light into heat even under 
NIR light irradiation.  
1-6 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) 
1-6-1 APIs and their Physicochemical Properties 
 APIs are compounds that induce chemical reactions inside patients’ bodies once taken in 
various formulations to obtain an intended therapeutic effect. The effect can be diagnosis, 
mitigation, and treatment of the disease of interest. These compounds are chemically 
synthesised either in batch or on an industrial scale depending on the situation the API is 
applied. [77] To simplify the synthesis complexity, their molecular structures are usually much 
smaller and simpler than those produced in bio-based methods or by enzymes. Despite their 
structure, it is possible to adjust the properties of the API by selecting functional groups. The 
functional groups determine, among others, pKa, which, for some APIs, is crucial because the 
value hugely influences the location where the API is activated as the pH value varies within 
the bodies.[78], [79] The pKa is the value at which the API is ionised by 50%, which dictates 
the degree of hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of the API, which is one of the decisive factors in 
how the APIs interact with the disease target during the treatment.[80], [81] The degree of the 
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of APIs, in principle, affects the pharmacokinetic profile of the 
compounds.[82] The profile includes the speed of the absorption and elimination of the APIs, 
hence also determining the residual time of the APIs in the bodies.  
==PAGE:21==
11 
 
1-6-2 Metronidazole (MET) 
 Metronidazole (MET) is an antibiotic commonly used to treat various bacterial infections 
caused by Bacteroides species, Clostridium species, Gardnerella vaginalis, and Trichomonas 
vaginalis against which the compound was applied for therapeutic use for the first time. The 
compound is particularly effective against gram-negative bacteria. [83] The compound is 
widely used as an API of topical medications. [84] Figure 5 shows the molecular structure of 
metronidazole. Despite its widespread application of the compound as an antibiotic also against 
skin disease, its exact therapeutic mechanism is yet to be elucidated. However, a mechanism is 
suggested to take place over 4 different steps: (a) penetration through bacterial cell walls; (b) 
reduction of the nitro group in the five-membered ring structure; (c) the momentarily cytotoxic 
effect by the metronidazole derivative; (d) decomposition of the derivative into an inactive end 
product. The reduction of metronidazole is believed to take place during metabolic processes 
with low redox potential involving electron transport components. [85] Table 1 summarises 
the physicochemical properties of MET. [86] 
 
Figure 5: The molecular structure of metronidazole [86] 
 
Table 1 Physicochemical properties of MET [86] 
==PAGE:22==
12 
 
 
1-6-3 Pharmacokinetics of Metronidazole  
 MET has a profound absorption behaviour when it is administered orally with high 
bioavailability whereas rectal, intravaginal and systemic absorption is also observed but they 
demonstrated poorer bioavailability than the oral counterpart [84], [87], [88]. The distribution 
of MET is facilitated by the cellular penetration that can take place in tissues and fluids. One 
study shows that the mean volume of distribution of MET is 1.05 l/kg. [89] Its binding to human 
plasma protein, which interferes with the distribution of some APIs, is less than 15%. [90] 
These data imply that MET can be distributed effectively. It is heavily metabolised before being 
eliminated. [91] Most notably, its alcoholic metabolites, which is the derivative with a 
cytotoxic effect on the bacteria, possess only 30% of the activity of the original compound. 
[92] The excretion of MET itself is hardly found in the urine whereas the hydroxy metabolite 
is excreted. [89]  
 1-6-4 Pharmacodynamics of Metronidazole 
 MET kills anaerobic bacteria at a higher rate than clindamycin and cefoxitin, both of which 
are also effective against anaerobic bacteria. [93] Additionally, it demonstrates its bactericidal 
effect that depends on its concentration against T. vaginalis under anaerobic conditions. The 
concentration range is from 0.1 to 10 or above times the minimum lethal concentrations. [94] 
1-7 Analytical Instruments 
 In this section, we will walk through the general principle of the pieces of equipment applied 
during this project. 
 1-7-1 Scanning Electron Microscopy: SEM 
As the name explicitly indicates, MMs are not visible with naked human eyes due to their size 
in micro-order. However, it is critical for the development of micro-devices to observe their 
shape and size. To achieve this, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is commonly applied. 
The crude diagram of the structure of the SEM is shown in Figure 6. The electron source or 
transmitter accelerates electrons with the addition of high voltage. Once the accelerated 
electrons are released from the emitter, they approach the anode that immediately follows. This 
anode is positively charged to diffract and align the electrons which otherwise are shot in 
==PAGE:23==
13 
 
random directions, hence forming the electron beam. The electron beam passes through the 
condenser lens, scan coils, and objective lens below which the sample specimen is located. 
Once the electron beam hits the surface of the specimen, it scatters in different manners 
depending on the surface profile of the sample. The surface between 5 and 50 nm depth is 
prone to emit secondary electrons. In comparison, the electrons from the transmitter are called 
primary electrons. The secondary electrons are the electrons that have been removed from the 
sample atom by the inelastic interaction between the electron beam and the electric field of an 
atom electron in the sample. The secondary electrons have energy less than 50 eV. During the 
generation of the secondary electrons, vacancy is created, in which electrons on higher-level 
orbitals refill, emitting characteristic X-rays. By contrast, deeper surfaces inside the sample 
tend to release backscattered electrons. Backscattered electrons are the result of the interactions 
between the electron beam and the electric field of the nucleus of a sample atom. The 
interaction modifies the direction of the incidental electron beam without losing the energy, 
usually possessing over 50 eV, which varies depending on the atomic density and number. 
Generally, secondary electrons provide researchers with sample morphology and topography, 
backscattered electrons indicate the composition of the sample, and X-ray reveals the 
identification of the atoms located on the surface of the sample. [95] 
 
1-7-2 Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Analysis: EDX 
 As mentioned in the previous section, SEM also produces X-rays by hitting the electron beam 
against the sample specimen. The generation of the X-rays takes place because electrons 
excited by the incidental beam return to their ground state. When the electrons do so, they emit 
the energy that they no longer require. The emitted energy is recognised as X-rays. The energy 
of the X-rays is characteristic of the identity of the elements that receive the electron beam. 
The X-ray detector receives these electromagnetic waves and converts them into electric 
signals, which are voltage pulses. Based on the signals, histograms are plotted, which gives the 
X-ray energy spectrum for elemental analysis. [96] 
 For samples that give weak signals due to their ability to emit only low-energy X-rays, the 
amplification of signals is performed by the increment in beam currents and/or imaging times. 
[96] Since the EDX analysis can be performed while running the SEM, its detector is often an 
==PAGE:24==
14 
 
integrated part of the SEM. In Figure 6, the detector is indicated as the “EDS detector”. EDS 
stands for Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy. 
Figure 6: Crude illustrations and image of the internal structure of SEM. [95] 
 
1-7-3 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy: FTIR  
  Infrared (IR) light is a tool for non-destructive, cheap, fast, and precise molecular analysis. IR 
light induces the vibration of different bonds in molecules depending on the wavelength of the 
light. Each molecule demonstrates vibrations at different IR wavelengths, which leads to a 
fingerprint of molecular identification and is useful for qualitative analysis. The vibrations can 
roughly be categorised into two types: stretching and bending. Stretching motion can be either 
symmetric or asymmetric. Bending vibrations include rocking, scissoring, wagging and 
twisting. Among these, molecules that give asymmetric vibrations show an IR spectrum 
because these motions cause changes in intramolecular dipole moment. However, molecules 
with symmetric structures and homonuclear diatomic molecules do not give IR spectra due to 
the lack of changes in the dipole moment. [97] 
 
==PAGE:25==
15 
 
 The components of an FTIR are, in general, the light source, which continuously emits the IR 
light in a controlled manner, the parts that select the light at the specific wavelength and remove 
the other light at untargeted wavelengths, and a detector. [97] As an example, Figure 7 shows 
a crude illustration of a single-beam and a double-beam spectrometer. In both spectrometers, 
the direction of IR light is aligned when it passes through the collimator, reaching the 
monochromator that selectively emits the light with a narrow range of wavelengths by 
diffraction. Once the light goes through the wavelength selector, it takes different paths 
depending on whether the spectrometer is single-beam or double-beam. In both spectrometers, 
the detector collects the transmitted light and visualises the data via an attached computer. The 
single-beam spectrometers allow all the light to go through the sample cuvette without losing 
energy, enabling the sensitivity of the device. The absence of light splitting also reduces the 
noise coming from multiple components through which the light passes in the double-beam 
spectrometers. However, they are labour-demanding due to their requirement to calibrate at 
each measurement. In the double-beam spectrometer, the light is split into two by the beam 
splitter (M1) and goes through the sample and reference cuvette at the same time. Reflecting 
mirrors (M2 and M3) and the grid mirror (M4) are integrated into the structure of the double-
beam spectrometer to navigate the IR light to hit the reference and get combined with the other 
light that passes through the sample. This splitting allows the spectrometer to simultaneously 
measure the sample spectrum while correcting the standardising it. [98] Despite its structural 
complexity and cost, the double-beam mechanism is commonly applied in FTIR spectrometers 
due to its high reproducibility of results, ability to automatically correct light intensity loss that 
takes place while it passes through the cuvettes, robustness against fluctuations in light 
intensity, and much less labour requirement than the single-beam counterpart.  
==PAGE:26==
16 
 
 
Figure 7: Crude illustrations of the structures of single-beam and double-beam spectrometers. 
[98] 
 
1-7-4 Microplate Reader  
 Although it is a simple task to select the amount of drug to load on MMs, the determination of 
the drug actually loaded on them can be challenging. To solve this problem, this project 
employed the microplate reader. The working principle of microplate readers is based on the 
UV absorption of molecules. [99] While IR light vibrates the bonds in target molecules, UV 
light excites electrons on the ground state, provided that the target molecules that can absorb 
the light at a specific wavelength. When such absorption takes place while UV light is passing 
through a cuvette containing a sample with UV absorptivity, the intensity of the transmitted 
light is reduced as compared to the initial one. The ratio of the intensities of the transmitted 
light and the initial light is taken, and the logarithmic value of the ratio to usually 10 as the 
basis is defined as absorbance. The UV spectrum is obtained by plotting the absorbance against 
the wavelength. The formula of the absorbance (A) is as follows.  
𝐴= 𝑙𝑜𝑔10 (
𝐼0
𝐼) 
 
 
(1) 
==PAGE:27==
17 
 
where I0 and I stand for the initial UV intensity and the transmitted UV intensity, respectively. 
Absorbance changes its value depending on the wavelength and the sample. In other words, 
each molecule has its unique UV absorption spectrum and thus it is possible to identify an 
unknown sample molecule based on the comparison of the obtained spectrum and reference 
spectra. To quantify the sample molecule in a solution, in principle, the Lambert-Beer law is 
commonly applied. The equation of the law is shown below. 
𝐴= 𝜀∗𝑐∗𝑑  
 
 
(2) 
where A, ε, c, and d are defined as absorbance, molar absorption coefficient which is unique to 
the sample molecule, the concentration of the sample, and the path length of the measuring 
beam in the sample, respectively. The equation states that the absorbance and the concentration 
of the sample species are proportional to each other, as the molar absorption coefficient and 
the path length are constant. Thus, it is possible to determine the concentration of the sample 
based on the absorbance. [100]  
 Both UV spectrometers and microplate readers work on the same principle however, the latter 
has much higher throughput than the former because it measures multiple samples in, for 
example, 96-well microplates. Figure 8 illustrates a part of the instrumental structure of a 
microplate reader. Similar to UV spectrometers, the UV light is emitted toward the sample but 
simultaneously in multiple wells in the microplate. Below the wells, there is a detector to catch 
the transmitted light to calculate the absorbance.  
 
Figure 8: A schematic illustration of the core part of a microplate reader. [101] 
==PAGE:28==
18 
 
  
1-7-5 Sputtering Machine  
 In this project, the carbonate-based MM is designed to move on thermophoresis under NIR 
light. To create the thermal gradient required for the motion mechanism, an asymmetric surface 
structure (Janus structure) is necessary for our MMs to have. The sputtering technique 
introduces such a structure by depositing Au NP on the hemispherical surface of the MMs. 
Figure 9 shows the principle of sputtering used for this project. In sputtering, the application 
of the energy transfer of the inert gas plasma to the surface of the target takes place to create 
the NPs of the target and the deposition of the NPs on the surface of the substrate. The plasma 
gas is created by electromagnetic excitation, which is generated by a direct current voltage, 
accelerated, and confined to the magnetic field under high pressures ranging from 10-1 to 10-3 
mbar. Once the plasma is shot against the target, the high energy is transferred from the plasma 
gas to the atoms on the surface of the target, from which the atoms are released. In other words, 
the bombardment of the accelerated plasma gas on the target creates the NPs that are used for 
the deposition. Consequently, ion implantation of the NPs into the substrate takes place, in 
which the NPs are integrated into the MMs, followed by the condensation of the NPs on their 
surface, forming a thin layer. [102] In our project, the inert gas, the target, and the substrate are 
the Ar gas, an Au cathode, and the MM with the drug. Although it is not applied for this project, 
it is possible for the sputtering machine to deposit thin layers of different metals such as Pt and 
Ag by selecting the cathode made of respective metals.  
Figure 9: Illustration of the sputtering process. [102] 
==PAGE:29==
19 
 
1-8 Aim of this Project  
 The aim of this study is to investigate parameters for CaCO3 Janus micromotors preparation 
and the effect of drug loading on the size. 
 
1-9 Hypothesis 
 CaCO3 microparticles for the base material of the Janus micromotor can be fabricated first by 
mixing two aqueous solutions of Na2CO3 and CaCl2 together, and then by optimising the 
fabrication parameters.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
20 
 
2 Experiment 
2-1 Fabrication of CaCO3 Microparticles (CCMPs)  
 It is a fundamental part of this project to be able to stably fabricate MMs with varying sizes 
with high replicability. First, the investigation into fabrication parameters was foretaken. Then, 
the fabrication method developed by Vikulina et al was employed. [103] 
 Throughout the procedure, Mili Q water was applied. In this report, CCMPs whose observed 
mean diameter is above 5 μm are termed “large” CCMPs whereas those whose diameter is less 
than 5 μm are called “smaller” CCMPs 
2-1-1 Fabrication Method during the Parameter Optimisation 
 This brief description gives an optimised fabrication procedure. In a glass bottle, 3 ml 1M 
CaCl2 and 3 ml 1M Na2CO3 were stirred by a magnetic stirrer for 5 min. 9 ml Mili Q water 
was added and left for 10 min as the crystallisation process. Afterwards, the mixture was 
centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min (Eppendorf ST 16R, Germany). The separated solvent was 
replaced by 15 ml Mili Q water and centrifuged under the same condition. This step was 
repeated once more. After the third centrifugation and the removal of the separated solvent, 2 
ml Mili Q water was added and transferred to a 10 ml beaker to dry at 95°C for 1h.  
2-1-2 Fabrication of MET-Loaded CCMPs during the Parameter 
Optimisation 
  As a proof of concept, MET was selected as a model API. The stock solution of MET was 
prepared by dissolving the drug into 1M Na2CO3 aqueous solution at 4 different concentrations 
(0.5, 1, 3, and 5 mg/ml). The same protocol mentioned in the previous section was employed 
with the MET stock solution. 
2-1-3 Fabrication of Large CCMPs 
 In a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube, 0.1 M CaCl2·H2O 0.3 ml aqueous solution was placed. Then 0.1 
M Na2CO3 0.3 ml was added and the mixture was left at room temperature for 2 hours without 
getting stirred. Afterwards, the mixture was centrifuged at 1000 g for 3 minutes (Eppendorf, 
Centrifuge 5430, Germany) and the supernatant was extracted for drug loading study. 0.5 ml 
==PAGE:31==
21 
 
Mili Q water was added, and the mixture was centrifuged under the same condition. The 
superfluent was removed and the MM was dried in the oven at 70 °C for 15 minutes.  
2-1-4 Fabrication of Small CCMPs 
 In a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube, 0.07 M CaCl2·H2O 0.8 ml aqueous solution was placed. Then 1 
M Na2CO3 0.012 ml was added and stirred at approximately 1300 rpm for 30 seconds. 
Afterwards, the mixture was left for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 minutes. 
(Eppendorf  5430, Germany) After extracting the supernatant for the drug loading study and 
0.5 ml Mili Q water was added, the mixture was centrifuged again under the same condition. 
Then, the superfluent was removed from the mixture and quickly dried in the oven at 200 °C. 
2-1-5 Fabrication of the MET-Loaded CCMPs 
 As a proof of concept, an antibiotic drug, metronidazole (MET) was selected as the model 
API. To integrate it, the MET stock solution was prepared by dissolving the drug into 0.1 M 
CaCl2·H2O and 0.07 M CaCl2·H2O for the large and small CCMPs, respectively. 4 different 
concentrations (0.5, 1, 3, and 5 mg/ml) were for the MET loading test. The same protocols 
were applied using the CaCl2 aqueous solutions containing the MET. 
2-1-6 Principle of the Fabrication 
 Bots et al argue that the crystallisation of the carbonate is a three-step process under the 
condition in which the salt grows in a supersaturated environment.[104] Figure 10 depicts the 
graphical description of the multistage crystallisation process. Firstly, immediately after the 
raw materials (namely, Na2CO3 and CaCl2) at high concentrations are mixed, disordered 
hydrated amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) is formed. The transition from the ACC to 
vaterite takes place because the process is thermodynamically favoured. [105] The transition 
is also facilitated by the solubility difference in which the vaterite has a much lower value than 
the ACC, encouraging nucleation and spherulitic growth until the ACC is exhausted. Once the 
exhaustion of the ACC happens, the second stage of crystallisation takes place: Ostwald 
ripening. During the ripening, the crystal has time to grow if provided. However, with a 
prolonged time given, the dissolution of vaterite takes place to form calcite, which is more 
stable than the former. [106] The rate of the second process is much slower than the first 
process, but it can be even prolonged under a low concentration of CO32- ion. [107]  
==PAGE:32==
22 
 
 Figure 11 shows different crystallisation mechanisms the CaCO3 crystals follow in different 
fabrication methods. [103] Based on the multistage crystallisation, the fabrication method 
produces the large crystals via Ostwald ripening that requires a slow growth progress while 
small crystals are fabricated via a nucleation-controlled condition in which a high stirring speed 
is crucial to maintain the high supersaturation of the reaction mixture.  
 
Figure 10: A suggested multistage crystallisation mechanism of CaCO3. [104] 
 
 
Figure 11: Different crystallisation mechanisms that take place depending on the fabrication 
condition.[103] 
==PAGE:33==
23 
 
2-2 Characterisation of the CCMPs  
The characterisation of the surface was conducted with scanning electron microscopy (SEM; 
TM3030Plus, Hitachi, Japan). For the SEM, the MMs were diluted in ethanol and suspended 
on a silicon wafer and air-dried. The size was calculated using a free image analysing software, 
ImageJ (https://imagej.net/Welcome) Composition analysis was conducted by using Fourier 
transform infrared spectroscopy. (IR-Prestige-21, Shimadzu, Japan) and Energy-Dispersive X-
ray Spectroscopy (EDX).  
2-3 Drug Loading Study   
 To estimate the amount of the MET loaded on the CCMPs, a method using the microplate 
reader (VarioskanTM, Thermo Scientific) based on UV absorption at 380 nm was employed for 
this project. In a 96-welled microplate, superfluent extracted during the fabrication of MET-
loaded CCMPs were pipetted as the samples. The CaCl2-solutions with the MET at the 4 
concentrations were also pipetted in the microplate as the standard stock solutions. The 
superfluent extracted during the fabrication of CaCO3 crystals was pipetted as the blank 
sample. Then the absorbance of each solution is measured. Based on the absorbances obtained, 
the following calculation is conducted:  
1 The mean value of the absorbance of the superfluent extracted from the fabrication of MET-
free CCMPs is calculated.  
2 The Difference between the absorbances of the standard stock solution and the values 
obtained in Step 1 was calculated. 
3 The values obtained in Step 2 were plotted against the concentrations of the standard stock 
solutions to obtain a standard curve. 
4 Differences between the absorbances of the superfluent, which was extracted from the 
fabrication of MET-loaded CCMPs and the value obtained in Step 1 were calculated.  
5 The values obtained in Step 4 were applied to the standard curve from Step 3 to gain the MET 
concentration in the superfluent, which was extracted from the fabrication of the MET-loaded 
CCMPs.  
6 The difference between the concentration of the standard stock solutions and the values 
obtained in Step 5 was calculated. They were the MET concentration loaded in the CCMPs.  
 
==PAGE:34==
24 
 
 Figure 12 displayed the way the superfluent and the solutions were pipetted in the 96-welled 
microplate. The wells marked with “MM+Drug”, “Drug in CaCl2“, and “MM” were those in 
which the superfluent extracted during the fabrication of the MET-loaded CCMPs, the MET in 
CaCl2 aqueous solutions, and the superfluent extracted during the fabrication of CCMPs were 
placed, respectively.  
 
Figure 12 A photograph of the microplate used for the drug loading study. 
 
2-4 Au Sputtering 
  To construct Janus MMs, it is required to construct an asymmetric structure. To achieve this 
goal, Cressington 208HR sputter coater with the Au target (TED PELLA, INC., USA) was 
employed. After the fabrication of MET-loaded CCMPs was completed, 0.6 mg small MET-
loaded crystals and 2 mg large MET-loaded CCMPs were suspended on separate clean glass 
plates using absolute ethanol as the solvent. After the solvent completely evaporated, the 
suspended CCMPs were carefully placed in the chamber of the sputter coater. The Au NPs 
were sputtered on the suspended MPs at 40 mA for 30 seconds. This process was repeated once 
more. The Au-coated MET-MMs (Au-MET-MMs) were stored in the air at room temperature 
for further study. 
 
==PAGE:35==
25 
 
3 Results and Discussion 
3-1 Optimisation of Fabrication Parameters  
 In this study, stirring time, crystallisation time, and temperature were investigated as target 
parameters. The result of the investigation into temperature is included in Appendix A. In this 
report, size is defined as the observed mean diameter of CCMPs recognisable in SEM images.  
3-1-1 Stirring Time  
 Firstly, the effect of stirring time on the crystal size was investigated. The stirring process was 
conducted by mixing the raw materials using magnetic stirrers for 0.5, 1, and 5 minutes (min) 
followed by leaving time for 10 min as an initial crystallisation time. Figure 13 shows the SEM 
images and the size obtained after the fabrication. Figures 13 (a), (b) and (c) display the images 
of CaCO3 crystals after being stirred for 0.5, 1, and 5 min, respectively. They show that most 
of the crystals are spherical, which is a feature of vaterite, regardless of the stirring time length. 
Figure 13 (d) shows the sizes and their standard deviations corresponding to the different 
stirring times. The mean size after stirring for 0.5, 1, and 5 min were 2.80±0.40, 1.99±0.44, 
and 1.70±0.52 μm, respectively. To obtain more detailed information on the sizes, the size 
distributions of CCMPs were investigated. Figure 14 shows the result.  Figures 14 (a), (b), 
and (c) each display the size distribution after stirring for 0.5, 1, and 5 min followed by the 
crystallisation for 10 min. Figure 14 (a) reveals that the minimum size obtained after 0.5 min 
stirring is 2 μm while the most frequently observed size is between 2.5 and 3 μm. Also, there 
is 1 crystal whose size is beyond 4 μm. Figure 14 (b) shows that the minimum size is below 1 
μm, the maximum size is between 2.5 and 3 μm, and the most frequently observed size is found 
between 2.5 and 3 μm after 1 min stirring. Figure 14 (c) shows that the size range is the same 
as the result obtained after 1 min stirring. However, the most frequently observed sizes are 
between 1.5 and 2.5 μm. To verify that the stirring effect on the size was replicable, the same 
fabrication process was conducted twice so that the initial attempt was counted as the first trial. 
Table 2 summarises the means and their standard deviations (Stdv) obtained from the 3 trials. 
The result reveals that the mean slightly fluctuates despite the constant stirring times and 
crystallisation times.  
==PAGE:36==
26 
 
 Although stirring time for 0.5 and 1 min yielded crystals with a narrower range than those 
obtained after 5 min of stirring, the replicating trials revealed that more calcites were observed 
in the first two groups than in the last group which was stirred for 5 min. Therefore, 5 min was 
selected for the optimal stirring time length.  
Figure 13: SEM images of CCMPs fabricated by stirring for (a) 0.5, (b) 1, and (c) 5 min 
followed by crystallisation for 10 min, (d) mean sizes and their standard deviations 
corresponding to the stirring times, indicated by the lines on the top of each bar. The bar is 10 
μm.  
Figure 14: Size distributions obtained after stirring for (a) 0.5, (b) 1, and (c) 5 min followed 
by 10 min crystallisation. 
==PAGE:37==
27 
 
 
Table 2: The summary of the mean sizes and their standard deviation (Stdv). 
 
 Figure 13 indicates that the crystal shape is not affected by the stirring time length, which also 
indicates that the reaction between Ca2+ and CO32- is an extremely fast process as argued in 
previous literature. [103] Figures 13 and 14 indicate that the longer stirring times lead to 
smaller vaterite crystals with statistically significant differences in their sizes. However, Table 
2 shows otherwise, which indicates that there is another factor involved in forming vaterite 
crystals. Shimazu et al argued that the crystal size was influenced by the stirring profile such 
as the position and the speed of their mixing equipment, which in turn affected the flow 
dynamics of the mixed materials. [108] Yousuf et al discovered that the size distribution profile 
shifted toward smaller sizes by increasing the shear stress generated by stirring. [109] The shear 
stress is generated by the non-homogeneous flow profile, which causes friction between fluids 
at different velocities in the agitated reactor. During my fabrication trials, the individual 
difference in stirrers available in the laboratory was vividly recognised because the apparent 
mixing speed was different despite setting the same stirring speed across the magnetic stirrers. 
Also, to compensate for the apparently different stirring speed, the stirring speed was modified 
while the mixing of the raw materials was taking place. The individual difference in the stirrers 
and the human-made errors were considered to be causes of the fluctuation in the crystal size 
Table 2 revealed. Table 2 also shows that crystals being stirred for 0.5 min are generally larger 
than those obtained with a longer stirring time. This could be also caused by the increment of 
the stirring speed during the longer stirring times. To confirm that the shear stress influences 
the crystal size, it is worth changing the stirring intensity as an indication of shear stress, and 
to observe the morphology of the CaCO3 crystals. To limit the number of fabrication 
parameters during this investigation, using the same magnetic stirrer, the same stirrer[110], and 
its position in the glass bottle [111] for a short stirring time such as 10 seconds will be required.  
 
==PAGE:38==
28 
 
3-1-2 Crystallisation Time 
  As there is a term called “crystal growth rate”, I set a hypothesis that crystals generally take 
time to grow. [112] Based on this, the effect of crystallisation time on the crystal size was 
investigated. Setting the stirring time at 5 min, the following crystallisation times were tried: 
30, 60 (1h), and 1440 (24h) min. These values are taken from an earlier study. [103] Figures 
15 show the SEM images taken after leaving the stirred mixture for 30, 60 and 1440 min as 
crystallisation times. The majority of the crystals are vaterite until they are left for 60 min for 
crystallisation but when they are left for 1440 min, the resulting crystals are calcites. Figure 
15 (e) shows the sizes and their standard deviation with their corresponding crystallisation 
times. The data from crystallisation time at 10 min are taken from those obtained during the 
investigation into stirring time as a reference. The mean sizes are 1.70±0.52, 0.99±0.36, 
1.19±0.35, and 1.11±0.33 μm for crystals obtained after crystallisation for 10, 30, 60 and 1440 
min, respectively. The difference in the mean sizes is statistically significant but they are not 
large enough for further study. To obtain further insight into the size profile of the CCMPs, the 
size distributions were taken. Figures 16 show the size distributions obtained after 
crystallisation for 10, 30, 60 and 1440 min. The size range shown in Figures 16 (a) and (c) are 
wider than in Figures 16 (b) and (d). Figures 16 also indicate that in general, longer 
crystallisation times seem to lead to smaller crystals. To verify the indication obtained from 
Figure 16, the same fabrication procedures were repeated twice, thus the first fabrication was 
counted as the first trial. Table 3 summarises the mean sizes and their standard deviation (Stdv) 
obtained during the replication. As observed during the investigation of stirring time, similar 
fluctuations in the size exist despite the repetition of the fabrications with the same parameters. 
In particular, crystallisation for 1440 min yielded calcites, which is in agreement with the study 
conducted by Rodriguez-Blanco et al. whose data shows that leaving vaterites in water longer 
than 12.5h transforms the vaterites into calcite.[113] Although crystallisation for 60 min 
produced vaterites in more stable sizes than those obtained after crystallisation for 10 min, the 
former also yielded more calcite than the latter. For the fabrication of Janus MMs, it is crucial 
to have a spherical structure. Therefore, 10 min was selected for crystallisation time.  
==PAGE:39==
29 
 
Figure 15: SEM images of CCMPs after crystalising for (a) 10, (b) 30, (c) 60, and (d) 1440 
min, (e) the mean sizes and their standard distribution. The bars in the SEM imagesindicate 10 
μm.  
 
Figure 16: The size distribution obtained after crystallising for (a) 10, (b) 30, (c) 60, and (d) 
1440 min. 
 
==PAGE:40==
30 
 
Table 3: The summary of the investigation of the effect of crystallisation on the size. 
 
 As revealed by the data, the time length of crystallisation does not influence the size of CCMPs 
though it affects their shape. The transformation of the crystal shape occurs due to the solubility 
difference between vaterite and calcite. [113] The solubility constant of the former is 10-7.913 
whereas the latter is 10-8.480. Thus, if vaterite remains in the water for 24h, it dissolves and 
reprecipitates to form calcite. The transformation is surface-controlled as the “transition” state 
of such crystals has the appearance of vaterite fused with calcite. Rodriguez-Blanco argues that 
the mechanism of this transformation is the release of Ca2+ and CO32- ions from the surface of 
the vaterite, which is followed by their reprecipitation on the same site. [113] This reaction is 
observable in Figure 15 (c). Even if the shape transformation does not take place, Hanafy 
implies that the aggregation of CaCO3 crystals can take place due to the high surface energy, 
and ions form nuclei instead of contributing to the crystal growth. [114] The aggregation of the 
single crystals is not preferable for the fabrication of Janus MMs because it makes it difficult 
to coat an Au layer only partially. Therefore, provided that the concentration and the volume 
of the raw materials are constant, the adjustment in crystallisation time is highly unlikely to 
grow the CaCO3 single crystals. 
.  
3-1-3 Chemical compositions of CCMPs 
 To verify the composition of the obtained CaCO3 crystal, EDX images and FTIR spectra were 
obtained. Figures 17 show an SEM image of a CaCO3 single crystal obtained from the 
optimised fabrication, and EDX images of calcium (yellow), oxygen (green), and carbon (red). 
Each element shows the densest area at the site where the vaterite is, verifying the 
compositional elements of CaCO3. Figure 17 (e) shows the FTIR spectrum of the raw materials 
and CaCO3. From the top, the red, blue, and black lines are the spectrum of CaCl2, Na2CO3, 
and CaCO3 crystals, respectively. In the FTIR spectrum of CaCO3, two clear peaks at 870, and 
1401 cm-1 are attributed to out-of-plane C=O bending and asymmetric C-O stretch, 
respectively. [115] They are superimposable to the peaks at 876 and 1406 c m-1 on the FTIR 
==PAGE:41==
31 
 
spectrum of Na2CO3. [116] However, it is difficult to evaluate whether CaCO3 has CaCl2 as its 
component by observing the FTIR spectrum alone. This is because FTIR only indicates the 
presence of CaCl2 by detecting the H-O-H bending, which is the result of the interaction 
between Cl- and water molecules absorbed by the chloride. [116] Therefore, the FTIR spectrum 
of CaCO3 was compared with other literature, which confirmed that the CaCO3 was vaterite. 
[117] Therefore, the FTIR data indirectly confirmed the compositions of the CaCO3 crystal as 
well as its crystal state, which is vaterite. 
Figure 17: (a) An SEM image of the CaCO3, EDX images of (b) calcium, (c) oxygen, (d) 
carbon, and (e) FTIR spectrum. The bars in SEM and EDX images indicates 5 μm. 
 
==PAGE:42==
32 
 
3-1-4 Drug Loading  
 Inspired by a study conducted by Vikulina et al, in this project, metronidazole (MET) was 
dissolved into 1M Na2CO3 aqueous solution to co-synthesise the CaCO3 crystals. [118] As a 
preliminary investigation, 4 different concentrations were tested: 0.5, 1, 3, and 5 mg/ml.  
 Figures 18 show the SEM images of the CCMPs fabricated using MET in the aqueous solution 
at 0.5, 1, 3, and 5 mg/ml#. When the MET concentration is up to 1 mg/ml, the crystal shape is 
spherical. However, at 3 and 5 mg/ml, calcites are recognised. This indicates that the drug 
concentration affects the crystal shape. Figure 18 (e) shows the mean sizes and their standard 
deviation against the MET concentration (Cx). The sizes of the MET-loaded CCMPs at 0.5, 1, 
3, and 5 mg/ml are 1.96±0.48, 1.47±0.56, 1.12±0.31, and 1.36±0.43 μm, respectively. These 
data indicate that the higher load decreases the size of the CCMPs. Figures 19 show the size 
distribution of the MET-loaded CCMPs at 0.5, 1, 3, and 5 mg/ml. The size range is between 
0.5 and 3.5 μm at the crystals with 0.5 and 1 mg/ml loading whereas at 3 and 5 mg/ml loading, 
the range is between 0.5 and 2.5 μm. Irrespective of the MET concentration, the majority of 
the particle size is between 1 and 1.5 μm, suggesting that the MET concentration actually does 
not affect the size of the CCMPs. To verify how the MET concentration influences the 
microparticle size, the same fabrication was repeated twice. Table 4 summarises by listing the 
mean sizes and their corresponding standard deviations (Stdv). Based on Figures 18 and 19, 
as well as Table 4, the MET concentration in 1M Na2CO3 influences the mean size and the 
shape of the microparticle to some degree. However, it does not affect the overall profile of the 
size distribution. It is probably attributed to the phenomenon in which the MET in 1M Na2CO3 
solution gains strong pink colour as the drug concentration increases. When MET is dissolved 
in the water, the solution is colourless and transparent (The photographs of the MET aqueous 
solutions are available in Appendix B1.). Therefore, the colour may indicate that the basic 
condition created by Na2CO3 induced the hydrolysis of MET. [119] For this reason, the CaCO3 
microparticles could not absorb MET, which consequently results in no size effect observed in 
my study.  
==PAGE:43==
33 
 
Figure 18: SEM images of CCMPs with MET concentrations at (a) 0.5, (b) 1, (c) 3, and (d) 5 
mg/ml, and (e) the mean sizes with their standard deviations against the MET concentrations 
(Cx). The bars in the SEM images indicates 10 μm. 
Figure 19: Size distributions of the CCMPs with MET concentrations at (a) 0.5, (b) 1, (c) 3, 
and (d) 5 mg/ml.  
 
==PAGE:44==
34 
 
Table 4: Summary of the effect of the MET loading over the crystal size. 
 
 It is well-documented that the presence of other chemical species than Ca2+ and CO32-, usually 
additives affects the crystal morphology.[120]–[122] Trushina demonstrates the increasing 
concentration of additives such as ethylene glycol and glycerol leads to a decrease in mean 
vaterite crystal size. [123] The combination of additives and the design of the fabrication 
method can limit the size variation within 0.4 to 2.7 μm. [124] My project revealed that the 
drug concentration also influences the crystal shape if the drug exists at a high concentration 
during the nucleation of the microparticles. However, to my knowledge, there is no study 
showing that an additive facilitates the growth of CaCO3 microparticles with their size reaching 
above 10 μm. Therefore, there is still a potential in discovering an additive that not only protects 
the vaterite from its transformation into calcite, [122] but also facilitates the vaterite nuclei to 
increase their diameter.  
 
3-2 CCMPs in Different Sizes  
Hitherto, it is impossible to produce CCMPs in vastly different sizes preferably with, at least, 
a 10 μm difference in size. To solve this problem, an additive-free fabrication of microparticles 
tested by Vikulina et al is implimented in this project. [103] 
 
3-2-1 Fabrication 
 To verify that the protocol described in Vikulina et al was replicable, the fabrication of the 
CCMPs was conducted by implementing the parameters summarised in Table 5. [103] To 
produce small CCMPs, the concentrations and volumes were 0.07 M and 0.8 ml for the CaCl2 
• 2H2O solution and 1M and 0.012 ml for the Na2CO3 solution. The stirring time and the 
crystallisation time were 0.5 min and 30 min, respectively. These conditions set up the 
supersaturation for the CaCO3 to crystalise in smaller sizes. The excess CaCl2 also aids the 
crystallisation within the limited diameter. To fabricate the large CCMPs, the concentration 
==PAGE:45==
35 
 
and the volume of the raw materials were set to be equivalent; 0.1M and 0.3 ml. There was no 
stirring but a much longer crystallisation time than the one taken for the fabrication of the 
smaller microparticles. These parameters limit the number of nuclei generated before the 
crystal growth and instead encourage each nucleus to take Ostwald ripening. Even with the 
deviations, the size difference between the small and large crystals is above 5 μm. Figure 20 
shows the CCMPs obtained after the fabrication. Based on the scale bars in the SEM images, 
it is evident that the large CCMP is much bigger than the smaller counterpart.  
 
 Table 5: Summary of the fabrication parameters of the small and large CaCO3 crystals and 
their mean size and its standard deviation. 
 
Figure 20: SEM images of (a) small and (b) large CCMPs. The bars indicate 1 μm.  
 
 As implemented in Vikulina’s fabrication method, the degree of supersaturation plays a major 
part in the realisation of the production of CCMPs in different sizes. This is proven by the 
degree of supersaturation or supersaturation ratio based on activity Sa is defined by Flaten as: 
[125] 
(a) 
(b) 
==PAGE:46==
36 
 
𝑆𝑎= √
𝑎𝐶𝑎2++𝑎𝐶𝑂32−
𝐾𝑠𝑝
  
 
 
(3) 
In equation (3), Ksp is the thermodynamic solubility product of CaCO3. The ai is the activity 
coefficient of a chemical species i. For the fabrication of CaCO3, the activity coefficient is 
equivalent to the ionic concentration in the water. Equation (3) is used to theoretically calculate 
the radius of critical nucleus rc and the rate of nucleation J, both of which are defined as [123]:  
𝑟𝑐=
2𝛾𝑣
𝐾𝑇𝑙𝑛(𝑆)   
 
             (4) 
𝐽= 𝐴𝑒𝑥𝑝[−
16𝜋𝛾3𝑣2
3𝐾3𝛵3 {ln(𝑆)}2]  
 
(5) 
 Here, γ is interfacial tension, v is the volume of a molecule inside the nucleus, K is Boltzmann 
constant, and T is temperature. Equations (4) and (5) argue that higher supersaturation leads to 
the formation of smaller nuclei at greater speed. Based on this argument, it is highly plausible 
that the optimisation of the fabrication parameters in this study has been unsuccessful because 
the concentrations of the CaCl2 and Na2CO3 have been excessively high for the CCMPs to 
grow. On the contrary, Vikulina’s method yields a large crystal size because it takes the 
supersaturation ratio into consideration. However, unlike their results, it has been impossible 
to achieve the crystal diameter as great as 50 μm. Rather, the resulting mean size of the large 
vaterite crystals is much closer to the one Volodkin obtained. [126] It can be attributed to the 
age of 1M Na2CO3 stock solution used for the fabrication. The stock solution was prepared 2 
months ago. By the time Vikulina’s method was tested, the stock solution had a white 
precipitate on the mouth of the storing bottle. Though the identity of the white precipitate has 
not been determined, it is speculated that the natural evaporation of the solution has been 
trapped by the lid, forcing the vapour to leave the Na+ and CO32- ions. As the vapour further 
evaporates, recrystallisation takes place and forms the white precipitate along the mouth of the 
bottle. If this hypothesis is correct, the concentration of the 1M Na2CO3 aqueous solution has 
decreased over time. As there are fewer CO32- ions in the reaction glass bottle, the amorphous 
calcium carbonate (ACC) is formed less than it is originally designed, which causes the early 
exhaustion of ACC and the disruption in the Ostwald ripening. Consequently, the size of the 
vaterite crystals shortens. Therefore, it is required to prepare new solutions for the raw 
materials at every fabrication.  
 
==PAGE:47==
37 
 
3-2-2 Drug Loading in Two Sizes  
 Instead of dissolving MET in the Na2CO3 aqueous solution, the drug was dissolved in the 
CaCl2•2H2O aqueous solution to avoid undesirable reactions. Using the solution containing 
MET, the small and large CCMPs were fabricated. Figure 21 (a) and (b) show an SEM image 
of the small and large CCMPs while Figure 21 (c) and (d) show the sizes and their standard 
deviation for small and large MET-loaded CCMPs, respectively. For 0.5, 1, 3, and 5 mg/ml, 
the sizes of the small MET-loaded CCMPs are 3.31±1.87, 2.63±1.65, 2.37±1.46, and 15.0±2.63 
μm while the size of larger counterparts are 9.27±4.99, 9.46±4.38, 3.51±4.67, and 26.7±8.41, 
respectively. Table 6 lists the mean sizes and their standard deviation of the MET-loaded 
CCMPs. Generally, as the MET concentration reaches 3 mg/ml, the behaviour of the size 
becomes interesting. The size of large CCMPs greatly fluctuates at any MET concentration 
while the size of the smaller CCMPs remains unaffected.  
Figure 21: SEM images of (a) small and (b) large CCMPs, size comparison of (c) small and 
(d) large CCMPs before and after the adsorption of MET. The bars in SEM images indicate 10 
μm 
 
Figure 22 shows the size distribution of small CCMPs at MET concentrations at (a) 0.5, (b) 1, 
(c) 3, and (d) 5 mg/ml. Compared to the small MET-free CCMPs, the size range of the MET-
loaded small CCMPs gets wider as a few of them have a size larger than 5 μm. The majority 
of them are from 2 to 4 μm in their diameter except for those fabricated with MET concentration 
==PAGE:48==
38 
 
at 5 mg/ml, whose majority size varies from 1 to 4 μm. Furthermore, the frequency of the MET-
loaded CCMPs larger than 5 μm increases as the MET concentration gets higher. These results 
imply that the presence of MET greatly influences the nucleation of small vaterites under high 
supersaturation. Some of the “small” crystals are above 5 μm in diameter.  
Figure 22: Size distributions of the small CCMPs with MET concentration at (a) 0.5, (b) 1, (c) 
3, and (d) 5 mg/ml.  
Figure 23: Size distributions of the large CCMPs with the MET concentrations at (a) 0.5, (b) 
1, (c) 3, and (d) 5 mg/ml.  
  
 Figure 23 shows the size distribution of the large CCMPs with MET concentration at (a) 0.5, 
(b) 1, (c) 3, and (d) 5 mg/ml. When the MET concentration is at 0.5 and 1 mg/ml, the majority 
of the large crystals are between 6 and 11 μm in their diameter. However, at 3 and 5 mg/ml, 
==PAGE:49==
39 
 
the distribution profile changes drastically. At 3 mg/ml, the majority size is between 1 and 6 
μm but the sizes between 16 and 21 μm are the minority. At 5 mg/ml, the most frequent size is 
above 21 μm followed by those between 16 and 21 μm.   
 
Table 6: Summary of the mean and standard deviation (Stdv) of the small and large CCMPs 
with MET concentrations.  
 
  The comparison of Figures 21, 22, and 23 gives rise to an interesting point. Figures 21 (a) 
and 22 indicate that the MET concentration does not influence the size distribution profile of 
the small CCMPs as greatly as it does to the larger counterpart, as indicated by Figures 21 (b) 
and 23. Table 6 also indicates this point. This can be attributed to the supersaturation ratio. 
The condition to fabricate small CCMPs seems to maintain its sufficiently high supersaturation 
ratio to produce the intended size despite the presence of the MET molecules. However, the 
low supersaturation ratio for the fabrication of large CCMPs can be sensitive to the presence 
of the drug molecule, which increases the ratio. As discussed in section 3-2-1, a higher 
saturation ratio leads to the nucleation of small crystals. As the concentration of MET increases, 
so does the supersaturation ratio, which results in the size profile shown in Figure 23. 
However, at 5 mg/ml, a different mechanism can be involved. One possible mechanism is that 
active loading has taken place during the fabrication, in which the aggregation of vaterite takes 
place using the drug crystals that could not dissolve in water as nuclei. [118] Another possible 
mechanism is the reprecipitation of CaCO3 due to the presence of the MET crystals. The SEM 
image in Appendix B2 shows, there are significantly more calcites observed when the 5 mg/ml 
MET solutions are used for the fabrication. In this mechanism, vaterite is formed. However, it 
releases Ca2+ and CO32- ions from its surface and those ions reach the drug crystal. As the ions 
re-precipitate, they form calcite centring the drug crystal. Further investigation into the 
nucleation behaviour of CaCO3 in the presence of a drug is required.  
==PAGE:50==
40 
 
 To stabilise and limit the size variation, the fabrication of vaterite in the solvent mixture of 
water and ethylene glycol with gelatine has been proven to be effective. [127] However, the 
resulting crystal size is extremely small for this study.  
 
 To determine the MET concentration for further study, the amount of MET loaded on the 
CCMPs was investigated using the microplate reader. The superfluent extracted during the first 
centrifugation process of the fabrication of both MET-free and MET-loaded CCMPs was 
pipetted in a microplate together with the MET in the CaCl2•2H2O solutions that were used as 
the standard material. Figures 24 (a) and (b) show the standard curves obtained from the MET 
in the CaCl2•2H2O solutions. To confirm the data, 4 samples were taken from each solution. 
There were standard solutions with 4 different MET concentrations however, those of 3 and 5 
mg/ml showed only saturated result that was not reliable data. For this reason, the points for 
these two solutions were omitted from the curve. The curves were adjusted to have the origin. 
The regression coefficients (R2) are 0.998 for both curves for small and large MET-loaded 
CCMPs. As the absorbance obtained from the microplate reader only indicated the amount of 
MET in the superfluent, the simple calculation described in sections 2-3 was performed. The 
result of the calculation is summarised in Table 7 which includes the size of the CCMPs, 
concentrations, and the estimated loaded amount of MET. In both the small and large CCMPs, 
as the concentration of MET doubles, the loaded amount also increases by twice. Based on the 
data listed in Table 7, the encapsulation efficiency is calculated. [128] It is defined as:  
𝐸𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦= 
(𝑐0−𝑐𝐸)
𝑐𝐸
   
 
(6)  
where, c0 and cE each stand for the initial concentration of the drug in the stock solution and 
the concentration of the drug in the superfluent extracted during the first centrifugation for the 
fabrication. Therefore, the encapsulation efficiency obtained from the MET 1 mg/ml stock 
solution is 34% for small and 48% for large CCMPs. At 0.5 mg/ml, the efficiency is 22.8 % 
for the small and 50.2% for the large CCMPs.  Due to the larger loaded amount, the CCMPs 
fabricated using the 1 mg/ml MET solution are selected for further study. However, it is 
difficult to evaluate whether the large CCMPs can load more MET than the smaller counterpart 
because the fabrication method uses different volumes of the CaCl2•2H2O solutions at two 
separate concentrations. Therefore, further investigation on drug loading is required. An 
alternative method the drug encapsulation is the adsorption by the CCMPs that have already 
been fabricated. [118] In this method, the drug is dissolved into the water, eliminating the 
==PAGE:51==
41 
 
concern for its decreased solubility due to the presence of CaCl2. In the case of metronidazole, 
it can dissolve in water up to 1.0 g/100 ml, or 10 mg/ml. [86] By mixing the MET in the aqueous 
solvent with the vaterite, a more detailed standard curve can be obtained, and the maximum 
encapsulation efficiency is estimated with higher precision.  
Figure 24: Standard curves obtained for the MET-loaded (a) small and (b) large CCMPs. 
 
Table 7: The summary of the loaded amount of MET on the small (S) and large (L) CCMPs. 
 
3-2-3 Compositions 
To confirm that the MET was adsorbed into the crystals, the FTIR spectra were taken. Figure 
25 (a) shows the spectrum of small, and Figure 25 (b) shows the spectra of the large CCMP. 
Both of them also show the spectrum of MET. The grey line shows the MET-free CCMPs 
(small or large CaCO3) while the black one shows the MET-loaded CCMPs (MET+CaCO3). 
The green line shows the spectrum of MET, which shows a broad peak at 1471 cm-1, being 
attributed to the N=O asymmetric stretch. The peaks at 1425, 1353, and between 1265 and 
1157 cm-1 are assigned to C-C stretching, N=O asymmetric stretching, and C-O stretching. C-
N stretching and =C-H bending are indicated by the peaks at 1074 and 711 cm-1, respectively. 
==PAGE:52==
42 
 
The obtained spectrum for MET is very similar to the one investigated in earlier studies. [129], 
[130] The peak at 870 cm-1 in the spectrum of both small and large MET-loaded CCMPs 
indicates that MET has been loaded on the CCMPs. An extremely small peak is recognised at 
1074 cm-1 in the spectrum for MET-loaded CCMPs, further confirming the adsorption of MET 
into the CCMPs.  
Figure 25: FTIR spectra (a) small and (b) large CCPMs 
To confirm that the MET adsorption influenced the particle sizes, SEM images of MET-free 
and the 1 mg/ml MET-loaded CCMPs were taken and displayed in Figure 26 (a) and (b), 
respectively. Table 8 and Table 9 list the sizes of MET-free and 1 mg/ml MET-loaded small 
CCMP. Figures 27 (a) and (b) show the SEM images and Tables 10 and 11 enlist the size 
information of the MET-free and 1 mg/ml MET-loaded larger CaCO3 crystals. Figure 26does 
not immediately show the mean size difference between the two small CCPMs. However, 
Table 8 and 9 reveal that the size increases with the adsorption of MET. On the contrary, 
Figure 26: SEM images (a) MET-free and (b) MET-loaded small CCMP. The bars 
indicate 5 μm.  
==PAGE:53==
43 
 
Tables 10 and 11 reveal that the MET adsorption decreases the size of the large CCMPs, and 
this effect is more observable in Figure 27.  
 
.Table 8: Observed mean diameter and standard deviation of the MET-free small CCMPs 
 
Table 9: Observed mean diameter and standard deviation of the MET-loaded small CCMPs.  
 
Figure 27: SEM images of (a) MET-free and (b) MET-loaded large CCMP The bars indicate 
10 μm. 
 
Table 10: Observed mean diameter and standard deviation of the MET-free large CCMPs. 
 
==PAGE:54==
44 
 
Table 11: Observed mean diameter and standard deviation of the MET-loaded large CCMPs. 
 
Table 8 and 9 reveals that the small CCMPs are enlarged by the encapsulation of MET whereas 
Table 10 and 11 shows the opposite effect occurs to the size of the large CCMPs. As discussed 
in section 3-2-2, two different mechanisms can also take place. The small CCMPs actively 
adsorb MET during their fabrication, resulting in greater crystal size. Meanwhile, the 
fabrication of large CCMPs may be affected by the volume occupied by MET, leading to higher 
supersaturation than in the absence of the drug molecule. Also as discussed in the same 
previous section, drug molecules can also be recognised as an additive when the fabrication of 
the large crystals takes place. As Naka demonstrated that the increment in the addition of 
poly(amidoamine) decreases the vaterite size. [130] In a similar way, the diameter of the 
CaCO3 spherical crystal is expected to be shorter as the MET concentration increases.  
3-2-4 Construction of Janus Micromotor 
To construct the NIR-light-driven Janus structure, it is necessary to coat an Au layer on the 
hemispherical surface of MET-loaded CCMPs. To achieve this, the Au sputtering machine was 
applied. The thickness of the Au layer is negligible compared to the size of the MET-loaded 
CCMPs. Figures 28 show the SEM images of small and large Au-coated and MET-loaded 
MMs (Au-MET-MM-S and Au-MET-MM-L, respectively), and an illustration of the Janus 
structure for comparison. In Figure 28 (c), the yellow hemisphere represents the Au coating 
whereas the white semi-circle is the non-coated part of the MM. In both Figures 28 (a) and 
(b), the surface profile of the coated part is more vivid than the non-coated area because the 
Au layer is conductive, indicating that the Au coating is successful. To confirm the presence 
of the Au on the surface of the MMs, EDX images were taken for the small and large Au-MET-
MMs which are shown in Figures 29 and 30. In both Figures 29 and 30 from (a) to (d), the 
EDX images of Au, carbon, calcium, and the Au-MET-MMs are shown. The EDX images 
reveal that the Au is concentrated only on the semi-circular area of the MMs in contrast to the 
carbon and calcium, which are both recognised on the entire surface of the crystal. Thus, both 
the SEM and the EDX images confirm that the Au layer covers half of the MET-MMs and that 
the Janus structure has been successfully constructed.  
==PAGE:55==
45 
 
 
 
 
Figure 28: SEM images of (a) Au-MET-MM-S and (b) Au-MET-MM-L both coated with Au 
nanoparticles (Au-NPs), (c) an illustration of Au-MET-MM  The bars indicate 2.5 μm. 
Figure 29: EDX images of Au-MET-MM-S showing only (a) gold, (b) oxygen, (c) calcium, 
and (d) all the elements combined. The bars indicate 2 μm. 
Figure 30: EDX images of Au-MET-MM-L showing only (a) gold, (b) oxygen, (c) calcium, 
and (d) all the elements combined. The bars indicate 5 μm. 
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
==PAGE:56==
46 
 
4 Conclusion  
  In this project, fabrication parameters were extensively investigated to produce CaCO3 Janus 
MMs in two different size groups. For this purpose, time lengths of stirring and crystallisation 
were investigated in detail. The study revealed that the stirring time length did not influence 
the size of the CaCO3 microparticles enough to produce two different size groups. Out of the 
candidates of stirring time lengths, 5 min was selected because the result showed that the crystal 
size was the most uniform of all the time lengths. The subsequent investigation into 
crystallisation time revealed that longer exposure to water transformed the vaterite into calcite 
crystals. Despite the common perception of crystal growth rate, the particle size did not 
increase. Based on the results, 10 min was chosen for the crystallisation time. As an active 
pharmaceutical ingredient, metronidazole was chosen due to its high solubility in water. To 
load the drug on the CaCO3 micromotor, co-synthesis was selected. FTIR spectra confirmed 
the composition of the product and the product identity. The effect of the concentration of the 
drug in Na2CO3 aqueous solution on the CaCO3 crystal size was investigated. The result 
revealed that the higher metronidazole concentration led to the formation of calcite. However, 
the three parameters; stirring time, crystallisation time, and drug concentration, did not have 
any major impacts to produce two different size groups.   
 To solve this problem, a new procedure was implemented based on research conducted by 
Vikulina et al. The method was proven to be effective to produce the CaCO3 microparticles in 
different sizes without adding any additives. The sizes were 1.03±0.39 μm for small 
microparticles and 13.4±3.65 μm for large ones. Inspired by the same study, metronidazole 
was dissolved into CaCl2 aqueous solution. Setting the concentration of the drug in CaCl2 
solution as a new parameter, its effect on the crystal size was investigated. The study revealed 
that the size fluctuated greatly for the large microparticles when the concentration reached 3 
mg/ml and above. The microplate reader indicated that metronidazole was successfully loaded 
in the CaCO3 microparticles within the concentration of 0.5 and 1 mg/ml. The encapsulation 
ratio of metronidazole was up to 50.2%. Based on the apparent amount of the drug loaded on 
the vaterite estimated by the microplate reader, 1 mg/ml was chosen for further study. As a 
secondary verification method, FTIR was applied and confirmed that metronidazole became a 
component of the CaCO3 microparticles as the result of the active adsorption by the 
microparticle. 
==PAGE:57==
47 
 
 Using Au sputtering machine, the CaCO3 Janus micromotor was fabricated. The SEM and 
EDX image analysis confirmed that the construction of the Janus structure was successful with 
both small and large CaCO3 MMs. 
 The fabrication of the biocompatible CaCO3 micromotor clearly demands further investigation 
into other fabrication parameters, which indicates that its drug delivery performance is tuneable 
by adjusting the parameters. The successful drug loading opens the door to work on the 
dissolution study to obtain the release profile using the micromotor. Also, as the Janus structure 
has been successfully constructed with Au coating, it also calls for the need for motion study 
under NIR light. I hope that this preliminary study will aid further investigation into CaCO3 
Janus microtmor for non-invasive skin disease treatment. 
==PAGE:58==
48 
 
5 Future Perspective 
 There are many factors that need to be investigated in this project.  
Firstly, there are some fabrication parameters that are worth studying. As mentioned in a 
previous section, the shear stress on CaCO3 particles plays a role in fabrications aiming for 
target size. This study can be performed by using different mediums such as a mixture of an 
organic solvent and water or a pure organic solvent or using a different mixing method other 
than a magnetic stirrer to change the position of the centre of mixing. Another parameter to 
consider is the concentration of raw materials. As the new fabrication procedure does, 
adjustment of the concentrations and volume tunes the saturation ratio that also dictates the 
crystal size.  
 Secondly, the successful drug release study is also an utmost important investigation. The 
release profile indicates the lifetime of the micromotor as an active pharmaceutical drug 
delivery system, which also affects the travel distance the device can take. Depending on the 
profile, it can also require the replacement of the API, to control the release speed.  
 Thirdly, as mentioned in the previous paragraph, the selection of API needs more 
consideration. Due to the relatively high solubility in water, metronidazole was selected. To 
change the target skin disease, fabrication using other drug molecules is necessary. To target 
acne vulgaris, erythromycin and clindamycin have already been commercially applied and thus 
can be suitable candidates for the investigation of the CaCO3 Janus micromotor. [131] 
 A motion study is also required to confirm that the Janus micromotor is mobile under NIR 
light. This study can be conducted using coherent anti-stoke Raman spectroscopy (CARS). The 
study elucidates such as the mean travelling speed, and the presence of API on the micromotor. 
 Lastly, other in vitro and ex vivo studies are powerful methods to investigate the behaviour of 
the micromotor against bacteria. Provided that metronidazole is applied as the API, as an in 
vitro study, the Janus micromotor can target a Trichomonas vaginalis biofilm to evaluate its 
therapeutic effect. [132] Alternatively, for acne treatment, micromotors loaded with 
erythromycin can target Propionibacterium acnes biofilm grown in cell cultures. [131] In ex 
vivo, a piece of skin infected with P. acnes can be applied as the working material to test the 
therapeutic effect of the Janus micromotor. Not only the investigation of therapeutic 
performance, but it is also necessary to measure the rate of degradation of the Janus 
==PAGE:59==
49 
 
micromotor. Despite its high biocompatibility, it is still important to clarify the elimination 
profile of the device to avoid potential threats arising from the accumulation.  
 
==PAGE:60==
50 
 
References  
[1] 
C. Flohr and R. Hay, ‘Putting the burden of skin diseases on the global map’, British Journal 
of Dermatology, vol. 184, no. 2, pp. 189–190, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1111/bjd.19704. 
[2] 
C. Karimkhani et al., ‘Global Skin Disease Morbidity and Mortality’, JAMA Dermatol, vol. 
153, no. 5, p. 406, May 2017, doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.5538. 
[3] 
G. McKnight, J. Shah, and R. Hargest, ‘Physiology of the skin’, Surgery (Oxford), vol. 40, no. 
1, pp. 8–12, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.mpsur.2021.11.005. 
[4] 
L. M. Hemmingsen, K. Julin, L. Ahsan, P. Basnet, M. Johannessen, and N. Škalko-Basnet, 
‘Chitosomes-In-Chitosan Hydrogel for Acute Skin Injuries: Prevention and Infection Control’, 
Mar Drugs, vol. 19, no. 5, p. 269, May 2021, doi: 10.3390/md19050269. 
[5] 
Coenye T., Honraet K., Rossel B., and Nelis H. J., ‘Biofilms in Skin Infections: 
Propionibacterium acnes and Acne Vulgaris’, Infectious Disorders - Drug Targets (Formerly 
Current Drug Targets - Infectious Disorders), vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 156–159, Sep. 2008. 
[6] 
P. S. Stewart and J. William Costerton, ‘Antibiotic resistance of bacteria in biofilms’, The 
Lancet, vol. 358, no. 9276, pp. 135–138, Jul. 2001, doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(01)05321-1. 
[7] 
N. M. Phillips and R. Nay, ‘A systematic review of nursing administration of medication via 
enteral tubes in adults’, J Clin Nurs, vol. 17, no. 17, pp. 2257–2265, Sep. 2008, doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2702.2008.02407.x. 
[8] 
Q. Zhou et al., ‘The optimal choice of medication administration route regarding intravenous, 
intramuscular, and subcutaneous injection’, Patient Prefer Adherence, p. 923, Jul. 2015, doi: 
10.2147/PPA.S87271. 
[9] 
A. Corbett, A. McGowin, S. Sieber, T. Flannery, and B. Sibbitt, ‘A method for reliable 
voluntary oral administration of a fixed dosage (mg/kg) of chronic daily medication to rats’, 
Lab Anim, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 318–324, Oct. 2012, doi: 10.1258/la.2012.012018. 
[10] 
K. Marren, ‘Dimethyl Sulfoxide: An Effective Penetration Enhancer for Topical 
Administration of NSAIDs’, Phys Sportsmed, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 75–82, Sep. 2011, doi: 
10.3810/psm.2011.09.1923. 
[11] 
Y. Masaoka, Y. Tanaka, M. Kataoka, S. Sakuma, and S. Yamashita, ‘Site of drug absorption 
after oral administration: Assessment of membrane permeability and luminal concentration of 
drugs in each segment of gastrointestinal tract’, European Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, vol. 29, no. 3–4, pp. 240–250, Nov. 2006, doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2006.06.004. 
[12] 
S. Majumdar and R. Srirangam, ‘Solubility, Stability, Physicochemical Characteristics and In 
Vitro Ocular Tissue Permeability of Hesperidin: A Natural Bioflavonoid’, Pharm Res, vol. 26, 
no. 5, pp. 1217–1225, May 2009, doi: 10.1007/s11095-008-9729-6. 
[13] 
J. Fallingborg, ‘Intraluminal pH of the human gastrointestinal tract.’, Dan Med Bull, vol. 46, 
no. 3, pp. 183–96, Jun. 1999. 
[14] 
S. Asha and M. Vidyavathi, ‘Role of Human Liver Microsomes in In Vitro Metabolism of 
Drugs—A Review’, Appl Biochem Biotechnol, vol. 160, no. 6, pp. 1699–1722, Mar. 2010, doi: 
10.1007/s12010-009-8689-6. 
==PAGE:61==
51 
 
[15] 
G. Nauman, J. Gray, R. Parkinson, M. Levine, and C. Paller, ‘Systematic Review of 
Intravenous Ascorbate in Cancer Clinical Trials’, Antioxidants, vol. 7, no. 7, p. 89, Jul. 2018, 
doi: 10.3390/antiox7070089. 
[16] 
A. Sharma et al., ‘A pilot study for treatment of COVID-19 patients in moderate stage using 
intravenous administration of ozonized saline as an adjuvant treatment-registered clinical 
trial’, Int Immunopharmacol, vol. 96, p. 107743, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.107743. 
[17] 
N. Payani, M. Foroughi, and A. Dabbagh, ‘The Effect of Intravenous Administration of Active 
Recombinant Factor VII on Postoperative Bleeding in Cardiac Valve Reoperations; A 
Randomized Clinical Trial.’, Anesth Pain Med, vol. 5, no. 1, p. e22846, Feb. 2015, doi: 
10.5812/aapm.22846. 
[18] 
Patrick Graham, An Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry, 6th ed. Oxford University Press, 
2017. 
[19] 
Patrick Graham, An Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry, 6th ed. Oxford University Press, 
2017. 
[20] 
D. J. Huggins, W. Sherman, and B. Tidor, ‘Rational Approaches to Improving Selectivity in 
Drug Design’, J Med Chem, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1424–1444, Feb. 2012, doi: 
10.1021/jm2010332. 
[21] 
G. Tiwari et al., ‘Drug delivery systems: An updated review.’, Int J Pharm Investig, vol. 2, no. 
1, pp. 2–11, Jan. 2012, doi: 10.4103/2230-973X.96920. 
[22] 
Patrick Graham, An Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry, 6th ed. Oxford University Press, 
2017. 
[23] 
C. Chen, E. Karshalev, J. Guan, and J. Wang, ‘Magnesium‐Based Micromotors: Water‐
Powered Propulsion, Multifunctionality, and Biomedical and Environmental Applications’, 
Small, vol. 14, no. 23, p. 1704252, Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1002/smll.201704252. 
[24] 
D. Rojas, M. Kuthanova, K. Dolezelikova, and M. Pumera, ‘Facet nanoarchitectonics of 
visible-light driven Ag3PO4 photocatalytic micromotors: Tuning motion for biofilm 
eradication’, NPG Asia Mater, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 63, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41427-022-
00409-0. 
[25] 
W. Gao, A. Pei, and J. Wang, ‘Water-Driven Micromotors’, ACS Nano, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 
8432–8438, Sep. 2012, doi: 10.1021/nn303309z. 
[26] 
J. Frueh et al., ‘Propulsion Mechanisms of Light‐Driven Plasmonic Colloidal Micromotors’, 
Adv Photonics Res, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 2100189, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1002/adpr.202100189. 
[27] 
Y. Yu, J. Guo, Y. Wang, C. Shao, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhao, ‘Bioinspired Helical Micromotors as 
Dynamic Cell Microcarriers’, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, vol. 12, no. 14, pp. 16097–16103, 
Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1021/acsami.0c01264. 
[28] 
D. Zhou et al., ‘Visible-light controlled catalytic Cu 2 O–Au micromotors’, Nanoscale, vol. 9, 
no. 1, pp. 75–78, 2017, doi: 10.1039/C6NR08088J. 
[29] 
M. Ussia, M. Urso, K. Dolezelikova, H. Michalkova, V. Adam, and M. Pumera, ‘Active Light‐
Powered Antibiofilm ZnO Micromotors with Chemically Programmable Properties’, Adv 
Funct Mater, vol. 31, no. 27, p. 2101178, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1002/adfm.202101178. 
[30] 
M. R. Prausnitz, ‘Microneedles for transdermal drug delivery’, Adv Drug Deliv Rev, vol. 56, 
no. 5, pp. 581–587, Mar. 2004, doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2003.10.023. 
==PAGE:62==
52 
 
[31] 
T. Waghule et al., ‘Microneedles: A smart approach and increasing potential for transdermal 
drug delivery system’, Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy, vol. 109, pp. 1249–1258, Jan. 2019, 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.10.078. 
[32] 
J. Jiang et al., ‘Coated Microneedles for Drug Delivery to the Eye’, Investigative 
Opthalmology & Visual Science, vol. 48, no. 9, p. 4038, Sep. 2007, doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-0066. 
[33] 
T. Maric et al., ‘Microscopic Cascading Devices for Boosting Mucus Penetration in Oral Drug 
Delivery—Micromotors Nesting Inside Microcontainers’, Small, vol. 19, no. 15, Apr. 2023, 
doi: 10.1002/smll.202206330. 
[34] 
C. Mazzoni et al., ‘From concept to in vivo testing: Microcontainers for oral drug delivery’, 
Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 268, pp. 343–351, Dec. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.10.013. 
[35] 
Z. Abid et al., ‘Biodegradable microcontainers – towards real life applications of 
microfabricated systems for oral drug delivery’, Lab Chip, vol. 19, no. 17, pp. 2905–2914, 
2019, doi: 10.1039/C9LC00527G. 
[36] 
R. Dong et al., ‘ZnO-based microrockets with light-enhanced propulsion’, Nanoscale, vol. 9, 
no. 39, pp. 15027–15032, 2017, doi: 10.1039/C7NR05168A. 
[37] 
X. Zhang et al., ‘Chitosan enhanced the stability and antibiofilm activity of self-propelled 
Prussian blue micromotor’, Carbohydr Polym, vol. 299, Jan. 2023, doi: 
10.1016/j.carbpol.2022.120134. 
[38] 
M. M. Stanton, J. Simmchen, X. Ma, A. Miguel-López, and S. Sánchez, ‘Biohybrid Janus 
Motors Driven by Escherichia coli’, Adv Mater Interfaces, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 1500505, Jan. 
2016, doi: 10.1002/admi.201500505. 
[39] 
W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. Uygun, A. Pei, A. Ponedal, and J. Wang, ‘Polymer-based 
tubular microbots: role of composition and preparation’, Nanoscale, vol. 4, no. 7, p. 2447, 
2012, doi: 10.1039/c2nr30138e. 
[40] 
V. V. Singh et al., ‘Multifunctional Silver-Exchanged Zeolite Micromotors for Catalytic 
Detoxification of Chemical and Biological Threats’, Adv Funct Mater, vol. 25, no. 14, pp. 
2147–2155, Apr. 2015, doi: 10.1002/adfm.201500033. 
[41] 
T. Cui, S. Wu, Y. Sun, J. Ren, and X. Qu, ‘Self-Propelled Active Photothermal Nanoswimmer 
for Deep-Layered Elimination of Biofilm In Vivo’, Nano Lett, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 7350–7358, 
Oct. 2020, doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.0c02767. 
[42] 
S. Tottori, L. Zhang, F. Qiu, K. K. Krawczyk, A. Franco-Obregón, and B. J. Nelson, 
‘Magnetic Helical Micromachines: Fabrication, Controlled Swimming, and Cargo Transport’, 
Advanced Materials, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 811–816, Feb. 2012, doi: 10.1002/adma.201103818. 
[43] 
Y. Wu, Z. Wu, X. Lin, Q. He, and J. Li, ‘Autonomous Movement of Controllable Assembled 
Janus Capsule Motors’, ACS Nano, vol. 6, no. 12, pp. 10910–10916, Dec. 2012, doi: 
10.1021/nn304335x. 
[44] 
F. Mou, C. Chen, H. Ma, Y. Yin, Q. Wu, and J. Guan, ‘Self-Propelled Micromotors Driven by 
the Magnesium-Water Reaction and Their Hemolytic Properties’, Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition, vol. 52, no. 28, pp. 7208–7212, Jul. 2013, doi: 10.1002/anie.201300913. 
==PAGE:63==
53 
 
[45] 
W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. M. Manesh, D. Weihs, and J. Wang, ‘Magnetically Powered 
Flexible Metal Nanowire Motors’, J Am Chem Soc, vol. 132, no. 41, pp. 14403–14405, Oct. 
2010, doi: 10.1021/ja1072349. 
[46] 
Y. Ge, M. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Sun, H. Zhang, and B. Dong, ‘Dual-Fuel-Driven Bactericidal 
Micromotor’, Nanomicro Lett, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 157–164, Apr. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s40820-
015-0071-3. 
[47] 
M. Urso, M. Ussia, and M. Pumera, ‘Breaking Polymer Chains with Self‐Propelled Light‐
Controlled Navigable Hematite Microrobots’, Adv Funct Mater, vol. 31, no. 28, p. 2101510, 
Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1002/adfm.202101510. 
[48] 
R. Dong et al., ‘Visible-Light-Driven BiOI-Based Janus Micromotor in Pure Water’, J Am 
Chem Soc, vol. 139, no. 5, pp. 1722–1725, Feb. 2017, doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b09863. 
[49] 
X. Ma et al., ‘Enzyme-Powered Hollow Mesoporous Janus Nanomotors’, Nano Lett, vol. 15, 
no. 10, pp. 7043–7050, Oct. 2015, doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b03100. 
[50] 
Y. Dong et al., ‘Magnetic Microswarm Composed of Porous Nanocatalysts for Targeted 
Elimination of Biofilm Occlusion’, ACS Nano, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 5056–5067, Mar. 2021, doi: 
10.1021/acsnano.0c10010. 
[51] 
V. Milosavljevic, L. Kosaristanova, K. Dolezelikova, V. Adam, and M. Pumera, ‘Microrobots 
with Antimicrobial Peptide Nanoarchitectonics for the Eradication of Antibiotic‐Resistant 
Biofilms’, Adv Funct Mater, vol. 32, no. 43, p. 2112935, Oct. 2022, doi: 
10.1002/adfm.202112935. 
[52] 
T. Maric, A. Løvind, Z. Zhang, J. Geng, and A. Boisen, ‘Near Infrared Light‐Driven 
Mesoporous SiO 2 /Au Nanomotors for Eradication of Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Biofilm’, Adv 
Healthc Mater, p. 2203018, Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1002/adhm.202203018. 
[53] 
Z. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Hu, and D. Wang, ‘980-nm Laser-Driven Photovoltaic Cells 
Based on Rare-Earth Up-Converting Phosphors for Biomedical Applications’, Adv Funct 
Mater, vol. 19, no. 23, pp. 3815–3820, Dec. 2009, doi: 10.1002/adfm.200901630. 
[54] 
Y. Fan et al., ‘NIR‐II Emissive Ru(II) Metallacycle Assisting Fluorescence Imaging and 
Cancer Therapy’, Small, vol. 18, no. 23, p. 2201625, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1002/smll.202201625. 
[55] 
S.-R. Tsai and M. R. Hamblin, ‘Biological effects and medical applications of infrared 
radiation’, J Photochem Photobiol B, vol. 170, pp. 197–207, May 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2017.04.014. 
[56] 
A. Raza, U. Hayat, T. Rasheed, M. Bilal, and H. M. N. Iqbal, ‘“Smart” materials-based near-
infrared light-responsive drug delivery systems for cancer treatment: A review’, Journal of 
Materials Research and Technology, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1497–1509, Jan. 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.jmrt.2018.03.007. 
[57] 
M. Xuan, J. Shao, X. Lin, L. Dai, and Q. He, ‘Light-activated Janus self-assembled capsule 
micromotors’, Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp, vol. 482, pp. 92–97, Oct. 2015, doi: 
10.1016/j.colsurfa.2015.04.032. 
[58] 
X. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Luan, D. Wang, and X. Du, ‘Near-infrared light-propelled Janus metal-
phenolic@Au micromotors for enhanced removal of organic pollutants’, Mater Lett, vol. 346, 
p. 134538, Sep. 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.2023.134538. 
==PAGE:64==
54 
 
[59] 
A. Piattelli, G. Podda, and A. Scarano, ‘Clinical and histological results in alveolar ridge 
enlargement using coralline calcium carbonate’, Biomaterials, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 623–627, 
Apr. 1997, doi: 10.1016/S0142-9612(96)00158-5. 
[60] 
X. Zhou, X. Huang, B. Wang, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, and Y. Jiao, ‘Light/gas cascade-propelled 
Janus micromotors that actively overcome sequential and multi-staged biological barriers for 
precise drug delivery’, Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 408, p. 127897, Mar. 2021, doi: 
10.1016/j.cej.2020.127897. 
[61] 
Y. Sun et al., ‘Calligraphy/Painting Based on a Bioinspired Light-Driven Micromotor with 
Concentration-Dependent Motion Direction Reversal and Dynamic Swarming Behavior’, ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces, vol. 11, no. 43, pp. 40533–40542, Oct. 2019, doi: 
10.1021/acsami.9b14402. 
[62] 
Z. Deng, F. Mou, S. Tang, L. Xu, M. Luo, and J. Guan, ‘Swarming and collective migration of 
micromotors under near infrared light’, Appl Mater Today, vol. 13, pp. 45–53, Dec. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.apmt.2018.08.004. 
[63] 
L. Zheng and X. Zhang, ‘Embedding-Parameters Perturbation Method’, in Modeling and 
Analysis of Modern Fluid Problems, Elsevier, 2017, pp. 39–77. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-
811753-8.00002-5. 
[64] 
X. Zhou, Z. Li, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, and Y. Jiao, ‘Near-Infrared Light-Steered Graphene Aerogel 
Micromotor with High Speed and Precise Navigation for Active Transport and 
Microassembly’, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, vol. 12, no. 20, pp. 23134–23144, May 2020, 
doi: 10.1021/acsami.0c04970. 
[65] 
F. Sun, M. Yao, H. Su, Q. Yang, and W. Wu, ‘A magnetic fluorescent spirochetes micromotor: 
Dynamic monitoring and in situ sterilization of foodborne pathogens’, Sens Actuators B Chem, 
vol. 385, p. 133679, Jun. 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2023.133679. 
[66] 
X. Li et al., ‘Near-Infrared Light-Driven Multifunctional Tubular Micromotors for Treatment 
of Atherosclerosis’, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, vol. 13, no. 26, pp. 30930–30940, Jul. 2021, 
doi: 10.1021/acsami.1c03600. 
[67] 
Y. Wang et al., ‘NIR‐II Light Powered Asymmetric Hydrogel Nanomotors for Enhanced 
Immunochemotherapy’, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, vol. 62, no. 3, Jan. 2023, 
doi: 10.1002/anie.202212866. 
[68] 
Q. Zhang, R. Dong, Y. Wu, W. Gao, Z. He, and B. Ren, ‘Light-Driven Au-WO 3 @C Janus 
Micromotors for Rapid Photodegradation of Dye Pollutants’, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, vol. 
9, no. 5, pp. 4674–4683, Feb. 2017, doi: 10.1021/acsami.6b12081. 
[69] 
B. Jurado-Sánchez et al., ‘Self-Propelled Activated Carbon Janus Micromotors for Efficient 
Water Purification’, Small, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 499–506, Jan. 2015, doi: 
10.1002/smll.201402215. 
[70] 
O. Felfoul et al., ‘Magneto-aerotactic bacteria deliver drug-containing nanoliposomes to 
tumour hypoxic regions’, Nat Nanotechnol, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 941–947, Nov. 2016, doi: 
10.1038/nnano.2016.137. 
[71] 
B. E.-F. de Ávila et al., ‘Micromotor-enabled active drug delivery for in vivo treatment of 
stomach infection’, Nat Commun, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 272, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-
00309-w. 
==PAGE:65==
55 
 
[72] 
F. Mou, C. Chen, Q. Zhong, Y. Yin, H. Ma, and J. Guan, ‘Autonomous Motion and 
Temperature-Controlled Drug Delivery of Mg/Pt-Poly( N -isopropylacrylamide) Janus 
Micromotors Driven by Simulated Body Fluid and Blood Plasma’, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, 
vol. 6, no. 12, pp. 9897–9903, Jun. 2014, doi: 10.1021/am502729y. 
[73] 
W. Wei et al., ‘Preparation of Hierarchical Hollow CaCO 3 Particles and the Application as 
Anticancer Drug Carrier’, J Am Chem Soc, vol. 130, no. 47, pp. 15808–15810, Nov. 2008, doi: 
10.1021/ja8039585. 
[74] 
D. A. Eurov et al., ‘Biocompatible acid-degradable micro-mesoporous CaCO3:Si:Fe 
nanoparticles potential for drug delivery’, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, vol. 333, 
p. 111762, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.micromeso.2022.111762. 
[75] 
S. Saad, H. Kaur, and G. Natale, ‘Scalable Chemical Synthesis Route to Manufacture pH-
Responsive Janus CaCO 3 Micromotors’, Langmuir, vol. 36, no. 42, pp. 12590–12600, Oct. 
2020, doi: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.0c02148. 
[76] 
T. N. Borodina, D. B. Trushina, I. V. Marchenko, and T. V. Bukreeva, ‘Calcium Carbonate-
Based Mucoadhesive Microcontainers for Intranasal Delivery of Drugs Bypassing the Blood–
Brain Barrier’, Bionanoscience, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 261–268, Sep. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s12668-
016-0212-2. 
[77] 
V. Kumar et al., ‘Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) chemicals: a critical review of 
current biotechnological approaches’, Bioengineered, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 4309–4327, Feb. 
2022, doi: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2031412. 
[78] 
A. Jakimska, A. Kot-Wasik, and J. Namieśnik, ‘The Current State-of-the-Art in the 
Determination of Pharmaceutical Residues in Environmental Matrices Using Hyphenated 
Techniques’, Crit Rev Anal Chem, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 277–298, Jul. 2014, doi: 
10.1080/10408347.2013.835244. 
[79] 
D. T. Manallack, ‘The acid–base profile of a contemporary set of drugs: implications for drug 
discovery’, SAR QSAR Environ Res, vol. 20, no. 7–8, pp. 611–655, Oct. 2009, doi: 
10.1080/10629360903438313. 
[80] 
D. T. Manallack, ‘The pK(a) Distribution of Drugs: Application to Drug Discovery.’, Perspect 
Medicin Chem, vol. 1, pp. 25–38, Sep. 2007. 
[81] 
S. Kumar, ‘Local Anesthetics’, in Anesthesia Secrets, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 105–111. doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-323-06524-5.00014-3. 
[82] 
J. Allen and J.-P. Pellois, ‘Hydrophobicity is a key determinant in the activity of arginine-rich 
cell penetrating peptides’, Sci Rep, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 15981, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41598-
022-20425-y. 
[83] 
G. A. Pankuch, M. R. Jacobs, and P. C. Appelbaum, ‘Susceptibilities of 428 gram-positive and 
-negative anaerobic bacteria to Bay y3118 compared with their susceptibilities to 
ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, metronidazole, piperacillin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and 
cefoxitin’, Antimicrob Agents Chemother, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 1649–1654, Aug. 1993, doi: 
10.1128/AAC.37.8.1649. 
[84] 
L. K. Schmadel and G. K. McEvoy, ‘Topical metronidazole: a new therapy for rosacea.’, Clin 
Pharm, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 94–101, Feb. 1990. 
[85] 
Miklós Müller, ‘Mode of action of metronidazole on anaerobic bacteria and protozoa ’, 
Surgery, vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 165–171, Jan. 1983. 
==PAGE:66==
56 
 
[86] 
C. Dollery, ‘Metronidazole’, Therapeutic Drugs, vol. 2, pp. M146–M151, 1999. 
[87] 
T. Bergan and E. Arnold, ‘Pharmacokinetics of Metronidazole in Healthy Adult Volunteers 
after Tablets and Suppositories’, Chemotherapy, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 231–241, 1980, doi: 
10.1159/000237911. 
[88] 
J. Mattila, P. T. Männistö, R. Mäntylä, S. Nykänen, and U. Lamminsivu, ‘Comparative 
pharmacokinetics of metronidazole and tinidazole as influenced by administration route’, 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 721–725, May 1983, doi: 
10.1128/AAC.23.5.721. 
[89] 
J. C. Jensen and R. Gugler, ‘Single- and multiple-dose metronidazole kinetics’, Clin 
Pharmacol Ther, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 481–487, Oct. 1983, doi: 10.1038/clpt.1983.201. 
[90] 
D. E. Schwartz and F. Jeunet, ‘Comparative Pharmacokinetic Studies of Ornidazole and 
Metronidazole in Man’, Chemotherapy, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 19–29, 1976, doi: 
10.1159/000221906. 
[91] 
K. E. Andersson, ‘Pharmacokinetics of nitroimidazoles. Spectrum of adverse reactions.’, 
Scand J Infect Dis Suppl, vol. 26, pp. 60–7, 1981. 
[92] 
E. D. Ralph and W. M. M. Kirby, ‘Bioassay of Metronidazole with Either Anaerobic or 
Aerobic Incubation’, Journal of Infectious Diseases, vol. 132, no. 5, pp. 587–591, Nov. 1975, 
doi: 10.1093/infdis/132.5.587. 
[93] 
J. B. Selkon, ‘The need for and choice of chemotherapy for anaerobic infections.’, Scand J 
Infect Dis Suppl, vol. 26, pp. 19–23, 1981. 
[94] 
D. E. Nix, R. Tyrrell, and M. Müller, ‘Pharmacodynamics of metronidazole determined by a 
time-kill assay for Trichomonas vaginalis’, Antimicrob Agents Chemother, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 
1848–1852, Aug. 1995, doi: 10.1128/AAC.39.8.1848. 
[95] 
K. Akhtar, S. A. Khan, S. B. Khan, and A. M. Asiri, ‘Scanning Electron Microscopy: Principle 
and Applications in Nanomaterials Characterization’, in Handbook of Materials 
Characterization, Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 113–145. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-92955-2_4. 
[96] 
Basic Fundamentals of Drug Delivery. Elsevier, 2019. doi: 10.1016/C2018-0-03215-6. 
[97] 
A. A. Ismail, F. R. van de Voort, and J. Sedman, ‘Chapter 4 Fourier transform infrared 
spectroscopy: Principles and applications’, 1997, pp. 93–139. doi: 10.1016/S0167-
9244(97)80013-3. 
[98] 
S. Jena, R. Tokas, S. Thakur, and N. Sahoo, ‘Characterization of Optical Thin Films by 
Spectrophotometry and Atomic Force Microscopy’, SMC Bulletin , vol. 6, no. 1, Apr. 2015. 
[99] 
G. E. BOYHAN, N. E. SCHMIDT, P. M. WOODS, D. G. HIMELRICK, and W. M. 
RANDLE, ‘ADAPTION OF A SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC ASSAY FOR PUNGENCY IN 
ONION TO A MICROPLATE READER’, J Food Qual, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 225–233, Jun. 
1999, doi: 10.1111/j.1745-4557.1999.tb00553.x. 
[100] W. Mäntele and E. Deniz, ‘UV–VIS absorption spectroscopy: Lambert-Beer reloaded’, 
Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc, vol. 173, pp. 965–968, Feb. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.saa.2016.09.037. 
==PAGE:67==
57 
 
[101] M. Caccia, L. Nardo, R. Santoro, and D. Schaffhauser, ‘Silicon Photomultipliers and SPAD 
imagers in biophotonics: Advances and perspectives’, Nucl Instrum Methods Phys Res A, vol. 
926, pp. 101–117, May 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.nima.2018.10.204. 
[102] John A., ‘Sputter Coating - Its Principles and Potential’, SAE Transactions , vol. 82, no. 3, pp. 
1787–1805, 1973. 
[103] A. Vikulina et al., ‘Mesoporous additive-free vaterite CaCO3 crystals of untypical sizes: From 
submicron to Giant’, Mater Des, vol. 197, p. 109220, Jan. 2021, doi: 
10.1016/j.matdes.2020.109220. 
[104] P. Bots, L. G. Benning, J.-D. Rodriguez-Blanco, T. Roncal-Herrero, and S. Shaw, 
‘Mechanistic Insights into the Crystallization of Amorphous Calcium Carbonate (ACC)’, Cryst 
Growth Des, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 3806–3814, Jul. 2012, doi: 10.1021/cg300676b. 
[105] A. V. Radha, T. Z. Forbes, C. E. Killian, P. U. P. A. Gilbert, and A. Navrotsky, 
‘Transformation and crystallization energetics of synthetic and biogenic amorphous calcium 
carbonate’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 107, no. 38, pp. 16438–
16443, Sep. 2010, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1009959107. 
[106] J. D. Rodriguez-Blanco, S. Shaw, and L. G. Benning, ‘The kinetics and mechanisms of 
amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) crystallization to calcite, viavaterite.’, Nanoscale, vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 265–271, 2011, doi: 10.1039/C0NR00589D. 
[107] T. Ogino, T. Suzuki, and K. Sawada, ‘The rate and mechanism of polymorphic transformation 
of calcium carbonate in water’, J Cryst Growth, vol. 100, no. 1–2, pp. 159–167, Feb. 1990, 
doi: 10.1016/0022-0248(90)90618-U. 
[108] K. Shimizu, T. Nomura, and K. Takahashi, ‘Crystal size distribution of aluminum potassium 
sulfate in a batch crystallizer equipped with different types of impeller’, J Cryst Growth, vol. 
191, no. 1–2, pp. 178–184, Jul. 1998, doi: 10.1016/S0022-0248(98)00021-9. 
[109] M. Yousuf and P. J. Frawley, ‘Experimental Evaluation of Fluid Shear Stress Impact on 
Secondary Nucleation in a Solution Crystallization of Paracetamol’, Cryst Growth Des, vol. 
18, no. 11, pp. 6843–6852, Nov. 2018, doi: 10.1021/acs.cgd.8b01074. 
[110] B. S. Coller, H. R. Gralnick, and S. Burt, ‘The effect of stir bar size and shape on quantitative 
platelet aggregation’, Thromb Res, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 121–129, Feb. 1976, doi: 10.1016/0049-
3848(76)90255-3. 
[111] K. W. Payne, E. J. Eisenbraun, and J. M. Lucas, ‘Magnetic Stirring with the Stirring Bar 
Length Exceeding the Vessel Diameter’, J Chem Educ, vol. 79, no. 2, p. 217, Feb. 2002, doi: 
10.1021/ed079p217. 
[112] A. C. Levi and M. Kotrla, ‘Theory and simulation of crystal growth’, Journal of Physics: 
Condensed Matter, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 299–344, Jan. 1997, doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/9/2/001. 
[113] J. D. Rodriguez-Blanco, S. Shaw, and L. G. Benning, ‘The kinetics and mechanisms of 
amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) crystallization to calcite, viavaterite.’, Nanoscale, vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 265–271, 2011, doi: 10.1039/C0NR00589D. 
[114] N. A. N. Hanafy, M. L. De Giorgi, C. Nobile, R. Rinaldi, and S. Leporatti, ‘Control of 
colloidal CaCO3 suspension by using biodegradable polymers during fabrication’, Beni Suef 
Univ J Basic Appl Sci, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 60–70, Mar. 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.bjbas.2015.02.009. 
==PAGE:68==
58 
 
[115] D. Chakrabarty and S. Mahapatra, ‘Aragonite crystals with unconventional morphologies’, J 
Mater Chem, vol. 9, pp. 2953–2957, Jan. 1999. 
[116] J. Zhu et al., ‘Effect of Na2CO3 on the Microstructure and Macroscopic Properties and 
Mechanism Analysis of PVA/CMC Composite Film’, Polymers (Basel), vol. 12, no. 2, p. 453, 
Feb. 2020, doi: 10.3390/polym12020453. 
[117] C. E. Weir and E. R. Lippincott, ‘Infrared Studies of Aragonite, Calcite, and Vaterite Type 
Structures in the Borates, Carbonates, and Nitrates.’, J Res Natl Bur Stand A Phys Chem, vol. 
65A, no. 3, pp. 173–180, 1961, doi: 10.6028/jres.065A.021. 
[118] A. S. Vikulina, N. A. Feoktistova, N. G. Balabushevich, A. G. Skirtach, and D. Volodkin, ‘The 
mechanism of catalase loading into porous vaterite CaCO 3 crystals by co-synthesis’, Physical 
Chemistry Chemical Physics, vol. 20, no. 13, pp. 8822–8831, 2018, doi: 
10.1039/C7CP07836F. 
[119] Renu CHADHA, Amit AGGARWAL, D.V.S. JAIN, V.K. KAPOOR, Deepika THAKUR, and 
Aarti SHARMA, ‘Degradation kinetics of metronidazole and its mutual prodrug with 
ciprofloxacin: a calorimetric analysis’, Int. J. Biol. Chem. Sci, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 197–210, 2007. 
[120] J. Dou, F. Zhao, W. Fan, Z. Chen, and X. Guo, ‘Preparation of non-spherical vaterite CaCO3 
particles by flash nano precipitation technique for targeted and extended drug delivery’, J 
Drug Deliv Sci Technol, vol. 57, p. 101768, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.jddst.2020.101768. 
[121] C. Chesneau et al., ‘Cyclodextrin-Calcium Carbonate Micro- to Nano-Particles: Targeting 
Vaterite Form and Hydrophobic Drug Loading/Release’, Pharmaceutics, vol. 15, no. 2, p. 653, 
Feb. 2023, doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15020653. 
[122] G. Choukrani et al., ‘High Loading Efficiency and Controlled Release of Bioactive 
Immunotherapeutic Proteins Using Vaterite Nanoparticles’, Particle & Particle Systems 
Characterization, vol. 38, no. 7, p. 2100012, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1002/ppsc.202100012. 
[123] D. B. Trushina, T. V. Bukreeva, and M. N. Antipina, ‘Size-Controlled Synthesis of Vaterite 
Calcium Carbonate by the Mixing Method: Aiming for Nanosized Particles’, Cryst Growth 
Des, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1311–1319, Mar. 2016, doi: 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b01422. 
[124] Y. I. Svenskaya et al., ‘Key Parameters for Size- and Shape-Controlled Synthesis of Vaterite 
Particles’, Cryst Growth Des, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 331–337, Jan. 2018, doi: 
10.1021/acs.cgd.7b01328. 
[125] E. M. Flaten, M. Seiersten, and J.-P. Andreassen, ‘Polymorphism and morphology of calcium 
carbonate precipitated in mixed solvents of ethylene glycol and water’, J Cryst Growth, vol. 
311, no. 13, pp. 3533–3538, Jun. 2009, doi: 10.1016/j.jcrysgro.2009.04.014. 
[126] D. V. Volodkin, A. I. Petrov, M. Prevot, and G. B. Sukhorukov, ‘Matrix Polyelectrolyte 
Microcapsules:  New System for Macromolecule Encapsulation’, Langmuir, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 
3398–3406, Apr. 2004, doi: 10.1021/la036177z. 
[127] A. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Liu, W. Cui, and J. Li, ‘Gelatin-Assisted Synthesis of 
Vaterite Nanoparticles with Higher Surface Area and Porosity as Anticancer Drug Containers 
In Vitro’, Chempluschem, vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 194–201, Feb. 2016, doi: 
10.1002/cplu.201500515. 
[128] S. P. Dunuweera and R. M. G. Rajapakse, ‘Encapsulation of anticancer drug cisplatin in 
vaterite polymorph of calcium carbonate nanoparticles for targeted delivery and slow release’, 
==PAGE:69==
59 
 
Biomed Phys Eng Express, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 015017, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1088/2057-
1976/aa9719. 
[129] M. Kumar Trivedi, ‘Spectroscopic Characterization of Biofield Treated Metronidazole and 
Tinidazole’, Med Chem (Los Angeles), vol. 5, no. 7, 2015, doi: 10.4172/2161-0444.1000283. 
[130] B. Sravani, D. Raja, S. Bharath, B. Raj B V, and V. Madhavan, ‘Studies on Vigna mungo 
mucilage as a pharmaceutical excipient’, J Chem Pharm Res, vol. 3, pp. 118–125, Jan. 2011. 
[131] H. Xu and H. Li, ‘Acne, the Skin Microbiome, and Antibiotic Treatment.’, Am J Clin 
Dermatol, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 335–344, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1007/s40257-018-00417-3. 
[132] Y. Buchner and D. I. Edwards, ‘The effect of metronidazole and nitrofurans on the 
morphology of Trichomonas vaginalis’, Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, vol. 1, no. 2, 
pp. 229–234, 1975, doi: 10.1093/jac/1.2.229. 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
60 
 
Appendix  A 
 As parts of my project, two investigations were conducted to deepen the understanding in 
calcium carbonate microparticle and its application. However, the data generated through these 
studies turned out to be less significant than those included in the report. Therefore, those data 
are briefly mentioned in this section.  
 
Temperature influence over the morphology of CCMPs 
 In classical thermodynamics, reaction kinetics improves by raising the reaction temperature. 
By setting a hypothesis that the crystal growth would be accelerated and large CCMPs could 
be obtained, the temperatures throughout the stirring and crystallisation time were selected. 
The concentration and the volume of CaCl2 and Na2CO3 were both 1M and 0.3 ml. The stirring 
time was 5 min. Since this trial was preliminary, 0, 23, and 55 °C were chosen as the 
representatives of cold, benign and warm reaction environments. The lower temperature was 
achieved using an ice bath. The temperature in the ice bath was measured to be 4 °C. The high 
temperature was obtained using a magnetic stirrer with the hot plate.  
 
The results are summarised in Figure A1 and Figure A2. Figure A1 plots the size of the 
CCMPs against the crystallisation times. The colours of the bars indicate the temperature under 
which the precipitation has taken place. The blue and red each represent 0 and 23°C. The data 
from 55°C is omitted because only calcite is obtained. As calcite does not have the porous 
structure that is vital for drug loading, the data from the high temperature is considered 
insignificant to further work with.  
Figure A2 shows the size distribution profile of each fabrication condition. By stating from 
temperature to crystallisation; (A) 0°C, 1 min; (B) 23°C, 1 min, (C) 0°C, 5 min, and (D) 23°C, 
5 min.  
 Figures A1 and A2 imply that the lower temperature and a short crystallisation time limit the 
crystal growth as the size distribution profile is on the side of the shorter diameters and the 
mean size is also low. Interestingly, a long crystallisation under the benign temperature does 
not yield CCMPs that are much larger than those fabricated under different conditions. On the 
country, Figure A2 (D) shows the size distribution profile that is similar to the one in Figure 
A2 (A). This is in fact in agreement with Equation (4) and (5) 
==PAGE:71==
61 
 
𝑟𝑐=
2𝛾𝑣
𝐾𝑇𝑙𝑛(𝑆)   
 
             (4) 
𝐽= 𝐴𝑒𝑥𝑝[−
16𝜋𝛾3𝑣2
3𝐾3𝛵3 {ln(𝑆)}2]  
 
(5) 
 
Where they define the radius of critical nucleus rc and the rate of nucleation J using γ is 
interfacial tension, v is the volume of a molecule inside the nucleus, K is Boltzmann constant, 
and T is temperature. These equations imply that the higher temperature facilitates the 
nucleation rate and making the radius of critical nucleaus longer. However, the supersaturation 
ratio: S is significantly large under the concentration conditions, the temperature effect can be 
minor. Therefore, the result obtained in this experiment is unclear of the temperature effect 
over the size of CCMPs.  
==PAGE:72==
62 
 
Appendix  B 
Metronidazole in pure water and 1M Na2CO3 aqueous solution are displayed to confirm that a 
reaction was occurring when the drug molecule is exposed to a basic condition.   
 Figure B (A) shows the metronidazole in the basic solution while (B) shows the same drug 
in Mili Q water. The pink colour in Figure B (A) is very distinct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure B2 shows SEM images of large MET-loaded CCMPs at the MET concentration in 
CaCl2: 0.5, 1, 3, and 5 mg/ml.  
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure B1: Metronidazole in (A)1M Na2CO3 solution, (B) pure water 
1 mg/ml 
0.5mg/ml 
(d) 5 mg/ml 
(c) 3 mg/ml 
Figure B2: SEM images of large MET-loaded CCMPs The bars indicate 50 μm. 
