==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Synthesis of Geometric Models of Neural
Tissue
Ruiqi Cui (s212483)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging (dMRI) is a reliable imaging technique em-
ployed to non-invasively investigate the microstructure and connectivity of tissue in
the human brain. As part of this field, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was introduced
to estimate microstructural properties by fitting a 3D ellipsoid model. However, re-
cent studies have revealed that the outcomes of this model exhibit certain biases
compared to the actual situation. Consequently, there is a growing need for a more
precise biophysical model that can provide accurate inferences.
With the goal above, this project develops a curve-based tool for modeling axons
to prepare for studying the biophysical model of neural tissues. Before this work, an
ellipsoid-based tool was implemented and put into use for biophysical model study.
It turns out that the ellipsoid-based method can only generate a subset of all kinds of
deformation. Inspired by that, this curve-based tool was implemented to cover more
general deformation cases. In this thesis, a detailed description of the curve-based
method is presented. Meanwhile, comparisons between both methods are conducted
to show the pros and cons.
Additionally, the limitations and challenges of each
method are discussed, along with potential areas for future research. The findings
of this study contribute to the understanding of axon growth simulation and provide
insights into improving existing methods for more accurate and realistic simulations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Human-centered Artificial Intelligence.
Kongens Lyngby, June 27, 2023
Ruiqi Cui (s212483)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my deepest appreciation and gratitude to my esteemed super-
visors, Professor J. Andreas Bærentzen and Professor Tim Bjørn Dyrby. Their ex-
ceptional guidance, expertise, and unwavering support throughout this journey have
been invaluable. Their insightful feedback, constructive criticism, and dedication to
my academic development have significantly influenced the direction and quality of
this work.
I am also immensely thankful to Ph.D. student Sidsel Borup Winther for her
invaluable time and input during the experimental phase of this thesis. Her contri-
butions, feedback, and suggestions have greatly enriched the quality and rigor of this
work.
Furthermore, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to the contributors
of CGAL and Dear Imgui for providing the necessary resources that have greatly
facilitated the progress of this research.
In conclusion, I am profoundly humbled and grateful to all those who have con-
tributed to the completion of this thesis. Their unwavering support, guidance, and
contributions have played a pivotal role in shaping both this work and my growth as
a researcher.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context: Biomedical Imaging Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Enhanced Biophysical Model for Improved Realism . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
7
2.1
Biomedical Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Computer Graphics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
13
3.1
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Collision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Axon Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Implementation Details
25
4.1
Data Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
GUI Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Experiments & Results
31
5.1
Basic Functionality Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Advanced Feature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Use Case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Pros & Cons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Combating and treating diseases have always been significant topics in both biological
and medical communities. Among the various challenges, neurological and psychiatric
diseases hold a prominent position. In order to better understand, diagnose and ad-
dress these diseases, decades-effort has been dedicated to imaging and investigating
the structure of the neural system. However, the imaging of microstructures has re-
mained a formidable challenge due to imaging technical limitations. Fig.1.1 illustrates
a proposed pipeline for microstructure imaging, which will be elaborated further in
Sec.1.2.1.
This thesis is a submodule of this pipeline, which aims to construct a biophysical
model to simulate the real neural environment based on existing anatomical knowl-
edge.
1.1
Context: Biomedical Imaging Techniques
The goal of biomedical imaging in the field of neuroscience is to visualize and under-
stand the structure, function, and connectivity of the neural system. This knowledge
will help people gain insights into the mechanisms of neural processing, and identify
abnormalities or changes associated with neurological disorders. For the structure of
the neural system, more specifically for our project, there are several anatomical fea-
tures that interest us most, which are tissue density, cell size/shape, axon size/shape,
fiber directions, and so on.
Current imaging techniques are capable of achieving nanoscale image resolution.
Fig.1.2 shows the latest imaging techniques across anatomical length scales. With
those high-resolution tools, such as electron microscopy (EM), synchrotron imaging,
and light microscopy, researchers are able to gain insights into cellular ultrastructure,
subcellular organization, tissue architecture, cell-cell junctions, etc. However, all of
them are ex-vivo imaging techniques, which means they may not show the real mor-
phology in vivo context, and risk introducing artifacts. One additional consideration
is that certain anatomical features, such as axon morphology, exhibit micro-scale char-
acteristics in the radial plane but macro-scale characteristics along the axial direction.
On the other hand, non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based methods,
(diffusion MRI (dMRI), relaxation (T1 and T2), magnetization transfer (MT), and
susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI)), have millimeter-level image resolution. At
this scale, it’s impossible to directly observe those features we are interested in. A
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: An indirect approach for microstructure imaging[Ale+19].
lot of methods are invented to infer microfeatures indirectly. One popular approach
among them is dMRI (readers can get further information in Sec.2.1.1). It can be
utilized to measure the in vivo feature of axon diameter for exploring the brain net-
work.
Nevertheless, recent research [And+20] found that observed complex morphologies
of axons bias measurements obtained from this model-based approach (dMRI). By
applying synchrotron X-ray nano-holotomography (XNH) imaging, they obtained
feature measurements of the white matter from the same research sample several
years ago. With this 3D image, as shown in Fig.1.3, they revealed the geometrical
deviations from cylinders in the real environment led to an overestimation of axon
diameter when using dMRI. That implies new methods are needed to infer more
accurate feature measurements.
1.2
Motivation
1.2.1
A New Microstructural Imaging Pipeline
Since microstructure imaging is a model-based, indirect approach, as the assumption
made by dMRI is that axons are cylinder-like geometry, what we need to do is to
update the biophysical model with a more accurate one. Fig. 1.1 shows the proposed
pipeline for our project.
The input is the whole brain from the same monkey. The top route performs
non-invasive neuroimaging at the millimeter scale. While the bottom route differs
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Motivation
3
Figure 1.2: Imaging across anatomical length scales [Dyr+18]
from dMRI most.
With the knowledge and statistics [And+20] we got from the
measurements acquired from synchrotron XNH imaging, we are able to build a more
complex and realistic biophysical model. With this model prepared, the project will
adopt machine learning / deep learning techniques to fit it. Finally, we are able to
obtain the microstructure from this model. At the same time, the prediction result
can be validated by the 3D image acquired by synchrotron XNH imaging. In this
way, the prediction model can be evaluated and improved.
1.2.2
Existing Biophysical Model
Before this thesis, an axon generator prototype was developed by a former collaborator
of this project. Fig.1.4 shows a simple example generated by this demo.
In this prototype, each axon is initialized as a set of ellipsoids on a straight line
first. Users can perform growth step by step. In each step, the program will perform
collision detection and collision resolution, where the ellipsoids can be deformed to
avoid invalid geometry. In the end, based on the final scene composed of ellipsoids,
the program can convert it to cylinder-like axons.
Unfortunately, the rendering result from this prototype didn’t generate a good
enough prediction. There are several possible factors that may lead to this result. At
the biophysical modeling stage, the most likely reason for suboptimal results is that
the ellipsoid-based method made overly restrictive simplifications and assumptions
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.3: Segmented axons from the monkey splenium[And+20]
that deviated from the actual case. This straight-line initialized, symmetric deforma-
tion model is insuﬀicient to encompass all possible axon morphologies. Meanwhile,
according to [And+20], it is also impossible to simulate the realistic shape of axons
with this prototype. The axon diameter for a single axon is not a scalar but a distri-
bution, and the same as the axon-wise g-ratio (the ratio of the axon diameter to the
outer fiber diameter). We will further analyze the reason in Sec.2.1.2. It is always
a fatal problem when the data used for model fitting biases the real case. To obtain
an accurate prediction of microstructural features, it is crucial to construct a reliable
biophysical model based on the knowledge obtained from synchrotron XNH imaging.
So that, further efforts can be made to construct suitable prediction models even for
preclinical usage.
1.3
Enhanced Biophysical Model for Improved Realism
Our goal in this master thesis project is to develop a tool for further studying a more
realistic biophysical model. It should be able to perform most general deformation
cases while keeping a solid geometry validity. Different from the former ellipsoid-based
method, this work is based on the NURBS curve, which enables more flexibility for
the simulator from a theoretical perspective (For more information about the NURBS
curve, please refer to Sec.2.2.1). It supports various features such as asymmetric local
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Enhanced Biophysical Model for Improved Realism
5
Figure 1.4: Visualization of a simulated scene generated by the axon generator pro-
totype
deformation, local displacement, global displacement, etc. This creates the potential
to simulate axon morphology in a more realistic manner.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In this chapter, prerequisite knowledge is presented to facilitate a comprehensive
understanding of the master’s thesis work. This knowledge is categorized into two
sections: biomedical imaging-related and computer graphics/modeling-related, which
are introduced in Sec.2.1 and Sec.2.2, respectively.
2.1
Biomedical Imaging
2.1.1
Diffusion-MRI - Diffusion Tensor Imaging
Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging (dMRI) is a powerful imaging technique that
enables the non-invasive investigation of tissue microstructure and connectivity in the
human brain. By measuring the diffusion of water molecules, dMRI provides valuable
insights into the underlying neural architecture.
This technique has been widely
applied in neuroscience research and clinical settings, offering unique opportunities
to study brain development, connectivity patterns, and white matter abnormalities.
The diffusion tensor model[BML94b], is commonly used to estimate the diffusion
properties of brain tissue.
Based on dMRI, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was proposed to capture the dif-
fusion pattern and infer the underlying tissue microstructure[BP98][BP11][Pie+96].
The DTI acquisition process involves acquiring a series of diffusion-weighted images
(DWIs) in different directions, typically using a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
scanner. The diffusion weighting is achieved by applying gradients to the imaging
process, which sensitizes the measurements to the diffusing water molecules. From
the acquired DWIs, a diffusion tensor model is then fitted to estimate the diffusion
properties in each voxel of the image.
The diffusion tensor represents a 3D ellip-
soid that characterizes the magnitude and directionality of water diffusion at that
voxel[Mor+99], as shown in Fig.2.1. The three principal directions of the ellipsoid
correspond to the primary diffusion directions within the tissue.
Using the diffusion tensor, several quantitative measures can be derived to as-
sess the characteristics of tissue diffusion. Fractional anisotropy (FA) quantifies the
degree of anisotropy or directionality of diffusion within a voxel, with higher values
indicating more organized and coherent diffusion. Mean diffusivity (MD) measures
the average magnitude of diffusion within a voxel[Le +01][BML94a]. Additionally,
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
Figure 2.1: The 3D ellipsoid fitted with DWIs.
tensor-derived maps such as axial diffusivity (AD) and radial diffusivity (RD) pro-
vide insights into the diffusion characteristics along the principal diffusion directions
and perpendicular to them, respectively[PB96][WC09]. These measures can be used
to assess microstructural changes, such as axonal integrity or myelin disruption, in
various brain regions.
Overall, DTI allows researchers and clinicians to visualize and analyze the diffu-
sion properties of tissues, providing valuable information about tissue microstructure,
connectivity, and integrity in the brain.
2.1.2
Ellipsoid-based Axon Generator
The existing ellipsoid-based axon generator offers a visually plausible simulation of
axons and their growth process. This method involves discretizing an axon into a user-
defined number of ellipsoids. By addressing the collisions between these ellipsoids,
deformations are applied to the axon structure. Initially, each axon is initialized with
a series of spheres arranged in a straight line. As the growth progresses, each step
involves an iterative collision response to resolve any potential collisions. Collision
detection is performed by evaluating pairs of ellipsoids that may be colliding. When a
collision is detected, a displacement and aﬀine transformation are computed based on
the ”contractSpeed” parameter. These calculations are then applied to the relevant
ellipsoids/spheres to resolve the collision. Once the growth is complete, a ring of
vertices is sampled on each ellipsoid. By defining their connectivity, the ellipsoid-
based axons can be converted into mesh-based representations and exported.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Computer Graphics
9
2.2
Computer Graphics
2.2.1
NURBS Curve
Non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS) curve is the core representation of this curve-
based simulator. It is a type of mathematical curve that allows for precise control
over shape and curvature[Far02]. A NURBS curve is defined by a set of control points,
weights, a degree, and a knot vector. The knot vector specifies the parameterization
of the curve and influences its shape. The equation for a NURBS curve[Far14] is
shown in Eq.2.1 as below:
C(u) = ∑n
i=0 N(i,p)(u)∗P(i)∗W(i)
∑n
i=0 N(i, p)(u)∗W(i)
(2.1)
where C(u) represents the point on the curve at parameter u.
N(i,p)(u) is the
blending function, which is defined recursively based on the degree of the curve p and
the knot vector. P(i) represents the control points of the curve, and W(i) represents
the weights associated with each control point[PT96]. The blending function used in
NURBS curves is based on B-splines, which are piecewise polynomial functions. It
determines the influence of each control point at a given parameter value u. Eq.2.2
presents the definition of a degree-zero function.
N(i,0)(u) =
{
1,
if ui ≤u ≤ui+1
0,
otherwise
(2.2)
With the degree-zero function, the higher-degree value can be computed recur-
sively by Eq.2.3. Fig.2.2 gives an intuitive function plot for readers to understand[Kie+15].
N(i,p)(u) =
u−ui
ui+p −ui
·N(i,p−1)(u)+
ui+p+1 −u
ui+p+1 −ui+1
·N(i+1,p−1)(u)
(2.3)
NURBS curves offer several advantages over other curve representations. They
can accurately represent both simple and complex shapes, allowing for intricate and
realistic modeling. The use of control points and weights provides flexibility in manip-
ulating the curve’s shape and controlling local deformations. Additionally, NURBS
curves can be eﬀiciently evaluated and rendered in computer graphics applications.
2.2.2
Collision Detection
Collision detection is a fundamental problem in computer graphics and simulation,
playing a crucial role in various applications such as virtual environments, robotics,
and physics-based simulations[Eri04]. The goal of collision detection is to determine
whether or not two or more objects in a simulated environment intersect or come
into contact with each other. Eﬀicient and accurate collision detection algorithms
are essential for providing realistic and interactive simulations.
Usually, collision
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
Figure 2.2: Cubic Bezier blending functions with a knot vector of [0, 0, 0, 0, 0.25, 0.5,
0.75, 1, 1, 1, 1].
detection is divided into two main phases, the broad phase, and the narrow phase.
For the broad phase, one popular approach in collision detection is the use of spatial
data structures, which organize objects in a way that facilitates eﬀicient collision
checks. Examples include octrees, kd-trees, and BVHs, which partition the space
into smaller regions to accelerate collision queries[Eri04].
These structures enable
early termination of collision tests by quickly eliminating large portions of the scene
that are guaranteed to be non-colliding. On the other hand, more advanced methods,
such as the separating axis theorem (SAT) and GJK algorithm, provide exact collision
detection but can be computationally expensive for complex geometries.
Most methods mentioned above are discrete collision detection (DCD). While ad-
vancements in physics-based simulations have led to the development of advanced col-
lision detection techniques, which is known as continuous collision detection (CCD).
CCD algorithms take into account the continuous movement of objects over time,
ensuring accurate detection and response to collisions even in high-speed scenar-
ios[OH95][KRK08].
To further enhance collision detection, researchers have explored the integration
of machine learning and data-driven approaches. By leveraging training data and
neural networks, these methods aim to learn eﬀicient collision detection strategies
and improve accuracy and performance[Che+19].
In this thesis, we implemented and experimented with the GJK algorithm[GJK88].
It operates on the principle of finding the closest points between two convex shapes,
referred to as the Minkowski sum of the shapes. The Minkowski sum[Sch14] is a new
shape obtained by taking the algebraic sum of all possible pairs of points from the
two original shapes. By iteratively searching for the closest points on the boundary of
the Minkowski sum, the GJK algorithm determines if the two shapes intersect or are
in proximity to each other. The algorithm begins with an initial simplex, which is a
small polygon or polyhedron that contains the origin of the coordinate system. This
simplex is constructed using points from the Minkowski sum. In each iteration, the
algorithm expands the simplex by adding a new point in the direction of the origin.
The simplex is then updated based on the new point. This process continues until
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Computer Graphics
11
Figure 2.3: An example of detecting collision with the update of simplex
the simplex encloses the origin, indicating that the two shapes are intersecting, or
the algorithm fails to find a new point that brings the simplex closer to the origin.
Fig.2.3 gives an example where the simplex indicates the two shapes collide with each
other[Ham17].
2.2.3
Collision Response
After detecting a collision between objects, the next step is to apply collision response
to determine their behavior. The primary objective of collision response is to achieve
physically realistic and visually pleasing outcomes while maintaining stability and
energy conservation in the simulation. Various approaches are commonly employed in
collision response algorithms, including impulse-based methods and constraint-based
methods.
Impulse-based methods involve calculating and applying impulses to the colliding
objects based on factors such as collision forces, mass properties, and restitution
coeﬀicients. These impulses modify the objects’ velocities to simulate the transfer
or rebound of momentum during the collision[Bar97]. The magnitude and direction
of the impulses depend on the collision normal, relative velocities, and the objects’
elasticity.
Constraint-based methods, on the other hand, treat collisions as a system of con-
straints that must be satisfied.
These constraints encompass distance constraints,
geometric constraints, contact constraints, and friction constraints. By adjusting the
positions and velocities of the objects, collision response algorithms ensure that these
constraints are fulfilled while considering principles such as momentum conservation
and energy preservation[Pro+95][MMC16][Mül+07].
When implementing collision response, it is crucial to take into account additional
factors such as the material properties of the objects, the nature of the collision (e.g.,
rigid body collision or deformable collision), and any supplementary constraints or
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
external forces acting on the objects. Realistic simulations often combine multiple
techniques to handle various types of collisions, ensuring accurate and visually ap-
pealing results.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This chapter will introduce the mathematical and physical models we used in this
simulator.
3.1
Geometry
This section demonstrates how axons are mathematically modeled and how their
geometric representation is obtained for later collision handlers.
3.1.1
Center Curve
In Sec.2.2.1, we discussed that the NURBS curve forms the core of our axon simulator.
To define a NURBS curve, we need to determine several key variables, including con-
trol points, order, knot vector, and weights. In order to simplify the user interface, our
simulator adopts equal weights and utilizes the Hartley-Judd (HJ) algorithm[HJ78]
for knot vector determination. The HJ algorithm aims to provide a good parame-
terization that ensures the curve is end-truncated and the parameter values (knots)
are proportional to the physical distance. To achieve the end truncation property,
k −1 points are inserted at both the beginning and the end of the control points
array, where k represents the order of the curve. The HJ algorithm automatically
determines reasonable knot values ti for the knot vectors, as shown in Eq.3.1.
ti =





0,
0 ≤i ≤k
∑i
j=k+1(t j −tj−1),
k < i < n+1
1,
t ≥n+1
(3.1)
when k < i < n+1, ti follows Eq.3.2
ti −ti−1 =
∑i−1
j=i−k lj
∑n+1
m=k+1 ∑m−1
j=m−k lj
(3.2)
where lj is the Euclidean length of the polygon segments, and n is the number of
control points. Fig.3.1 shows a comparison between the HJ algorithm and equally
spaced knots.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Methods
(a) Uniformly-sampled curve points with
equally-spaced knots.
(b) Uniformly-sampled curve points with HJ
algorithm.
Figure 3.1: Parameterization comparison between equally-spaced knots and HJ algo-
rithm. More natural and evenly-distributed sampled points are obtained by the HJ
algorithm. (Images are sourced from [HJ78])
Then, by providing control points and the degree of this curve, one can easily
define the central axis of an axon. Any point p on the curve can be sampled with
Eq.2.1.
3.1.2
Surface
To query a surface point on the axon, we need two variables, t and r, settled, where t
is a float number ranging [0,1] and r is the radian on the normal plane ranging [0,2π].
By applying Eq.2.1, the central point Pc and the radius rc can be acquired at given
t. Meanwhile, r decides the direction ⃗vn (also normal) of the surface point relative to
the central point. Thus, the surface point Ps can be acquired by Eq.3.3
Ps = Pc +rc⃗vn
(3.3)
Now, it is possible for one to retrieve any points on a curved cylinder, which is also
the initialized shape of an axon in this simulator. However, the real world is always
far more complicated than the over-simplified model, as shown in Fig.1.3. Compared
to current models, real axons exhibit a lot more variety of deformations than smooth
curves, such as scaling, tapering, axial twisting, bending, and so on[Bar84] [SP86].
There are numerous factors that contribute to these phenomena. Similar to all
other living organisms, perfectly straight lines or smooth curves can hardly exist on
them. People often use noise to approximate the complex interplay of these factors.
But certain macro-scale factors can still be analyzed using modern physics knowledge.
In the field of computer graphics, physically-based simulation/animation has been a
popular topic and well-studied. Its subtopic, soft-body dynamics, is well fitted to our
context.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Geometry
15
Figure 3.2: A simplified spring-mass model of axons.
A number of methods are available for solving the soft-body simulation problem.
Among them, mass-spring systems are considered one of the simplest and most intu-
itive models[Nea+06]. Taking inspiration from this approach, we assume a simplified
volumetric mass-spring model for the axon, as illustrated in Fig.3.2, where S1 and
S2 represent two springs with different elastic modulus. When two axons come into
contact, a repulsive force is generated, pushing the axons apart. This force, denoted
as F, acts on the surface particles in direct contact (top particles in Fig.3.2), result-
ing in local shape changes. Simultaneously, the influence of this force propagates to
other non-contact regions through the interaction forces between particles, leading to
global shape changes. The method used to represent these changes will be explained
in the subsequent sections.
In this initial exploration stage, we do not attempt to fit a rigorous physical model,
as limited knowledge is available regarding the physics simulation of these specific
living organisms. Instead, we approach the simulation from a geometric perspective,
aiming to build a model that can theoretically encompass all possible morphologies of
axons. Based on Young’s modulus[YBS12][Bau00] of S1 and S2 (E1, E2) in Fig.3.2, we
decompose the shape changes into four scenarios. During axon growth, the membrane
in the contact region (referred to as the collision region hereafter) undergoes local
deformation.
When E1 →0 and E2 →0, the deformation of the collision region will apply lit-
tle force to the non-collision region via these springs. This will cause one extreme
circumstance that particles in the non-collision region will not have any changes, as
shown in Fig.3.3a. When E1 →0 and E2 →∞, the other side will also be forced to
move, as shown in Fig.3.3b.
If E1 →∞and E2 →∞, a global deformation will be caused like Fig.3.4a. And
Fig.3.4b shows the shape when E1 →∞, E2 →0.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Methods
(a) Circumstance I when E1 →0, E2 →0.
(b) Circumstance II when E1 →0, E2 →∞.
Figure 3.3: Collision circumstances I & II.
(a) Circumstance III when E1 →∞, E2 →∞.
(b) Circumstance IV when E1 →∞, E2 →0.
Figure 3.4: Collision circumstances III & IV.
In order to capture the various morphologies of an axon, we employed three types
of shape transformations on our parameters: local deformation (L-DFM), local dis-
placement (L-DSP), and global displacement (G-DSP). The adjustments of these
transformations are controlled by two parameters: axial rigidity and radial rigidity,
which are discussed in detail in Sec.3.2.2. To preserve the information, we project the
axon surface onto a 2D image, as illustrated in Fig.3.5.
L-DFM
It is a map where each pixel stores a scalar l. All axons are initialized as
curved cylinders and pixels are sampled on the surface. This map serves how far
a specific needs to contract along its normal direction ⃗vn. This shape modification
covers circumstance I in Fig.3.3a.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Collision
17
Figure 3.5: Surface query map.
L-DSP
L-DSP is an array of vectors ⃗
vdsp. Each vector stands a displacement of all
the points with corresponding t. It is in charge of deformation like Fig.3.3b
G-DSP
G-DSP is a vector that directly moves the control points. In this way, the
axon will bypass the obstacle like Fig.3.4a.
To cover circumstance IV, an additional smoothing operation will be applied to
convert circumstance II to IV.
With these terms defined, a surface point Ps on an axon with an arbitrary shape
can be queried using Eq.3.4 below.
Ps = Pc + ⃗
vdsp +(rc −l)⃗vn
(3.4)
3.2
Collision
As we have discussed the geometric aspects of the axon simulation and the represen-
tation of shape changes, it is crucial to now shift the focus toward collisions. While
understanding the geometry of axons is essential for capturing their diverse morpholo-
gies, it is equally important to account for collisions between axons and other objects
(at this stage, only axon-axon collisions) in the environment. In the following sec-
tions, we will explore the methods employed for handling collisions. Additionally,
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Methods
we will delve into the various narrow-phase detection strategies utilized to ensure
realistic and physically plausible interactions between axons and their surroundings.
By integrating both geometric modeling and collision handling, we aim to create a
comprehensive axon simulation framework that accurately captures their complex
behaviors in interactive environments.
3.2.1
Collision Detection
Like many other collision detection methods, the algorithm consists of two main
phases: the broad phase and the narrow phase [Ale01]. In the broad phase, a collection
of colliding axis-aligned bounding boxes (AABB) is identified. Subsequently, for each
pair of colliding boxes, a narrow phase primitive detection is conducted. In contrast
to the typical mesh-based detection, we do not consider the triangles of the segmented
cylinders as geometric primitives due to their coarse resolution, which may overlook
actual collisions. Instead, additional sampling is performed, and the narrow phase
detection is based on the higher-resolution primitives (sampled points).
3.2.1.1
Broad Phase
To optimize the narrow phase detection process, we divided each axon into 2 ∗nc
segments, where nc represents the number of control points. For each segment, an
AABB is computed. Using the eﬀicient algorithm proposed by [ZE00], we detect and
store all colliding AABBs during the broad phase, as illustrated in Fig.3.6. These
detected AABBs will be utilized in the subsequent narrow-phase detection.
3.2.1.2
Narrow Phase
During the narrow phase, we explored three different methods: the Gilbert-Johnson-
Keerthi (GJK)[GJK88] algorithm, gradient descent, and binary search.
Through
experimentation, we encountered certain limitations and constraints along the way.
As a result, we determined that the binary search method best suited our needs and
ultimately made it our final choice for the narrow phase collision detection.
GJK algorithm
During the experimentation with the GJK algorithm, we did not
have a complete understanding of the physical model depicted in Fig.3.2. Initially,
our approach focused on deforming the NURBS curve parameters, such as transform-
ing, inserting, and removing control points, to achieve deformation.
We assumed
that each segmented part of the axon was convex, and by using Minkowski difference
[Sch14], we could determine the shortest collision direction. Based on this assumption,
we adjusted the parameters of the NURBS curve. However, we encountered several
limitations with this approach. Firstly, not all segments were convex, which was a
strong assumption for a more detailed simulation. As mentioned in Sec.3.1.2, if the
surface involved local deformation (L-DFM), it could form a non-convex shape, which
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Collision
19
Figure 3.6: Collisions detected between AABBs in the broad phase.
violated the assumption. Additionally, resolving collisions in our context proved to
be nontrivial. In the broad phase, we segmented each axon and performed AABB
intersection detection. In some cases, if the closest direction followed the axial direc-
tion, the resolution method would simply move the intersection to other segmented
parts instead of effectively resolving it. This discovery also highlighted a constraint in
resolving such shapes, namely that all deformations should only occur in the normal
plane.
Gradient descent
The experiment with the GJK algorithm also raises questions
about how to define primitives in our narrow phase.
Given that the curve-based
method represents axons as a continuous surface, we can easily retrieve any point
on the surface by specifying the parameters t and r. As a potential approach, we
consider using a single position as the primitive for the narrow phase. This choice
is reminiscent of stochastic methods [Tes+05] [GD04], although we evenly sample
surface positions to convert the detection into a more precise approximation, as high
precision is crucial in the initial stage.
The application of gradient descent to search for the ”closest” position on the
other axon poses certain challenges. The closeness is defined by the signed distance,
where negative values indicate an inside position and positive values indicate an out-
side position. The ”closest” position refers to the minimum signed distance, which
represents the deepest penetration. However, experiments have revealed some short-
comings of this method, as illustrated in Fig.3.7. Furthermore, the collision response
method also has other potential issues that need to be addressed. As a new con-
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Methods
(a) Convergence steps of gradient descent.
(b) Detection fails at specific configuration.
Figure 3.7: (a) The step size is determined by backtracking line search with Armijo
condition[Wri06]. The brightness of a point indicates its proximity to the converging
position. The brighter the point is, the closer it is to the converging position. (b)
Determining the sign of the distance using only two surface positions and their cor-
responding axial position is a nontrivial task. In this example, the black dots are
positions detected as a collision happening.
straint was met above, all the deformation was projected onto the normal plane. But
this response introduces another issue by disrupting the order of sampled points, as
shown in Fig.3.8. From this, we have learned that a proper way of deforming at
sampled positions should be aligned with the normal direction, either contraction or
expansion.
Binary search
Based on the trials above, a principle for deformation has been
reached: the deformation for specific surface positions should always follow the nor-
mal direction. With this principle, it is easy to detect if one point in 3D is inside
or outside an axon. Since we could query any surface point with t and r, the task
is converted to find the parameters t2 and r2 on the second axon, given P1 on the
first axon. Fig.3.9 demonstrates the target setting of the binary search method. In
this way, the distance from P1 to Pc can be compared with the surface distance d to
determine if the position is inside or outside an axon, where Pc is the corresponding
position on axis t and d = rc −l in Eq.3.4.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Collision
21
Figure 3.8: Because of collision response, P3 is moved to the left side of P2, causing
an invalid connectivity.
Figure 3.9: The target of the binary search is to find a value t that gives the same
length as the red solid line in the picture.
3.2.2
Collision Resolution
Once a point on an axon surface is detected inside the other axon, the collision re-
sponse needs to be taken to resolve it. With two maps for local deformation (L-DFM)
and local displacement (L-DSP) set up in Sec.3.1.2, the last thing to be determined is
how far this point should move along its normal direction. Unfortunately, it is always
diﬀicult to achieve the solution in one step. When the detected surface point moves,
the corresponding fitted parameters, t2 and r2, will change at the same time, which
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methods
means the detection result is not available anymore. Thus, this response method is
designed in a progressive fashion. With a user-defined number of step n, for L-DFM,
the step size d is decided by Eq.3.5, where Rmax is the maximum radius of the axon,
Rmin is the minimum radius of it, and rr refers to radial rigidity. When rr = 0.0, this
will allow the surface to deform all the way to its minimum size.
d = (1.0−rr)· Rmax −Rmin
n
(3.5)
As for L-DSP, the deformation vector
⃗
vd fm is computed by Eq.3.6, where ra refers
to axial rigidity and R2 is the radius of the collided axon. Its direction is decided
by the collision case of a ring, as shown in Fig.3.10. When rr = 1.0 and ra = 0.0, it
supports solving the collision by L-DSP only.
|vdsp| = rr ·(1.0−ra)· R2
n
(3.6)
Similarly, G-DSP is computed by the same Eq.3.6. But an additional merge op-
eration is needed before moving the control points, as shown in Fig.3.11. Otherwise,
a control point will be moved several times, leading to other problematic scene con-
figurations. Based on the longest vector, a principle coordinate is constructed. Each
vector will be decomposed in three directions. For each direction, the largest move is
taken, and the final vector is the summation of three max vectors. However, as long
as a negative vector appears in this decomposition, no move will be taken because it
may worsen some other collision region. For further implementation details, please
refer to Sec.4
Rigidity
Here we defined two rigidity: radial rigidity and axial rigidity. From Eq.3.5
and Eq.3.6, one can tell that these two parameters decide how much this handling
relies on deformation or displacement. Both parameters range from 0 to 1. However, a
potential issue exists because the operation of displacement does not only contract, it
will force the shape to move to some other direction, which will cause other potential
collisions, as shown in Fig.5.5. This indicates that the more crowded the scene is,
the smaller the radial rigidity should be. In some extremely crowded circumstances,
only L-DFM should be taken as a solution. At this stage, the investigation of how to
tune these parameters during the axon growth is a little out of scope, which will be
discussed as future work in Sec.6.2.
3.3
Axon Features
This section includes a very short description of some axon features implemented in
this simulator.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Axon Features
23
Figure 3.10: The red dots refer to collided points while the green ones are non-collided.
The direction of L-DSP is determined by vdsp in this figure.
3.3.1
Growth
The primary simulated behavior in our model is axon growth. Utilizing discrete colli-
sion detection (DCD), a simulation framework that allows us to initiate and recover
from a state with pre-existing intersections, facilitates the simulation of growth be-
havior. By appropriately setting the time step, we can directly modify the radius
of each axon to simulate its growth. Following each growth step, we perform one
iteration of collision detection and resolution to maintain the system in order.
3.3.2
Initialization: Tortuosity
Another noteworthy aspect is the initialization of the axon shape. In the ellipsoid-
based approach, the axons are initialized with straight lines, resulting in a restricted
range of axon simulations, as depicted in Fig.3.12. To address this limitation, we
have been inspired to utilize curves as the initial structure, enabling the coverage of
a wider range of possible scenarios.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methods
Figure 3.11: A 2D case when merging three vectors at one control point. The red
dashed line is the principal axis defined by the longest vector v1 and the second longest
vector v2.
Figure 3.12: The top left figure shows the tortuosity distribution of one scene gen-
erated by the ellipsoid-based method. The top mid picture is a distribution of the
real-world case. One can tell that the straight-line initialized method only covers a
subset of natural cases bounded in the black dashed box. The top right figure shows
the definition of tortuosity. The figure below presents some examples taken from the
top right simulated result. (Figure provided by Sidsel Winther)
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
Details
This chapter introduces the algorithm-wise design of the curve-based simulation
method, including basic data structure, algorithms, and GUI design.
4.1
Data Structure
Fig.4.1 shows the data structure and a simple data flow of the program.
In the
visualizer class, a set of functions are defined to render different elements, such as
points, meshes, boxes, and the GUI. Three objects are stored in this visualizer for
rendering, including shader, camera, and scene. The shader class is basically in charge
of the integration of shader files and value settings. The camera class allows the user
to move in this scene for visualization from different spots. The scene class stores all
the information needed to render a single voxel. And there are two other classes, io,
and random case generator, providing the initialization of the axons in this voxel.
Fig.4.2 shows the structure of the scene class.
An array of axons are stored
for further behavior simulation and visualization. When it is about to be rendered,
an update function will be called to generate corresponding meshes based on some
resolution parameters. Besides, global parameters such as radial rigidity, axial rigidity,
minimum radius, and some other visualization choices, are kept here. Also, different
collision algorithms, GJK, gradient descent, binary search, and other helper functions
are implemented in this class as private members.
For each axon, it contains a curve for the center skeleton, two maps for L-DSP
and L-DFM respectively, bounding boxes, and functions such as growth, different
surface point query function, and value update. The NURBS curve class keeps all
the required parameters for a NURBS curve, such as knots, control points, weights,
etc. It enables the user to retrieve a center point along the curve by providing the
parameter t. As for the mesh class, it saves the information of axons as a triangle
mesh, e.g. vertices, colors, normal, and indices.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Implementation Details
Figure 4.1: Data structure and data flow of the implementation.
4.2
Algorithms
In this section, a number of algorithms in this program are introduced. Firstly, a
global software logic will be presented. And then, each specific algorithm, especially
those in the narrow phase of collision detection, follows up.
Alg.1 shows a global logic of this software. Start by providing a config file or
initialize by random generator, the program will initialize everything with it and
perform one iteration of the collision algorithms. Afterward, data are passed to the
visualization loop. In this loop, several keys are set for different commands, e.g. ”g”
for growing one iteration. After the visualizer is terminated, the final mesh will be
exported as an OBJ file.
Among all these algorithms, surface point sampling will be introduced first since it
is the basic one that every other algorithm needs it. Based on different narrow phase
methods, different surface point query functions are designed. Here the only focus is
put on the final decision, binary search, whose query function needs t and r as inputs.
Alg.2 gives a pseudo code of it. According to Eq.3.4, the center point Pc, displacement
DSP, deformation DFM are prepared for later computing. As we save the L-DFM
with a grid map, we need to apply a bilinear interpolation to get the deformation of
a random position. Before calculating the surface point Ps, the normal direction is
needed. For each discretized segment of the axon, we can obtain its tangent direction.
In the first segment, a reference direction is defined in its normal plane, so that the
reference directions of other segments are acquired by adopting the same rotation as
tangent directions. Then the surface point can be easily queried by Eq.3.4.
With the surface query function defined, the only challenge is collision detection,
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Algorithms
27
Algorithm 1 Global software logic
Require: con figPath
parameters ←configFile
axons ←configFile
Scene initialization
Collision detection broad phase
Collision detection narrow phase
Data update
Visualizer initialization
while true do
if key pressed then
corresponding response
else if esc pressed then
break
GUI response
render boxes
render meshes
render points
end if
end while
Export mesh
Algorithm 2 Surface point query
Require: t,r
Pc = getCenter(t)
DSP = interpolateDSP(t)
Pc+ = DSP
DFM = interpolateDFM(t,r)
rzero = interpolateZeroRadian()
n = rotate(ninit,rzero,r)
radius = interpolateRadius(t)
Ps = Pc +radius·n−DFM
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Implementation Details
Figure 4.2: Data structure of the scene class.
since our data structure and surface point query method already defined the collision
response somehow.
In the broad phase, the algorithm[ZE00] implemented in the
Computational Geometry Algorithms Library (CGAL)[The23] is embedded to detect
possible collision segment pairs. After that, a narrow phase with binary search follows
to detect the exact collision region and deliver the deformation info to corresponding
axons, as shown in Alg.3. This is an iterative process, collisions will be detected
in function displacement() and deformation(). If collision exists, a vector/value will
be computed based on the user-defined parameter steps and passed to the axon’s
memory in real-time. Alg.5 and Alg.4 present the logic in both detection functions,
displacement() and deformation(). The same collision criteria are applied in both
functions. The deformation info will be directly modified/added to the memory of
the corresponding axon so that these changes can take effect in the next iteration.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Algorithms
29
Algorithm 3 The binary search method for narrow phase
Require: steps,collision_pairs
while i < steps do
while j < collision_pairs.size() do
while k < 2 do
Choose the target axon according to k
displacement(collision_pairs[j],i)
deformation(collision_pairs[j],i)
end while
end while
end while
Smoothing
Algorithm 4 deformation
Require: steps,collision_pair,safe_zone
Initialization
while i < resolution_t do
while j < collision_r do
Initialize t1,r1 according to i, j
P1 = getSur facePoint(t1,r1)
t2,r2 = binarySearch(P1)
C2 = getCenterPoint(t2)
P2 = getSur facePoint(t2,r2)
if isCollision(C2,P2,P1) then
Collision response - update info
end if
end while
end while
Algorithm 5 displacement
Require: steps,collision_pairs
Initialization
while i < resolution_t do
Same detection as 4
Decide ⃗
vdsp as depicted in 3.10
Collision response - update info
end while
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Implementation Details
Figure 4.3: The layout of the GUI.
4.3
GUI Design
For the convenience of both users and developers, a GUI is designed to enable the
ability to change parameters directly through it. Fig.4.3 presents all the features
in this GUI. With these features, it is easy to locate possible bugs/issues with the
algorithm and shows the user what the intermediate result looks like.
Other keyboard functions are defined for the user to perform specific operations.
The user could move the camera in an FPS fashion with keys ’w’, ’a’, ’s’, and ’d’.
By pressing ’i’, the cursor can be enabled/disabled. One growth iteration will be
performed once ’g’ is pressed. Also, the user can export the current mesh by pressing
’e’.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments & Results
In this chapter, we will present a comprehensive series of experiments to demonstrate
the performance of our curve-based axon generator. The experiments are divided
into three main categories: basic functionality, advanced features, and actual use
cases.
In Section 5.1, we will apply our algorithm to carefully configured simple
scenes, providing readers with clear visualizations to showcase the core functionality.
Section 5.2 will focus on introducing new properties that go beyond the ellipsoids-
based algorithm. Additionally, we have received scene configurations from real users,
which will be evaluated in Section 5.3. Both the curve-based and ellipsoids-based
algorithms will be tested on these scenes to assess the strengths and weaknesses of
each method.
5.1
Basic Functionality Verification
To show the functionality of our method, we perform the algorithm on two simple-
designed scenes as shown in Fig.5.1, Fig.5.2, and Fig.5.3.
Among them, the scene with only two axons intersection is used to show how
these basic features work on a very clean configuration. While the other two scenes
with three axons are targeted at presenting the following features in a narrow area
with multiple axons intersected. There are two intersections in the scene of Fig.5.2,
they are very close to each other, which will bring challenges when handling collisions.
Whereas the scene of Fig.5.3 contains only one intersection area but involves multiple
(three) different axons.
5.1.1
Three Types of Collision Deformation
In order to provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of our collision resolu-
tion methods, we will initially apply three distinct resolution techniques individually
to simple scenes. Subsequently, we will proceed to combine these methods in the
test scenes by adjusting two parameters, illustrating the seamless integration of these
three approaches.
Type I: Global Displacement (Curve Refit)
Fig.5.4 gives an intuitive image of how
this global displacement works in general. This operation will refit the curve con-
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Experiments & Results
(a) Scene visualization.
(b) Zoomed visualization of the intersection.
Figure 5.1: A test scene with two intersected axons.
(a) Scene visualization.
(b) Zoomed visualization of the intersection.
Figure 5.2: A test scene with three intersected axons. Several intersection areas exist
in this scene, each intersection involves two axons only.
figuration, more exactly, control points, related to this intersection area. This will
introduce a global change in the shape of axons. Fig.5.5 shows this resolution method
on three-axon scenes. Both results meet our expectations and intuition. It is worth
noting that, in the single-intersection scene, this resolution introduced new collisions
into the resulting scene. In the real use case, this won’t be an issue since several steps
of collision detection and resolution will be performed. In this iterative manner, the
newly-introduced collision will be solved in the next step. And when it gets close
to the final stages, no more global displacement will be carried out anymore, which
ensures the simulator does not go into endless repeating collision handling.
Type II: Local Displacement
As depicted in Fig.5.6, the local displacement exclu-
sively affects the collision regions, resulting in high-frequency changes on the axon
surface. The outcome on three-axon scenes with only local displacement, as illustrated
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Basic Functionality Verification
33
(a) Scene visualization.
(b) Zoomed visualization of the intersection.
Figure 5.3: A test scene with three intersected axons. Only one intersection area
involving three different axons exists in this scene.
in Fig.5.7, clearly demonstrates that a single method for collision resolution alone is
insuﬀicient to handle more complex scenarios. It leads to substantial local variations
and artificial artifacts, along with the potential introduction of new collisions, similar
to global displacement.
Type III: Local Deformation
Apart from displacement, the soft material should also
be considered. As Fig.5.8 displays, local deformation only happens where the surface
intersects. It won’t cause any changes at either the non-collision part or the surface
in other directions of the collision area. With the minimum radius set to zero, Fig.5.9
shows the possibility of resolving the collision by applying local deformation only. Dif-
ferent from deformation, this operation will not introduce any possible new collisions
to the whole scene because it is a subtractive operation. The only possible invalid
geometry is when the radius in some directions shrinks to zero, and degenerated faces
form.
Combination of three types of resolution method
By assigning proper axial rigidity
and radial rigidity, a more realistic result that meets our expectations is reached, as
shown in Fig.5.10.
5.1.2
Growth
Back into the context, we are not only simulating a static scene at a fixed time frame.
Instead, we aim to simulate a dynamic process of the neural environment from its
initial state to a stable state. Thus, the functionality of axon growth is needed and
tested. This experiment was carried out on two sample scenes more complicated than
above, a random initialized one and a narrowly distributed scene.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Experiments & Results
Figure 5.4: Global displacement on the two-axon intersection.
Fig.5.12 shows the growth process with a fixed rigidity: ra = 0.5,rr = 0.7, where
ra is axial rigidity and rr refers to radial rigidity.
The geometry validity is well-
kept during this growing process. However, some unnatural sharp edges are visible
around the deformation region, which could be a further improvement in applying
the smoothing method to the shape transformation.
And Fig.5.13 shows an organized scene with all axons orient in almost the same
direction. As narrow as it is, the radial rigidity is settled very close to 0. At this
stage, few investigations are made to learn how these parameters should be related
to real cases. Most parameter settings are based on the author’s intuition. Further
research needs to be carried out to learn the process.
5.2
Advanced Feature
This section mainly depicts some advanced features that the ellipsoid-based method
can not reach. In Sec.6.1, further comparison of the pros and cons of both methods
will be discussed in detail.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Use Case
35
(a) Global displacement on the three-axon
multiple-intersection scene.
(b) Global displacement on the three-axon
single-intersection scene.
Figure 5.5: Three-axon scenes tested with global displacement resolution. A new
collision is introduced at the yellow circle part in the single-intersection scene.
5.2.1
Geometry Validity
Firstly, the ellipsoid-based method does not guarantee a theoretically rigorous colli-
sion detection. As Fig.5.14 shows, no matter how high the ellipsoid density is, the
red region always exists without being detected. While the curve-based method is
able to query any point on the shape, it is theoretically able to avoid any collision
even in some extreme circumstances.
Fig.5.15 shows the ellipsoid configuration and its output mesh as tubes on a ran-
domly initialized scene. Fig.5.16 shows the same scene resolved by curve-based rep-
resentation. The same resolution of detection is kept to ensure the fairness of the
comparison.
5.2.2
Asymmetric Deformation
Furthermore, the ellipsoid-based representation poses limitations on simulating asym-
metric deformations, as demonstrated in the magnified part of Fig.5.17. In contrast,
the curve-based method allows for distinct deformations on the surface, enabling the
simulation of asymmetric deformations.
5.3
Use Case
In this section, we will test our simulator on some actual use cases provided by our
further collaborator. To reach comparable results with the ellipsoid-based method
and save time, we start from the final output configuration of the ellipsoid-based
method after several growth iterations. For each axon, we sample every fifth ellipsoid
position as a control point and set the minimum radius as a global radius of this axon.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Experiments & Results
Figure 5.6: Local displacement at the two-axon intersection.
Based on this initialization, 3 growth iterations are performed with axial rigidity of
0.0 (already high-density scene) to strive for fairness in comparison.
Fig.5.17 shows the final scene grown by the ellipsoid-based method. In the zoomed
area, an unnatural deformation happens to the outside of the red axon. Without any
forces outside the voxel, it looks like being pushed by a force from the left. This is due
to the inability of the ellipsoid-based method to make asymmetric deformation. As for
geometry validity, it has 13,190 faces involving intersections. Considering each axon
in this mesh has two layers while the inner layer is less possible to get an intersection,
the intersection rate of this mesh is larger than
13190
8859840 ≈1.49o/oo.
Fig.5.18 shows a similar real case as above grown by our curve-based method.
Compare with the zoomed part of the ellipsoid-based method, it’s more natural and
close to our intuition.
Also, this mesh has a lower intersection rate of
7298
12608496 ≈
0.58o/oo.
Furthermore, this experiment gives more interesting insights into the shortcomings
of the current algorithm. Firstly, this algorithm has a high time complexity, it took
several hours to finish one iteration on the actual use case with around 500 axons
with high density. Secondly, it gives failure cases where the geometry validity is not
fully guaranteed. Two typical categories are found in this scene, as shown in Fig.5.19.
Especially, the second category leads the author to further thoughts about the growth
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Use Case
37
(a) Local displacement at the three-axon
multiple-intersection scene.
(b) Local displacement at the three-axon
single-intersection scene.
Figure 5.7: Three-axon scenes tested with global displacement resolution. A new
collision is introduced at the yellow circle part in the single-intersection scene.
process. We will mention it in the section of future work, see Sec.6.2.
Fig.5.20 and Fig.5.21 provide a comparison of the interior axons between the
ellipsoid-based method and the curve-based method. However, due to export issues,
only a portion of the selected axons are displayed in the ellipsoid-based method image.
The comparison reveals that the ellipsoid-based method achieves a more visually
plausible effect, while the curve-based method exhibits sharp artifacts. This can be
attributed to a few factors. Firstly, the collision response in the curve-based method
only considers intersections and lacks additional constraints, leading to the need for
smoothing techniques or further research on physically accurate constraints. Secondly,
it is challenging to obtain a perfectly fair comparison of a dynamic process. In this
experiment, the curve-based method is applied to a pre-grown scene generated by the
ellipsoid-based method. To highlight the differences, each axon in the curve-based
method is assigned a constant maximum radius identical to that of the corresponding
axon in the ellipsoid-based scene. This introduces challenges, such as dealing with an
excessively large time step in the discrete collision detection (DCD) process. A more
appropriate experimental setup would involve generating and growing the scene from
the beginning to ensure a fair comparison.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Experiments & Results
Figure 5.8: Local deformation at the two-axon intersection.
(a) Local deformation at the three-axon
multiple-intersection scene.
(b) Local deformation at the three-axon
single-intersection scene.
Figure 5.9: Three-axon scenes tested with local deformation resolution. The minimum
radius is set to zero and the smoothing (conservation of mass) feature is discarded
here to illustrate how local deformation works clearly.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Use Case
39
Figure 5.10: Combined resolution method on the two-axon intersection, where axial
rigidity equals 0.95, radial rigidity equals 0.9.
(a) Combined resolution method on the
three-axon multiple-intersection scene.
(b) Combined resolution method on the
three-axon single-intersection scene.
Figure 5.11: Three-axon scenes tested with combined collision resolution, where axial
rigidity equals 0.9, radial rigidity equals 0.9.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Experiments & Results
(a) Fifteen randomly initialized axons. Five
times growth with a growth rate of 1.2 to
get the result on the right.
(b) Result scene. The bottom right picture
was taken from the other side of the red
circled region.
Figure 5.12: The growth on a random scene.
(a) Fourty nine orderly initialized axons.
(b) Result scene.
Figure 5.13: The growth on an organized scene. Four times growth with a growth
rate of 1.2 to get the result on the right.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Use Case
41
Figure 5.14: The ellipsoid-based method suffers from this blank-detection regions
(a) The scene after collision resolution by
checking ellipsoids validity.
(b) The result after transforming to tube
representation.
Figure 5.15: The ellipsoid-based method on a random initialized scene. In ellipsoid
mode, there is no collision between the red ones and the blue ones. Collisions happen
after transforming into tubes.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Experiments & Results
Figure 5.16: The curve-based method detected the collision and got proper handling.
Figure 5.17: Final scene grown with the ellipsoid-based method. Face intersection
number: 13,190. Total face number: 8,859,840.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Use Case
43
Figure 5.18: Final scene grown with the curve-based method. Face intersection num-
ber: 7298. Total face number: 12,608,496.
(a) Failure category I: out of range. This
kind of failure happens when the
corresponding parameter t is out of the
range of [0,1], which will cause problems
with collision detection.
(b) Failure category II: full coverage. If both
sides of a thinner axon are inside a thicker
axon, the thicker one will not recognize it.
(In this figure, the white axon goes into the
green one)
Figure 5.19: Two main categories of geometry failures in the actual use case.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Experiments & Results
(a) Interior axons generated by
curve-based method, group I.
(b) Interior axons generated by
ellipsoid-based method, group I.
Figure 5.20: Comparison between generated axon meshes of both methods, group I.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Use Case
45
(a) Interior axons generated by
curve-based method, group II.
(b) Interior axons generated by
ellipsoid-based method, group II.
Figure 5.21: Comparison between generated axon meshes of both methods, group II.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this chapter, we will review what we have done in this thesis and give a comprehen-
sive discussion about the strengths and weaknesses of this method. Based on that, a
clear image of what to do next in future work will be presented.
6.1
Pros & Cons
Fig.6.1 shows a table presenting the pros and cons of both the ellipsoid-based method
and the curve-based method.
Taking inspiration from the limitations of the ellipsoid-based method, we have
developed a mass-spring physical model that encompasses a wide range of shape
deformation scenarios. This model incorporates accurate collision detection and re-
sponse algorithms to maintain the geometric integrity of the shapes. However, while
this complex model offers numerous advantages, it also comes with some drawbacks.
The most significant pain point is its eﬀiciency, as demonstrated in our experiments in
Sec.5.3, where generating a crowded scene with approximately 500 growing axons took
several hours. Additionally, the model introduces additional parameters for users to
consider, and without a comprehensive understanding of their adaptive changes dur-
ing growth, it becomes challenging to achieve an optimal simulation. Furthermore,
the model solely focuses on ensuring geometric validity (avoiding face intersection)
and does not consider other constraints related to local or global deformation.
On the other hand, as a simulation tool, the ellipsoid-based method has been
successfully employed to generate highly complex neural scenes. Leveraging its eﬀi-
cient collision detection, it can generate a grown scene within a reasonable timeframe.
Moreover, with appropriate parameter configurations, it can produce scenes with
minimal intersections. For obtaining a preliminary understanding of the neural en-
vironment during the initial stages, the ellipsoid-based method serves as a valuable
choice, providing intuitive insights.
6.2
Future Work
With the pros and cons discussed above, it is clear that further work in several
directions is needed to keep exploring this way.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Discussion
Figure 6.1: A table discussing pros & cons of both methods.
6.2.1
Eﬀiciency
To address this major challenge, there are several potential strategies to enhance
memory and computation eﬀiciency. Within the existing framework, one option is
to implement parallelism to accelerate the collision detection process. Additionally,
during the binary search stage of each iteration, creating a new map to store infor-
mation from the previous iteration can help reduce resource consumption, especially
when dealing with extensive search ranges.
Another viable approach is to explore the development of a new framework that
leverages the knowledge and insights gained from this project. One promising avenue
is to investigate generative methods[Bær+12], which can be experimented with to
incorporate implicit surfaces, noise-based techniques, or differential growth[YSC21].
These methods offer the potential to address the eﬀiciency challenges while enabling
the exploration of diverse shapes and patterns for axon simulations.
6.2.2
Simulation
As mentioned in Sec.6.1, no other constraints than intersections are considered in our
work. There are two main categories of simulation in Computer Graphics[BMM15].
The most classical methods are physically-based simulation. They discretize Newton’s
second law and compute forces to simulate various effects on deformable bodies, fluids,
and so on. For our project, efforts could be put to embed the mechanical model
into the simple physical model defined by the mass-spring system in Sec.3.1.2. Also,
finite element simulation is also a popular method as a simulation tool.
It is a
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Future Work
49
more physically accurate approach than the mass-spring system, which uses the finite
element method (FEM) to solve PDEs of elastic material[Kau+09].
On the other hand, another type of constraint are popularly studied two decades
ago called position-based simulation[Mül+07][MMC16].
Although not as accurate
as force-based methods, it still provides a plausible visualization of a simulation, at
the same time, a faster simulation. In our context, compared with those macroscale
deformable bodies in normal visual life, the growth process of axons is extremely slow
and could be approximated without simulating forces.
6.2.3
Parameter study
In Sec.3.2.2, we presented some speculative principles derived from our experimental
findings. One such principle suggests a correlation between the axial rigidity and
the radius of the axon, indicating that the rigidity may vary based on the axon’s size.
Additionally, we observed that in densely populated areas, lower radial rigidity is nec-
essary. However, to effectively control the growth process and adjust the parameters
adaptively, further research and collaboration with colleagues are needed to validate
these hypotheses and acquire additional knowledge.
6.2.4
Framework
Currently, we are talking about collision detection and response under the discrete
collision detection (DCD) framework. However, by updating the space information
within this voxel, we have a chance to perform continuous collision detection (CCD),
which is more intuitively similar to the growth process of an axon.
6.2.5
Other challenges
Also, there are a number of challenges for soft body dynamics that we ignored in this
project, e.g. self-intersection. Recent research[CDY23] has awesome progress on this
kind of collision detection and response, which could be adopted into our project to
make further improvements.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
A biophysical model is essential to study structures and features that cross multiple
scale levels in the neural system such as axon orientation and diameter distribution.
As the ellipsoid model applied by diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)[BML94b] is proved
to cause bias, a new model for the visualization and characterization of neural tissues
is needed.
This project moves one exploratory step toward the goal by building a simulation
tool for generating axons within a voxel of a specific size.
Based on the insights
acquired from the ellipsoid-based simulator, a curve-based method is designed with
an intuitive and popular physical model. This method is able to simulate a generally
broad range of deformation types of tube-like shapes while keeping a good geometry
validity.
Meanwhile, it opens new challenges to further research. With the drawbacks of
low eﬀiciency and lack of physical/geometrical constraints, new frameworks could be
designed to raise usability while keeping a high simulation quality. At the same time,
experiments could be carried out to validate this simulation model and any growth
model based on this work, to study the real morphology of tissues in an in-vivo
context.
In conclusion, this is a very starting step before research on the structures in the
neural system. Along the way, new models must be proposed beyond this project.
This project plays the role of a bridge connecting the biomedical field to the en-
trance of the physically-based simulation realm.
With insights from this project,
more physically-accurate models can be presented and validated, helping researchers
gain valuable knowledge about the human brain.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[Ale+19]
Daniel C Alexander et al. “Imaging brain microstructure with diffusion
MRI: practicality and applications.” In: NMR in Biomedicine 32.4 (2019),
e3841.
[Ale01]
Andrei Alexandrescu. Modern C++ design: generic programming and
design patterns applied. Addison-Wesley, 2001.
[And+20]
Mariam Andersson et al. “Axon morphology is modulated by the local
environment and impacts the noninvasive investigation of its structure–
function relationship.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 117.52 (2020), pages 33649–33659.
[Bær+12]
J Andreas Bærentzen et al. Guide to computational geometry process-
ing: foundations, algorithms, and methods. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2012.
[Bar84]
Alan H Barr. “Global and local deformations of solid primitives.” In:
ACM Siggraph Computer Graphics 18.3 (1984), pages 21–30.
[Bar97]
David Baraff. “An introduction to physically based modeling: rigid body
simulation I—unconstrained rigid body dynamics.” In: SIGGRAPH course
notes 82 (1997).
[Bau00]
E Baumgart. “Stiffness-an unknown world of mechanical science.” In: In-
jury 31.Suppl 2 (2000), B14–23.
[BML94a]
Peter J Basser, James Mattiello, and Denis LeBihan. “Estimation of the
effective self-diffusion tensor from the NMR spin echo.” In: Journal of
Magnetic Resonance, Series B 103.3 (1994), pages 247–254.
[BML94b]
Peter J Basser, James Mattiello, and Denis LeBihan. “MR diffusion
tensor spectroscopy and imaging.” In: Biophysical journal 66.1 (1994),
pages 259–267.
[BMM15]
Jan Bender, Matthias Müller, and Miles Macklin. “Position-Based Sim-
ulation Methods in Computer Graphics.” In: Eurographics (tutorials).
2015, page 8.
[BP11]
Peter J Basser and Carlo Pierpaoli. “Microstructural and physiological
features of tissues elucidated by quantitative-diffusion-tensor MRI.” In:
Journal of magnetic resonance 213.2 (2011), pages 560–570.
==PAGE:64==
54
Bibliography
[BP98]
Peter J Basser and Carlo Pierpaoli. “A simplified method to measure
the diffusion tensor from seven MR images.” In: Magnetic resonance in
medicine 39.6 (1998), pages 928–934.
[CDY23]
He Chen, Elie Diaz, and Cem Yuksel. “Shortest Path to Boundary for Self-
Intersecting Meshes.” In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings
of SIGGRAPH 2023) 42.4 (July 2023). ISSN: 0730-0301. DOI: 10.1145/
3592136. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3592136.
[Che+19]
Wenzheng Chen et al. “Learning to predict 3d objects with an interpolation-
based differentiable renderer.” In: Advances in neural information process-
ing systems 32 (2019).
[Dyr+18]
Tim B Dyrby et al. “Validation strategies for the interpretation of mi-
crostructure imaging using diffusion MRI.” In: Neuroimage 182 (2018),
pages 62–79.
[Eri04]
Christer Ericson. Real-time collision detection. Crc Press, 2004.
[Far02]
Gerald Farin. Curves and surfaces for CAGD: a practical guide. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2002.
[Far14]
Gerald Farin. Curves and surfaces for computer-aided geometric design:
a practical guide. Elsevier, 2014.
[GD04]
Stéphane Guy and Gilles Debunne. “Monte-Carlo collision detection.”
PhD thesis. INRIA, 2004.
[GJK88]
Elmer G Gilbert, Daniel W Johnson, and S Sathiya Keerthi. “A fast
procedure for computing the distance between complex objects in three-
dimensional space.” In: IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation 4.2
(1988), pages 193–203.
[Ham17]
Kenton Hamaluik. April 2017. URL: https : / / blog . hamaluik . ca /
posts/building-a-collision-engine-part-1-2d-gjk-collision-
detection/.
[HJ78]
PJ Hartley and CJ Judd. “Parametrization of Bézier-type B-spline curves
and surfaces.” In: Computer-Aided Design 10.2 (1978), pages 130–134.
[Kau+09]
Peter Kaufmann et al. “Flexible simulation of deformable models using
discontinuous galerkin fem.” In: Graphical Models 71.4 (2009), pages 153–
167.
[Kie+15]
J Kiendl et al. “Single-variable formulations and isogeometric discretiza-
tions for shear deformable beams.” In: Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 284 (2015), pages 988–1004.
[KRK08]
Sujeong Kim, Stephane Redon, and Young J Kim. “Continuous collision
detection for adaptive simulation of articulated bodies.” In: The Visual
Computer 24 (2008), pages 261–269.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
55
[Le +01]
Denis Le Bihan et al. “Diffusion tensor imaging: concepts and applica-
tions.” In: Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging: An Oﬀicial Journal
of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 13.4
(2001), pages 534–546.
[MMC16]
Miles Macklin, Matthias Müller, and Nuttapong Chentanez. “XPBD:
position-based simulation of compliant constrained dynamics.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Conference on Motion in Games. 2016,
pages 49–54.
[Mor+99]
Susumu Mori et al. “Three-dimensional tracking of axonal projections
in the brain by magnetic resonance imaging.” In: Annals of Neurology:
Oﬀicial Journal of the American Neurological Association and the Child
Neurology Society 45.2 (1999), pages 265–269.
[Mül+07]
Matthias Müller et al. “Position based dynamics.” In: Journal of Visual
Communication and Image Representation 18.2 (2007), pages 109–118.
[Nea+06]
Andrew Nealen et al. “Physically based deformable models in computer
graphics.” In: Computer graphics forum. Volume 25. 4. Wiley Online
Library. 2006, pages 809–836.
[OH95]
James F O’brien and Jessica K Hodgins. “Dynamic simulation of splash-
ing fluids.” In: Proceedings Computer Animation’95. IEEE. 1995, pages 198–
205.
[PB96]
Carlo Pierpaoli and Peter J Basser. “Toward a quantitative assessment
of diffusion anisotropy.” In: Magnetic resonance in Medicine 36.6 (1996),
pages 893–906.
[Pie+96]
Carlo Pierpaoli et al. “Diffusion tensor MR imaging of the human brain.”
In: Radiology 201.3 (1996), pages 637–648.
[Pro+95]
Xavier Provot et al. “Deformation constraints in a mass-spring model to
describe rigid cloth behaviour.” In: Graphics interface. Canadian Infor-
mation Processing Society. 1995, pages 147–147.
[PT96]
Les Piegl and Wayne Tiller. The NURBS book. Springer Science & Busi-
ness Media, 1996.
[Sch14]
Rolf Schneider. Convex bodies: the Brunn–Minkowski theory. 151. Cam-
bridge university press, 2014.
[SP86]
Thomas W Sederberg and Scott R Parry. “Free-form deformation of solid
geometric models.” In: Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Com-
puter graphics and interactive techniques. 1986, pages 151–160.
[Tes+05]
Matthias Teschner et al. “Collision detection for deformable objects.” In:
Computer graphics forum. Volume 24. 1. Wiley Online Library. 2005,
pages 61–81.
==PAGE:66==
56
Bibliography
[The23]
The CGAL Project. CGAL User and Reference Manual. 5.5.2. CGAL
Editorial Board, 2023. URL: https://doc.cgal.org/5.5.2/Manual/
packages.html.
[WC09]
Claudia AM Wheeler-Kingshott and Mara Cercignani. “About “axial”
and “radial” diffusivities.” In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An Of-
ficial Journal of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine 61.5 (2009), pages 1255–1260.
[Wri06]
Stephen J Wright. Numerical optimization. 2006.
[YBS12]
Warren C Young, Richard G Budynas, and Ali M Sadegh. Roark’s for-
mulas for stress and strain. McGraw-Hill Education, 2012.
[YSC21]
Chris Yu, Henrik Schumacher, and Keenan Crane. “Repulsive curves.” In:
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40.2 (2021), pages 1–21.
[ZE00]
Afra Zomorodian and Herbert Edelsbrunner. “Fast software for box in-
tersections.” In: Proceedings of the sixteenth annual symposium on Com-
putational geometry. 2000, pages 129–138.
