==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
CO2 emission assessment of the surveys for 
the site investigation phase of an offshore 
wind farm project
Ana Catarina Abreu De Oliveira
DTU Wind-M-0686
July 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0686 
July 2023
Project period: 
February - July 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Niels-Erik Clausen
Asger Bech Abrahamsen
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Sara Skar
Olsi Koreta
ØRSTED
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Ana Catarina Abreu De Oliveira
Title:
CO2 emission assessment of the surveys 
for the site investigation phase of an 
offshore wind farm project
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the DTU Wind and Energy Systems de­
partment, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science.
Ana Catarina Abreu de Oliveira ­ s210295
July 1, 2023
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The offshore wind industry has been growing, in a urge to solve the climate crisis, by
electrifying the energy sector and transitioning to renewable energies. However, the in­
stallation and operation of a wind farm still pose some environmental impacts, and it’s
crucial to understand them if we want to reduce the emissions.
In this thesis, the site investigation phase CO2 emissions are addressed, evaluating what
causes the total emissions from the geophysical and geotechnical investigations, and how
they react to variations in different variables.
A case study was created, using data received from Ørsted, characterizing the typical
scope of geophysical and geotechnical investigations of a 1 GW wind farm located in the
North Sea, and publicly available reports about the Thor wind farm, which has similar
characteristics. Every campaign and survey commonly done in this project phase were
described, as well as the different kinds of vessels used, to do the calculations of the
emissions, by operating fuel consumed per each vessel and duration of tests. All durations
and fuel consumptions were categorized per campaign, survey and type of activity, in
order to obtain reliable emissions, as well as to understand what is mainly driving them.
The results show that the geophysical investigations cause more emissions that the geotech­
nical, explained by the high values of weather downtime affecting the vessels during the
geophysical surveys and that in general, the operations time (when the actual tests are
done) drive the emissions.
With various sensitivity tests outcomes was possible to understand that, both for geo­
physical and geotechnical investigations, the reduction of vessels fuel consumption is
more efficient to reduce emissions, than reducing the weather downtime, as well as that
if, in the future, Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USVs) or energy efficient vessels are used
in the site investigations, the emissions can greatly be reduced, opposing what is esti­
mated for the floating wind farms investigations, driven by the possible extreme weather
conditions faced in their locations. A final conclusion, is that all emissions values are very
subjective, depending on the wind farm and approach of the site investigation, imposing
some challenges on determining the emissions from different wind farms.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
To the ones who made this possible and helped through the whole process, until the last
day and giving me all kinds of tips and knowledge, Niels­Erik Clausen and Asger Bech
Abrahamsen.
To Ørsted for the collaboration to shape this thesis, and most specially to Olsi Koreta, the
one creating this idea and helping every time some question came up, and Sara Skar, for
giving me her time and availability.
To my loved ones, for the time and care in the turbulent days.
Finally, to DTU for all the learnings and good experiences it provided.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abbrevia(ons 
 
 
USVs    Unmanned Surface Vehicles 
OSS      Oﬀshore Substa7on 
GT        Geotechnical 
GP        Geophysical 
IAC         Inter Array Cables 
RECON   Reconnaissance 
ECR         Export cable route 
EIA         Environmental Impact Assessment 
UXO      Unexploded Ordnance 
EOD      Explosive Ordnance Disposal. 
CPT      Piezo-cone Penetra7on Test 
DTH     Down-the-hole  
SCPT    Seismic Cone Penetra7on Test 
HDD    Horizontal Direc7onal Drilling  
DEA     Danish energy Agency 
DP       Dynamic posi7oning 
SFOC     Speciﬁc Fuel Oil Consump7on 
DP       Dynamic Posi7oning 
MDO    Marine Diesel Oil 
IMO    Interna7onal Mari7me Organiza7on 
GHG   Greenhouse Gas  
UN     United Na7ons 
CO2   Carbone Dioxide 
LCA   Life Cycle Assessment 
 
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Site Investigation of Offshore Wind Farms, State Of The Art
3
2.1
Geophysical Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Campaigns and Type of Vessels Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Geotechnical Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Campaigns and Type of Vessels Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Case Study
7
3.1
Thor Wind Farm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Geophysical Investigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Geotechnical Investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Scope Wind Farm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Methodology and Results
11
4.1
Methodology of calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.1
Fuel consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.2
Emission factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Calculation of emissions and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2.1
Geophysical Investigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2.2
Geotechnical Investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.3
Geophysical versus Geotechnical Investigations . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Discussion
29
5.1
Geophysical Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1.1
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Geotechnical Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2.1
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Geophysical and Geotechnical Investigations Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Future technologies and Implications on Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.4.1
Unmanned Surface Vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.4.2
Floating Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4.3
Green Fuels and Vessels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Conclusion
39
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Bibliography
41
A Appendix A
45
B Appendix B
46
v
==PAGE:8==
C Appendix C
47
D Appendix D
48
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The climate crisis we experience today urges us to investigate the causes of emissions
and where mitigation measures can be taken. It’s known that the energy sector is the
biggest polluter, being responsible for 73.2% of the global greenhouse gas emissions,
according to Our world in Data [1], so the renewable energies and electrification have
been seen as solutions. To accomplish this, wind farms are pointed out as a resource
that is expected to grow exponentially, especially the offshore ones, which have greater
production capacities. Offshore wind farms are then expected to lower carbon emissions
and assist in combating climate change, however, the phases to put a wind farm in place
still lead to environmental impacts.
Ørsted, one of the most experienced developers in the offshore wind energy, has imple­
mented some net­zero targets to achieve a full chain decarbonization, and this initiated
the quest to identify the sources of emissions within their activities, being the site investi­
gation phase of an offshore wind farm addressed in this thesis.
Using data received from Ørsted, characterizing the typical scope of site investigations of
a 1 GW wind farm located in the North Sea, and publicly available reports about the Thor
wind farm, which has similar characteristics, calculations of the carbon dioxide emissions
(CO2) released by the vessels utilized for each of the tests conducted were done, to
understand how they interact with different variables.
1.1
Motivation
From a developer perspective, conducting a comprehensive site investigation phase is
imperative to ensure the cost­effectiveness of developing a wind farm project [2] and,
facing the fact that the installation of offshore wind farms in increasingly challenging con­
ditions it’s a recurrent trend, these pre­investigations are of utmost importance in keeping
pace with such circumstances, however this also implies that this phase tends to be more
extensive, resulting in higher emissions being released.
The offshore wind farms are relatively recent constructions (Vindeby in 1991 was the first
one) so this type of study has never been done to offshore wind farms, although it is of
great importance for multiple reasons. The ultimate purpose is to determine the carbon
footprint of the geotechnical and geophysical investigations, to understand it’s environ­
mental impact and optimize the design of the wind farm according to that, for permitting
and bidding processes, since some countries have already in place some regulations re­
lated to emissions associated with construction and operation of wind farms, and lastly
to contribute for corporate social responsibility, as some companies have made com­
mitments to reduce their emissions and overall impact, just like Ørsted, as previously
mentioned.
1.2
Research Questions
The aim and objective of this thesis culminate in the main research question: What is
driving the emissions on the site investigation phase of an offshore wind farm project?
The following sub­questions are raised to address the main question:
1. What causes the emissions in the geophysical site investigations?
2. What causes the emissions in the geotechnical site investigations?
1
==PAGE:10==
3. How do site investigation emissions change with modifications in their variables?
4. How does the future emissions look like when introducing new technologies under
development?
1.3
Limitations
The initial idea for this thesis was a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of the site investiga­
tion phase of an offshore wind farm, however, constraints imposed by data availability
and time limitations, guided our focus towards examining the carbon releases generated
by vessels, the downstream emissions, or the called ”Tank­to­Wake” part of a LCA [3],
represented in fig. 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Generic Life Cycle Assessment phases [3]
Overall, the main limitations were related to the data available and time constraints. The
search for publicly accessible data regarding each performed test, incorporating the nec­
essary details required to effectively characterize carbon emissions, such as the duration,
in both geophysical and geotechnical investigations, was almost unsuccessful, resulting
in a major dependence on the data received from Ørsted. Additionally, it was challenging
to obtain detailed information regarding the fuel consumption of each vessel resulting in
the adoption of several assumptions.
Lastly, the fact that each offshore wind farm has specific characteristics and site con­
ditions, combined with different developers backgrounds and perspectives, as well as
different tender processes for each region, posed a challenge in defining one wind farm
scope and in creating calculations that can be reproduced for other wind farms.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Site Investigation of Offshore Wind
Farms, State Of The Art
The feasibility and the implementation of an offshore wind farm project requires previous
data collection in order to understand the site conditions regarding the wind, water and
soil. In the soil conditions study, the site investigation phase, the seabed characterization
and the properties of the soil underneath are analyzed to create a Ground Model, which
means the exhaustive representation of the ground through the soil properties found,
being this crucial to reduce the risk of hazards and to develop the optimal design of all the
wind farm elements, from the cables to the wind turbines foundations [2]. A representation
with the type of data and outcome of a ground model can be seen in fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Data used to create the Ground Model [4]
The site investigation comprises numerous offshore surveys and laboratory interpreta­
tions that are done in different stages of the project, being both subjective to each wind
farm and decided depending on the site location, the existing data and previous expe­
rience of the developers. In the North Sea, the common scenario relies upon the ISO
19901 standard (Petroleum and natural gas industries­ Specific requirements for offshore
structures) and other criteria directed to the offshore wind energy industry, as the DNV GL
standards [2], usually starting with desk studies, to have an initial idea of the soil type and
possible encounterings in the targeted area, dictating the geophysical investigation plan
of surveys. With the data received from this last campaign, the geotechnical investigation
is projected, to inspect specific locations.
Understanding that there are not two equal offshore wind farms leads us to the fact that
the standards on the investigations needed for each site are just guides. In this thesis,
3
==PAGE:12==
we focus on the main offshore surveys involved in both geophysical and geotechnical
investigations, as well as naming each phase and vessel according to guidance from
Ørsted.
(a) Examples of Geophysical Surveys
(b) Geotechnical Sampling
Figure 2.2: Examples of Geophysical and Geotechnical surveys [5]
2.1
Geophysical Investigation
The geophysical investigation maps and defines the seafloor by reporting data such as the
bathymetry and seabed mobility, identifying hazardous areas like unexploded ordnance
or boulders and also providing some information for environmental studies, such as ben­
thic for the Environmental Impact Assessment EIA). These are obtained through offshore
survey campaigns covering the whole area involved in the wind farm, including the ex­
port cable route (ECR) and the landfall (represented in the offshore elements example
in fig. 2.3), and are done in various stages of the project, with different types of vessels
equipped with remote sensing devices, as sonars and magnetometers [6], represented in
fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.3: Offshore Wind Farm elements, adaptation from [7]
2.1.1
Campaigns and Type of Vessels Used
The first campaign of the geophysical investigation, part of the preliminary investigations
and called Geophysical Reconnaissance (GP RECON) in this report, occurs during the
4
==PAGE:13==
tender process and helps developers providing data for the initial project design, such
as defining the foundation concept and the ECR, as well as supporting the geotechnical
planning optimization by knowing how many investigations should be done and where [2].
This is usually done with two different types of vessels, one small sized (15 to 20 meters
length), called 12h vessel because they are able to operate continuously for 12 hours
before coming back to port, which is used for the landfall area survey, and one large sized
(with more than 30 meters), a 24h vessel that is able to operate over 24 hours and stay
offshore for days, used in the ECR and site surveys [8]. Note that the location of each
wind farm element is not defined at this point of the project, which means that the surveys
should cover the whole area and provide general information about the site and not very
exhaustive.
After the tender process, the awarded developer needs to define specific locations and
designs for each wind turbine, the offshore substation (OSS) and the ECR, as well as
prepare the installation activities, so all these areas need additional surveys, which are
executed in the Geophysical Detailed campaign, using the same approach as the previous
phase but requiring longer times on the vessels [2]. During this campaign, one key output
concerns the unexploded ordnance (UXO) risk mitigation that is further investigated in the
Geophysical UXO Inspection campaign, where every UXO found in the seabed or below
it is described, with records acquired with one 24 hours vessel. This results are crucial for
the Geophysical Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) campaign, done with one 24 hours
vessel alongside a 12 hours, that protects the area under work.
The last campaign studied in this thesis relates to one requirement to develop an offshore
wind farm, the approval of the environmental impact assessment (EIA) [9]. This report
includes several data about the site that is provided by the geophysical investigation, such
as the morphology of the seabed, which is obtained in the Geophysical EIA campaign,
with two vessels, in a similar practice as the Geophysical Reconnaissance and Detailed
surveys.
2.2
Geotechnical Investigation
The geotechnical investigation explores areas of interest, pointed out in data received
from desk studies and the geophysical campaigns, to characterize soil parameters, such
as thermal conductivity and moisture content, and test it dynamically recreating what hap­
pens to foundations under the sea. This is done with offshore intrusive methods as drillings
with sampling (represented in fig. 2.2) or in­situ testing piezo­cone penetration tests (CPT),
and laboratory assessments to the samples acquired [6]. In this report we will examine
the common four campaigns the industry divides the works in, which depend on the area
of the wind farm and the stage of the project.
2.2.1
Campaigns and Type of Vessels Used
The preliminary investigation also involves geotechnical surveys, called Geotechnical Re­
connaissance (GT RECON), where the whole wind farm area is investigated to obtain soil
properties for the design. Two different types of surveys are done, with one drilling vessel
for the called borehole survey, collecting samplings while opening holes, downhole CPTs
(DTH­CPT) and seismic cone penetration tests (DTH­SCPT), and one seabed vessel that
does seabed and seismic CPTs [10]. The main difference between seabed and borehole
tests is the target depth, being around 20 meters for the first ones and 50 to 70 meters for
the downhole ones, because in what concerns the vessel, although different names are
given in this thesis, some wind farms investigations are done with only one vessel type.
As for the geophysical investigation, a Geotechnical Detailed campaign occurs, but in this
5
==PAGE:14==
case only the wind turbine and OSS locations are targeted. During this campaign also a
borehole and a seabed vessels are used to do the same type of tests done in the previous
phase.
The ECR and the landfall area of the cables are studied in different campaigns, the
Geotechnical ECR and the Geotechnical Landfall. In the first one, a seabed vessel per­
forms vibrocores, shallow CPTs and in­situ thermal conductivity tests in the ECR and
within the inter­array cables (IAC) corridors, while in the second campaign, a jack­up
barge vessel evaluates the horizontal directional drilling (HDD) area, both onshore and
nearshore, with drillings as well as CPTs and SCPTs.
Figure 2.4: Geophysical and Geotechnical campaigns and types of vessels Used, based
on data delivered by Ørsted
6
==PAGE:15==
3
Case Study
To be able to study the emissions caused by the site investigation phase, a case study
was needed. Ørsted provided a base case, created from in­house data from their projects,
which means all numbers are based on average quantities and estimations. In order to
have real data associated, as well as publicly available, it was decided to use the Thor
wind farm as the case study, since this has a similar scope as the base case, and both
the geophysical and geotechnical reports of the preliminary investigations are available
in the Danish Energy Agency website [11]. Both projects are used complementing each
other as will be explained over this chapter.
3.1
Thor Wind Farm
The Thor wind farm, or Horns Rev 4, will be the biggest Danish offshore windfarm and will
be located in the North sea, at around 20 km from the shore, with a production capacity
of 1 GW, coming from 72 wind turbines supported by monopile foundations, in a water
depth of 27 m and having two OSS [12]. The development status of its implementation
lays under the concept achievement and early planning [13], so the data available comes
merely from the preliminary investigations. This data was integrated in the thesis, partic­
ularly the vessels used for each investigation campaign and the duration of each of them,
being these details specified in this section of the chapter.
Figure 3.1: Thor Wind Farm location on the west coast of Jutland, Denmark [14]
3.1.1
Geophysical Investigations
According to the geophysical survey reports provided by the DEA, the geophysical recon­
naissance investigations were done by various vessels but, in order to avoid excessive
boat specifications, it was decided to choose a 12h one, named Ping, a nearshore survey
vessel, displayed in fig. 3.2, and one 24h, called Northern Franklin, an offshore survey
vessel [15], and represented in fig. 3.3 . In the Table 3.2 both vessels and respective
specifications are presented, being all data taken from the specs sheets found, while the
missing values for fuel consumption will be stated in the next chapter. Although these
vessels were used just for the preliminary investigation phase, it was assumed they will
be operating for the next campaigns as well, to, again, simplify the amount of details
approached.
7
==PAGE:16==
Table 3.1: Geophysical vessels specifications
Vessel
Type
Vessel
Name
Construction
Year
Main Engine
Power
[kW]
Gross Tonnage
[Metric ton]
Fuel consumption
[Metric ton/day]
Service Speed
[Knots]
Max Speed
[Knots]
References
24h Vessel
Northen Franklin
1985
1590
1178
3 Ton/day
(Operation speed)
12
13.5
Spec sheet: [17]
12h Vessel
Ping
2003
80
5.6
10.4
Spec sheet: [16]
Power: [18]
Service Speed: [19]
Figure 3.2: Nearshore Vessel, Ping [16]
Figure 3.3: Offshore Survey Vessel, Northern Franklin [17]
Over the preliminary investigations, as mentioned in the previous chapter, the exact loca­
tion of the wind farm elements is not defined, meaning, in the Thor case, 4 different export
cable routes and 2 landfalls areas were investigated, as well as the wind turbines site. Re­
garding the duration of the investigations, no information could be found since the reports
available are more focused on the results of the investigation than the proceedings, so the
average time spent in each survey, given by Ørsted, was employed. The same approach
was applied to the other geophysical campaigns since these are not reported yet.
3.1.2
Geotechnical Investigations
In what regards the geotechnical investigations, the reports from DEA are more detailed
and both the vessels used, the number of tests done and the duration of the surveys is
specified. The vessel selected to deploy the seabed campaign was the Wilson Adriatic,
called Connector nowadays, a multipurpose supply vessel and represented in fig. 3.4,
while for the borehole the Jill, a drilling jack­up vessel, was chosen, in fig. 3.5. As for the
geophysical case, these were the vessels considered throughout the whole geotechnical
investigations.
8
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.4: Multipurpose Supply Vessel, Connector [20]
Figure 3.5: Drilling Jack­up Vessel, Jill [21]
Table 3.2: Geotechnical vessels specifications
Vessel
Type
Vessel
Name
Construction
Year
Main Engine
Power
[kW]
Gross Tonnage
[Metric ton]
Fuel consumption
[Metric ton/day]
Service Speed
[Knots]
Max Speed
[Knots]
References
Seabed Vessel
Connector
2002
9125
4030
5 (Dynamic positioning);
9.5 (Economic Speed);
27.2 (Full speed)
16
Spec sheet: [20]
Drilling Vessel
Jill
2014
4700
3908
6.2 (Transit);
3.1 (Dynamic positioning)
6
Spec sheet: [21]
Regarding the duration, although we have information about how many tests were per­
formed, specifications on the survey in which they were done is not given, it was then
decided to use the days spent on each vessel as a base for our case, 20 days in the
seabed and 55 in the borehole [22]. The other geotechnical campaigns were addressed
in the same way as the geophysical ones, using data from the scope wind farm, as ex­
plained in the next section.
9
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Scope Wind Farm
The scope wind farm is based on Ørsted data, from old site investigations projects. This
characterizes a typical scope for a North Sea wind farm, producing 1 GW with 72 wind
farms and one OSS, with an ECR length of 67 km.
Every detail needed to define each campaign was specified, like all types of tests typically
performed on each survey, how many are expected to be needed, how much time is
in average spent performing the actual test (operation time), in standby due to weather
conditions (weather downtime) or in transit (being this last one only for the geotechnical
investigations) and common fuel consumptions from the vessels used. For all the tests,
and respective vessels, was also set the productivity per day, on Km/day surveyed in the
geophysical investigations, and m/day in depth covered by geotechnical surveys.
Although there are some differences between wind farms characteristics, such as the
ECR lenght and the number of OSS, these were dismissed because they don’t impose
much difference in the results, and the material received from Ørsted is very detailed
and it enabled a more in depth analysis. The characterization of the reconnaissance
campaign is mostly covered by the Thor wind farm reports available, except some time
frames coming from the scope case data. The remaining campaigns, both geophysical
and geotechnical, were delineated with the scope tests duration and productivity, but the
Thor vessels were considered.
10
==PAGE:19==
4
Methodology and Results
The estimation of the site investigations emissions required some research into existing
methods, along with the incorporation of several assumptions. The focus of this chapter
is to unveil these details and present the resulting outcomes.
4.1
Methodology of calculations
Taking into consideration the data that was obtained, presented in the previous chapter,
the logical approach to calculate the emissions was by utilizing the time spent on each
survey and consequent fuel consumption of the respective vessel deployed, utilizing the
eq. (4.1) [23].
CO2 Emissions = Fuel consumption · Emission factor
(4.1)
4.1.1
Fuel consumption
The data provided by Ørsted divides the duration of each test based on the corresponding
activity. We have time under operation, travelling from site to port (Site­Port) and weather
downtime (WTD), related to when the vessel can’t proceed with the surveys due to bad
weather conditions, or due to the presence of fish and mammals, in the geophysical case.
For the geotechnical investigations, extra information was obtained concerning the time
allocated to transit or at the location where the test is done.
The fuel consumption also varies depending on the activity being performed, as it directly
impacts the operating conditions of the vessel engines. If the specifications sheet of each
vessel did not include the fuel consumptions, they were obtained through different ap­
proaches.
To calculate the consumptions while on transit the eq. (4.2) was used, which takes into
account the ship’s energy consumption, E, and the specific fuel oil consumption, SFOC
[24]. The energy, eq. (4.3), is obtained with time, considered 24 hours, the engine load
factor, EL, which is recommended 0.3 [24] and was assumed the same for the main engine
and the auxiliary, and main and auxiliary engines power, Pmain and Paux, taken from the
vessel’s specs sheet or calculated as explained in Appendix C. The SFOC, eq. (4.4), is
calculated also with the load factor and 3 factors, a,b,c, that depend on the engine power
of the vessel, also presented in Appendix D.
Fuel consumption = SFOC · E
(4.2)
E = ∆T · (ELmain · Pmain + ELaux · Paux)
(4.3)
SFOC = a∗EL2 −b∗EL + c
(4.4)
Three more fuel consumptions were needed to cover the different activities.
For the
geotechnical surveys, the fuel usage under operation it’s related to the dynamic posi­
tioning (DP) location, a stationary mode where the vessel position is maintained, while
for the geophysical both the survey and weather downtime (assumed in standby) vessel
11
==PAGE:20==
modes need to be addressed. The values used for these consumptions were the aver­
ages provided by Ørsted. It is possible to verify the final values used for fuel consumption
in the Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Fuel consumption on each activity
Vessel type
Vessel name
Activity
Fuel
[metric tons/day]
24h Vessel
Northern Franklin
Transit
6, with eq. (4.2)
Operations (survey)
3 [17]
Standby
3.5, from Ørsted
12h Vessel
Ping
Transit
1.0, with eq. (4.2)
Operations (survey)
0.15, from Ørsted
Standby
0, from Ørsted
Drilling Vessel
Jill
Transit
6.2 [21]
DP Location
3.1 [21]
Seabed Vessel
Connector
Transit
17, with eq. (4.2)
DP Location
5 [20]
4.1.2
Emission factor
The emission factor, the value that relates the fuel used with the quantity of pollutant emit­
ted from its combustion, depends on the carbon content of the fuel. For this thesis the
fuel selected was the marine diesel oil (MDO), which is usually related to a carbon emis­
sion factor of around 3.206 tCO2/tfuel[25]. Using approximate estimations for emission
factors bears some uncertainty, up to 50%, but the fuel­based carbon dioxide emission
factor doesn’t vary with different engine loads and types, leading to low variability along
different vessel power engines [26].
4.2
Calculation of emissions and Results
The calculations of the geophysical and geotechnical emissions were conducted sepa­
rately, considering their distinct approaches and incorporating different assumptions, all
in line with the feedback received from Ørsted. The following sections present both of
them, along with the results that provide a clearer understanding of the emission causes.
4.2.1
Geophysical Investigations
The geophysical calculations comprised the quantification of emissions for the Site survey,
Export Cable Route, and Landfall campaigns, with each campaign treated separately.
Moreover, emissions arising from operational time, weather­related downtime, and transit
from site to port were analyzed for each survey. These calculations were made under
specific assumptions, such as considering the distance from site to port (Esbjerg) as equal
to the length of the ECR, which is 20 km, along with others outlined in Table 4.2.
12
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.1: Geophysical reconnaissance campaign emissions calculation excel sheet
Table 4.2: Assumptions for geophysical emissions calculation, from Ørsted and Thor data
Investigation
Assumption
Geophysical
24 Vessel transit speed
12 knots
12 Vessel transit speed
6 knots
24h Vessel weather downtime
55%
12h Vessel weather downtime
120%
24h Vessel daily production
80.9 km/day
12h Vessel daily production
36.9 km/day
Trip to port once a month for crew change
The layout of the calculations excel sheet is presented in the fig. 4.1, for the geophysical
reconnaissance (GP RECON) campaign, while the others campaigns can be checked in
Appendix A. The starting point was the time duration of the operational activity, expressed
in days, being this precise information provided by Ørsted, which was based on their
estimations of the survey distance required for each campaign. Based on the assumptions
listed in Table 4.2, the duration and frequency of site­to­port trips were estimated, and the
weather downtime was determined as a percentage of total operational time. The next
step was achieving the fuel consumed by each vessel, in each activity with the respective
fuel consumption from Table 4.1, and further calculating the emissions with the emission
factor, according to the equation initially presented eq. (4.1).
Utilizing the obtained results, various graphs and comparative analyses were conducted,
aiming to comprehend the surveys and activities that result in higher emissions, as well
as identify opportunities to introduce measures for reductions. In fig. 4.2 and fig. 4.3 the
emissions resulting from each campaign are presented, showing the impacts by activity
or per survey, respectively. The fig. 4.4 shows a comparison between emissions from
each survey, shedding light on the specific activities that contribute to these results.
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: Geophysical campaigns with emissions per activity
Figure 4.3: Geophysical campaigns with emissions per survey
14
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.4: Geophysical surveys with emissions per activity
In order to understand the relation of emissions with time spent in each activity, the fig. 4.5
and fig. 4.6 are presented, and with each survey can be check in fig. 4.7.
Figure 4.5: Geophysical campaigns with duration per activity
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.6: Geophysical campaigns with duration per survey
Figure 4.7: Geophysical surveys with duration per activity
The fig. 4.8, fig. 4.9 and fig. 4.10 present the variation in emissions between activities,
campaigns and surveys, respectively, expressed as percentages, aiming to have a better
overview of the different impacts.
16
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.8: Comparison of geophysical activities emissions, in percentage, obtained by
summing the contributions of each campaign into weather downtime, site­port and Oper­
ational
Figure 4.9: Comparison of geophysical campaigns emissions, in percentage
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.10: Comparison of geophysical surveys emissions, in percentage
4.2.2
Geotechnical Investigations
The estimation of geotechnical emissions was carried out for each survey, covering the
activities conducted on the seabed and borehole. These calculations took into account
emissions generated by every test performed, entailing emissions resulting from opera­
tions, weather downtime delays, and the journey from the site to the port. As previously
indicated, the data provided by Ørsted enabled the differentiation of time spent during
transit and time spent at the location, which is related with different fuel consumptions
and consequently resulting in distinct emission levels. The results for the geotechnical re­
connaissance campaign (GT RECON) can be seen in fig. 4.11, being the other campaigns
represented in Appendix B. The calculation process follows a similar approach to the one
employed for geophysical investigations, with the distinction that the duration of each ac­
tivity is divided into time in transit and time at the location being tested, and subsequently
the fuel consumed is determined with the assumptions outlined in Table 4.3.
Figure 4.11: Geotechnical reconnaissance campaign emissions calculation excel sheet
As done with the results for geophysical emissions, a range of graphs were produced and
are presented in this section. In fig. 4.12 and fig. 4.13 the emissions resulting from each
campaign are presented, showing the impacts by activity or per survey, which in these
18
==PAGE:27==
Table 4.3: Assumptions for geotechnical emissions calculation, from Ørsted and Thor
data
Investigation
Assumption
Geotechnical
Seabed vessel transit speed
14 knots
Drilling vessel transit speed
5 knots
Weather downtime borehole
30%
Weather down time seabed
25%
Weather down time landfall
50%
Seabed CPT daily production
160 m/day
Seismic CPT daily production
100 m/day
DTH­CPT daily production
45 m/day
DTH­SCPT daily production
30 m/day
Borehole (sampling) daily production
37.5 m/day
Vibrocore daily production
72 m/day
Shallow CPT daily production
109 m/day
In situ thermal daily production
277 m/day
Open hole daily production
120 m/day
Seabed vessel time spent on transit
8%
Seabed vessel time spent on location
92%
Export Cable route time spent on transit
7%
Export Cable route time spent on location
93%
Drilling vessel time spent on transit
4%
Drilling vessel time spent on location
96%
Trip to port once a month for crew change
investigations compares seabed and borehole impacts. The fig. 4.14 shows the quantity
of emissions attributed to transit time and time spent at the location, for each campaign.
With the objective of gaining insights on the relation between emissions and time spent in
each campaign, the fig. 4.15 and fig. 4.16 were done. Also for the campaigns with transit
versus location the duration representation is available in fig. 4.17
Once Ørsted provided data about each test performed in the geotechnical surveys, an
assessment was conducted to identify the operations that contributed to higher emissions.
The fig. 4.18 and fig. 4.19 both indicate the emissions associated with each activity, with
the first case illustrating the impact of the individual geotechnical tests performed, and
the second case reflecting the cumulative emissions resulting from the total number of
tests conducted across all campaigns, and an additional comparison with the weather
downtime emissions. For the duration analysis of each activity, the fig. 4.21 and fig. 4.20
are presented.
The fig. 4.22, fig. 4.23 and fig. 4.24 present the variation in emissions between activities,
campaigns and geotechnical surveys, respectively, and expressed as percentages.
The fig. 4.25 and fig. 4.26 represent the comparison between emissions from seabed
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.12: Geotechnical campaigns with emissions per activity
Figure 4.13: Geotechnical campaigns with emissions per survey (seabed versus bore­
hole)
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.14: Geotechnical campaigns emissions with transit versus location
Figure 4.15: Geotechnical campaigns with duration per activity
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.16: Geotechnical campaigns with duration per survey (seabed versus borehole)
Figure 4.17: Geotechnical campaigns duration with transit versus location
22
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.18: Emissions per each test performed
Figure 4.19: Geotechnical activities with emissions per campaign
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.20: Duration per each test performed
Figure 4.21: Geotechnical activities with duration per campaign
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.22: Comparison of geotechnical activities emissions, in percentage
Figure 4.23: Comparison of geotechnical campaigns emissions, in percentage
Figure 4.24: Comparison of geotechnical surveys emissions, in percentage
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.25: Geotechnical surveys with emissions per activity
and borehole surveys, being in the first graph displayed the contributions from each ac­
tivity and in the second the transit or time spent in the location. The first graph is also
reproduced in therms of duration to understand the time spent in each survey, seen in
fig. 4.27.
Figure 4.26: Geotechnical surveys with emissions from transit and location
26
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.27: Geotechnical surveys with duration per activity
4.2.3
Geophysical versus Geotechnical Investigations
Furthermore, a comparative assessment between emissions from the geotechnical and
geophysical investigations was done. In fig. 4.28 a comparison between activity emissions
is done, while in fig. 4.29 the total emissions from each investigation are displayed as a
percentage. A last graph was done to show the differences in emissions resulting from
the weather downtime on both investigations, seen in fig. 4.30.
Figure 4.28: Comparison between geophysical and geotechnical emissions, shown by
activity
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.29: Comparison between geophysical and geotechnical weather downtime, in
percentage
Figure 4.30: Comparison between geophysical and geotechnical emissions, in percent­
age
28
==PAGE:37==
5
Discussion
With the results presented in the previous chapter, we gain valuable insights into the
emissions profiles of different activities and surveys from offshore wind farm site inves­
tigations. This chapter is dedicated to discussing these results, along with the findings
from sensitivity analyses, and to provide some insights into the potential future emissions
landscape as the new technologies under research are implemented in the investigations.
The discussion is subdivided into geophysical and geotechnical investigations, in addition
to a section dedicated to a comparative assessment between the two investigations.
5.1
Geophysical Investigation
Looking into fig. 4.2 and fig. 4.9 is easily noticed that the Detailed and Unexploded Ord­
nance Inspection campaigns have a higher impact in emissions, being together responsi­
ble for 81% of total releases, with 1306 and 1525 tons of CO2 respectively, caused mostly
by operational and weather downtime, which is common to all campaigns (accountable
for 99% of total emissions, as seen in fig. 4.8), while the site to port trips are insignificant
comparing with the other activities. Analyzing these finds with the fig. 4.5, where the dura­
tion of each campaign and respective time spent in every activity is presented, is evident
that the relation between time and fuel emissions is direct, which can be explained by
the low variability in fuel consumption between operations and standby (used for weather
downtime) in the 24 hours vessel (Northern Franklin), from 3 to 3.5 metric tons/day, seen
Table 4.1. This relation with time explains the high emissions from UXO campaign, which
is slow due to the need for a thorough inspection, considering the sensitivity associated
with the findings.
In therms of surveys, the site exploration is the one triggering a stronger impact, causing
65% of geophysical emissions, according to fig. 4.10, with a total of 2273 tons of CO2,
seen in fig. 4.4, being this almost the double of the amount caused by the export cable
route inspection, which is 1174 tons of CO2. Although the landfall survey uses a vessel
related to a much higher weather downtime, 65% more than the 24 hours vessel, as well
as a reduced daily production, the time spent examining this area represents less than
10% of the total duration of geophysical investigations and the 12 hours vessel (Ping)
consumption is very small, leading to emissions that are negligible when compared to the
other surveys.
5.1.1
Sensitivity analysis
The determination of how the emissions vary with changes in different variables it’s crucial
to understand how to reduce them and, once the operations and weather downtime cause
more impact in the geophysical investigations, these were the explored ones.
For the operations, tests were done reducing the fuel consumption of the 24 hours vessel,
since this is used in the surveys emitting more, testing a 10% reduction. The results
show that the emissions also decrease almost 10%, 344 tons of CO2 less, being this
reduction practically uniform along the different campaigns, as presented in fig. 5.1, with
only the EOD relatively lower, probably because this campaign requires more time utilizing
the 12 hours vessel than the 24 hours one. Further calculations were done reducing
the fuel consumption in 20%, to assess the linear correlation between consumption and
emissions, which was validated, as predicted considering the equation used in eq. (4.1).
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.1: Impact of a 10% reduction in the 24 hours vessel fuel consumption, in each
campaign
Regarding the weather downtime, 50% reductions were examined also in the 24 hours
vessel, in order to employ a value analogous to the ones experienced in the geotechnical
investigations. The outcomes depict a 22% mitigation in emissions, equivalent to 769 tons
of CO2, also equally distributed through the campaigns as can be seen in fig. 5.2 and again
lower for the EOD for the same reason as explained before, this campaign uses more the
24 hours vessel, as displayed in the Appendix A.
Figure 5.2: Impact of a 50% reduction in the 24 hours vessel weather downtime, in each
campaign
30
==PAGE:39==
5.2
Geotechnical Investigation
Analysing the graphs presenting the emissions in the geotechnical campaigns, specially
into fig. 4.12 and the percentages in fig. 4.23, the Detailed clearly stands out, causing
124 tons of CO2, which represents 52% of total geotechnical emissions. Looking into
fig. 4.13 and fig. 4.12 the results for this campaign suggest the emissions sources are
mainly the borehole survey, with 108 tons of CO2, being the operations the most emitting
activity, which is in general seen throughout the geotechnical investigations, representing
this activity 75% of all emissions, as seen in fig. 4.22.
In therms of the transit allocation of emissions, in fig. 4.14 it’s noticeable how the location
keeping is responsible for most of the impact, particularly in the borehole surveys, seen
in fig. 4.26, being this outcome anticipated, as this mode is employed during the actual
execution of soil tests. Mentioning the comparison of surveys, from fig. 4.24 the borehole
represents 64% of emissions, which actually was not expected taking into consideration
the lower Dp location fuel consumption, but can be explained with the higher time this
survey takes, as seen in fig. 4.27. Similar to the geophysical investigations, there is a
direct relation between time and fuel emissions, proved by the different duration graphs,
which can also explain why the Detailed campaign has higher emissions, this requires
much more time to be done, which is visible in fig. 4.15.
The outcomes of the assessment of the impact of each activity, presented in fig. 4.19,
show that both weather downtime and the down­hole cone penetration tests (DTH­CPT)
involve more emissions in the whole situation, while when focusing in the tests performed
in operations, the outcomes reveal that each DTH­CPT emits 44 tons of CO2, 20 tons more
than opening the hole which is the second most impacting test. This can be explained
due the duration, around 4 days to finalize only one test, from fig. 4.20.
5.2.1
Sensitivity analysis
To gain a comprehensive understanding of all emissions, the most impacting variables
were examined, with the initial ones aimed at illustrating how diverse the site investiga­
tions can be, and done with comparisons between geotechnical investigations from dif­
ferent wind farms.
The first compares the geotechnical reconnaissance campaign emissions of Thor wind
farm and the Ørsted scope, focusing on this campaign only because it’s the one covered
by enough data available. The results, from emissions in fig. 5.3 and duration of each the
campaign, considering each survey, in fig. 5.4, are very interesting and relevant. Although
there are big differences in the duration of this campaign, 75 to 31 days, which can be
related to a different site investigations approach, the developer experience or existence
of previous findings about the area, the final emissions are quite close to each other.
When examining the fuel consumption averages considered by Ørsted, in Table 5.1, the
reasoning becomes apparent, the drilling vessel consumption is significantly higher, cor­
roborating with the fact that even if the scope is similar, there are much more variables
that impact the emissions, as such vessels used, the specific location of the wind farm
and respective soil characteristics, or the approach of the developer.
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.3: Thor versus Scope Wind Farm reconnaissance emissions, from seabed and
borehole surveys
Figure 5.4: Thor versus Scope Wind Farm reconnaissance duration, from seabed and
borehole surveys
Table 5.1: Scope Wind Farm Geotechnical vessels specifications
Geotechnical
Vessel
Transit speed
[knots]
Consumption transit
[metric ton/day]
Consumption location
[metric ton/day]
Drilling
10
20,4
10,2
Seabed
10
11,9
5,95
32
==PAGE:41==
Carrying on in a similar approach to demonstrate the dynamic nature of emissions in
relation to vessel used, a comparison is done with the estimation of emissions in case
the drilling and seabed vessels were the same, as it happened for the Hesselø wind farm
preliminary geotechnical investigation, based on the report found in the Danish Energy
Agency [27]. Assuming the same duration of the surveys as for the Thor, a transit fuel
consumption of 10 tons/day and 5 tons/day in DP location, and the use of this vessels
throughout the all campaigns, the results can be seen in fig. 5.5, with emissions per survey,
and fig. 5.6 showing emissions on transit versus location. Note that the Hesselø wind farm
is not accessed here, as it doesn’t present any similarities to Thor, being the reference just
to emphasize that the borehole and seabed surveys can be done with the same vessel,
and to explore how the emissions change with this.
Figure 5.5: Thor versus Hesselø emissions, from seabed and borehole surveys
Figure 5.6: Thor versus Hesselø emissions, from transit and location
The emissions are higher, but this was expected cause the fuel consumption is also big­
33
==PAGE:42==
ger, what is important to examine is the disparities between surveys and transit versus
location. With the fuel consumption remaining constant, the emissions tend to fluctuate
with duration, and these results show exactly that, the location time is predominant as
well the borehole surveys.
Figure 5.7: Impact on geotechnical campaigns emissions with a 10% fuel consumption
reduction in the drilling vessel
Figure 5.8: Impact on geotechnical campaigns emissions with a 10% fuel consumption
reduction in the seabed vessel
The next trials explore the influence of 10% reductions in fuel consumption, both in the
drilling vessel and seabed. In the first case it imposes a 6% reduction in total emissions,
corresponding to 176 tons of CO2, while in the second the reductions are a bit smaller,
102 tons of CO2 of 4%. These are unevenly distributed through the campaigns, in both
34
==PAGE:43==
cases, as seen in fig. 5.7 and fig. 5.8, depending on the time the different vessels are used
in each of them. It’s clear that the drilling vessel is not used to investigate the export cable
route area, as well as the seabed vessel is not deployed in the landfall area, resulting in
emissions remaining stable when the fuel consumption reduces.
Lastly, interpretations on how the reduction in weather downtime (WDT) influences the
emissions were done. Reducing the WDT by 10% in the drilling vessel, the emissions
decrease up to 3%, while if the reduction is done to the seabed vessel the difference is of
2%. These demonstrate that the emissions from the borehole survey are more affected
by weather downtime.
5.3
Geophysical and Geotechnical Investigations Results
With the results from each investigation, 3467 tons of CO2 in the geophysical and 2837 tons
of CO2 in geotechnical, it’s possible to understand that the geophysical assessment cre­
ates more emissions, 10% more according to fig. 4.29. When analysing the fig. 4.28 is
observed that the weather downtime on this is much higher, with a 32% difference which,
after some research and talks with Ørsted, was perceived to happen because the geo­
physical investigations might occur over the winter, where the weather conditions are not
favorable, as well as because the survey vessels need stability to obtain satisfactory re­
sults. In the previous section, with the sensitivity test done to the weather downtime in the
geophysical investigations, determined that in fact when assuming values similar to the
ones experienced in the geotechnical investigations, the final emissions are quite similar,
with 2698 tons of CO2 being released due to geophysical assessments. From looking into
the outcomes of both investigations, another noteworthy observation is that even though
the landfall assessments are affected by higher weather downtime, the resulting emis­
sions are super low comparing to the others, since the duration of these tests is reduced.
Moreover, it is essential to draw attention to the emissions that arise from the reconnais­
sance campaign, as these happen whenever an offshore wind farm process is launched,
and occur regardless of project feasibility, being possible that it does not progress, for
example when soil conditions don’t allow it, or that this assessment is done by diverse
developers to prepare their bidding proposals. In fig. 5.9 can be seen that geotechnical
emissions are much higher in this campaign and that the total emissions from RECON
are 1123 tons of CO2, representing 18% of total site investigations emissions.
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.9: Reconnaissance campaign emissions from the geophysical and geotechnical
investigations
For the sake of curiosity, some highlight in the emissions from the Environmental Impact
Assessment can be done. 376 tons of CO2 are released from the investigations done
with the purpose of preserving the environment of the areas affected by the wind farm,
which means that even if the wind energy has an ultimate goal of protecting the planet,
this implies some emissions when trying to do it with a nature conscious approach.
A last observation was done to understand how the site investigations emissions compare
to the ones generated during the life time of the wind farm. Checking the report from United
Nations (UN) [28] which reveal the lifecycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions per source
of energy, we know that the average from the offshore wind is 15 g of CO2 per KWh. Using
the eq. (5.1) was obtained the Actual Energy Production of the Thor wind farm, assuming
a capacity factor of 50% and 1 GW of power, which is equal to 4380 GWh/year.
Capacity Factor = Actual Energy Production (MWh)
Power (MW) · Time (h)
(5.1)
Multiplying the two obtained values with 25 years of life time, this results in 1 642 500 tons
of CO2 released thorough the whole life of the Thor wind farm. Comparing this with the
emissions from the site investigations, these last ones represent 0.38% of all emissions.
5.4
Future technologies and Implications on Emissions
The offshore wind energy and maritime sectors have been evolving across multiple sec­
tors, striving to enhance energy production while prioritizing sustainability. In this section
three of the main actual tendencies will be introduced while determining how the site in­
vestigations emissions might change when using Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USVs),
green fuels, and floating foundations in the wind turbines.
5.4.1
Unmanned Surface Vehicles
Unmanned Surface Vehicles as the name says are vessels that operate in the water sur­
face without any crew, guided by communications and navigation instruments, that can
have various sensors to collect data from the ocean [29]. Recent developments put them
36
==PAGE:45==
in the offshore wind industry bringing big advantages in therms of sustainability by re­
ducing the emissions, due to faster surveys, once these are less susceptible to weather
conditions [30], as well as because they are usually hybrid.
Initially this technologies can be introduced to the geophysical investigations, specially
the landfall area due to it’s reduced distance to shore, so replacing the 12 hours vessels,
although some USVs are already under development to be used in offshore [31]. The
geotechnical surveys will use these technologies in the future, but this possibility has
still a long process until the technology readiness level reaches the values needed [32].
Knowing this, a simulation reducing the fuel consumption by 83% in the 24hours vessel
was done, assuming that the projections from [33] are correct, and resulting in less 84%
carbon emissions from the geophysical investigations.
5.4.2
Floating Wind Farms
The floating wind farms have been into the spotlight recently, opening the offshore wind
industry to bigger depths and boosting the renewable energy production from wind.
In therms of site investigations and respective emissions, some changes are expected.
These wind farms will be sustained by anchors, which don’t require such deep geotechni­
cal investigations (50 to 70 m) [34] and, according to this investigation on floating offshore
wind [35], 5 CPTs will be required per wind turbine (Thor wind farm has 72) to do the
site characterization to install the anchors. This results in a total of CPTs similar to the
necessary for the Thor wind farm, but taking into account the reduced depth, assuming
a decrease of 10 m, the emissions from geotechnical investigations could ease about
10%. However, considering that floating wind farms are expected to be installed in larger
water depths and further from the coast, the duration of the surveys may increase due
to weather downtime and area to be surveyed for cables purposes (ECR and landfall
campaigns specially). Similar trends are expected for geophysical investigations, higher
weather downtime and area to scan, increasing the total emissions of the site investiga­
tions.
5.4.3
Green Fuels and Vessels
Since 2011 the International Maritime Organization (IMO) has been taking some actions to
cut the GHG emissions from vessels through mandatory rules that the ship industry needs
to follow [25], and in order to achieve this various new technologies to improve vessels
energy efficiency have been developed as well as new types of fuel, less pollutants.
In therms of improving the energy efficiency of a vessel, which can be achieved through
numerous ways, as such weather routing, estimations from IMO show that a reduction
of 75% in carbon emissions can be achieved [36], which would represent a mitigation of
4728 tons of CO2 for the site investigations. Although this would represent big amounts
of carbon releases, the availability of survey vessels reigns when subcontracting the op­
erations, which has been a supply chain problem to be solved if the offshore wind farm
continues increasing as projected.
Regarding the green fuels, there are three main types that are expected to release less
GHG during their life cycle, the ’blue’ fuels, like methanol, that are synthesized with carbon
capture and storage technologies, the e­fuels that come from renewable electricity, and
the biofuels, such as ethanol, from biomass [37]. It was decided to explore the emissions
variations when using a biofuel, by using the emission factor of 3.037 tCo2/tfuel which is
related to a mixture of used cooking oil and marine diesel oil [38],meaning an EF 5% lower,
resulting in 5% reduction in emissions, both in geophysical investigations, representing
less 177 tons of CO2 release, and geotechnical, with 150 tons of CO2.
37
==PAGE:46==
38
==PAGE:47==
6
Conclusion
In total, the site investigation of an offshore wind farm with a similar scope as Thor, and
assuming the investigation methods adopted by Ørsted, impose 6304 tons of CO2 emis­
sions, which corresponds to 0.38% of the amount estimated for the whole life cycle of the
Thor wind farm. Typically, the vessels used for the geophysical investigation are smaller
than the geotechnical ones, explained by the type of tests performed over the surveys and
respective equipment needed, creating expectations that the emissions might be higher
for geotechnical. The results from this investigation reveal a distinct trend, where the
geotechnical assessment creates 45% of total site investigations emissions, 10% less
than the geophysical. This can be explained by the big difference in weather downtime,
32% higher in the geophysical surveys, happening because the geophysical investiga­
tions might occur over the winter, where the weather conditions are not favorable, as well
as because the survey vessels need stability to obtain satisfactory results, according to
Ørsted.
The geophysical investigation is responsible for 3467 tons of CO2 of emissions, being the
most impacting campaign the Unexploded Ordnance Inspection (UXO), responsible for
44% of the total geophysical emissions, with 1525 tons of CO2 released, explained by it’s
high duration, since UXO are commonly encountered in the North Sea, and being the ves­
sels used mostly under operation or standby (due to weather downtime). This tendency
of time spent in each activity is uniform through all campaigns, being the operations time
responsible for 59% of emissions and weather downtime for 40%. In therms of surveys,
the exploration of the wind farm location (site survey) and the export cable route dominate,
with 65% and 34% of the emissions, respectively, facilitating the realization that the 24
hours vessel is causing 99% of the geophysical emissions. The results also show a direct
relation between time and fuel emissions, which can be explained by the low variability in
fuel consumption on the 24 hours vessel, between operations and standby.
With the sensitivity tests, the linear correlation between consumption and emissions was
proved, as well as that 10% reductions in the 24hours vessel fuel consumption impose
similar emissions reduction, of approximately 10%, evenly distributed through the cam­
paigns. When testing reductions in the weather downtime, could be concluded that a 50%
reduction in the weather downtime lead to 22% less emissions being released. These
findings indicate that for geophysical investigations is more efficient, emissions wise, to
reduce fuel consumption of vessels.
The geotechnical investigations have a total of 2837 tons of CO2 emissions, mainly caused
by the Detailed campaign, with 52% of total emissions, being in this campaign, as well
as in the general of geotechnical tests, the borehole survey the most heavy in emissions,
responsible for 64%, with the majority of them coming from operational time, 75% of all
emissions in this investigation. The duration of the tests performed is seen as the rea­
son for higher emissions, once it could be observed a direct relation between time and
emissions. When exploring which geotechnical test is more emission intensive, this rela­
tion with time imposed as the explanation for the 44 tons of CO2 emitted per each down­
the­hole cone penetration test performed. In therms of transit versus location time, as
anticipated, the emissions from location keeping mode are much higher in all campaigns.
The sensitivity tests done to geotechnical emissions supported the fact that even if two
wind farms have the same scope, as is the case of Thor wind farm and the one received
39
==PAGE:48==
from Ørsted, the emissions from investigations can fluctuate significantly, because there
are various ways these can be proceed, as such using different vessels, with respective
distinct fuel consumptions, and the variety of tests carried out. Furthermore, the sen­
sibility of emissions to variations in fuel consumption and weather time were assessed,
done with reductions of 10%, showing that they are more prone to decrease with the fuel
consumption, being this influence higher when changes occur in the drilling vessel, with
reductions of up to 6%.
Examining future prospects, conclusions are that the use of Unmanned Surface Vehicles
(USVs) in the site investigations has the potential to bring substantial emissions reduc­
tions, of up to 84% according to estimations, specially in the geophysical surveys, consid­
ering the technologies in place at the moment, while the use of more efficient vessels can
decrease them approximately 75%, or 5%, in case a biofuel is used as an alternative to
marine diesel oil. On the other hand, the predictions on the site investigation emissions
from a floating wind farm show they might be higher, due to the possibility of challenging
weather conditions in the installation areas.
A last note about this project, relates to the fact that even though it was possible to obtain
good results, these are not easy to reproduce to other wind farms without relying on lot
of assumptions, leading to possible discrepancies. The conclusions can be used to have
an idea of how the emissions behave with variations, but the prediction of a whole site in­
vestigation it’s a challenge, considering the uniqueness of each wind farm and respective
site investigation planning.
6.1
Future Work
Throughout the thesis elaboration, some ideas of possible studies came up, but due to
time restrictions they were not possible to follow. Not only the CO2 emissions impact the
environment, others like Nitrogen Oxide (NOx), have been under ship regulations so it
would be interesting to approach all the harmful gases emitted.
Facing the fact that this project relies on several assumptions related to fuel consumption,
a model capable of predicting these values, using real time data from vessels, and taking
into account the weights of the various tools used in different geophysical and geotechnical
tests, would improve the veracity of the results.
40
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Emissions by sector. https://ourworldindata.org/emissions­by­sector.
[2]
Jan Fischer et al. Presentation and Comparison of Site Investigation Methods for
Offshore Wind Energy in the European North Seas Countries in the Context of the
EU North Seas Energy Cooperation. 2019. URL: https://www.umweltbundesamt.
de/sites/default/files/medien/5750/publikationen/2020_10_22_texte_186_2020_
baugrunderkundung_offshore_windenergie.pdf.
[3]
Guidelines on life cycle GHG intensity of marine fuels (LCA Guidelines). https://
www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/Pages/Lifecycle-GHG---carbon-intensity-
guidelines.aspx. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[4]
Per Sparrevik. Offshore Wind Turbine Foundations State of the Art. 2019. URL:
https://www.issmge.org/uploads/publications/84/85/8-keynote-lecture-s8-sparrevik.
pdf.
[5]
Ørsted. Marine Affairs and Site Investigation. 2021. URL: https://a2f3e3.emailsp.
com/frontend/nl_preview_window.aspx?idNL=259.
[6]
BVG Associates. Guide to an offshore wind farm. 2018. URL: https://www.thecrownestate.
co.uk/media/2861/guide-to-offshore-wind-farm-2019.pdf.
[7]
MACKENZIE RYAN. Offshore Wind Farm Noise Raises Concerns About Marine
Life. 2021. URL: https://www.capenews.net/falmouth/news/offshore-wind-farm-
noise-raises-concerns-about-marine-life/article_f89cbb58-1fec-526c-b854-c5c0e2fa2fa5.
html.
[8]
Inc. Fugro Marine GeoServices. Geophysical and Geotechnical Investigation Method­
ology Assessment for Siting Renewable Energy Facilities on the Atlantic OCS.
2017. URL: https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/environmental-stewardship/
Environmental-Studies/Renewable-Energy/G-and-G-Methodology-Renewable-Energy-
Facilities-on-the-Atlantic-OCS.pdf.
[9]
The Netherlands A. H. Pickaver Coastal Marine Union (EUCC). Denmark’s offshore
wind farms planning and policy approach ­ DK. 2015. URL: https://discomap.eea.
europa.eu/map/Data/Milieu/OURCOAST_097_DK/OURCOAST_097_DK_Case_
OffshoreWindfarmPlanningPolicyApproach.pdf.
[10]
Subsea Working Group of the Offshore Soil Investigation Forum. GUIDANCE NOTES
ON GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS FOR SUBSEA STRUCTURES. 2000. URL:
https://www.sut.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/subseaguidancenotes.pdf.
[11]
Thor offshore wind farm. https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/wind-power/ongoing-
offshore-wind-tenders/thor-offshore-wind-farm. Accessed: 2023­06­22.
[12]
RWE Gathers Thor Offshore Wind Farm Dream Team. https://www.offshorewind.
biz/2023/04/25/rwe- gathers- thor- offshore- wind- farm- dream- team/. Accessed:
2023­06­27.
[13]
Thor Offshore Wind Farm. https://www.4coffshore.com/windfarms/denmark/thor-
denmark-dk22.html. Accessed: 2023­06­22.
[14]
Great interest in building the Danish Thor Offshore Wind Farm. https://ens.dk/en/
press/great-interest-building-danish-thor-offshore-wind-farm. Accessed: 2023­06­22.
[15]
MMT SWEDEN AB. GEOPHYSICAL SURVEY REPORT. URL: https://ens.dk/
sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi/301_geophysics.pdf.
[16]
MMT SWEDEN AB. NEARSHORE SURVEY VESSEL|PING. URL: https://mmt2019.
wpenginepowered.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Ping_Datasheet.pdf.
41
==PAGE:50==
[17]
MMT SWEDEN AB. OFFSHORE SURVEY ROV VESSEL | NORTHERN FRANKLIN.
URL: https://mmt2019.wpenginepowered.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/MMT_
Franklin_Data_Sheet_Rev5.pdf.
[18]
D2 Inboard Engine. https://www.volvopenta.com/marine/all-marine-engines/d2/.
Accessed: 2023­06­23.
[19]
PING. https://www.fleetmon.com/vessels/ping_0_8403110/?language=de. Ac­
cessed: 2023­06­23.
[20]
World Marine Offshore. MPSV Survey Wilson Adriatic Vessel Specification. URL:
https://s3-eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/spinpublicdocuments/94/94992cb3e2473b15bd6e3bdf4c949bb062e9
pdf.
[21]
SEACOR Marine. Liftboats 335 Class ­ L/B Jill. URL: https://s3- eu- central- 1.
amazonaws.com/spinpublicdocuments/58/5811aec03938d54fcce91a0b1c6bda130c6c7fab.
pdf.
[22]
Energynet. Thor OWF – Geotechnical Site Investigation 2020. URL: https://ens.
dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi/308_geotechnical_invest._main_report_.pdf.
[23]
Which methods can be used to calculate fuel consumption? https://www.verifavia-
shipping.com/shipping-carbon-emissions-verification/faq-which-methods-can-be-used-
to-calculate-fuel-consumption-26.php. Accessed: 2023­06­24.
[24]
Daniel A. Schwarzkopf et al. “A ship emission modeling system with scenario ca­
pabilities”. In: Atmospheric Environment: X (2021), p. 4. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.aeaoa.2021.100132.
[25]
International Maritime Organization. Third IMO Greenhouse Gas Study 2014. 2015.
URL: https://wwwcdn.imo.org/localresources/en/OurWork/Environment/Documents/
Third%20Greenhouse%20Gas%20Study/GHG3%20Executive%20Summary%20and%
20Report.pdf.
[26]
Zhongmin Ma et al. “Analysis of Marine Diesel Engine Emission Characteristics of
Different Power Ranges in China”. In: MDPI (2021), p. 2. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
3390/atmos12091108.
[27]
Gardline Limited. Volume II: Measured and Derived Geotechnical Parameters and
Final Results – Interim CPT Report. 2021. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/
Vindenergi/308_final_factual_report.pdf.
[28]
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. Carbon Neutrality in the UNECE
Region: Integrated Life­cycle Assessment of Electricity Sources. 2021.
[29]
Uncrewed Surface Vessels. https://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/technology/usv/usv.
html. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[30]
USVs Eye Offshore Wind Opportunities. https://www.oedigital.com/news/499513-
usvs-eye-offshore-wind-opportunities. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[31]
Fugro expands its USV fleet with the development of the Blue Prism™For au­
tonomous and sustainable geophysical surveys. https://www.fugro.com/news/
business- news/2022/fugro- expands- usv- fleet- blue- prism- autonomous- sustainable-
geophysical-surveys. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[32]
Marine­i backs world­first geotechnical subsea vehicle. https://www.offshore-energy.
biz/marine-i-backs-world-first-geotechnical-subsea-vehicle/. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[33]
Offshore Wind Farm Scouring and Cable Survey by OceanAlpha USV. https://www.
oceanalpha.com/application_cases/oceanalpha-case-offshore-wind-farm-scouring-and-
cable-survey/. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[34]
P.4.2 Geotechnical surveys. https : / / guidetofloatingoffshorewind . com / guide / p -
development-and-project-management/p-4-geological-and-hydrographical-surveys/p-
4-2-geotechnical-surveys/. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
42
==PAGE:51==
[35]
Benjamin Cerfontaine et al. “Anchor geotechnics for floating offshore wind: Current
technologies and future innovations”. In: Elsevier (2022), p. 2. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.oceaneng.2023.114327.
[36]
Energy efficiency in shipping ­ why it matters! https://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/
PressBriefings/Pages/05-GMNvideo.aspx. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[37]
FUTURE FUELS. https://www.dnv.com/maritime/hub/decarbonize-shipping/fuels/
future-fuels.html. Accessed: 2023­06­30.
[38]
Patritsia Maria Stathatou et al. “Towards decarbonization of shipping: direct emis­
sions life cycle impacts from a biofuel trial aboard an ocean­going dry bulk vessel”.
In: Royal Society of Chemistry (2022), p. 1694. DOI: 10.1039/d1se01495a.
43
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
A
Appendix A
Figure A.1: Geophysical Environmental Impact Assessment, Detailed, Unexploded Ord­
nance Inspection and Explosive Ordnance Disposal campaigns emissions calculations,
in excel
45
==PAGE:54==
B
Appendix B
Figure B.1: Geotechnical Detailed, Export Cable Route and Landfall campaigns emis­
sions calculations, in excel
46
==PAGE:55==
C
Appendix C
Figure C.1: Equations and tables used for Main and Auxiliary Power calculation, from [24]
47
==PAGE:56==
D
Appendix D
Figure D.1: Table used to obtain a,b and c factors, to calculate SFOC, from [24]
48
==PAGE:57==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
