==PAGE:1==
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-
2 sea ice measurements
Parallelle flyspor til validering af CryoSat-2 havis målinger
Master thesis
Caroline Ulstrup Larsen (s183801)
Supervisor: Sine Munk Hvidegaard
DTU Space
Institut for Rumforskning og -teknologi
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
Caroline Ulstrup Larsen - s183801
Signature
Date
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
iii
23-06-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
On April 16, at the CryoVEx 2017 field campaign, a swath of five parallel tracks was flown
covering the entire footprint of CryoSat-2, with measurements from both an airborne laser
scanner (ALS) and a Ka-band radar (KAREN), where KAREN only covered four of the
five tracks.
In this study it is found that by using that approach, instead of the traditional single-track
observations, the correlation between the CryoSat-2 data and the airborne data averaged
to the footprint of CryoSat-2 is improved. For ALS the correlation went from -0.0081 ±
0.0146 to 0.3249 ± 0.0776, and for KAREN it went from -0.0622 ± 0.0473 to 0.2496 ±
0.0742, when covering the full footprint instead.
By taking the mean over larger sections, for CryoSat-2 and the averaged ALS data, it is
found that the correlation improves even further, with a correlation of 0.8349 ± 0.0517
over 10 km section and 0.8553 ± 0.0170 over 25 km sections.
It is furthermore found, that the discrepancies between the CryoSat-2 data and the aver-
aged airborne data are connected to the roughness of the surface, with a larger difference
found for the rougher surfaces.
iv
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Caroline Ulstrup Larsen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Author of this project.
Sine Munk Hvidegaard, supervisor, DTU Space
smh@space.dtu.dk
Alessandro di Bella, co-supervisor, ESA
Alessandro.Di.Bella@ext.esa.int
Front page picture source:[1] [2]
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
Altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
CryoSat-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Airborne measurements - five parallel tracks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Data
11
3.1
CryoSat-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Airborne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
DTU21MSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
CARRA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Operation IceBridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Method
17
4.1
Comparison areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Results
23
5.1
Data variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Nearest neighbours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Doppler-limited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.5
Individual tracks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.6
Detailed comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.7
Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.8
Geometry - preferential sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.9
Reduced resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.10 Other CryoSat-2 data products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6
Discussion
51
6.1
Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Discrepancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.3
Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.4
Data point selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.5
Sea surface height anomaly (SSHA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
A Appendix
67
A.1 Closest airborne (mid-track) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
vii
==PAGE:8==
A.2 10 closest airborne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.3 Pulse-limited
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.4 Single-track flights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.5 Camera FOV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.6 Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.7 Sea ice thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.8 Roll-angle (KAREN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.9 Code overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
viii
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Sea ice is highly affected by the ongoing climate changes, why monitoring the sea ice is
a factor of investigating effects of the climate change.
Satellites have an important role in sea ice monitoring, as they can cover large areas in
short time periods, allowing for continuous observations. It is therefore highly relevant, to
have an estimate of the accuracy and precision of the satellite measurements. To help
determine this, validation flights are flown along the same tracks as the satellite.
CryoSat-2 is a satellite with the main purpose of observing the cryosphere and is there-
fore also used for monitoring sea ice. Comparing CryoSat-2 with single-track airborne
data averaged to the footprint of the satellite, the correlation has been found to be low or
non existing, although it is found that it increases when averaging over 50 km sections.[2,
3].
The reason for the low correlations are thought to be that the airborne single-track data
does not cover the entire across-track width.
During the ESA CryoVEx/KAREN 2017 Arctic campaign a flight was conducted, on April
16 , where five parallel tracks was flown over sections of 50 km, covering the entire
CryoSat-2 footprint. An approach that has previously been tested over Austfonna land
ice, during the CryoVEx 2016 spring campaign.
This study investigates the data obtained on April 16 2017, including all five parallel tracks
flown north of Greenland. It is tested how the correlation is affected by covering the full
CryoSat-2 footprint compared to just the single-track at nadir. For this flight both an air-
borne laser scanner (ALS) and a Ka-band radar (KAREN) was used for measuring, the
data of both of which is included in this study. The comparisons are carried out between
the CryoSat-2 data and the average of the airborne data within the CryoSat-2 SAR foot-
print (≈305m × 1650m).
Besides improving the correlation the more included tracks also provides further knowl-
edge on how the surface within the footprint is structured. This is used to further explore
what may cause the discrepancies found between the CryoSat-2 data and the averaged
airborne data.
Also, as it has been found that the correlation for the single track validations increased
when averaging over 50 km sections, it has been tested, how reducing the resolution af-
fects the correlation, both when including all five tracks and only the middle (nadir) track.
The results of this study can contribute with knowledge on how future validation flights of
CryoSat-2 and other satellites should be approached, to obtain the best data for valida-
tions of sea ice measurements.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
2.1
Altimetry
Figure 2.1: Visualisation of the prin-
ciple of airborne altimetry measure-
ments.
Altimetry is a measuring method of determining al-
titudes of a surface or object above a given level.
This technique is often performed from satellites or
aircrafts with the objective of observing the Earths
surface.
It is done by transmitting an electromagnetic wave
towards the surface of the Earth, where the time
for the wave to reach the surface and eventually
be received by the altimeter, is measured. From
the two way travel time the distance to the surface
can be determined, as the speed of light is know.
Hence, multiplying the speed of light with the two
way travel time divided by two, will provide us with
the distance.
Through knowledge of the exact location of the al-
timeter in reference to some level, this could be the
reference ellipsoid, it is possible to determine the
height of the surface, again referenced to the same
reference level. This is done simply by subtracting
the distance between the altimeter and the surface
from the elevation of the altimeter above the refer-
ence level, see figure 2.1.
The same principle can be applied to determine the
sea ice freeboard, which is the part of an ice floe
that is located above the water surface. For this the distance to the water surface can
be estimated from the lowest elevation values, and by subtracting this from the measure-
ments over sea ice, the elevation above the water level can be determined.
For the reference level different approaches can be utilised. One, which is frequently
used, is an ellipsoid, a mathematical approximation of the geoid. Both CryoSat-2 and the
airborne measurements from The ESA CryoVEx/KAREN 2017 Arctic campaign is refer-
enced to the WGS84 reference ellipsoid [4, 2].
When considering altimetry measurements of ice, particularly ice with a snow layer on
top, it is important to account for the fact, that altimeters with different wavelengths may
have different penetrations depths in regards to the snow. It is know that an altimeter
using visible light will be reflected at the surface of the snow, whereas a radar altimeter
will be able to penetrate through at least some part of the snow.
It is not certain exactly how deep into the snow a radar is able to penetrate, this might
also depend on whether the snow contains a layer of previously melted snow that did
not melt all the way through, which may form an icy snow layer within the snow [5]. The
temperature can also affect the penetration depth as the radar can penetrate deeper into
the snow if it is dry and cold, hence this will make it more likely to be reflected at the
snow/ice interface [6].
2
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:11==
2.1.1
Waveforms
The detected signal, also called the waveform, corresponds to the magnitude and shape
of the echo. From this information of the reflected surface can be derived.
Over a very smooth surface, as that of an ocean, the waveform will have a characteristic
form also called the ideal waveform, which can be described by the Brown model. [7]
(a) smooth surface
(b) rough surface
Figure 2.2: the formation of the waveform, for both a smooth (left) and more rough surface (right).
For the smooth surface the amplitude increases rapidly from the point at which the signal reaches
the surface, whereas for the rough surface it increases gradually as it continues to hit peaks at the
surface. [8]
As seen in figure 2.2 the waveform depends on the surface smoothness. The waveform
of the smooth surface increase rapidly from the moment it reaches the surface, where as
it increases slower for the rougher surface as peaks continue to arise. This part of the
waveform is called the leading edge slope, which also provide the backscatter coefficient.
[7]
Besides information on the smoothness of the surface, other characteristics can be de-
rived from the waveform.
Figure 2.3: Characteristics given in the waveform.
[8]
The distance from the satellite to the
surface, also called the range, can be
determined from the epoch, see figure
2.3, which is the time on the leading
edge where the echoed signal reaches
half-height.
The trailing edge slope contains infor-
mation on the degree of penetration.
The further into the surface the pulse
can penetrate the more slowly the tail-
ing off, if there is no penetration the tail-
ing off will be rapid. [7, 8]
For a specular surface such as a lead
where the pulse will not be able to pen-
etrate the surface, the waveform should have a steep leading edge slope, and a rapid
tailing off. Oppositely for e.g. multi year ice with a snow layer, the surface should be
rougher corresponding to the more gradually increasing leading edge slope and with a
slower tailing off, due to possible penetration of the snow. The penetration depth de-
pends on the wavelength of the pulse, and not all wavelengths are able to penetrate into
the snow.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
CryoSat-2
CryoSat-2 is an ESA satellite with a purpose of observing the cryosphere, the areas on
Earth where water is found in its solid state. Hence, one target area is the sea around
Greenland, which is the area of interest for this project.
CryoSat-2 carries a radar altimeter, more specifically the SAR Interferometric Radar Al-
timeter (SIRAL), which is a single frequency Ku-band radar altimeter. CryoSat-2 uses a
Doppler Orbit and Radio Positioning Integration by Satellite (DORIS) receiver together
with a small laser retro-reflector, to achieve the position of the satellite, used to determine
the surface elevations. [9] A more thorough review on how these works will be found in
this section.
The satellite was launched on April 8 2010 and is in a Low-Earth orbit which is non-Sun-
synchronous [10]. Parameters connected with CryoSat-2 can be found in table 2.1.
Variable
symbol
value
Altitude of the satellite
h
730 km
Velocity of the satellite
v
7.52 km/s
Wavelength (SIRAL)
λ
0.0221 m
Frequency (SIRAL)
f
13.575 GHz
Bandwidth
B
320 MHz
Pulse Repetition Frequency (SAR mode)
PRF
18.181 kHz
Table 2.1: CryoSat-2 parameters [11] [12]
2.2.1
Modes
The altimeter work in three different modes, depending on which surface it is monitoring
[9], this being a Low Resolution Mode (LRM), Synthetic Aperature Radar (SAR) mode,
and SAR Interferometric (SARIn) mode. An overview of where which mode is applied can
be seen in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: The geographical mode mask for CryoSat-2 V3.9 (February 2017 - August 2019
[13]).[9]
A further description of the given modes can be found in the sections below, including
which types of areas each of the modes are primarily operated over.
4
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:13==
Low Resolution Mode (LRM)
Figure 2.5:
Illustration of a
pulse-limited radar
This measurement mode is used primarily close to the
centre of ice sheets, as well as parts of the oceans
and land that are not being covered by any of the two
other modes.
As the name indicates this mode has
a lower spatial resolution, why it is only in operation
when observing areas where a high resolution is not re-
quired.
The lower resolution is connected with the footprint,
which for this mode is similar to a pulse-limited al-
timeter, see figure 2.5, with a single receive chan-
nel.
This mode also has a low Pulse Repetition Frequency
(PRF), corresponding to the number of pulses emitted
over a period of time, e.g. number of pulses per second,
this also means that the data rate will be relatively low.
[9]
In this mode the footprint of CryoSat-2 is pulse-limited,
which means that it can be approximated by a circle with
a radius of:
r =
√
h c τ
(2.1)
Where h is the altitude of the satellite, c is the speed of light, and τ is the compressed pulse
length, corresponding to one over the pulse bandwidth.[11] The width of the pulse-limited
footprint is therefore approximately equal to 1.65 km [11].
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) mode
This mode is used mainly when observing sea ice, but is also used for some ocean basins
and coastal areas. In these cases a better resolution is desired. The better resolution is
made possible by utilising the Doppler properties of the received signal, see figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Visualisation of Doppler shift, used to improve the along-track resolution. [14]
As the satellite is in constant motion the received frequency experiences a Doppler shift,
due to the Doppler effect. This is seen in the figure above, where the satellite is moving
to the right, this entails that the satellite moves towards the right part of the footprint and
away from the left part.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.7:
Illustration of Doppler-limited
radar. For CryoSat-2 it should be 64 Doppler-
beams here illustrated with fewer.
This causes the frequency shift, as seen
from the red and the blue colours, with
a higher frequency in the forward look-
ing parts of the beam and a lower fre-
quency in the aft looking.
[15] This shift
in frequency is what is used to get a
better resolution, as it allows for the an-
tenna beam to be split into 64 more nar-
row synthetic Doppler beams [9], see fig-
ure 2.7.
The footprint can thereby be di-
vided into strips,
where the interval be-
tween two burst approximately corresponds
to the width of the strip in the along-track
direction.
This allows for each strip to
be observed multiple times, why the in-
dependent bursts, covering a given strip,
can be superimposed (as shown in figure
2.6) and the average of this can be found,
reducing the noise contained in the mea-
surements.[15] This process of superimpos-
ing is also called stacking and the averag-
ing of the stacks is referred to as multi-
looking.[16]
For the Pulse-Doppler limited footprint, the
across-track width is the same as for the
Pulse-limited (see equation 2.1), the along-
track is of course different, and can be found
as:
∆x = h
λ
2 N vPRF
(2.2)
Where λ is the wavelength of the radar signal, N is the number of pulses per burst which
is 64, v is the satellite velocity, and PRF is the pulse-repetition frequency. For CryoSat-2
this can be found to be approximately 305 metres [11].
SAR Interferometric (SARIn) mode
The most advanced mode is the SAR Interferometric (SARIn) mode which is used primar-
ily over ice sheet margins as well as small ice caps and mountain glaciers, this mode is
also utilised when passing over some of the geostrophic ocean currents and over major
hydrological basins. In this mode the data rate is even higher than that of the SAR mode.
The SARIn mode utilises SAR in combination with interferometry allowing for the direction
of the earliest arrived echo to be determined, both in the across-track and the along-track
direction. For the interferometry it uses a second antenna, providing the across-track an-
gle, through comparison of the phases of the different receiving channels. [9]
This mode is especially useful in the areas with steep surface slopes, as it enables for the
location of the observation to be determined. In areas with changing surface elevations,
the earliest arrived echo will sometimes be received from an off-nadir direction, if a higher
elevated surface is nearby, making this the first surface to be detected. These possible
sudden elevation changes, entails that the range-tracking concept should be very robust,
which is obtained trough transmission of narrow-band tracking pulses between the wide-
band bursts. [17]
6
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:15==
In this mode the footprint is the same as that for the SAR mode, which is described in
section 2.2.1, hence given as a Pulse-Doppler-limited footprint.
For the area investigated in this project the used data has been obtained using the SAR
mode, as it is considering measurements over sea ice.
The difference in the operations modes entails that the footprint of the CryoSat-2 obser-
vations changes, this should be considered when performing a validation, as the area
included in the observations depends on this.
2.2.2
Elevations and corrections
The elevations are retrieved from the waveforms obtained by the altimeter, as described
in section 2.1.
Multiple different corrections are applied for these elevations. The speed of light used to
determine the range, is only valid in vacuum, in reality the radar pulses does not pass
through vacuum, why corrections needs to be applied for the possible delays through
the atmosphere between the satellite and the reflected surface. The corrections made
for the individual data points, includes the delay due to the wet and dry troposphere, the
ionosphere, oscillator drift, the effect of the inverse barometer, as well as for the dynamic
atmospheric correction. Different tides are also considered in the corrections, this being
the ocean equilibrium tide, long period ocean tide, solid Earth tide, load tide, as well as
the pole tide. [18]
Figure 2.8: Illustration of the different param-
eters connected with the freeboard values
As mentioned in section 2.1 the radar is
somewhat able to penetrate through snow,
entailing that the elevations obtained from
CryoSat-2 are not detected from the surface
of the snow, but rather somewhere between
the air/snow interface and the snow/ice in-
terface. The propagation speed through the
snow layer is lower than that through the
air, this slower propagation through the snow
layer is not corrected for, why the elevations
may be found to be lower than the real eleva-
tions. [19]
The freeboard values where this has not been
corrected for is called the radar freeboard. To
correct for this the height difference induced
by the slower propagation is to be determined, as described by equation 2.3 [20].
δhd = hs
( c
cs
−1
)
(2.3)
Where hs is the snow depth, c is the speed of light in vacuum, and cs is the speed of light
through the snow, and is given by[20]:
cs =
c
√
1 + 1.7ρs + 0.7ρ2s
(2.4)
Where ρs is the snow density given in g/m3. Adding this correction to the radar freeboard
results in the ice freeboard, and adding the snow depth on top of this gives us the snow
freeboard (see figure 2.8).
Fi = Fr + δhd
Fs = Fi + hs
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2.3
Spacecraft position
The position of the Satellite should be known precisely to be able to make more accurate
measurements, for this CryoSat-2 carries two instruments. One of them is a tracking sys-
tem, Doppler Orbit and Radio positioning Integration by Satellite (DORIS). From signals
broadcasted from different places around the world, DORIS is able to measure and detect
the Doppler shift, from this the orbit of the satellite can be determined on an accuracy of
millimetres [4].
The other instrument is a laser retro-reflector, which can reflect light back in the exact di-
rection of which it received from. At globally distributed laser tracking stations light pulses
are emitted towards CryoSat-2, where it gets reflected back from the retro-reflector, the
time it takes for the light to return can then be used to get independent measurements of
the position.
2.2.4
Waveform parameters
Besides the elevations the CryoSat-2 data also contains other variables, some of which
are described in this section.
Pulse Peakiness (PP)
The pulse peakiness can be derived from the peak power, which is higher for a specular
surface, as that of a lead.[21] The pulse peakiness can be explained by the following
equation.
PP = k · Pmax
∑n
i=j Pi
(2.5)
Where Pmax is the peak power, Pi is the power of the i’th range gate, k is a scaling factor
which for CryoSat-2 data equals 1, j can be used to exclude gates, but is 1 for CryoSat-2,
n is the number of range gates, which is 128 in SAR mode [18, 4]. For the data from
baseline C, the waveform power is normalised so that the maximum value equals 1.[19]
As the pulse peakiness is higher for more specular surfaces, this parameter can be used
to detect leads, for Baseline C with the normalised waveform power a lead is expected
to have a pulse peakiness above 0.18 [18] whereas for Baseline D, which has not been
normalised, the pulse peakiness should be above 40 [21] to indicate a lead.
Stack standard deviation (SSD)
For one look the power is averaged for all of the ranges, and fitted with a Gaussian fit. The
stack standard deviation (SSD) is the standard deviation of the Gaussian fit for all multi-
looks. The lower the SSD the more smooth the surface, a SSD value of zero indicates
that the surface is perfectly smooth in all multi-looks.[16]
A lead should have a relatively smooth surface, why this parameter can also be used in
lead detection, combining it with the thresholds for the pulse peakiness. For an indication
of measuring a lead the stack standard deviation should be low due to the smooth surface,
a frequently used threshold is that it should be below 4 [21].
2.2.5
Baseline
The way the CryoSat-2 measurements are processed has changed over the time, this is
indicated by the baseline, in this project only baselines C and D have been investigated.
New baselines are connected with updated processing algorithms which should improve
the output of the data processing.
From baseline C to D a number of changes has been applied, for the scope of this project
the most interesting changes are that the first-maximum retracker is now determined with
another threshold value for diffuse waveforms in the sea ice regions, and all waveforms
from non-polar regions. Also the discrimination algorithm, used to determine which sur-
face type is represented by the waveform has been updated for sea ice regions, so that
8
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:17==
in baseline D it is based on sea ice concentration, waveform peakiness, stack standard
deviation, and peakiness of the stack. This improves the chance, that waveforms repre-
senting off-nadir specular reflection, of e.g. leads, can be rejected by the algorithm.[22]
2.3
Airborne measurements - five parallel tracks
The main scope of this project is to investigate, what is the better way of flying over the
CryoSat-2 track for validation of the observations.
As the satellite is located much higher than the aircraft, there will be a difference in the
size of the footprint. The aircraft was flying at an altitude of around 300 m above the
surface[2]. The further away from the Earths surface the measurements are obtained,
the larger the footprint, hence also implying a coarser spatial resolution.
When using airborne data to validate satellite data, this should therefore be taken into
consideration.
At the ESA CryoVEx/KAREN 2017 Arctic campaign five parallel flight tracks was flown
along the CryoSat-2 track in 50 km sections, to cover the full width of the footprint of
CryoSat-2, as illustrated in figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Illustration of how the five airborne lines covers the footprint of CryoSat-2.
The campaign was coordinated by National Space Institute, Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU Space), York University (YU), and Environment Canada (EC). The campaign
had the purpose of validating several satellite measurements, including CryoSat-2, Sentinel-
3 and SARAL/AltiKa as well as investigating the concept of dual-frequency altimetry for
later polar satellite missions. [2]
The campaign utilised different altimeters, the data used in this study was measured by
an Airborne Laser Scanner and a Ka-band radar.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3.1
Airborne Laser Scanner (ALS)
The airborne laser scanner used is of the type Riegl LMS Q-240i-80, which has three
rotating mirrors with scan angles of 80◦. The resolution of the laser scanner is 1m×1m with
a swath-width of 400 m. It operates with a wavelength of 904 nm, hence it is an infrared
laser, which is expected to be reflected at the air-snow surface. The elevations are given
in reference to the WGS84 reference ellipsoid. The accuracy of the measurements in the
vertical direction is around 10 cm, mostly connected with uncertainties in the GPS.[2]
For calibration, overflights are performed over buildings where the position of the corners
are know very precise, by flying over this from different directions calibrations are made
possible. Furthermore cross-overs of the same area are used as a way of calibrating the
ALS.
2.3.2
KAREN: Ka-band
Another altimeter used is KAREN a Ka-band interferometric modulated continuous wave
SAR altimeter, with a frequency of 34.525 GHz corresponding to a wavelength of around
8.7 mm, hence in the microwave spectrum. KAREN has one transmitting antenna and
two receiving antennas allowing for data collection to be in SARIn mode, this results in
a footprint of 5 m in the along-track direction and 12 m in the across-track direction [2].
The vertical resolution of KAREN measurements is 0.1650 m[2]. The obtained elevations
are referenced to the WGS84 reference ellipsoid. To account for delay of the pulse in
the cables and electronics, an offset should be applied, this offset is estimated through
comparisons with the ALS measurements over areas where they should be reflected at
the same surface.[2]
2.3.3
Aircraft position
On board the aircraft there where four geodetic dual-frequency GPS receivers, of type
Javad Delta, from which the position of the aircraft was logged. For differential post-
processing of the GPS positions, overflights of GPS reference stations, when the flight
track was close to such, was used. Other times reference points installed by the team
was overflown, these had a position accuracy of around 2 cm [2]. Precise point positioning
was also used a method based on information from a satellite clock and orbit errors. The
attitude was detected by three inertial navigation systems.[2]
10
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:19==
3
Data
Multiple different data sets are used in this project, the primary data being the CryoSat-2
and the airborne data, as this is directly connected to the topic of investigation. However,
to further explore possible effects on the data, which could cause differences, other data
sets has also been applied. All data used in this project will be described in this section.
The investigated flight track of CryoSat-2 from April 16 2017 and the airborne data with
five parallel tracks can be seen below in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The flight tracks from April 16 2017 of CryoSat-2 and the airborne measurements,
with indication of the location of the overflight with five parallel tracks.
The overflight with the 5 airborne tracks, are following a line with latitudes between 84.5543
and 84.9538 and longitudes of -46.802 to -44.7869. For the CryoSat-2 data this part of
the track takes approximately 7 seconds beginning at 15:23, whereas for the airborne
measurements it takes about 79 minutes, with the start time being 14:36 and the end time
being 15:55.
The freeboard values obtained along the overflight, from CryoSat-2 as well as both ALS
and KAREN from the airborne campaign, can be seen in figure 3.2, the values are com-
puted by subtracting the mean sea surface (DTU21MSS) from the elevations provided in
the data files, described further in section 4.2.1.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: All freeboard values along the track from April 16 2017 from CryoSat-2, the ALS and
KAREN, respectively. The values are found by subtracting the Mean Sea Surface (DTU21MSS)
from the elevations given in the data products.
3.1
CryoSat-2
For CryoSat-2 different data products has been utilised, both different levels and base-
lines, has been implemented. A description of each of the products used can be found
in this section. The main CryoSat-2 product used is provided by ESA, however for ba-
sis of comparison other products are also implemented. This being one from the Al-
fred Wegener Institute (AWI) from their Climate Change Initiative (CCI) project, and the
CryoTEMPO-EOLIS product also provided by ESA.
3.1.1
level 1b, baseline C
For baseline C the level 1b data product is used, this provides values for; elevations above
the WGS84 reference ellipsoid as well as the corrections connected with these, further-
more the latitude, longitude, pulse peakiness, stack standard deviation, and the satellite
altitude has been used.
The CryoSat-2 data that passes the same track, as the airborne validation data, is given in
the file RDWES1B_CS_OFFL_SIR_SAR_1B_20170416T151903_20170416T152327_C001.nc
[19]. The time span of this data set is, as implied by the naming, from the 16th of April
2017 between 15:19:03 and 15:23:27.
3.1.2
level 1b, baseline D
The level1b data product changes a lot from baseline C to D, the only parameter used
from baseline D level 1b is the stack standard deviation, and the corresponding latitude
and longitudes.
The exact file used is: CS_LTA__SIR_SAR_1B_20170416T152039_20170416T152327_D001.nc.
This data is gained from [23].
3.1.3
level 2, baseline D
Baseline D level 2 contains more of the parameters wanted, including the elevations above
the WGS84 reference ellipsoid, freeboard values, latitude, longitude, quality flags, pulse
peakiness, as well as the snow depths with the corresponding latitude and longitude. The
elevations are corrected for both geophysical and instrumental corrections.[4]
Two retrackers are used in SAR mode, for a diffuse echo the CPOM threshold of first
12
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:21==
peak is used, and for a specular echo the Giles model fit is used [4]. The snow depths
are extracted from a static UCL04 Snow Depth Climatology (Warren)[4, 24].
The used file is: CS_LTA__SIR_SAR_2__20170416T152039_20170416T152327_D001.nc
obtained from [23].
This data product is also used for validating files from other single-track flight days, as
described in section 3.2, provided on the same format, with different naming of the files.
3.1.4
Mode mask V3.9
The different versions of the mode mask for CryoSat-2 as the one shown in figure 2.4, can
be found at [9]. Here version 3.9 is applied, as this should be valid from February 2017
to August 2019, hence this version was used when the data described in section 3.1 was
obtained.
Figure 3.3: Mode mask V3.9 for CryoSat-2 for the area of the altimetry data from April 16 2017.
It is found that for the area of interest CryoSat-2 only operates in SAR mode, fitting with
the expected sea ice surface type.
3.1.5
AWI - CCI product
Another CryoSat-2 product used for comparison is from the Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI)
from the Climate Change Initiative (CCI) project. This utilises the Threshold First Maximus
Retracker Algorithm (TFMRA).[25]
From this the sea ice freeboards and the connected latitudes and longitudes are used.
This data product can be downloaded from ftp://ftp.awi.de/sea_ice/projects/cci/crdp/v3p0-
rc1/cryosat2/nh/.
3.1.6
CryoTEMPO-EOLIS product
The last type of CryoSat-2 data is the sea ice product from the ESA CryoTEMPO project,
which also uses the Threshold First Maximus Retracker Algorithm (TFMRA).[26]
Again the variables used is the sea ice freeboards and the coordinates of these. This data
is available at [23].
3.2
Airborne
Different airborne data sets has been included in this project, the main one being the data
from the 16th of April 2017 with the five parallel tracks. However, other data where only
a single-track is flown has also been investigated. All of the airborne data is from the
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
13
==PAGE:22==
ESA CryoVEx/KAREN 2017 Arctic campaign, an overview of the airborne data files can
be found in table 3.1 and a plot of the tracks can bee seen in figure 3.4.
Filename(s)
Latitude
Longitude
day
time
CS2 overpass
[84.5543, 84.9538]
[-46.802, -44.7869]
16 Apr. 2017
14:36-15:55
15:23
083_5x5.frb
[85.1137, 87.0127]
[-46.3555, -28.1761]
24 Mar. 2017
16:17-18:30
16:40
086_5x5.frb
[84.1919, 86.2939]
[-64.2235, -51.2939]
27 Mar. 2017
16:40-17:45
17:25
103_5x5.frb
[85.8344, 87.2245]
[-93.6996, -76.5097]
13 Apr. 2017
15:52-17:34
02:09 (14 Apr.)
Table 3.1: Airborne data sets overview
Figure 3.4: Plot of the flight tracks for each of the four days.
As described in section 2.3 two different instruments has been used to obtain the Airborne
data from April 16 2017, used to validate the CryoSat-2 data, why two different data sets
has been utilised.
Both data sets has been obtained during the same flight, and has been measured simul-
taneously. It covers the time from 13:39 to 16:00, spanning over an area with latitudes
between 82.6380 and 85.0508 and with longitudes between -54.2872 and -44.4454.
Part of this flight track overlaps with the track of CryoSat-2, specifically the measurements
described in section 3.1, furthermore for some of this there has been flown five parallel
tracks along the CryoSat-2 track to cover the full extent of footprint of CryoSat-2. In figure
3.5 the five tracks can be seen along with when and where each track was flown in relation
to the others.
14
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.5: Overview of how the five parallel airborne data tracks are located, with track 1 being
flown first and track 5 being flown last. Track 1 is found to be located in the middle also overlapping
with the nadir CryoSat-2 coordinates.
It is seen that track 1 is the one located in the middle passing over the centre (nadir) of
the CryoSat-2 foot print.
3.2.1
ALS data
The ALS data, it is provided in different formats. All the obtained elevations from April
16 can be found in the netCDF file ALS_20170416T133911_160025.nc with the following
parameters: Latitude, longitude, time in decimal year, scannumber, amplitude, and ele-
vation. The data covers an area of latitudes from 82.6380 to 85.0508 and longitudes from
-54.2872 to -44.4454.
A lower resolution product for the mid-value of the swath is provided in the ASCII file
1339_5x5_2.frb, containing: time, latitude, longitude, freeboard.
ALS data for the other days where only one flight track has been flown, is provided on the
same format.
For April 16 it is mainly the full-resolution netCDF file that is used, whereas for the other
days, the lower resolution product has been applied.
3.2.2
Ka-band data
These measurements, only investigated for April 16 2017, follows the same track as the
ALS data seen in figure 3.1, as it is obtained simultaneously. However, only the first four
of the five tracks are given as the instrument had to be restarted due to the Ka-radar
freezing.
This data is provided in ASCII format including, amongst others, the latitude, longitude,
and the Offset Centre of Gravity (OCOG) retracked elevations.
3.2.3
Camera
The ESA CryoVEx/KAREN 2017 Arctic campaign also obtained geolocated images from a
nadir-looking camera of the type: Canon EOS 7D. The images were taken with a 5 second
interval. The camera was time tagged with an internal camera clock, this entails the
possibility of determining the geolocations, by connecting it to the GPS data for the same
time. The positions of the images are available in the position file PIX_BAS_20170416.pos.
[2]
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
15
==PAGE:24==
3.3
DTU21MSS
The Mean Sea Surface, used to estimate the freeboard values, is implemented as the
DTU21 Mean Sea Surface (MSS), which is computed using data from multiple different
satellites over a period from 1993 to 2012. [27]
As the altimetry data is provided as elevations above the WGS84 reference ellipsoid in
metres, the version of the MSS referenced to the same ellipsoid has been applied here.
The file contains a grid spanning over all latitude and longitudes, with 10800 cells (latitude)
x 21602 cells (longitude), connected with an elevation of the MSS above WGS84 for each
grid cell. [27]
3.4
CARRA
To investigate the conditions of the day of the measurements as well as those from the
months before (from January to April), the C3S Arctic Regional Reanalysis (CARRA),
which provide 3-hourly analysis [28], has been implemented. This includes the tempera-
tures, the total precipitation and snow depths.
For the temperatures the single mode variable Sea ice surface temperature was chosen,
the temperatures are that of the sea ice near the surface and are given in Kelvin. The
total precipitation is the mean accumulated precipitation in the grid cell given in kg/m2,
within the forecast time step, here chosen to be an entire day. The snow depth variable
used is the snow on ice total depth, which is described as a rough estimate [28], based
on other snow variables, this is given in metres.[29]
The product has a spatial resolution of 2.5km × 2.5km.[29]
The product is available from 1991 to present.
It is possible to get values from one of two areas, the one used is the west domain covering
Greenland and Iceland and the area around it.
3.5
Operation IceBridge
On March 24 Operation IceBridge and the flight from the CryoVEx 2017 campaign over-
lapped. This entails that the snow depths obtained from Operation IceBridge can be
used. The part of the flight overlapping with the CryoVEx flight was carried out from 14:29
to 15:50. The values are obtained from the snow radar carried by IceBridge with an un-
certainty of 5.7 cm, with the distance between the measurements being approximately 41
metres.
For Multi year ice (MYI) it is found that the root-mean-square-error (RMSE) for the snow
depths is 17.5 cm[30].
16
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:25==
4
Method
Different methods has been applied to the data described in section 3, how these has
been implemented will be described in this section.
4.1
Comparison areas
For the Airborne data used to compare with the CryoSat-2 data, different approaches of
the area included in the averages used for the comparisons are applied. This is done to
get a better understanding of the data and the results.
4.1.1
Nearest neighbours
The most simple way of determining which airborne data to include in the comparison, is
by only investigating the nearest measurements. Within this method different approaches
are possible, one being the single airborne measurement closest to the middle of the
CryoSat-2 footprint, another being the k number of airborne measurement closest to the
midpoint, and yet another method being, that each airborne measurement is being ap-
plied to the data point, that it is located closest to in the CryoSat-2 data.
To find the nearest and k-nearest airborne observations for each of the CryoSat-2 mea-
surements, the Matlab-function knnsearch [31] is utilised. This allows for the closest of
the airborne measurements, in regards to the CryoSat-2 measurement, to be determined,
based on the latitude and longitude of the measurements. The mean of these points can
then be computed, and used to compare with the CryoSat-2 values.
For the method of projecting each airborne measurement onto the CryoSat-2 measure-
ment, which it is closest to, the Matlab function dsearchn [32] is used. This finds the
closest CryoSat-2 point based on the latitudes and longitudes for each of the airborne
measurements. All the measurements, closest to one CryoSat-2 measurement, can then
be found, and by averaging these the comparable values can be determined.
4.1.2
Pulse-limited
The pulse-limited footprint is used as another comparison area, the radius of this is found
as described by equation 2.1, by using the parameters found in table 2.1, this results in a
diameter of 1.65 km.
This can be used together with the latitude and longitude of the CryoSat-2 measurements
and the Matlab function scircle1 [33] to find 100 latitude and longitude pairs along the
edge of the pulse-limited footprint, at the surface of the WGS84 reference ellipsoid. An
illustration of what the area covers can be seen in figure 4.1. [33] [34]
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Illustration of what the pulse-limited footprint comparison area covers for one CryoSat-
2 measurement.
It is seen that overlaps of the comparison areas will occur, as the distance between two
CryoSat-2 measurements is smaller than the radius of the footprint. It is also noticeable
that the airborne data-swath is wider than the footprint, hence the footprint is fully covered.
Using the Matlab function inpolygon[35] the airborne measurements within the footprint
can be found, and the mean of these can be calculated for each CryoSat-2 measurement.
4.1.3
Doppler-limited
The area covered by CryoSat-2 is a Pulse-Doppler-limited footprint, where the along track
width can be determined using equation 2.2, using the parameters given in table 2.1 this
is found to be approximately 305 m, the across track width is the same as for the pulse-
limited footprint (1.65 km).
To determine the angle of flight (α), as the azimuth angle clockwise from north, the Matlab
function azimuth [36] is utilised. Using this angle together with angles from nadir to the
corners of the footprint simplified to a rectangle (see figure 4.2), it is possible to determine
the latitude and longitude for each of the corners of the footprint.
Figure 4.2: Angles used to determine the corner positions (C1-C4) of the simplified rectangle
footprint. The red dots indicating CryoSat-2 data points, with the upward direction being towards
the North.
18
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:27==
The angle to the corners from the across and along-track plane can be found as:
v1 = tan−1
( along track width
across track width
)
v2 = 90◦−v1
The angle to each corner in respect to directly North can then be found as:
• C1 = α −180 + v2
• C2 = α −v2
• C3 = α + v2
• C4 = α + 180 −v2
The distance from the centre point to the corners can be found through Pythagoras:
d =
√
(along track width/2)2 + (across track width/2)2
To determine the latitude and longitude coordinates of each of the corners, the Matlab
function reckon [37] is used, where the angles and distance from the centre/nadir-point
to the corners is given as input.
Using inpolygon it is again possible to find all airborne measurements within the footprint.
The footprint is determined as the intersection (intersection[34]) of this rectangle and
the pulse-limited footprint, giving the comparison area for the Doppler-limited footprint.
This comparison area is visualised for one CryoSat-2 measurement in figure4.3.
Figure 4.3: Illustration on the Doppler-limited footprint comparison area for one CryoSat-2 mea-
surement.
4.2
Adjustments
To account for factors influencing the measuring conditions different aspects are consid-
ered, how this is implemented is described in this section.
4.2.1
Freeboards
To determine the sea ice freeboard values, both for CryoSat-2 and for the airborne ALS
and KA-band data, the Mean Sea Surface (MSS) is used. As mentioned in section 3 the
specific version used, is the DTU21MSS [27]. The freeboard values can then be found by
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
19
==PAGE:28==
subtracting the nearest values of the MSS from each of the given elevations. Again the
nearest MSS value is found using the knnsearch [31] function in Matlab.
This actually only provide us with the elevations above the MSS, but the sea surface height
anomaly (SSHA) is found to be very small for this track, containing values on the same
scale as the uncertainties. Hence, to avoid adding further uncertainties, these elevations
above the MSS are the values used for comparisons, and are assumed to be freeboards.
This is also the reason for not investigating e.g. the sea ice thicknesses, as it is sought
out to explore the data as raw as possible.
In the baseline D product a quality flags is also provided, where measurements with the
value 16777216 corresponds to height errors, theses measurements are ignored as well
as a few other points, more on this in section 5.1.1.
4.2.2
Snow depths
As the Ku-band radar that CryoSat-2 carries, might penetrate somewhat or entirely into
the snow on top of the sea ice, the snow depths should be considered.
For baseline D these are provided within the level2 data product. The snow depths are
more sparsely covered than the elevations, hence the snow depths connected to the in-
dividual freeboard values are not unique. The Matlab function knnsearch[31] is used to
find the closest snow depths. These values can then be added on top of the freeboard
values, and be used to determine the propagation delay entailed by the penetration of the
snow. The propagation delay is computed as stated in equation 2.3, using a snow density
of 400kg/m3 as given in the CryoSat-2 data product [4].
Adding both the snow depth and the propagation delay to the radar freeboard values
from CryoSat-2, should presumably provide the snow freeboard comparable to the ob-
tained airborne freeboards.
To further explore the snow value, also snow depths from Operation IceBridge and CARRA
are implemented. This is done only for March 24, as this is the only day of the four days
where the airborne track coincide with Operation IceBridge. This is done in the same
manor as described for the Warren values contained in the CryoSat-2 product.
For CARRA instead of using knnsearch[31] to find the closest point Haversine.m[38] is
used to determine the distance to all points within the domain, for then to select the clos-
est one, more on this in section 4.2.6.
The same snow density is used to determine the propagation delay for all three snow
products.
4.2.3
Leads
As mentioned in section 2.2.4 the pulse peakiness (PP) and the stack standard deviation
(SSD) can be used to detect lead observations.
The threshold value for the pulse peakiness depends on the baseline, as baseline C uses
normalised waveform power. The threshold values are chosen to be over 0.18 for base-
line C and over 40 for baseline D for the pulse peakines, for the stack standard deviation
the threshold is the same for the two baselines and is set to be under 4.
To further explore if this detects actual leads, the waveforms of these can can be investi-
gated as well as the nearest images, which can provide an idea of how the surface may
look. Note that the field of view for the camera is smaller than the footprint of CryoSat-2
(see appendix A.5).
20
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:29==
4.2.4
Drift
One of the factors impacting the difference between the measurements made with CryoSat-
2 and the airborne measurements, is sea ice drift.
As CryoSat-2 has a much higher along track speed, than the aircraft has, it allows for
time to pass between the two sets of measurements. Hence if the ice is moving, it might
not be the same ice being observed. For this reason the drift speed is estimated, this is
done through inspection of the airborne data, as these data sets contains cross-overs.
This allows for detection of movement of the ice, as the same area is passed twice with a
small time delay.
Through visual inspection the same sea ice feature is located in both of the observation
tracks of the area, this allows for the coordinates of that specific feature at different times
to be determined. In Matlab the distance between two geographical coordinates can be
determined using the function Haversine.m [38], which determines the shortest distance
between two points through the following formula [39].
d = 2r arcsin
(√
sin2
(φ2 −φ1
2
)
+ cos (φ1) cos (φ2) sin2
(λ2 −λ1
2
))
(4.1)
This gives the distance and as we have the time difference, the drift speed can be calcu-
lated.
4.2.5
Geometry - preferential sampling
Figure 4.4: Geometry of prefer-
ential sampling within the FP.
The observations from CryoSat-2 might not always
be reflected from nadir.
However, if it is accounted
for as a nadir reflection,
height errors can occur
due to the geometry within the footprint (see figure
4.4.
The height error depends on the distance from nadir to
the point which the sample is detected from, the further
away from nadir the larger the error.
The elevation, if received from another point, can be de-
termined as:
elev_CS2_shift = sat_alt−
√
range2 −dist_from_nadir2
(4.2)
By subtracting the given elevations, the height error caused by the geometry can be found.
herror = elev_CS2_shift −elev_CS2
(4.3)
This is used both to determine the theoretical value of the height error as well as the
freeboard values for CryoSat-2 if received from the outer airborne tracks.
4.2.6
CARRA variables
Multiple variables from C3S Arctic Regional Reanalysis (CARRA) are used and evaluated.
When loading these only the ones located closest to the tracks are collected. To determine
which points in the CARRA domain closest corresponds to each of the points in the tracks,
the Haversine.m [38] function is used. For each CryoSat-2 point the distance between
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
21
==PAGE:30==
this and all points in the CARRA domain is determined, whereafter the point entailing
the minimum distance for each CryoSat-2 point is found. This is done as the spatial
resolution of the CARRA product is worse than that of CryoSat-2 and the points are not
provided along the track, why the euclidean distance, used in knnsearch.m [31], would
be insufficient, locating the wrong points, due to the latitude and longitude not having the
same dimension.
Temperatures
For the temperatures the values from January to April are utilised, to provide knowledge
on the maximum temperature along the flight tracks within these months, as well as de-
termining the mean temperature for the exact day of each of the flights. The index for
the points located closest to each CryoSat-2 point is determined with Haversine.m[38]
as described above, and the temperature for these are extracted. Whereafter the mean
temperature of the day and the maximum temperature for the entire period can be deter-
mined.
Precipitation
The precipitation values are also extracted from January to April 16 for the track flown on
April 16. As the timestep of the forecast is 24 hours, the variable is given as a sum of all
the expected precipitation of that day.
The mean precipitation over the track is then determined and the cumulated sum is found
from the 1st of January until April 16 and plotted over time.
22
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:31==
5
Results
In this section the resulting averages of the airborne measurements within each of the
comparison areas described in section 4.1 is shown. These results are shown together
with the freeboards from CryoSat-2, and eventually the differences between the two will
be inspected.
The investigations are carried out for deviations from the mean sea surface (MMS), which
for these tracks are assumed to approximately equal the freeboards, why it is referred to
as such. The comparisons are made for as ”raw” data as possible, why it is not done for
the estimated sea ice thicknesses for example, as this would require more assumptions
and include parameters with connected uncertainties.
The individual tracks and the conditions for the time and area of the flights will also be
explored.
5.1
Data variables
Some of the variables given in the CryoSat-2 data products are further explored to de-
termine which data points are to be investigated as well as gaining knowledge about the
data.
5.1.1
Quality flag - Height error
The Quality flag variable can be used to discard some of the measurements, here the
height error flag (with value: 16777216) is used.
In figure 5.1 the freeboard variable provided in the baseline D CryoSat-2 data product can
be seen together with the freeboards found by subtracting the DTU21MSS with indications
of the points with height error flags.
Figure 5.1: Freeboard (FB) values directly from the CS2 product (top graph) and the ones com-
puted by subtracting the DTU21MSS from the elevations. The circles marks the data points with
a height error flag, and the stars show manually ignored data points.
It is seen that the height error flag is present only when the values are very different than
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
23
==PAGE:32==
the rest, all of the freeboard values connected to a height error flag are seen to be below
-10 m. It is also found that in the freeboard variable provided in the product, a lot more
data is discarded, than just the ones with a height error flag.
For this project it has been chosen to only discard the values with height error flags, and
the six points shown in the bottom plot, which are seemingly outliers, and all somewhat
below the MSS, hence not expected to be presenting sea ice. Leaving 130 data points
out of 154.
5.1.2
Lead detection
For the part of the CryoSat-2 track overlapping with the airborne tracks, the expected
leads has been detected.
As described in section 4.2.3, the lead observations are expected to have a pulse peak-
iness (PP) above 40 for baseline D and above 0.18 for baseline C and a stack standard
deviation (SSD) below 4 for both baselines. The observations fulfilling these requirements
are found and shown in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Lead detection for both baseline C and D. The stars shows expected leads, red ones
for baseline D (with PP≥40 and SSD≤4), and purple ones for baseline C (with PP≥0.18 and
SSD≤4). The letters A-H represent which image shown in figure 5.4 it is connected to.
All the freeboard values expected to represent leads are seen to be rather close to zero
in the baseline D product, where they are found to be higher for baseline C. It is noticed
how it is the same measurements that are detected as leads for both baselines with few
exceptions, there are a few more measurements detected as leads in baseline C. When
looking at the freeboard values, the difference is more profound, as baseline C generally
has higher values, which also entails that the detected leads from baseline D has free-
board values close to zero, whereas for baseline C they are found to be higher.
It is also seen that the very negative freeboard values are not detected as leads. How-
ever, as mentioned earlier these values are ignored due to height errors.
To further explore the lead detection a waveform from a detected lead is shown along side
of a waveform of an observation with a sea ice quality flag, this can be seen in figure 5.3.
24
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.3: Waveform of an expected lead (left) with PP≥40 and SSD≤4, and a waveform from
a surface not expected to be a lead (right).
It can be seen that the waveform for the expected lead is a distinct single peak, hence it
shows a very steep leading edge and a very rapid tailing off. Where for the sea ice the
leading edge is still rather steep, but the tailing edge is much less rapid and not as smooth.
Lastly, images from the camera, found to be closest to nadir for the observations of the
detected leads along the flight track, is shown in figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Images from the airborne campaign closest to the expected leads along the overflown
track. The letters are connected to the detected leads in figure 5.2.
It is seen that a majority of the images contain areas of water, for images G and H water
is however not obviously present, but for image H the surface seems very smooth which
could possibly be an example of thin new ice. The amount of water in the images differs
where image D and E contains the most water, and the remaining images A,B,C, and F
depicts much less water.
5.2
Nearest neighbours
For the nearest neighbours comparison, three different approaches has been utilised, the
results of each of them can be found in this section and in appendix A.1 to A.2.
5.2.1
All airborne projected onto the closest CryoSat-2
Firstly, the method where all of the airborne observations are projected onto the CryoSat-
2 observations of which it is closest to.
After having determined which CryoSat-2 data point each of the airborne measurements
belongs to, the mean of all those belonging to the one CryoSat-2 data point is found, this
being what is used to compare with the freeboard values from CryoSat-2.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
25
==PAGE:34==
The computed average freeboard values found using this approach, both for the ALS and
KAREN are plotted together with the ones from CryoSat-2 where the snow depths and
the propagation delay has been added, this can be seen in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Freeboard values from April 16 2017, computed as the mean of the airborne projected
onto the closest CryoSat-2 observation both for ALS (red) and KAREN (yellow).
The mean freeboard values from ALS and KAREN are found to lie relatively close, though
the ones from KAREN varies a bit more, the overall graph seems to follow each other.
The freeboards from CryoSat-2 are found to be lower than those from the airborne in-
struments. It is also noticed that where the curve of ALS and KAREN looks similar, the
same is not found for CryoSat-2. However, some areas seems to fit better than others,
for example the values at latitudes around 84.8 have a similar curve compared to the
airborne values, while others around latitude 84.65 has some values almost overlapping
with KAREN.
The difference between including only one track compared to all of the tracks is now ex-
plored. A plot of the freeboard values as shown above for all the tracks, is made together
with the values found with the same method, but only with the data from the mid-track
(track 1 see figure 3.5), this can be seen in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: The freeboard values from April 16 2017 found by projecting the airborne measure-
ments onto the nearest CryoSat-2 data point, both done with all the tracks (red) and only using
the middle track (yellow). The left figure shows this for the ALS whereas the right figure displays
the values from KAREN (with only four tracks).
Differences between including only the mid-track and including all of the tracks are noticed,
26
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:35==
where some values lie close others are found to have a larger gap. Both curves are found
to be smoother for the ALS than for KAREN, where especially the mid-track is seen to
fluctuate, due to fewer data points being included in the averaged product.
In general the curves including all tracks are found to be smoother than the ones for the
mid-track only.
For the CryoSat-2 freeboards it is seen that there is somewhat of a gap between these
and the ALS freeboards, such a gap is seemingly less present between the CryoSat-2
freeboards and the KAREN freeboards, although still pronounced.
5.2.2
Closest airborne
In this section a comparison will be made between the CryoSat-2 freeboard values and
the single closest airborne ground observation.
A plot of this, done for both of the instruments from the airborne campaign, can be found
in figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: The freeboard values from CryoSat-2 from April 16 2017, along with the closest air-
borne measurement obtained with ALS (red) and KAREN (yellow).
For this comparison method it is found that the airborne freeboard values fluctuate a lot
over the track, and only few points are found where the two instruments show similar val-
ues, as expected due to different footprint sizes.
Compared to the CryoSat-2 data it is also noticed that the fluctuations in the airborne val-
ues are much larger.
For this comparison the results are found to be the same when only including the mid-
track, as all of the closest airborne points are located in the mid-track see appendix A.1.
5.3
Doppler-limited
The average of all of the airborne freeboards within the Doppler-limited footprint, with an
across-track width of 1.65 km and an along-track width of 305 m, is found. The results of
this for both airborne instruments, with five tracks for ALS and four tracks for KAREN, is
shown along with the freeboards from CryoSat-2, this can be seen in figure 5.8.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.8: Average of the airborne freeboards from April 16 2017 from both ALS (red) and KAREN
(yellow) within the Doppler-limited footprint together with the freeboards from CryoSat-2 (blue).
Again it is found that the overall curve of the averaged freeboards from ALS and KAREN
seemingly follow each other, with the resulting KAREN values primarily being a bit lower.
It also seems as though the fluctuation in the results from KAREN are a bit larger than
those in the ALS results, which may be due to the less data points included in the aver-
ages for KAREN.
Once again, there is seen to be a gap between the CryoSat-2 freeboards and the aver-
aged Doppler-limited freeboards for some areas, where for other areas, as around latitude
84.65, the values are a lot closer together. A further investigation into what may cause
some areas to show similar resulting values whereas others do not, can be found in sec-
tion 5.6.
The results found when only including the mid-track are now computed and shown to-
gether with the ones when including all tracks, along with the freeboards from CryoSat-2,
this can be seen in figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Average of all the airborne freeboards from April 16 2017 within the Doppler-limited
footprint, including only the mid-track (yellow) and including all tracks (red), only four for KAREN.
This is shown for both ALS (left) and KAREN (right), together with the freeboards from CryoSat-2.
The results when only using the mid-track, does for some parts simulate the results when
using all tracks, while for others the two does not look alike. Seemingly more fluctuations
28
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:37==
are found in the results for only the mid-track for both of the instruments, with especially
large fluctuations in the KAREN results. Another noticeable point is, that it appears as
though the CryoSat-2 freeboards are closer to the KAREN results than the ALS ones,
although still with gaps for some areas.
A histogram is computed for the differences between the CryoSat-2 freeboards and the
airborne results when including all or only the mid track, this can be found in figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Histograms showing the differences between the freeboards from April 16 2017 from
CryoSat-2 and the averages of the airborne values inside the Doppler-limited footprint for all tracks
(blue) and mid-track (red), The left figure shows the differences between CryoSat-2 and ALS and
the right for CryoSat-2 and KAREN.
It is found that a smaller variance in the difference is present when including all tracks
instead of only the mid-track. It is also found that the mean difference is smaller for the
results using KAREN, as also expected from the investigation of the plots of the results.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
29
==PAGE:38==
5.4
Summary
A summary table is presented in this section, with variables describing how well the air-
borne results, computed using each of the comparison areas, as shown in sections 5.2.1
to 5.3 and in appendix A.1 to A.3, fits with the freeboards from CryoSat-2. This being the
difference between the freeboards (∆FB), the correlation and the p-value between the
two. This is shown for both the ALS and KAREN results when including all tracks and
only the mid-track.
ALS
Ka-band
All tracks
mid-track
All tracks
mid-track
All airborne projected to closest CryoSat-2
∆FB, mean
0.3637 m
0.3133 m
0.2684 m
0.2593 m
∆FB, median
0.3598 m
0.3082 m
0.2439 m
0.2378 m
∆FB, std
0.1856 m
0.2154 m
0.2114 m
0.2760 m
Correlation
0.1880 ± 0.0616
0.0475 ± 0.0339
0.1163 ± 0.0542
-0.0185 ± 0.0257
p-value
0.0322
0.5916
0.1875
0.8349
Nearest point
∆FB, mean
0.3470 m
0.3470 m
0.2629 m
0.2629 m
∆FB, median
0.2453 m
0.2453 m
0.2236 m
0.2236 m
∆FB, std
0.5834 m
0.5834 m
0.4244 m
0.4244 m
Correlation
-0.0417 ± 0.0615
-0.0417 ± 0.0615
-0.1171 ± 0.0845
-0.1171 ± 0.0845
p-value
0.6373
0.6373
0.1847
0.1847
10 Nearest points
∆FB, mean
0.3501 m
0.3504 m
0.2627 m
0.2627 m
∆FB, median
0.3056 m
0.3056 m
0.2238 m
0.2238 m
∆FB, std
0.4614 m
0.4613 m
0.3679 m
0.3679 m
Correlation
-0.0853 ± 0.0763
-0.0858 ± 0.0765
-0.0980 ± 0.0710
-0.0980 ± 0.0710
p-value
0.3348
0.3320
0.2671
0.2671
Pulse-limited
∆FB, mean
0.3504 m
0.3159 m
0.2659 m
0.2691 m
∆FB, median
0.3497 m
0.3032 m
0.2476 m
0.2426 m
∆FB, std
0.1535 m
0.1810 m
0.1553 m
0.1965 m
Correlation
0.3818 ± 0.0745
0.1178 ± 0.0437
0.3798 ± 0.0775
0.0698 ± 0.0371
p-value
0.0000
0.1820
0.0000
0.4299
Doppler-limited
∆FB, mean
0.3533 m
0.3111 m
0.2652 m
0.2615 m
∆FB, median
0.3437 m
0.3066 m
0.2543 m
0.2337 m
∆FB, std
0.1660 m
0.2309 m
0.1843 m
0.2824 m
Correlation
0.3249 ± 0.0776
-0.0081 ± 0.0146
0.2496 ± 0.0742
-0.0622 ± 0.0473
p-value
0.0002
0.9274
0.0042
0.4822
For ALS it is seen that the mean difference in freeboard is lowest for the nearest point
comparison area. However, this has a much larger standard deviation than the other
methods. The Pulse-limited has the lowest standard deviation of the difference, with the
Doppler-limited coming in as the second lowest. It is also found that for the ALS including
all tracks the correlation is best for the pulse-limited and next best for the Doppler-limited,
this is also valid for the p-value. For the ALS only including the mid-track the pulse-limited
has the highest correlation and the lowest p-value although still having a relatively high
p-value and low correlation.
30
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:39==
For the Ka-band radar (KAREN) the comparison area with the smallest mean difference
is the one with 10 nearest points when including all tracks, when only including the mid-
track it is the Doppler-limited. The best correlation is again found to be when using the
pulse-limited comparison area, which also has the lowest p-value.
In general it is found that the nearest neighbours comparison areas entail low correlations,
where the pulse- and Doppler-limited show some correlation when including all tracks, and
low correlations when only including the mid-track.
We proceed with the results for the Doppler-limited footprint, as this is the actual footprint
of CryoSat-2 when operating in SAR mode, utilised over sea ice.
5.5
Individual tracks
In this section each of the five tracks will be further investigated, with the freeboard values
from the two instruments onboard the airborne campaign, hence the Altitude Laser Scan-
ner (ALS) and the Ka-band radar (KAREN). As mentioned earlier Karen only measured
along the first four tracks, why only these are shown for that section.
5.5.1
ALS
Firstly, this is done for the ALS observations, to provide a general idea of how the tracks
may differ, a box plot is made for the measurements from each of the tracks, this can be
seen in figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Box plot of all the freeboard values from ALS from April 16 2017 for each of the five
tracks.
Track
1
2
3
4
5
Median
0.9280
0.9770
0.9920
0.9850
1.0040
It is found that the median for all five tracks lies around 1 metre. Generally, not that much
difference is seen between the tracks. However, track 1 (the mid-track) is seen to be the
one with the most outliers to the lower side and also has the smallest median. It is also
noticed that the lower threshold for the outliers is around zero, with the outliers probably
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
31
==PAGE:40==
being observations of leads.
The results found for ALS when using the Doppler-limited comparison area but only in-
cluding one track at a time can be seen in figure 5.12, together with the freeboards from
CryoSat-2.
Figure 5.12: Averages of the ALS freeboard values from April 16 2017 within the Doppler-limited
footprint for each track individually, together with the ones from CryoSat-2 displayed with the thicker
blue line. The ovals show areas where the five tracks show similar values.
It is seen that it is not necessarily track 1 (the mid-track) that is closest or looks most
like the freeboards from CryoSat-2, neither is it the same track which is closest to the
CryoSat-2 values through out the extend of the track.
It is noticed that when all five tracks show similar values, the difference between the
CryoSat-2 values and the ALS values are smaller, indicating that the variability across the
track impacts the comparisons.
A special case is found around the latitudes just above 84.6, where perhaps the ALS
tracks agree the most, here the shape of the CryoSat-2 curve seems to also somewhat
follow the same curve as the ALS.
32
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:41==
5.5.2
KAREN
The same investigations as just done for ALS is now done for the Ka-band radar (KAREN).
Firstly, a box plot is made for each of the tracks separately, here only four tracks as track
five was not measured, this can be seen in figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: Box plot of all the freeboard values from KAREN for April 16 2017 for each of the
four out of five tracks available for KAREN.
Track
1
2
3
4
Median
0.8910
0.9120
0.9110
0.9160
Again the median is found to be very similar for all four tracks. The main difference no-
ticed when exploring these box plots, is that track four has much larger negative outliers
than the other tracks. In general more negative outliers is found for KAREN than for the
ALS freeboards. Again the low values may originate from leads, but some of these are
also caused by a large roll angle (see figure A.14 in appendix A.8), seemingly occurring
most over the flight of the fourth track.
The results found for each track individually, for the average of the KAREN measurements
inside the Doppler-limited footprint, is plotted and shown in figure 5.14.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.14: Averages of the KAREN freeboards from April 16 2017 within the Doppler-limited
footprint for the individual tracks (only four out of five for KAREN), as well as the values from
CryoSat-2 shown with the thicker blue line.
As for ALS, it is found that the CryoSat-2 freeboards is not continuously closest to one
track, and it does not seem as though it is closer overall to the values from track 1 (the
mid-track).
It is noticed that almost each of the CryoSat-2 freeboard values lie close to at least one
value from either of the four tracks.
5.6
Detailed comparison
As seen in section 5.3 some of the averaged airborne freeboard values within the Doppler-
footprint, are found to be close to the CryoSat-2 values, whereas for other areas a larger
distance between the values are seen. To investigate what may cause this difference, two
sections (I and II) where the values are close and two (III and IV) where they are further
apart are extracted and further explored.
Firstly, the freeboard values are plotted together with the swath from the ALS over the
same area, as well as the images taken closest to the locations of each of the observa-
tions. This can be seen for the two sections with similar freeboard values in figure 5.15.
Note that some images was found to be the closest to multiple of the observations, but
each image is only shown once, this means that for some of the sections there might be
fewer images than observations.
34
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.15: Two of the sections where the freeboard values from CryoSat-2 are close to the
Doppler-limited mean of the airborne data. The top plot shows the freeboard values, the middle
depicts the ALS swath over the area, and the bottom show the images closest to the CryoSat-2
coordinates. These areas seemingly consist of rather smooth surfaces.
It is seen from the swath of both sections that they mostly contain freeboard values around
1 metres, with very few low values, and some areas with higher values.
From the images it can be deducted that the areas seem to consist of sea ice with a rather
smooth surface. This is especially profound in section I, where the swath also seems to
show less variance in the freeboards.
The same type of plot is conducted for the sections with a larger discrepancy in freeboards,
this can be seen in figure 5.16.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.16: Two of the areas where the freeboard values from CryoSat-2 disagrees with the
Doppler-limited mean of the airborne freeboard values. On the top the freeboard values are dis-
played, in the middle the airborne ALS swath from the same latitudes is show, and the bottom
show the images closest to the CryoSat-2 coordinates. Generally, for these sections, the surface
is found to be rougher, than for the areas where the freeboard values from CryoSat-2 and the
airborne campaign are closer.
From the swaths of these areas it is noticeable that there is more variance in the free-
boards compared to that found for the close-sections. For these sections it can be seen
that instead of mainly consisting of freeboards around 1 metres there is also found many
areas with higher and lower values.
From the images it is seen that the surface contains leads and looks to be more rough
than for the close-sections. The roughness is quantified later in this section, where the
standard deviations of the freeboards within the footprint are shown.
The potential difference in surfaces is further explored by inspection of the waveforms for
each of the observations in all four of the sections, these can be seen below in figure 5.17.
36
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.17: The waveforms from CryoSat-2 from the chosen sections. The two top rows are of
the two sections (I and II) where the CryoSat-2 and the average of the airborne freeboards within
the Doppler-limited footprint lie close, and the two bottom rows are from the sections (III and IV)
where a greater gap is seen between the values.
Noticeable the two top rows (I and II) depicting the waveforms for the close-sections all
consist of rather similar waveforms, with a rather steep leading edge, and a relatively slow
trailing off, with only one peak.
For the off-sections numerous of the waveforms show multiple peaks, this is especially
found for section III.
In general differences between the waveforms for sections I-II and the sections III-IV are
found, the main difference is found in the trailing edge, where sections I and II all have
very similar trailing edges, whereas the ones for sections III and IV either show multiple
peaks or very fast trailing off.
Histograms of the freeboard values in the airborne ALS swaths, for each of the four sec-
tions, are found, these can be seen in figure 5.18.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.18: The histograms of the ALS freeboard values in selected sites. With the two top rows
depicting where the CryoSat-2 and the average of the airborne freeboards, within the Doppler-
limited footprint, lie close, and the two bottoms where they differ more.
Once again it is found that there is a greater variance in sections III and IV, containing
more values in the tails of the histograms. For all four sections it is seen that the peak
of the distributions is close to 1 metre. However, for the sections III and IV the peak is
located at a bit lower freeboards.
Lastly, to expand the analysis of the surface roughness dependency to the full section of
investigation, the standard deviation of the airborne freeboard values within the footprints
are found. A plot of the computed freeboards and the standard deviations of the footprint,
along with the pulse peakiness and the stack standard deviations, given by CryoSat-2,
are plotted. This can be seen in figure 5.19.
38
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.19: Top graph: the freeboard value from CryoSat-2 (blue) along with averages of the
ALS (red) and KAREN (yellow) freeboards within then Doppler-limited footprint. Middle graph: the
standard deviations of the airborne values within the Doppler-limited footprint. Bottom graph: the
pulse peakiness (blue) and stack standard deviations (red) provided as variables in the Baseline
D product. The vertical dashed lines represent examples of; red = when sd for FB is high and the
freeboard difference is large, green = when sd for FB is low and the freeboard difference is small,
blue = expected lead.
A connection between the difference of the freeboards and the standard deviation within
the footprint is found. In the areas with larger standard deviations the difference is mostly
found also to be greater, this can be seen e.g. at the latitude right above 84.6 and just
below 84.7 degrees (vertical red dashed lines). The values between these two latitudes
are found to be relatively close together, and here the standard deviations is also found
to be lower. One example really showing this is displayed with the vertical green dashed
line.
Where the pulse peakiness is high and the stacked standard deviation is low, the reflected
surface is expected to be a lead, this is seen for latitudes between 84.75 and 84.8 and
between 84.85 and 84.9 (vertical blue dashed lines). Here, it is found that the standard
deviation is high, and the difference in freeboards are also found to be larger. To further
explore the relationship between the differences in freeboards and the standard deviations
for the footprints, the correlations between them are found, this can be seen in table 5.1
ALS
KAREN
Correlation
0.5122 ± 0.0910
0.4913 ± 0.1039
P-value
0.0000
0.0000
Table 5.1: Correlations of the difference in freeboards from CryoSat-2 and the airborne instru-
ments and the standard deviations of the values found within the footprint.
A positive correlation is found, again indicating that the roughness of the surface, found
within the footprint, is a contributor to the somewhere larger differences in freeboards.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
39
==PAGE:48==
5.7
Conditions
All of the data used in this project is from either March or April of 2017, for a better under-
standing of the conditions under which the data was collected, different variables for this
year as well as for the individual flights has been investigated.
The sea ice extent was relatively low in 2017, due to rather high temperatures in the au-
tumn of 2016 and the winter of 2016-2017 [40, 41]. A table depicting how the sea ice
extent for each month in relation to the same month for other years can be found in ap-
pendix A.6. However, it is found that this should not interfere with the area of these flight
tracks, as it is seen that this area should be covered by sea ice [42].
The warmer ending of 2016 and beginning of 2017 also resulted in the sea ice being thin
[40], which together with the low sea ice extent means that the sea ice volume was also
low [43].
The area of all the flights is north of Greenland, where the ice is some of the thickest ice
in the Arctic Ocean, and seemingly not that affected by this [44].
It is further found in [45, 46] that the modal sea ice thickness close to the track of April 16
was 2.15 m with a mean sea ice thickness of 3.41 m.
The mean temperatures from the CARRA product over the track from April 16 are plotted
from 2015 to 2019, as shown in figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20: Daily mean temperatures for the entire track from April 16. The temperatures for
2017 (the year of the flight) is displayed with the thicker blue line.
It is found that the temperatures was high in 2017 compared to the adjacent years, but still
very much below freezing. It is generally the year with the highest temperatures between
these years, when considering the months from January to April, although for some days
or shorter periods other years show higher temperatures than those from 2017.
Also the precipitation along the track is plotted, this is done with the precipitation being
displayed as the cumulative amount since January 1st of the given year of the mean
precipitation over the track. This can be seen in figure 5.21.
40
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.21: The mean cumulated precipitation from the 1st of January over the track from April
16. This is shown for the years 2015 to 2019, with the one for 2017 (the year of the flight) shown
in the thicker blue line. The estimated snow depth if melt, wind and other factors are ignored can
be seen on the right y-axis (snow density assumed to be 400 kg/m3, as given in baseline D).
For this it is found that in some periods the cumulated precipitation is higher for 2017 than
for the remaining years, but for the most part, it seems to lie relatively in the middle of the
other years. Hence, only investigating these years, the precipitation seems to be rather
normal.
Lastly, the drift found from the overflights of the same track, with both measurements
being from the ALS, is determined. One value is found for each of the four flights, these
are displayed along with the temperatures of the flight tracks, in table 5.2.
For April 13 the CARRA domain does not cover the track, why the temperatures are not
actually from that track, but rather more than 80 km away.
Parts of the tracks from March 24 and 27 are also outside the CARRA domain, but most
of it is within the domain, only the part covered by the domain is used when determining
the temperature parameters for these days.
Day
Drift
Mean time diff.
between airborne and CS2
Mean temp. of day
Max temp. (Jan-Apr)
16 Apr. 2017
9m/hr
20.7 min
−11.9◦
−8◦
24 Mar. 2017
569m/hr
47.6 min
−27.4◦
−8.6◦
27 Mar. 2017
327.5m/hr
18.9 min
−24.8◦
−7.5◦
13 Apr. 2017
8.7m/hr
558 min
−22.5◦
−12◦
Table 5.2: Different conditions connected to each of the flights. Note that the temperatures from
April 13 does not cover the actual track, but are the closest values in the CARRA domain.
It is found that the drift is slow for April 16 and 13, but for April 13 the time difference
between the airborne and the CryoSat-2 passing is rather large, where it is much smaller
for the other three flights.
The temperatures of the days are found to be under −20◦for all other flights than that
from April 16. For all of the tracks the highest temperature obtained over the track is seen
seen to be −7.5◦.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
41
==PAGE:50==
5.7.1
Snow depths
The snow depths are explored primarily for March 24 2017, as the flight of that day is also
covered by Operation IceBridge (OIB), carrying a snow radar. Expected differences in the
snow depths between March and April is also investigated.
Warren, CARRA and Operation IceBridge - March 24
For March 24 Three snow depth products are investigated, this being the Warren climatol-
ogy contained in the CryoSat-2 level 2 baseline D product, the CARRA re-analysed snow
depths and the snow depths from the snow radar onboard Operation IceBridge.
The CARRA domain only covers the latitude up until 86 degrees North, why the snow
values within this are the ones being investigated.
The snow depths from each of the products along the track flown on March 24 with lati-
tudes below 86 degrees, are found and plotted, this can be seen in figure 5.22.
From the Warren product only five different snow depths are found along the track, from 19
different data points. The CARRA product has 62 points connected to the measurements
along the track with 62 different values. Lastly, the values from Operation IceBridge has
323 unique snow depths from 363 different data points along the track.
Figure 5.22: The snow depths of March 24 from Warren, CARRA and Operation IceBridge (OIB)
and the trend of OIB, along the track flown on March 24, for the part within the CARRA domain
(latitudes below 86 degrees).
It is seen that not only does the Warren climatology not contain that many different data
points, the five depths are also almost identical, why it looks to be almost constant along
the track. The CARRA values show a slope with the snow depths decreasing when mov-
ing towards the north. For Operation IceBridge it is found that the depths vary a lot more,
with values spanning from around zero to around 0.8 metres with a mean of around 0.3
metres. The purple curve displaying the moving average of the IceBridge values, show a
slight decrease when moving north, as also found in the CARRA product. However, the
slope seems to be less steep.
The snow depths from each product are now plotted together with the differences be-
tween the averages of the ALS freeboards and the CryoSat-2 freeboards corrected for
propagation delay but without added snow depths, this can be seen in figure 5.23. This
42
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:51==
is done as this difference should correspond to the snow depth, if CryoSat-2 is reflected
at the snow/ice interface, and if the influence of other factors is ignored.
The figure shows the difference from both forth (left) and back (right) the track, where
the CryoSat-2 values are the same for both directions but the airborne are measured
separately.
Figure 5.23: The blue graphs show the snow depth values from Warren, CARRA and Operation
IceBridge (OIB), the red graphs show the difference in freeboards between the mean of the ALS
freeboards within the Doppler-limited footprint and CryoSat-2 without added snow but corrected
for propagation delay. This is shown for both directions forth (left) and back (right).
For the most part for both the forth and back track the differences in the averages of the
ALS freeboards and the CryoSat-2 freeboards are found to be positive, as expected, as
it should correspond to the snow depth.
The snow depths from both Warren and CARRA seemingly fits better with the back track,
whereas the differences in freeboards for the forth track are found overall to be smaller
than the snow depths. The slight slope found in the CARRA snow depths looks to per-
haps be a better estimate, seen as the more northern values seems to be closer to the
differences, than what is found with Warren.
For IceBridge the snow values varies quite a lot as these are actual measurements, rather
than a model, the larger variance is to be expected. For the most part the snow values
are seemingly of the same magnitude as the differences. However, due to the variance
it is harder to distinguish how well the two fits together.
Lastly, to further examine the influence of the snow depth products, the difference between
the CryoSat-2 values with the snow depths and the ALS airborne freeboard values are
found, as well as the correlation between the two results, this can be seen in table 5.3.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
43
==PAGE:52==
Snow product
Warren
CARRA
OIB
forth
back
forth
back
forth
back
∆FB, mean
-0.1248m
-0.0941m
0.1789
0.2105m
0.0074m
0.0320m
∆FB, median
-0.1640m
-0.1290m
0.1994m
0.2022m
-0.0053m
0.0135m
∆FB, std
0.2598m
0.2538m
0.3662m
0.3509m
0.3274m
0.3274m
Correlation
0.0248 ± 0.0285
0.1405 ± 0.0715
-0.0077 ± 0.0197
0.1244 ± 0.0835
0.1121 ± 0.0724
0.1559 ± 0.0900
p-value
0.4959
0.0001
0.8335
0.0006
0.0075
0.0002
Table 5.3:
The difference between the CryoSat-2 with added snow and propagation delay and
the airborne ALS freeboard values for March 24 with each of the snow depth products, as well as
the correlation and p-value for these.
It is found that the largest difference is present when using the snow depths from the
Warren climatology and the smallest is found when using IceBridge values. However The
differences computed with Warren has the lowest standard deviation.
In general it is seen that the highest correlation is found for the flight back. However, none
of the correlations are very high, the best one is seen to be 0.2015 for the IceBridge snow
for the flight back, with the next best being for Warren also for the flight back.
5.7.2
CARRA snow depths April vs. March
To help determine if the results found for March 24 can be transferred to April 16, where
the five track flight was flown, the values from the CARRA product along this track is found
for both days, and plotted together, this can be seen in figure 5.24.
Figure 5.24: CARRA snow depths from April 16 (blue) and March 24 (red) along the track from
April 16, showing a difference off around 2.7 cm.
It is seen that the snow depth from the two separate days follow the same pattern with an
almost constant offset of around 2.7 cm. Where the values from April 16 are the highest,
implying that snowfall corresponding to this offset has occurred within the period between
the two.
44
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:53==
5.8
Geometry - preferential sampling
As mentioned earlier off-nadir reflections entails height errors, as all elevations are deter-
mined based on the assumption that the signal is received from nadir.
The possible height errors caused by preferential sampling, are found as described in
section 4.2.5, this is done for distances from nadir, going from zero to the edge of the
footprint (825m). The results of this can be seen in figure 5.25, where the height error
is plotted as a function of the distance from nadir. Here the elevation over the WGS84
reference ellipsoid has been chosen to be 20.5 m, corresponding to a freeboard value
of around 0.5 m, as the MSS in this area is around 20 m above the WGS84 reference
ellipsoid, the choice of elevation is however of insignificant influence.
Figure 5.25: The possible height error caused by the geometry of the CryoSat-2 footprint (with an
elevation of 20.5 m above WGS84) as a function of the distance from nadir.
It is found that the error induced by receiving the reflected signal off-nadir increases with
the distance from nadir, as expected. The maximum possible height error caused by
preferential sampling is therefore also found at the edge of the footprint at around 46 cm.
Hence, the influence of mainly leads being detected from other directions is 46 cm or
lower.
As it is probably rarely the case, that a lead is only present right at the edge of the foot-
print, the error is probably for the most part lower than the 46 cm.
To further explore this phenomena the CryoSat-2 freeboard values are projected on to the
middle of the most eastern, and most western airborne tracks, with the mid-values from
file: 1339_5x5_2.frb. This means that the height error for the distance from nadir to the
middle of the outer tracks, is added to the CryoSat-2 values.
The shifted CryoSat-2 values are shown together with the freeboard values from the air-
borne laser scanner at the middle of the tracks, this can be seen in figure 5.26.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.26: The ALS freeboard values from the middle of the top, east, and west track along with
the CryoSat-2 values shifted to each of the tracks.
It is found that for the mid-track, where the CryoSat-2 values are the original ones, the
CryoSat-2 freeboards generally consist of lower values than those from the ALS. Whereas,
for the east and west track, with the shifted CryoSat-2 values they are found to be pre-
dominantly higher than the ALS values.
For all three tracks there are some areas where the freeboards fits rather good, for the
mid-track it is found that the area which also matched the best when using the Doppler-
limited comparison area (84.6 - 84.65 N), is found to fit quite well.
It is expected that the off-nadir reflections should predominantly originate from leads, why
if low elevations is seen to coincide for the outer tracks, it could be due to this preferential
sampling. A point fulfilling this is seen in the west track between the latitudes 84.9 and
84.95 degrees, here it is also found that the values does not fit well for the mid-track, con-
sisting of lower values than ALS. This section is therefore plotted alone, with the swath of
the same latitudes, this can be found in figure 5.27.
Figure 5.27: Zoom in on expected preferential sampling from near the middle of the west track
(between the dashed lines). On the top plot the ALS values from the middle of the west track,
with the shifted CryoSat-2 values. The bottom plot shows the ALS swath, with indications of the
CryoSat-2 nadir, and the middle of the west track.
46
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:55==
As seen the area around latitude 84.92 degrees is fitting rather well with the middle of the
west track after shifting the CryoSat-2 values to this track. Investigating the ALS swath,
it is found that there could be a lead present at this area, where the remaining values in
the footprint, does not resemblance leads. Hence, this could be an example of prefer-
ential sampling caused by the lead, located predominantly in the bottom track, why the
CryoSat-2 values fit after shifting.
5.9
Reduced resolution
To be able to better explore how the correlation is affected by covering the entire footprint
instead of just the mid-track, the resolution has been reduced, and the correlation of the
resulting variables is found. This has been investigated for all flights from April 16, March
24, March 27, and April 13. The preliminary results for the other days can be found in
appendix A.4.
The comparisons are only for CryoSat-2 and the airborne laser scanner, and only for the
Doppler-limited footprint, except for April 13. At this day the track did not match com-
pletely, and the distance between the two are larger than the CryoSat-2 footprint, why
instead the means are computed of all airborne values projected to the closest CryoSat-2
point.
Reducing the resolution is done by using the moving average of x points, hence every
point is included in multiple of the means, this way the amount of data points after reducing
the resolution is the same as the original minus (x-1).
To evaluate the results, a scatter plot of the CryoSat-2 and ALS values is made, depicting
each point after reducing the resolution, this is shown in figure 5.28
Figure 5.28: Scatter plot of the averaged ALS freeboards and the CryoSat-2 freeboards, for res-
olutions ≈25 km (82 points), ≈10 km (33 points), and ≈1 km (3 points).
It is found that only the values with all tracks from April 16 depicts a relationship when the
mean is taken over sections of 1 km, this also show the most profound relationship for
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
47
==PAGE:56==
the other resolutions, almost following the same line for a resolution of both 10 km and 25
km. When only including the mid-track the relationship is not as profound, it might seem
to follow a line for the 10 km resolution. Where for the 25 km, the points are distributed in
almost a zigzag pattern, with the two ends showing negative correlation, and the middle
almost following what could be the same line as the one found when including all tracks.
For March 24, March 27, and April 13 forth the points are seen to be rather spread out,
indicating no or little correlation. For April 13 back the lower resolution products could
possibly be following a line which is almost vertical.
Note, that fewer points are present for the comparisons of April 16, due to shorter over-
flights.
The computed correlations and the p-values can be found in table 5.4.
Resolution
Original (305m)
25 km
10 km
1 km
April 16, all tracks
Correlation
0.3249 ± 0.0776
0.8553 ± 0.0170
0.8349 ± 0.0517
0.4521 ± 0.0794
p-value
0.0000
1
0.0000
0.0000
April 16, mid-track
Correlation
-0.0081 ± 0.0146
-0.5023 ± 0.0150
0.2730 ± 0.0272
0.0877 ± 0.0392
p-value
0.9274
0.0000
0.0024
0.2945
March 24, forth
Correlation
0.0248 ± 0.0285
-0.1604 ± 0.0143
0.0882 ± 0.0162
0.0887 ± 0.0420
p-value
0.4959
0.0000
0.0134
0.0119
March 24, back
Correlation
0.1405 ± 0.0715
-0.3588 ± 0.0279
-0.1341 ± 0.0252
0.1912 ± 0.0658
p-value
0.0001
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
March 27
Correlation
0.0675 ± 0.0504
0.2936 ± 0.0316
0.3817 ± 0.0520
0.1139 ± 0.0524
p-value
0.0548
0.0000
0.0000
0.0009
April 13, forth
Correlation
0.0811 ± 0.0487
0.2771 ± 0.0249
0.2380 ± 0.0330
0.1150 ± 0.0467
p-value
0.0524
0.0000
0.0000
0.0045
April 13, back
Correlation
0.0679 ± 0.0457
0.4835 ± 0.0268
0.2759 ± 0.0303
0.1012 ± 0.0455
p-value
0.1583
0.0000
0.0000
0.0300
Table 5.4: Correlation from taking the moving average of every 82 (≈25 km), 33 (≈10 km), and 3
(≈1 km) points respectively.
The correlation is generally found to increase when reducing the resolution, with a few
exceptions such as March 24. It is still found that the correlation is best when having all
five tracks, covering the entire width of the footprint, instead of just the mid-track.
Only April 13 with the single track and April 16 when including all tracks show a continu-
ing increase when reducing the resolution, which where also the ones found depicting a
relationship in figure 5.28.
Noticeable, the correlation for April 16 when only including the mid-track for sections of
25 km, shows some correlation, but it is found to be negative. All in all, it is found once
again that covering the entire CryoSat-2 footprint, increases the correlation, between the
freeboards from CryoSat-2 and the average of the ALS freeboard within the footprint.
48
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:57==
5.10
Other CryoSat-2 data products
In this section results computed using the Doppler-limited footprint comparison area with
other CryoSat-2 data products is investigated.
The other products being from the Alfred Wegener institute from their Climate Change
Initiative (CCI) project and from ESA from the CryoTEMPO project.
Firstly, the values from the different products are plotted together, this can be seen in
figure 5.29.
Figure 5.29: The freeboard values from the three different CryoSat-2 data products. ESA - base-
line D (blue), AWI - Climate Change Initiative project (red), and ESA CryoTEMPO (yellow).
It is seen that over all the AWI and the CryoTEMPO products agree the most, the Baseline
D is in some areas also close to the others, where for other areas there is a larger dis-
crepancy. In the areas with greater differences the Baseline D values are primarily found
to be the highest.
The effect of using one of these products instead of the ESA - Baseline D is investigated,
by determining the correlation between the products, and the averages of the measure-
ments from both the airborne laser scanner and the Ka-band radar within the Doppler-
limited footprint.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
49
==PAGE:58==
ESA, Baseline D
(130 points)
AWI, CCI
(130 points)
ESA, CryoTEMPO
(102 points)
ALS
∆FB, mean
0.3533m
0.4138m
0.4164m
∆FB, median
0.3437m
0.4187m
0.4258m
∆FB, std
0.1660m
0.1924m
0.1955m
Correlation
0.3249 ± 0.0776
0.3712 ± 0.0924
0.4056 ± 0.0914
P-value
0.0002
0.0000
0.0000
KAREN
∆FB, mean
0.2652m
0.3258m
0.3308m
∆FB, median
0.2543m
0.3233m
0.3405m
∆FB, std
0.1843m
0.2105m
0.2120m
Correlation
0.2496±0.0742
0.2764 ± 0.0870
0.2946 ± 0.0870
P-value
0.0042
0.0015
0.0027
It is found that a slightly higher correlation is found for the other two products, with the
ESA CryoTEMPO product entailing the highest correlation. However, this product is also
seen to have fewer points, possibly affecting the correlation. The differences between the
CryoSat-2 values and the averaged airborne values are seen to be smallest for Baseline
D. However, the two other products are provided as freeboard values, hence the sea sur-
face height anomaly (SSHA) is also subtracted from the elevations, why these freeboards
should generally be a bit lower as also seen in figure 5.29.
50
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion
In this section factors influencing the validation comparisons are discussed, first and fore-
most in respect to whether the validation is improved by incorporating more airborne tracks
to cover the full width of the CryoSat-2 footprint, as well as conditions under which the
measurements where obtained.
It is also discussed how the difference, in the way the instruments acquire the measure-
ments, may cause inconsistency in how comparable the observations may be.
This is done based on the results as shown in section 5.
6.1
Comparisons
It is generally found that the correlation when including all five tracks is higher than when
only including the mid-track. Indicating that the incorporation of multiple tracks, covering
the across-track width, has a positive influence for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice mea-
surements.
One thing to note is that the best correlation is found for the Pulse-limited footprint, this
is valid both for comparisons with the ALS and the Ka-band radar. This is unexpected
as CryoSat-2 for this part of its track operates in SAR mode, why the actual footprint of
CryoSat-2 is in fact Doppler-limited.
A thought could be that the correlation increases the more airborne points are included
when computing the average. However, this would mean that the comparison area where
all the airborne values are projected onto the nearest CryoSat-2 measurement should also
have a higher correlation than for the Doppler-limited, especially for ALS, as the five tracks
covers more than the footprint. This is not found to be the case, why this seemingly does
not explain the phenomena.
Another reason could be, that the pulse-limited footprint results in a smoother curve re-
ducing the variability, and in a way, entails a reduction of the resolution of the airborne
measurements. This could increase the correlation as it avoids, if not all then most of the
outliers, which could cause lower correlations.
Hence, although the correlations are highest for the pulse-limited footprint, the Doppler-
limited comparison area is still thought to be the most suitable, and is therefore the primary
comparison area.
Besides the increase in correlation gained by covering the full across-track width, we also
gain knowledge of the entire footprint in regards to the structures of the surface, this being
both the roughness and potential observations of off-nadir leads. Hence, this may help
understand the found discrepancies between the CryoSat-2 data and the airborne data,
this is discussed further in section 6.2.
6.1.1
ALS and KAREN
It is found that the correlation between CryoSat-2 and ALS is better than for CryoSat-2
and KAREN. However, the difference between the compared values is smaller for KAREN
than for ALS.
The lower correlation for KAREN might be explained by the fact that it does not cover the
entire footprint of CryoSat-2, hence this may further indicate the positive effect gained by
covering the entire footprint. Furthermore, KAREN has a worse spatial resolution com-
pared to that of the ALS, which again possibly could contribute to the worse correlation,
as this will also entail that the averaged KAREN values may be more unstable.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
51
==PAGE:60==
For the smaller freeboard difference, it is noted that the CryoSat-2 values are lower than
the airborne ones, where KAREN values again are found to be lower than those from the
ALS, see section 5.5. It was also found that each of the KAREN tracks contained more
low outliers, with multiple even being negative, contributing to the lower means.
The very low values can be caused by the roll angle being high, which can lead to blurring
of the waveforms [2]. In figure A.14 in appendix A.8 it is shown that all of the very low
values are in fact observed when the absolute roll angle is higher than 1.5◦, hence the low
values are not related to the surface. Furthermore, KAREN is a SAR radar, why the values
are found as an average of the superimposed bursts, reducing noise and thereby possi-
bly overlooking some of the extremes, both high and low. The ALS tracks are found to
contain mostly high outliers, probably caused by structures such as ridges, again causing
the averaged ALS values to be higher.
In figure 3.2, showing all the freeboards of the overflight, a smaller variance is found for
KAREN than for ALS, and again the smallest variance is found for the CryoSat-2 values.
This may both be due to the way of operating for SAR, but it might also be connected
to the spatial resolution of the products, where the ALS spatial resolution is higher than
the one for KAREN, while both airborne instruments have much higher spatial resolutions
than CryoSat-2. This difference was also seen for the airborne values used for the single
closest point comparison, where the values are different for the two airborne instruments,
but by including 10 points the averages where found to match much better.
Another factor, possibly causing differences, is how the elevations are derived, for this
different retrackers are used. The elevations are easier to derive for ALS, where it is de-
termined from the maximum peak, again resulting in less uncertainty, where the retracking
of both KAREN and CryoSat-2 is more extensive and may cause further uncertainty.
6.1.2
Reduced resolution
When reducing the resolution it is found that the correlation when including all five tracks
from April 16 gets to be very high, again confirming that this approach of covering the
entire footprint, makes for better validations. This is further supported as the correlation,
when only including the mid-track, does not show the same tendency, and for the mean
over 25 km sections the correlation even becomes negative. For the 10 km section av-
erages it is seen in the scatter plots that it could almost follow the same line as the one
found when including all tracks, hence it might be possible to find correlation when only
including one track perhaps for even larger sections of means. In [3] it is found that the
correlation does increase for a single-track flight when comparing averages over sections
of 50 km, resulting in correlations comparable to the ones found when including all five
tracks before reducing the resolution.
Noticeable, the correlation for e.g. April the 13th is found to be somewhat high, when
reducing the resolution sufficiently. However, for this flight the tracks of the airborne and
CryoSat-2 did not even overlap, although it is not impossible that the ice may have drifted
in the time gap, in a manor resulting in the same ice being observed for both the airborne
measurements and the CryoSat-2 measurements, it is highly unlikely.
This may emphasise a problem when reducing the resolution, it may possibly result in
too high correlations. But as the correlation does not become nearly as high as when
including all five tracks it is still thought that the approach with five parallel tracks does
significantly increase the correlation.
For the two days in March the correlations are not found to be very high, investigating the
52
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:61==
scatter plots no relationship is found either, as the points seem to be randomly distributed.
These data sets being the worst correlated is probably due to the higher drift speeds found
for these tracks, entailing the ice to move between the observations.
Comparing the means over larger sections improves the correlation, why long overflights
are preferable, but as seen covering the full-footprint, improves the correlation even with-
out reducing the resolution, and improves it even further when reduced. Hence, it is
found to be even more beneficial to cover the entire across-track width than flying long
overflights.
6.2
Discrepancies
For some areas along the track a discrepancy is found between the airborne values and
the CryoSat-2 values, after adding the Warren snow depths and the propagation delay
through the snow. These differences are found to have magnitudes of up to around 80
cm. Some of it may just be due to the better spatial resolution of the airborne instruments,
leading to smaller structures being observed, this being for example ridges and other
structures on the surface, causing for higher elevations to be observed, which may be
uncaught by the lower resolution of CryoSat-2.
Another connected primary source to these differences, is thought to be the roughness of
the sea ice surface, further discussed in section 6.2.1. However, other aspects may also
contribute to the difference, some of which will be explored further in this section.
It must also be noted, that even though the entire CryoSat-2 footprint is covered, the ice
that is observed may not be the same for the airborne and the CryoSat-2 data, as there is
a small time difference between the two observations, due to the sampling time difference.
Even with a low drift speed, as found for April 16, some movement is still occurring, and
also the ice itself could possibly deform during the time span.
6.2.1
Sea ice surface (roughness)
As investigated in section 5.6 the roughness of the surface may be a root factor to whether
values are close together or further apart, at least multiple indications of this has been
found throughout the investigation.
The connection is found to be, that the sections with larger discrepancies have rougher
surfaces than the ones with smaller differences.
First of, the visual inspection of the two sections depicting each scenario, finds that the
surface is relatively smooth for the two sections with small differences, whereas much
more structure is found for the other sections with larger differences. Even when further
looking into the close-sections, it is found that section I, shown in figure 5.15, is seem-
ingly more smooth than section II, where section I contain CryoSat-2 values closer to the
airborne values.
A reason for this is that the surface roughness impacts the waveform, sometimes causing
multiple peaks as well as spreading the energy over the received waveform. This is also
found for the waveforms for sections III and IV, as shown in figure 5.17, again supporting
the assumption that the roughness is a contributor to the discrepancies present for some
areas.
As the elevations are derived from the waveforms, the roughness also affects the retrieved
elevations and thereby also the freeboards. The mulitpeak waveforms may also interfere
with the retracking, possibly causing disturbance in the elevations.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
53
==PAGE:62==
Some of the difference occurring over the rougher surfaces may still be caused by the
different spatial resolutions, as seen in figure 5.18 both lower and higher values where
present in the sections showing larger differences. However, the greatest difference be-
tween the two types of areas is probably the number of observed values over 2 metres,
with a larger amount found for sections III and IV. Most of these high values are likely
observations of different structures on the surface, such as ridges. These may not be
observed directly by CryoSat-2, actually it is thought, that the return signal may be dom-
inated by the higher backscatter from the thinnest ice floe, leading to underestimation of
ridges [16].
With the better resolution of the airborne instruments it is most likely that these would
detect such structures.
Some indications supporting that this effect is causing some of the off-set are found. The
overall magnitudes of the freeboards seem to fit better when using the nearest neighbour
comparison area, where the chance that the airborne values are influenced by a ridge is
smaller, as only the one point is included in the comparison, and if present the value will
be much to large. By just including the 10 nearest points, instead of only the single clos-
est, it entails a larger difference, mainly seen in the median of the difference, which is less
sensitive to outliers. The found difference is of course large for some points, entailing the
larger standard deviation, due to less points being included in the mean making it more
unstable, and when a ridge is detected the influence will therefore be larger.
Again, the KAREN results does not show the same, the median difference is found to be
almost constant, independent of the comparison area, indicating that this problem should
mainly be considered for the ALS validations.
It is also seen in figure 5.12, that when the five tracks agrees, the airborne and the
CryoSat-2 values are closer, again indicating that when similar freeboards are found
across-track the discrepancies are smaller.
To further establish the relation, between the surface roughness and the difference, the
standard deviations of the airborne values within the footprint has been determined. This
allowed for the study of the four sections (two with close values and two with larger differ-
ences) to be extended to the entire track. What otherwise might have been considered
a coincidence, only applied to those four sections, is now a more valid assumption. This
is further established through the correlation of the standard deviations and the differ-
ences in freeboards, as this is found to have a fairly high correlation, definitely indicating
a relation between the two, as also seen in figure 5.19.
6.2.2
Geometry - preferential sampling
Another factor that might explain some of the off-set, is the geometry of the footprint
causing height errors in the case of preferential sampling. It is found that for a reflection
received from the very edge of the footprint, it can cause a height error of up to around
46 cm, which is more than the mean difference between the airborne and the CryoSat-2
values.
Some indications that this effect may at least have caused some of the deviations are
found. However, as not all the difference are found to be lower than the 46 cm it cannot
explain all of the discrepancies. Most of the height errors caused by preferential sampling
are also probably smaller than 46 cm, as it would not only occur at the edge of the footprint.
One example however, is found where the off-set might very well be explained by this
effect, this is shown in figure 5.27.
Expected off-nadir reflections like this one, are thought primarily to occur in the presence
of leads, as CryoSat-2 is rather sensitive to leads [16] or recently frozen flat ice, as the
54
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:63==
specular reflections may dominate the returned signal [21]. However, as seen in figure
5.26 these measurements are not detected as leads, when using threshold values of
above 40 for the pulse peakiness and and below 4 for the stacked standard deviation,
but for off-nadir reflections more of the power is scattered to other directions entailing a
lower pulse peakiness [47, 48]. The stack standard deviation (SSD) is also affected by
the incidence angle, as larger angles, connected with signals received further away from
nadir, causes the SSD to be larger [49]. Hence, even though not being initially detected
as a lead, it still could be one. After all, the shifted values are found to be close to zero,
as are the ALS values in the given area. From the swath it is also implied that the area
consist of low values, where none of the others within the footprint are seen to be quite as
low. Hence this being the only area of the footprint possibly connected to a lead or recently
frozen ice, why it is reasonable to assume that this might depict preferential sampling.
This example shown in figure 5.27, is a special case, where a lead is present in the outer
region of the footprint, without other as low values being detected closer to nadir.
For other cases it may also contain leads closer to nadir, entailing the induced height error
to be smaller, as it would probably detect the closest lead.
It is noted that in lack of leads or specular surfaces inside the footprint, hence if the surface
consist only of sea ice, preferential sampling should not occur as the freeboards should
be relatively close in magnitudes.
Thus, a height error should not be applied for all measurements, on the contrary, it is
probably only relevant for a few observations, and for some of these the error might not
even be very large.
6.2.3
Snow depths
The snow depth could be another cause for the differences, the values for the snow depths
are not very precise. This is a common problem for validation of sea ice, as it is definitely
a factor when the one data set is expected to be measured at the air/snow interface, and
the other expected to be at the snow/ice interface.
A problem that might be somewhat solved with the ESA satellite CRISTAL, planned to
launch in 2027, as it will be carrying a dual-frequency radar altimeter, hence it should be
able to measure both interfaces. [50]
In this study it is assumed that both airborne instruments measures the air/snow interface
and that CryoSat-2 measures the snow/ice interface. However, this might not be the case,
which also contributes to the uncertainty of how much of the actual snow depths needs
to be added to the CryoSat-2 values, in order to represent the same surface.
In [51] it is found, that this assumptions is most valid for first year ice, but is also very much
dependent on the snow temperature, with lower temperatures increasing the possibility
that Ku-band radars, such as CryoSat-2, measures closer to the snow/ice interface.
As will also be explored in section 6.3, the temperatures leading up to the measurements
has all been more or less below −8◦, indicating a chance that at least some of the CryoSat-
2 measurements could actually originate from the snow/ice interface.[51, 6]
Three sets of snow depths has been explored, with none of them being very certain.
The Warren snow depths provided in the baseline D product, are almost constant ranging
from 38.4-38.6 cm over the track. Hence it is almost the same as just adding an off-set,
why it should not interfere much with the correlation, compared to not adding the snow.
The other two shows more variance along the track. For CARRA it mainly consist of the
snow depth decreasing when moving North, support for this actually being a valid case,
can be seen in appendix A.6 figure A.13. Although not representing snow values from
2017, the decreasing of snow depths when moving North are depicted, how much it is
shown for the exact track is difficult to know exactly, without plotting the two together, but
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
55
==PAGE:64==
it does support the decreasing values.
The snow depths from Operation IceBridge also showed a small slope, with decreasing
snow depths when moving north, although not as predominantly. The main thing seen for
IceBridge is that the values vary quite a lot, which may be connected to the rather high
RMSE for this product found in [30] to be 17.5 cm for multi year ice environments.
Inspecting the differences between the CryoSat-2 values and the averages of the ALS
values inside the Doppler-limited footprint, for March 24, it is found that using the snow
depths from Operation IceBridge entails a very small mean difference, which is not nec-
essarily due to the value fitting very well.
As implied by the standard deviations of the difference, it may rather be due to the CryoSat-
2 values with added snow being located on either side of the ALS values, hence the mean
ends up close to zero.
For this study the Warren climatology snow depths are applied, although no clear results
where found that one product was better than the others.
The Warren values are based on in-situ measurements from 1954-1991, as the sea ice
has changed since then, it is not very certain, but rather mean values for the given years.
As for the CARRA values, they are described as rough estimates of the snow depths
[28]. None of these have a very good spatial resolution either, with the one for CARRA
being 2.5 km × 2.5 km, and the distance between each value in the Warren variable from
baseline D being around 6.12 km. The spatial resolution of Operation IceBridge is much
better with the distance between measurements being around 41 m. However, again the
RMSE is rather large, and this product is not available for April 16. Another disadvantage
of OIB is that, it has to be obtained simultaneously, to avoid observing different ice due to
drift and other effects. For March 24 a small time difference is present with a drift speed
that probably causes the ice observed by Operation IceBridge to be different from that
observed by the airborne laser scanner.
The uncertainty of each of the products, entails that they could almost all be agreeing,
and the correlations when adding each product to the track from March 24 are all rather
similar, implying that no conclusion to which product is better fitting, can be made based
on this data set. Hence, the Warren snow depths being almost constant, and again not
really contributing to the correlation, may be the least interfering choice. Also the Warren
values added are supported by the in-situ measurements as described in [45, 46], where
snow depths measured in an area close to the track from April 16, are found to have a
mean depth of 40 cm ± 16 cm, which is rather close to the approximately 39 cm found
for Warren.
The different snow depth products have been investigated for March 24 2017, as this
is the day with an overflight from Operation IceBridge. It is however assumed, that the
results can be transferred to April 16, as it has been found that, according to the CARRA
snow depths, only a difference of around 2.7 cm between the two days is present.
As mentioned the Warren snow depths adds mainly a mean, of how the snow might be,
to the freeboards. However for some regions there might occur thicker layers, e.g. accu-
mulated snow near ice ridges, this could contribute to the somewhere larger differences
in freeboards.
The effect of the snow depths, and especially varying snow depths, should be minimised
when reducing the resolution, as this will smooth out the actual snow observed by the
airborne measurements, so that areas of varying snow depths would disappear.
56
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:65==
The propagation delay through the snow is of course also affected by the choice of snow
product, but this should not contribute as much to the comparisons, as the values are
much smaller. For this however, the density of the snow also adds an uncertainty, as this
is a varying factor, here assumed to be constant at 400 kg/m3.
6.2.4
CryoSat-2 products
As seen in section 5.10 the correlation depends on which CryoSat-2 data product is used,
and as the values in the products are not the same, the difference between the CryoSat-2
freeboards and the averages of the airborne observations also depends on this.
The differences induced by the choice of data product originates from the differences in
the data processing, including the retracking method.
To try to avoid unintended deviations, only the measurements corresponding to those in-
vestigated for the Baseline D product, is included in the inspection of the other products.
It is found that the resolution increased when implementing either of the two other data
products. For the CryoTEMPO product, which resulted in the best correlation, the amount
of remaining points where fewer than the 130 points otherwise investigated, this could lead
to the correlation being higher than if all 130 points where to be included. As seen most
of the values from the CCI project from AWI and the values from CryoTEMPO are very
close, also derived with the same retracker, leading to the assumption that the correlation
of CryoTEMPO might have been around the same as for AWI, if all of the 130 points had
been available.
The difference between the CryoSat-2 values and the averages of the airborne values,
are found to be larger for either of the other products compared to Baseline D. This is
seen as the values where the products does not agree, baseline D is generally found
to be higher, probably due to the sea surface height anomaly being subtracted from the
other products. As the ALS values are not corrected for this either, this comparison is not
as valid.
For some of the values the three products are seen to match rather well, where for others
the deviations are much larger. Hence, the retracking might also be dependent on the
surface, which is sensible as the roughness affects the waveforms as discussed earlier.
The utilised retracker does affect the correlation. Why, if even more precise retrackers
are utilised/developed, perhaps being even better suited for the specific surface, the cor-
relation could probably be enhanced even further.
6.2.5
Collectively
For some areas the values are seen to be rather close together, indicating that the differ-
ences are likely to originate from differences in observation methods, rather than being
infiltrated data points. For the other areas showing larger discrepancy, it may be induced
by one or multiple of the factors described above, and possibly even further factors adding
to the uncertainty and thereby the discrepancy.
For the points with the largest differences it may be caused by all of the factors converging
to cause a larger effect, where for other areas maybe not all factors are causing an effect.
In section 5.8 figure 5.26 it is found that the area where the magnitudes fits best with the
mid-track, is the same that was found to fit best when implementing the Doppler-limited
comparison area for all tracks. This indicates that when the values fits it also matches with
the nadir observations, which should be when CryoSat-2 is not affected by preferential
sampling, and when no larger off-nadir structures are observed by the airborne instru-
ments, leading again the smoothness of the surface to be a key factor.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
57
==PAGE:66==
The magnitude of the effect of the structures, observed primarily by the airborne instru-
ments, is unknown. However, this may also suggest that it might be in the order of mag-
nitude of the found discrepancies.
6.3
Conditions
The conditions under which the validation flights are performed must be taken into ac-
count, as they can interfere with how much the observed surface(s) actually compare
with each other. This being both the possibility of the ice moving in the time difference
between the measurements but also how deep into the snow the signal penetrates.
The drift of the ice being one of the greater factors affecting the possibility of validation, as
high drift speeds will result in the ice moving between observations, hence not observing
the same ice. As it takes longer to fly five parallel tracks instead of just the one single-
track, this approach may enhance the effect of the drift speed. However, for validation
flights in general it is still most optimal for it to be performed under low drift speeds.
For the track of April 16 the drift speed was found to be rather low at around 9 m/hr, al-
lowing for the ice to move around 12 m in the time span of the airborne measurements,
this being a relatively small distance compared to the footprint size of CryoSat-2. Hence,
the effect of the drift is thought to be insignificant, but should be taken into consideration
in future flights.
The temperatures from the day of the flight and the months leading up to implies that
no snow should really have melted in the period leading up to the day of flight. This
increases the possibility that the CryoSat-2 data are obtained from the snow/ice interface,
as the more compact icy layers inside of the snow pack are less likely to be present.
Otherwise, when snow melt has occurred, the process of adding the snow depths would
be further complicated, as it would ad yet another uncertainty of how much of the snow
layer is to be added, for the airborne and the CryoSat-2 values to represent the same
surface.
The comparison between the conditions of year 2017 and the adjacent years of temper-
atures and precipitation over the track from April 16 2017, shows comparable values.
Indicating that the results, had this approach been tested for those other years, might
have had similar outcomes. Although other aspects might have interfered causing signif-
icantly different results, more test examples of flights with similar approaches would have
to be performed to be better able to transfer the results.
Note, that the comparisons for April 16 using all tracks and only the mid-track is based
on the same data obtained simultaneously, expect that the mid-track comparison only
includes the middle (nadir) track. Hence, the conditions, for these two comparisons, are
the same.
6.4
Data point selection
As explained in section 5.1.1 only the data points with a height error flag and 6 other data
points that are seemingly off compared to the remaining points are discarded. However,
in the freeboard values provided directly in baseline D more data points are being ignored.
The more included points, in this study, does make the correlations more reliable, while
also allowing points not only being characterised as sea ice to be included. This may
inflict with the correlation as some of the measurements not considered in the baseline D
freeboard estimations might be observations of e.g. off-nadir leads. The investigations of
58
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:67==
these may also be relevant, to achieve more understanding on how CryoSat-2 measures,
but it may also lead to a decreased correlation between the CryoSat-2 values and the
averages of the airborne values.
More exploration towards this could be performed, for a greater knowledge on how to
select which data points to perform the comparisons for.
6.5
Sea surface height anomaly (SSHA)
As mentioned in section 4.2.1 the elevations with only the mean sea surface (MSS) sub-
tracted are assumed to represent the freeboard for this area, normally the sea surface
height anomaly (SSHA) should also be corrected for.
For the areas investigated in this study it is however found, that the SSHA is of a very
small magnitude.
Some error could arise from the assumption, but the same approach has been used for
both the CryoSat-2 data and the airborne data, and as the two flights does almost match
temporally the SSHA should be approximately the same. Also, as the magnitude of the
SSHA provided in the baseline D product, and the lowest values along the ALS swath are
found to be close to zero. It is possible that by including the SSHA, which is an approxi-
mation, may lead to more deviations between the two.
For the variable provided in baseline D the mean RMS of the SSHA is larger than the
mean SSHA, with a mean RMS of 6.48 cm and mean SSHA of 5.50 cm along the track
of April 16, again indicating that the assumption may be reasonable. The ALS has an
accuracy of around 10 cm in the vertical direction [2], through derivation of the minimum
values for every 500000 ALS points, it is found that the mean estimated SSHA based on
this, inspired by [52], is around 3.8 cm, again showing a small value, and a value lower
than the accuracy.
Even if this assumption is wrong, elevations above the MSS, are still comparable, hence
it should not inflict with the correlations or the results in general.
6.5.1
Comparing to In-situ measurements
For reference, the freeboard values are converted to sea ice thicknesses and compared
to in-situ measurements from the same area, obtained at the same campaign.
The in-situ measurements being from an area close to the track from April 16, and as they
are observations from the same campaign the temporal aspect also matches.
The conversion is performed as described in appendix A.7. The computed sea ice thick-
nesses based on the freeboards from CryoSat-2 have a mean of 2.98 m ± 1.16 m and a
mode of 2.19 m which matches rather well with the in-situ measurements from the Cry-
oVEx2017 campaign having a mean of 3.41 m ± 1.16 m and a mode of 2.15 m.
This confirms that it might very well be valid to assume that the elevations referred to the
mean sea surface, in this case, corresponds closely to the freeboards.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
59
==PAGE:68==
6.6
Future work
Further work on this topic could be performed, some of which will be explored in this
section.
6.6.1
Correction factor for roughness
All these indications of the roughness disturbing the retrieved elevations, leads to the
question whether this can be corrected for.
It would be optimal if a correction factor could be estimated, and tested out.
For this further investigations into how CryoSat-2 measures when observing a rough sur-
face is needed, to achieve understanding on why this show larger differences than found
over smoother surfaces.
It could also be explored if the magnitude of the differences depends on how close to nadir
the more distinct features are located, this being both leads or structures such as ridges.
If the correction factor for the surface roughness were to be determined, preferably rather
precise, it would allow for this factor to be eliminated, making it possible to further investi-
gate other factors influencing the observations. As seen the more smooth surfaces show
smaller deviations between the CryoSat-2 values and the airborne value. Hence, if the
deviations are small, after having corrected for the roughness factor, it could also lead to
further knowledge on how deep into the snow layer CryoSat-2 actually penetrates.
6.6.2
More 5 track validation flights
For further investigation of this topic, it would be beneficial to have more examples of such
an approach of validation flights, as it would contribute with more knowledge, and enable
for a better supported hypothesis.
It would be especially interesting to test the approach for other areas and other times of
the year, to expand the study to cover a larger variety of conditions.
As mentioned earlier the effect of the drift speed might be even larger for this approach,
as the time used to fly multiple tracks to cover the across-track width, will lead to a greater
amount of time for displacement. Hence, this should be considered before utilising this
approach.
If a correction factor for the roughness of the surface was deducted from this one survey,
it would also have to be tested on some independent flights, again providing a reason for
more flights like this to be performed.
6.6.3
SARIn mode
If SARIn was implemented over sea ice areas, it would be possible to determine where in
the across-track direction the reflected signal originated from, hence avoiding the height
error caused by preferential sampling.
This would make it possible to only validate data points reflected within the mid-track.
Hence, possibly making the covering of the entire footprint redundant. However, to inves-
tigate how the measurements are affected by originating further away from nadir, it may
still be beneficial to perform some flights covering the entire width.
If this where to be implemented, the gained knowledge of the across-angle would also
make it possible to investigate more closely the area of which it is reflected from, mainly
when covering the full footprint.
As sea ice is relatively flat, it is not considered that off-nadir reflections should occur very
frequently, and it is definitely not thought to occur for areas fully covered by ice, why it may
be extensive to switch operation mode. However, the higher backscattering from specu-
lar surfaces such as leads and recently frozen ice, may interfere and even dominate the
return signal. For such cases it would be preferable to operate in SARIn mode.
60
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:69==
7
Conclusion
An investigation has been carried out for the flight of April 16 2017 from the ESA Cry-
oVEx/KAREN 2017 Arctic campaign. This flight consist of a swath of five parallel tracks
covering the full CryoSat-2 footprint as opposed to previous flights only consisting of a
single-track, covering only part of the across-track width.
For this measurements from both an airborne laser scanner (ALS) and a Ka-band radar
(KAREN) was utilised, both measurements are from the same flight. However, for the
KAREN data only four of the five tracks are available, and does not completely cover the
CryoSat-2 footprint.
It is found that the correlation between the CryoSat-2 data and the airborne data averaged
to the footprint of CryoSat-2 is significantly improved by covering the full footprint com-
pared to just including the mid-track. The correlation for the ALS when only including the
mid-track is found to be -0.0081 ± 0.0146, and to be 0.3249 ± 0.0776 when covering the
full footprint, for KAREN the correlations went from -0.0622 ± 0.0473 to 0.2496 ± 0.0742.
The comparison for the mid-track are made with the same observations as those for all of
the tracks, besides only including the middle (nadir) track. Hence, the conditions are the
same for both comparisons and does thereby not inflict with the results.
When computing the averages over larger sections and comparing these, done only for
ALS, the correlation was found to improve even further for the comparisons including all
the tracks. For sections of around 10 km the correlation was found to increase to 0.8349
± 0.0517 and for sections of around 25 km it was found to be 0.8553 ± 0.0170.
For some sections along the track the difference between the CryoSat-2 values and the
averaged airborne values are small, whereas other sections show larger discrepancies.
With differences reaching up to around 80 cm, with a mean difference of 35 cm for ALS
and 27 cm for KAREN.
The primary cause of the discrepancies are thought to be surface roughness, as the sec-
tions with similar values are found to be over smoother surfaces and the larger differences
are found over rougher surfaces.
This investigation is based primarily on four sections, with two showing similar values and
two with a larger difference, but is expanded to cover the full-track. This is done through
exploration of the standard deviation of each freeboard value and the magnitude of the
difference, with a correlation between the two of 0.5122 ± 0.0910 for ALS and 0.4913 ±
0.1039 for KAREN.
Further investigation into how the surface roughness affects the comparisons could be
performed, it would be especially beneficial if a correction factor for the roughness could
be estimated.
Other factors may also contribute to the discrepancies, the effect of each of the contribut-
ing factors is unknown and probably varies along the track. If the correction factor for the
roughness was determined the effect of these factors may be possible to further explore.
As the across-track width of CryoSat-2 is around 1.65 km the effect of detecting a reflec-
tion from off-nadir and then assume that it is received directly from nadir may cause height
errors up to a magnitude of 46 cm. This is however, thought to occur only if off-nadir leads
or other specular surfaces, such as recently frozen ice, are present within the footprint.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
61
==PAGE:70==
The height error is directly connected to the distance from nadir to where the received
signal is reflected from, hence this would primarily cause errors lower than the 46 cm.
This could be corrected for if CryoSat-2 operated in SARIn mode over sea ice, which it
does not currently.
Another factor impacting the results is the penetration depth of CryoSat-2 and the added
snow depths. As it is unknown how deep into the snow layer CryoSat-2 penetrates this
adds some uncertainty. For this study it has been assumed that the signal is reflected on
the snow/ice interface, where both of the airborne instruments are assumed to be reflected
at the air/snow interface, hence the snow depths and the propagation delay through this
layer has been added to the CryoSat-2 data. The snow depths are however only pro-
vided as estimates, hence also adding uncertainty, although in-situ measurements from
the same CryoVEx 2017 campaign, in an area close by, is found to correspond rather well
with the added snow from the Warren climatology.
One major factor that could lead to inconsistency is the drift speed, and the difference in
the time of the airborne flight and the CryoSat-2 passing. This is found to interfere with
the data for some of the other single-track flights, where the ice has moved so much that
it is not the same ice surface being observed.
The drift speed for the measurements from April 16 are though found to be rather low at
around 9 m/hr, why this factor should not really influence the results.
As it takes a longer time to fly this swath approach compared to a single track, the drift
speeds may be an even more crucial factor when performing parallel flight tracks for val-
idations, why this needs to be considered before planing further tests.
This analysis has only been performed on this one data set from April 16 2017, why even
though the results looks promising, it cannot be firmly concluded that this approach of
flight leads to better validations, although these results implies that it does. For more
certainty on the added benefits more similar flights should be conducted.
62
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
CryoSat Overview. https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/cryosat/description.
Visited 01-03-2023.
[2]
H. Skourup et al. “ESA CryoVEx/KAREN and EU ICE-ARC 2017 - Arctic field cam-
paign with combined airborne Ku/Ka-band radar and laser altimeters, together with
extensive in situ measurements over sea- and land ice”. In: (2019).
[3]
Christian Haas. CryoVal-SI: Data Selection & Consolidation, Technical Note 3:As-
sessment of Different Sources of Uncertainty. www.google.dk. 2016.
[4]
Cryosat-2 Product Handbook Baseline D 1.0. 2018.
[5]
Robbie Mallett. Challenges to the retrieval of sea ice thickness in Antarctica with
CryoSat-2 and Envisat. https://www.robbiemallett.com/researchblog/2022/8/23/
challenges-to-the-retrieval-of-sea-ice-thickness-in-antarctica-with-cryosat-2-and-
envisat. Visited 02-02-2023. 2022.
[6]
Rosemary Willatt et al. Ku-band radar penetration into snow cover on Arctic sea ice
using airborne data. https://doi.org/10.3189/172756411795931589. Visited 02-02-
2023. 2011.
[7]
PULSES AND WAVEFORMS. aviso.altimetry.fr/en/techniques/altimetry/principle/
pulses-and-waveforms.html. Visited 20-02-2023.
[8]
Principles of measuring the oceans from space. https://training.eumetsat.int/mod/
book/view.php?id=11825&chapterid=423. Visited 20-02-2023.
[9]
SIRAL Overview. https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/instruments/siral/description.
Visited 25-01-2023.
[10]
About CryoSat. https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/cryosat. Visited 13-02-
2023.
[11]
Michele Scagliola. CryoSat footprints. 2013.
[12]
Satellite:CryoSat-2. https://space.oscar.wmo.int/satellites/view/cryosat_2. Visited
13-02-2023.
[13]
CryoSat - Geographical Mode Mask 4.0 released. https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/
news/cryosat-geographical-mode-mask-4-0-released. Visited 31-01-2023. 2019.
[14]
François Boy et al. “CryoSat-2 SAR-Mode Over Oceans: Processing Methods, Global
Assessment, and Benefits”. In: 55.1 (2017).
[15]
R. Francis, M. Drinkwater, and M. Davidson. CRYOSAT ESA’s ICE MISSION. 2010.
[16]
Stine Kildegaard Rose. Measurements of sea ice by satellite and airborne altimetry.
2013.
[17]
CryoSat-2 (Earth Explorer Opportunity Mission-2). https : / / www . eoportal . org /
satellite-missions/cryosat-2#siral-operational-modes. Visited 19-06-2023. 2012.
[18]
N. T. Kurtz, N. Galin, and M. Studinger. An improved CryoSat-2 sea ice freeboard
retrieval algorithm through the use of waveform fitting. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-
8-1217-2014. 2014.
[19]
N. Kurtz and J. Harbeck. CryoSat-2 Level-1B Waveforms, Sea Ice Elevation, and
Surface Roughness, Version 1. https://doi.org/10.5067/5SZA7GSQI0YT. Visited
29-01-2023. 2018.
[20]
Alessandro Di Bella et al. Multi-peak Retracking of CryoSat-2 SARIn Waveforms
Over Arctic Sea Ice Di. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2020.3022522. 2021.
[21]
Robert Ricker et al. Classification of CryoSat-2 Radar Echoes. 10.1007/978-3-319-
13865-7_17. 2015.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
63
==PAGE:72==
[22]
Marco Meloni et al. CryoSat Ice Baseline-D validation and evolutions. https://doi.
org/10.5194/tc-14-1889-2020. Visited 15-02-2023. 2020.
[23]
CryoSat-2 Science Server. https://science-pds.cryosat.esa.int/#. Visited 13-02-
2023.
[24]
T. GEMINALE. Instrument Processing Facility Baseline E Evolutions. https://earth.
esa.int/eogateway/documents/20142/37627/Cryosat-Baseline-E-Evolutions.pdf. 2021.
[25]
Stefan Hendricks, Robert Ricker, and Stephan Paul. Product User Guide & Algo-
rithm Specification - AWI CryoSat-2 Sea Ice Thickness (version 2.4). 10013/epic.
eee8e1c4-56fd-4127-89c0-9bfddb9ec38b. 2021.
[26]
Stefan Hendricks. Cryo-TEMPO - Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document Sea Ice.
2022.
[27]
Ole Baltazar Andersen. DTU21 Mean Sea Surface. https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.
19383221.v1. Visited 10-02-2023. 2022.
[28]
Schyberg H. et al. Arctic regional reanalysis on single levels from 1991 to present.
10.24381/cds.713858f6. Visited 23-01-2023. 2020.
[29]
K. P. Nielsen et al. Copernicus Arctic Regional Reanalysis (CARRA): Data User
Guide. https://confluence.ecmwf.int/display/CKB/Copernicus+Arctic+Regional+
Reanalysis+%28CARRA%29%3A+Data+User+Guide#CopernicusArcticRegionalReanalysis(CARRA):
DataUserGuide-Snowvariables. Visited 24-04-2023. 2022.
[30]
Joshua King et al. Evaluation of Operation IceBridge quick-look snow depth esti-
mates on sea ice. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015GL066389. Visited 04-05-2023.
2015.
[31]
knnsearch. https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/knnsearch.html. Visited 28-02-
2023.
[32]
dsearchn. https://se.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/dsearchn.html. Visited 02-03-
2023.
[33]
scircle1. https://se.mathworks.com/help/map/ref/scircle1.html. Visited 02-03-2023.
[34]
intersection. https://se.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/double.intersect.html.
Visited 02-03-2023.
[35]
inpolygon. https : / / se . mathworks . com / help / matlab / ref / inpolygon . html. Visited
02-03-2023.
[36]
azimuth. https://se.mathworks.com/help/map/ref/azimuth.html. Visited 02-03-2023.
[37]
reckon. https://se.mathworks.com/help/map/ref/reckon.html. Visited 02-03-2023.
[38]
Josiah Renfree. Distance calculation using Haversine formula. https://www.mathworks.
com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/27785-distance-calculation-using-haversine-formula.
2014.
[39]
Haversine formula. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haversine_formula. Visited 15-02-
2023.
[40]
Polar Portal Season Report 2017. http://polarportal.dk/en/news/2017- season-
report/. 2018.
[41]
https://osisaf-hl.met.no/v2p1-sea-ice-index. Visited 29-03-2023.
[42]
Havisens udbredelse. Danish. http://polarportal.dk/havis- og- isbjerge/havisens-
udbredelse/. Visited 29-03-2023.
[43]
PIOMAS Arctic Sea Ice Volume Reanalysis. http : / / psc . apl . uw . edu / research /
projects/arctic-sea-ice-volume-anomaly/. Visited 29-03-2023.
[44]
Havisens tykkelse og volumen. Danish. http://polarportal.dk/havis- og- isbjerge/
havisens-tykkelse-og-volumen/. Visited 29-03-2023.
[45]
Christian Haas et al. Ice and Snow Thickness Variability and Change in the High
Arctic Ocean Observed by In Situ Measurements. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 /
2017GL075434. 2017.
64
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:73==
[46]
Christian Haas et al. Supporting Information for - Ice and Snow Thickness Variability
and Change in the High Arctic Ocean Observed by In Situ Measurements. https:
//doi.org/10.1002/2017GL075434. 2017.
[47]
Thomas W. K. Armitage and Malcolm W. J. Davidson. Using the Interferometric Ca-
pabilities of the ESA CryoSat-2 Mission to Improve the Accuracy of Sea Ice Free-
board Retrievals. 10.1109/TGRS.2013.2242082. 2014.
[48]
Marcello Passaro, Felix L. Müller, and Denise Dettmering. Lead detection using
Cryosat-2 delay-doppler processing and Sentinel-1 SAR images. www.google.dk.
2018.
[49]
Wiebke Aldenhoff, Céline Heuzé, and Leif E. B. Eriksson. Sensitivity of Radar Al-
timeter Waveform to Changes in Sea Ice Type at Resolution of Synthetic Aperture
Radar. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11222602. 2019.
[50]
CRISTAL. https://www.esa.int/ESA_Multimedia/Images/2020/09/CRISTAL. Visited
07-06-2023.
[51]
Claude de Rijke-Thoams et al. Airborne investigation of quasi-specular Ku-band
radar scattering for satellite altimetry over snow-covered Arctic sea ice. https://doi.
org/10.36227/techrxiv.22839488.v1. Preprint. 2023.
[52]
Sine Munk Hvidegaard and René Forsberg. Sea-ice thickness from airborne laser
altimetry over the Arctic Ocean north of Greenland. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1029 /
2001GL014474. 2002.
[53]
Canon Camera Museum. https://global.canon/en/c-museum/product/dslr802.html.
Visited 30-03-2023.
[54]
Mapping Snow on Arctic Sea Ice. https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/images/146758/
mapping-snow-on-arctic-sea-ice. Visited 03-05-2023.
[55]
Jennifer King et al. Comparison of Freeboard Retrieval and Ice Thickness Calcu-
lation From ALS, ASIRAS, and CryoSat-2 in the Norwegian Arctic to Field Mea-
surements Made During the NICE2015 Expedition. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 /
2017JC013233. 2018.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendix
A.1
Closest airborne (mid-track)
The freeboards found when only including the middle-track in the search for the nearest
airborne point is found. These are plotted together with the ones found when including all
tracks as well as the freeboards from CryoSat-2, this can be seen in figureA.1.
Figure A.1: Nearest freeboard values from both ALS and KAREN when including all tracks with
only four for KAREN (red), and only the mid-track (yellow), for both ALS (left) and KAREN (right),
together with the freeboards from CryoSat-2.
It can be seen that for the nearest point it makes no difference when including all tracks
compared to only the mid-track, this is seen as the freeboard values found when including
only the mid-track overlaps the ones found when including all tracks, this is valid for both
ALS and KAREN. This was also expected as the closest point should be within the mid-
track.
A.2
10 closest airborne
The mean of the ten closest airborne freeboard values, from both ALS and KAREN when
including all tracks, hence five for ALS and four for KAREN, is found and can be seen in
figure A.2.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.2: Mean of the ten closest airborne freeboard values from April 16 2017, both from ALS
(red) and KAREN (yellow), together with the freeboard values from CryoSat-2.
It is found that the freeboard values from ALS and KAREN seems to be rather similar,
with some deviations mainly where either of the two shows peaks.
The curve of the freeboards from CryoSat-2 does not follow the ones from the airborne
instruments. However, the gap between the satellite and airborne freeboards are not that
profound.
It is now investigated how the results may deviate if only the mid-track is included, instead
of all the tracks (five for ALS and four for KAREN).
Figure A.3: The mean of the ten nearest airborne freeboard values from April 16 2017, when
including one (yellow) or all tracks (red) for both ALS (left) and KAREN with only four tracks (right),
together with the freeboard values from CryoSat-2.
It is found that there is only one deviation between the freeboards found when includ-
ing only the mid-track compared to including all of the tracks, this is found in the ALS
freeboards with latitude between 84.9 and 84.95. For the remaining values a complete
overlap is found between the results when including the mid-track and including all tracks.
A.3
Pulse-limited
For the pulse-limited method, where the footprint is made as a circle on the WGS-84
reference ellipsoid with a radius of 1.65 km, the average of the airborne freeboard values
68
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:77==
within this is computed. These results are displayed together with the freeboards from
CryoSat-2, this can be seen in figure A.4.
Figure A.4: Average of the freeboard values from April 16 2017, within a Pulse-limited footprint
for both ALS (red) and KAREN (yellow) together with the freeboard values from CryoSat-2.
This shows that the result for the average of the two sets of airborne freeboards within the
pulse-limited footprint, are found to be following the same curve. A slight gap between
the two are found, with the ones from ALS primarily being the highest, but they still seem
to follow each other.
A much larger gap is found between the averaged airborne values and the freeboards
from CryoSat-2, where it is found that for some latitudes the values are somewhat close
together (around latitude 84.65) but for the most part they are further apart.
The values found when only including the mid-track are now plotted with the results with
all of the tracks and the freeboards from CryoSat-2, this can be seen in figure A.5.
Figure A.5: The average of airborne freeboards from April 16 2017 within the pulse-limited foot-
print including only the mid-track (yellow) and all tracks (red), only four for KAREN, for both ALS
(left) and KAREN (right), together with the CryoSat-2 freeboards.
A difference between including only the mid-track and including all tracks is found. How-
ever, the values from the two still seem to somewhat follow each other. The main differ-
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
69
==PAGE:78==
ence is seen to be that the variations when only including one track appears to be larger,
especially for the KAREN results.
A.4
Single-track flights
In this section the three other flights, where only one single track has been flown under-
neath the path of CryoSat-2, will be explored. For these flights only the ALS freeboard
values are investigated and compared to those from CryoSat-2. Here the Doppler-limited
comparison area is used for March 24 and 27, and the average within this is determined.
For April 13 the method of projecting all the airborne observations to the closest CryoSat-
2 measurement is applied, as the two tracks are not completely overlapping, why no ALS
values are found within the Doppler-limited footprint.
A.4.1
March 24
For March 24 the track was overflown twice, as it is also measured on the way back,
both of these are inspected. From these two sections of measurements from March 24,
the average airborne measurements within the Doppler-limited footprint for each of the
CryoSat-2 points are determined, this is shown in figure A.6.
Figure A.6: Averages of the ALS freeboard values within the Doppler-limited footprint together
with the freeboards from CryoSat-2 (blue) for March 24 2017. This is shown for both the forth track
(red) and the backwards track (yellow).
It can be seen that the airborne values are in general a bit lower than the CryoSat-2 ones,
with a mean for the forth airborne track of around 44 cm and around 47 cm for back, the
mean of the CryoSat-2 values are around 56 cm. For CryoSat-2 some values are found
to be rather low, which are mostly found to be below 0 metres, which could be reflections
of leads. For the ALS values the lowest values are found to be around 0 m, but these also
contains some rather high values, located much higher than the CryoSat-2 values.
To gain further knowledge on the difference between the averaged ALS freeboards and
those from CryoSat-2, histograms of the differences for both forth and back are shown in
figure A.7.
70
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.7: Histograms of the differences between averages of the airborne values within the
Doppler-limited footprint and the CryoSat-2 values for March 24 2017, both for forth (left) and
back (right).
The mean difference is found to be relatively close to zero, compared to what was found
for the tracks from April 16. For these tracks the CryoSat-2 values are found to be higher
than the averaged airborne, why most of the differences are found to be negative. A
few rather large positive differences are however also found, connected with some of the
airborne values being very high.
A.4.2
March 27
On March 27 the track was only overflown once. Again the mean of all the airborne points
within the Doppler-limited footprint is computed and plotted together with the freeboards
from CryoSat-2, this is shown in figure A.8.
Figure A.8: The average of the ALS freeboards within the Doppler-limited footprint (red) and the
freeboard values from CryoSat-2 (blue) for March 27 2017.
Again it is found that the freeboard values from CryoSat-2 are slightly higher, with a mean
of around 65 cm, than the averaged airborne values with a mean around 50 cm, although
the highest values are found to be ALS freeboards. It seems as though the fluctuations are
larger for the airborne results than for CryoSat-2, especially if ignoring the low CryoSat-2
values, that looks to be outliers.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
71
==PAGE:80==
Again a histogram of the differences between the freeboards is computed, this can be
seen in figure A.9
Figure A.9: Histogram of the differences between averages of the airborne values within the
Doppler-limited footprint and the CryoSat-2 values for March 27 2017
As found when plotting the values along the track, the CryoSat-2 values are primarily
found to be a bit higher, hence the negative mean difference. The histogram also shows
the high ALS freeboards entailing the larger differences found to be as large 1 m.
A.4.3
April 13
Again the track is measured both forth and back. For this track it does not overlap exactly
with the track of CryoSat-2, there is a slight deviation throughout the flight. Why it is not
eligible to use the Doppler-limited comparison area, as none of the airborne measure-
ments would lie within the area of such a footprint. Instead the mean of all the airborne
values projected to the closest CryoSat-2 data point are used for the comparison. This
can be seen in figure A.10.
Figure A.10: The freeboard values found as the averages of all the ALS closest to the CryoSat-2
point together with the CryoSat-2 freeboards (blue) both for April 13 2017. This is shown both for
the forth track (red) and the back track (yellow).
Overall it is found once more that the CryoSat-2 values are generally higher than the air-
borne, with a mean 60 cm where the airborne values has a mean of 42 cm forth and 45
72
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:81==
cm back.
It is also seen that some airborne points have higher values than CryoSat-2. For some
areas such as around latitude 86.2 and 86.5, the airborne and the CryoSat-2 values seem
to be rather close.
A histogram of the differences between the two, for both forth and back can be seen in
figure A.11.
Figure A.11: Histograms of the differences between averages of the airborne values closest to
each of the CryoSat-2 points and the CryoSat-2 values for April 13 2017, both for forth (left) and
back (right).
Again it shows that the CryoSat-2 values are generally a bit higher than the airborne,
whilst some airborne values are a lot higher than those from CryoSat-2.
A.5
Camera FOV
The angle of view for the camera is 29.4◦[53], this can be used to determine the field of
view (FOV).
FOV = 2
(
tan
(angle of view
2
)
· d
)
(A.1)
Where d is the distance from the camera to the Earths surface which is around 300 metres
[2]. Hence the FOV is found to be around 157 metres, which is a lot smaller than the
CryoSat-2 footprint.
A.6
Conditions
Two figures used for comparisons for the conditions are shown here.
The first figure show the ranked sea ice extent for each month, indicating how the sea ice
extent for each month is compared to previous years.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.12: Sea ice extent for each month in relation to the same month for other years [41]
The second figure shows the snow depths from October 2018 to April 2019 in the Arctic
Ocean, depicting a decrease in snow depths when moving north of Greenland to the North
pole.
74
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.13: The snow depth in the Arctic ocean in the winter 2018-2019. [54]
A.7
Sea ice thickness
The Sea ice thicknesses is determined using the following two equations, as described in
[55].
When the snow layer is thinner than the snow freeboard, the sea ice thickness is computed
as:
hi =
ρw
ρw −ρi
hfsnow + ρs −ρw
ρw −ρi
hs
(A.2)
When the snow layer is thicker than the snow freeboard, hence in the case of negative
ice freeboards, the sea ice thickness can be determined by:
hi =
ρs
ρw −ρi
hfsnow
(A.3)
A.8
Roll-angle (KAREN)
A plot depicting which KAREN freeboard values are connected with a high roll angle
(higher than 1.5◦) can be seen in figure A.14.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.14: The freeboard values from KAREN where the blue points has an absolute roll angle
lower than 1.5◦and the red points has an absolute roll angle higher than 1.5◦.
76
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:85==
A.9
Code overview
A short description of each of the Matlab-files is presented in this section.
A.9.1
Initial_CS2_data_selection
This code is used to compute the plots shown in section 5.1.
The contents being:
• The height correction flag from the CryoSat-2 baseline D and the discarded points.
• Waveforms for leads and sea ice.
• Basline comparisons between the ESA CryoSat-2 products baseline D and C. As
well as lead detection for both baselines.
• Determination of the images closest to the detected leads.
A.9.2
Comparison_CS2_airborne
This code is used to compute all the results for April 16, it utilises the functions described
in appendix A.9.3 to A.9.5.
The contents being:
• The height correction flag from the CryoSat-2 baseline D and the discarded points.
• Comparisons between CryoSat-2 and the averaged airborne values for each of the
comparison areas for both ALS and KAREN, for April 16 2017.
• Investigations of the sections showing close values and sections with larger discrep-
ancies.
• Differences in snow depths for April 16 and March 24 for the track from April 16.
• The height error due to preferential sampling.
• The reduced resolution results for April 16.
• The other CryoSat-2 products.
A.9.3
proji_air
This function determine which CryoSat-2 point each of the airborne points are located
closest to, and then takes the average of all the airborne points assigned to each CryoSat-
2 point.
The inputs are:
• latCS2, lonCS2: is the latitude and longitude values of the CryoSat-2 measure-
ments.
• lat_air, lon_air: is the latitude and longitude values for the airborne measurements.
• FB_air: is the freeboard values derived from the airborne measurements.
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
77
==PAGE:86==
A.9.4
Pulse_lim
This function finds the latitude and longitude coordinates of a circle, with radius r [km], and
determine the mean of all airborne measurements within this circular area (Pulse-limited
footprint).
The inputs are:
• latCS2, lonCS2: is the latitude and longitude values of the CryoSat-2 measure-
ments.
• lat_air, lon_air: is the latitude and longitude values for the airborne measurements.
• FB_air: is the freeboard values derived from the airborne measurements.
• r: is half of the across-track width in km.
A.9.5
Doppler_lim
This function finds the latitude and longitude coordinates of the Doppler-limited footprint
with across track 2r [km] and along track 2w [km], and determine the mean of all airborne
measurements within this area.
The inputs are:
• latCS2, lonCS2: is the latitude and longitude values of the CryoSat-2 measure-
ments.
• lat_air, lon_air: is the latitude and longitude values for the airborne measurements.
• FB_air: is the freeboard values derived form the airborne measurements.
• r: is half of the across-track width in km.
• w: is half of the along-track width in km.
A.9.6
Temp_precip_CARRA
This codes is used to determine the temperatures over the different tracks and the precip-
itation from CARRA for the track of April 16. This also determines the index in the CARRA
files corresponding to each of the tracks not from April 16.
A.9.7
Snow_products_Mar24
This codes investigates the snow depths from Warren, CARRA and Operation IceBridge
for March 24.
A.9.8
Single_track_flights
This codes performs the comparisons for the single-track flights from March 24, March 27
and April 13, as well as the reduced resolution results for these days.
78
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
==PAGE:87==
Parallel flight tracks for validation of CryoSat-2 sea ice measurements
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, bygning 327 og 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
