==PAGE:1==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of
Subsurface Scattering
Thomas Conrad
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
s183742@dtu.dk
Figure 1: Subsurface scattering in the Stanford dragon, lit by a single arealight above
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a novel approach for real-time rendering
of translucent materials. An evenly distributed pointcloud
on the translucent meshes is used as a collection of virtual
pointlights which is sampled for subsurface scattering. The
ReStir sampling method is used for rendering of direct il-
lumination in the scene, and to collect incoming light in
the virtual pointlights. For rendering the internal scattering
in the volume, in addition to ReStir sampling, octree based
spatial sampling is implemented to importance sample the
BSSRDF of the translucent material. The efficacy of the ap-
proach is evaluated by comparing to a converged render using
random sampling, which demonstrates the ability of the sam-
pling method to accelerate the convergence of subsurface
scattering, making it suitable for real-time applications.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Ray tracing.
KEYWORDS
Ray Tracing, Subsurface Scattering, Real Time, Many Lights Sam-
pling
This work is licensed under a
Creative
Commons
“Attribution-
ShareAlike 4.0 International” license.
1
INTRODUCTION
Translucent materials are constantly encountered in everyday life.
These are materials like skin, milk, wax, snow and marble. In these
materials, light entering the object can scatter hundreds of times
before exiting the volume at a different location. This can blur small
details in objects, like wrinkles in skin, and gives translucent mate-
rials a characteristic soft appearance and diffuse glow. Therefore,
rendering the appearance of translucent material has long been
researched for applications in games, movies and other areas of
computer graphics. Especially for simulating the true appearance
of skin it is necessary to simulate subsurface scattering effects, as
skin without subsurface scattering lands right in the uncanny val-
ley. Companies such as Pixar have long been rendering subsurface
scattering using extremely expensive Monte Carlo methods. Given
that these renders can take several thousands of hours to finish,
there is little hope of them being implemented for real-time ray
tracing. But as consumer graphics hardware is getting increasingly
more powerful and better algorithms are developed, methods that
would have earlier taken up minutes or even hours can now run in
milliseconds. Accurate simulation of real-time subsurface scattering
represents one of the cutting-edge technologies just on the verge
of feasibility, and hopefully, this work has pushed the boundary, if
only by the tiniest amount.
This work implements a version of subsurface scattering evaluated
by the use of a point-cloud storing incident radiance over the sur-
face of a translucent mesh. By implementing efficient many lights
sampling methods the physical appearance of various translucent
materials can be approximated in real-time. The implementation of
rendering real-time subsurface effects brought with it a very effi-
cient implementation for a many lights direct illumination renderer,
which can render huge scenes in real-time.
2
PRIOR WORK
Texture space diffusion
In one of the earliest implementations of subsurface scattering
Borshukov and Lewis [2003] showed the feasibility of performing
==PAGE:2==
Thomas Conrad
diffusion in texture space. By rendering the irradiance map to a
texture and blurring it, a convincing approximation of subsurface
scattering can be achieved. The technique was implemented in real
time by d’Eon et al. [2007]. It is very suitable for real time as texture
space blurs can be evaluated cheaply using hardware filtering. The
drawback of this technique is that a good UV mapping is needed
for the surface. Mapping using seams for edges will not work with
this method, as the mapping from mesh to UV-space needs to be
differentiable. In cases where the UV mapping isn’t isometric d’Eon
et al. [2007] use stretch maps, derived from the Jacobian of the trans-
formation, to modify the blur radii such that the diffusion becomes
correct when the texture is mapped to the mesh.
screen-space diffusion
The method introduced by Jimenez et al. [2009] to approximate
subsurface scatting of skin in real-time, seems to be the current
standard for subsurface scattering in games. Like texture space
diffusion it’s a multi-pass algorithm. In the first pass, the incoming
radiance can be rendered to a screen-space texture. A stencil to
mark all skin pixels, as well as a depth buffer is also rendered here.
A second pass can then be performed which blurs the radiance of
all skin pixels. A screen-space stretch map is calculated using the
depth map, scaling the kernel radius inversely with the distance
and gradient of the distance. This method is also very quick to
evaluate and can look very convincing when the diffusion is subtly
like it is for skin. The main drawback is that it only evaluates the
subsurface scattering in screen-space, meaning that if a light source
was occluded by a translucent material, the light from behind the
object wouldn’t be taken into account for subsurface scattering,
only that of the neighbouring pixels.
Depth maps
A simple method for real-time subsurface scattering proposed by
Hery [2005] uses depth maps to evaluate subsurface scattering. By
rendering a z-buffer from the point of view of each light source
and comparing it to the depth of the camera, obstructions between
the camera and light source can be found, much like how shadows
can be calculated using shadow mapping1. Instead of completely
blocking the light as in shadow maps, with this technique, if the
object shadowing the light source is translucent, the irradiance
of the light is merely attenuated by the distance it has travelled
through the object. This allows for subsurface scattering of even
lights which are behind objects. However, as the number of light
sources increases this method becomes increasingly expensive to
evaluate
Ray traced real-time subsurface scattering
With the recent advent of hardware ray tracing, methods for evalu-
ating real-time subsurface scattering using ray tracing have been
implemented in engines like Nvidia Omniverse and Unity. By trac-
ing rays inside the translucent material, points on the surface where
light is evaluated can be generated. By then back-propagating the
sampled light to the initial point of intersection at the mesh un-
biased subsurface scattering can be evaluated. There are many
1https://www.student.dtu.dk/~s183742/Worksheet%209/index.html
different tricks for importance sampling directions inside the vol-
ume and guiding the path to light, but this method is still very
costly requiring many rays per pixel to be traced, and often has
high variance in the sampled irradiance, due to the search space of
subsurface scattering being much larger than what can be evalu-
ated in real-time. Using general filtering methods can bring down
this variance significantly and learning-based models specifically
aimed at volume rendering for real-time ray tracing have recently
been developed [Hofmann et al. 2023], but evaluating ray traced
subsurface scattering in real-time is still a ways off.
3
PRELIMINARIES
A short primer on rendering
When rendering a scene the goal is to calculate the amount of
light hitting the camera lens from each point which is visible by
the camera. As there are an infinite amount of individual visible
locations, the visible radiance is usually averaged over a grid of
pixels, the screen. The way to calculate the visible radiance from
a pixel is to solve the rendering equation, eq. (1) [Kajiya 1986],
for the position in each pixel. In the rendering equation, the light
contributions from both the emitted and reflected radiance, 𝐿𝑒and
𝐿𝑟, at the position in the direction of the viewing location are added
up to equal the total incoming light.
𝐿𝑜(𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜) = 𝐿𝑒(𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜) + 𝐿𝑟(𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜) = 𝐿𝑒(𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜)
+
∫
2𝜋
BSDF(𝒙𝑜, ®𝜔𝑖, ®
𝜔𝑜)𝐿𝑖(𝒙𝑜, ®𝜔𝑖) (®𝑛· ®𝜔𝑖) d ®𝜔𝑖
(1)
Where 𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜are the position and direction of the radiated light, ®𝜔𝑖
is the direction of the incoming light, and ®𝑛is the normal direction
at the position of the radiated light. The problem of evaluating the
rendering equation arises when the reflected light is considered,
as this has to take all visible light sources in a hemisphere around
the visible point into account. The incoming light from a given di-
rection is then modified by the Bidirectional Scattering Distribution
Function (BSDF) [Nicodemus 1965], a function which specifies how
light from an incoming direction is scattered in an outgoing direc-
tion. Under this convention, any surface which can be connected
to a light source by a series of rays is a light source in itself and has
to be taken into account in the rendering equation. Approximating
this entire integral is known as global illumination and is reserved
for media like movies where they can afford to spend thousands of
CPU hours per frame [Dean Takahashi 2013]. Instead, most modern
techniques use clever techniques and approximations, which trade
quality for speed to achieve a look reminiscent of global illumi-
nation while running at interactive framerates. In this paper, to
render the likeness of materials and objects which exhibit subsur-
face scattering, sampling techniques from Bitterli et al. [2020] and
Lin and Yuksel [2020] have been heavily relied upon to make a
simple lighting technique converge in real-time.
Monte Carlo importance sampling for solving
integrals
As explained above, rendering is in many ways just a problem of
solving an integral. This can be done using Monte Carlo methods,
==PAGE:3==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
which are numerical techniques used to approximate complex in-
tegrals using random numbers. Importance sampling is a type of
Monte Carlo integration that aims to reduce the variance of the
estimate by generating random numbers more efficiently.
In the case of solving the integral 𝐿=
∫𝑏
𝑎𝑓(𝑥)d𝑥using simple
Monte Carlo integration, the integral can be solved by uniformly
generating values for 𝑥𝑖∈[𝑎,𝑏] and averaging the values 𝑓(𝑥𝑖) ·
(𝑏−𝑎). However, in the case where the function has signification
variation, a lot of samples might be used to evaluate an insignificant
portion of the integral. Instead, samples can be drawn proportion-
ally to a different probability distribution 𝑔(𝑥) which is positive
whenever 𝑓(𝑥) is nonzero. The integral can then be written as an
expectation value using 𝑔(𝑥):
𝐿=
∫𝑏
𝑎
𝑓(𝑥)𝑑𝑥=
∫𝑏
𝑎
 𝑓(𝑥)
𝑔(𝑥)

𝑔(𝑥)𝑑𝑥= E
 𝑓(𝑥)
𝑔(𝑥)

(2)
The advantage of this representation is that we can now sample
points according to 𝑔(𝑥), which may lead to more efficient esti-
mates.
To estimate the integral using importance sampling, we generate
𝑁random samples 𝑥1,𝑥2, . . . ,𝑥𝑁from the distribution 𝑔(𝑥). Then,
the Monte Carlo estimate of the integral is given by:
⟨𝐿⟩= 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑓(𝑥𝑖)
𝑔(𝑥𝑖)
(3)
The importance sampling estimate has a lower variance com-
pared to standard Monte Carlo integration when the importance
function is well chosen. The choice of the importance function
depends on the properties of the integrand. Ideally, it should be
similar to the integrand in regions where 𝑓(𝑥) is significant.
ReSTIR
Reservoir-based Spatio-Temporal Importance Resampling, or ReSTIR
for short is a many lights sampling method devoped by Bitterli
et al. [2020]. It uses a combination of resampled importance sam-
pling (RIS) [Talbot et al. 2005] and weighted reservoir sampling
[Chao 1982; Vitter 1985] to achieve low variance real-time direct
illumination.
The ReSTIR algorithm has since been extended to be able to
handle global illumination [Ouyang et al. 2021] and volume render-
ing [Lin et al. 2021], and an algorithm for utilizing the benefits of
ReSTIR while still providing convergence guarantees has also been
developed [Lin et al. 2022]. When used together with a real-time
denoising scheme such as SVGF [Schied et al. 2017] or DLSS [Nvidia
Gameworks 2023] this method is the state of the art method for
real-time ray tracing [Nvidia 2021], and is widely used in modern
RTX capable games.
Weighted reservoir sampling [Chao 1982; Vitter 1985] is a tech-
nique to sample N random elements from a stream of 𝑀random
samples {𝑥1,𝑥2, . . . ,𝑥𝑀}, each sampled according to some distri-
bution 𝑝. Weighted reservoir sampling was developed as a way to
randomly select data on tape drives where random access was not
possible, so the tape would have to be rewound to reread data. In
reservoir sampling, only a single pass of the 𝑀samples is performed,
and at the end, each sample will have a probability of having been
Figure 2: Graph illustrating the flow of ReStir. Copied from
[Bitterli et al. 2020]
chosen proportional to the weight of the sample. This weight cor-
responds to the desired final sample pdf. It does this by constantly
keeping track of the total weight it has seen so far, the currently
selected sample and the number of samples seen. When a new sam-
ple is generated with weight 𝑤𝑖it is then chosen with a probability
𝑝=
𝑤𝑖
𝑤𝑠𝑢𝑚. An important aspect is then that any can be combined
with another reservoir to draw a sample from a combination of the
two reservoir’s populations. As long as the two reservoir weights
are generated using the same method, this combination remains
unbiased. This turns out to be extremely useful in light sampling
applications when reservoirs can be shared temporally and spatially.
Resampled Importance Sampling (RIS) [Talbot et al. 2005] is
a technique to sample approximately from a distribution ˆ𝑝which
might be hard to sample from using another distribution 𝑝which
is possible to draw samples from. It is an alternative to Multiple Im-
portance Sampling (MIS) [Veach and Guibas 1995]. In RIS 𝑀initial
samples are drawn from the "bad" distribution 𝑝. 𝑁of the initial
samples are then chosen proportional to the desired pdf:
𝑝(𝑥𝑧| 𝒙) =
w (𝑥𝑧)
Í𝑀
𝑖=1 w (®𝑥𝑖)
w(𝑥𝑗) =
ˆ𝑝(𝑥𝑗)
𝑝(𝑥𝑗)
(4)
Having picked 𝑁samples, {𝑦1, . . . ,𝑦𝑁} the N-sample RIS estimator
is then:
⟨𝐿⟩𝑁,𝑀
ris
= 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
©­
«
𝑓(𝑦𝑖)
ˆ𝑝(𝑦𝑖) · ©­
«
1
𝑀
𝑀
∑︁
𝑗=1
w  𝑥𝑖𝑗
ª®
¬
ª®
¬
(5)
Which essentially reweights each final sample as if it was drawn
directly from ˆ𝑝, and corrects it based on how close the value of 𝑝
is to ˆ𝑝to account for the fact that the final sample distribution is
only an approximation of ˆ𝑝. The complete RIS algorithm is then:
ALGORITHM 1: Resampled Importance Sampling
Result: Estimate of integral
1 Draw 𝑀proposals from the source distribution {𝑥1, . . . ,𝑥𝑀} ∼𝑝(𝑥𝑗)
2 Compute a weight for each proposal, w(𝑥𝑗) =
ˆ𝑝(𝑥𝑗)
𝑝(𝑥𝑗)
3 Draw 𝑁samples from the proposals {𝑦1, . . . , 𝑦𝑁} ∼𝑤(𝑦𝑗)
4 Estimate the integral, using eq. (5);
The novel idea of ReStir is the combination of Talbot-style RIS
==PAGE:4==
Thomas Conrad
with weighted reservoir sampling. The main drawback to using
only RIS for light sampling is that as 𝑀is increased, large arrays
are required to store all the previously seen samples. On a GPU
where cache misses will often be the limiting factor, storing these
large arrays lead to massive slowdowns. Instead, using reservoir
sampling only 𝑁reservoirs are kept in memory, with each reservoir
storing the number of samples seen, the total weight seen and the
final sample. This combined process is seen in algorithm 2. While
the final samples will be drawn from an identical distribution to
that obtained using algorithm 1 no previous samples are stored in
memory. The RIS with WRS algorithm is:
ALGORITHM 2: RIS with weighted reservoir sampling
Input: Reservoirs {𝑟1, . . . ,𝑟𝑁}
Output: Estimate of integral, filled reservoirs
1 𝐿←0.0
2 for 𝑗←1 to 𝑁do
3
for 𝑖←1 to 𝑀do
4
Draw sample 𝑥𝑖∼𝑝(𝑥𝑖) ;
⊲Using alias table
5
Calculate weight 𝑤𝑖= ˆ𝑝(𝑥𝑖)
𝑝(𝑥𝑖)
6
𝑟𝑗.w_sum ←𝑟𝑗.w_sum + 𝑤𝑖
7
if rand() · 𝑟𝑗.w_sum < 𝑤𝑖then
8
𝑟𝑗.𝑦←𝑥𝑖
9
end
10
𝑟𝑗.𝑀←𝑟𝑗.𝑀+ 1
11
end
12
𝑟𝑗.𝑊←
1
ˆ𝑝(𝑟𝑗.𝑦) ·

1
𝑟𝑗.𝑀𝑟𝑗.w_sum



Equation (5)
13
𝐿←𝐿+ 𝑓(𝑟𝑗.𝑦) · 𝑟𝑗.𝑊
14 end
15 return 1
𝑁· 𝐿
In the ReStir paper by Bitterli et al., the initial M samples are chosen
based on their unshadowed path contribution, which is the unoc-
cluded luminance of a light. This value is relatively straightforward
to calculate as it skips the costly ray intersection step. Visibility is
then traced for the 𝑁chosen samples in the end, to ensure some
amount of shadows.
Using the property of reservoirs that they can be freely combined,
the ReStir method used a series of reservoir reuse steps to improve
the quality of the samples in the reservoirs. A graph illustrating the
sample flow is shown in 2.
Temporal reuse of the reservoirs is carried out after shadows
have been traced. If the same object is rendered multiple frames
in a row, a lot of lights have already been sampled and traced for
that position. If the scene is relatively temporally stable, not saving
those previous good candidates is a massive waste of computational
resources. Temporal reuse reuses previously good samples by com-
bining the current reservoir with that of the last frame, increasing
the effective sample population per frame. In the paper the authors
recommend limiting the amount of times a sample can be reused
by decreasing its sample weight as it is reused further. This is to
avoid artifacts where extremely bright and long-lived samples fill
the screen, not allowing other lights to be sampled. Not retracing
the reused samples can introduce bias if objects move around in
the scene, but a method for dealing with this bias is also introduced
in the ReStir paper.
Spatial reuse is the last step in Reservoir-based Spatio-Temporal
Importance Resampling. This step combines nearby reservoirs, al-
lowing a single good sample to spread to a large area. Several itera-
tions of this can be performed, increasing the distance a sample can
travel in screen-space linearly with the number of iterations, and
the number of pixels that can use a sample exponentially with the
number of iterations. Reusing reservoirs from different locations
in the scene can also introduce bias, as visibility isn’t guaranteed
from other locations than the original reservoir location.
Bitterli et al. describes both a biased and an unbiased way of per-
forming this reuse. In the unbiased variant, additional shadow rays
are traced when samples are exchanged, to ensure that the selected
sample is still visible. The unbiased variant uses a heuristic based
on the depth and normal difference to reject reservoir combination
when the geometry of the two reservoirs is too different. In practise
the unbiased variant visually looks much better than the biased
variant, as more samples are reused and because fewer rays are
traced the performance is much better. The bias is however visible
in many scenes, where shadows get blurred around the edges and
in some cases completely disappear.
Subsurface Scattering
Subsurface scattering is the effect of light entering an object, scat-
tering internally several times, and then exiting the material again
at another point on the surface. This effect is shown in Figure 3.
When travelling inside the medium, the intensity of the incoming
radiance will decrease exponentially with distance, until it either
hits the surface and exits the medium or is absorbed inside the
volume. Generally, different wavelengths of light will be absorbed
inside the medium at different rates, often giving the light contri-
bution from subsurface scattering a distinctly different colour than
that of the incoming radiance. A real-life example of this which we
encounter every day is the translucency of skin. In human skin red
colours tend to travel a lot further than other colours before being
absorbed. This leads to the distinct red glow that is observed near
thin areas of skin when light is being shone from behind, like when
holding your hand to block the sun.
The main difference between transparent and translucent materials
is the behaviour of the light inside the medium. As already stated, in
translucent materials the light bounces around at a near-continuous
rate. In transparent materials, however, the light is refracted at the
point of intersection due to the difference in the effective speed of
light (refractive index 𝑛) of the two materials. Thereafter it contin-
ues in a straight path through the object until being absorbed or
exiting the material, upon which refraction occurs again. As the
movement of the light is straight inside the material, a single inter-
section point and direction maps to a single exit point. This makes
transparent materials relatively easy to evaluate, with the exception
of caustics, as it just requires a few extra traces to evaluate the path
of the ray.
==PAGE:5==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
Figure 3: Illustration of the light scattering process inside
translucent materials. Copied from [Jensen et al. 2001]
On the other hand, for translucent materials, a ray entering a mate-
rial could exit anywhere on the surface of the material which can
be connected by a series of lines. To model the light exiting a point
when subsurface scattering is present, the generalised rendering
equation (eq. (6)) [Jensen et al. 2001] must be used:
𝐿𝑜(𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜) = 𝐿𝑒(𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜) + 𝐿𝑟(𝒙, ®
𝜔𝑜) = 𝐿𝑒(𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜)
+
∫
𝐴
∫
2𝜋
BSSRDF(𝒙𝑖, ®𝜔𝑖; 𝒙𝑜, ®
𝜔𝑜)𝐿𝑖(𝒙𝑜, ®𝜔𝑖) (®𝑛· ®𝜔𝑖) d ®𝜔𝑖d𝒙𝑖
(6)
Here the same parameters are used as in eq. (1), with the addition of
the location of the incoming radiance ®𝑥𝑜. The BSDF of the rendering
equation has been replaced by the bidirectional surface scattering re-
flectance distribution function (BSSRDF), and an additional integral
over the surface 𝐴of the object is performed. The BSSRDF is a func-
tion which roughly describes how much of the light from the rest of
the surface is internally scattered to exit at the observed point. This
function is intractable and would ideally be evaluated using Monte
Carlo methods to get as close as possible to the underlying physical
phenomenon [Rushmeier 1988]. When evaluating random walk
subsurface scattering with Monte Carlo integration a length and
direction is importance sampled based on the exponential atten-
uation profile of the material (𝐿𝑟𝑖(𝑥𝑖+ 𝑠®𝜔𝑖, ®𝜔𝑖) = 𝑒−𝜎𝑡𝑠𝐿𝑖(𝑥𝑖, ®𝜔𝑖))
and the phase function 𝑝( ®𝜔, ®𝜔′). To determine whether the ray was
absorbed by the last bounce, or can still keep propagating inside
the medium, Russian roulette, developed by John Von Neumann
and Stan Ulan, can be used. Performing these steps yields the sim-
plest possible Monte Carlo integrator for the random walk problem,
which will still converge in reasonable time. This random walk
technique is however not generally possible for real-time applica-
tions due to the number of samples needed to reduce variance, and
therefore techniques have been developed which approximates the
true solution, such as the work by Frisvad et al. [2014].
In this work, the BSSRDF is instead modelled using an isotropic
diffusion profile 𝑅𝑑(·), as introduced by Jensen et al. [2001]. The
diffusion profile describes how light at one location is distributed
over different distances from the original location. With this ap-
proximation, the costly BSSRDF becomes:
𝑆𝑑(®𝑥𝑖, ®𝜔𝑖; ®𝑥𝑜, ®𝜔𝑜) = 1
𝜋𝐹𝑡(®𝑥𝑖, ®𝜔𝑖) 𝑅𝑑(∥®𝑥𝑖−®𝑥𝑜∥2) 𝐹𝑡(®𝑥𝑜, ®𝜔𝑜)
(7)
Where 𝐹𝑡is the Fresnel transmittance at the boundary, ®𝑥𝑖and ®𝑥𝑜
are the same as in eq. (6) and 𝑅𝑑(·) is the isotropic diffusion profile.
This automatically sets the phase function to a constant
1
4𝜋. Three
different models for the diffusion profile have been implemented
and used. The simplest is the unscattered approximation. This as-
sumes that light never bounces inside of the volume, travelling in a
straight line. The unscattered diffusion profile becomes:
𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡
𝑑
(𝑟) = 𝜌𝑑
𝑟2𝜎2
𝑡
2𝜋𝑒−𝜎𝑡𝑟
(8)
Where 𝜌𝑑is the diffuse reflectance (albedo) and 𝜎𝑡= 1
𝑙𝑠with 𝑙𝑠
being the mean free path of single scattering. In this case as the
unscattered diffusion is merely used for model validation, the diffuse
scattering distance has been used instead. The factor
𝑟2
2𝜋𝜎2
𝑡has been
set to ensure that the diffuse reflectance holds:
𝜌𝑑=
∫∞
0
𝑅𝑑(𝑟)2𝜋d𝑟⇔
∫∞
0
𝑟2𝜎2
𝑡
2𝜋𝑒−𝜎𝑡𝑟d𝑟= 1
(9)
This is to ensure that the diffuse BSSRDF simplifies to the diffuse
reflectance when an even amount of light is supplied from all dis-
tances, such as an infinitely thick and wide slab lit from a light
infinitely far away.
The second model implemented is the dipole diffusion approxima-
tion by Jensen et al. [2001]. This model models the diffuse scattering
inside an object by the combination of a real light source inside
the volume at a distance 𝑑𝑟and a virtual light source outside at a
distance 𝑑𝑣:
𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑒
𝑑
(𝑟) = 𝛼′
4𝜋
(
𝐶1
𝑒−𝜎𝑡𝑟𝑑𝑟
𝑑2𝑟
+ 𝐶2
𝑒−𝜎𝑡𝑟𝑑𝑣
𝑑2𝑣
)
,
𝐶1 = 𝑧𝑟

𝜎𝑡𝑟+ 1
𝑑𝑟

and 𝐶2 = 𝑧𝑣

𝜎𝑡𝑟+ 1
𝑑𝑣

(10)
The dependence of the diffusion profile and the of this model: 𝜎′𝑠
and 𝜎𝑎, is highly non-linear and makes it extremely difficult predict
appearance based on parameters. Following the approach of Jensen
and Buhler [2002], the model has been reparameterized to be de-
pendent on the diffuse reflectance 𝜌𝑑and the diffuse mean free
path length 𝑙𝑑. The diffuse reflectance is the colour of an evenly lit
surface, whereas the diffuse mean free path length is the colour of
scattered light far from a light source. The variables of Equation (10)
are then defined as:
𝜎′
𝑡=
1
𝑙𝑑
√︁
3(1 −𝛼)
𝜎′
𝑠= 𝛼𝜎′
𝑡
𝜎𝑎= 𝜎′
𝑡−𝜎′
𝑠
𝜎𝑡𝑟=
√︃
3𝜎𝑎𝜎′
𝑡
𝑧𝑟= 1
𝜎′
𝑡
𝑧𝑣= 𝑧𝑟(1 + 4
3𝐴)
𝐴= 1 + 𝐹
1 −𝐹
𝐹= −1.440
𝑛2
+ 0.710
𝑛
+ 0.668 + 0.0636𝑛
This results in an expression for 𝑅𝑑which is dependent on the
reduced albedo 𝛼, 𝑙𝑑and the relative index of refraction 𝑛. To find
the diffuse albedo 𝑅𝑑is inserted into Equation (9). Jensen et al.
[2001] evaluated this to be:
𝜌𝑑= 𝛼′
2

1 + 𝑒−4
3𝐴√
3(1−𝛼′)
𝑒−√
3(1−𝛼′)
(11)
In this work, solving for 𝛼is performed using Newton’s method
using 𝜌𝑑as the starting point for the root finding procedure.
==PAGE:6==
Thomas Conrad
The last method implemented is the approximate reflectance profile
of Christensen [2015]. They found an efficient approximation to the
diffusion profile by function fitting to a Monte Carlo simulation:
𝑅𝐵𝑢𝑟𝑙𝑒𝑦
𝑑
(𝑟) = 𝑒−𝑟/𝑑+ 𝑒−𝑟/(3𝑑)
8𝜋𝑑𝑟
(12)
Where the parameter 𝑑is a function of the diffuse mean free path
length and surface albedo:
𝑑=
𝑙𝑑
1.85 −𝜌𝑑+ 7|𝜌𝑑−0.8|3
(13)
This function is very simple and efficient to evaluate while provid-
ing results very close to the ground truth. The one downside is that
it tends to infinity for 𝑟→0. A simple fix to not run into errors
is to clamp the minimum depth while sampling. This won’t add
any bias as when evaluating the radiance the clamping isn’t used.
This also won’t be a problem when evaluating the mesh samples
as discs covering a surface instead of infinitesimal points on the
surface, which is discussed later on.
In Appendix B renders have been carried out with the different
models. For the rest of the paper 𝑅𝐵𝑢𝑟𝑙𝑒𝑦
𝑑
(𝑟) have been used as it
seemed the most visually pleasing of the three models.
4
IMPLEMENTING RESTIR FOR MANY-LIGHT
SAMPLING
Implementing the ReStir method took an excessively long time to
implement, the main reason being the overhead that came with
starting a project. The article by Bitterli et al. explained the process
in very simple terms and was easy to read, but there are many
pitfalls when implementing it, and debugging graphics hardware
can be hard. The RenderDoc software from https://renderdoc.org/
was invaluable in the implementation process.
Efficient loading of emissive triangles
When sampling light from emissive triangles using the method
of Algorithm 2, the largest bottleneck by far is the time is takes
to load in the triangle objects from global memory. These objects
must contain a complete descriptor of the triangle: its three vertex
locations, base emissive RGB strength and if the triangle is lit by an
emissive texture the UV coordinates of the vertices as well as the
texture index. In total this is at least 76 bytes, going up to 109 bytes
if interpolation of the vertex normals is wanted. By using lower size
data types and unit vector compression, this can be reduced to 28
bytes resulting in a near 4x speedup of sampling time. Then when
the final sample is to be evaluated, the full 109 byte precision is
used to avoid artifacts, following the overarching theme of sample
cheap, evaluate accurately. The specific space saving measures are:
• Use 16 bit floats for vertex positions.
• Only use face normal.
• Compress face normal to 32 bit using octahedron encoding
[Meyer et al. 2010].
• Use the average colour of the emissive texture in 16 bit
floating format.
The last element, requires an expensive pre-pass on the CPU. For
each triangle with an emissive texture, the the triangle is projected
to the texture using its UV coordinates. The average color is then
found, using bilinear interpolation in cases where a pixel is partially
inside the triangle.
Alias sampling
When sampling lights for direct illumination, the simplest way
to do it is to sample inversely to triangle area by generating a
uniformly random triangle index and a set of barycentric coordi-
nates. Then the probability of sampling that point on a triangle
Ω is 𝑝(Ω) =
1
𝐴·𝑛, with A being the triangle area and n being the
total amount of triangles. This specific probability comes from the
fact there were n triangles to choose from, but as the probability of
sampling two triangles of vastly different sizes is identical, larger
triangles will be undersampled compared to smaller triangles. The
validity can be checked by integration of the probability over the
triangle:
∫
Ω 𝑝(Ω)𝑑𝑥= 1
𝑛. The problem with this sampling scheme
is that it doesn’t take the luminance of the emissive triangles into
account. The variance can be decreased by using power sampling,
where samples are drawn proportional to the irradiance of the area.
The obstacle is then that there is no intuitive way to draw such
a sample in O(1) time like with the random sampling. The intu-
itively simple way to perform power sampling would be to have
all emissive triangles sorted and generate a number 𝑥𝑗∼[0, 𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡],
𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡being the total radiance of all triangles. Using binary search
the corresponding triangle can be found and sampled in O(log(𝑛))
operations. There does however exist a way to draw samples from
a discrete probability distribution in constant time, described first
by Walker [1974]. The method, called Alias Sampling, relies on
generating two random numbers per sample. With the first random
number a random element (triangle) in the set is chosen. There is
then a possibility of rejecting the chosen element and instead using
its corresponding alternative. If the total power 𝐼𝑗of the initial
element is at or above 𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝑛
it will always be chosen. If it has less
power, it will have a probability 1 −𝐼𝑗·𝑛
𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡of instead choosing its
alternative. The alternatives are then assigned in such a way that
all the probability mass of the samples whose initial sampling prob-
ability got truncated is present in the alternatives. Such a scheme
can always be created as the sample probabilities form a partition of
unity. This sampling method has been implemented for the direct
illumination light sampling for fast sampling with lower variance
than random sampling.
5
SUBSURFACE SCATTERING EVALUATION
The method used to evaluate subsurface scattering in this paper
uses a presampled point-cloud as a set of virtual pointlights (mesh
samples). The mesh samples have been placed into an octree on
the GPU which allows efficient spatial and hierarchical methods.
The entire practical implementation is discussed later and a graph
showing the control flow of the render loop is show in Figure 6. In
short, the method uses to steps to calculate the subsurface scatter-
ing.
First, for every point in the point-cloud incoming direct illumi-
nation is sampled using the ReStir algorithm. This is identical to
what is being done for the areas of the scene visible by the camera,
==PAGE:7==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
but using the point-cloud ensures that even areas of the scene not
visible by the camera are sampled.
Second, for every pixel visible by the camera if the hit object is
translucent light is sampled from the virtual pointlights and using
a subsurface diffusion profile the radiance transmitted through the
translucent mesh is estimated. Doing this sampling of pointlights is
extremely difficult as to densely cover a mesh the distance between
points should be close to the diffuse mean free path length, usually
resulting in several hundreds of thousands of points. Because of the
random motion experienced by light packets inside a volume, the
average distance travelled is much shorter than for light travelling
in nonparticipating media. Therefore, the vast majority of samples
in the point-cloud are not contributing significantly to the subsur-
face scattering of a point on the mesh. Two methods have been
implemented to improve sample generation from the point-cloud.
The first is using the full ReStir process where reservoirs are saved
which store good points in the point-cloud. The second method
uses the octree to sample proportional to the incoming radiance of
the points. Both methods work independently of each other an can
be combined to work in tandem, as instead of sampling randomly
in the ReStir sample generation, the octree can be used for sample
generation.
Octree sampling
To importance sample from the BSSRDF, the surface samples are
placed into an octree. By traversing the octree, a light can be sam-
pled according to the approximate light contribution of the point in
O(𝑛log(𝑛)) time complexity, where n is the amount of points in the
octree. The sampling algorithm is implemented in pseudocode in
Algorithm 3. The octree sampling algorithm is recursive in nature,
but as the GPU has no stack it is implemented iteratively in code.
For each child cell in an octree grid, the total radiance of the cell is
calculated. In practise this is performed by multiplying the average
radiance with the amount of points in the cell. If the cell is not a
leaf node, and therefore contains multiple points, the distance to
use for the BSSRDF isn’t known. Instead, the BSSRDF is calculated
for both the farthest and closest possible points in the cell, which
roughly approximates the average BSSRDF. This is an approach
inspired by the implementation of real-time stochastic lightcuts by
Lin and Yuksel [2020]. In their article they use a perfect binary tree
to sample virtual pointlights. For each node in their perfect binary
tree they store a bounding box which encompasses all points con-
tained by the node. In the case where a node is inside the bounding
box, the minimum distance goes to infinity. This leads to a poten-
tial singularity. Yuksel [2021] got around this by just ignoring the
distance when the point was too close to the bounding box, but
instead Lin and Yuksel [2020] calculates a sampling probability of
a node by using both the closest and farthest points in the possible
child nodes.
𝑤min
𝑗
=
𝑰𝑗𝑆

𝑑min
𝑗
(𝒙)
𝐿
𝑤max
𝑗
=
𝑰𝑗𝑆

𝑑max
𝑗
(𝒙)
𝐿
(14)
Here, 𝒙is the shaded point, 𝑑min/max
𝑗
(𝒙) is either the shortest or the
longest possible distance to a point in the cell, 𝑆(𝑟) is the isotropic
BSSRDF, which only depends on distance, mean free path and
diffuse reflectance. The norm | · |𝐿signifies the luminance of the
ALGORITHM 3: Radiance Based Octree Sampling
Input
:Origin: 𝑥
Output:Incoming radiance from sample and pdf of sample
1 max_weights[8],min_weights[8] ←0
2 𝑝𝑑𝑓←1, cur_node ←root
3 while true do
4
for each node𝑖in cur_node do
5
if node𝑖is empty then
6
skip
7
else if node𝑖is a child then
8
𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠[𝑖] ←𝑓(𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑖.𝐼, |𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑖.pos −𝑥|);
9
𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠[𝑖] ←𝑓(𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑖.𝐼, |𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑖.pos −𝑥|);
10
else
11
Find 𝑑min and 𝑑max;
⊲node𝑖is a parent
12
𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠[𝑖] ←𝑓(𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑖.𝐼,𝑑min);
13
𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠[𝑖] ←𝑓(𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑖.𝐼,𝑑max);
14
end
15
end
16
sample 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑in [0,1];
17
𝑤cumulative ←0;
18
for each 𝑤𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑖
, 𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑖
in weights do
19
𝑝←0.5

𝑤𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑖
Í
𝑗𝑤𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑗
+
𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑖
Í
𝑗𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑗

20
𝑤cumulative ←𝑤cumulative + 𝑝;
21
if 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑< 𝑤cumulative then
22
𝑝𝑑𝑓←𝑝𝑑𝑓· 𝑝;
23
if node𝑖is a leaf then
24
return 𝑓(𝑦𝑖.𝐼, ∥𝑦𝑖.pos −𝑥∥), 𝑝𝑑𝑓
25
else
26
cur_node ←node𝑖;
27
end
28
end
29
end
30 end
colour calculated by the REC. 709 standard [ITU-R BT.709-6 2015].
The probabilities associated with the weights are then calculated
by normalising the weights.
𝑝min
𝑗
=
𝑤min
𝑗
Í
𝑖𝑤min
𝑖
𝑝max
𝑗
=
𝑤max
𝑗
Í
𝑖𝑤max
𝑖
(15)
The final for each cell is the average of the largest and smallest
probability 𝑝𝑗= 0.5

𝑝min
𝑗
+ 𝑝max
𝑗

. When calculating the weights,
Lin and Yuksel employ a neat trick to avoid diving by zero. They
multiply all weights in eq. (15) by the total product of the distances.
This cancels out the division by zero and turns it into a multiplica-
tion by zero for all other weights.
Interestingly, when using the BSSRDF by Christensen [2015] which
also includes a singularity, this method doesn’t deliver good results.
As soon as one of the weights has a minimum distance of 0 the
associated weight 𝑤min
𝑗
goes to infinity. This leads to 𝑝min
𝑗
always
having a value of 1 for the cell containing 𝒙and 𝑝min
𝑖≠𝑗to be 0. All
information about the total light intensity of a cell is lost and it
is granted an unconditional 50% sampling probability. While this
might work for Lin and Yuksel, when used for participating media
==PAGE:8==
Thomas Conrad
like volumes it leads to very visible artifacts.
A simple solution is to clamp the minimum distance to a mini-
mum value when sampling the octree. Then the division by zero
effects are avoided and the results still visually look good, as the
evaluated radiance is using the correct formula.
The min and max weights are still used when sampling from the
octree. Using the minimum in this case is needed as often times the
width of the cell will be much larger than the scattering distance
of the subsurface model. In that case, if the average position of all
points or the centroid of the cell was to be used, it would seem as if
the cell contained no light. If the cell contains a somewhat isotropic
distribution of points, and is large, most of the illumination to a
sampled point outside of the cell with come from the points in the
cell closest to the sampled point. Therefore the smallest distance
can be a good indicator of the possible amount of light that can be
received. Including the longest distance is to have a measure of the
size of the cell. Even though large cells might have a high maximum
contribution they will also contain a lot of points far away form
the sample location, whereas smaller cells will have more of the
points closer and contributing more. Using both leads to a good
approximator of the total received illumination of a cell.
6
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF
SUBSURFACE SCATTERING
The implementation of the procedure described in this work has
been carried out using C++ for the CPU code and Vulkan with
GLSL for the GPU code. Vulkan has been chosen as it is an open
source cross-platform framework offering minimal overhead for
frame generation. In a real-time application such as this, reducing
frametimes wherever possible is necessary which made Vulkan a
good choice. The learning curve is extremely steep, as it exposes a
lot of the low level mechanics of the framework to the user. The
real advantage of using Vulkan in this project was the reduced CPU
overhead of launching GPU invocations, increasing the parallel
region substantially.
Octrees on the GPU On a CPU building a pointer based octree is
relatively simple and a nice exercise in spatial trees. On the GPU
however, building and using octrees are very difficult as there is
no dynamical memory management. The way that they have been
implemented in this work is by building the octree on the CPU
using standard procedures and then flatten the entire thing into
a contiguous, array-based structure, which is transferred to GPU
memory. When transferring memory from the CPU to the GPU
like this, taking the endianness of the two devices into account is
necessary as they may differ. Each node in the CPU octree becomes
a grid on the GPU, loosely following the implementation of indi-
rection grids explained in GPU Gems 2 [Pharr and Fernando 2005,
Chapter 37]. The memory layout of a grid is visually illustrated in
Figure 4. Each grid contains 8 cells, representing the 8 octants of the
node in a predefined order. A cell can be empty, a leaf or a parent,
distinguished by the amount of contained points within it. A leaf
node contains a single point and instead of position and intensity
Figure 4: Illustration showing the memory layout of a single
grid-array.
stored the index of the point-cloud sample which it represents. A
parent node in comparison will store the total intensity of all the
lights it contains as well as the average position of the points. The
average position isn’t used in the rendering pipeline and could be
replaced by the spanned solid angle of the contained points for
heuristic purposes.
When flattening the octree to the indirection grids, care is taken to
ensure that each level of the octree is contiguously gathered in the
array. This allows efficient parallel summation of the light in each
node, a process explained in pass 3.
Clustered evaluation of octree nodes
When employing an octree for tree sampling of VPL’s, the traversal
is often a very expensive and slow process. This is because of the
many random reads from global memory, which is a bottleneck.
One way to increase sampling efficiency without increasing the
error much is to use clustered evaluation [Jensen and Buhler 2002].
The main idea is to approximate the a branch node as a single light
when the error associated with this is small. The information known
about a branch node is only the total light intensity and average
position of the points in it, which isn’t enough to evaluate the light
contribution. However, when a node is observed from far away, the
far field approximation can be used, as d𝑅𝑑(𝑟)
d𝑟
→0,𝑟→∞. Thus
it is a reasonable approximation to evaluate all lights in a node as
single powerful light, using the voxel centroid as the position. This
technique has been implemented by Jensen and Buhler [2002] for
use in subsurface evaluation. They use the maximum solid angle
spanned by the points in the voxel as a heuristic for whether to
split the node:
Δ𝜔=
𝐴𝑣
®𝑥−®𝑃𝑣

(16)
𝐴𝑣is the area of points in the node, 𝑉𝑒𝑐𝑥is the origin position
and ®𝑃𝑣is the irradiance weighted average position of the contained
points. In the implementation in this work another heuristic is used.
==PAGE:9==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
Figure 5: Comparison of three different thresholds for the
clustering heuristic, as well as the time to sample from the
octree.
The heuristic is the difference in tone-mapped luminance of placing
all points at the closest and farthest points inside the node. This
difference measure is an upper bound on the possible error from
evaluating the entire cell as a single light source. The reason for
using the difference in luminance after tonemapping is that it ties
it to the real appearance on screen, meaning the same clustering
distance will correspond to the same difference in visual quality. In
practise this approach works well and has the potential to vastly
accelerate octree traversal, at the cost of minor artifacts. A node
is set to never be evaluated as a cluster if the origin is inside the
node, much like the solid angle heuristic. The speed-up effects of
clustering can be seen in Figure 5. When the clustering threshold
is too low the visual artifacts resulting from the approximation
become apparent, but using reasonable values the technique can
drastically speed up sampling.
Sample generation on the surface
The samples used for subsurface evaluation must be evenly dis-
tributed over the surfaces. If they are unevenly distributed, areas
with a higher density of points will tend to have a higher luminance
from subsurface scattering, due to the approximation being more
accurate in those areas. The method used in this work for generat-
ing a sample distribution is a two step approach. First a very high
amount of points are sampled uniformly on the surface. For this
Alias sampling [Walker 1974] is again used to sample proportional
to the triangle area. Sampled points are rejected if they’re too close
to a preexisting point to limit the depth of the octree. This is further
explained in Appendix A. Thereafter, Sample Elimination by Yuksel
[2015] is used to select a subset of the initial samples with Poisson
disk property. The method is computationally efficient, but the cho-
sen sample subset can never be better than the initial sample set,
which leads to low frequency noise in the subsurface scattering.
An alternative for sample generation which has been used by
[Jensen and Buhler 2002] it the point repulsion algorithm [Turk
1992]. This method iteratively moves the points on the surface away
from each other using a repulsion force until convergence. This
generates very even distributions without tiling artifacts, but is
very computationally expensive and has therefore not been imple-
mented.
Dealing with low frequency noise
Due to not using perfect sampling and only using a limited number
of constant samples, low frequency noise will be present in the
final render even when convergence is reached. One way to deal
with this is to not treat the samples as infinitesimally small points,
but instead as a disc of Poisson radius 𝑟𝑝on the surface where the
actual sampled location could be anywhere within. As the points on
the surface display Poisson disc propertied, this will tend to cover
the surface. A practical way to sample a location is then to offset
the sample location a distance between 0 and 𝑟𝑝tangentially to the
surface, which can approximate the diffuse disc reflectance profile:
𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐
𝑑
( ®𝑥𝑜) =
1
𝜋𝑟2𝑝
∫
Ω
𝑅𝑑(∥®𝑥𝑜−®𝑥𝑖∥)d ®𝑥𝑖
(17)
Where Ω is the sampled Poisson disc of radius 𝑟𝑝. The problem
encountered when trying to implement this disc sampling was that
it requires the normal plane of the sample. This cannot be known
when traversing the octree for nodes containing multiple points,
and it therefore wasn’t implemented. Again, a way to circumvent
this issue is to not use disc sampling when traversing the octree, but
only use it when evaluating light contributions. The implemented
noise reduction method is to clamp the minimum distance to the
Poisson disc radius, which is an extremely crude approximation of
Equation (17). Because the clamping removes all contribution from
scattering paths shorter than the Poisson radius, large Poisson radii
result in a render that is biased towards longer scattering paths. The
approximation becomes better the smaller the Poisson radius, and
combined with a high sampling density the bias is not perceptible
while successfully removing low frequency noise.
7
APPLICATION RENDER LOOP
Several passes are needed to render an image with both spatiotem-
poral reservoir sampling and octree sampling of virtual pointlights
on translucent meshes. The reason multiple passes are necessary is
because of a dependence on prior calculations. As everything on
the GPU is calculated in massively parallel environments, relying
on data sharing in the same pass between threads results in race
conditions. Therefore, each calculation which can be done indepen-
dent of neighbouring threads is performed in a single invocation, as
there is an overhead for each pass launched. A dependency graph
of the different passes in the implementation can be seen in Figure 6.
Pass 1: G-Buffer pass
The primary hit of all rays is calculated using traditional rasteri-
zation, as it is a hybrid renderer. The primary advantage of this
the performance benefit of rasterization vs ray tracing. Even with
hardware Ray Tracing, rasterization is essentially free compared
to tracing rays. Saving half of the rays traced by using a hybrid
approach saves a lot of time to use for light sampling. This G-Buffer
pass writes information about the primary hit of the scene into
textures. It saves the hit position, albedo, normal direction, material
ID, tangent, UV coordinates, motion vector, and depth. By using a
==PAGE:10==
Thomas Conrad
so-called ping-pong technique the position, albedo and normal of
the previous frame is also stored. This done by using two different
descriptor sets, Vulkan’s way of telling a shader where in memory
different attributes are stored. By never writing the position, albedo
and normal to the same location in memory two frames in a row,
two sets of textures will be stored, one for the newly rendered frame
and one for the previous frame. This technique has essentially zero
overhead compared to not saving previous frame information. This
information is essential for the temporal reuse in ReStir, as the way
to minimize bias is to only accept previous samples with similar
features.
Pass 2: Ray-Tracing pass
This pass is responsible for tracing all the rays. Initially 𝑀points on
the different lights in the scene are power sampled and 𝑁samples
are collected using resampled importance sampling with reservoir
sampling, Algorithm 2. In this implementation, for direct illumina-
tion 𝑁was kept at 1. This is done both for every pixel on the screen
which collided with geometry, and for every point to be sampled on
the translucent geometry. After the sample generation the visibility
of the samples is traced, which is what enables shadows in the scene.
At the end of the pass, the screen-space and mesh-space reservoirs
are combined with the reservoirs of the previous frame. This step
allows good samples to keep being used, vastly increasing the effec-
tive sample amount per frame. As the camera might have moved
between frames the location of the best screen-space reservoir isn’t
necessarily located in the same pixel. Therefore the motion vectors
calculated in pass 1 are used to find the previous pixel index of
the geometry. These motion vectors are found by reprojecting the
world space positions of the current visible geometry to clip coor-
dinates using the projection and view matrices from the previous
frame and comparing to the current clip coordinates. To determine
whether a reservoir is eligible for temporal reuse, a heuristic based
on normal and position since the last frame is used. As the mesh
samples are stationary in space, no reprojection is necessary.
Pass 3: Octree light summation
In pass 2 the incident radiance for each point in the octree was
found. This radiance is stored at the nodes of the octree which hold
the individual points. When sampling using the octree, the total
light intensity stored in each node of the octree must be known.
This compute shader pass iteratively sums up all the light stored
in the children of a node and writes it to the parent. To avoid race
conditions this must be done in a minimum of 𝑛−1 parallel invo-
cations, 𝑛being the amount of levels in the octree. The lowest level
does not have to be run as it can only contain leaf nodes. Prefer-
ably the octree should be as vertically spread out as possible when
integrating the radiance from the child nodes, with a minimum
amount of empty nodes. This is because nodes on the same level
are independent of each other as there is no overlap. Therefore,
the light from them can be summed in parallel on the GPU. Even
though this process requires many shader invocations, it is a very
efficient process, due to the contiguous memory layout of each indi-
vidual level in the octree, meaning that the amount of cache misses
is minimised. This process of summing the light is equivalent to
the generation of mipmaps for an image.
Rasterize G-Buﬀer
Sample DI for octree
Sample DI for pixels
Trace visibility of DI
Temporal reuse of DI
Generate octree mipmaps
Spatial reuse of DI
Sample SSS from octree
Spatial reuse of SSS
HDR color
Filtering
Temporal reuse of SSS
Tonemapping and UI
Figure 6: Rendering pipeline of the application, with all
passes grouped by color. DI is direct illumination from are-
alights, SSS is subsurface scattering propagating through an
object from a sample on the mesh.
Pass 4: Octree traversal and SSS sampling
After summation of the light for each node of the octree, the octree
can be used for sampling using Algorithm 3. For each pixel that
hits a translucent object the full RIS with WRS method is used to
importance sample points in the point-cloud based on outgoing
radiance, using the BSSRDF. After the initial samples have been
chosen, they are combined with the chosen reservoirs from the
previous frame to increase effective sampling count. Like in pass 2,
the motion vectors calculated in pass 1 are used to find the pixel
index of the previous reservoirs. The same heuristic for choosing
whether to combine reservoirs as in pass 2 is used to minimise
reuse bias.
Pass 5: Spatial reuse and colour calculation
After pass 2 and pass 4 are finished, two sets of reservoirs filled
with samples have been generated, one for direct illumination and
one for subsurface illumination. A biased spatial reservoir reuse
pass [Bitterli et al. 2020] is run first. Here, reservoirs from neigh-
bouring pixels are reused to reduce variance. This is also where
the Fresnel transmittance effects are added for the subsurface scat-
tering. While sampling, diffuse Fresnel transmittance is assumed.
==PAGE:11==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
After sampling the Fresnel transmittance based on the angle and
relative index of refraction is used. After the reuse, the light from
the emissive materials, the direct illumination and the subsurface
scattering is accumulated into an HDR texture of the rendered im-
age.
Pass 6: Filtering, Tonemapping and UI
When pass 5 has completed, all the pixels of the scene have been
rendered. Mipmaps of the HDR texture are calculated for automatic
exposure, and filtering techniques can have access to all pixels with-
out race-conditions. This is necessary if DLSS or Optix Denoising
is to be implemented. The only pixel reuse currently implemented
is simple temporal reprojection and reuse:
𝑐𝑜𝑙[𝑖] = 𝛼new_col[𝑖] + (1 −𝛼) old_col[𝑗]
(18)
Where 𝛼is the weight of the new sample, usually around 0.2, 𝑖is
the current pixel index and 𝑗is the previous pixel index found by
reprojection. This has not been used for any of the tests performed.
Finally the tonemapping is calculated using the ACES algorithm
[Arrighetti 2017] and the Imgui UI is rendered.
8
RESULTS
To perform the performance evaluation and testing, the program
was run in Linux using an RTX 4090 gpu with the vulkan beta
driver 525.47.31.
Direct Illumination rendering results
In order to evaluate the efficacy of the ReStir implementation pre-
sented in this study, rendering experiments were conducted using
the Amazon Lumberyard Bistro scene, as depicted in Figure 7. The
left image represents the scene rendered with random sampling of
arealights and no spatiotemporal reuse, while the right image show-
cases the employment of ReStir. Although ReStir exhibits slower
execution times, the obtained results demonstrate its significant
value and more than justify the additional computational cost.
Figure 7: The Amazon Lumberyard Bistro scene at night with
2,832,120 triangles and 20,638 emissive triangles rendered
using the ReStir implementation in this paper.
Figure 8: Left: Dragons in the Bistro scene without subsurface
scattering. Right: Dragons in the Bistro scene with subsurface
scattering.
Subsurface Scattering rendering results
Two different many lights sampling methods for subsurface point-
light sampling have been described and implemented in this work,
the ReStir sampling method and the octree sampling method. Com-
bining the two methods yields four separate configurations for
which results have been gathered:
• Random sampling, no reuse
• Random sampling + Temporal reuse
• Octree sampling, no reuse
• Octree sampling + Temporal reuse
The first method only uses resampled importance sampling with
reservoir sampling to sample subsurface scattering lights, sampling
all lights randomly and only keeping them for a frame. The Tempo-
ral reuse method combines the reservoirs temporally to preserve
good samples. Spatial reuse was also implemented, but didn’t work
well for subsurface scattering, so it has been left out. The octree
sampling method performs no reuse, but generates high quality
samples from a spatial data structure, at the cost of samples be-
ing expensive to generate. The last method combines uses both
previous methods for sample generation. All tests were run using
200k samples on the mesh, and for two different values of 𝑁, the
amount of subsurface reservoirs per pixel. More reservoirs mean
fewer initially generated samples but more saved and reused sam-
pled. For comparison a baseline was created by letting the random
sampler run, and using the average of tens of thousands of samples
for convergence. In Section 8 all the visual renders of this test are
shown. The right column shows color differences for each method
compared to the baseline of the cropped in view.
All methods in the test were normalised to run in equal time, with
the goal being 125 fps or 8ms spent per frame. As the rendering time
was equal for all methdos this was then adjusted by changing the
amount of initial samples generated until the subsurface sampling
time was identical for all methods.
For a numerical measure of similarity to the baseline, the peak
signal to noise ratio [Wang et al. 2004] was used. These results can
be seen in Table 1.
==PAGE:12==
Thomas Conrad
Baseline
Random Sampling
No Reuse
Octree Sampling
T
emporal Reuse
Random Sampling
No Reuse
Octree Sampling
T
emporal Reuse
Octree Samping + T
emporal Reuse, N=8
Random Sampling
No Reuse
Octree Sampling
T
emporal Reuse
Random Sampling
No Reuse
Octree Sampling
T
emporal Reuse
Figure 9: Visual comparisons of the different methods. The left column shows the baseline and best method. Of the remaining
four groups the top two figures show results for 𝑁= 1 and the bottom two show results for 𝑁= 8. The right column shows the
difference to the baseline.
Table 1: Comparison of the PSNR for different sampling tech-
niques. All methods have been normalised to run in 8 ms
(125 fps), by increasing sample count when necessary.
Method
PSNR, N=1
PSNR, N=8
Random sampling, no reuse
16.343
16.388
Random sampling + Temporal reuse
22.209
26.338
Octree sampling, no reuse
20.638
24.579
Octree sampling + Temporal reuse
23.183
30.705
The last test performed is a visual comparison of the influence
of scaling the diffuse mean free depth by a factor. Four different
renders corresponding to four scaled scattering depths are shown
in fig. 10.
9
DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
The best method, based on the testing methodology described above
and the results in Table 1, is by far the combination of both ReStir
and octree sampling. This combination was visually identical to the
baseline implementation while running many orders of magnitude
faster. Note that this testing was only performed for this one scene
and using a point-cloud of 200k points. However, it is reasonable
to assume that the patterns observed generalise to other test cases.
For all test cases using more reservoirs 𝑁resulted in a better, and
more converged final outcome, even at the cost of initial samples
𝑀. Generally this shows that one sample isn’t enough to model the
subsurface scattering for this object, which will rarely be the case.
In the case of octree sampling approaches, this notion is further
reinforced as each generated sample is essentially guaranteed to be
of high quality. Considering the expensive nature of the sampling
scheme, it is advisable to reuse all the samples. For the methods
using temporal reuse the advantage of using multiple reservoirs,
in this case, is that most of the reservoirs will eventually be filled
with good samples as temporal reuse progresses. It will take more
frames than if it was allowed a higher number of initial samples,
but as the temporal reservoir lifetime is based on the total number
of samples seen 𝑀and not amount of frames, they will end up with
the same quality of reservoirs.
One problem with octree sampling arises from the fact that sam-
ples are drawn from a spatial data structure, which can introduce
spatial artifacts. This can be seen in the images in Section 8 where
==PAGE:13==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
Figure 10: Renders of the subsurface scattering for the Stan-
ford bunny, using four different scale parameters for the
diffuse mean free length.
only the octree sampler is used and is especially noticeable in the
difference images. When using the octree to trace an image, the
samples are being generated proportionally to an approximation of
the received luminance, as it has to be evaluated for entire nodes
at a time. The final result after averaging enough frames will be
unbiased, due to dividing by the sample probabilities, but when
not being given the chance to converge the spatial artifacts can
look extremely jarring. The artifacts essentially stem from the ap-
proximation of the received radiance per node being worse in some
areas than others, simple due to where the octree has been split.
When temporal sample reuse is employed in conjunction, this issue
is mitigated, as the estimation of received radiance is enhanced by
utilizing information from previous samples. Additionally, combin-
ing octree sampling with spatial reuse was extremely effective at
removing these artifacts as the samples were allowed to propagate
through voxel boundaries via screen-space.
From the difference image in Section 8 interesting conclusions
can be drawn to the effects of the different sampling schemes. In
the northwest quadrants where random sampling is performed, it
can be seen that especially the blue colour is lacking. In this case
where the diffuse reflectance is white and the mean free path is
longest for red wavelengths, a lack of blue colour means the short
paths are being undersampled. The explanation for this is that the
long path lengths stem from a lot of dim light sources while the
short path lengths stem from very few and very bright light sources.
As importance sampling of the received luminance isn’t performed,
these short paths tend to be comparatively undersampled. The op-
posite seems to be the case for the schemes employing temporal
reuse for 𝑁= 1. They undersample long paths and become too
blue. This can be explained by them only having a single reservoir.
They want to importance sample the luminance, and the short blue
paths carry more luminance. So if 75% of the luminance is from
short paths, 75% of the reservoirs will only contain blue samples.
Therefore, most of the time, when they can only hold a single sam-
ple it will the that. In comparison, when the amount of reservoirs
is increased this tendency disappears completely. Now that more
reservoirs are available, in the case of a 75/25 percent luminance
split between short and long scattering paths, 6 reservoirs will on
average hold blue samples and 2 will hold red samples.
Regarding temporal stability: It may seem as if ReStir sam-
pling (temporal reuse) and octree sampling are pretty close in terms
of performance, not counting the artifacts of pure octree sampling.
However, the single frame renders shown in Section 8 do not tell
the whole story. Even though there is variance in both methods by
themselves, the temporal instability of the octree method is way
worse than the ReStir method. When sing ReStir temporal reuse,
good samples last a long time, resulting in variance with temporally
long periods. By exclusively relying on octree sampling, new sam-
ples are used every frame. Even though each result sampled from
the octree is good, it still draws new results almost every single
frame, resulting in a flickering appearance when observed over
time. Combining the two methods completely fixes the temporal
instability as samples are now allowed to be kept for longer.
In fig. 10 the effects of shorter and longer diffuse mean free paths
can be seen. With extremely short scattering lengths the artifacts
go beyond just "low frequency noise" as the point-cloud itself be-
comes apparent. This method of rendering subsurface scattering
will not perform well in those cases and instead, blur based tech-
niques can be used in these cases. The further the scattering length
is increased the more luminance will bleed through, from the lit side
of the bunny. In a surprising turn of events, for very long scattering
lengths the scattered illumination will tend to stop being modulated
by the mean free path length, and instead by the difference of the
albedo and the mean free path length. This is of course due to the
approximation used as it assumes a mix of both short and long
scattered paths, but in the case where a significant amount of the
diffuse reflectance is made up of light from paths longer than the
length of the model, the approximation breaks down.
Combining many lights scenes with translucent objects: Gen-
erally, the effects of subsurface scattering are often less pronounced
in scenes with a large amount of light sources, as most surfaces
will be directly lit, and therefore the short diffuse reflectance will
dominate. In these cases, the pronounced subsurface scattering can
then be seen more in corners and crevices, where most paths to
light sources will be blocked. In Figure 8 this is seen on the two
Stanford dragons in the Bistro scene. The biggest difference be-
tween the image with and without subsurface scattering is near the
mouth, where light bleeds through to the dark areas, illuminating
the thinner areas. Additionally, the model received a softer look as
the subsurface scattering will smooth out features much smaller
than the diffuse mean free path length. However, this short scatter-
ing that results in a blurred look can already be simulated quite well
==PAGE:14==
Thomas Conrad
using much more efficient methods such as screen-space diffusion.
The difference between the cheap and expensive methods become
more apparent when light has to travel further inside objects or
when less of the object is illuminated. So even though many lights
sampling methods are very applicable for rendering subsurface
scattering from a point-cloud, placing these translucent objects in
scenes with many lights won’t necessarily use the technique to its
fullest.
The remaining problem is then the low frequency noise present
even in the baseline image, when the biased depth clamping is
removed. Numerous methods available are available to fix this, and
some have even been described in this paper. Implementing one of
these along with increasing the number of points the octree can
hold is the logical immediate next step of this work.
There are issues with the most basic ReStir DI version. The spatial
reuse can break down in scenes with very high variance, such as
scenes with small, bright features. These small bright features are a
natural consequence of using the point-sampled subsurface scat-
tering approximation, and when using spatial reuse in these cases
artifacts will appear. This issue has also been observed in other
implementations of ReStir [Tomasz Stachowiak 2022]. From the
limited testing that has been done it seems that numerical precision
might be causing artifacts with spatial reuse, as when both the
sample weight and radiance contribution of a reservoir are very
low the integral estimator ⟨𝐿⟩(𝑟) ≈𝑓(𝑟𝑦)
𝑟𝑊
becomes numerically
unstable, which can lead to runaway illumination.
A notable consequence of sampling the subsurface scattering from
a point-cloud in this way is that different meshes can be added
at no additional complexity. As all translucent triangle faces are
treated equally, they will all be merged in a single point-cloud. This
is exploited to create the render in Figure 8, where two dragons
are placed close to each other in the same scene. Since the sam-
pling technique used for subsurface scattering focuses on excluding
unimportant points, meshes that are spaced apart will typically not
be included in the sampling process, resulting in minimal loss of
quality. If multiple meshes are brought close enough together, light
bleed from one to the other could take place, but in some ways
this is not too inaccurate as that could physically happen. Because
the point-cloud are also stored in a sparse tree based structure,
very little extra information is needed to store different translucent
meshes in the same scene.
The only major drawback of the current octree implementation is
that only 16 bits are allocated for the child offset value. This limits
the total possible amount of grids on a level to 65536. In practise
this has always been enough to generate at least 200k points, and a
run-time check is performed to ensure that no nodes are unreach-
able using 16 bit pointers. Using 32 bit values for the amount of
points contained in a node as well as the child offset would allow an
extreme amount of points to be stores, placing the limiting factor
on the amount of VRAM available on the GPU. Such an implemen-
tation was used for https://github.com/ThomasConrad/VoxelTrace
where millions of voxels could be Ray-traced in real-time.
In this project, lot of work has been put into developing a novel
approach for applying ReStir DI [Bitterli et al. 2020] with point-
sampled subsurface scattering. In the end, the developed approach
of sampling points on the translucent meshes (virtual pointlights),
then using reservoir sampling to evaluate the incident direct illumi-
nation for each sample, and finally approximating the subsurface
scattering radiance of a pixel by reservoir sampling of the virtual
pointlights, is quite similar to the approach for global illumination
of ReStir GI [Ouyang et al. 2021]. Applying techniques for virtual
light sampling from ReStir GI into the framework developed in
this work might help to improve both efficiency and stability of
rendering. The approach presented in this paper has complete sep-
aration between the evaluation of subsurface scattering and direct
illumination, but it may not be the most optimal solution.
With more time, a simple way to combine the real illumination
from lights in the scene with the scattered illumination from in-
side the mesh is to importance sample from both arealights and
virtual pointlights when evaluating the outgoing radiance of a pixel.
Instead of having a separate BSDF to handle diffuse and specular
reflections and a BSSRDF to handle subsurface scattering, combin-
ing them is a simpler and more scalable approach. Simplifying the
program in this way could also expand the parallel region of the
different shaders, giving a slight performance boost.
10
CONCLUSION
In this paper a method for real-time rendering of translucent ma-
terials is proposed. The method is implemented in a Vulkan based
hardware ray-traced renderer. The renderer is able to render direct
illumination in complex scenes with thousands of light sources at
hundreds of frames per second, while also capturing the soft and
smooth appearance of translucent materials. The renderer combines
the spatiotemporal reservoir sampling method with spatial octree
sampling for efficient samples of virtual pointlights for subsurface
scattering. Through testing, the advantages and disadvantages of
the different methods implemented have been analysed, and the
resulting best method is achieved by a combination of temporal
reservoir reuse and octree imporance sampling.
11
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my supervisor,
Jeppe Revall Frisvad, for providing invaluable guidance and unwa-
vering support throughout the project. His prompt responsiveness
and willingness to address queries, even during late hours, have
been greatly appreciated.
Furthermore, the I extend my gratitude to Morten Hannemose
for valuable discussions and feedback on the thesis layout, Mark
Bo Jensen for assistance with Vulkan, Henrik Philippi for insights
into filtering methods and DLSS, and Hans Henrik for assistance
in optimising GPU cache hits. I would also like to acknowledge
the department of DTU Compute for generously providing a high-
performance computer for conducting the experiments and grant-
ing access to an office space for productive work.
==PAGE:15==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
REFERENCES
Walter Arrighetti. 2017. The academy color encoding system (ACES): A professional
color-management framework for production, post-production and archival of still
and motion pictures.
https://doi.org/10.3390/jimaging3040040
Benedikt Bitterli, Chris Wyman, Matt Pharr, Peter Shirley, Aaron Lefohn, and Wojciech
Jarosz. 2020. Spatiotemporal reservoir resampling for real-time ray tracing with
dynamic direct lighting. ACM Transactions on Graphics 39, 4 (2020). https://doi.
org/10.1145/3386569.3392481
George Borshukov and J. P. Lewis. 2003. Realistic human face rendering for "The
Matrix Reloaded". In ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Sketches & Applications. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1145/965400.965470
M. T. Chao. 1982. A general purpose unequal probability sampling plan. Biometrika
69, 3 (1982). https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/69.3.653
Per H. Christensen. 2015. An approximate reflectance profile for efficient subsurface
scattering. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2015 Talks, SIGGRAPH 2015. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2775280.2792555
Dean Takahashi. 2013.
How Pixar made Monsters University, its latest techno-
logical marvel.
https://venturebeat.com/media/the-making-of-pixars-latest-
technological-marvel-monsters-university/
Eugene d’Eon, David Luebke, and Eric Enderton. 2007. Efficient rendering of hu-
man skin. EGSR’07 Proceedings of the 18th Eurographics conference on Rendering
Techniques (2007).
Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Toshiya Hachisuka, and Thomas Kim Kjeldsen. 2014. Directional
dipole model for subsurface scattering. ACM Transactions on Graphics 34, 1 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2682629
Christophe Hery. 2005. Implementing a skin BSSRDF (or several...). In ACM SIGGRAPH
2005 Courses, SIGGRAPH 2005. https://doi.org/10.1145/1198555.1198584
Nikolai Hofmann, Jon Hasselgren, and Jacob Munkberg. 2023. Joint Neural Denoising of
Surfaces and Volumes. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques 6, 1 (5 2023), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3585497
ITU-R BT.709-6. 2015. BT.709 : Parameter values for the HDTV standards for production
and international programme exchange. , 3 pages. https://www.itu.int/rec/R-REC-
BT.709-6-201506-I/en
Henrik Wann Jensen and Juan Buhler. 2002. A rapid hierarchical rendering technique
for translucent materials. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’02. https://doi.org/10.1145/566570.
566619
H. W. Jensen, S. R. Marschner, M. Levoy, and P. Hanrahan. 2001. A practical model
for subsurface light transport. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on
Computer Graphics. https://doi.org/10.1145/383259.383319
Jorge Jimenez, Veronica Sundstedt, and Diego Gutierrez. 2009. Screen-space perceptual
rendering of human skin. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception 6, 4 (9 2009),
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/1609967.1609970
James T. Kajiya. 1986. RENDERING EQUATION. Computer Graphics (ACM) 20, 4
(1986). https://doi.org/10.1145/15886.15902
Daqi Lin, Markus Kettunen, Benedikt Bitterli, Jacopo Pantaleoni, Cem Yuksel, and Chris
Wyman. 2022. Generalized resampled importance sampling: Foundations of ReSTIR.
ACM Transactions on Graphics 41, 4 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3528223.3530158
Daqi Lin, Chris Wyman, and Cem Yuksel. 2021. Fast volume rendering with spa-
tiotemporal reservoir resampling. ACM Transactions on Graphics 40, 6 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3478513.3480499
Daqi Lin and Cem Yuksel. 2020. Real-Time Stochastic Lightcuts. Proceedings of
the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques 3, 1 (2020).
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3384543
Quirin Meyer, Jochen Süßmuth, Gerd Sußner, Marc Stamminger, and Günther Greiner.
2010. On floating-point normal vectors. Computer Graphics Forum 29, 4 (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2010.01737.x
Fred E. Nicodemus. 1965. Directional Reflectance and Emissivity of an Opaque Surface.
Applied Optics 4, 7 (1965). https://doi.org/10.1364/ao.4.000767
Nvidia. 2021. RTX Direct Illumination (RTXDI). https://developer.nvidia.com/rtx/ray-
tracing/rtxdihttps://github.com/NVIDIAGameWorks/RTXDI
Nvidia Gameworks. 2023. Nvidia Real Time Denoiser Documentation.
Y. Ouyang, S. Liu, M. Kettunen, M. Pharr, and J. Pantaleoni. 2021. ReSTIR GI: Path
Resampling for Real-Time Path Tracing. Computer Graphics Forum 40, 8 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.14378
Matt Pharr and Randima Fernando. 2005. GPU gems 2 : programming techniques for
high-performance graphics and general-purpose computation. Vol. 2.
Holly Edith Rushmeier. 1988. Realistic Image Synthesis for Scenes with Radiatively
Participating Media. Ph. D. Dissertation. USA.
Christoph Schied, Anton Kaplanyan, Chris Wyman, Anjul Patney, Chakravarty R.Alla
Chaitanya, John Burgess, Shiqiu Liu, Carsten Dachsbacher, Aaron Lefohn, and
Marco Salvi. 2017. Spatiotemporal variance-guided filtering: Real-time reconstruc-
tion for path-traced global illumination. In Proceedings of High Performance Graphics,
HPG 2017. https://doi.org/10.1145/3105762.3105770
Justin Talbot, David Cline, and Parris Egbert. 2005.
Importance Resampling for
Global Illumination. Rendering Techniques (Proceedings of the Eurographics Sympo-
sium on Rendering 2005) August (2005). https://github.com/NVIDIAGameWorks/
RayTracingDenoiser/blob/master/README.md
Tomasz Stachowiak. 2022.
Kajiya Renderer: Global illumination overview.
https://github.com/EmbarkStudios/kajiya/blob/main/docs/gi-overview.md#noise-
with-small-and-bright-emissive-surfaces
Greg Turk. 1992. Re-tiling polygonal surfaces. Computer Graphics (ACM) 26, 2 (1992).
https://doi.org/10.1145/142920.134008
Eric Veach and Leonidas J. Guibas. 1995. Optimally combining sampling techniques for
Monte Carlo rendering. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques - SIGGRAPH ’95. ACM Press, New York, New
York, USA, 419–428. https://doi.org/10.1145/218380.218498
Jeffrey S. Vitter. 1985. Random Sampling with a Reservoir. ACM Transactions on
Mathematical Software (TOMS) 11, 1 (1985). https://doi.org/10.1145/3147.3165
A.J. Walker. 1974. New fast method for generating discrete random numbers with
arbitrary frequency distributions. Electronics Letters 10, 8 (1974), 127.
https:
//doi.org/10.1049/el:19740097
Z. Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. 2004. Image Quality Assessment:
From Error Visibility to Structural Similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing
13, 4 (4 2004), 600–612. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2003.819861
Cem Yuksel. 2015. Sample Elimination for Generating Poisson Disk Sample Sets. In
Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 34. https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12538
Cem Yuksel. 2021. Stochastic Lightcuts for Sampling Many Lights. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 27, 10 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/
TVCG.2020.3001271
==PAGE:16==
Thomas Conrad
12
APPENDIX
A
OCTREE DEPTH LIMITING AND SORTING
To ensure a maximum allowed depth of the octree, points are re-
jected if it is so close to a neighbouring point that it would force
the octree to be split in more levels than the preset maximum. In
this case, the maximum depth has been set at 20 levels, as this was
found to not slow down the initial uniform sampling of the mesh
due to too many rejected samples, while also allowing the light
integration of the octree to be performed with minimal overhead.
This is done by ensuring that no two closest points are within the
same voxel node at the bottom level. Each time the level of the
amount of potential bottom level nodes is octoupled, splitting each
node into half along each dimension. This means that for a unit
bounding box, the side length of a bottom level node will be
1
2𝑚
in each xyz dimension, 𝑚being the maximum amount of levels.
They will be aligned along a grid with each new node beginning
at a location in space 𝑁· 2−𝑚,
𝑁∈[0, . . . , 2𝑚−1]. One way to
check whether a given point will share a node with another in an
octree is of course to use perform a nearest neighbour search or
to check whether the given node already is filled. Both of these
operations can be drastically sped up with the use of the already
present octree, allowing them to run in O(log(𝑛)) time. As the
sampling of points on the translucent meshes is done as a pre-pass,
the time to sample can generally be ignored, but it would still vastly
extend the time required to complete the pass. A constant time
solution exists, by creating a unique hash for the bottom level node
which each new point is inserted into, and storing each hash in
a set2 this check can be performed at constant time. As there are
(2𝑚)3 possible bottom level nodes for an octree of depth 2𝑚, in the
case where 𝑚= 20 at least 60 bits are required to store an ID for
a bottom level node. One simple way to generate this node is to
use the inserted point’s location within the unitary bounding box
to generate the hash. This position consists of three floating point
values in the range [0, 1). By converting each to an 𝑚bit unsigned
integer representation, where the most valuable bit has a value of
1
2, the second most valuable bit has a value of 1
4, and so on, the
smallest possible discernible increment will have a width of
1
2𝑚, 𝑚
once again being the maximum level of the octree. Therefore any
two points within the same bottom level node will be given the
same 𝑚bit unsigned integer representation along each dimension.
By stacking the three m bit values together, a unique node identifier
is obtained. In the case of 𝑚= 20, at least 60 bits are required to do
that. This is equivalent to sorting all the possible bottom level nodes
along each individual dimension and combining them. The way
in which the identifier has been obtained in this work is instead
to use a Morton ordering. This ordering will sort the nodes in the
same way as the levels of the octree data structure. Therefore, if the
sampled points on the translucent mesh(es) are sorted according
to this ordering, the cache locality of the points in memory will be
improved leading to a slight speedup when integrating the light-
ing in the octree. Sorting the mesh samples based on the Morton
code can be done efficiently as the total amount of mesh samples is
limited, using any standard sorting method.
2An abstract data structure allowing constant time checks for the existence of an item.
B
RENDERS WITH DIFFERENT DIFFUSION
PROFILES
Figure 11: Render of the translucent Stanford bunny using
the unscattered diffusion profile.
Figure 12: Render of the translucent Stanford bunny using
the dipole multiscatter diffusion profile
==PAGE:17==
Many Lights Sampling Methods for Real-Time Rendering of Subsurface Scattering
Figure 13: Render of the translucent Stanford bunny using
the Christensen-Burley approximate diffusion profile.
