==PAGE:1==
Analysing public acceptance towards
repowering wind farms in Denmark
Ashwin Shankar (s210250)
Msc Sustainable Energy : Energy Systems Analysis
Master’s Thesis
Supervisor: Jacob Ladenburg
July 7th, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Proximity Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Turbine size, density and encounter frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Acceptance towards Repowering Turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Research Methodology
9
3.1
Survey Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Spatial Data calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Analysis of sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Data Grouping and Coding Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Model Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Data limitations
16
4.1
Vagueness of Spatial variable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Viewshed calculations disregarded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Missing clarity on self-stated spatial variable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Survey Responses could be outdated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Results
20
5.1
Effect of Density and Size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Turbine Encounters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Socio economic parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Conditional Analysis
23
6.1
Gender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Age
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
Seriousness towards Global Warming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Discussion and policy implications
28
8
Conclusion
30
References
32
A Case Study : Cape Wind Project
38
B
Literature on Environmental and Socio-economic characteristics influencing ac-
i
==PAGE:3==
ceptance towards turbines
39
C Descriptive Statistics
40
D Respondent exclusion test
44
E
Econometric models
45
E.1
Multiple Linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
E.2
Ordered Logit regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
F
Linear Hypothesis test
49
G Two sample t-test
50
H R language and Code
52
ii
==PAGE:4==
Analyzing Public Acceptance Towards Repowering wind farms in Denmark
Ashwin Shankar
Master’s Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
July 7 2023
Abstract
With major advancements in the wind industry, the existing landscape of onshore wind
turbines presents an opportunity for repowering where older turbines are required to be
replaced by newer highly efficient systems. Although repowering along with its benefits
enhances energy production across the globe, understanding social acceptance towards re-
powering is critical for its initiation. Hence based on the results of a web survey, this thesis
analyses the role of different spatial parameters that affect the attitude towards repowering
in Denmark. The findings indicate that people living in regions with a high density of large
turbines are more positively inclined towards repowering than those living in regions with
a high density of small turbines. Another important result indicates that there is a display
of increasing positive attitude among people who see 1-5 and 6-15 turbines on a daily basis
compared to those who see none. As a secondary result, it can be seen that socioeconomic
parameters in age, gender and seriousness towards global warming have a significant influ-
ence on the attitude towards repowering. A conditional analysis based on age also indicates
a cross-relation between age and the spatial parameters included in the model, with the older
population showing higher sensitivity to the spatial variables included in the analysis. To
conclude, policy implications pertaining to the analysis results are discussed.
Keywords: Repowering, Social Acceptance, Regression Analysis, Wind energy
1
Introduction
In the global quest for green sources of electricity production, wind energy over the 21st century
has seen major advancements with widespread adoption in different corners of the world. With
China and USA leading the way in terms of the total cumulative capacity of installed turbines,
European countries in Germany and Denmark have been the pioneers in promoting and utilizing
wind resources to the fullest [1]. However, with the advent of growing technology and an existing
ageing fleet of turbines, ”repowering ” has become a widely popular term in recent times [2].
Repowering is the process of dismantling old turbines and replacing them with newer highly
efficient systems, at existing wind energy sites ,to leverage wind conducive geographies and
produce more energy [3]. With wind technology, stated to cater to nearly 20% of the world’s
energy demand by 2030 and a large proportion of wind turbines older than 10 years, repowering
could potentially become a primary source of business in the wind industry in the near future
1
==PAGE:5==
(Table 1). Along with a high yield of energy, the process of repowering also carries a wide range
of economic, social and environmental benefits.
Due to an existing foundation set up and a scope for reusability of infrastructure, the planning
costs associated with repowering projects are set to be much lower driving cheaper production
and consumption of energy [4]. In the context of the energy markets, repowered turbines with
high efficiency are expected to improve the ancillary market services playing a crucial role in
maintaining power stability [3]. The new upcoming turbines are expected to have lower rota-
tional speed and noise emissions compared to the existing turbines. These rotational speeds and
bigger rotor sizes are said to contribute to a visually less intrusive view reducing the effects of
flickering that can cause photosensitive epilepsy [5]. Re-powering projects are also stated to re-
duce bird fatalities, in general, [6] but monitoring and assessing bird fatalities specifically with
repowered turbines is still unclear[7].
While repowering resonates with a high array of benefits, the implementation of wind tech-
nologies hinges on the support and cooperation of different stakeholders in local communities,
environmental organizations and policymakers. Research in this field shows that wind turbines
are often subject to public opposition 1, citing ”visual pollution” as the most significant reason
[8][9]. It is also understood that these aesthetic perceptions vary with different spatial factors in
size, distance and count of turbines in a locality. There has been extensive research supporting
this, emphasizing the role of social acceptance towards wind energy [10] and its importance in
driving decisions and policy-making across different regions. However, there exists a knowledge
gap when it comes to analyzing the public attitude towards repowering as a process, with only
a handful of studies in the literature [8] [11]. By replacing smaller turbines with larger efficient
systems, the visual landscape of the region is affected and hence it is vital to also capture the
attitude of people towards this change to understand and strengthen policy making in practice.
Therefore with the aim to facilitate well-informed decision-making, efficient project construc-
tion, and the establishment of enduring partnerships with communities, this thesis will examine
the acceptance of repowering with different spatial parameters in turbine density, size, and fre-
quency of turbine encounters in the analysis. To fully understand the relationship, the analysis
will also take other socioeconomic aspects into account.
The study is built on existing data collected from a web-based survey in Denmark used in Laden-
burg et al.[12]. With Denmark home to the highest percentage of the ageing fleet Table 1(1200+
turbines already active for more than 20 years [3]) restricted by the small size of the country,
understanding repowering in Denmark is crucial and highly relevant for the analysis.
An overview of existing literature, setup of the survey & data collection, results, discussions and
policy implications will be explained further in the upcoming sections of the thesis.
1A case study on a Wind Project affected due to public opposition is documented in Appendix A
2
==PAGE:6==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Denmark
Germany
Spain
EU28
USA
China
Cumulative capacity
4.4
53.2
23.5
160.7
97.7
206.8
installed in 2019 (GW)
Share of cumulative capacity
≥10years
55%
43%
73%
39%
34%
7%
≥15years
53%
26%
27%
17%
6%
0.40%
≥20years
23%
4%
3%
3%
1%
0.20%
Table 1: Cumulative Capacity Installed in 2019 and Share of Cumulative Capacity,recreated
from Kitzing et al. [2]
2
Theoretical Background
With one of the oldest reports published back in 1987, [13], there has been a wide spectrum
of studies across the globe centred around analyzing the public attitude towards wind energy.
Through a diverse range of methods employed and parameters estimated successfully in the dif-
ferent studies, it is understood that social acceptance is a complex, multidimensional, culturally
conditioned and socially structured phenomenon [14][15]. These attitudes are also described as
a by-product of personal beliefs, the outcome of community or individual benefits and imme-
diate emotions.[16][17][8]. Although social aspects play a vital role in gauging the acceptance
levels towards wind energy, spatial parameters have been one of the most influential research
points about the subject and hence will be highlighted in this thesis. Some of the most common
spatial parmaters addressed in literature are that of the distance of residence from the turbine in
proximity hypothesis and frequency of turbine encounters daily. Hence the analysis around these
parameters will be reviewed in this article to provide a good understanding of the role of spatial
elements and their influence in defining one’s attitude. With acceptance towards repowering be-
ing the main focus of this study, a sub-section on a handful of literature addressing it will also
be documented in this section along with different socioeconomic parameters in Appendix B.
The overview of literature addressing the different elements described can be seen in Table 2.2
2.1
Proximity Hypothesis
The proximity hypothesis in the context of wind acceptance states that people living closer to
a wind turbine are expected to have a more negative perception towards it than people living
further away [18]. The analysis around this hypothesis as a spatial parameter in most models
has been quite complex to understand with differences in results across literature. To list a few,
2It is to be noted that the example of literature discussed in this section caters to the relevant parameters essential
for this study and the list in Table 2 presented is not exhaustive.
3
==PAGE:7==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
the studies by Andersen et al.[19] and Warren et al. [20] find evidence that increasing distance
from a wind turbine results in a decrease in acceptance levels whereas Jones and Eiser [21]
and AMR-interactive [22] find the opposite. A possible explanation that falsifies the proximity
hypothesis is the concept of residential sorting explained in Ladenburg and Skotte [23] where
they find contrasting results in lower willingness to pay towards offshore wind turbines with
increasing distances with respect to that of Ladenburg and Dubgaard [24] conducted two years
prior to their study. They explained that residential sorting could be a possible justification for
this trend where respondents who are comfortable or do not find wind turbines visually intrusive
tend to relocate or live closer to it whereas the rest reside farther away from it. This explanation
could hold true concerning onshore wind turbines as well. The temporal influence of people’s
perception towards wind turbines [25][26] could be an important parameter to consider, but is
beyond the scope of this thesis.
Swofford and Slattery [27] conducted a survey to capture the physical and environmental char-
acteristics towards wolf ridge wind farms located in Cooke County in Texas. With the survey
being rolled out to different zones differentiated by their distance from the mentioned site, they
found that people living closer to the site had negative perceptions towards wind turbines when
compared to people living in zones that a far away.
Warren et al. [20] conducted a face-to-face survey to gauge the public acceptance towards wind
farms across different sites in Scotland and Ireland in 2003. The results of this survey for all
sites in southwest Ireland were against the proximity hypothesis, with respondents living away
from the sites being more significantly negative to Wind farms than the ones living closer.
Thayer and Freeman [13] analyze public response towards wind energy development in the Al-
tamont Pass. They report that people who are familiar with turbines have a negative attitude
towards it perceiving them as inefficient, unattractive etc. whereas others think of it as a new in-
novation that is efficient. They also report that respondents living closer to the site have negative
perceptions compared to those living further away.
With respect to perceptions towards offshore wind farms, this hypothesis holds true in the case
of Ladenburg[28] where he tests the effect of prior exposure to offshore wind farms by capturing
people’s attitude towards its visual impact by rolling a questionnaire and comparing the results
between the national sample and the sample of people living close to two prominent offshore
sites. The paper concludes that people with prior exposure to offshore wind farms have a signif-
icant positive attitude in general and it has a positive correlation with the distance of the offshore
turbine from the shore.
Addressing the impact of visibility on the attitude towards wind energy Jones and Eiser [21]
conducted a survey across five different communities in the UK and came to the conclusion
that although the proximity hypothesis held true with the acceptance towards wind energy,the
relationship is not linear in nature with distance but also highly depends on factors like the
4
==PAGE:8==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
visibility of it. Therefore although the Proximity hypothesis proves to be a simple metric to
capture the acceptance levels towards wind turbines, various other factors like viewshed impact
and turbine encounter frequency could contribute to a stronger analysis.
2.2
Turbine size, density and encounter frequency
Viewshed impacts are considered to be one of the crucial factors for creating a negative impres-
sion towards wind turbines [29]. It is believed that the impact of turbines is so drastic that it
results in a decrease in the property value of a region temporarily resulting in uncertainty and
fear among the public[30][31]. One of the reasons for the visual intrusiveness of the turbines
is accounted for its size and population in a region. It is often the case that small turbines are
usually mounted in clusters in order to cut capital investment on different transmission systems
and to meet rising energy demands. With repowering being the main focus of the study it is
highly critical to analyze the size, density of turbines and their effect on daily encounters which
form the basis of people’s attitude towards it.
With respect to the size of the turbines, there have been consistent results across the literature
stating the public has a positive attitude towards a smaller number of larger turbines in their
locality [32] [11] [26]. Although Lee et al. [33] being one of the older studies have contradictory
views on it . Through a combination of street and in-house interviews in locations in the UK,
they conclude that people had decreasing percentage acceptability towards wind turbines with an
increasing number of turbines in their vicinity. The majority of respondents also showed liking
towards a larger number of smaller turbines compared to a smaller number of large turbines.
However, the difference in this was minimal and not stated as significant by the study. Therefore
by virtue of recent articles, the public is expected to have a liking towards the smaller density
of turbines even if they are mounted at a greater height. One possible explanation could be
that commercial wind turbines are usually mounted in clusters, optimizing costs and utilising
wind resources to the fullest creating a negative viewshed impact around the locality. Hence
the analysis and inclusion of the density of turbines as a spatial parameter become critical for
attesting the public attitudes.
Ladenburg and Dahlgaard [34] address the correlation between turbine density and general ac-
ceptance towards wind turbines through a survey in Denmark. They conclude that people who
see more turbines on a frequent basis generally have a negative attitude towards them and the
threshold for opposition towards on-shore turbines was found to be five sightings per day in the
longer run. The study discovers a threshold state beyond which the viewshed of turbines is not
a significant parameter in gauging the attitude of people towards on-shore wind turbines.
Warren and McFayden [35] developed a comparative study towards the acceptance of wind en-
ergy in two different sites Gigha and Kintyre in Scotland based on the ownership of wind farms.
Gigha during the study was home to three small turbines with a capacity of 0.7MW whereas
5
==PAGE:9==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Kintyre had a capacity of more than 100MW with close to 70 turbines in the region. Although
the main result of the paper concluded with community ownership having a significant impact
towards the attitude, various comments by the survey takers emphasised that frequent turbine
sightings might be an important factor in describing their attitude towards the turbines as Gigha
respondents had fewer concerns regarding the negative impacts of wind turbines.
Betakova et al. [36] tests the visual preferences with respect to the number of wind turbines
and their distance away from the observer. By identifying three aesthetically varying landscapes
and changing the count and distance of wind farms from the observer, the study concluded the
gradual increase in turbines to the same landscape background caused a progressive decrease in
visual preferences. The study stated that the most aesthetic location was deemed ” the worst”
after the inclusion of more wind farms and vice versa. Based on the distance from the observers it
was noticed that the proximity hypothesis is true and the threshold distance for the disappearance
of negative attitude was very small for a less aesthetic landscape compared to a better-looking
one.
2.3
Acceptance towards Repowering Turbines
With plenty of literature addressing the techno-economic facets of repowering projects [3][4]
[37] [38][39] and also emphasizing its market potential and policy implications for the suc-
cessful energy transition in the future [2] [26] there are only a handful of studies that gauge
the acceptance towards repowering. It is therefore important to analyze these studies to draw
parallels with the outcome of this thesis.
Ladenburg et al. [11] address the attitude of people towards wind energy on two different
schemes namely- the development of more onshore wind turbines and the repowering of on-
shore turbines. The estimates of the conditional binary logit models developed in this paper
state that respondents with a view of the wind turbines in their locality have a significant nega-
tive attitude toward the increasing number of turbines whereas the attitude of people without any
turbines in their viewshed do not have a significant relationship with the number of turbines in
their locality. Although there is no significance between the attitude towards repowering and the
count of turbines in the locality, the results point out that replacing smaller turbines with larger
ones could possibly help in decreasing the turbine density in the locality leading to a more pos-
itive attitude towards onshore wind turbines although larger turbines might be in the viewshed
of many more living in the area.
Frantal [8] conducted a survey to understand the acceptance towards repowering from inhabi-
tants and local government bodies across municipalities in the Czech Republic. Through a set
of questionnaires rolled out to two different groups of mayors and local residents, he found that
the most cited reason for the negative attitude towards repowering was that of ” disruption to
landscape”.However, he also found that support towards the future development of wind tur-
6
==PAGE:10==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
bines correlated strongly with perceived economic profits associated with the projects thereby
concluding that establishing a spatially and socially structured economic benefit scheme will
outweigh the visual impact created by a repowered turbine.
Although these studies on repowering capture the spatial effect towards its acceptance, the com-
bined effect of the size and density of turbines on the acceptance are not documented in the
literature yet. With the agenda to explore this effect, this thesis aims to develop a correlation
among different spatial variables in density, size and turbine encounters on a daily basis with
acceptance towards repowering with other socio-economic parameters 3 also taken into consid-
eration.
3A theoretical study with regard to socioeconomic and environmental parameters can be found in Appendix B.
7
==PAGE:11==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Literature
Year
Sample size
Proximty
Hypothesis
Turbine size
and sightings
Repowering
Other
Characteristics1
Thayer and Freemano,n [13]
1987
600
✓t
✓
Lee et al.o,n [33]
1989
✓NS
✓
Andersen et al. o,n [19]
1997
690
✓f
✓
Eko,g [40]
2005
547
✓
Warren et al.o,e [20]
2005
240
✓f
Swofford and Slatteryo,g [27]
2009
200
✓t
Ladenburg off [28]
2009
350-700
✓t
✓S
✓
Jones and Eisero,g [21]
2009, 2010
417
✓t
Warren and Mc Faydeno,e & n [35]
2010
106
✓
Ladenburg and Dahlgaard o,e [34]
2012
1086
✓S
✓
Ladenburg et al.o & r,n [11]
2013
1050
✓NS
✓
✓
Betakova et al.o,g [36]
2015
169
✓t
✓S
Linden et al.o,g [41]
2015
3457
✓
Ladenburg o & off,n [42]
2015
1072
✓NS
✓
✓
Frantal o & r [8]
2015
81
✓NS
✓
✓
Lacal Aranategui [4]
2020
✓
Ladenburg et al. o & off ,g [12]
2020
✓t
✓S
✓
Ladenburg et al.[23]
2022
350
✓t
✓-
✓
Table 2: Overview of Literature addressing acceptance towards wind energy or repowering with different spatial and socioeconomic
parameters taken into consideration
Literature : Acceptance towards o : Onshore ,off : Offshore , r : Repowering of n : new or e : existing turbines or attitude in g : general
Proximity hypothesis : t signifies paper’s result true whereas f denotes the results are false with respect to the general proximity hypothesis
Turbine sightings &size : S - significance ,NS - non-significance , −not reported for turbine sightings wrt acceptance
1 Physical and Socioeconomic characteristics that influence acceptance parameters
8
==PAGE:12==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
3
Research Methodology
3.1
Survey Setup
The analysis in this thesis is based on a subset of questions included in a survey conducted by
Ladenburg et al.[12]. The data pertaining to this thesis was obtained through a web survey hosted
by Userneeds in 2011-12 in Denmark. The invite to answer this survey was rolled out between
December 2011 & January 2012 to sample representatives of age, gender, education, and house-
hold incomes geographically distributed across the different postal codes in the country. The
analysis of the sample will be provided in the results section of this thesis. The survey as ex-
plained was carried out in the form of 3 different sections of questions based on their attitudes,
choice experiment and socio-economic parameters of the respondent.
The attitudinal questions were one of the first sections presented to most survey takers with
questions based on global warming, their acceptance level of investment in renewable sources
of energy and their attitude towards different wind energy concepts. All the questions barring the
one addressing global warming followed the five-scale Agree-Disagree rating scale [43] ,with
options based on a scale of 1-5 with 1 representing a highly negative attitude,5 a highly positive
attitude and 3 indicating neutrality.
The socio-economic parameters included in the survey are the different income levels that people
belonged to, their educational backgrounds and their connection to the labour market.
The section on the choice experiments is out of the scope of this thesis and a detailed explanation
about it can be seen in Ladenburg et al.[12]
Testing the design of the survey,the formulation of the different questions and the attribute lev-
els for the choice experiment, a focus group interview and a pilot survey were carried out. The
response rate was only 8.6 % for the pilot study as it involved no participation reminders. Un-
fortunately due to the mistakes made by the host website, the response rate for the actual survey
could not be estimated. Although based on the existing literature on similar studies Table 2 the
sample size for this thesis surpasses most studies with a total of 1773 responses to the survey.
3.2
Spatial Data calculations
Spatial data like the turbine densities based on the size of turbines across Denmark was obtained
from the Master Data Register of Wind turbines maintained by the Danish Energy Agency [44].
Since the survey was released in 2011 -2012, this data had to be filtered to turbines only es-
tablished before the 31st of December 2012. With the help of GIS (Geographical Information
System) tools as explained in Ladenburg et al.[12] the density of wind turbines based on their
size could be calculated easily based on the count of turbines per postal code divided by the area
it covers (Figure 1). The turbine density variables were segregated for each size based on its
9
==PAGE:13==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
capacity as small ( 0-750kW), medium(750kW-1.5MW) and large (1.5MW + ) turbines.
Although turbine density is an important variable taken into consideration, the survey does not
account for the exact location of the respondent introducing some limitations that could affect the
results of the analysis. A detailed explanation of the limitations can be seen in further sections.
In this study, all respondents belonging to a postal region are assumed to be equally influenced
by all the turbines in their zonal area of residence (Figure 2).
Figure 1: Count of turbines per postal code [12]
Figure 2: Postal Codes and their centroids
10
==PAGE:14==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
3.3
Analysis of sample
The respondent sample for the survey rolled out covers different sociodemographic characteris-
tics and geographies representative of the Danish National Sample. In reality, there are 593 4
recognized zonal codes in Denmark but the sample only states 397 of them representing 70% of
the areas. Therefore spatial factors used in the analysis such as wind power density were only
calculated for the zones used in the study and only covers respondents from these zones.
With respect to gender, the sample used for analysis is very much a good representation of the
actual population distribution of Denmark in 2012 ( Appendix C). With respondent ages ranging
from 20 years to 67 years, this sample covers one-third of the age category in Denmark at the
same time. This sample representation is due to the age restrictions associated with taking the
survey. There is a very high representation of middle-aged people ranging between 45-60 years
whereas the youth (20-29 years ) and the old (60-69 years) are under-represented. The average
age of the sample is seen to be 45 years, which is greater than the Danish national average of
43.8 years.
With close to 25% of the population earning higher than the Danish national average and one-
third of the sample having an intermediate higher education, it is all the more important to control
for the socio-demographic variables in the analysis.
With respect to the self-stated spatial variable, nearly 86.5% of the respondents do not have a
view of a turbine from their summer house or permanent residence. These results are slightly
on the higher side when compared to the report of similar studies conducted using the national
sample survey earlier [45] [11].
3.4
Data Grouping and Coding Variables
For developing more concrete results from the model, some responses to these characteristics
are grouped together to form a new category to maintain a good sample size and distribution of
variables. The numeric values represented in Table 11 will be used for describing the sample
and the need for grouping.
With regards to the education variable, all responses are grouped into three different variables
namely ”Not qualified ”, ”Educated” and ”basic education”. The not-qualified group here con-
sists of people who have their highest level of education in Primary school, High school or other
categories accounting for 17% of the sample. The educated group for the analysis consist of
respondents with intermediate, or long higher education including PhD and research training
forming 54% of the sample. The third category under the education variable is people with
4In total are 1,035 postal areas. However, historically Copenhagen has 449 small postal areas, with as few as
one person living in some postal areas. As there are not any onshore turbines in central Copenhagen, these are
subdivided into three main postal variables in the data
11
==PAGE:15==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
vocational training and shorter higher education termed as the group with basic education ac-
counting for 28% of the total sample.
With regards to the respondent’s labour status, they are divided into 3 groups ”Unemployed”,
”employed” and ”retired”. The ”unemployed” category here consists of respondents who are
students, Home-maker, unemployed or belong to any other labour categories outside of the op-
tions provided in the survey. They account for nearly 17% of the total sample. The ”employed”
category consists of 71% of the total sample including people who work for the government, pri-
vate firms or if they are self-employed. The retired category consists of early and post-retirees
for the analysis who account for 11% of the sample.
The self-stated spatial variables also required data grouping as the options pertaining to questions
like ”turbines seen on a daily basis” and ”turbines seen from the respondent’s summer house or
residence” had a high level of detail in the responses as shown in the Table 11 (Appendix C).
Due to a high skewness in the options chosen, data grouping here is highly relevant in order
to carry out the analysis using linear regression. With regards to the ”turbines seen on a daily
basis”, the options were grouped into four categories from the six presented namely people who
can see ”None”,”1-5 turbines”,”6-15 turbines” and ”15+ turbines” on a daily basis. Similarly,
”turbines viewed from the residence” were categorized as None,1-3 and 3+ turbines seen and
the question on ”years living in the same residence ”were categorized as 5-9years, 10-14years
and 15+ years.
An overview of the distribution of the sample after the grouping of variables is presented in
Table 3 along with the coding values used in R software to run the different regression models.
3.5
Model Building
Of 1773 respondents, 53 were excluded from this study as they chose not to answer the question
related to repowering (Appendix D). Out of the rest, as seen in the Table 4, 1018 people had
a positive response towards repowering with 483 of them being highly positive whereas 228
having a negative attitude with 87 being very highly negative. 474 respondents out of the total
had a neutral stand on repowering, representing nearly 28% of the total survey takers.
Question:
What is your opinion on replacing many small wind turbines with
fewer but large windmills?
Rating scale:
Much Positive
Positive
Neutral
Negative
Much Negative
Response
count:
483
535
474
141
87
Table 4: Count of responses for question on attitude towards wind turbines
The response distribution across the different self-stated survey questions is described in Fig-
12
==PAGE:16==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Responses
Mean / Percentage
Coding variables
Attitude towards Repowering
Chosen as Continuous Variable
Much Negative
5%
=1 if Much Negative
Negative
8%
=2 if Negative
Neutral
28%
=3 if neutral
Positive
31%
=4 if Positive
Much positive
28%
=5 if Much Positive
Density of small Turbines per km2
0.050
Continuous Variable
Density of medium Turbines per km2
0.007
Continuous Variable
Density of large Turbines per km2
0.003
Continuous Variable
Number of Wind Turbines seen on a typical day
None
49%
=1 if None,else=0
1-5
27%
=1 if 1-5 ,else 0
6-15
19%
=1 if 6-15, else =0
15+
5%
=1 if 15+,else =0
Wind turbines seen from Summer House
0
86%
=1 if 0,else =0
1-3
8%
=1 if 1-3,else =0
3+
7%
=1 if 3+,else =0
Gender
Female
49%
=1 if Male else 0
Male
51%
Age
45.13
Continuous Variable
Education Level
Not Qualified
17%
=1 if Not Qualified,else =0
Higher Education
54%
=1 if Higher Education,else =0
Basic Education
28%
=1 if Basic Education,else =0
Income
Chosen as Continuous Variable
Under 100,000
5%
=1 if under 100,000
100,000-199,999
8%
=2 if ’100,000-199,999
200,000-299,999
9%
=3 if ’200,000-299,999
300,000-399,999
14%
=4 if 300,000-399,999
400,000-499,999
12%
=5 if 400,000-499,999
500,000-599,999
14%
=6 if 500,000-599,999
600,000-699,999
12%
=7 if 600,000-699,999
Over 700,000
26%
=8 if Over 700,000
Work
Unemployed
12%
=1 if Unemployed,else =0
Employed
72%
=1 if Employed,else =0
Retired
15%
=1 if Retired,else =0
Serious about Global warming
Yes
86%
=1 if Yes,else =0
No
8%
=1 if No,else =0
Dont Know
6%
=1 if Don’t Know,else =0
Plans to setup turbines nearby
Yes
15%
=1 if Yes,else =0
No
17%
=1 if No,else =0
Dont Know
68%
=1 if Don’t know,else =0
Years at Residence
0-4 years
38%
=1 if 0-4 years,else =0
5-9 years
20%
=1 if 5-9 years,else =0
10-14 years
23%
=1 if 10-14 years,else =0
15+ years
19%
=1 if 15+years,else =0
Table 3: Variable Coding
13
==PAGE:17==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
ure 10 (Appendix C).
To understand the spatial effects on the attitude towards the repowering of wind farms, a mul-
tiple linear regression model (subsection E.1) is developed in the analysis with the question of
the stated attitude as the dependent variable and spatial & other parameters as the predictor
variables.
Plotting the graph between the responses to the attitude towards repowering and the total turbine
density of the postal area, it is evident that 721 out of the 1720 respondents live in areas with
zero turbines in their postal area (Figure 3) (Figure 4).
Hence a dummy variable is accounted for in all the models to capture the difference between the
attitudes of people with and without turbines in their postal regions.
People living in zero turbine region=



0,
if Total density of turbines per sq km > 0 (n=999)
1,
if Total density of turbines per sq km = 0 (n=721)
Four different linear regression models are developed here :
Model 1 captures the direct influence of the density of turbines in a postal region differenti-
ated by their size in the attitude towards repowering.
Model 2 is an extension of model 1 with the inclusion of the variables capturing turbine encoun-
ters on a daily basis.
Model 3 is further extended to include viewshed variables in the number of turbines seen from
the respondent’s residence or summer house.
Model 4 accounts for all socioeconomic parameters of the respondents alongside the different
spatial variables described in Model 3 .
It can be clearly seen that the inclusion of new variables in the model improves the R square
metric of linear regression indicating a relatively strong positive correlation. Although the cor-
relation as a metric is very weak. Therefore, the agenda of this linear regression analysis is not to
predict the acceptance but to analyze the parameter estimates, its magnitude, size and direction
with respect to the response variable.
14
==PAGE:18==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Figure 3: Turbine density frequency
Figure 4: Acceptance towards Repowering Vs Turbine Density for each respondent
An Ordered logit regression model is also developed taking into account all the parameters used
in Model 4.
Although, it is to be noted that the results (subsection E.2) pertaining to the magnitude, direction
and significance of parameters is similar to that of linear regression. Therefore for the sake of
simplicity of model inference, further sections of the report will only discuss the results of the
multiple linear regression analysis performed.
15
==PAGE:19==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
4
Data limitations
Unlike other studies that have been designed to address the subject of attitude across individual
turbine-affected locations [8][20][35], the survey utilized in this thesis was distributed across
different zones of the country to capture people’s attitudes and decision-making regarding wind
energy in Denmark. The survey was also not explicitly designed to analyze people’s acceptance
of repowering wind turbines but was more generic in the context of wind energy. This indeed
leads to some limitations with data for this specific analysis as more questions or calculations
could contribute to a better study. Some of the major limitations are highlighted in this section -
4.1
Vagueness of Spatial variable
The web-based survey only captures the respondent’s postal area of residence and not their exact
location or address. This indeed does not allow the study to analyse the exact distance of the
wind farms located from the area of residence. Thus it is assumed that all respondents within a
particular postal zone are equally attached to the turbines through the turbine density parameter
Table 7. This also leads to an assumption that all people belonging to a postal region have a view
of all the turbines located in the region which might not be the case. Therefore, the different
spatial variables included in the modelling may or may not have correlations with each other
affecting the analysis. This factor can be explained through an illustration based on fictional
data Figure 5.
For ease in explanation let us assume that there are only 3 zones in this illustration with each
zone varying in area from one other ( Zone 1 : 3 sq km, Zone 2: 2 sq Km, Zone 3: 4 sq km) .
Respondent 1 (R1) has a residence in Zone 1 and travels to Zone 2 for work on a daily basis.
This results in him/her viewing 4 small wind turbines on their way to work and 2 large ones
located right in the vicinity of their house. Hence respondent 1 sees 6 turbines on a daily basis
to influence their decision towards the acceptance of wind energy or repowering in this case.
Although with regard to the analysis of this article, the size of the turbines is not captured by
the self-stated questions described. Similarly, based on the illustration, the answers for other
responses are tabulated in Table 7. It can be seen that since all respondents are equally assumed
to be affected by all the turbines in their postal area, the turbine density with regard to size
remains the same for both R1 and R2 in this analysis despite a difference in their daily encounters
with them.
From the illustration described in Figure 5 it is evident from Table 7 that although the density of
turbines accounts for the size, the self-stated spatial questions in ” Turbines seen on a daily basis
” and ” Turbines seen from residence/summer house ” does not account for it ,not capturing the
actual reason behind a resident’s acceptance towards repowering.
16
==PAGE:20==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
4.2
Viewshed calculations disregarded
The questions based on ” Turbines seen on a daily basis” and ” Turbines seen from residence/-
summer house ” only capture the self-stated answers of the respondent. The results of these
questions are only stated estimates that are subject to errors. Hence seeking inspiration from
Jensen et al. [46], a thorough spatial modelling can be performed with the use of a high-level
digital surface model (DSM) to calculate the exact viewshed for the respondent based on their
location and distance from the wind turbines.
The inclusion of the exact location of the resident can make the analysis more robust by Spatial
variables used in the models that only capture the stated preference of the respondent,
4.3
Missing clarity on self-stated spatial variable
The survey question pertaining to ” Turbines seen from residence/summer house ” is not very
clear or could be two separate questions in the survey as there is a mismatch between the re-
sponses given to ”turbines seen on a daily basis” and ”turbines seen from the residence or sum-
mer house”. For example, as seen in Table 5 some people who see zero ”turbines on a daily
basis” actually state that they see more than zero turbines from their residence or summer house.
These numbers are highlighted in yellow in the table. In this situation, it can only be assumed
that these respondents refer to their encounters from the summer residence which they do not
visit on a regular basis. Hence the question in itself could be framed better in order to gauge the
exact attitude based on these variables included in the model.
Turbines seen from residence
or summer house
Turbines seen on
a daily basis
Zero
1
2-3
4-5
6-10
11+
Zero
802
5
15
9
4
2
1-5
385
23
40
12
3
3
6-10
158
1
24
16
13
1
11-15
70
6
6
14
12
4
16-20
30
4
6
1
2
21+
28
6
4
4
7
Table 5: Count of responses to the self-stated spatial variables
4.4
Survey Responses could be outdated
With the survey being rolled out between the years 2011-12 the attitudes and responses captured
could be outdated and irrelevant in the modern age. As emphasized by Frantal et al. [8] people
17
==PAGE:21==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
who do not have much information about wind turbines, repowering or upcoming projects, usu-
ally base their attitudes on trust entailed in their local governing body or the decision makers[47].
With a high volume of information circling the media around depleting resources and the im-
portance of renewable energy compared to the previous decade, there could be a possibility of a
change in the opinion and behaviour of the survey respondents in the current day and age. Hence
it could be more relevant to analyze newer surveys that could also include the expectations of
local decision-makers to provide a stronger case for current policy implications and changes[8].
18
==PAGE:22==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Figure 5: Illustration Example
Turbine Size
Zone 1
Zone 2
Zone 3
Large
2
1
0
Medium
3
1
0
Small
4
3
0
Total
9
5
0
Table 6: Count of turbines in illustration for each
Zone by Turbine Size
Turbine encounters
R1
R2
R3
R4
Daily basis
8
3
3
0
Residence / Summer house
2
0
0
0
Turbine Density
Large
0.66
0.66
0.5
0
Medium
1
1
0.5
0
small
1.3
1.3
1.5
0
Table 7: Turbine Encounter and Density per resident
19
==PAGE:23==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
5
Results
5.1
Effect of Density and Size
The results pertaining to the density of the turbines categorized by their size are consistent across
all four models developed (Table 12). The βdensity of small turbines per sq km is significant at a 90%
confidence level and points in the direction of having a negative attitude towards the question of
repowering. This indicates that a higher number of small turbines in a postal region lowers the ac-
ceptance levels towards repowering. Similarly, for βdensity of medium turbines per sq km, the param-
eter estimate points towards having a negative acceptance whereas, βdensity of large turbines per sq km
indicates an increasingly positive attitude with a higher density of larger turbines in the region.
Although these values are not significantly different from zero, it is important to analyze if the
spatial variables are different from one another [48]. Hence a linear hypothesis test (Appendix F)
is conducted between the three spatial variables across all the models and the results are docu-
mented in Table 8.
It can be seen that the difference in the coefficient of linear regression across model 1-3 for
the βdensity of large turbines per sq km and βdensity of small turbines per sq km are significantly different
from one another at a 90% confidence level whereas it is insignificant for model 4. The coeffi-
cients also point in the opposite direction signifying that a unit increase in the density of large
turbines in a locality leads to a relatively positive outlook towards repowering unlike that of
smaller turbines where a unit increase is expected to decrease the acceptance level. (Figure 6).
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
Figure 6: Model Coefficients : Density per sq km of wind turbines by size
Linear hypothesis test
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
βdensity of large turbines per sq km - βdensity of small turbines per sq km
90%
90%
90%
x
βdensity of large turbines per sq km - βdensity of medium turbines per sq km
90%
x
x
x
βdensity of medium turbines per sq km - βdensity of small turbines per sq km
x
x
x
x
Table 8: Level of Confidence of linear hypothesis tests across all models
20
==PAGE:24==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Intercept
3.749∗∗∗
3.649∗∗∗
3.639∗∗∗
3.832∗∗∗
(0.058)
(0.068)
(0.068)
(0.157)
Density of small Turbines per sq km
−0.785∗
−0.858∗
−0.825∗
−0.833∗
(0.465)
(0.467)
(0.469)
(0.465)
Density of medium Turbines per sq km
−1.174
−1.588
−1.315
−1.577
(1.509)
(1.514)
(1.524)
(1.511)
Density of Large Turbines per sq km
2.498
1.975
2.155
1.901
(1.622)
(1.637)
(1.638)
(1.637)
People living in zero turbine region
−0.048
0.001
0.013
−0.018
(0.071)
(0.073)
(0.074)
(0.073)
Can see 1-5 wind turbines daily
0.123∗
0.111∗
0.095
(0.066)
(0.067)
(0.068)
Can see 6-15 wind turbines daily
0.237∗∗∗
0.251∗∗∗
0.224∗∗∗
(0.077)
(0.079)
(0.082)
Can see 15+ wind turbines daily
0.161
0.187
0.091
(0.126)
(0.129)
(0.133)
Can see 1-3 wind turbines from residence
0.150
0.127
(0.105)
(0.104)
Can see 3+ wind turbines from residence
−0.164
−0.127
(0.114)
(0.113)
Male
0.346∗∗∗
(0.055)
age
−0.005∗
(0.003)
Higher Education
0.056
(0.081)
Basic Education
0.030
(0.087)
Income
0.007
(0.015)
employed
−0.070
(0.100)
Retired
−0.014
(0.115)
Not serious about global warming
−0.337∗∗∗
(0.112)
Don’t know if serious about global warming
−0.185∗
(0.098)
No Plans to setup turbine nearby
−0.089
(0.099)
Dont know about setting up turbines nearby
−0.047
(0.079)
5-9 years at residence
0.012
(0.075)
10-14 years at residence
−0.163∗∗
(0.078)
15+ years at residence
0.018
(0.090)
R2
0.003
0.009
0.012
0.046
Adj. R2
0.001
0.005
0.007
0.033
Num. obs.
1720
1720
1720
1720
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
Table 9: Multiple Linear regression model results
21
==PAGE:25==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Similarly, the linear hypothesis test is repeated for βdensity of large turbines per sq km and
βdensity of medium turbines per sq km and it is found to be significantly different only for Model 1 at
a 90% level and insignificant for the rest of the models. The test also clarifies that
βdensity of medium turbines per sq km and βdensity of small turbines per sq km is not significantly differ-
ent from one another.
Hence with respect to the turbine density and size, it is evident that people living with a higher
number of large turbines in a postal region have a relatively positive attitude towards repowering
when compared to people living in regions with a high density of small turbines.
5.2
Turbine Encounters
When compared to people who see zero turbines on a daily basis it is evident that respon-
dents with some turbine encounters have a relatively positive attitude towards re-powering.
βCan see 1−5 turbines daily is significantly different from people who do not see turbines on a daily
basis at a 90% confidence level across models 2 and 3 whereas βCan see 6−15 turbines daily is sig-
nificant at a 95% confidence level across all the models. βCan see 15+ turbines daily indicates a
relatively positive attitude towards repowering in comparison with people who see zero turbines
on a daily basis but is not significantly different from it. Purely looking at the magnitude of the
parameter estimates it can be seen that the relative increase in positive attitude does not have a
linear relationship with the increase in daily sightings, but in fact, becomes slightly less posi-
tive when people encounter 15+ turbines on a daily basis. A possible explanation for this is the
fact that smaller turbines are usually mounted in clusters resulting in a high number of encoun-
ters when compared to larger turbines decreasing the acceptance levels. Therefore, increasing
turbine encounters do not have a linear relationship with the attitude towards repowering, but is
rather complex to define beyond the threshold point of 15 turbines on a daily basis in this analysis
Figure 8.
For the self-stated spatial variable in ” Turbines seen from residence or summer house,” it is
clear that people who see more than 3 turbines from their residence or summer house have
a relatively negative attitude towards repowering whereas people having 1-3 turbines have a
relatively positive attitude compared to those who have no turbines in their viewshed. However,
the results are not significant across the models used.
5.3
Socio economic parameters
Out of all the socioeconomic parameters added to model 4, we find that gender is a significant
parameter in deciding the attitude towards repowering. With female respondents as the base for
the analysis, it is clear that males have a comparatively positive acceptance level. It can also be
seen that age as a continuous variable here is significant at a 90 % confidence level and depicts
that younger respondents have a more positive outlook when compared to an older population.
22
==PAGE:26==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
An attitude question on ”seriousness towards global warming” also captures that people who do
not consider global warming a serious change have a negative acceptance towards repowering
compared to people who find global warming a major concern and are serious about it. Another
notable result from Model 4 is the ”years of residence at a particular location” being a factor in
accepting repowering. Compared to people who have lived in the same residence for less than 5
years, people who have lived for 10-14 years in the same place have a significant negative attitude
towards repowering. In contrast, people living with 15+ years of experience have a positive but
insignificant attitude when compared to the same.
6
Conditional Analysis
Analyzing the results presented in the previous section it is evident that some socioeconomic
parameters like gender, age and seriousness towards global warming have a highly significant
influence in deciding the attitude towards repowering. Although the results presented in Table 12
paint a good picture, studies show that such socio-economic parameters are interlinked to dif-
ferent visuospatial decisions or behaviour, especially that of gender and age [49][50][51] [52].
Hence it is relevant to conduct a conditional linear regression analysis to understand the cross-
relation and influence the parameter has on the other spatial variables included in the model.
The conditional analysis is performed on model 4 across three different categories in gender
( male vs female ), age ( Young: 20-39 years vs Old: 40 years and above ) and seriousness
towards global warming ( GW concern, GW not a concern ). This section is further divided into
subsections to describe the results for each of the categories as presented in Table 10.
6.1
Gender
The analysis in this section is sampled based on the variable gender where the respondents are
categorized into Males or Females. The category variables almost have an equal distribution of
male (n=875) and female (n=845) respondents in the sample population. Addressing the spatial
parameter in density and size of turbines, the trend followed with gender here is similar to that of
model 4 ,with the attitude towards repowering being relatively negative with an increase in the
density of smaller turbines and the opposite for larger turbines. The estimate is only statistically
significant from zero in the female sample for the density of smaller turbines whereas the other
density parameters are insignificant across both models. This indicates that with an increase in
the density of smaller turbines in a postal region, only the female population is subject to have
a relatively negative attitude towards repowering. It is important to note that unlike model 4 ,
the linear hypothesis test (Table 13) in gauging the difference between the density of large and
small turbines is insignificant for both genders,
Looking into the ”turbine encounters on a daily basis” it is evident that both models are almost
23
==PAGE:27==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
indifferent across the parameters in terms of acceptance levels and magnitude, barring the case
of ”more than 15 turbines viewed on a daily basis” where the parameters pull in the opposite
directions. However, they are not statistically significant from zero turbine encounters in the
model developed. The only significant result here is the parameter stating ”6-15 turbine en-
counters” on a daily basis having a positive value indicating that both males and females who
see 6-15 turbines on a daily basis tend to have a relatively positive attitude towards repowering
when compared to people who do not see any at all.
In the parameters stating the ”turbine encounters from a residence or summer house”, the female
and the male population have contrasting estimates with regard to the direction and magnitude.
However, the estimates in the male sample are not statistically significant in this case . In the
female population, it is interesting to find that the 1-3 turbines in the viewshed affect the attitude
relatively positively when compared to people without any turbines in their viewshed whereas
viewing more than 3 turbines will result in a relatively negative attitude.
Female respondents with higher education also signify a relatively positive attitude when com-
pared to those who are unemployed. This parameter estimate for the male population although
different in direction is statistically insignificant. For both genders who are not serious towards
global warming, the results resonate the same as model 4 in showing a negative attitude when
compared to people who are serious about it.
A two-sample t-test (Appendix G) performed between all the parameters across both genders
suggests that the parameter ” Can see 1-3 turbines from residence or Summer house ” is signif-
icantly different across the male and female samples indicating that there exists an interaction
among the gender and turbine encounters from residence or summer house. This implies that
males who see 1-3 turbines from their residence or summer house are more negative towards the
acceptance of repowering compared to the females in the population. The analysis also points
in the same direction for each of the genders among people who have a higher education quali-
fication than people who are not qualified.
6.2
Age
The analysis in this section is sampled based on age as a category with those respondents be-
tween the ages 20-39 years and 40 and above years representing the young and the old population
respectively. It is evident that the sample group estimated in Model 4 have a majority of par-
ticipants who belong to the older category (n= 1099) when compared to the younger sample
population (n=621).
Analyzing the spatial variable in density and size of the turbines in a postal region it can be
seen that across the three spatial variables for each category, the difference in magnitude is very
minimal and insignificant for the younger population, whereas the older sample has a higher
magnitude and difference in direction of the results. It can be clearly seen that the higher density
24
==PAGE:28==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
of smaller turbines for the older sample result in a relatively negative attitude towards the repow-
ering of turbines when compared to the people living in a zero-density region. Very similar to the
result in model 4, the difference in density of larger and smaller turbines for the older population
pull in the opposite direction and are found to be significantly different from one another on a
90% level. Performing a two-sample t-test across the parameters for each model category in the
analysis, it can be seen that for the density of smaller turbines, the parameter estimates across the
young and older samples are significantly different from each other indicating a cross-relation
between age and the stated spatial variable. From this, we can conclude that with the increasing
density of smaller turbines in a postal region, the older population tend to have a more negative
attitude towards repowering whereas the younger population have a relatively positive attitude
compared to the people who do not have any small turbines in their postal region.
Hence it is clear that the older population here is responsible for driving the results of this spatial
variable in model 4 with high magnitude and significance of parameter estimates.
Other spatial variables in the model like ”turbines seen from residence” and ”turbines seen on
a daily basis ” present very similar results to that of model 4 in terms of magnitude, direction
and significance of the parmaters showcasing that there is no cross relation with the sample
populations and the stated spatial variables in this analysis.
Out of the socioeconomic parameters included in the study, an important result to note here is in
regard to the ” years spent at the residence” for each respondent. For the older sample, Spending
5-9 years at a residence indicates a negative attitude towards repowering when compared to
people who have been residents in the postal region for less than 5 years whereas the younger have
a relatively positive attitude towards the same. Although the parameter estimates by themselves
are not significant with respect to residents living in the region for less than 5 years, they are found
to be significantly different from each other when performing the two-sample t-test indicating
cross relation with age and the variable in ”5-9 years spent at residence”.
6.3
Seriousness towards Global Warming
Looking at the sample population the variable addressing ”seriousness towards global warming
” it is evident that a vast majority perceive it as a serious problem ( n=1473) and the rest either
do not take it seriously or are not sure about their stance with respect to the question (n=247).
Analyzing the spatial variable with respect to the density and size of the turbines the parameter
estimates follow a similar pattern to that of Model 4 indicating a relatively positive attitude with a
higher density of larger turbines when compared to that of smaller turbines. The results however
are not significantly different across the three variables for both category options.
For ”Turbines seen on a daily basis ” people who are serious and see 6-15 turbines on a daily
basis are relatively positive and statistically significant when compared to people who do not
25
==PAGE:29==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
view any turbines at all. The results prove to be contrary to the case of people who are not sure
or do not take global warming seriously.
The age of the respondent presents an important result in this categorical study as the rate of
increase in negative attitude is higher for ”GW not concern ” with increasing respondent age
when compared to the ”GW concern” sample set. The difference in samples across this variable
is also significant at a 90% level. This indicates that there is a potential cross-relation between a
respondent’s age and their stance on global warming, with older people who are not concerned
about GW being more negative than older people who are concerned about the same.
With respect to years spent at the residency, people who spent 5-9 years at a residence and belong
to the ”GW, not concern ” sample has a relatively significant positive attitude towards repowering
when compared to respondents with less than 5 years at the postal residence, whereas the ”GW
concern ” sample on a statistically significant result only indicate that respondent who has lived
for 10-14 years in the same postal region find it relatively negative when compared to the base
population who have lived for less than 5 years in the residence stated.
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
Figure 7: Turbine density by size : parameter values by category
26
==PAGE:30==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Female
Male
Young
Old
GW Concern
GW not Concern
Intercept
3.914∗∗∗
4.172∗∗∗
3.492∗∗∗
3.614∗∗∗
3.779∗∗∗
3.968∗∗∗
(0.230)
(0.220)
(0.203)
(0.279)
(0.168)
(0.454)
Density of small Turbines per sq km
−1.297∗
−0.516
0.369
−1.392∗∗
−0.977∗
−0.002
(0.726)
(0.613)
(0.752)
(0.606)
(0.510)
(1.203)
Density of medium Turbines per sq km
−2.576
−1.379
−0.852
−1.635
−1.809
1.179
(2.489)
(1.912)
(2.641)
(1.905)
(1.623)
(4.344)
Density of Large Turbines per sq km
0.259
3.044
0.267
2.615
1.520
4.198
(2.617)
(2.119)
(2.501)
(2.163)
(1.853)
(3.656)
People living in zero turbine region
−0.028
−0.024
0.081
−0.067
0.021
−0.251
(0.108)
(0.101)
(0.115)
(0.097)
(0.079)
(0.202)
Can see 1-5 wind turbines daily
0.026
0.137
0.062
0.105
0.117
−0.057
(0.099)
(0.096)
(0.106)
(0.090)
(0.074)
(0.192)
Can see 6-15 wind turbines daily
0.251∗
0.226∗∗
0.281∗
0.210∗∗
0.270∗∗∗
−0.046
(0.132)
(0.107)
(0.144)
(0.102)
(0.090)
(0.204)
Can see 15+ wind turbines daily
−0.126
0.099
−0.088
0.140
0.110
−0.165
(0.291)
(0.154)
(0.258)
(0.160)
(0.148)
(0.331)
Can see 1-3 wind turbines from residence
0.341∗∗
−0.035
0.230
0.067
0.146
−0.064
(0.164)
(0.136)
(0.174)
(0.131)
(0.111)
(0.298)
Can see 3+ wind turbines from residence
−0.355∗
0.015
−0.173
−0.108
−0.199
0.038
(0.183)
(0.145)
(0.247)
(0.133)
(0.126)
(0.270)
age
−0.005
−0.005
−0.003
−0.021∗∗
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.008)
male
0.370∗∗∗
0.330∗∗∗
0.313∗∗∗
0.510∗∗∗
(0.083)
(0.074)
(0.059)
(0.160)
Higher Education
0.210∗
−0.121
0.007
0.076
−0.006
0.308
(0.115)
(0.115)
(0.107)
(0.118)
(0.087)
(0.220)
Basic Education
0.138
−0.080
−0.087
0.086
−0.049
0.383∗
(0.128)
(0.121)
(0.127)
(0.122)
(0.095)
(0.223)
Income
−0.011
0.028
0.024
−0.002
−0.000
0.038
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.020)
(0.016)
(0.040)
employed
−0.119
−0.057
−0.121
0.014
−0.021
−0.284
(0.132)
(0.159)
(0.116)
(0.214)
(0.107)
(0.282)
Retired
−0.061
0.007
0.036
−0.003
0.023
−0.259
(0.155)
(0.178)
(0.148)
(0.224)
(0.124)
(0.317)
Not serious about global warming
−0.411∗
−0.300∗∗
−0.305∗∗
−0.400∗∗
(0.236)
(0.128)
(0.152)
(0.161)
Don’t know if serious about global warming
−0.305∗∗
−0.100
−0.078
−0.235∗
(0.151)
(0.129)
(0.158)
(0.125)
No Plans to setup turbine nearby
−0.153
−0.081
−0.066
−0.093
−0.074
−0.217
(0.156)
(0.133)
(0.180)
(0.122)
(0.106)
(0.294)
Dont know about setting up turbines nearby
−0.105
−0.045
−0.008
−0.054
−0.042
−0.115
(0.130)
(0.101)
(0.148)
(0.096)
(0.085)
(0.229)
5-9 years at residence
0.097
−0.098
0.159
−0.115
−0.043
0.352∗
(0.107)
(0.108)
(0.100)
(0.111)
(0.082)
(0.206)
10-14 years at residence
−0.078
−0.247∗∗
−0.064
−0.221∗∗
−0.197∗∗
0.121
(0.114)
(0.107)
(0.163)
(0.100)
(0.084)
(0.216)
15+ years at residence
0.051
−0.048
−0.325
−0.044
−0.018
0.299
(0.130)
(0.127)
(0.289)
(0.102)
(0.097)
(0.252)
R2
0.043
0.028
0.060
0.047
0.042
0.124
Adj. R2
0.018
0.003
0.025
0.027
0.029
0.042
Num. obs.
845
875
621
1099
1473
247
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
GW : Global Warming
Table 10: Conditional Analysis
27
==PAGE:31==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
Figure 8: Turbine encounters daily parameter values by category
7
Discussion and policy implications
Analyzing the results derived from the different models it is evident that spatial parameters in the
density of turbines distinguished by size, and frequent turbine encounters do play a significant
role in determining the attitude toward repowering. The main result of this analysis is the com-
bined effect of size and density towards the stated attitude question. The parameters based on the
density of small turbines and the density of large turbines per sq km pull in opposite directions
possibly signifying that people living in regions with a higher number of larger turbines are gen-
erally desensitized by any negative viewshed impact it creates, and over a period of time have a
positive outlook towards large wind turbines favouring the concept of repowering, whereas the
vice versa is expected with a higher density of smaller turbines. Hence assuming a successful
initiation of repowering projects over time, it is expected that with new larger turbines replacing
the old smaller turbines, the density of larger turbines in a region could outnumber the density
of smaller turbines leading to an overall positive attitude towards repowering in the future. As-
sessing the temporal aspects of acceptance towards wind farms [25][53],[54][55], this initiation
although might face some opposition in the short run, could highly improve social acceptability
to wind turbines and benefit the community in the longer run.
Another interesting result that can be worth discussing in this paper is that of ”the turbines seen
from the residence/ Summer house” alone are not a significant parameter in determining one’s
attitude towards repowering but the question on ”turbines seen on a daily basis” plays a signifi-
cant role. Hence the importance of an individual’s daily path or route accessed as illustrated in
Figure 5 is highly critical in being one of the influencing parameters. This result is similar to
the outcome as explained in Ladenburg et al. [11] where the combined effect of residential and
daily sightings was seen to be significant in determining the attitude towards new onshore wind
turbines for the subset of people who had turbines in their region of residence.
28
==PAGE:32==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Despite earlier research like that of Ladenburg and Dahlgaard [34] showing that turbine encoun-
ters on a daily basis have negative attitudes towards onshore turbines in general, the results point
in the opposite direction when it comes to gauging the attitude towards repowering in this analy-
sis. When compared to people who see no turbines on a daily basis it can be clearly seen that all
the models have a positive coefficient term with respect to the parameter in the discussion (Can
see 1-5 turbines and Can see 6-15 turbines on a daily basis), indicating and supporting frequent
exposures to turbines in improving their attitude towards repowering.
Although there seems to be a positive attitude with more than zero turbine encounters on a daily
basis, the magnitude of the positivity seems to decrease for the case of 15 + turbine encounters.
One possible explanation for this is in line with research done by Betakova et al [36] where a
drastic increase in turbine sightings to a particular landscape resulted in a decrease in visual
preferences. Although this result is insignificant in this analysis, the threshold for increasing
positive attitudes towards replacing small turbines with fewer larger ones is 15 turbine encounters
on a daily basis when compared to people who see none.
However, with the success of repowering projects, the count of smaller turbines could drastically
reduce resulting in fewer turbine encounters on a daily basis. This indeed will result in an overall
positive social acceptance across individuals towards wind turbines.
Out of all the socioeconomic parameters included in the study, ”Gender”, ”age” and ”seriousness
towards global warming” provides interesting insights that could be the base for policy implica-
tions. With respect to gender, it is clear that Males in general have a positive attitude towards
repowering when compared to the female population. The result is in contrast to the findings
from Westerlund [56] where she assessed the social acceptance towards wind energy with gen-
der as a parameter and stated that men were found to oppose wind energy practices more than
women in the urban areas of Finland. Articles from Azarova et al. [57] and ´Olafsd´ottir, R.&
Sæ´orsd´ottir [58] produced similar results to this analysis. One possible explanation for this result
is the ability of Males to recall spatial information better [50] but the evidence is not conclusive
and consistent across all literature. The results of the conditional regression model state that
gender as a category has cross-relations with ”1-3 turbine encounter from residence or summer-
house ” and ” Higher education ” indicating that females are more positive about the attitude in
question when compared to males across the two parameters. This is however in contrast with
the results produced in Model 4 where Male respondents were relatively positive compared to
the female population as a whole.
It is generally the notion that the younger population with wider exposure to new technological
improvements [52], understand the role of renewable energy better and is expected to have a
positive outlook towards wind turbines. This is in line with the results of this analysis as with
increasing age there is a significant increase in the negative attitude towards repowering. It is also
interesting to note that respondents who are employed and retired have a comparatively negative
29
==PAGE:33==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
attitude towards wind turbines than those who are unemployed. However, the parameters are
not statistically significant in this analysis. The results from the conditional regression analysis
of older and younger populations give an implication that older people are more sensitive with
respect to spatial variables that influence their acceptance levels. However, it is still unclear if
it is the age or the generation gap that is driving this difference in attitudes. If the latter is the
reason, it could very well be that age might not be a significant parameter at all in the next couple
of decades.
As explained by Ellis & Ferraro [59], public acceptance towards wind energy is also driven
by the attitude towards the environment in general. Assessing the question on the seriousness
towards global warming it is clear that compared to people who consider global warming as
a ”serious” factor, people who are ”not serious ” have a significantly relative negative attitude
towards repowering. People who ”do not know” if they are serious about global warming also
have a relatively negative attitude, but the magnitude is comparatively small to the people who
are not serious at all.
Although visual impact is the main driving factor towards influencing the attitude towards wind
turbines or repowering in general, Frantal et. al [8] explain that economic profit to the commu-
nity was the most cited reason for a possible positive attitude towards repowering. Their analysis
states that establishing a spatially and socially structured financial benefit scheme associated with
repowering projects indeed overpowers the visual dis-amenity it creates, driving a positive atti-
tude towards new projects among the public. These statements were also supported very well by
Baxter et al. [60] where they emphasize the negligence of inclusion of health risks, community
appraisals and enhancements as drivers to influence wind projects. Hence,it is indeed important
to inform and gauge the direct tangible benefits associated with setting up a wind turbine at a
local level.
With the study focusing mainly on the spatial aspects such as size, density and frequency of
turbine encounters, the results of such factors could form the basis for developing policies that
are socially and spatially structured. Also considering the temporal factors affecting acceptance
levels, policies providing economic benefits to the public during the planning and construction
phase of a repowering project could result in the smooth project initiation of setting up larger
wind turbines.
8
Conclusion
With an extensive research base addressing the attitude towards on-shore and offshore wind tur-
bines, there is only a handful of literature that gauges the attitude of people towards repowering
turbines. Hence the agenda of this thesis is to address the relationship between this attitude with
different spatial parameters in size, density and frequency of turbine encounters on a daily basis
30
==PAGE:34==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
with the help of different linear regression models. With the inclusion of different socioeco-
nomic parameters, a conditional regression analysis is also performed based on ”Gender”, ”Age
” and ”attitude towards global warming”.The results strongly indicate that people living with a
high density of large turbines (Capacity greater than 1.5 MW) have a relatively positive attitude
when compared to people living with a high density of small turbines ( Capacity 0-750kW ) or
medium-sized turbines (750-1.5MW). The results show that the difference between the model
estimates in small and large-sized turbines pull in the opposite direction indicating that expo-
sure to large turbines in general tends to have a positive influence towards repowering. The
frequency of turbine encounters on a daily basis also shows a significant correlation with the at-
titude in question showcasing that people who view 1-5 turbines or 6-15 turbines on a daily basis
are highly positive when compared to people who see no turbines. This parameter although pos-
itive for residents who see 15 + turbines on a daily basis, the result is not significantly different to
people with zero encounters. Looking at the insignificance of the spatial parameter on turbines
seen from the residence, the results suggest that residential viewshed impacts are not the sole
driving parameter towards the repowering attitude and the inclusion of the daily encounters is
important in formulating the analysis. From the conditional analysis performed it can be seen
that among the older and younger population of respondents there exists some interaction be-
tween different socioeconomic and spatial variables included in the model. From the magnitude
and significance of the parameter estimates it is clear that older populations are more sensitive
towards acceptance towards repowering driving the results in the analysis.
Although the results provide a good platform for policy implications and other discussions per-
taining to public acceptance towards repowering, there is always a scope for the analysis to be
more robust by building complex regression models over data points with high details and intri-
cacies.
31
==PAGE:35==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
References
[1] Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC). Global wind energy report 2018. Website, 2019.
[2] Lena Kitzing, Morten K. Jensen, Thomas Telsnig, and Eric Lantz. Multifaceted drivers
for onshore wind energy repowering and their implications for energy transition. Nature
Energy, 5(12):1012–1021, 2020.
[3] Lisa Ziegler, Eduardo Gonzalez, Teresa Rubert, Ursula Smolka, and Juan J. Melero. Life-
time extension of onshore wind turbines: A review covering germany, spain, denmark, and
the uk. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 82:1261–1271, 2018.
[4] Roberto Lacal-Arantegui, Andreas Uihlein, and Jos´e M. Yusta. Technology effects in re-
powering wind turbines. Wind Energy, 23:660–675, 2020.
[5] Graham Harding, Philip Harding, and Arnold Wilkins. Wind turbines, flicker, and photo-
sensitive epilepsy: characterizing the flashing that may precipitate seizures and optimizing
guidelines to prevent them. Epilepsia, 49(6):1095–1098, 2008.
[6] K. Shawn Smallwood and Brian Karas. Avian and bat fatality rates at old-generation and
repowered wind turbines in california. Journal of Wildlife Management, 73(7):1062–1071,
2009.
[7] GreenTechMedia. The wind sector trend: Helping turbines to kill fewer birds.
[8] Bohumil Frant´al. Have local government and public expectations of wind energy project
benefits been met? implications for repowering schemes. Journal of Environmental Policy
& Planning, 17(2):217–236, 2015.
[9] Cathrine Jensen, Toke Panduro, and Thomas Lundhede. The vindication of don quixote:
The impact of noise and visual pollution from wind turbines. Land Economics, 90:668–
682, 11 2014.
[10] Rolf W¨ustenhagen, Maarten Wolsink, and Mary Jean B¨urer. Social acceptance of renew-
able energy innovation: An introduction to the concept. Energy Policy, 35(5):2683–2691,
2007.
[11] Jacob Ladenburg, Mette Termansen, and Berit Hasler. Assessing acceptability of two on-
shore wind power development schemes: A test of viewshed effects and the cumulative
effects of wind turbines. Energy, 54:45–54, 2013.
[12] Jacob Ladenburg, Pablo Hevia-Koch, Stefan Petrovi´c, and Lena Knapp. The offshore-
onshore conundrum: Preferences for wind energy considering spatial data in denmark.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 121:109711, 2020.
32
==PAGE:36==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
[13] Robert L. Thayer and C. Michael Freeman. Altamont: Public perceptions of a wind energy
landscape. Landscape and Urban Planning, 14:379–398, 1987.
[14] Benjamin K. Sovacool. The cultural barriers to renewable energy and energy efficiency in
the united states. Technology in Society, 31(4):365–373, 2009.
[15] Maarten Wolsink. The research agenda on social acceptance of distributed generation in
smart grids: Renewable as common pool resources. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 16(1):822–835, 2012.
[16] David Bidwell. The role of values in public beliefs and attitudes towards commercial wind
energy. Energy Policy, 58(1):189–199, 2013.
[17] Noel Cass and Gordon Walker. Emotion and rationality: The characterisation and evalua-
tion of opposition to renewable energy projects. Emotion, Space and Society, 2(1):62–69,
2009.
[18] Patrick Devine-Wright. Beyond nimbyism: Towards an integrated framework for under-
standing public perceptions of wind energy. Wind Energy, 8:125–139, 2005.
[19] K. H. Andersen, M. Thomsen, and J. Kruse. Rapport om hvordan en dansk kommune
blev selvforsynende med ren vindenergi og skabte ny indkomst til kommunens borgere.
Publication (in Danish) from Nordvestjysk Folkecenter for Vedvarende Energi, 1997.
[20] Charles R. Warren, Charles Lumsden, Simon O’Dowd, and Rona V. Birnie. ”green on
green”: Public perceptions of wind power in scotland and ireland. Journal of Environmen-
tal Planning and Management, 48(6):853–875, 2005.
[21] Christopher R. Jones and J. Richard Eiser. Understanding ’local’ opposition to wind de-
velopment in the uk: How big is a backyard? Energy Policy, 38(6):3106–3117, 2010.
[22] AMR-Interactive. Community attitudes to wind farms in nsw. New South Wales, Australia:
Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water, 2010. [Accessed 15.03.11].
[23] Jacob Ladenburg and Marie Skotte. Heterogeneity in willingness to pay for the location of
offshore wind power development: An application of the willingness to pay space model.
Energy, 241:122900, 2022.
[24] Jacob Ladenburg and Alexandra Dubgaard. Willingness to pay for reduced visual dis-
amenities from offshore wind farms in denmark. Energy Policy, 35:4059–4071, 2007.
[25] Paul Gipe. Wind Energy Comes of Age. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.
[26] Ronny Windemer. Acceptance should not be assumed. how the dynamics of social accep-
tance changes over time, impacting onshore wind repowering. Energy Policy, 173:113363,
2023.
33
==PAGE:37==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
[27] Jeffrey Swofford and Michael Slattery. Public attitudes of wind energy in texas: Local
communities in close proximity to wind farms and their effect on decision-making. Energy
Policy, 38(5):2508–2519, 2010.
[28] Jacob Ladenburg. Visual impact assessment of offshore wind farms and prior experience.
Applied Energy, 86(3):380–387, 2009.
[29] A. M. Simon. A summary of research conducted into attitudes to wind power from 1990–
1996. British Wind Energy Association, 1996. [Online], Accessed: 4 January 2003.
[30] J. Hinman. Wind farm proximity and property values: A pooled hedonic regression anal-
ysis of property values in central illinois. Illinois State University, Department of Eco-
nomics, May 2010.
[31] Peter Cappers, Ben Hoen, Gautam Sethi, Mark Thayer, and Ryan Wiser. The impact of
wind power projects on residential property values in the united states: A multi-site hedonic
analysis. Technical Report LBNL-2829E, Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, December 2009.
[32] Sustainable Energy Ireland. Attitudes towards the development of wind farms in ireland,
2003.
[33] T. Lee, B. Wren, and M. Hickman. Public responses to the siting and operation of wind
turbines. Wind Engineering, 13:188–195, 1989.
[34] Jacob Ladenburg and Jens Dahlgaard. Attitudes, threshold levels and cumulative effects
of the daily wind-turbine encounters. Applied Energy, 98:40–46, 2012.
[35] Charles R. Warren and Maureen McFadyen. Does community ownership affect public atti-
tudes to wind energy? a case study from south-west scotland. Land Use Policy, 27(2):204–
213, 2010.
[36] Veronika Betakova, Jiri Vojar, and Petr Sklenicka. Wind turbines location: How many and
how far? Applied Energy, 151:23–31, 2015.
[37] T. Prabu and S.K. Kottayil. Repowering a windfarm - a techno-economic approach. Wind
Eng., 39:385–397, 2015.
[38] Luis M. Abadie and Nerea Goicoechea. Old wind farm life extension vs. full repowering:
A review of economic issues and a stochastic application for spain. Energies, 14, 2021.
[39] B. Nivedh, R. Devi, and E. Sreevalsan. Repowering of wind farms - a case study. Wind
Eng., pages 137–150, 2013.
[40] Kristina Ek. Public and private attitudes towards ’green’ electricity: The case of swedish
wind power. Energy Policy, 33(13):1677–1689, 2005.
34
==PAGE:38==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
[41] Anna Lind´en, Laura Rapeli, and Andreas Brutemark. Community attachment and mu-
nicipal economy: Public attitudes towards wind power in a local context. Environmental
Science Policy, 54:10–14, 2015.
[42] Jacob Ladenburg. Does more wind energy influence the choice of location for wind power
development? assessing the cumulative effects of daily wind turbine encounters in den-
mark. Energy Research Social Science, 10:26–30, 2015.
[43] Melanie A. Revilla, Willem E. Saris, and Jon A. Krosnick. Choosing the number of cate-
gories in agree–disagree scales. Sociological Methods & Research, 2013.
[44] Danish Energy Agency. Master data register of wind turbines. Retrieved October 25, 2015,
from http://www.ens.dk/node/2233/register-wind-turbines, 2015.
[45] Leah Knapp and Jacob Ladenburg. How spatial relationships influence economic prefer-
ences for wind power—a review. Energies, 8(6):6177–6201, 2015.
[46] Cathrine Ulla Jensen, Toke Emil Panduro, and Thomas Hedemark Lundhede. The vindi-
cation of don quixote: The impact of noise and visual pollution from wind turbines. Land
Economics, 90(4):668–682, 2014.
[47] Nicole M. A. Huijts, E. J. E. Molin, and Linda Steg. Psychological factors influencing sus-
tainable energy technology acceptance: A review-based comprehensive framework. Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16(1):525–531, 2012.
[48] Andrew Gelman and Hal Stern. The difference between “significant” and “not significant”
is not itself statistically significant. The American Statistician, 60(4):328–331, 2006.
[49] William W. Beatty and Alexander I. Tr¨oster. Gender differences in geographical knowl-
edge. Sex Roles, 16:565–590, 1987.
[50] Emanuele Coluccia and Giuseppe Louse. Gender differences in spatial orientation: A
review. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 24(3):329–340, 2004.
[51] Amy Munion, Jeanine K. Stefanucci, Emily Rovira, and et al. Gender differences in spatial
navigation: Characterizing wayfinding behaviors. Psychonomic Bulletin Review, 26:1933–
1940, 2019.
[52] Ioanna Markostamou and Kenny R. Coventry. Age effects on processing spatial relations
within different reference frames: The role of executive functions. Applied Neuropsychol-
ogy: Adult, pages 1–17, 2022. Epub ahead of print.
[53] Anders Dugstad, Kristine Grimsrud, Gorm Kipperberg, Henrik Lindhjem, and St˚ale
Navrud.
Acceptance of wind power development and exposure - not-in-anybody’s-
backyard. Energy Policy, 147:111780, 09 2020.
35
==PAGE:39==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
[54] Maarten Wolsink. Attitudes and expectancies about wind turbines and wind farms. Wind
Engineering, 13:196–206, 1989.
[55] J. Bishop and H. Proctor. Love them or loathe them? public attitudes towards wind farms
in wales. 1994.
[56] Mika Westerlund. Social acceptance of wind energy in urban landscapes. Technology
Innovation Management Review, 10(9), 2020.
[57] Valeriya Azarova, Jed Cohen, Claudia Friedl, and Johannes Reichl. Designing local renew-
able energy communities to increase social acceptance: Evidence from a choice experiment
in austria, germany, italy, and switzerland. Energy Policy, 132:1176–1183, 2019.
[58] Ragnheiur ´Olafsd´ottir and Anna D´ora Sæ´orsd´ottir. Wind farms in the icelandic highlands:
Attitudes of local residents and tourism service providers. Land Use Policy, 88:104173,
2019.
[59] G. Ellis G. European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Ferraro. The social acceptance
of wind energy: where we stand and the path ahead. Technical report, Publications Office,
2017.
[60] Jamie Baxter, Raksha Morzaria, and Rachel Hirsch. A case-control study of support/op-
position to wind turbines: Perceptions of health risk, economic benefits, and community
conflict. Energy Policy, 61:931–943, 2013.
[61] Wikipedia contributors. Cape wind — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cape_Wind&oldid=1162416648, 2023.
[On-
line; accessed 30-June-2023].
[62] Cape wind project case study. National Geographic Education. https://education.
nationalgeographic.org/resource/case-study-cape-wind-project/.
[63]
[64] Photosensitivity and seizures. Online, Accessed 2023-05-17.
[65] U.S. Department of Energy. Wind turbines noise and health: Fact vs. fiction simulcast:
A neweep webinar. Online, 2010. Available at: http://www.windpoweringamerica.
gov/filter_detail.asp?itemid=2783.
[66] Exeter Enterprises Ltd. Attitudes to wind power: A survey of opinion in cornwall and
devon. Technical report, ETSU Report W/13/00354/038/REP prepared for the Department
of Trade and Industry, 1993.
36
==PAGE:40==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
[67] Market Research Associates. Cammaes windfarm sociological impact study: Final report.
Technical report, ETSU Report W/13/00300/REP prepared for the Department of Trade
and Industry, 1994.
[68] Robertson Bell Associates. Proposed wind farm at cilciffeth – a survey of local residents,
1995.
[69] Alexandra Kontogianni, Christos Tourkolias, Michalis Skourtos, and Dimitrios Damigos.
Planning globally, protesting locally: Patterns in community perceptions towards the in-
stallation of wind farms. Renewable Energy, 66:170–177, 2014.
[70] Elizabeth V. Hobman and Peter Ashworth. Public support for energy sources and related
technologies: the impact of simple information provision. Energy Policy, 63:862–869,
2013.
[71] Mattias Viklund. Energy policy options — from the perspective of public attitudes and
risk perceptions. Energy Policy, 32:1159–1171, 2004.
[72] Michael Greenberg. Energy sources, public policy, and public preferences: analysis of us
national and site-specific data. Energy Policy, 37:3242–3249, 2009.
[73] Pınar Ert¨or-Akyazı, Fikret Adaman, Beg¨um ¨Ozkaynak, and ¨Unal Zenginobuz. Citizens’
preferences on nuclear and renewable energy sources: Evidence from turkey. Energy Pol-
icy, 47:309–320, 2012.
[74] Alvin C. Rencher and G. Bruce Schaalje. Linear Models in Statistics. John Wiley & Sons,
2nd edition, 2008.
[75] Richard Williams. Ordered logit models – basic & intermediate topics. Website, accessed
2023. University of Notre Dame.
[76] Andrew Gelman and Hal Stern. The difference between “significant” and “not significant”
is not itself statistically significant. The American Statistician, 60(4):328–331, 2006.
[77] Nerd For Tech.
Hypothesis testing on linear regression.
https://medium.com/
nerd-for-tech/hypothesis-testing-on-linear-regression-c2a1799ba964,
Month Year. Accessed: Day Month Year.
[78] Clifford C. Clogg, Elena Petkova, and Alice Haritou. Statistical methods for comparing
regression coefficients between models. American Journal of Sociology, 100(5):1261–
1293, 1995.
37
==PAGE:41==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
A
Case Study : Cape Wind Project
Although wind energy repowering projects are highly feasible, there are plenty of stakeholders
that are required to be taken into consideration before implementing them. One prime example
is that of the Cape Wind project [61] planned in November 2001, where developers proposed
establishing USA’s first offshore wind farm across the horseshoe shoal in Nantucket Sound in
order to replace older turbines with larger ones off the coast in producing clean energy more
efficiently. The proposed project was set to include 130 wind turbines spaced over 65 square
kilometres (25 square miles) expected to produce an output of 468MW with 174MW on average.
Figure 9: Wind Power Potential across Nantucket Sound
off Cape Cod, Massachusetts
[62]. Although The new wind farm
had the potential to generate clean,
renewable energy, reduce carbon
emissions and create jobs the project
met with significant opposition from
various groups and individuals, in-
cluding residents, environmental ac-
tivists, Native American tribes, and
influential celebrities. Concerns ex-
pressed by opponents included land-
scapes, marine life, fisheries, flight
safety and possible adverse effects
on cultural heritage.
Opponents organize campaigns, file
lawsuits, and oppose projects over
concerns about visual impacts on
coastal landscapes, potential dam-
age to wildlife and fisheries, and
concerns about the economic viabil-
ity of projects. carried out lobbying activities. These resistance activities have resulted in delays,
lawsuits and increased costs for the Cape Wind project.
Ultimately, after more than a decade of controversy and regulatory hurdles, the Cape Wind
project was unable to secure the necessary permits and funding to proceed. In 2017, the project
suffered a major setback when the power purchase agreement with the power company expired,
further worsening the prospects. As a result, the Cape Wind project was effectively abandoned.
The Cape Wind case serves as an example of how a technically viable repowered wind turbine
project faced major challenges due to a lack of public acceptance, ultimately leading to project
failure. This highlights the importance of working with local communities to address concerns
and build consensus for the successful implementation of renewable energy projects.
38
==PAGE:42==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
B
Literature on Environmental and Socio-economic charac-
teristics influencing acceptance towards turbines
The most frequently cited reasons for negative acceptance towards wind farms have been related
to noise and visual disamenities created by a wind turbine [29]. An article from Pace University
[63] also talks about the Aesthetics, property values and sound associated with wind energy.
According to this paper, viewshed impacts are a major factor in setting up a wind turbine in a
locality. Some people find wind farms to be aesthetically pleasing whereas others might state it
disrupts the scenery. Citing information from the epilepsy foundation [64][65], epileptic seizures
could be caused due to shadow flickering by the blades on a sunny day and could be a potential
reason for people to dislike having a wind turbine very close to their property. Backing studies
performed in different New York counties, the second aspect addressed here is the decreasing
value of the property when a wind farm is set up [30]. The third point of discussion is the
sound generated by the mechanical parts of the wind turbines and the aerodynamic ”whooshing
” sound created by the air moving around the rotor blades. Other notable factors also cited
were unreliability [66], High costs [67] associated with setting up turbines and wind turbines, in
general, being one of the factors for the increase in bird fatalities[68].
As stated by Frantal et al. [8], Attitudes are shaped by knowledge and prior experiences. It is
therefore important to consider different socio-economic parameters that influence the behaviour
towards turbines. Kontogianni et al. [69] emphasize that along with spatial parameters, socioe-
conomic parameters like age, gender and income also play a significant role in factoring the
acceptance towards wind energy.It is believed that the younger population are expected to have
a more positive outlook towards wind energy than the older population [12]
Linden et al. [41] validate the acceptance towards wind power by measuring the NIMBY- Not
in my backyard attitude with two hypotheses related to community attachment and economic
trouble in Finland. Questions based on attitudes towards wind farms and visibility range were
used to quantify the NIMBY attitude. They find that socioeconomic parameters like age and
gender play a significant role in displaying the NIMBY attitude with males and older respondents
showing a relatively negative attitude on the same than their counterparts. They also state that
people living in economically poor regions show less NIMBYism than those in wealthier regions.
Ek [40] analyses the attitude towards wind power in Sweden among electricity consumers with
different socioeconomic factors. Performing a logit regression she comes to the conclusion that
wind acceptance is rather positive in the country and the probability of a positive attitude for an
individual decreases with age and income on average.
Knowledge and attitude towards the environment also shape one’s behaviour and stance on estab-
lishing renewable sources of energy as a positive change to society. [70] [71] [72]. Ert¨or-Akyazı
et al. [73] through a set of face-to-face surveys in Turkey gauge the preference of people between
39
==PAGE:43==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
nuclear and renewable sources of energy. Their main findings indicate that nuclear energy faced
strong opposition among people who were concerned and had knowledge about climate change.
They also found that males who were knowledgeable about climate change but did not see it as
a concern were the majority of people endorsing nuclear energy.
Therefore the inclusion of social parameters is also relevant to gauge the acceptance level of
respondents in the analysis.
C
Descriptive Statistics
Variable (N=1720)
Data value
Mean/% [std.dev]
Min-Max
National Statistics
Age
45.1[12.6]
20-67
43.8
Gender
Female
1
49.9%
Male
2
50.1%
Serious attitude towards global warming
Yes
1
85.6%
No
2
6.0%
Dont Know
3
8.5%
Years at current residence
Under 5 years
1
38.4%
5-9 years
2
20.3%
10-14 years
3
13.1%
15-19 years
4
9.3%
20+ years
5
18.8%
Do not know
6
0.1%
Turbines seen on a typical day
None
1
50.8%
1-5
2
26.3%
6-10
3
11.6%
11-15
4
6.2%
16-21
5
2.5%
21+
6
2.7%
40
==PAGE:44==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Turbines seen from summer house / residence
0
0
86.2%
1
1
2.0%
2-3
2
5.4%
4-5
3
3.4%
6-10.
4
2.0%
11+
5
1.0%
Plans to set up new wind turbines in own backyard or a neighbouring municipality
Yes
1
15.0%
No
2
17.3%
Do not know
3
67.7%
Education
Primary School
1
5.8%
24.90%
Vocational Education
2
18.4%
36.80%
High School,HF,HTX etc
3
11.0%
9.00%
Short Highereducation
4
10.1%
4.50%
Intermediate higher education
5
33.9%
17.10%
Long higher Education
6
18.3%
PhD or Research Training
7
2.0%
8.10%
Others
8
0.6%
Labour market connection
Government Employee
1
28.3%
Private Employee
2
37.4%
Self Employed
3
5.8%
Student,Pupils,Apperentice
4
10.0%
Unemployed
5
6.0%
Post Retiree or Pensioner
6
6.1%
Early Retiree
7
3.6%
Rehabilitation
8
0.4%
Stay at Home
9
1.0%
Other category
10
1.4%
Income before tax [Dkk]
41
==PAGE:45==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Under 100,000
1
5.1%
100,000-199,999
2
8.6%
22.60%
200,000-299,999
3
9.4%
19.80%
300,000-399,999
4
14.3%
14.30%
400,000-499,999
5
11.9%
9.50%
500,000-599,999
6
13.7%
7.50%
600,000-699,999
7
12.2%
7.20%
Over 700,000
8
24.8%
19.20%
Density of small turbines in postal code area (Number/km2)
0.048[0.071]
0-0.578
Density of medium turbines in postal code area (Number/km2)
0.0063[0.017]
0-0.215
Density of large turbines in postal code area (Number/km2)
0.0030[0.016]
0-0.2346
Notes
a Statistics Denmark, age of the population in the age group 20–67 FOLK1A.
b Statistics Denmark highest completed education HFUDD10 age group 20–69.
c Statistics Denmark, family income level INDKF122.
42
==PAGE:46==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Figure 10: Repowering acceptance distribution with discrete variables
43
==PAGE:47==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
D
Respondent exclusion test
An exclusion test is conducted for the respondents who have chosen not to answer the question
on attitude towards repowering. The purpose of this test is to gauge if there is any spatial signif-
icance with respect to the population who have chosen not to answer the question addressed in
the thesis.
Hence here a variable named exclude is introduced into the analysis with it taking the value of
1 if the respondent has chosen to not respond to the question and equal to 0 if they have chosen
to answer the question. With exclude being the dependent variable a multiple linear regression
is performed with the same independent variables included in model 4.
exclude=



1,
if respondent chose to skip question (n=53)
0,
otherwise (n=1720)
It is clear from the results that there is no major significance in parameter estimates catering to
the section excluded (n=53) in the main analysis indicating that the spatial data is well distributed
among the respondents who chose to answer the question on repowering.
Exclusion test
Intercept
−0.698
(0.890)
Density of small Turbines per sq km
−0.081
(0.071)
Density of medium Turbines per sq km
−0.391∗
(0.233)
Density of Large Turbines per sq km
−0.117
(0.253)
People living in zero turbine region
0.007
(0.011)
Can see 1-5 wind turbines daily
0.005
(0.010)
Can see 6-15 wind turbines daily
−0.001
(0.012)
Can see 15+ wind turbines daily
0.008
(0.020)
Can see 1-3 wind turbines from residence
−0.016
(0.016)
Can see 3+ wind turbines from residence
−0.016
(0.017)
Male
−0.027∗∗∗
(0.008)
age
0.000
(0.000)
...
...
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
Exclusion test
...
...
Higher Education
0.012
(0.012)
Basic Education
−0.000
(0.013)
Income
−0.002
(0.002)
employed
−0.005
(0.015)
Retired
0.012
(0.017)
Not serious about global warming
−0.009
(0.017)
Don’t know if serious about global warming
0.023
(0.015)
No Plans to setup turbine nearby
−0.001
(0.015)
Dont know about setting up turbines nearby
0.004
(0.012)
5-9 years at residence
−0.000
(0.011)
10-14 years at residence
0.001
(0.012)
15+ years at residence
−0.002
(0.014)
R2:0.022 — Adj. R2:0.009 — Num. obs. : 1773
Table 12: Respondent exclusion test
44
==PAGE:48==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
E
Econometric models
With the agenda of this thesis exploring the relationship between the acceptance of repowering
with different spatial and socioeconomic data points, this section will dwell on suitable econo-
metric regression models that would cater to the objective of the research based on the nature of
the data used in the analysis.
With the dependent or response variable in attitude towards repowering being numbers on a 1-5
Likert scale, the most relevant models to be discussed in the section will be that of Multiple
Linear regression and Ordered Logit regression to carry out the analysis.
E.1
Multiple Linear regression
Multiple linear regression is one of the simplest and most extensively used econometric models
used to capture the relationship of a dependent variable with two or more independent variables
. This form of regression assumes that there exists a linear relationship between the variables
included in the model taking the form
Y = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + β3X3 + . . . + βnXn + ε
where,
Y
The dependent variable ( The attitude towards repowering in the case of this thesis)
β0
The intercept of the fitted line and
β1...βn
The coefficients of different spatial and socioeconomic data points from the survey
indicating the increase or decrease in the value of the dependent variable with the
increase in one unit of the independent variable in question holding other data variables
constant in the analysis.
ε
The error term of the unexplained deviation that could exist with the actual population
estimate of the dependent variable.
The assumption taken into consideration with respect to this analysis is that the response to the
question on repowering here is seen as a quantitative variable with 5 being the highest value
given the choice of ”Much positive ” and 1 being the lowest given to ”Much negative” as seen
in Table 3
In order to establish the ”best-fit line” or a ”hyperplane” across different dimensions, the goal of
the regression is to estimate the parameter coefficients (β0, β1, β2, β3 . . . βn) that would minimize
the sum of squared errors.
These parameter estimates can be interpreted to understand the direction and magnitude of im-
pact each independent variable has on the dependent variable in the analysis. By further per-
forming statistical tests, the significance of these parameters and the performance of the model
45
==PAGE:49==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
can also be estimated.[74]
The multiple linear regression model used for this analysis is described as follows
yAcceptance towards repowering = β0
+ βDensity of small Turbines per sq km · xDensity of small Turbines per sq km
+ βDensity of medium Turbines per sq km · xDensity of medium Turbines per sq km
+ βDensity of Large Turbines per sq km · xDensity of Large Turbines per sq km
+ βPeople living in zero turbine region · xPeople living in zero turbine region
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Model 1
+ βCan see 1-5 wind turbines daily · xCan see 1-5 wind turbines daily
+ βCan see 6-15 wind turbines daily · xCan see 6-15 wind turbines daily
+ βCan see 15+ wind turbines daily · xCan see 15+ wind turbines daily
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Model 2
+ βCan see 1-3 wind turbines from residence · xCan see 1-3 wind turbines from residence
+ βCan see 3+ wind turbines from residence · xCan see 3+ wind turbines from residence
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Model 3
+ βMale · xMale
+ βage · xage
+ βHigher Education · xHigher Education
+ βBasic Education · xBasic Education
+ βIncome · xIncome
+ βemployed · xemployed
+ βRetired · xRetired
+ βNot serious about global warming · xNot serious about global warming
+ βDon’t know if serious about global warming · xDon’t know if serious about global warming
+ βNo Plans to set up turbine nearby · xNo Plans to set up turbine nearby
+ βDon’t know about setting up turbines nearby · xDon’t know about setting up turbines nearby
+ β5-9 years at residence · x5-9 years at residence
+ β10-14 years at residence · x10-14 years at residence
+ β15+ years at residence · x15+ years at residence
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Model 4
46
==PAGE:50==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
E.2
Ordered Logit regression
The ordered logit regression model is a type of generalized Linear regression model used for
regression analyses with ordinal dependent data. In the case of this thesis, it is very clear that
the choices to the question on repowering are on a 1-5 Likert scale with categories: ” Much
Positive ”,” Positive”, ”Neutral”, ”Negative” and ” Much Negative”. Unlike Linear regression,
although these choices are naturally ordered according to a scale we do not know the differences
between each category.
Hence the goal of an ordered logit model is to estimate the relationship between the different
independent variables and their odds of falling into each category part of the dependent variable
[75]
The regression model makes the assumption that the relationship between the independent vari-
ables and the likelihood of falling into a specific category can be explained by a series of cut-off
points or thresholds along a latent continuous variable. These cutoff points separate the several
groups from the latent variable.
This type of regression takes the form
logit[P(Y ≤j)] = αj −P βiXi
where
Y
The ordered dependent variable ( The attitude towards repowering in the case of this thesis)
αj
This is the intercept term specific to the category j. It represents the log-odds of the event
when all the predictor variables (Xi) are zero.
X
The value of the independent variable
β
The parameter coefficient of the independent variable.
j
represents the categories (” Much Positive ”,” Positive”, ”Neutral”, ”Negative” and ” Much
Negative”)
i
represents the different Parameters used in the analysis ( spatial and socioeconomic param-
eters).
It is to be noted that the count of categories taken into the model is always one less than the total
count of categories as the analysis is performed relative to a base category
While holding other variables constant, the model calculates the cumulative odds ratios for each
independent variable, which show the change in odds of falling into a higher category for a one-
unit change in the independent variable.
To simplify the estimation and calculation of the model estimates, R software is used to carry
47
==PAGE:51==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
out the statistical analyses.
Coefficients
Value
Std.Error
t value
p-value
Density of small Turbines per sq km
-1.386
0.772
-1.796
0.073
*
Density of medium Turbines per sq km
-1.873
2.644
-0.708
0.479
Density of Large Turbines per sq km
3.927
2.927
1.342
0.180
People living in zero turbine region
-0.016
0.122
-0.129
0.897
Can see 1-5 wind turbines daily
0.195
0.114
1.717
0.086
*
Can see 6-15 wind turbines daily
0.386
0.135
2.855
0.004
***
Can see 15+ wind turbines daily
0.143
0.223
0.641
0.522
Can see 1-3 wind turbines from residence
0.170
0.171
0.994
0.320
Can see 3+ wind turbines from residence
-0.091
0.197
-0.465
0.642
Male
0.591
0.092
6.406
0.000
***
age
-0.007
0.005
-1.523
0.128
Higher Education
0.128
0.134
0.958
0.338
Basic Education
0.091
0.145
0.631
0.528
Income
0.013
0.025
0.524
0.600
employed
-0.146
0.165
-0.883
0.377
Retired
-0.005
0.190
-0.027
0.978
Not serious about global warming
-0.566
0.187
-3.025
0.002
***
Don’t know if serious about global warming
-0.303
0.160
-1.893
0.058
*
No Plans to setup turbine nearby
-0.237
0.166
-1.422
0.155
Dont know about setting up turbines nearby
-0.165
0.134
-1.232
0.218
5-9 years at residence
0.024
0.124
0.191
0.849
10-14 years at residence
-0.257
0.130
-1.980
0.048
**
15+ years at residence
0.038
0.151
0.248
0.804
Intercepts
Much Negative—Negative
-3.178
0.279
-11.378
0.000
***
Negative—Neutral
-2.114
0.266
-7.954
0.000
***
Neutral—Positive
-0.559
0.260
-2.151
0.031
**
Positive— Much Positive
0.808
0.261
3.099
0.002
***
Residual Deviance : 4836.10
AIC : 4890.10
No.of Observations : 1720
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
Looking at the results of the ordinal regression model, it is clear that the analysis in terms of
direction and significance is very similar to that of the linear regression model no. 4 developed
in the analysis. Hence for the purpose of simplicity in interpreting and analyzing the results ,
the ordinal linear regression is not considered as a part of the main analysis.
48
==PAGE:52==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
F
Linear Hypothesis test
Linear regression is one of the most simple and widely used statistical techniques for modelling
relationships between predictor and response variables. However, interpreting such models is
not bound to the results’ significance alone. Gelman & Stern [76] with a backing of two applied
examples explain the relevance of linear hypothesis tests to interpret the ”difference” in signif-
icance between parameters rather than the variables themselves. They emphasize that carrying
a linear hypothesis test, for relevant continuous variables in the models enhances the results and
provides more robust conclusions in different analyses.
Let us assume that linear regression is as follows
Y = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + ϵ
From the linear regression analysis using the Ordinary Least Squares Method (OLS) regression
coefficients β0, β1, and β2 and their respective standard errors SE(β1) and SE (β2) are obtained.
To formulate a linear hypothesis test between β1 and β2 , two hypothesis statements in H0 (Null
Hypothesis) and Ha (Alternate Hypothesis) are presented.
To test the difference in the two parameters the hypothesis statements are as follows
H0 : β1 = β2
Ha : β1 ̸= β2
Next, a t statistic is calculated
t =
β1 −β2
p
SE(β1)2 + SE(β2)2
The degrees of freedom for the t-distribution depend on the sample size and the number of
predictor variables in the model. For example, if you have n data points and p predictor variables,
the degrees of freedom will be approximately (n - p - 1)
A critical α value is also set for the significance criteria.
Hence based on the parmaters described above if the test value falls in the critical region of the
normal distribution curve Figure 11, we can be safe to reject the Null hypothesis(H0) and accept
the Alternate hypothesis stated (Ha)
49
==PAGE:53==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Figure 11: Representation of two-tailed t-test based on significance level [77]
Linear hypothesis test
Female
Male
Young
Old
GW Concern
GW not Concern
βdensity of large turbines per sq km - βdensity of small turbines per sq km
x
x
x
x
90%
x
βdensity of large turbines per sq km - βdensity of medium turbines per sq km
x
x
x
x
x
x
βdensity of medium turbines per sq km - βdensity of small turbines per sq km
x
x
x
x
x
x
Table 13: Level of Significance of linear hypothesis tests across all conditional models
G
Two sample t-test
To test if the parameter coefficients of two samples in a linear regression are significantly differ-
ent from one another, a two-sample t-test is performed across each parameter used in the analysis
with the following hypothesis statement :
H0 : β1,1 = β1,2
Ha : β1,1 ̸= β1,2
and the t-statistic is calculated as follows [78] :
t =
β1,1 −β1,2
p
(SEβ1,1)2 + (SEβ1,2)2
where
β1,1 & β1,2 are the same parameter coefficients estimated in two different models 1 and 2 .
50
==PAGE:54==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
SEβ1,1 and SEβ1,2 are the respective standard errors for the same parameter across two models.
The degrees of freedom used to calculate and verify the significance of the analysis here are the
same for all models: n1+n2-2 where (n1+n2 =1720 for all categories used in the conditional
regression).
In the case of the conditional regression model used in this thesis, models 1 and 2 are ”male”
and ”female” in the gender category, ”young” and ”old” in the age category and ”GW concern”
and ”GW not concern ” in the global warming category.
The results of the t-test are presented in Table 14
Gender
Age
GW
Intercept
-0.81
-0.35
-0.39
Density of small Turbines per sq km
-0.82
1.83 *
-0.75
Density of medium Turbines per sq km
-0.38
0.24
-0.64
Density of Large Turbines per sq km
-0.83
-0.71
-0.65
People living in zero turbine region
-0.03
0.98
1.25
Can see 1-5 wind turbines daily
-0.80
-0.31
0.85
Can see 6-15 wind turbines daily
0.15
0.40
1.42
Can see 15+ wind turbines daily
-0.68
-0.75
0.76
Can see 1-3 wind turbines from residence
1.77 *
0.75
0.66
Can see 3+ wind turbines from residence
-1.58
-0.23
-0.80
male
0.37
-1.15
age
-0.01
2.07 **
Higher Education
2.03**
-0.44
-1.33
Basic Education
1.23
-0.98
-1.78
Income
-1.29
0.87
-0.91
employed
-0.30
-0.55
0.87
Retired
-0.29
0.15
0.83
Not serious about global warming
-0.41
0.43
Don’t know if serious about global warming
-1.03
0.78
No Plans to setup turbine nearby
-0.35
0.12
0.45
Dont know about setting up turbines nearby
-0.36
0.26
0.30
5-9 years at residence
1.28
1.83*
-1.78
10-14 years at residence
1.08
0.82
-1.37
15+ years at residence
0.54
-0.92
-1.17
∗∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗p < 0.1
Table 14: t -test results
51
==PAGE:55==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
H
R language and Code
R software was used to prepare data and run statistical models in this study.
R is an open-source computer language and software environment that is frequently used in
statistical computing, data analysis, and graphics. It was designed in the early 1990s by Ross
Ihaka and Robert Gentleman and has since become one of the most popular languages for data
science and statistical research.
R offers a variety of statistical and graphical tools, such as linear and nonlinear modelling, time
series analysis, classification, clustering, and more. It also features a large array of R community-
contributed packages and libraries that considerably increase its usefulness.
The R code formulated for the analysis is presented below :
Install required libraries and input source data
library(readxl)
library(’xlsx’)
library(dplyr)
library(’fastDummies’)
library(’nnet’)
library(installr)
library(’jtools’)
library(’huxtable’)
library(’broom’)
library("lm.beta")
library(car)
library(tidyverse)
library(texreg)
library(corrplot)
Survey_data <- read_excel("<input data file location>")
Model 1
x_TD_dummy<-ifelse(Survey_data$Density_total__1_km2_ >0,0,1)
Required_data_only<-subset(Survey_data,select=
c(Density_small__1_km2_,Density_medium__1_km2_,Density_large__1_km2_,q3_vindm_land_3))
Required_data_only<-cbind(Required_data_only,x_TD_dummy)
basic_regression_1=lm(q3_vindm_land_3~.,data =Required_data_only)
summary(basic_regression_1)
Model 2
x_TD_dummy<-ifelse(Survey_data$Density_total__1_km2_ >0,0,1)
Required_data_only<-
subset(Survey_data,select=
c(Density_small__1_km2_,Density_medium__1_km2_,Density_large__1_km2_,q9_antal_vindm,
52
==PAGE:56==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
q3_vindm_land_3))
#Clubbing q9 : Turbines seen on a typical day
Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm >=3
& Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=4,3,ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm >=5 &
Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=6,4,ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm==2,2,1)))
Required_data_only<-
dummy_cols(Required_data_only,select_columns=c("q9_antal_vindm"),
remove_first_dummy=TRUE,remove_selected_columns = TRUE)
Required_data_only<-cbind(Required_data_only,x_TD_dummy)
basic_regression_2=lm(q3_vindm_land_3~. ,data = Required_data_only)
summary(basic_regression_2)
Model 3
x_TD_dummy<-ifelse(Survey_data$Density_total__1_km2_ >0,0,1)
Required_data_only<-subset(Survey_data,select=
c(Density_small__1_km2_,Density_medium__1_km2_,Density_large__1_km2_,q9_antal_vindm,
q3_vindm_land_3,q11_antal_vindm_hus))
#Clubbing q9 : Turbines seen on a typical day
Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm >=3
& Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=4,3,ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm
>=5 & Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=6,4,ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm==2,2,1)))
#Clubbing q11 : Turbines seen from residence
Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus >=3
& Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus <=5,2,ifelse(Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus >=1
& Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus <=2,1,0))
Required_data_only<-dummy_cols(Required_data_only,select_columns=
c("q9_antal_vindm","q11_antal_vindm_hus"),remove_first_dummy=TRUE,remove_selected_columns = TRUE)
Required_data_only<-cbind(Required_data_only,x_TD_dummy)
basic_regression_3=lm(q3_vindm_land_3~. ,data = Required_data_only)
summary(basic_regression_3)
Model 4
x_TD_dummy<-ifelse(Survey_data$Density_total__1_km2_ >0,0,1)
53
==PAGE:57==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
Required_data_only<-subset(Survey_data,select=
c(Density_small__1_km2_,Density_large__1_km2_,Density_medium__1_km2_,q3_vindm_land_3,
q29_udd,q31_indkomst,q30_arbejdsmarked,
birthyear,q1_global_op,q9_antal_vindm,gender,q11_antal_vindm_hus,q15_plan_moel,
q16_udsigt_moel,q8_nuv_bopael))
#Clubbing q9 : Turbines seen on a typical day
Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm >=3
& Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=4,3,ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm >=5
& Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=6,4,ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm==2,2,1)))
#Clubbing q11 : Turbines seen from residence
Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus >=3
& Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus <=5,2,ifelse(Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus >=1 &
Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus <=2,1,0))
#education clubbing
Required_data_only$q29_udd<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q29_udd ==1 |Required_data_only$q29_udd ==8
|Required_data_only$q29_udd ==3,1,
ifelse(Required_data_only$q29_udd >=5 & Required_data_only$q29_udd <=7,2,3))
#work clubbing
Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked ==4
|Required_data_only$q29_udd ==5
|(Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
>=8 & Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
<=10),1,
ifelse(Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
>=1
& Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
<=3,2,3))
#years lived at residence clubbing
Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==3
|Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==4,3,ifelse(Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==5
|Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==6,4,Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael))
Required_data_only<-dummy_cols(Required_data_only,select_columns=
c("q9_antal_vindm","q11_antal_vindm_hus","gende
r","q29_udd","q30_arbejdsmarked","q1_global_op","q16_udsigt_moel","q15_plan_moel","q8_nuv_bo
pael"),remove_first_dummy=TRUE,remove_selected_columns = TRUE)
Required_data_only<-cbind(Required_data_only,x_TD_dummy)
basic_regression_4=lm(q3_vindm_land_3~ Density_small__1_km2_ +Density_medium__1_km2_
54
==PAGE:58==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
+Density_large__1_km2_
+x_TD_dummy
+q9_antal_vindm_2
+q9_antal_vindm_3
+q9_antal_vindm_4
+q11_antal_vindm_hus_1
+q11_antal_vindm_hus_2
+gender_2
+birthyear
+q29_udd_2
+q29_udd_3
+q31_indkomst
+q30_arbejdsmarked_2
+q30_arbejdsmarked_3
+q1_global_op_2
+q1_global_op_3
+q15_plan_moel_2
+q15_plan_moel_3
+q8_nuv_bopael_2
+q8_nuv_bopael_3
+q8_nuv_bopael_4
,data = Required_data_only)
summary(basic_regression_4)
Linear Hypothesis test
#Test between Large and small Turbines
linearHypothesis(< enter Model name>,
"Density of Large Turbines per sq km-Density of small Turbines per sq km = 0")
#test between large and medium turbines
linearHypothesis(< enter Model name>,
"Density of Large Turbines per sq km-Density of medium Turbines per sq km = 0")
#test between small and medium turbines
linearHypothesis(< enter Model name>,
"Density of small Turbines per sq km-Density of medium Turbines per sq km = 0")
}
Ordered Logit model
#install.packages(rio)
#install.packages(MASSExtra)
library(rio)
55
==PAGE:59==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
library(MASS)
x_TD_dummy<-ifelse(Survey_data$Density_total__1_km2_ >0,0,1)
Required_data_only<-subset(Survey_data,select=c(Density_small__1_km2_,Density_large__1_km2_,
Density_medium__1_km2_,q3_vindm_land_3,q29_udd,q31_indkomst,q30_arbejdsmarked,birthyear,
q1_global_op,q9_antal_vindm,
gender,q11_antal_vindm_hus,q15_plan_moel,q16_udsigt_moel,q8_nuv_bopael))
#Clubbing q9 : Turbines seen on a typical day
Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm >=3 &
Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=4,3,ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm >=5
& Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm <=6,4,
ifelse(Required_data_only$q9_antal_vindm==2,2,1)))
#Clubbing q11 : Turbines seen from residence
Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus >=3
& Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus <=5,2,ifelse(Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus >=1
& Required_data_only$q11_antal_vindm_hus <=2,1,0))
#education clubbing
Required_data_only$q29_udd<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q29_udd ==1 |Required_data_only$q29_udd ==8|
Required_data_only$q29_udd ==3,1,
ifelse(Required_data_only$q29_udd >=5 & Required_data_only$q29_udd <=7,2,3))
#work clubbing
Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked ==4 |
Required_data_only$q29_udd ==5 |(Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
>=8 &
Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
<=10),1,
ifelse(Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
>=1 &
Required_data_only$q30_arbejdsmarked
<=3,2,3))
#years lived at residence clubbing
Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael<-ifelse(Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==3
|Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==4,3,
ifelse(Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==5 |Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael==6,4,
Required_data_only$q8_nuv_bopael))
Required_data_only<-dummy_cols(Required_data_only,select_columns=
c("q9_antal_vindm","q11_antal_vindm_hus","gender","q29_udd",
"q30_arbejdsmarked","q1_global_op","q16_udsigt_moel","q15_plan_moel",
"q8_nuv_bopael"),remove_first_dummy=TRUE,remove_selected_columns = TRUE)
Required_data_only<-cbind(Required_data_only,x_TD_dummy)
Required_data_only$q3_vindm_land_3<-factor(Required_data_only$q3_vindm_land_3)
56
==PAGE:60==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
ologit_regression_5=polr(q3_vindm_land_3~ Density_small__1_km2_
+Density_medium__1_km2_
+Density_large__1_km2_
+x_TD_dummy
+q9_antal_vindm_2
+q9_antal_vindm_3
+q9_antal_vindm_4
+q11_antal_vindm_hus_1
+q11_antal_vindm_hus_2
+gender_2
+birthyear
+q29_udd_2
+q29_udd_3
+q31_indkomst
+q30_arbejdsmarked_2
+q30_arbejdsmarked_3
+q1_global_op_2
+q1_global_op_3
+q15_plan_moel_2
+q15_plan_moel_3
+q8_nuv_bopael_2
+q8_nuv_bopael_3
+q8_nuv_bopael_4
,data = Required_data_only)
summary(ologit_regression_5,digits = 3)
coef_table <- coef(summary(ologit_regression_5,digits = 3))
p_value <- 2 * (1 - pnorm(abs(coef_table[, "t value"])))
coef_table<-cbind(coef_table,p_value)
options(digits=3)
stars <- symnum(coef_table[,"p_value"], corr = FALSE, na = FALSE,
cutpoints = c(0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 1), symbols = c("***", "**", "*"," "))
coef_table<-cbind(coef_table,stars)
coef_table[,"p_value"]<-paste0(coef_table[,"p_value"], " ", stars)
coef_table
logLik(ologit_regression_5)
Conditional regression analysis follows the same code as model 4 - Only the source data used is filtered based on
Gender, Age, Seriousness towards Global Warming
Two sample t-test
57
==PAGE:61==
Analyzing public acceptance towards repowering wind farms in Denmark
# Extract the coefficient estimates from both models
coeff_1 <- coef(basic_regression_5_female)
coeff_2 <- coef(basic_regression_5_male)
# Extract the standard errors of the coefficients from both models
se_1 <- sqrt(diag(vcov(basic_regression_5_female)))
se_2 <- sqrt(diag(vcov(basic_regression_5_male)))
denominator<-sqrt(se_1 *se_1 + se_2*se_2)
numerator<-coeff_1 - coeff_2
t<-numeric(num_coeffs)
p<-numeric(num_coeffs)
num_coeffs <- length(coeff_1)
for(i in 1:num_coeffs){
t[i]=numerator[i]/denominator[i]
# p[i]=2*pnorm(-abs(z))
p[i]=2*pt(t[i],1718,lower.tail=FALSE)
}
comparison_results<-cbind(names_gender,t,p)
Significance<- numeric(num_coeffs)
for(i in 1:num_coeffs){
Significance[i] <- ifelse(p[i] < 0.001, "***",
ifelse(p[i] < 0.01, "**",
ifelse(p[i] < 0.05, "*",
ifelse(p[i] < 0.1, ".", ""))))
}
output_results<-cbind(comparison_results,Significance)
output_results<-as.data.frame(cbind(comparison_results,Significance))
58
