==PAGE:1==
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on
the Sewage System in Amager
Master Thesis
Margrét Ásta Bjarnadóttir
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Margrét Ásta Bjarnadóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was completed from February 2023 to July 2023 for the Department of Envi-
ronmental and Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The project
is accredited 35 ECTS points. The project was conducted in collaboration with Thomas
Rozario and Toke Sloth Illeris from HOFOR.
Margrét Ásta Bjarnadóttir - s212941
Signature
Date
ii
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
 
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As knowledge of climate change increases and extreme weather events grow more fre-
quent, alternative rainwater solutions have become an integrated factor of local city plan-
ning worldwide. In 2011, the City of Copenhagen issued a climate adaptation plan ad-
dressing significant measures toward adaptive stormwater management solutions. In the
report, Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD) was identified as one of the most impactful
and cost-efficient adaptation measures for managing the increased rainwater runoff of the
future and subsequently, Copenhagen’s local plan includes a variety of WSUD today.
In the Landowners Association Odin, (Grundejerforeningen Odin, GF Odin) on Amager,
16 rain gardens are set to be installed on five private roads; Pæonvej, Kaktusvej, Lo-
tusvej, Oxford Allé, and Alperosevej. In this study, two MIKE+ models provided by HO-
FOR were used to analyze the impact of the 16 rain gardens on the sewer system in
Amager. The impact was measured by comparing two scenarios, the Baseline scenario,
and the WSUD scenario. Two types of simulations were conducted: CDS simulations in-
volving rain events with return periods of T=1, T=2, T=5, and T=10 years, and continuous
simulations that simulated historical rain from 2000 to 2009.
The analysis showed that the addition of the 16 rain gardens had a positive but restricted
impact on the sewer system. Simulations showed that the current sewer system faced
substantial backwatering problems, contributing greatly to manhole surcharges in the up-
stream areas of the system. Due to these problems, the sewer system was observed
to reach its capacity earlier than the rain gardens. Consequently, some of the manhole
surcharge flowed into the rain gardens causing them to infiltrate not purely rainwater but
also sewer surcharge. Simulations showed that during CDS rain with a return period of
T=10 years, the rain gardens infiltrated 55% surcharge and 45% rainwater. Continuous
simulations furthermore showed that from 2000-2009, the rain gardens infiltrated in total
97% rainwater and 3% surcharge.
The frequency of manhole surcharge in the studied area was reduced with the addition
of the 16 rain gardens. For CDS simulations, the frequency of manhole surcharge was
reduced by 9-40%, depending on the return period. During continuous simulations, the
reduction of manhole surcharge varied between the years with an average reduction of
17% in the studied area. The duration of manhole surcharge was furthermore reduced.
CDS simulations showed a reduction rate between 25-47% and continuous simulations
measured an average reduction rate of 4% in the 10-year period.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors from DTU, Hjalte Jomo
Danielsen Sørup and Peter Steen Mikkelsen, for their invaluable guidance throughout this
journey. Learning and growing under your mentorship has been an absolute honor.
Furthermore, I extend my heartfelt thanks to Thomas Rozario for his unwavering support
and willingness to answer my questions during this project. Your input and vast knowledge
have been truly invaluable.
iv
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Hydrological Influence of Urbanization and Climate Change
. . . . . .
1
1.2
Water Sensitive Urban Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Aims and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Modeling of Urban Drainage Systems
5
2.1
MIKE+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
CDS Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Continuous Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
MIKE+ Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Model Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Performance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Results and Discussion
20
4.1
Model Corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2
CDS Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Continuous Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
Comparison of CDS and Continuous Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4.5
Measures Towards Service Level Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
65
A CDS Rain
67
B Water Levels in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej
69
C Infiltration Calculations
74
D CDS Simulations - Infiltration
75
E
U- and f-values
77
F
IDF Curves
78
G Continuous Simulations - Infiltration
81
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
The Hydrological Influence of Urbanization and Climate
Change
The natural water cycle, also known as the hydrologic cycle, has been greatly altered by
urbanization. The increase in impermeable surfaces and the removal of vegetation has
reduced the function of nature’s fundamental hydrological processes such as interception,
evapotranspiration, storage, and infiltration (Viessman et al. 1989). Subsequently, surface
runoff has increased significantly in volume and speed as the runoff travels quicker on
artificial surfaces and via sewers than in natural streams and surfaces, see figure 1.1
(Butler et al. 2018). As a result, catchment runoff time has greatly reduced, and maximum
peak flows increased (Zölch et al. 2017).
Figure 1.1: The impact of urbanization on the processes of the hydrologic cycle (Butler
et al. 2018).
In recent years, climate change has furthermore altered the natural water cycle. Extreme
weather events such as wildfires, storm surges, tornadoes, and flooding have become
more frequent and are foreseen to only grow in intensity (Tsavdaroglou et al. 2018, Stott
2016). In terms of extreme rainfall events, the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) cat-
egorizes them into two different types: heavy rains, and cloudbursts. A rainfall event is
considered a cloudburst if the precipitation exceeds 15 mm in 30 minutes and heavy rain
if precipitation exceeds 24 mm in 6 hours. With the increase in impermeable surfaces
coupled with intense precipitation, flooding has therefore become a prominent issue for
urban drainage infrastructure. The implications of heavy cloudbursts are not only prop-
erty damage but also more frequent combined sewer overflows (CSOs), poor water qual-
ity in runoff recipients, and increased flows to wastewater treatment plants (Butler et al.
2018). Cities may experience serious negative effects from this, as Copenhagen did in
2011 when a massive cloudburst event caused significant infrastructure disruptions and
expensive insurance claims (Zölch et al. 2017).
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
1
==PAGE:10==
The change in surface runoff due to urbanization and climate change is one of the most
prominent issues for today’s urban drainage systems. As a means to adapt to this chang-
ing climate, adaptive stormwater solutions such as Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD)
are widely favored around the world in urban water management.
1.2
Water Sensitive Urban Design
WSUD is a set of techniques and strategies used to manage rainwater and reduce the risk
of flooding in urban areas while also promoting environmental sustainability (Ahammed
2017).
WSUD is an umbrella for various design solutions such as green roofs, rain gardens,
porous pavement, and swales that aim to improve hydrological processes and reduce
rainfall runoff. The solutions provide an opportunity to adapt to increasing rainfall inten-
sities without major disturbances to the already established sewer system. The cost of
WSUD is also significantly lower than enlarging the sewer’s pipe network. Furthermore,
WSUD reduces sewer surcharge during extreme weather events by retaining and detain-
ing runoff which takes pressure off the sewer system and lowers the likelihood of the sys-
tem’s capacity being exceeded (Lloyd, Wong, and Chesterfield 2002, Ahammed 2017).
It should be noted that WSUD not only improves water quantity but also water quality,
amenities, and biodiversity (Ballard et al. 2016). Further discussion on these matters will
however not be discussed as it is outside the scope of this study.
Following the major cloudburst event of 2011 in Copenhagen, the city issued a climate
adaptation plan, where significant measures toward adaptive stormwater management
solutions were introduced. In the report, WSUD was identified as one of the most impactful
and cost-efficient adaptation measures for increased stormwater runoff. Subsequently,
the city has drastically increased its effort in retrofitting WSUD within the municipality area,
and is now an integrated part of Copenhagen’s local and wastewater management plans
(Copenhagen 2011).
1.2.1
Rain gardens
Rain gardens are a type of WSUD that captures and absorbs rainwater, reduces runoff,
and treats pollution through vegetation and soil (Butler et al. 2018). Rain gardens can be
installed, for example, in driveways, gardens, and alongside roads.
Roadside rain gardens are both installed to reduce runoff volume and to slow down traffic.
They usually have an inlet at one end and a soakaway underneath where water can be
retained. Additionally, they are built with an overflow and/or a bypass connected to the
sewer system in case they exceed their capacity during a heavy rainfall event (Ballard
et al. 2016).
Rain gardens have specific soils to enhance filtration and treat polluted runoff. Further-
more, the vegetation at the top surface is carefully chosen to withstand high humidity and
aid with the purification of runoff. In Denmark, rain gardens are not consistently used,
and road runoff is sometimes directed straight to the sewer system on cold and humid
days. This is because salt from de-iced roads can destroy the structure of the engineered
soil and thus reduce its filtration abilities. Furthermore, the specific vegetation would not
2
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:11==
tolerate the heavy concentration of salt in the road runoff (Undervisningsministeret 2013,
Ballard et al. 2016).
A technical cross-section of a rain garden and its plan view can be seen in figure 1.2 and
1.3. The figures illustrates the typical structure of a roadside rain garden but it is important
to note that the design can vary between locations. For example, a connection from the
soakaway to the sewer system is not always required.
Figure 1.2: Cross section of a rain garden, provided by HOFOR
Figure 1.3: Plan view of a rain garden, provided by HOFOR
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
3
==PAGE:12==
Stormwater runoff from both sides of the road is directed to the rain garden, as figure 1.3
illustrates. The runoff is first led to an inlet where two scenarios can occur depending
on the opening of the well’s lid. When roads are salted, the lid is opened manually by a
HOFOR technician which directs the runoff directly to the sewer system, bypassing the
rain garden. However, at times when roads are salt-free, the lid is closed, causing runoff
to overflow into the rain garden. From there, water seeps through a filter soil and into a
soakaway below. The water is there stored until it infiltrates the soil around it, both from
the bottom and sides. If the volume of a soakaway is foreseen to be too small during
heavy rainfall, a drainage pipe is installed to connect the soakaway directly to the sewer
system. In the event of a cloudburst or heavy rainfall, where infiltration rates are lower
than the rate of inflow, water will flow from the soakaway via the drainage pipe into a
manhole equipped with a throttle unit. There, the water level will rise until it reaches the
level of the throttle pipe where it eventually is directed to the sewer system. This is done
to delay the volume of runoff into the sewer system.
1.3
Aims and Objectives
The aim of this thesis is to investigate the functionality of the combined sewer system in
Sundby, Amager, and measure the impact of adding 16 rain gardens to the area. The
objective is to carry out simulations of MIKE+ models where the following questions will
be sought to answer:
• Why does the current sewer system show signs of being challenged?
• Do the 16 rain gardens reduce the frequency of manhole surcharge?
• Do the 16 rain gardens reduce the duration of manhole surcharge?
• What is the runoff volume reduction of the 16 rain gardens when road runoff is dis-
connected from the sewer system?
• What are the potential additional locations within the studied area where WSUD
implementation could be beneficial?
In order to answer the following questions, both CDS and continuous simulations will be
carried out. The simulations will be performed for the system with and without rain gardens.
Results will be compared in order to measure the overall impact of the rain gardens.
4
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:13==
2
Modeling of Urban Drainage Systems
In the 1970s, computational modeling for urban drainage design and analysis was first de-
veloped. However, hydraulic modeling did not become a standard practice until sufficient
computational power was available (Butler et al. 2018). Today, various software exist for
the design and analysis of future and existing systems. These models are essential for
investors and drainage engineers as they can both help scope and quantify the benefits
of current and future projects (Hoffmann et al. 2015).
2.1
MIKE+
MIKE+ is a software package developed by the Danish company DHI, which is designed
for urban water management and modeling. It is used by engineers and planners to
simulate and analyze water distribution systems, sewer networks, stormwater systems,
and other urban water infrastructure. The software provides a range of modeling tools
and features, including hydraulic modeling, water quality modeling, GIS integration, and
advanced visualization capabilities. The software is widely used by municipalities, water
utilities, consulting firms, and research institutions around the world (DHI n.d.).
A general hydrodynamic MIKE+ model consists of nodes, pipes, weirs, orifices, curb in-
lets, pumps, and valves. The flow in a combined sewer system is generated from both
catchment runoff and load points and enters the system via connected nodes. The flow in
the network is calculated with the Saint-Venant equations, also known as Shallow Water
Equations, see equations 2.1 and 2.2 below (DHI 2017). Equation 2.1 is known as the
continuity equation and describes the conservation of mass,
∂q
∂x + ∂Afl
∂t
= qin
(2.1)
where q is the discharge, Afl is the flow area and qin is the lateral flow.
Equation 2.2, known as the momentum equation, describes the law of momentum and is
given by:
∂q
∂t +
∂
(
α q2
Afl
)
∂x
+ gAfl
∂h
∂x + gAfllf = f
ρw
(2.2)
where h is the water level, and α is the momentum distribution coefficient, lf is the flow
resistance term, f is momentum forcing and ρw is the density of water.
It should be noted that the Saint-Venant Equations are only valid when the flow in the
network has free surface flow. When the water level in the pipes reaches the height of
the pipe, flow changes from free flow to pressurized flow. In this case, an approximate
treatment of pressurized flow is adopted where a fictitious slot at the top of the reach is
created. This slot is also known as the Preissman slot (DHI 2017).
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
5
==PAGE:14==
The option of ”cover type” for nodes such as manholes, basins, and soakaways deter-
mines the fate of water that exceeds the ground level. By default, the cover type is ”Nor-
mal” which means that they are open at the top. If the water level in these open nodes
reaches ground level, an artificial inundation basin is created above the node which ex-
pands to a diameter 1000 times larger than the node below, see figure 2.1. The water
stored in the inundation basin enters the system again when the outflow from the node
exceeds the inflow (DHI 2017).
Figure 2.1: Simulation of surface flooding for cover type ”normal” (DHI 2017)
Alternatively, MIKE+ offers two other cover types. The cover option ”sealed” closes the
nodes, preventing water from flowing to the surface although pressure rises within the
system and a ”spilling” cover means that the water spills irreversibly out of the model.
The generation of runoff can be calculated via four different surface runoff models: Time-
Area Method, Kinematic Wave, Linear Reservoir and Unit Hydrograph Method. In Danish
practice, the first two models are most commonly used as they provide sufficient urban
runoff analysis with minimum to moderate data requirements (DHI 2023). In this study
the Time-Area Method, also called Model A, was solely utilized. The Time-Area Method
(Model A) calculates the runoff quantity from an initial loss parameter, continuous hydro-
logical reduction, and the size of the contributing area. The initial loss parameter rep-
resents interception and depression storage, whereas the hydrological reduction factor
represents evapotranspiration and imperfect imperviousness (DHI 2017).
2.1.1
Modeling of WSUD
As WSUD becomes an integrated factor of urban drainage management in Denmark, wa-
ter utilities and consulting companies have experienced a growing need for modeling tools
equipped to simulate green solutions. In recent years, DHI has reached the milestone of in-
corporating green solutions into its models, giving modelers the ability to analyze the effect
of WSUD on the sewer system (Hoffmann et al. 2015). MIKE+ provides two approaches
for modeling of WSUD structures: LID screening level which is a catchment-based ap-
proach and soakaway node level which is a network-based approach (DHI 2023). In this
paper, the soakaway node level approach will strictly be used.
6
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:15==
In MIKE+, a soakaway is modeled as a regular node much like a basin with the distinc-
tion that it includes infiltration. Furthermore, the soakaway node provides the ability to
interact with the sewer system in more detail than a LID screening tool can. For exam-
ple, it can be connected to weirs or orifices and can discharge into downstream pipes. A
schematic diagram of a soakaway node can be seen in figure 2.2. The software provides
three infiltration methods for the soakaway node: ”No infiltration”, ”Constant infiltration”,
and ”Infiltration”. The difference between the three options lies in the functionality of the
soakaway, where ”No infiltration” inhibits filtration from the soakaway, ”Constant infiltra-
tion” provides a constant infiltration rate out of a soakaway, and ”Infiltration” provides the
ability to vary the infiltration based on the water level of the soakaway (DHI 2023). For all
infiltration options, an initial water level and porosity value for each soakaway node can
be inserted as input.
Figure 2.2: A schematic diagram of a soakaway node in MIKE+ (DHI 2023)
The ”Infiltration” method is based on the work of Roldin et al. 2012, where the infiltration
rate is calculated with equation 2.3 below,
Qf = K · (l · w + 2h(l + w))
(2.3)
where K is the soil hydraulic conductivity, l is the length, w is the width and h is the water
level in the soakaway. In MIKE+, this equation is edited in order to correspond to the basin
geometry of the soakaway node, see equation 2.4,
Qf = Kfs,bottom · As,h=0 + Kfs,side ·
(
2Ac + 2V ol
Ac
d
)
(2.4)
where Kfs,bottom is the field-saturated hydraulic conductivity at the bottom, Kfs,side is the
field-saturated hydraulic conductivity at the side, As is the surface area and Ac is the
cross-sectional area. The latter two are calculated as follows,
As = w · l
(2.5)
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
7
==PAGE:16==
Ac = w · h
(2.6)
where w is the width, l is the length and h is the height of the soakaway. The soakaway
node has, as equation 2.4 illustrates, the unique ability to simulate infiltration through both
the sides and bottom. The modeler has however the option, to simulate only through the
sides or only the bottom (DHI 2023). For dimensioning purposes, solely infiltration through
the sides is a common practice as a conservative measure and to account for clogging.
The volume of a rain garden lies primarily in the underlying soakaway. However, it must be
expected that there is a small volume available in the filtered soil between the soakaway
and surface level. In order to include this additional volume, the geometry inputs for each
soakaway are altered within the basin geometry editor. An example of how geometry
values are defined in MIKE+ can be seen in table 2.1 below. The first height value is
interpreted as the bottom level of the soakaway whereas the last value corresponds to
the surface level.
Table 2.1: Example of basin geometry for rain gardens in MIKE+
H [m]
Volume [m3]
Ac [m2]
As [m2]
0
0
0.72
5.04
0.60
3.02
0.72
5.04
0.601
3.03
0.72
1
2
4.43
0.72
1
As mentioned before, soakaway nodes are able to interact with the sewer system via
weirs and orifices. A weir is used to imitate an above-ground flow connection between
a rain garden and the sewer system. The flow is set to be two-directional, i.e. water
can flow to and from the soakaway node. In MIKE+, a weir can be characterized by four
different computational methods. In this study, the option ”Weir Formula” is used and will
therefore be the only one described. The ”Weir Formula” method describes the weir with
the following input values: crest level, discharge coefficient, and crest width. The flow is
then calculated with the overflow formula seen below,
Qweir = 2
3 · Cd · B ·
√
2g · H
3
2
(2.7)
where Cd is the discharge coefficient, B is the crest width and H is the water depth above
the weir crest level. For a soakaway node, the crest level indicates the level of the overflow
manhole, and the crest width interprets the diameter of the overflow manhole in the rain
garden.
A direct pipe connection between a soakaway and the sewer system is modeled in MIKE+
with an orifice element. An orifice can be modeled with different geometry: circular, CRS,
or rectangular. As a means to imitate the pipe connection best, a circular orifice is typically
8
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:17==
used along with a specified diameter and discharge coefficient. A non-return flap can be
chosen as well to inhibit water to flow back into the soakaway.
2.2
CDS Simulations
Chicago Design Storm (CDS) is a type of synthetic rainfall data that estimates the amount
of rainfall that can be expected for a given storm event (Keifer and Chu 1957). By using
CDS to estimate the amount of precipitation that a given area may experience, engineers
and hydrologists can design stormwater management systems that can handle expected
storm events while minimizing the risk of flooding and other stormwater-related issues.
A CDS rain varies in duration and intensity but the shape of the hyetograph stays the
same, see figure 2.3. In Danish practice, combined sewer systems should be designed
to cause no terrain flooding during a CDS rain event with a return period of T=10 years.
This criterion is also known as the service level of the system.
Figure 2.3: Typical CDS hyetograph (Butler et al. 2018)
2.3
Continuous Simulations
Historical rainfall time series are often utilized in stormwater management. A historical
time series involves a complete collection of rainfall data, both wet and dry events, at a
certain time and place. They are frequently used to imitate the current climate as closely
as possible. Continuous simulations utilize historical time series as rainfall input data. In
practice, CDS storms are utilized to depict and analyze pipe sizes in the urban drainage
system. However, studies have shown that the frequency of CSOs and implementation of
WSUDs are analyzed better with continuous or long-term statistic (LTS) modeling (Sørup
et al. 2018).
In this study, continuous simulations were chosen as a more suitable option than LTS
simulations. As infiltration of water in rain gardens is most often measured in days, a
distinction between rain events was difficult to determine. In other words, due to infiltration
rates, rain from an earlier event can still be present in the rain gardens when the next
one starts. This can cause problems with interpretation as LTS modeling carries out a
simulation of discontinuous series of rain events. Based on these factors, continuous
simulations were opted to produce more accurate results for analysis in this project.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Methodology
This thesis is based on two separate sections: CDS rain simulations and continuous simu-
lations. The workflow of the study is illustrated in figure 3.1 below. The flow chart functions
as a visual roadmap, outlining the steps and stages of the project.
Figure 3.1: Project workflow
The first part of the project will focus on CDS simulations in order to analyze the sewer
system’s performance and identify weaknesses. Furthermore, errors in the model will be
identified and corrected. In the second part of the project, continuous simulations will
be conducted for the purpose of exploring the system’s performance further. Comparison
between both scenarios and types of simulation will additionally be a subject of exploration.
Further discussion on the project components will be addressed in the following sections.
10
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Case Study
The area of the study is situated in the neighborhood Sundby in Amager, Denmark. The
rain gardens are set to be installed on five private roads: Pæonvej, Kaktusvej, Lotusvej,
Oxford Allé, and Alperosevej, see figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Area of study
The area is a residential district with a total of 25.5 hectares of catchment area, thereof
12.7 hectares of reduced area. Included in this area is 7.5 hectares of green area. The
green area contains multiple football fields and lies at the western end of the studied area
at Sundby Idrætspark.
The case study area is served by a combined sewer system, which ultimately leads the
wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) Lynetten. Previous simulations of
the area have shown that the sewer system is challenged during heavy rainfall events,
causing manhole surcharge on roads such as Pæonvej, Kaktusvej, Lotusvej, Oxford Allé,
and Alperosevej. Homeowners in the area requested the implementation of the 16 rain
gardens. The layout of the combined sewer system in the studied area can be seen in
figure 3.3.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: Layout of the combined sewer system in the study area
3.1.1
Hydraulic conductivity
An infiltration test was conducted by HOFOR in 2020 to obtain values for the hydraulic
conductivity of the soil in the area. The soil was taken from five boreholes of 2-meter
depth, one corresponding to each private road studied (Rozario 2022). The results can
be seen in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Measured hydraulic conductivity
Road
Hydraulic conductivity, K
Pæonvej
5.5×10−6 m/s
Kaktusvej
5.5×10−5 m/s
Lotusvej
8.1×10−5 m/s
Oxford Allé
2.8×10−5 m/s
Alperosevej
3.3×10−5 m/s
3.1.2
Groundwater
The boreholes mentioned above were also used for groundwater level measurements.
Measurements were taken approximately every month from March 2020 to August 2021.
The results showed that, generally, groundwater levels were below 2 meters for all roads.
12
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:21==
As the bottom level of the soakaways is approximately 1.1 - 1.2 meters below ground,
HOFOR concluded that infiltration rate calculations can be assumed unhindered (Rozario
2022)
3.1.3
Rain gardens
The intended placement and name of the 16 rain gardens can be seen in figure 3.4.
The green rectangles represent the rain gardens. Each rain garden is named after the
road and address on which it is located closest to. For example, AL09 is located along-
side Alperosevej 9 and PÆ30 alongside Pæonvej 30. The rain gardens disconnect 0.24
hectares of reduced catchment land, i.e. 1.9 % of the reduced area in the case study
area.
It is important to note that each rain garden has its individual design in terms of geometry,
infiltration capability, and connection to the sewer system. The defined characteristics
are dependent on the location of each individual rain garden and have been pre-defined
by HOFOR. Table 3.2 shows the main characteristics of each rain garden. Note that the
catchment area listed in the table refers to the reduced catchment area.
Volume analysis conducted by HOFOR led to the decision that only two rain gardens,
LO55 and PÆ30, required a direct connection to the sewer system. This was decided
based on the fact that the available surface area yielded less soakaway volume than the
Spildevandskomiteen (SVK) recommended (Rozario 2022).
Figure 3.4: Location of the 16 rain gardens in the study area
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.2: Characteristics of the 16 rain gardens
Rain garden
Width
Length
Depth
K
Vol
Catchment area
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m/d]
[m3]
[m2]
AL01
1.20
4.2
0.6
2.8512
3.02
38
AL05
1.20
13.8
0.6
2.8512
9.94
125
AL09
1.20
16.2
0.6
2.8512
11.66
152
KA55
1.63
9.0
0.6
4.7520
8.80
148
KA62
1.20
13.8
0.6
4.7520
9.94
168
KA65
1.32
13.3
0.6
4.7520
10.53
214
LO55
0.63
20.4
0.6
6.9984
7.34
199
LO62
1.20
13.8
0.6
6.9984
9.94
212
LO64
1.20
14.5
0.6
6.9984
10.40
188
OX19
3.00
4.2
0.6
2.4192
7.56
119
OX23
1.20
10
0.6
2.4192
7.20
101
OX56
3.60
6.6
0.6
2.4192
14.26
206
OX58
1.46
9.6
0.6
2.4192
8.41
117
PÆ30
0.98
19.2
0.6
0.4752
11.29
158
PÆ42
1.27
21.6
0.6
0.4752
16.46
181
PÆ59
1.35
20.4
0.6
0.4752
16.52
128
3.2
MIKE+ Models
Two MIKE+ models representing the sewer system in Amager were provided by HOFOR,
one including the rain gardens and the other excluding them. The two models are minia-
ture cut-outs of the Lynetten model which represent the entire Lynetten catchment. The
area is divided into multiple sub-catchments, which are connected to the sewer system at
designated manholes. Model A (Time-Area Method) calculates rainfall runoff for all catch-
ments. Initial loss is estimated to be 0.6 mm for all catchments except for green areas
which have a higher loss of 50 mm. Both models are run with a hydraulic factor of 0.8. An
overview of the catchments in the studied area can be seen in figure 3.6.
The models stand for two different scenarios investigated in this study: the Baseline sce-
nario (model without rain gardens) and the WSUD scenario (model including the rain
gardens). The models are to a large extent identical. The main difference between the
two is the addition of soakaway nodes (representing the rain gardens) and the necessary
alternations needed to incorporate them. These include additional catchments, nodes,
weirs, and orifices. Boundary conditions, such as rainfall and load point discharge stay
the same. Moreover, pipe dimensions, basins, pumps, and outlets remain the same.
An overview of the WSUD model is illustrated in figure 3.5 (note that the location of the
rain gardens is at the top left corner of the model). Sewage and stormwater from the
14
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:23==
upstream parts of the system are led to the main sewer line in the middle of the modeled
network, where it is directed to a pumping station. If the combined sewer system faces
high water levels, CSO overflow tunnels and basins convey the water further downstream
where it is either led to the WWTP or to the sea through CSO. The model provided by
HOFOR for this project is cut before this division takes place and has instead a modeled
outlet, see outlet at the top right of figure 3.5).
Figure 3.5: Overview of WSUD model in MIKE+
Figure 3.6: Modeled catchments in the study area
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
15
==PAGE:24==
3.2.1
Modeling of soakaway nodes
The 16 rain gardens were modeled in MIKE+ as soakaway nodes. All soakaway nodes
were modeled with individual basin geometry, based on the characteristics showcased in
table 3.2. The nodes had the cover type ”normal” and a porosity of 0.95. Furthermore,
an initial water level was determined by HOFOR for each soakaway node during CDS
simulations, where the depth was defined as 5 mm for 1 m3 per 200 m2 connected area
(Rozario 2022).
All soakaway nodes were connected to a weir in order to imitate an above-ground connec-
tion between the rain gardens and sewer system. The crest level was determined to be 3
cm below terrain level and the crest width was 1 m in correspondence to the diameter of a
ø315 well (see figure 1.2 for clarification). As mentioned, only PÆ30 and LO55 required
a direct connection between the soakaway and sewer system. They were therefore mod-
eled with a connection via an orifice with a circular shape and a diameter of 0.02 m. The
invert level of the orifice was 40 cm above the soakaway’s bottom level for PÆ30 and 30
cm above for LO55. Both orifices had a non-return flap. It is highlighted that all elevations
and dimensions were pre-defined by HOFOR.
3.3
Model Input
3.3.1
CDS rain
The CDS data used in this study was provided by HOFOR and was generated from the
rain gauge Rødovre Vandværk. The rainfall duration was 4 hours in 10-minute intervals,
from 07:00 AM to 11:00 AM. Four different return periods were utilized: T=1, T=2, T=5,
and T=10 years. No safety factors were applied to the system as this report focuses solely
on the performance of the system. As the lifetime of the rain gardens is estimated to be
30 years, a climate factor of 1.1 (previously defined by HOFOR) was used in this project.
A CDS rain with a return period T=10 years was applied in order to analyze the efficiency
of the system in compliance with the Danish service level. Other return periods were used
to evaluate the functionality of the system. Individual graphs for each CDS return period
can be found in Appendix A.
3.3.2
Historical rain
A total of 44 years of rain data from the rain gauge station 5740 - Kløvermarksvej was pro-
vided by HOFOR spanning the years from 1979-2023. The station was chosen as it was
the most reliable long-term rain gauge station with the closest distance to the studied area.
The original data was corrected by discarding rain events marked with d (discard) and t
(technical error). Furthermore, events marked with 2e were disposed of as recommended
by DMI.
16
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.7: Overview of 44-year historical rain series
As it was not feasible in terms of computational time to simulate 44 years continuously,
a 10 year period was chosen to represent the historical rain series. In order to evaluate
what time period was the most representative, the DTU Rain Analyst provided by the
SVK was utilized (Sørup 2015). The DTU Rain analyst is a tool that can, among other
things, assess how well a rain series fits the regional model for a specific catchment by
computing f- and U-values. The f-values are correction factors that illustrate how aligned
the chosen rain series is to the regional model whereas the U-values measure if the rain
series has more or less extreme events compared to the regional model. For instance,
when the f-value of a rain series drops below 1, it signifies that the series demonstrates
a comparatively more significant amount of rainfall than the regional model (Sørup 2015).
The f- and U-values for the entire rain series were therefore compared to the computed
values for three different time periods: 1999 - 2008, 2000 - 2009, and 2001 - 2010.
3.3.3
Hotstart file
A sewer system in MIKE+ is considered empty if not specified otherwise. Before running
both CDS and continuous simulations, hot-start files were generated to imitate dry weather
flow (DWF) in the system. The hotstart files were created by running a two-day simulation
for the Baseline model with only wastewater flow from households, industries, offices, and
public spaces. That is, the system was run solely with wastewater and no rainfall runoff.
Wastewater loads and cyclic behaviors were pre-defined by HOFOR and were not altered
in this project.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
17
==PAGE:26==
3.4
Performance Analysis
To meet the objectives of this study, an analysis of the system’s performance (for both
Baseline and WSUD scenario) was conducted through CDS and continuous simulations.
Simulations were carried out for both surface runoff and the sewer network. The surface
runoff was computed with a fixed 60-second time step and the network with a time step of
5 seconds. Results were saved every 60 seconds during CDS simulations, whereas for
continuous simulations, the results were saved every 10 minutes to reduce the result file
size.
Given the focus of this study, the impact analysis of the rain gardens was strictly set
on the area where they will be located on. Thus, detailed investigation is limited to that
particular aspect, and won’t delve into the results of the entire model. However, in order
to evaluate and understand the functionality of the combined sewer system, the whole
model was taken into account. Figure 3.8 shows the area in which the rain gardens
performance was analyzed. The figure shows the WSUD model, however, the same area
was studied for the Baseline model. The arrows in the figure illustrate the flow direction in
the pipes, showing that ultimately all upstream discharge flows into the local pipe located
in Sundbyvestervej. It should be noted that the mentioned pipe also receives water from
a section of an area in the southern part of the system.
Figure 3.8: Studied area in the WSUD model
18
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:27==
As a means to assess the performance of the sewer system and quantify the impact of
the 16 rain gardens, a set of performance indicators were developed. The performance
indicators are as follows:
• Number of manhole surcharges
• Duration of manhole surcharge
• Runoff volume reduction
A Python code provided by HOFOR was utilized in order to obtain the duration of the
surcharge in each manhole. Other indicator results were taken straight from MIKE+ sim-
ulation result files.
In the WSUD scenario, additional nodes were included in the model to establish con-
nections between the soakaway nodes and the sewer system. However, it is important to
note that these nodes will not be constructed in reality when the rain gardens are installed.
Therefore, for the sake of simplification, these nodes were excluded from the analysis and
results.
Additionally, an investigation of whether the rain gardens infiltrated purely rainwater was
conducted. This was done by analyzing the modeled weir connection between the rain
gardens and the combined sewer system and quantifying the flow between the two if one
occurred.
Finally, measures towards service level compliance were explored. An evaluation of the
extent of reduced area that should be disconnected from the combined sewer system to
prevent manhole surcharge was carried out. The disconnection was modeled within the
WSUD scenario, acquiring the additional disconnected area needed. The evaluation was
done by trial and error.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
19
==PAGE:28==
4
Results and Discussion
The results and subsequent discussion of the CDS and continuous simulations for the two
scenarios are presented in this chapter. The chapter is divided into five separate sections
where the following will be addressed,
• Model corrections
• CDS simulations results
• Continuous simulations results
• Comparison of CDS and continuous simulations
• Measures towards service level compliance
4.1
Model Corrections
During the process of simulating CDS rains, errors in the models were identified and
corrected. For both models, five catchments had impervious area percentages above
100%. They were corrected to 100%. In the WSUD model, the Time-Area Method was
not chosen for 6 catchments, this was corrected. Note that the corrections mentioned
above are a product of a conversion issue from MIKE URBAN to MIKE+, i.e. these errors
are not present in the MIKE URBAN version utilized by HOFOR.
In the WSUD model, an error in the pipe and node layout in Oxford Allé was corrected.
The bottom levels for two nodes (named node 21 and node 19 in the model) were changed
in order to imitate the correct flow direction and slope, see values in table 4.1 below.
Table 4.1: Updated bottom level values
Original
Corrected
Node
bottom level [m]
bottom level [m]
Node 21
1.41
1.86
Node 19
0.06
1.36
In the Eastern part of the model near Amager Strand, a basin node had previously been
placed in order to imitate the lake around Kastrupfort, see figure 4.1. For that reason,
the ground level of the node was relatively low compared to nodes close by and showed
continuous surcharging problems during simulations. Thus, to imitate the reality of the
system better, the basin was deleted from the model and three outlets were added to the
pipes previously connected to it.
20
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.1: Location of the basin node deleted from model
In the WSUD model, corrections were also made to the properties of the soakaway nodes.
The infiltration method of all soakaway nodes was changed from ”Constant infiltration” to
”Infiltration” in order for the model to simulate variation in infiltration rates depending on
the water level in the soakaway. As a conservative measure and to account for clogging,
infiltration through the bottom was de-selected for all soakaways.
Ac values for all 16 soakaways were corrected as well as As values for LO64, PÆ30 and
PÆ59. Furthermore, the terrain and crest levels were adjusted for a number of soakaways
in order to have a constant 3 cm difference between the two variables. The Ac, As, crest
level, and terrain level values of the soakaway nodes can be seen in table 4.2 below.
Values in red indicate changes from the original model.
In the original model, all 16 soakaway nodes were connected to the sewer system via a
weir to imitate above-ground connections and orifices for underground connections. How-
ever, as mentioned before, volume analysis conducted by HOFOR showed that only two
rain gardens required a direct connection from the soakaway to the sewer system. There-
fore, orifices were deleted for all soakaway nodes in the model except for LO55 and PÆ30.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.2: Characteristics of the 16 soakaway nodes
Rain garden
Ac
As
Terrain level
Crest level
[m2]
[m2]
[m]
[m]
AL01
0.72
5.04
4.10
4.07
AL05
0.72
16.56
4.10
4.07
AL09
0.72
19.44
4.07
4.04
KA55
0.98
14.67
4.18
4.15
KA62
0.72
16.56
4.08
4.05
KA65
0.79
17.56
4.04
4.01
LO55
0.36
12.24
4.1
4.07
LO62
0.72
16.56
4.05
4.02
LO64
0.72
17.34
3.99
3.96
OX19
1.80
12.60
4.14
4.11
OX23
0.72
12.00
4.20
4.17
OX56
2.16
23.76
4.12
4.09
OX58
0.88
14.02
4.10
4.07
PÆ30
18.82
18.82
4.21
4.18
PÆ42
0.76
27.43
3.96
3.93
PÆ59
0.81
27.54
4.13
4.1
22
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:31==
4.2
CDS Simulations
Baseline and WSUD model simulations were carried out for CDS rain with a climate factor
of 1.1 and a return period of T=1, T=2, T=5, and T=10 years. First of all, the functionality
of the current sewer system was explored. Then the frequency and duration of manhole
surcharge was analyzed as well as the interaction between the rain gardens and the sewer
system. Furthermore, the runoff volume reduction was quantified.
4.2.1
Functionality of the modeled sewer system
The combined sewer system in Amager is designed under unfavorable conditions as the
terrain is low and flat. In fact, most of the island has a terrain level of around 2 - 2,5
meters above sea level except for a small area in the middle of Amager where the terrain
level reaches 5 meters. The study area of this project is found in that section of the island
(Nobel 1915).
In order to successfully transfer the wastewater from the flat area of Amager to the Lynet-
ten WWTP, pumps had to be installed. However, due to economic reasons, the pumping
capacity does not include the addition of rainwater. Instead, basins were installed where
water is collected and gradually pumped away. Furthermore, CSO storage tunnels were
added in the middle of Amager’s sewer network as a means to store and detain rainwater
during heavy rainfall events (Nobel 1915).
Figure 4.2 shows the intended flow direction of wastewater from the upstream part of the
system at Irlandsvej down to a main pipe in Greisvej and from there to the pumping station
in Wibrandsvej 100. The highlighted pipes on the map indicate the intended flow route.
Similar routes are found for other parts of the system, i.e. the wastewater is all led to a
main pipe in Greisvej. The CSO storage tunnels discussed above, are situated alongside
the main pipe in Greisvej.
Figure 4.2: An overview of the flow direction from the most upstream part of the system
(the study area) down to the pumping station at Wibrandsvej 100
The diameter of the pipes flowing from Irlandsvej down to Grækenlandsvej enlarges from
0.2 meters to 1.1 meters. The main pipe in Greisvej that receives the water from said pipes
however is 0.75 meters and later enlarges to 0.9 meters close to the pumping station. The
CSO stormwater tunnel has a diameter of 1.6 meters. A 3D figure of the pipe intersection
at Grækenlandsvej and Greisvej can be seen in figure 4.3.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3: A 3D schematic of the pipe intersection at Grækenlandsvej and Greisvej
The setup of the main pipe in Greisvej and the CSO storage tunnel illustrated above
showcases that an overflow from the main pipe to the storage tunnel does not start until the
water level has exceeded both the crown of the main pipe in Greisvej and Grækenlandsvej.
This causes water to back up in the pipe in Grækenlandsvej before the CSO stormwater
tunnel can begin to take on water. This layout in the downstream part of the network
coupled with capacity problems is the reason for backwater effects which are detected all
the way up to the most upstream areas of the system in Irlandsvej.
During the Baseline scenario, CDS simulations with a return period of T=10 years showed
that the pipe system experienced multiple issues such as backwatering and manhole sur-
charge. The pipe located in Sundbyvestervej which conveys all water from the studied
area had reduced discharging capacity due to backwater effects from the downstream
pipes described earlier. Subsequently, due to high water levels in Sundbyvestervej, pipes
along all roads further upstream of Sundbyvestervej experienced backwater effects. Fig-
ure 4.5 shows a profile plot of the water level at 8:45 AM in the pipe stretch in Sund-
byvestervej and Irlandsvej when water starts to back up in the pipe. Additionally, the
figure illustrates the maximum water level during the 10-year event. An overview of the
pipe stretch in question can furthermore be seen in figure 4.5. Please note that in Ap-
pendix B, an animation of the water level in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej throughout
a 10-year event can be seen by viewing this thesis in Adobe Acrobat Reader or Foxit. If
these readers are not at hand, the Appendix also offers snapshots of the water levels in
the pipe stretch throughout the 10-year event.
24
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.4: An overview of the selected pipe stretch shown in a profile view in the figure
below
Figure 4.5: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej at 8:45 AM
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
25
==PAGE:34==
4.2.2
Baseline scenario
4.2.2.1
Manhole surcharge
As a result of backwatering problems within the combined sewer system, frequent occur-
rences of manhole surcharges were identified during CDS rain events with return periods
of T=2, T=5, and T=10 years in the studied area. No manhole surcharges were observed
for the return period T=1 year, hence, the results for that event will not be discussed in
this report.
Figure 4.6 depicts the manholes that surcharge during CDS rain events with return periods
of T=2, T=5, and T=10 years. Manholes experiencing surcharge during a 2-year event
are highlighted in red. Similarly, those affected by a five-year event are indicated by a
combination of red and yellow, while manholes impacted by a 10-year event are marked
with red, yellow, and green colors.
A total of 7 manhole surcharges (out of 35) were observed during a rain event with a 2-
year return period. The location of the surcharges can be seen in figure 4.6. The location
of the surcharging manholes illustrates that the system faces its greatest challenges in
Irlandsvej and Pæonvej.
As problems were already faced in a 2-year event, surcharges grew more frequent with
simulations of bigger events. During a 5-year event, a total of 25 manholes in the studied
area surcharged, and during a 10-year event, all surcharged except for one.
Figure 4.6: Manhole surcharge for the Baseline scenario during a CDS rain event with a
return period of T=2, T=5, and T=10 years
26
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:35==
A summary of the number of manhole surcharges and the corresponding percentage of
manholes that surcharge can be seen in table 4.3 below. The total number of manholes
in the studied area is 35.
Table 4.3: Number of manhole surcharges
Return
Nr. of manhole
Surcharge
period
surcharges
percentage
T=10
34
97 %
T=5
25
71 %
T=2
7
20 %
The results above showcase that the current system in Amager faces profound challenges
and is far from complying with the Danish service level. It is therefore highly relevant
to explore whether the 16 rain gardens can have a positive impact on the system after
installation.
4.2.2.2
Duration of manhole surcharge
Table 4.4 shows the average duration of manhole surcharge for all return periods as well
as the minimum and maximum surcharge time in the studied area. The duration of man-
holes surcharging above ground varied across different locations, however, for all return
periods, Irlandsvej exhibited the longest surcharge time. For a 10-year event, the max-
imum duration of manhole surcharge was 45 minutes whereas the average surcharge
duration above ground was 22 minutes in the studied area. A similar pattern was ob-
served for other return periods, i.e. a considerably higher surcharge time above ground
in Irlandsvej than in the studied area. Results showed furthermore that the average sur-
charge time above ground increased the more upstream the manhole was situated. For
example, for the roads on which the rain gardens are to be situated, Pæonvej had the
highest average duration of 30 minutes during a 10-year event whereas Alperosevej had
an average of 12 minutes. These results indicate that the surcharge volume in Pæonvej is
significantly larger than on roads further downstream such as Oxford Allé and Alperosevej.
Table 4.4: Duration of manhole surcharge
Return
Nr. of manhole
Average
Maximum
Minimum
period
surcharges
duration [min]
duration [min]
duration [min]
T=10
34
22
45
1
T=5
25
15
30
2
T=2
7
8
11
1
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
27
==PAGE:36==
4.2.3
WSUD scenario
4.2.3.1
Manhole surcharge
Figure 4.7 illustrates the observed manhole surcharges for a CDS rain with a return pe-
riod of T=2, T=5, and T=10 years after the rain gardens have been added. A total of 5
surcharges were detected for a 2-year event, all of which occurred in Irlandsvej and one at
the western end of the network system in Sundbyvestervej. Moreover, the results show
that with the addition of rain gardens, Pæonvej is cleared of manhole surcharges for a
2-year event.
The inclusion of rain gardens demonstrated also improvements in manhole surcharges
for both a 10-year and 5-year event. For a 5-year event, both Alperosevej and Oxford
Allé experienced no surcharges and fewer were observed in Pæonvej, Kaktusvej, and
Lotusvej. As for a 10-year event, fewer improvements were perceived with a total of 31
manholes (out of 35) flooding. The main change was observed in Alperosevej, see figure
4.7.
Figure 4.7: Manhole surcharge for the WSUD scenario during a CDS rain event with a
return period of T=2, T=5, and T=10 years
28
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:37==
A summary of the number of manhole surcharges and the percentage of manhole sur-
charges in the area can be seen in table 4.5 below. The total number of manholes in the
studied area is 35.
Table 4.5: Number of surcharging manholes
Return
Nr. of manhole
Surcharge
period
surcharges
percentage
T=10
31
89 %
T=5
15
43 %
T=2
5
14 %
The results above showcase that even with the addition of rain gardens, the combined
sewer system in Amager is still far from complying with the Danish service level. However,
the results indicate some improvements in the overall system’s performance, see chapter
4.2.4 for a detailed discussion.
4.2.3.2
Duration of manhole surcharge
Table 4.6 shows the maximum and minimum duration of manhole surcharge for all return
periods as well as the average surcharge time in the studied area. The duration as before
varied between locations with the maximum duration found in Irlandsvej. For a 10-year
event, the maximum duration of manhole surcharge was 40 minutes whereas the average
surcharge duration in the area was 17 minutes. The same pattern as in the Baseline
scenario was observed, i.e. where the duration of surcharge was higher in the roads
upstream than in the ones further downstream.
Table 4.6: Duration of manhole surcharge
Return
Nr. of manhole
Average
Maximum
Minimum
period
surcharges
duration [min]
duration [min]
duration [min]
T=10
31
17
40
2
T=5
15
14
26
2
T=2
5
8
10
4
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
29
==PAGE:38==
4.2.3.3
Rain garden surcharge
The discussion above showcases that the 16 rain gardens aid in improving the frequency
and duration of manhole surcharges in the studied area. However, when diving further
into the performance of each rain garden it is observed that many of them surcharged
themselves. In fact, during a CDS rain with a return period of T=10 years, 12 rain gardens
flooded, and a total of 6 during a 5-year event. This raised concern as the rain gardens
had previously been dimensioned to withstand a 10-year event.
The reason for the flooding of the rain gardens lies within the overground connection be-
tween the sewer system and rain gardens, i.e. through the modeled weir. The purpose of
the connection is to direct water to the sewer system once the rain gardens have reached
their capacity. In MIKE+ this diversion would result in a positive weir discharge. However,
water can also flow from the sewer system into the rain gardens, causing a negative weir
discharge.
For the studied area, negative weir discharge was observed for multiple soakaway nodes
during CDS rains with return periods of T=10, T=5, and T=2 years. The negative discharge
stems from the fact that during these rains the sewer system reaches its capacity before
the rain gardens do. Thus, when the manholes closest to the rain gardens flood, a part of
the surcharge flows straight to the rain gardens. Figure 4.8 shows the hydraulic conditions
of a randomly picked soakaway node, KA55, that surcharges during a 10-year event. It
depicts the water level in soakaway node KA55 and the manhole closest to it and the weir
discharge between the two nodes.
Figure 4.8: Graph of water level and weir discharge for KA55
30
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:39==
The figure above shows how the water level in the manhole closest to KA55 quickly rises
at 8:50 AM (green-colored line) and reaches the weir crest level (4.15) around 9:00 AM.
At that time an instant increase in water level is detected in KA55 (orange-colored line)
which is explained by the negative weir discharge (blue-colored line) that starts as soon
as the manhole starts to surcharge. Consequently, the rain gardens terrain level of 4.18 is
surpassed within the time when the negative discharge occurs, indicating that the sewer
surcharge is the main contributor to the flooding of the rain garden.
It is important to note that the weir discharge as illustrated in figure 4.8 also shows positive
discharge, i.e. the flow direction changes, and part of the water is directed back to the
sewer system. This occurs for all soakaways that fill up during rain events, surpassing the
weir crest level. The positive discharge lasts until the water level in the soakaway goes
down below the weir crest level.
A 3D schematic and a technical cross-section of how the sewer surcharge flows into the
rain gardens can be seen in figure 4.9 and 4.10. The figures aim to illustrate the two
ways surcharge can flow from the sewer system into the rain gardens, i.e. both from a
surcharging manhole in the road and through the underground connection between rain
garden and sewer system.
Soakaway water level
Node water level
Sewer surcharge flows into the rain garden
Ground level
Rain garden
Figure 4.9: Schematic of sewer surcharge flowing to rain gardens
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.10: Schematic of sewer surcharge flowing to rain gardens
4.2.3.4
Infiltration of rain gardens
From the discussion above, it is evident that the rain gardens infiltrate not only pure rainfall-
runoff (which is their designated purpose) but also mixed water originating from manhole
surcharge. Table 4.7 shows the ratio of how much surcharge and rainwater was infiltrated
through each rain garden during a CDS rain event with a return period of T=10 years. In
order to calculate the percentages showcased below, the volume of runoff and surcharge
running into the rain gardens is taken into account as well as the volume flowing out of
them through the weir and orifice (terrain level and soakaway drainage pipe). A detailed
explanation of the calculations can be seen in Appendix C. The results show that the rain
gardens infiltrate 235 m3 in total, where 130 m3 is sewer surcharge and 105 m3 is rainfall-
runoff. In other words, the overall infiltrated volume of the 16 rain gardens consists of 55
% sewer surcharge and 45% rainfall runoff during a 10-year event.
The ratio between infiltrated rainwater and surcharge varies between rain gardens. The
rain garden that has the largest percentage (73%) of surcharge infiltration during a T=10
is PÆ42, see table below.
32
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:41==
Table 4.7: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated during a CDS, T=10
Infiltration
Rain garden
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
AL01
37
63
AL05
50
50
AL09
45
55
KA55
42
58
KA62
41
59
KA65
48
52
LO55
52
48
LO62
50
50
LO64
44
56
OX19
39
61
OX23
48
52
OX56
79
21
OX58
46
54
PÆ30
48
52
PÆ42
27
73
PÆ59
30
70
Total
45
55
Figure 4.11 shows the overall ratio between infiltrated rainwater and surcharge for the
16 rain gardens for return periods T=10, T=5, and T=2 years. The results show that the
percentage of infiltrated surcharge decreases with a lower return period. During a 5-year
event, the 16 rain gardens infiltrate an overall 45% surcharge and 55% rainwater, and
during a 2-year event, they infiltrate only 1% surcharge and 99% rainwater.
During a CDS rain with a return period of T=2 years, only one rain garden had surcharge
flowing into it. The rain garden in question is PÆ42, which also showed the highest
percentage of surcharge infiltrated during both a 5-year and a 10-year event. It is therefore
clear that PÆ42 faces the largest surcharge infiltration issues out of the 16 rain gardens.
A breakdown of the percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated for each rain garden
during CDS rain with a return period of T=5 and T=2 years can be found in Appendix D.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.11: Ratio between infiltrated rainwater and surcharge for all 16 rain gardens
during a CDS rain with a return period of T=10, T=5, and T=2 years
It is important to mention that the calculations above are limited to the fact that when
manholes and rain gardens flood, MIKE+ creates an artificial basin on top of them as
mentioned in chapter 2.1. Consequently, the calculations entail that the volume of runoff
and surcharge is retained within these nodes, which does not reflect reality. In reality,
when the rain gardens flood due to surcharge from the combined sewer system, the runoff
and surcharge can spread in various directions, resulting in only some of the mixed water
being infiltrated by the rain gardens. Additionally, the calculations are limited to the fact
that the model only accounts for one surcharge route to the rain gardens via the manhole
closest to it. In reality, as manholes in the studied area surcharge, the rain gardens can
receive surcharge from other manholes as well. It can therefore be expected that the
percentage of surcharge infiltration is higher in the more downstream rain gardens than
the results above indicate.
34
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:43==
4.2.4
Comparison of scenarios
4.2.4.1
Manhole surcharge
Table 4.8 shows the reduction of manhole surcharges when rain gardens have been im-
plemented. Results show that the biggest reduction occurs during a 5-year event where
40% fewer manhole surcharges occur, i.e. 10 fewer manholes. The results also show
that the reduction is only 9% during a 10-year event, indicating that the rain gardens only
do so much in aiding the system to comply with the service level. The location of manhole
surcharge reduction was mainly observed further on downstream roads such as Alpero-
sevej and Oxford Allé. This was expected as it has been shown that the system became
more challenged further upstream, i.e. the volume and duration of manhole surcharge
increased further upstream.
Table 4.8: Manhole surcharge reduction in percentages
Return
Baseline
WSUD
Manhole surcharge
period
Manhole surcharges
Manhole surcharges
reduction
T=10
34
31
9 %
T=5
25
15
40 %
T=2
7
5
29 %
4.2.4.2
Duration of manhole surcharge
In the previous subchapters, the average duration for each scenario has been calculated
based on solely the manholes that surcharge. In order to compare the two scenarios,
however, the reduction of the duration of all surcharging manholes in the Baseline scenario
will be explored. In that way, values where a manhole, for example, goes from surcharging
for 7 minutes to not at all (0 minutes) is included in reduction calculations. The average
duration of manhole surcharge decreased by 27 - 47 %, depending on the return period,
see table 4.9. The maximum duration reduction however was only between 9 - 13 %.
These results indicate, that even if the rain gardens do not fix the problem of manhole
surcharge, they do have an impact on the duration of which the surcharge occurs. For
example, the average duration of manhole surcharge was reduced by 47 % in the studied
area during a 5-year event, and 25% for a 2-year event.
Table 4.9: Reduction in average and maximum manhole surcharge duration
Return
Reduction of
Reduction of
period
average duration
maximum duration
T=10
27 %
11%
T=5
47 %
13 %
T=2
25 %
9 %
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.10 depicts the reduction of the average duration of manhole surcharge for each
road that the rain gardens are placed on during a 10-year event. The table shows that the
reduction decreases as we move further upstream in the studied area, with a reduction of
85% in Alperosevej and 27% in Pæonvej. These results further illustrate the challenges
faced in the upstream-most area and are an indication of why rain gardens in Pæonvej,
specifically PÆ42, experience sewer surcharge flooding into them most frequently.
Table 4.10: Reduction of average manhole surcharge duration during a 10-year event for
each road
Reduction of
Road
average duration
Alperosevej
85 %
Oxford Allé
48 %
Lotusvej
42 %
Kaktusvej
33 %
Pæonvej
27 %
4.2.4.3
Runoff reduction
Table 4.11 shows the runoff volume directed to the 16 rain gardens for all return periods.
The results show that the reduction varies between 4.1 to 4.7 %, depending on the return
period. The difference in reduction stems from the fact that during a 10-year and 5-year
event, some of the runoff that is directed to the rain gardens is re-directed to the combined
sewer system via the overflow (weir) and/or the underground (orifice) connection.
A comparison between the runoff reduction versus the percentage of disconnected area
can also be seen in table 4.11. The runoff reduction is higher than the area of discon-
nection due to the fact that the green areas don’t contribute to runoff generation during
CDS simulations. This is due to the fact that the green areas have an inital loss of 50 mm
whereas the largest event simulated (T=10 years) only has a depth of 37.5 mm. If the
green areas are disregarded for the area of disconnection, the rain gardens would have
a disconnection percentage of 4.7%. That is in direct correlation with the runoff reduction
values presented below, with an exception when runoff is re-directed to the sewer system.
Table 4.11: Runoff volume reduction
Return
Runoff
Runoff
Area disconnection
period
volume reduction [m3]
reduction [%]
percentage [%]
T=10
85
4.1
1.9
T=5
79
4.5
T=2
63
4.7
T=1
50
4.7
36
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:45==
4.3
Continuous Simulations
Baseline and WSUD model simulations were carried out for 10-years of continuous simu-
lations. The frequency and duration of manhole surcharge in the studied area were ana-
lyzed as well as the interaction between the rain gardens and the sewer system. Moreover,
the reduction of runoff volume was quantified.
4.3.1
Historical rain input
The f- and U-values for three different 10-year periods compared to the historical rain
series can be seen in table 4.12. The f-value for the historical rain series was 0.88, indi-
cating that the series has a greater quantity of rain than the regional model. Furthermore,
the range of U-values was 0.87 - 2.43, demonstrating that the series have more extreme
events than the regional model. The results showed that all analyzed time periods had
lower f-values than the series and higher U-values, indicating that they have more quantity
of rain and more intense extreme events. The three analyzed 10-year periods exhibited
similar f- and U-values and therefore was one period selected at random to proceed with
simulations. The time period chosen was 2000-2009. All computed f- and U-values for
the time period can be seen in Appendix E.
Table 4.12: Computed f- and U-values for the entire historical rain series as well as 10-
year periods
Year
f - value
U - value
Series
0.88
0.87 - 2.43
2001 - 2010
0.80
1.32 - 4.02
2000 - 2009
0.81
0.87 - 3.59
1999 - 2008
0.81
0.80 - 3.53
The 10-year time period from 2000-2009 varied between 454 - 752 mm in annual rainfall
depth, see figure 4.12 below. In terms of extreme events, table 4.13 furthermore shows
the number of cloudbursts and heavy rains in the 10-year period. The table illustrates
that a total of 8 cloudbursts and 9 heavy rains were detected in the time period from
2000-2009.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.12: Graph of annual rainfall depth for each year in the 10-year series
Table 4.13: Number of cloudbursts and heavy rains for each year in the 10-year series
Year
Cloudbursts
Heavy rains
2000
0
0
2001
1
1
2002
1
1
2003
1
0
2004
0
0
2005
1
0
2006
2
0
2007
0
3
2008
2
4
2009
0
0
Total
8
9
The rainfall events in the 10-year period varied in both depth and duration. Furthermore,
the volume in the system before the start of the events differed, subsequently generating
different responses within the system. In the 10-year period, two events had considerable
negative impacts on the sewer system. The events occurred on the 6th of August 2001
and on the 11th of July 2008. Figure 4.13 shows the two events fitted on an IDF curve. For
the 6th of August 2001, it can be seen that the most extreme part of the event has a return
period of T=40 years at 60 minutes duration. Moreover, the figure shows that for the 11th
38
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:47==
of July 2008, the most extreme part of the event has a return period of T=200 years at 10
minutes duration. Table 4.14 further showcases the depth, duration, and categorization
of the two events.
Figure 4.13: Two historical events fitted against IDF curves for different return periods
Table 4.14: Event characteristics
Depth
Duration
Event
[mm]
[min]
Categorization
6. August 2001
53.2
492
Cloudburst & Heavy rain
11. July 2008
31.4
63
Cloudburst & Heavy rain
As the table shows, the two events differ fundamentally in behavior. The one on the 6th of
August has a higher volume and lasts considerably longer whereas the latter one in 2008
has a higher intensity and a shorter duration. Both events caused considerable trouble
within the system during simulations that in many cases were similar. The exact impact
will be discussed in detail further in this chapter. Nonetheless, this is important to point out
as it shows that the system can encounter both intensity-driven problems (as showcased
in 2008) but also volume driven (as in 2001).
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
39
==PAGE:48==
4.3.2
Baseline scenario
4.3.2.1
Manhole surcharge
An analysis of the frequency of manhole surcharge presented as a return period can be
seen in figure 4.14 below. The manholes are marked with either the color red, yellow or
green, indicating the surcharge return period which can be below or equal to T=2, T=5, or
T=10 years. Gray manholes imply no flooding in the 10-year period observed.
Figure 4.14: Manhole surcharge for the Baseline scenario from 2000-2009 presented as
a return period
The results illustrate that from 2000-2009, the manholes in the studied area surcharged
frequently. The figure shows that a total of 22 manholes have a surcharge return period
of 5 years, equivalent to 2 surcharges in 10 years. The surcharge occurred during the
two previously mentioned rain events, the 6th of August 2001 and the 11th of July 2008.
As the events had mean intensities equal to a return period of T=40 and T=200 years, it
can be concluded that the manhole surcharges were to be expected. Therefore, from a
compliance standpoint, the surcharges in these manholes can be considered within an
acceptable range and do not pose a significant concern.
A surcharge return period equal to or lower than 2 years is observed for 10 manholes
out of the 35 in the studied area. The manholes are all located in the upper section of
the studied area, i.e. Irlandsvej and Pæonvej. The figure shows furthermore that the
manholes located in Pæonvej all have surcharge return periods ranging from T = 1.4 -
3.3, equivalent to 3 - 7 surcharges per manhole in the 10-year period. Excluding the two
40
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:49==
surcharges in 2001 and 2008, these results come to show that the manholes in Pæonvej
experienced surcharge during 5 other events in the 10-year period. The events in question
can be seen in table 4.15 as well as their depth, duration and categorization.
Table 4.15: Duration, depth, and categorization
Event
Depth [mm]
Duration [min]
Categorization
2. July 2003
19.4
75
Cloudburst
29. July 2005
21.8
133
Cloudburst
21. August 2006
15.8
27
Cloudburst
4. August 2008
43.8
461
Cloudburst & Heavy rain
8. August 2008
25.6
130
Heavy rain
The events above can be seen in Appendix F fitted on an IDF curve. The most extreme
parts of the five events had a return period between T=5 and T=10 years at durations
between 27 - 461 min. The 4th of August 2008, had a mean intensity equivalent to the
highest return period of T=10 years at 461 minutes duration as well as the largest depth
and duration. However, the 2nd of July 2003 was the only event that caused all four
manholes in Pæonvej to surcharge. The most extreme part of that event had a return
period of T=7.5 years at 30 minutes duration.
Figure 4.14 furthermore shows that manhole surcharges occurred most frequently in Ir-
landsvej. In fact, the second most upstream manhole in Irlandsvej surcharged a total of
51 times, i.e. the manhole had a surcharge return period of T = 0.2 years. The reason
for the high number of manhole surcharges in the area will be explained later on in the
chapter.
The number of surcharging manholes and the percentage of manhole surcharges in the
area for each year can be seen in table 4.16 below. The table only illustrates how many
manholes are surcharged in the area, thus not how often. The total number of manholes
in the studied area is 35.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
41
==PAGE:50==
Table 4.16: Number of surcharging manholes
Nr. of manhole
Surcharge
Year
surcharges
percentage
2000
2
6%
2001
33
94%
2002
5
14%
2003
11
31%
2004
5
14%
2005
10
29%
2006
9
26%
2007
1
3%
2008
34
97%
2009
4
11%
Average
11
33%
The table illustrates the significant impact of the events that occurred in 2001 and 2008 on
the occurrence of manhole surcharges in the area. The two events resulted in the highest
surcharge percentages of 94% and 97%, respectively. The table further indicates that the
system encounters surcharge every year in the 10-year period, with the lowest number of
1 manhole in 2007.
4.3.2.2
Duration of manhole surcharge
Table 4.17 shows the maximum and minimum duration of manhole surcharge as well as
the average surcharge time in the studied area for each year. It is important to note that
the values are for the entire year and not exclusively rainfall events, thus the values can
be accumulated over several events depending on the year.
The table shows that the average duration of manhole surcharge varies between 32 - 550
minutes depending on the year. The average value is highly dependent on the number of
surcharges in the area. For example, the highest average of 550 minutes in 2007 stems
from the fact that only one manhole surcharged that year (the second most upstream node
in Irlandsvej). However, this one manhole surcharged a total of 11 times throughout the
year.
On average manhole surcharge for the 10-year period was 127 minutes. The maximum
duration of surcharge above ground is interconnected with the manhole that showed the
most frequent surcharges throughout each year. The second most upstream manhole in
Irlandsvej experienced the most frequent surcharges every year, subsequently accumu-
lating the largest time above ground. On average the manhole surcharged for a total of
455 minutes or 7.5 hours above ground throughout the year. The largest value of max-
imum duration of surcharge above ground was found in 2001, where the accumulated
time amounted to 850 minutes or 14 hours.
42
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:51==
Table 4.17: Duration of manhole surcharge
Nr. of manhole
Average
Maximum
Minimum
Year
surcharges
duration [min]
duration [min]
duration [min]
2000
2
195
380
10
2001
33
68
850
20
2002
5
90
370
10
2003
11
68
500
10
2004
5
46
190
10
2005
10
32
200
10
2006
9
97
550
10
2007
1
550
550
550
2008
34
70
770
10
2009
4
55
190
10
Average
11
127
455
65
Table 4.17 shows that the minimum duration for 8 out of 10 years is 10 minutes. As results
from MIKE+ are saved every 10 minutes during continuous simulations, the duration for
surcharging manholes can not be under 10 minutes. However, in reality, the duration may
be lower.
4.3.2.3
Impact of green areas
As mentioned in chapter 3, the study area includes 7.5 hectares of green area, which
represents the multiple football fields at Sundby Idrætsparks. During CDS simulations, the
green areas did not generate any runoff due to the fact that their initial loss was modeled
to be 50 mm. The depth of the 4-hour CDS rains, however, never reached this value with
the 10-year event having a depth of 37.5 mm.
During continuous simulations, the generation of runoff from the green areas turned out
to be considerable. The generation did not only occur during rainfall events with a depth
higher than 50 mm but also whenever rainfall events were frequent. In other words, the
accumulation of rainwater was frequently detected during continuous simulations, collec-
tively overthrowing the initial loss depth of 50 mm.
Given the size of the green areas, the runoff generation was substantial throughout the
simulated 10-year period. On average, the generated runoff amounted to 35% of the total
runoff in the studied area.
The green areas are all connected to the second-most upstream manhole in Irlandsvej,
see figure 4.15. This connection explains why the manhole surcharged much more often
than other manholes in the studied area during continuous simulations.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.15: Catchment connection between the green areas and the combined sewer
system
The accumulation of rainfall depth in MIKE+ is dependent on a factor called the initial loss
recovery rate. The recovery rate is changed within the MIKE 1D engine configuration
and controls the regeneration of initial loss capacity in dry periods by a linear rate. By
default, this rate is set to be 5e−5 m/hour or 1.2 mm/day. During continuous simulations
in this project, this value was used. In reality, the recovery rate is higher. For example,
evaporation in Copenhagen is measured to be between 0 - 4 mm/day, depending on the
season (DMI n.d.). Thus, from evaporation values alone, it is clear that the default value
is too low. There is also no knowledge of whether the football fields have an underground
drainage system or not. Most likely, some sort of system is in place, but how it is connected
to the combined sewer system is also uncertain. For these reasons, there is a significant
uncertainty regarding the quantity of runoff and its impact on the combined sewer system
in the studied area.
44
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:53==
4.3.3
WSUD scenario
4.3.3.1
Manhole surcharge
The frequency of manhole surcharges for the WSUD scenario from 2000-2009 can be
seen in figure 4.16 presented as a return period. The manholes are marked with either
the color red, yellow, or green, indicating the surcharge return period which can be below
or equal to T=2, T=5, or T=10 years. Gray manholes imply no flooding in the 10-year
period observed.
Figure 4.16: Manhole surcharge for the WSUD scenario from 2000-2009 presented as a
return period
As illustrated in the figure above, the majority of manholes in the WSUD scenario have a
return period of T=5 or higher. As before, the events causing the two floodings in most
manholes are the ones in 2001 and 2008, thus, are considered acceptable. The image
also shows that fewer manholes have a return period equal to or lower than 2-years when
the 16 rain gardens have been added. For example, the surcharges in Pæonvej have
been reduced with all of them having now a return period of T=5 years. These results
underline that the rain gardens function as intended in the studied area, especially in the
areas in which they are placed (see further discussion on the topic in chapter 4.3.4.4).
As before, the second most upstream node in Irlandsvej surcharged most often. This was
to be expected as CDS simulations showed that the rain gardens had a limited effect on
surcharges in Irlandsvej. Furthermore, as the generation of rainfall runoff from the green
areas is directly connected to the node, the large amount of water overthrows the limited
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
45
==PAGE:54==
effect found during CDS simulations. A detailed discussion on the reduction of manhole
surcharges in the studied area between scenarios can be found in chapter 4.3.4.
The number of surcharging manholes and the percentage of manhole surcharges in the
area for each year can be seen in table 4.18 below. The table only illustrates how many
manholes are surcharged in the area, thus not how often. The total number of manholes
in the studied area is 35.
Table 4.18: Number of surcharging manholes
Nr. of manhole
Surcharge
Year
surcharges
percentage
2000
1
3%
2001
27
77%
2002
5
14%
2003
7
20%
2004
4
11%
2005
7
20%
2006
7
20%
2007
1
3%
2008
33
94%
2009
3
9%
Average
10
27%
The table illustrates that 2001 and 2008 have the most frequent manhole surcharge, stem-
ming from the two large rain events on the 6th of August 2001 and the 11th of July 2008.
The table further indicates that the system still encounters manhole surcharge every year
in the 10-year period, with the lowest number of 1 manhole in 2007.
4.3.3.2
Duration of manhole surcharge
Table 4.19 shows the maximum and minimum duration of manhole surcharge as well
as the average surcharge time in the studied area for each year. As mentioned before,
the values are for the entire year and not exclusively singular rainfall events, thus the
values can be accumulated over several events depending on the year. Furthermore,
the average values are highly dependent on the number of manholes surcharged in the
studied area each year.
The results below show that the average duration of manhole surcharge varies between
40 - 550 minutes depending on the year. Identically to the Baseline scenario, the highest
average duration value of 550 minutes was found in 2007, due to the fact that only one
manhole surcharged that year.
The average duration of manhole surcharge for the 10-year time period was 152 minutes.
As before, the second most upstream manhole in Irlandsvej experienced the most fre-
46
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:55==
quent surcharges every year, subsequently accumulating the largest time above ground
(maximum duration). On average the manhole surcharged a total of 454 minutes or 7.5
hours above ground throughout the year. The largest value of maximum duration of sur-
charge above ground was found in 2001, where the accumulated time amounted to 850
minutes or 14 hours.
Table 4.19: Duration of manhole surcharge
Nr. of manhole
Average
Maximum
Minimum
Year
surcharge
duration [min]
duration [min]
duration [min]
2000
1
380
380
380
2001
27
72
850
10
2002
5
88
370
10
2003
7
96
500
10
2004
4
53
180
10
2005
7
40
200
10
2006
7
113
550
10
2007
1
550
550
550
2008
33
63
770
10
2009
3
70
190
10
Average
10
152
454
101
4.3.3.3
Rain garden surcharge
The occurrence of surcharge flowing from the sewer system into the rain gardens was
detected for 5 years out of the 10 years simulated, in 2001, 2003, 2005, 2006, and 2008.
More specifically, during the events listed in table 4.14 and 4.15 earlier.
The quantity of surcharge flowing into the rain gardens varied, with the largest quantity
occurring during the 40-year and 200-year events in 2001 and 2008. As a product of
this surcharge, the two events are also the only time during the 10-year period when rain
gardens flooded. In fact, all 16 rain gardens flooded for both events. During the 10-year
period, flooding due to purely rainwater never occurred.
4.3.3.4
Infiltration of rain gardens
Table 4.20 shows the ratio of how much surcharge and rainwater was infiltrated through
the 16 rain gardens each year. The results illustrate that no surcharge was infiltrated in
the years of 2000, 2002, 2004, 2007, and 2009. For the years 2003, 2005, and 2006, the
infiltration of surcharge amounted to 1%. The 1% stemmed from rain gardens in Pæonvej
for all three years, especially from PÆ42. This was in line with CDS simulations as the
rain garden was found to face the largest surcharge infiltration issues.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 4.20: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated for each year
Infiltration
Year
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
2000
100
0
2001
89
11
2002
100
0
2003
99
1
2004
100
0
2005
99
1
2006
99
1
2007
100
0
2008
88
12
2009
100
0
Total
97
3
The years 2001 and 2008, infiltrated the largest amount of surcharge through the 16 rain
gardens. In 2001, they infiltrated 89% rainwater and 11% surcharge and in 2008 the
infiltration was 88% rainwater and 12% surcharge. The infiltrated surcharge volume was
165 m3 in 2001 and 175 m3 in 2008. The total amount of infiltrated surcharge originated
solely from the 40-year event in 2001 but from three events in 2008, the 200-year event,
and the two smaller ones mentioned in table 4.15. A breakdown of the percentage of
rainwater and surcharge infiltrated for each rain garden throughout 2001 and 2008 can
be seen in table 4.21 and 4.22 below. As mentioned before, given the rarity of the events
manhole surcharge is considered to be acceptable. However, the acceptability of the
percentage of infiltrated surcharge remains open to discussion.
In total, the 16 rain gardens infiltrated 375 m3 of sewer surcharge from 2000-2009 and
13,095 m3 rainwater. On average, that amounts to 3% of the infiltration being sewer
surcharge and 97% rainwater. The breakdown for other years in the time period can be
seen in Appendix G.
48
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:57==
Table 4.21: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated in 2001
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
AL01
81
19
AL05
89
11
AL09
89
11
KA55
88
12
KA62
88
12
KA65
90
10
LO55
91
9
LO62
90
10
LO64
88
12
OX19
89
11
OX23
91
9
OX56
92
8
OX58
90
10
PÆ30
93
7
PÆ42
85
15
PÆ59
85
15
Total
89
11
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
49
==PAGE:58==
Table 4.22: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated in 2008
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
AL01
86
14
AL05
89
11
AL09
89
11
KA55
88
12
KA62
88
12
KA65
90
10
LO55
91
9
LO62
91
9
LO64
88
12
OX19
88
12
OX23
90
10
OX56
92
8
OX58
90
10
PÆ30
92
8
PÆ42
76
24
PÆ59
84
16
Total
88
12
4.3.4
Comparison of scenarios
4.3.4.1
Manhole surcharge
Table 4.23 shows the reduction of manhole surcharges in the studied area when rain
gardens have been implemented. Results show that the reduction varies between years,
with an average reduction of 17%. The reduction depends heavily on the location of the
manhole surcharge and the number of surcharging manholes. For example, in 2000 the
number of surcharging manholes went from 2 to 1 between scenarios, thus having the
largest reduction of 50%.
Throughout this chapter, the impact of the two events in 2001 and 2008 on the sewer
system has been discussed in detail. The events have shown similar responses, e.g. in
the number of surcharges and the duration of surcharges. Furthermore, the infiltration
ratio for the 16 rain gardens showed very similar results. However, the impact of installing
the 16 rain gardens on the frequency of manhole surcharges in the studied area differs
between the two events. As the table below showcases, the manhole surcharge reduction
was 18% for 2001 but only 3% in 2008. This can be explained by the fact that the event
50
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:59==
in 2008 can be fitted with a higher return period than the event in 2001. During CDS
simulations, results indicated that the impact of the rain gardens on the sewer system
became limited when rain events had a return period of 10 years or more. As the event of
2008 has higher rainfall intensities than the one in 2001, the measured impact declines.
Table 4.23: Manhole surcharge reduction in percentages
Baseline
WSUD
Manhole surcharge
Year
Manhole surcharges
Manhole surcharges
reduction
2000
2
1
50 %
2001
33
27
18 %
2002
5
5
0 %
2003
11
7
36 %
2004
5
4
20 %
2005
10
7
30 %
2006
9
7
22 %
2007
1
1
0 %
2008
34
33
3 %
2009
4
3
25 %
Average
11
10
17%
4.3.4.2
Duration of manhole surcharge
The average duration of manhole surcharge decreased by 0 - 18%, depending on the
year, see table 4.24. The largest reduction of 18% in average duration was measured for
the year 2001, where the duration of the surcharging manholes in the Baseline scenario
went from 68 minutes to 56 minutes. For the whole 10-year period, the average duration
was reduced by 4% on average.
A total of four years in the 10-year period had a reduction below 5% in average duration:
2000, 2002, 2007, and 2009. The four years all have in common that the manhole sur-
charges occurred only in Irlandsvej, indicating that the implementation of rain gardens
does not have a significant impact on the duration of manhole surcharges in that area.
This was further confirmed when the maximum duration of manhole surcharge was com-
pared between scenarios. As mentioned earlier, the manhole in the studied area that had
the maximum surcharge duration was the same one for all 10 years, i.e. the second-most
upstream node in Irlandsvej. As table 4.24 depicts, the 16 rain gardens did not reduce the
surcharge duration in the node at all except by 5% in 2004. In other words, the reduction
of the maximum surcharge duration in the studied area was 0% for 9 years out of 10.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.24: Reduction in average and maximum manhole surcharge duration
Reduction of
Reduction of
Year
average duration
maximum duration
2000
3%
0 %
2001
18 %
0 %
2002
2 %
0 %
2003
11 %
0 %
2004
9 %
5 %
2005
13 %
0 %
2006
9 %
0 %
2007
0 %
0 %
2008
13 %
0 %
2009
5 %
0 %
Average
4 %
0.2 %
4.3.4.3
Annual runoff reduction
Table 4.25 shows the reduced annual runoff volume in the studied area for each year as
well as the annual runoff reduction in percentages. On average, the 16 rain gardens re-
duced the annual runoff volume by 1300 m3. The largest volume reduction was measured
in 2002 and 2007, where the volume amounted to 1590 m3.
Table 4.25: Annual runoff volume reduction
Annual runoff
Annual runoff
Area disconnection
Year
volume reduction [m3]
reduction [%]
percentage [%]
2000
1220
3.3
1.9
2001
1370
3.0
2002
1890
2.8
2003
1150
3.3
2004
1350
3.1
2005
940
4.0
2006
1360
2.9
2007
1590
2.8
2008
1350
3.1
2009
1240
3.1
Average
1300
3.0
52
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:61==
The results above show that the reduction varies between 2.8 % to 4.0 %, depending on
the year. The highest percentage of 4% is seen in 2005, which is the driest year in the
10-year period. Similarly, the lowest percentage of 2.8% is measured during the wettest
years in the time period, 2002 and 2007. The annual runoff reduction amounts to 3.0 %.
The table furthermore shows a comparison between the percentage of area disconnected
versus the annual runoff reduction. The annual runoff reduction is in all cases higher than
the area of disconnection. The difference stems from the participation of the green areas
as they only contribute to runoff generation when rainfall has accumulated to a depth of
50 mm and higher.
4.3.4.4
Exclusion of Irlandsvej and extreme events
So far, the results have been focused on the entire studied area. However, by doing so the
impact of the 16 rain gardens has been overshadowed by the significant runoff generation
of the green areas as well as the two extreme events in 2001 and 2008. The green areas
make it difficult to conclude the actual impact of the rain gardens and the extreme events
minimize their effects. For that reason, in figure 4.17 and 4.18 the impact is re-measured
for each scenario by excluding the manholes in Irlandsvej and the manhole surcharges
that occur in 2001 and 2008.
Figure 4.17: Manhole surcharge for the Baseline scenario from 2000-2009 presented as
a return period when manholes in Irlandsvej are excluded as well as the two extreme
events in 2001 and 2008
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.18: Manhole surcharge for the WSUD scenario from 2000-2009 presented as a
return period when manholes in Irlandsvej are excluded as well as the two extreme events
in 2001 and 2008
Figure 4.17 shows that for the Baseline scenario, only manholes in Pæonvej surcharge.
The events that cause the surcharges were discussed earlier in this chapter and are listed
in table 4.15. When rain gardens have been added, no manhole surcharges are detected
in the area (see figure 4.18), indicating that the rain gardens have a significant impact on
the frequency of manhole surcharges in Pæonvej. A summary of the reduction of man-
holes surcharging between the two scenarios can be seen in table 4.26 below. Moreover,
table 4.27 shows the average duration reduction.
Table 4.26: Manhole surcharge reduction in percentages
Baseline
WSUD
Manhole surcharge
Event
Manhole surcharges
Manhole surcharges
reduction
2. July 2003
4
0
100%
29. July 2005
3
0
100%
21. August 2006
2
0
100%
4. August 2008
3
0
100%
8. August 2008
3
0
100%
54
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:63==
Table 4.27: Reduction in average manhole surcharge duration
Baseline
WSUD
Event
Average duration [min]
Average duration [min]
Reduction
2. July 2003
10
0
100%
29. July 2005
10
0
100%
21. August 2006
10
0
100%
4. August 2008
10
0
100%
8. August 2008
10
0
100%
The results above paint a different picture of the impact of the 16 rain gardens during
continuous simulations than before. The surcharges in the Baseline scenario show that
most manholes within the studied area already comply with the service level and those
that don’t are effectively addressed by the addition of rain gardens. The installation of the
16 rain gardens, therefore, proves to be instrumental for manholes close by in meeting the
service level. The improvement highlights the effectiveness of incorporating rain gardens
as a sustainable solution for stormwater management within the studied area.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
55
==PAGE:64==
4.4
Comparison of CDS and Continuous Simulations
4.4.1
Baseline scenario
Figure 4.19 shows the manhole surcharges observed during CDS and continuous simula-
tions. The two simulations can be compared by examining the difference in return periods
for each manhole in the studied system.
(a) CDS simulations
(b) Continuous simulations
Figure 4.19: Manhole surcharges during a) CDS rain with a return period of T=2, T=5,
and T=10 years and b) from 2000-2009 presented as a return period
56
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:65==
By comparing the colored manholes on the figures, it can be seen that more manholes
have a return period equal to or less than T=2 years (marked with the color red) during
continuous simulations than observed during CDS simulations. The additional manholes
are all located in Pæonvej.
Table 4.28: Difference in manhole surcharge in percentages
Return
CDS
Continuous
Manhole surcharge
period
Manhole surcharge
Manhole surcharges
difference
≤T=10
34
34
0 %
≤T=5
25
33
24 %
≤T=2
7
10
30 %
No surcharge
1
1
0%
4.4.2
WSUD scenario
Figure 4.20 and table 4.29 show the manhole surcharges observed during CDS and con-
tinuous simulations. The figures illustrate a similar pattern as observed for the Baseline
scenario, that is, manhole surcharges are more frequent during continuous simulations
than during CDS simulations. During CDS simulations, 5 manholes were observed to sur-
charge every 2-years. More manholes were observed during continuous simulations, i.e.
7 manholes. Similarly, an increase of 44% was observed for manholes that experienced
surcharges every five years or less during continuous simulations than CDS simulations.
The comparison shows furthermore that four manholes avoided surcharge during a 10-
year event whereas only two during continuous simulations.
Table 4.29: Difference in manhole surcharge in percentages
Return
CDS
Continuous
Manhole surcharge
period
Manhole surcharge
Manhole surcharges
difference
≤T=10
31
33
6 %
≤T=5
15
27
44 %
≤T=2
5
7
29 %
No surcharge
4
2
50%
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
57
==PAGE:66==
(a) CDS simulations
(b) Continuous simulations
Figure 4.20: Manhole surcharges during a) CDS rain with a return period of T=2, T=5,
and T=10 years and b) from 2000-2009 presented as a return period
4.4.3
Summary
In this project, one of the most noticeable differences between CDS simulations and con-
tinuous simulations was the involvement of the green areas. As mentioned earlier, the
green areas did not participate in CDS simulations as the depth of the biggest event sim-
ulated (return period of T=10 years) only reached a depth of 37.5 mm and the initial loss
58
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:67==
of the green areas was 50 mm. However, during continuous simulations, the generation
was substantial and had a tangible impact on the frequency of manhole surcharges in
Irlandsvej. In terms of the efficiency of the rain gardens, the generation of runoff from
the green areas did not matter as much, as the rain gardens are located on other streets
and have shown throughout this thesis to have limited impact on surcharge in Irlandsvej.
Nonetheless, the fact that CDS simulations already indicated difficulties in Irlandsvej which
then was made worse with the realization that runoff enters the system from the green ar-
eas, Irlandsvej stood out to be the most vulnerable part of the studied system. Taking into
account these results, WSUD measures in Irlandsvej could benefit the surcharge issues
in Irlandsvej. The option was explored further in the chapter 4.5 below.
Comparison between CDS and continuous simulations showed that during continuous
simulations, more manhole surcharges are observed than during CDS simulations. This is
of course highly dependent on the rain events present within the 10-year period, which has
shown in this case two events with mean intensities equivalent to a 40-year and 200-year
return period. Therefore, the high percentage increase between the CDS and continuous
simulations (24% for Baseline scenario and 44% for WSUD scenario) for manholes with
a return period equal to or higher than T=5 years was to be expected.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
59
==PAGE:68==
4.5
Measures Towards Service Level Compliance
4.5.1
Area disconnection
The results above have demonstrated that incorporating the 16 rain gardens and discon-
necting a total of 0.24 hectares of reduced area is insufficient to bring the system into
compliance with the service level. In order to do that and eliminate manhole surcharge
during a CDS rain event with a return period of T=10 years, an additional area of 3.96
hectares had to be disconnected within the WSUD scenario. In total, the disconnected
area, therefore, needs to be 4.2 hectares out of 5.2 hectares in the studied area. Thus, the
area that must be disconnected in order to comply with the service level is approximately
81%. Note that in the studied area, a total of 7.5 hectares are considered to be green
areas with an initial loss of 50 mm. During a 10-year event, this area does not generate
any runoff and is therefore excluded from calculations. Figure 4.21 shows the connected
and disconnected catchments within the study area as well as the green areas. The dark
green color represents the reduced area that needs to be disconnected to comply with
the service level.
Figure 4.21: An overview of the connected and disconnected catchment areas in order to
comply with the service level
It is important to note that the disconnection solely fixes the problem of manhole surcharge
in the studied area and does not aid other sections in the model. A summary of the quantity
of disconnected area can be seen in table 4.30 below.
60
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:69==
Table 4.30: Summary of the required area of disconnection to comply with the service
level. The green areas are excluded from calculations
Reduced
Percentage
area [ha]
disconnected [%]
Rain gardens
0.24
4.7
Additional disconnection
3.96
76
Total disconnection
4.2
81
4.5.2
WSUD in Irlandsvej
As results showed that Irlandsvej frequently experienced manhole surcharges, the effect
of disconnecting catchment areas alongside the road was investigated. The aim was to
measure the impact of adding WSUD solutions to that area. Simulations of the WSUD
scenario for a CDS rain event with a return period of T=2 years showed that disconnecting
an additional 0.53 hectares of reduced area, which were previously connected to nodes in
Irlandsvej, eliminated all manhole surcharges. However, as the return period increased,
more significant disconnection measures were necessary to generate the same results.
Figure 4.22 shows the areas which were disconnected in order to avoid manhole sur-
charges during a 2-year event.
Figure 4.22: An overview of the connected and disconnected catchment areas in order
to eliminate manhole surcharge in Irlandsvej during a CDS, T=2 years. The red areas
represent the pre-disconnected areas corresponding to the 16 rain gardens
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.23 furthermore shows the observed manhole surcharges during CDS rain with
a return period of T=2, T=5, and T=10 years when the additional disconnection along
Irlandsvej has taken place. As proclaimed, the figure illustrates no manhole surcharges
during a 2-year event but multiple during both a 5-year and 10-year event. A summary of
the total disconnection in the area that yields the discussed results can be found in table
4.31.
Figure 4.23: Manhole surcharges when additional catchment area in Irlandsvej has been
disconnected
Table 4.31: Summary of the area of disconnection in Irlandsvej
Reduced
Percentage
area [ha]
disconnected [%]
Rain gardens
0.24
4.7
Additional disconnection
0.53
10
Total disconnection
0.77
15
It is important to note that the disconnected areas that correspond to the rain gardens
are crucial to the results showcased above. Simulation of the Baseline scenario with the
same disconnection area along Irlandsvej but excluding the rain gardens resulted in an
improvement in manhole surcharges but not complete elimination during a 2-year event
as when the rain gardens are included.
62
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:71==
5
Conclusion
In conclusion, adding 16 rain gardens to the five private roads in Sundby, Amager has
a positive but restricted impact on the sewer system. The extent of this impact can vary
depending on how one interprets the results.
The current design of the combined sewer system in Amager was found to cause problems
in the upstream areas of the system, including the studied area. As the system is designed
under undesirable restrictions of low terrain levels, backwater effects originating from the
downstream main pipe in Greisvej are detected all the way up to the upstream parts of the
system. Backwater effects were observed during CDS rainfall events with a return period
of T=1 year and higher.
Due to the backwater effects in the studied area, the system experienced multiple man-
hole surcharges during CDS simulations and continuous simulations. The reduction of
manhole surcharge frequency and duration was found to be highly dependent on the lo-
cation of the manhole surcharge. Manhole surcharges in Irlandsvej, showed the least
improvements with the addition of rain gardens. This would be expected as the 16 rain
gardens were not located on that road as well as that Irlandsvej was found to be the most
challenged area in the studied system. Furthermore, with the addition of runoff from the
green areas during continuous simulations, the impact of the 16 rain gardens was even
more limited in Irlandsvej.
Nevertheless, the frequency of manhole surcharge was reduced by adding the 16 rain
gardens to the studied system. For CDS simulations, the frequency of manhole surcharge
was reduced by 9% during a 10-year event, 40% during a 5-year event, and 29% during a
2-year event. During continuous simulations, manhole surcharge reduction in the studied
area varied between the years with an average reduction percentage of 17%. When
manhole surcharges in Irlandsvej and two extreme events were disregarded, the rain
gardens showed a reduction percentage of 100%.
The duration of manhole surcharge was reduced with the addition of the 16 rain gardens.
For CDS simulations, the average surcharge duration was reduced by 27% for a 10-year
event, 47% for a 5-year event, and 25% for a 2-year event. For continuous simulations,
the measured average duration reduction in the studied area was smaller with an average
of 4% for the 10-year period. As before, when manhole surcharges in Irlandsvej and two
extreme events were disregarded, the rain gardens showed a reduction percentage of
100%.
The runoff volume reduction of the 16 rain gardens varied between rainfall events and
time simulated. For CDS simulations, the annual runoff volume reduction was between
50-85 m3. In percentages, the runoff volume reduction was 4.1 - 4.7 %. For continuous
simulations, the average annual runoff volume reduction in the 10-year period was 1300
m3 or 3%.
One of the main findings of this project was that the combined sewer system reached its
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
63
==PAGE:72==
capacity faster than the 16 rain gardens during heavy rainfall events. Consequently, some
of the manhole surcharge flowed into the rain gardens causing them to infiltrate not purely
rainwater but also sewer surcharge. Simulations showed that during a CDS rain with a
return period of T=10 years, the rain gardens infiltrated in total 55% surcharge and 45%
rainwater. For lower return periods, the percentage of infiltrated surcharge decreased
with 45% infiltrated during a 5-year event and 1% during a 2-year event. Continuous
simulations furthermore showed that from 2000-2009, the rain gardens infiltrated 97%
rainwater and 3% surcharge.
Given the challenges faced in Irlandsvej during CDS and continuous simulations, the
implementation of WSUD would benefit the area. Results showed that disconnecting an
additional 0.53 hectares of reduced area in Irlandsvej eliminated manhole surcharges on
the road during a CDS rain with a return period of T=2 years. However, with higher rainfall
return periods, more disconnection was necessary. In fact, in order for the studied area
to comply with the Danish service level and avoid manhole surcharge during a 10-year
event, a total of 81% of the reduced catchment area had to be disconnected.
Given the results presented in this thesis, it can be concluded that incorporating rain gar-
dens in challenged places such as in the studied area can have a positive impact. The
impact, however, is bound to the location in which the rain gardens are placed and does
not completely eliminate the challenges the sewer system faces. The impact is also tied
to the fact that the rain gardens not only relieve the system of the disconnected rainwa-
ter volume but also surcharge volume. The acceptance of this additional functionality of
rain gardens is a matter of debate, particularly considering the challenging nature of the
studied area.
Balancing the benefits of managing surcharge volume with any potential drawbacks or
concerns is crucial in determining the suitability and sustainability of rain gardens as a
stormwater management solution in challenged conditions such as the studied area. It
calls for further research, collaboration, and expert input to reach a consensus on whether
incorporating surcharge management into rain gardens aligns with the goals and objec-
tives of the overall stormwater management strategy.
64
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
Ahammed, Faisal (2017). “A review of water-sensitive urban design technologies and
practices for sustainable stormwater management”. In: Sustainable Water Resources
Management 3, pp. 269–282.
Ballard, B Woods et al. (2016). “The SuDS Manual”. In: CIRIA: London, UK.
Butler, David et al. (2018). Urban drainage. Crc Press.
Copenhagen, City of (2011). Copenhagen Climate Adaptation Plan.
DHI (2017). MIKE 1D Reference Manual.
– (2023). MIKE+ Collection System User Guide.
– (n.d.). Model Manager, The core of the MIKE+ user interface. URL: https : / / www .
mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mikeplus/model-manager/.
DMI (n.d.). Klimaatlas. URL: https : / / www . dmi . dk / klima - atlas / data - i - klimaatlas /
?paramtype=evap&maptype=kom.
Hoffmann, Birgitte et al. (2015). Sustainable urban drainage systems: using rainwater as
a resource to create resilient and liveable cities.
Keifer, Clint J and Henry Hsien Chu (1957). “Synthetic storm pattern for drainage design”.
In: Journal of the hydraulics division 83.4, pp. 1332–1.
Lloyd, Sara Dorothy, Tony HF Wong, and Christopher J. Chesterfield (2002). Water sen-
sitive urban design: a stormwater management perspective.
Nobel, O.K. et al. (1915). “Kloakanlæg i Københavns ydre Distrikter”. In: Ingeniøren 67,
pp. 461–469.
Roldin, Maria et al. (2012). “Representing soakaways in a physically distributed urban
drainage model–upscaling individual allotments to an aggregated scale”. In: Journal of
Hydrology 414, pp. 530–538.
Rozario, Thomas (2022). Grønne veje i GF Odi- Hydraulisk analyse. Memorandum 1.0.
HOFOR.
Sørup, Hjalte Jomo Danielsen et al. (2018). “Evaluating catchment response to artificial
rainfall from four weather generators for present and future climate”. In: Water Science
and Technology 77.11, pp. 2578–2588.
Sørup, Hjalte Jomo Danielsen et al. (2015). Tekniske documentation of brugervejledning
til programmer ”dtu rain analyst” version 1-0-2.
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
65
==PAGE:74==
Stott, Peter (2016). “How climate change affects extreme weather events”. In: Science
352.6293, pp. 1517–1518.
Tsavdaroglou, Margarita et al. (2018). “Proposed methodology for risk analysis of interde-
pendent critical infrastructures to extreme weather events”. In: International journal of
critical infrastructure protection 21, pp. 57–71.
Undervisningsministeret (2013). Mejeri og Jordbrugets Efteruddannelsesudvalg.
Viessman, Warren et al. (1989). Introduction to hydrology. Harper & Row New York.
Zölch, Teresa et al. (2017). “Regulating urban surface runoff through nature-based solutions–
an assessment at the micro-scale”. In: Environmental research 157, pp. 135–144.
66
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:75==
A
CDS Rain
Figure A.1: CDS rain with a return period of T=1 year
Figure A.2: CDS rain with a return period of T=2 years
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.3: CDS rain with a return period of T=5 years
Figure A.4: CDS rain with a return period of T=10 years
68
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:77==
B
Water Levels in Irlandsvej and
Sundbyvestervej
Figure B.1: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej. The figure
turns into an animation of the water level in the pipe stretch during a 10-year event if
clicked on
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure B.2: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej at the begin-
ning of a 10-year event, 7:00 AM
Figure B.3: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej during a 10-
year event at 8:00 AM
70
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:79==
Figure B.4: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej during a 10-
year event at 8:45 AM
Figure B.5: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej during a 10-
year event at 8:55 AM
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure B.6: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej during a 10-
year event at 9:03 AM
Figure B.7: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej during a 10-
year event at 9:30 AM
72
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:81==
Figure B.8: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej during a 10-
year event at 10 AM
Figure B.9: Water level in the pipe stretch in Irlandsvej and Sundbyvestervej during a 10-
year event at 11 AM
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
73
==PAGE:82==
C
Infiltration Calculations
Figure C.1: Example of how infiltration ratio for each rain garden was calculated. In this
figure, calculations for PÆ30 is shown
74
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:83==
D
CDS Simulations - Infiltration
Table D.1: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated during a CDS, T=5 years
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Sewer Surcharge [%]
AL01
100
0
AL05
100
0
AL09
73
27
KA55
46
54
KA62
54
46
KA65
51
49
LO55
58
42
LO62
82
18
LO64
47
53
OX19
44
56
OX23
100
0
OX56
98
2
OX58
74
26
PÆ30
50
50
PÆ42
31
69
PÆ59
31
69
Total
55
45
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
75
==PAGE:84==
Table D.2: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated during a CDS, T=2 years
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Sewer Surcharge [%]
AL01
100
0
AL05
100
0
AL09
100
0
KA55
100
0
KA62
100
0
KA65
100
0
LO55
100
0
LO62
100
0
LO64
100
0
OX19
100
0
OX23
100
0
OX56
100
0
OX58
100
0
PÆ30
100
0
PÆ42
87
13
PÆ59
100
0
Total
99
1
76
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:85==
E
U- and f-values
Table E.1: f- and U-values for the time period 2000-2009. Duration is in minutes.
f-value
T
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
0.95
0.93
0.93
0.88
0.83
0.85
0.86
0.87
0.87
0.85
0.86
1
0.95
0.93
0.94
0.87
0.80
0.80
0.83
0.87
0.87
0.88
0.87
2
0.94
0.92
0.92
0.86
0.78
0.78
0.84
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.89
5
0.93
0.91
0.87
0.82
0.77
0.78
0.87
0.90
0.94
0.98
0.93
10
0.92
0.89
0.83
0.80
0.77
0.78
0.91
0.93
0.99
1.03
0.96
20
0.91
0.88
0.78
0.77
0.77
0.80
0.95
0.95
1.05
1.09
1.01
50
0.90
0.85
0.71
0.73
0.78
0.82
1.03
0.99
1.13
1.17
1.07
100
0.88
0.83
0.66
0.71
0.79
0.84
1.10
1.02
1.20
1.24
1.13
U-value
T
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
1.10
1.26
1.03
1.71
2.71
2.53
2.71
2.35
2.09
2.28
2.48
1
1.02
1.26
1.09
2.06
3.46
3.25
3.18
2.33
2.15
1.93
2.59
2
0.92
1.24
1.47
2.41
3.59
3.17
2.71
2.06
1.72
1.27
2.07
5
0.79
1.19
2.20
2.75
3.23
2.55
1.60
1.53
0.76
0.25
1.05
10
0.73
1.15
2.76
2.91
2.81
2.03
0.87
1.08
0.08
-0.37
0.40
20
0.68
1.12
3.29
3.01
2.37
1.57
0.33
0.65
-0.41
-0.78
-0.07
50
0.64
1.11
3.93
3.10
1.86
1.09
-0.16
0.14
-0.82
-1.09
-0.48
100
0.62
1.11
4.38
3.15
1.54
0.80
-0.41
-0.20
-1.01
-1.22
-0.68
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
77
==PAGE:86==
F
IDF Curves
Figure F.1: Rainfall event on the 2nd of July 2003 fitted against different return periods
Figure F.2: Rainfall event on the 29th of July 2005 fitted against different return periods
78
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:87==
Figure F.3: Rainfall event on the 21st of August 2006 fitted against different return periods
Figure F.4: Rainfall event on the 4th of August 2008 fitted against different return periods
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure F.5: Rainfall event on the 8th of August 2008 fitted against different return periods
80
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:89==
G
Continuous Simulations - Infiltration
Table G.1: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated in 2000, 2002, 2004,
2007 and 2009
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
AL01
100
0
AL05
100
0
AL09
100
0
KA55
100
0
KA62
100
0
KA65
100
0
LO55
100
0
LO62
100
0
LO64
100
0
OX19
100
0
OX23
100
0
OX56
100
0
OX58
100
0
PÆ30
100
0
PÆ42
100
0
PÆ59
100
0
Total
100
0
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
81
==PAGE:90==
Table G.2: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated in 2003
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
AL01
100
0
AL05
100
0
AL09
100
0
KA55
100
0
KA62
100
0
KA65
100
0
LO55
100
0
LO62
100
0
LO64
100
0
OX19
100
0
OX23
100
0
OX56
100
0
OX58
100
0
PÆ30
99
1
PÆ42
87
13
PÆ59
99
1
Total
99
1
82
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:91==
Table G.3: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated in 2005
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
AL01
100
0
AL05
100
0
AL09
100
0
KA55
100
0
KA62
100
0
KA65
100
0
LO55
100
0
LO62
100
0
LO64
100
0
OX19
100
0
OX23
100
0
OX56
100
0
OX58
100
0
PÆ30
100
0
PÆ42
90
10
PÆ59
100
0
Total
99
1
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
83
==PAGE:92==
Table G.4: The percentage of rainwater and surcharge infiltrated in 2006
Infiltration
Rain Garden
Rainwater [%]
Surcharge [%]
AL01
100
0
AL05
100
0
AL09
100
0
KA55
100
0
KA62
100
0
KA65
100
0
LO55
100
0
LO62
100
0
LO64
100
0
OX19
100
0
OX23
100
0
OX56
100
0
OX58
100
0
PÆ30
99
1
PÆ42
88
12
PÆ59
99
1
Total
99
1
84
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
==PAGE:93==
Analysis of the Impacts of 16 Rain Gardens on the Sewage System in Amager
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
