==PAGE:1==
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical
Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
.
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Tech-
nology
.
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Shih-Chiao Sung
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
electro.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months in Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, Denmark, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of digital technology.
Shih-Chiao Sung - s213072
Signature
Date
ii
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Field Programmable Gate Array devices are a popular solution to many digital and in-
dustrial applications. A digital circuit can be designed for a specific application. The
schematic is described in Hardware Description Language and then realized on an FPGA
device. To provide one specific service, HDL designs such as FPGA and Application
Specific Integrated Circuit can often work faster and cost less energy than processors.
At the same time, FPGA is more flexible to deploy as a hardware solution than ASIC.
FPGA is often better than ASIC for the total development cycle and cost. Implementing
low-layer functionalities of mobile communication systems with HDL design on FPGA is
also common. Mobile communication technology is constantly updated and developed
to fulfil the growing demand for data capacity. The newly commercialized 5th Genera-
tion mobile communication system offers a higher data rate and flexibility than the 4th
Generation. Several pieces of research have been done to implement some physical
layer functionalities in LTE and 4G technology with FPGA. Researchers have optimized
resource utilization, improved the modelling of protocols, and analyzed the performance
of these functionalities on FPGA.
However, FPGA implementation of 5G functionalities is yet to be thoroughly studied un-
der the spotlight to the best of the author’s knowledge. This thesis attempts to realize the
physical layer functionalities in 5G New Radio technology and explore practical principles
and critical bottlenecks in HDL development on FPGA. Mathwork toolbox functions in the
numeric calculator software MATLAB are studied and used to build a golden reference
model of 5G NR physical layer processing chain for the hardware design. In the HDL de-
sign, First In-First Out memory IPs are used to cope with the suspension and resumption
of data transmission in the long processing chain. Hardware design of 5G NR physical
layer processing chain is proposed and partly implemented on the FPGA device. Xilinx
UltraScale Kria KV260 board is chosen as the FPGA device to implement. Vivado ML
2022.2 is used as the synthesis tool and bitstream generator to program the device. The
golden reference results produced by MATLAB models are stored in Read-Only Mem-
ories. A verification scheme is developed to examine the functionality of the hardware
implementation by comparing data in the ROMs and the circuit output. The functionalities
of the implemented circuit can be confirmed by observing the signals recorded by debug-
ging cores synthesized in the design. The realized sections on the board are capable
of providing specific functionalities. The HDL design meets the sample rate requirement
with a 90 MHz bandwidth. Several schemes are proposed to improve the performance
of the HDL design: (1) Increase the clock rate and reduce paralleled logic, (2) Adjust the
width and depth of FIFOs, (3) Self-repairing watchdog logic. Finally, FPGA remains a
valuable solution to the physical layer functionality of 5G.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Shih-Chiao Sung, MSc Communication Technology and System Design, DTU
Composer of this MSc research and thesis.
Michael Stübert Berger, DTU Electro, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Supervisor. msbe@dtu.dk
Gorm Scheel Kruger, Zeuxion ApS, 3500 Værløse
External co-supervisor. gsk@zeuxion.com
I would also like to thank the reader, You, for showing your interest in this topic and taking
up this work.
iv
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
3GPP
3rd Generation Partnership Project
5G
the 5th Generation mobile communication
ASIC
Application Specific Integrated Circuit
AXI
Advanced eXtensible Interface
BPSK
Binary Phase Shift Keying
BWP
Bandwidth Part
CP
Cyclic Prefix
CRB
Common Resource Block
CRC
Cyclic Redundancy Check
CU
Centralized Unit
DL
Downlink
DLSCH
Downlink Shared CHannel
DM-RS
Demodulation - Reference Signal
DU
Distributed Unit
DUT
Device Under Test
FEC
Forward Error Correction
FIFO
First In First Out
FPGA
Field-Programmable Gate Array
FWFT
First Written Fall Through
HARQ
Hybrid Automatic Repeat reQuest
HDL
Hardware Description Language
IFFT
Inverse Fast Fourier Transform
ILA
Integrated Logic Analyzer
IP*
Intellectual Property (designed modules)
IP*
Internet Protocol (network address)
IQ
In-phase and Quadrature space
Ksc,grid,µ
Number of subcarriers in the resource grid
l
Index of OFDM symbol in a slot
LCM
Least Common Multiple
LTE
Long Term Evolution mobile communication
µ
SCS configuration
MAC
Medium Access Control
ν
Number of transmission layers
NR
New Radio (5G)
NBWP,size(i)
Number of PRBs in the ith BWP
Ncell,ID
Cell identity of physical layer
NCP,µ(l)
Number of CP samples of the l-th OFDM symbol in a slot
(Continue on next page)
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
v
==PAGE:8==
Ngrid,µ
Size of resource grid with SCS factor µ
NIFFT
Point size of IFFT in OFDM
Nsc,RB
Number of subcarriers in a Physical Resource Block
Nsymb,data
Number of OFDM symbols for user data in a slot
Nsymb,DM−RS
Number of OFDM symbols for DM-RS in a slot
Nsymb,slot
Number of OFDM symbols in a slot
nCRB,µ
Common Resource Block number used in the resource grid with SCS factor µ
nRNTI
See RNTI
OFDM
Orthogonal Frequency Division Modulation
PDSCH
Physical Downlink Shared CHannel
PRB
Physical Resource Block
PS
Processor System
QAM
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation
Qm
Modulation order. Bit number represented by a symbol
QPSK
Quadrature Phase Shift Keying
ρ
Number of total antenna ports
RAN
Radio Access Network
RF
Radio Frequency
RNTI
Radio Network Temporary Identifier
ROM
Read-Only Memory
RTL
Register Transfer Level
SCS
Subcarrier Spacing
SC-FDMA
Single Carrier-Frequency Division Multiple Access
Tsymb
Duration of an OFDM symbol
UL
Uplink
VIO
Virtual Input Output
vi
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
FPGA technology and 5G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goals, solutions, and requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
General principles of RTL design
3
2.1
Control logic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Synthesis and Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
General requirement and role of functions in 5G physical layer
9
3.1
Definition of Physical layer and scope of this research . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Division of the processing chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
MATLAB 5G Toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Conditions of the carrier, DL channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
I/O specification of the design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.6
Re-configuration of the next slot/transport block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.7
General aspects of hardware implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Scrambling transport blocks
19
4.1
Processes and functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Golden model made in MATLAB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
RTL development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Discussion and conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
From codewords to layer symbols
27
5.1
Processes and functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Golden model made in MATLAB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
RTL development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5
Evaluation and performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.6
Discussion and conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
From layer symbol to time domain signal
41
6.1
Processes and functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
MATLAB model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
47
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
FPGA technology and 5G
Digital circuits nowadays are widely utilized in countless applications in information tech-
nology and various industries. Circuits are designed and optimized for a specific service
and functionality, described by HDL, and eventually presented as a hardware device that
performs the application with a high speed and low power consumption. ASIC and FPGA
are common subgroups among digital circuits. ASICs are often designed and described
by RTL codes. The schematic always goes through many simulations, verifications and
tests at all levels of abstraction. An IC chip is synthesized based on the RTL source
codes. The realized hardware typically features a compact size, rapid processing power,
and efficient power consumption. However, the major shorthand of ASIC is that chips
cannot be reprogrammed once manufactured. FPGAs, on the other hand, are produced
and purchased before the design is finished. The blueprint could be outlined in an IP block
diagram platform, an RTL code editor, or many other tools. The design is also synthesized
and described by gate-level HDL codes as in the ASIC design process. The synthesized
netlist then fits into the purchased hardware in the implementation stage. Eventually, the
purchased FPGA is programmed and configured with the product from implementation,
a bitstream file, and performs the specified application. An FPGA device can be erased
and programmed to a different design several times. With this characteristic, it is pos-
sible to debug and update a hardware design after observing its solid performance on
the chosen FPGA device. Both ASIC and FPGA are intensively utilized in mobile com-
munication technology. As the demand increases and many new services emerge, the
telecommunication system and all the devices within are assigned more and more tasks
and functions.
Wireless telecommunication protocols and technologies are continuously developed and
updated to meet the growing demand for capacity and diverse multimedia content. At the
same time, the power consumption and bandwidth utilization of telecommunication sys-
tems are also constantly optimized to reduce costs. In order to roll out new technologies
fast and frequently, implementations with shorter development and deployment times are
increasingly becoming popular. Compared to ASICs, realizing algorithms on FPGA and
processors is much faster and more convenient. FPGAs, among others, are more flexible
than ASICs and perform better in power and data rate than processors[1]. Hence, it has
become a common practice to carry out low-layer functionalities with FPGA designs. Re-
pairing and updating the numerous components in RAN become more accessible when
the devices are programmable logic boards.
The global organization 3GPP has laid a new generation of mobile communication tech-
nology, 5G. The maximum data rate, minimum latency and operation flexibility are im-
proved in 5G compared to LTE and LTE-Advanced in 4G. The complexity of the process-
ing chain also increases in the meantime. Many researchers have looked into the FPGA
implementation of LTE and 4G functions and produced valuable works. However, only
a few thorough studies into the FPGA implementation of 5G NR functions have been
done to the best of the author’s knowledge. This research aims to show the feasibility of
FPGA-based digital circuits for providing functionalities in 5G NR technology.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Goals, solutions, and requirements
Physical layer functions in mobile communication systems, such as scrambling, modu-
lation, layer mapping, precoding, and OFDM signal generation, could be implemented
in FPGA devices. Several comprehensive studies of FPGA implementation in the LTE
physical layer have been conducted. In [2], researchers synthesized the physical layer
for LTE based on a novel dataflow framework. In [3], an OFDM transceiver with efficient
resource utilization was implemented on an FPGA device. In [4], the performance of the
LTE physical layer in many different aspects is analysed using hardware cosimulation and
FPGA implementation. This research aims to be one of the few studies of NR physical
layer implementation using FPGA. Layer 1 functions of NR technology should be realised
in a chosen FPGA device.
The goal functionalities would be defined based on the 3GPP specification[5]. A golden
reference model will be assembled using numeric calculator software to process and gen-
erate the expected results of the physical layer processing chain. The functionality of the
hardware design will be verified by comparing the output from DUT and the results from
the golden software model. Reliable online resources from the software vendor are used
to construct the golden reference model. Hardware IP cores are also part of the RTL
code design in the development process. The synthesised circuit’s resource utilisation
should meet the physical constraints of the chosen device to implement. Finally, verifying
functionality should be as automated and convincing as possible.
1.3
Thesis Overview
The rest of the document is organised in the following way: Chapter 2 describes the prin-
ciples and general structure of RTL design throughout the system. The hardware design
kit, circuit simulator, and FPGA device are also specified. This chapter does not cover
the details of the goal functionalities to implement. Instead, Chapter 3 clarifies the scope
of the physical layer processing chain. Online resources about this topic are introduced.
The specification and constraints of hardware design are explained here. The chapter
aims to sort out details beyond individual function blocks and summarise the characteris-
tics of the whole hardware design. In Chapter 4, Chapter 5, and Chapter 6, successfully
implemented functional blocks and unfinished functional blocks are described in detail.
Chapter 7 concludes this research.
2
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:13==
2
General principles of RTL design
Regardless of the intended application of the FPGA design, applying specific ideas helps
compose RTL codes efficiently and effectively. Without diving into the specifications of
the project, numerous logic schemes are used in this project to ensure that the design
is readable and synthesizable. This chapter includes several guidelines that are put into
practice and the details about programming an FPGA. The logic design processes in this
project follow the RTL-to-Bitstream Design Flow in [6]. Design ideas are described in RTL
codes and integrated with some IP cores. Online resources from the device producer are
then utilized to synthesize and implement the device. Debugging cores are instantiated
to observe the status and result of the design. The hardware design is verified in both the
simulation and onboard debugging phases by comparing the DUT output with the golden
reference results computed in the software model.
This chapter is organized as follows: The control logic and inter-module communication
scheme will be explained first. The developed method is used at every interface between
the first-level divisions in the system to improve the efficiency of module development. The
following section describes the development platform, digital circuit simulator, the chosen
FPGA device, and other resources needed for FPGA implementation. The verification
and debugging of the hardware design are then explained. Finally, generic improvement
ideas for the hardware design are proposed.
2.1
Control logic
Dividing a design into several sections is a common practice in hardware development.
Each section in this project consists of one module, which could also include second-level
subsections and other hierarchies. To efficiently develop the circuit, each section could be
independently designed and verified, followed by the final verification of the whole system.
A reliable control scheme is needed throughout the system, such that all sections in the
circuit communicate in the same manner. The logic should ensure that data transmission
from one section to another is initiated, suspended, and resumed without any data collision
or loss.
The IP XPM synchronous FIFO, xpm _fifo _sync [7], is used to facilitate the traffic con-
trol in the system so that the data influx can be buffered and paused[8]. When the full
signal of XPM FIFO is asserted, adding new data by asserting the write _en signal be-
comes ineffective. The almost _full signal and programmed _full signal indicate that
the vacancy in FIFO is one or another small, synthesized number. However, writing is
still effective when these indicators are asserted. The data source in the front is given a
few clock cycles to suspend the operation while the transmitted data is safely stored in
the FIFO.
In the resetting phase of operation, any request for reading or writing can negatively affect
FIFO hardware. Thus, a state register is needed to halt the write and read enabling signals
until the read and write rst _busy signals are deasserted. In contrast, neither reading an
empty FIFO nor writing data into a full FIFO is destructive to the instance and content
inside[7]. In the event of a failed operation, the instance will assert warning signals, such
as overflow or underflow.
As shown in Figure 2.1, a state register called ready is asserted by the programmed
empty signal after resetting the FIFO. This signal endorses the data through all pipelines
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
3
==PAGE:14==
FIFO
FIFO
rst_busy
r_en
ready
data
valid
rst_busy
not w_full
w_en
r_valid
Figure 2.1: Generic concept of FIFO communication
between the two FIFOs as the valid signal of the transmitted data. This signal works
as the read-enabling logic to the FIFO at the front and the valid signal in parallel with the
data streaming through the pipelines, eventually becoming the write-enabling signal to the
FIFO sending the ready signal. When the FIFO at the back is close to full, the deasserted
ready signal suspends the data update of the pipeline until the backend FIFO approaches
empty again[8].
The threshold that defines programmed _full and programmed _empty should lie in
a particular range[7]. Aside from this, the threshold should ensure that writing attempts
remain effective at the backend FIFO after the assertion of programmed _full for data in
the preceding pipeline stages to be sent. Hence, the threshold of each FIFO in the whole
design can vary. If the almost _full or full signal is used instead, the data in the pipeline
stages would be turned down by the backend FIFO and lost.
The system configures itself by reading the configuration from FIFO and then moves on
to process data. First Written Fall Through (FWFT) allows the system to read the config-
uration data and perform reconfiguration before pulling the data out of FIFO.
Two sections are successfully implemented in the simulator and the FPGA device using
this FIFO scheme. No data is lost due to the suspensions and resumptions of data trans-
mission between the two sections. It can be assumed that subsequent sections can be
applied with the same idea or an improved version. The mechanism of this scheme is
adapted to the condition in each section and the overall requirement of the system spec-
ification. The details of realization are explained in Section 3.6, 4.3, and 5.3.
2.2
Synthesis and Implementation
The implementation starts with RTL coding. The source codes of the design are written
in Verilog language and verified with a Verilog testbench in a Mentor simulator program
ModelSim[9]. The simulation is limited to behaviour simulation since the hardware device
is available for field implementation.
Xilinx Kria KV260 board is chosen as the FPGA device to implement. Vivado ML Edi-
tion 2022.2 is the hardware design platform for the chosen device. To synthesize and
implement a circuit on Kria KV260, a reference design on the Vitis Extensible Platform,
”ispMipiRx vcu DP”, is adapted to a background[10]. The module offered in the online
resource, kv260 _ispMipiRx _vcu _DP, generates the clock signal and reset signal to the
primary part of the design. Several different clock rates are available from the clock wiz-
4
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:15==
ard module inside the IP block, which are 100 MHz, 200 MHz, 300 MHz and 600 MHz.
Through the block design tool in the software platform, three new output ports can be
added to the design such that chosen clock signal and two reset signals can be con-
nected to the primary part outside of the IP. One clock rate is used throughout the whole
system for the sake of simplicity. Based on the analysis below in Section 3.4, 200 MHz
is chosen as the clock rate to synthesize and implement. The constraint settings of the
whole project are the constraint sources from the same reference design[11].
The origin of the FPGA clock signal in the device comes from the processor on board.
Hence, the clock can function only after properly booting the processor. The KV260 Vision
AI Starter Kit image is therefore flashed onto a microSD card which is later inserted into
the board as the secondary boot. No other action is done to the processor in this project
[12]. To observe the indicator signals, such as flagging signal fail _flag and counter
cumulate _corrects, debug cores ILA and VIO are instantiated[13][14]. The depth of the
ILA waveform record is set to 1024 to balance memory utilisation.
Figure 2.2: The device for the implemented design, Xilinx UltraScale Kria series KV260.
2.3
Verification
An equivalent reference model for the goal functionality of DUT is built using the numeric
calculator software Mathworks MATLAB. This software model works as the source of the
golden reference result used to verify the implemented hardware design. Relevant toolbox
packages, objects and functions are used[15]. Note that the RTL design is not made by
model-based design with the MATLAB reference model. Random data is generated as
the input test vectors for the golden model, and the model computes the golden output
reference. ROMs are created to store input test vectors and the corresponding golden
reference output[16]. The test vectors are read from the ROM at the front and transmitted
to DUT one by one. At the back of DUT, the output is compared with the golden reference
read from the ROM. The output verification module asserts a flag signal if the DUT output
is inconsistent with the golden reference from the output ROMs.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
5
==PAGE:16==
2.3.1
Input test vector
The intended application of the hardware implementation starts with a set of data as input.
The MATLAB model generates valid test vectors and the corresponding results. Note
that the MATLAB model is not directly connected with the input ports of DUT. Instead,
the generated test vectors are hard coded in ROMs in a synthesizable module. The test
vectors should be transmitted by a sender module and received by DUT in a fixed order.
After several pipelines, the corresponding output sequence is also strictly compared with
the golden reference in the ROMs in a fixed order. The architecture of the input test vector
ROM’s module is depicted in Figure 2.3. When the receiver FIFO is resetting or almost
full, the input ready from the back pauses the operation of this module and deasserts the
output valid signal such that user data in each address will be read out and transmitted
exactly once before continuing to the successive address. The address register counts
up if the received ready signal is asserted. The request signal (req) is asserted when
the address of the primary data ROM locates in a valid range, where meaningful data
is written in the major ROM beforehand. After the last valid data in the major ROM is
read and sent, the ROM request signal deasserts and turns off the output valid signal in
the following clock cycle. The receiver FIFO will be written data once the main address
register returns to address zero. This recurrent characteristic allows a more flexible device
debugging and verification. Different stages of the verification scenario can be observed
in the ILA waveform display with limited record depth.
The HDL codes of the input sender modules are updated with MATLAB golden reference
model. The amount of test vector is determined before simulation or FPGA implementa-
tion. The valid range that determines the request signal must thus be hardcoded in the
source. It is crucial to ensure that the length of test vectors covers all design aspects
within the device’s memory limitations. Furthermore, designing the input content can in-
crease the reliability of the test vectors. In this project, the test vector for the software
simulation is much longer than that for the device implementation due to a shortage of
memory resources on the device. In other words, part of the device’s resources should
be reserved for ROMs and verification modules, which could have unforeseen impacts on
the hardware synthesis and implementation result.
major 
data 
ROM
major 
address
last >=
req
other 
ROM
other 
address
valid
ready
Figure 2.3: The architecture of input ROM’s module.
6
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:17==
2.3.2
Output comparison
As at the input side, the correct results generated by the software model are hardcoded
and synthesized in output ROMs. The golden reference results at the output side of the
DUT are read and compared with the DUT output. Subtractions are used between each
DUT output and its counterpart from the ROMs. Every calculated difference is marked as
”correct” if the absolute value is smaller than a pre-determined threshold, which is also
hardcoded in the source. If the data remains invalid, marking the single comparison as
correct will prevent the assertion of the failure-flagging signal and a false negative. Coun-
ters are used to count the number of correct DUT outputs and inconsistent outputs. When
verifying the functionality of DUT, both the failure-flagging signal and the counter should
be considered. Table 2.1 below enlists the interpretation of the output verifier’s indicator
signals. These signals greatly help the debugging process of hardware development.
fail _flag signal
counter of correct outputs
result
HIGH
positive
Control logic is more likely to be blamed
HIGH
0
Problems with control logic or data path
LOW
length of golden reference
System finished all the data
LOW
positive
System stopped untimely
LOW
0
System is idling
Table 2.1: Interpretation of the indicator signals.
2.4
Discussion
2.4.1
Design optimization
This research aims to study the FPGA implementation of the latest 5G NR functionalities
on the chosen Kria KV260 board using RTL coding and reliable MATLAB functions. RTL
coding and FPGA are proven capable of realizing a specific application. Considering the
development schedule, optimization of the hardware architecture is not prioritized. Never-
theless, the performance of the hardware design could be improved by certain principles
to make the most out of FPGA implementation.
The chosen clock rate in this implementation meets the requirement of the system sam-
pling rate. Increasing the clock rate that drives the design makes it possible to scale down
the parallel data processing chain and save resources significantly. In particular, there is
a noticeable emphasis on parallel data processing throughout the specification within the
physical layer[5]. On the other hand, designing control logic would become more compli-
cated when parallel data flows must be combined into a shared channel. More memory
units should also be used to buffer data.
Scaling down the resource used in the design is beneficial from the perspective of power
consumption and device cooling. Furthermore, the hardware design could enjoy a smaller
area and lower cost if the architecture is adapted to ASIC.
No self-repairing mechanism is included in the core goals of this project, which implies
that any flaw in the test vectors and input timing leads to an abrupt stop of the functionality
until the next reset. Some workarounds can be coded to clear errors due to the absence
of valid input or the presence of any undefined configuration. For example, timers similar
to watchdog modules can be designed to clear out crashed user data and reconfigure the
system.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
7
==PAGE:18==
2.4.2
Improvement of verification
During the development, verification has been shown to consume a considerable amount
of time and hardware resources. The process of FPGA implementation could be signif-
icantly improved by using a better verification method. Storing test vectors and golden
reference output in ROMs is a feasible option for testing the RTL design on a tight de-
velopment schedule. The cost of this method is the resource utilisation limitation during
synthesis and hardware implementation. A possible alternative to ROMs is software in
the processor. A PS instance is available in the KV260 online resource[10], by which the
board can boost an operation system, execute software, and communicate with another
personal computer. In contrast to using ROM, it is expected to take longer to build a reli-
able, executable golden reference and set up the needed environment in the processor.
An adequate amount of test vectors and golden reference data can thoroughly test the
data path. Verifying the control logic involves more than simply testing the test vectors in
ROMs. To identify potential issues, an examination of the AXI handshake interaction be-
tween the ROM-controller modules and the DUT. The current design of the ROM controller
gives a simple and stable valid signal at the input side and an even more monotonous
ready signal at the output side of DUT. Random number generators can be integrated
into the design to mimic the traffic and control signals from preceding and succeeding in-
stances. In this project, the succeeding blocks receiving the data are expected to pause
the transmission more often than the data source of the system. The ready signal of the
verification module could be made random to test the control logic of preceding sections.
8
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:19==
3
General requirement and role of
functions in 5G physical layer
The goal application of this FPGA programming project is the processing in 5G NR phys-
ical layer. The physical layer of most telecommunication systems consists of functions
that prepare and convert binary data, i.e., bits, into the physical carrier wave signal. The
processing chain in this layer is realized by physical channels, which exchange data with
transport channels in another layer above the physical layer[17][18]. This project studies
and implements the physical layer processing chain of DL user data in 5G NR technol-
ogy. The processing of user data is similar to that of signalling. However, several more
procedures should be performed in channels for user data due to the higher demand for
capacity. The enumerated processing in UL is longer than in DL, and the processing in
the receiver is more complicated than in the transmitter. To meet the time limit of this
project, the scope of the research is designated the DL transmitter.
This chapter gives an overview of the DL physical layer functions for user data in 5G
NR. Comprehensive ideas regarding FPGA implementation for the processing chain as
a whole are also covered in this chapter. The specifics beyond individual sections are
presented, and some questions in the last chapter are answered. First, the boundary of
intended implementation is set. The functions in the physical layer are briefly introduced
and grouped into several sections, the building blocks to be developed and verified in-
dividually. The golden reference model of the whole project in MATLAB is described in
the third section. The specification and requirements of the hardware design are then
enumerated and explained. The FIFO scheme described in the last chapter is presented
with more design and implementation details afterwards. This chapter ends with several
discussions and proposals about the implemented functionalities on the chosen hardware
device.
3.1
Definition of Physical layer and scope of this research
Before laying down the detailed hardware design specification, the definition of the physi-
cal layer and the functions within should be clarified. Function blocks and arrows in Figure
3.2 stand for needed modules in 5G DL data channel and data flow. In LTE and 5G, user
data is converted to radio wave samples by using OFDM technology just in front of the
antenna components and RF functionalities, which is considered the end of the transmit-
ter physical channel in research work [18] and MATLAB website [15]. In the standard
[5], the final data format in PDSCH is IQ symbols mapped onto the resource grid. The
time-continuous baseband signal is then generated by the OFDM module of the resource
grid. Going back along the processing chain, many branching out and modulations can
be found. Channel coding, such as CRC code attaching and FEC encoding, comes first at
the beginning of the processing chain. This block is not included in PDSCH in [5], either.
For the sake of time limit, this block is excluded from this project due to the complexity of
the encoder design.
In contrast to LTE and 4G, the SCS factor, also known as numerology and µ factor, is
made flexible in 5G NR. As µ increases by 1, SCS (∆f) doubles, and the symbol length
becomes half. Namely, ∆f = 2µ15kHz ≈1/Tsymb. Approximately 6.57% of the symbol
duration is CP. CP samples and duration also become a half when SCS doubles. The
total carrier bandwidth is constant. However, wider carrier bandwidth, around 50-100
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
9
==PAGE:20==
PRB
subcarrier
DM-RS "symbol"
Same length, extra position
into 1 OFDM symbol
Length be 1 or 2
12 OFDM symbols w. extended CP
14 OFDM symbols w. normal CP
or
Figure 3.1: The concept of subcarriers, OFDM symbols, and resource grid.
MHz[17], is commonly used in 5G[17]. The size of the source grid is thus significantly
larger than in 4G. The number of subcarriers in a PRB, Nsc,RB, is fixed at 12[5]. Hence,
the maximum number of PRBs is used to determine the size of the resource grid, Ngrid,µ.
The number is mainly determined by ∆f and carrier bandwidth[17]. The number should
fulfill that Ngrid,µ ∗12 ∗∆f ≤carrierBW.
The nCRB,µ CRBs in the resource grid are the planned resources for this slot. The order
of QAM, Qm, is the number of bits represented by a subcarrier symbol. The total bit
number carried by an OFDM symbol is hence Qm ∗Nsc ∗nCRB,µ. Another parameter is
the number of transmission layers. The modulated QAM symbols are allocated to 1-8
parallel layers. In DL, layers correspond directly to transmitter antennas. That is, the
number of antennas used for transmission is the number of layers, ν. It’s not the case in
UL, where used antennas must be more or equal to transmission layers. The modulated
QAM symbols have to be precoded before mapping onto antennas. A slot of time domain
signal in NR PDSCH contains either 14 OFDM symbols with normal length CP or 12
OFDM symbols with extended length CP. In both cases, the number of OFDM symbols
for DM-RS, Nsymb,DM−RS, can be 1-4. The remaining Nsymb,data symbols in a slot are
carrying user data. DM-RS has a fixed form and is not given by the information source.
nCRB,µ, Qm, ν and Nsymb,DM−RS are configuration that determined in the higher MAC
layer. The system takes service demand and the channel condition into consideration
and reconfigures these physical layer parameters.
10
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:21==
MAC 
functionalities
DL  
channel 
coding
Scrambling
QAM 
modulation
Layer 
mapping
Antenna 
mapping
Resource    
element     
mapping
OFDM
RF
Split 6
Split 7-3
Split 7-1
Split 7-2
Split 8
user data
transport block
codewords
binary 
codewords
complex numbers
(symbols)
symbols
on layers
Resource    
element     
mapping
OFDM
RF 
functionalities
symbols for
antennas
symbols in
resource grid
OFDM symbol
samples
Project input
DL  
channel 
coding
Scrambling
QAM 
modulation
codeword 0
codeword 1
Resource    
element     
mapping
OFDM
RF
Resource    
element     
mapping
OFDM
RF 
functionalities
Figure 3.2: Downlink physical layer processing for user data.
3.2
Division of the processing chain
As described in Section 2.1, the system is divided into several sections, which can be
developed and verified individually. The concept of functional splits is introduced as a
reference to partitioning the long processing chain. By applying functional splitting, the
whole processing chain from the network layer to the physical layer is divided into two.
The part connecting high-layer interfaces is physically located in a centralized unit, while
the low-layer part is performed in many distributed devices and machines[18]. Since
the functions located at the two sides of a functional split option can be carried out in
two different units, the split options also imply the proximity between specific functions.
The options and sub-options of functional splitting, the red boundaries, are proposed and
enumerated in [19][18]. The processing chain is divided into four sections by the five split
options, as shown in Figure 3.2. The position of the split in the processing chain is a
significant factor in enhancing power consumption and RAN traffic load. This hardware
project has the potential to be applied to such technology. Although the purpose is not
prioritized in the hardware implementation, separating functions and applying different
clock rates in each section could make this design more reusable.
Datatype and bitwidth
Slot length
Split 7-3
32-bit binary data
nCRB,µ ∗12 ∗Nsymb,data ∗ν ∗Qm / 32
Split 7-2
16-bit precision complex number
nCRB,µ ∗12 ∗Nsymb,data
Split 7-1
16-bit precision complex number
Ksc,grid,µ ∗Nsymb,slot
Split 8
16-bit precision complex number
∑NCP,µ(l) + NIFFT ∗Nsymb,slot
Table 3.1: Datatype and slot composition.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
11
==PAGE:22==
Scrambling
QAM 
modulation
Layer 
mapping
Antenna 
mapping
Resource    
element     
mapping
OFDM
Resource    
element     
mapping
OFDM
Scrambling
QAM 
modulation
codeword 0
codeword 1
32-bit input
DM-RS 
symbols
CP
OFDM symbol
QAM symbols
- Same flow rate
- Congestion due to small QAM order
Figure 3.3: The traffic variation through the processing chain.
Various data format is transmitted at each split interface, and the size of the data flow
grows in bitwidth and time domain length. The data type and the duration of processed
data passing through each split interface are listed in Table 3.1. The final product of
the system, time domain samples of the OFDM symbols, comes from the subcarriers in
frequency domain. At split 8, the l-th OFDM symbol in a slot consists of NCP,µ(l)+NIFFT
samples, where NCP,µ(l) is the length of the cyclic prefix. NIFFT should be an exact power
of 2, so OFDM can be performed by IFFT algorithm and architecture[20]. In most practical
cases, the number of subcarriers in the resource grid, Ksc,grid,µ, is smaller than NIFFT .
The architecture of the IFFT core is pipelined-streaming I/O, where subcarrier values are
fed into the instance one by one, such that higher throughput can be reached[20].
log2 NIFFT = ⌈log2 Ksc,grid,µ⌉
Nsymb,slot = 14 = Nsymb,data + Nsymb,DM−RS
Ksc,grid,µ = Nsc,RB ∗Ngrid,µ
(3.1)
In this project, the total OFDM symbol number in a slot, Nsymb,slot, is fixed at 14. Among
the 14 symbols in time domain, 10-13 of them are used for user data, while the rest
are reserved for DM-RS. During the generation of DM-RS in the functional module, the
processing user data is kept in the FIFO. Likewise, the subcarriers outside of the resource
grid are also generated in the design, and the resource grid subcarriers must wait in FIFO
in the meantime. FIFOs are used at these interfaces such that the back pressure signal,
”ready”, can pause the operation of the front-end functional blocks. Before OFDM, QAM
symbols on layers are mapped onto the subcarriers of each antenna. The parallelism of
the processing units can reduce the total number of clock cycles if more development time
is given.
12
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:23==
3.3
MATLAB 5G Toolbox
The 5G Toolbox package provided by Mathwork MATLAB is extensively used in this
project as a reference model[15], which is used to verify the output from the implemented
hardware design. A MATLAB script in version R2021a is written to reproduce the exem-
plary simulation in the website from DL-SCH to CP-OFDM. HARQ process, which is part
of the MAC layer, and receiver processing are excluded as much as possible. Carrier
object nrCarrierConfig and PDSCH configuration object rPDSCHConfig are built.
The µ factor in MATLAB could not exceed 4, while a factor of 5 or 6 is allowed in the stan-
dard[5][15]. Similarly, BPSK and 1024QAM in [5] are not accepted as the QAM mode
in the toolbox. The Qm is hence limited to even numbers between 2-8. The number of
PDSCH antennas, Nantenna, must equal ν, Nlayer in the script. For ν from 1 to 4, only
one codeword/transport block will be provided by the DLSCH encoder functionalities. For
ν from 5 to 8, on the other hand, the DLSCH encoder in the front gives two codewords in
parallel. For the sake of simplicity, this golden reference model employs only one code-
word. Unlike the transmission layers in parallel and the resource grid, the transport block
function has to handle two codewords with a cell of two different size arrays. Some sub-
sequent functions don’t process cell objects, and hence function cellfun() and many other
type castings are essential. Therefore, two codewords and more than four layers are not
used in the whole model to improve the readability.
1
mu = 1; % 1, 2, 3 ~ 4, 5~6 too big for MATLAB toolbox
2
QAMpow = 6; % Must be even number
3
if (QAMpow < 4)
4
modmod = "QPSK";
5
else
6
modmod = (string(2^QAMpow) + "QAM");
7
end
8
Nantenna = 3; Nlayer = min(Nantenna , 4); % Nlayer cannot exceed 4.
9
f_carr = 3.5e9; carrierBW = 90e6; % CHT NR bandwidth
Listing 3.1: The critical parameters of DL transmission in physical layer
Since the whole carrier bandwidth is not used in every case, the candidate grid sizes
listed in an array are deliberately made slightly smaller. The slot number in a subframe is
another factor determined by µ. A subframe is fixed to 1 ms, while a slot consists of 14
symbols with configurable duration in this project. The duration of a single OFDM symbol
is doubled when SCS becomes one-half of the previous value. Therefore, the slot number
that fits in 1 ms also becomes half. Since the total licensed carrier bandwidth is fixed, the
total subcarrier number must drop to lower than half of the previous amount such that the
spectral distance coincides with the determined SCS. There are always 12 subcarriers
in a PRB and hence a reduction in the total subcarrier number indicates a reduction of
Ngrid,µ. The array of candidate grid size, variable SCS _list, is determined accordingly.
The BWP functions are one of the highlights of NR, the user equipment without broadband
processing capability[21]. Though, this feature is not used in this project to meet the
development time limit. The configured PRB set thus contains all the resource blocks in
the resource grid, namely NBWP,size(i) = nCRB,µ = Ngrid,µ. Cell ID in the carrier object
and RNTI of the configuration of the current DL slot can be random integer numbers. The
length of DM-RS can be set to a single OFDM symbol or two symbols in a roll. Extra
DM-RS symbols can also be configured using the additional position parameter. The total
reservation of OFDM symbols for DM-RS is limited to a maximum of four[5]. In this project,
the number of DM-RS OFDM symbols is fixed to 2 and hence limits the possible scenario
to only two options. The reason and possible solution will be explained in Section 5.3.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
13
==PAGE:24==
1
SCS_list = [243; 121; 60; 30; 15; 7];
2
if(mu < 1)
3
mu = 0; N_gridSize = 500;
4
else
5
mu = floor(mod(mu, 7)); N_gridSize = SCS_list(mu); % Number of resource
block
6
end
7
8
del_f = 15000 * 2.^mu; % SubCarrier spacing
9
N_slotSubframe = 2.^mu; N_slotFrame = 10 * N_slotSubframe;
10
11
carr = nrCarrierConfig;
12
carr.NSizeGrid
= N_gridSize;
13
carr.SubcarrierSpacing = del_f / 1000; % Unit in kHz
14
carr.NSlot
= N_slotFrame; % Determined by numerology
15
carr.NCellID
= 888;
16
17
dataDLcfg = nrPDSCHConfig;
18
dataDLcfg.PRBSet
= 0 : (N_gridSize -1);
19
dataDLcfg.Modulation = modmod;
20
dataDLcfg.NumLayers
= Nlayer;
21
dataDLcfg.RNTI
= 48763;
22
dataDLcfg.DMRS.DMRSAdditionalPosition = 1; % [0 1 2 3] more reference
23
dataDLcfg.DMRS.DMRSConfigurationType
= 1;
24
dataDLcfg.DMRS.DMRSLength
= 1; % [1 2] longer duration
Listing 3.2: The configuration section of DL transmission in physical layer
To generate a valid codeword/transport block in MATLAB, a nrDLSCH object is created.
The RVseq and code rate are FEC parameters before PDSCH processing and can be
chosen arbitrarily in this project. To match the size requirement in PDSCH and reach
the code rate target, a valid transport block size is calculated by the function nrTBS().
The input of transport block processing, setTransportBlock, should be reshaped to the
calculated size. A uniformly pseudorandom binary array is used as the user data of the
slot from the MAC layer. The transport block is generated by calling the object. The rest
four arguments in the process are the transport block ID, HARQ ID, Redundancy Version,
and the same HARQ ID. These arguments are not within the scope of the research and are
arbitrarily chosen. When two codewords should be used, the returned value, as txSize,
will become an array. The resulting transport block is then a cell containing two binary
arrays with different lengths.
1
[~, dataDLinfo] = nrPDSCHIndices(carr, dataDLcfg);
2
txDLdata = nrDLSCH;
3
txDLdata.MultipleHARQProcesses = true;
4
txDLdata.TargetCodeRate
= 490/1024;
5
6
txSize = nrTBS(modmod, Nlayer, numel(dataDLcfg.PRBSet), dataDLinfo.NREPerPRB ,
txDLdata.TargetCodeRate);
7
setTransportBlock(txDLdata , randi([0 1], txSize , 1), 0, 2);
8
txBitblk = txDLdata(modmod, Nlayer , dataDLinfo.G, 3, 2); % DLSCHEncode
Listing 3.3: The preceding function and transport block generation
The processing chain is divided into the four divisions mentioned in Section 3.2. Two
function scripts, Func7 _23 and Func7 _12, are constructed with the MATLAB toolbox
functions. These functions produce golden reference results for the corresponding sec-
tions. The script structures will be explained in Section 5.2 and Section 6.2.
14
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:25==
1
scrambled = nrPUSCHScramble(txBitblk , carr.NCellID , dataDLcfg.RNTI);
2
symbTPC = Func7_23(N_gridSize , dataDLcfg , scrambled);
3
rsrcGrid = nrResourceGrid(carr, Nlayer);
4
rsrcGrid = Func7_12(carr, dataDLcfg , rsrcGrid , Nlayer , symbTPC);
5
6
[symbOFDM , radioInfo] = Func8_71(carr, rsrcGrid , f_carr);
Listing 3.4: The whole golden reference model
3.4
Conditions of the carrier, DL channel
The timing performance of the implemented hardware design fulfils a requirement of
OFDM sample rate. For the IFFT core to receive one of the grid subcarriers in one clock
cycle, the clock rate of the system must be higher than the intended output sample rate
of the OFDM symbols. Symbol length is determined by SCS, namely the numerology
factor µ. The number of samples to composite waveform in this period is derived from
the bandwidth of the carrier and the corresponding CP length. The higher the number of
samples, the more subcarriers can be used to transmit data. A carrier bandwidth of 90
MHz is assumed in this study, which is a typical NR bandwidth used by many operators
around the world, such as Vodafone and CHT[17][22]. Up to around 245 PRBs can be
used in 90 MHz[17], which implies that data is carried by 2940 subcarriers. The point size
of IFFT is then 4096 in the case of the smallest SCS, and 4384 samples are needed for
an ordinary OFDM symbol in 35.677 µs by the formulas in [5]. The sample rate is hence
122.88 MHz, and the most modest clock rate fulfilling the requirement among the options
provided by the chosen device is 200 MHz.
3.5
I/O specification of the design
The output of the system in hardware implementation should be an array of 8 antenna
signals, each port provides OFDM symbols consisting of waveform samples in complex
numbers. The real part and imaginary part should be 16-bit signed numbers in 2’s comple-
ment. The boundary of the slot and divisions between the 14 symbols should be marked
by the control logic. These control signals should be asserted if and only if the current
complex number is the last sample of a slot or an OFDM symbol, respectively. The valid
signal of the output should also be presented The output should allow reading in 122.88
MHz such that the RF functions can produce a correct waveform.
The input ports of the design should include the PDSCH configuration of the current slot
and a pair of 32-bit wide user data ports. The configuration channel is 55-bit wide and is a
concatenation of nRNTI, codeword number, Ncell,ID, QAM mode, layer number, DM-RS
duration, DM-RS number, and nCRB,µ. Two transport blocks encoded by DLSCH units
are separately read. The start of the slot signal is an important control signal. This signal
is only asserted when the first set of data in the transport block/slot arrives at the input.
In the verification process, this 1-bit signal is written in input ROM. Table 3.2 shows the
input and output specifications of the hardware implementation.
3.6
Re-configuration of the next slot/transport block
The implemented design must be configured with all the PDSCH parameters to produce
correct results. In this project, it is assumed that the device will be reconfigured in every
slot, which is the minimal time structure that a configuration can apply. The preceding
units, for example, MAC functionalities or channel encoders, should guarantee that the
timing of reconfiguration comes with the first data in the slot. The consumption rate of
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
15
==PAGE:26==
Input
Configuration
Concatenation of signals below:
RNTI
16-bit.
Codeword number
1 bit ’0’ for a single codeword, ’1’ for two.
Cell ID
14-bit
QAM mode
9-bit. Chosen among {256, 64, 16, 4}
Layer number
3-bit. Equals to ν −1, between [0, 7]
DM-RS duration
1 bit. ’0’ for 1 symbol, ’1’ for 2 consecutive symbols.
DM-RS number
2-bit. ’0’ for just 1 DM-RS symbol, ’3’ for 3 additional DM-RS
symbols and hence 4 DM-RS symbols in total, so and so forth.
CRB number
9-bit.
Transport block 0
32-bit binary sequence
Transport block 1
32-bit binary sequence
Start of slot
1 bit. HIGH for the first data in a slot
Input valid signal
1 bit. HIGH for valid
Output
Input ready signal
1 bit, HIGH for available
Antenna signal
256-bit. 8 complex numbers, each with signed 16-bit real part
and imaginary part
Output valid signal
1 bit. HIGH for valid
Last in a symbol
1 bit. HIGH for the last data in an OFDM symbol.
Last in a slot
1 bit. HIGH for the last data in a slot
Table 3.2: Datatype and slot composition.
configuration data, which is also stored in a ROM, is significantly lower than user data.
The input ROM module is designed in a way that the configuration of the next slot is
ready at the clock cycle of the first slot data. The data path of the system reconfigures
itself when the first data arrives and starts processing the new slot in the pipelines. Since
the throughput of functional modules in the processing chain varies, the configuration
of the first module is likely different from the last few modules. Hence, the idea that a
centralized reconfiguration module configures all modules at proper timings is too difficult
to realize. To simplify the control logic, the configuration data is buffered together with user
data in FIFOs such that the system doesn’t process data with the wrong configuration. As
depicted in Figure 3.4, the configuration is buffered in FIFOs along with user data. The
writing and reading of configuration occur exactly the same as those of user data, as if the
configuration is part of the user data. The configuration would travel through the same
pipeline with corresponding user data and get written into the next FIFO.
Ideally, the same configuration travels with user data in the same slot through all the
pipeline stages and FIFOs in the device. In fact, the configuration is only needed when
the first slot data arrives in a module, and the input ROM module only guarantees a cor-
rect configuration along with the first slot data. In Figure 3.5a, the configuration data in
the red bracket would be used to configure the module, this action is expressed by writing
a register. The rest of the data in the configuration channel doesn’t have any importance.
The reason behind this waste of resources is the complexity of control logic and the time
constraint of this project. However, the current design might be modified to the idea in Fig-
ure 3.5b if more development time is given. Pulling out configuration would be separated
16
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:27==
FIFO
Slot 
configuration
Slot data
Figure 3.4: The current design under correct operation.
(a) Current design.
(b) Proposal of improvement.
Figure 3.5: The situations using ROM as the information source.
from reading user data and hence no redundant configuration in the configuration chan-
nel. The condition to read configuration should be identical to that in the current design,
that the first data in a slot enables the update of the module configuration register behind
FIFO. This control signal is also written in FIFOs. Since configuration data occupies a
considerable bitwidth, this idea could release many memory resources.
3.7
General aspects of hardware implementation
Only sections from incoming transport block to layer symbols are successfully imple-
mented with the KV260 device. Meanwhile, only one codeword, namely a single transport
block without parallelism, is supported in the current design. To estimate the resource uti-
lization of a two-codeword structure, the modules from transport blocks to layer symbols
are instantiated twice. The only missing piece to a working two-codeword architecture
is the handling of the second data stream in the layer mapping unit. The IFFT logic in
the OFDM module is offered by Xlinx IP FFT v9.0[20] and is customized according to
the condition in Section 3.4 and [11]. Aside from this IP core, FIFOs, and clock wizard,
other necessary functionalities are planned to be finished in RTL codes. The deficient
OFDM module made in [11] is instantiated eight times to obtain more information on the
planned implementation resource utilization. The details of the processing algorithm and
hardware design will be explained in subsequent sections. Ideas of unfinished hardware
implementation will be explored in Section 6.3.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Resource utilization of the current design.
18
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:29==
4
Scrambling transport blocks
The physical layer takes over payloads from the data link layer. The MAC functionalities
in the data link layer convert data units into transport blocks and transfer them to the
physical layer. The transport blocks undergo a specific channel coding scheme and are
resized to the required size in PDSCH. As explained in Section 3.1, the complexity of the
channel encoder is beyond the scope of this implementation. The scrambling of transport
blocks thus becomes the only functionality in this section. This processing chain section
is outlined by the functional split option 6 and option 7-3.
4.1
Processes and functions
Scrambling is an operation to disorganize the bit sequence in a pseudo-random way, a
deterministic process. The input and the product are both bit sequences with the same
length. Bit 1 and bit 0 are distributed in a more uniform and balanced way after scrambling,
and the binary information has a more desirable spectrum[23]. The input of a scrambling
operation is transport blocks. The number of bits in a transport block equals the informa-
tion carried by OFDM symbols in one slot[15]. This number is determined by four factors:
Qm, nCRB,µ, Nsymb,data, and layer number ν. These factors are part of the transmission
configuration determined in the higher layer. Hence, the size of transport block bits can
be reconfigured differently from subframe to subframe.
Two codewords could have different sizes and are separately scrambled. An incoming
codeword is put into XOR operation with a pseudo-random sequence c[n]. c[n] is gen-
erated by the XOR between another two random sequences x1 and x2. The first 31 bits
of the sequence x1 are initialised with a fixed number, and those of the sequence x2 are
initialised with a combination of Ncell,ID, codeword index, and nRNTI. The subsequent
bits of the two sequences are updated based on the already generated bits. The scram-
bling sequence c[n] becomes valid after the first 1600 bits of x2 and x1 are consumed and
updated.
4.2
Golden model made in MATLAB
The UL user data scrambler nrPUSCHScramble() is confirmed capable of scrambling in
DL. The algorithm described in [5] was executed in MATLAB and compared with the UL
scrambler from the toolbox. Both the toolbox function and the script function return the
same sequence. Hence nrPUSCHScramble() is used as the golden reference model.
The transport block bits are assumed to be a Bernoulli random variable. An input vector is
generated by the function randi([0 1], ...). As explained in Section 3.3, the input transport
block is outlined by several toolbox objects and filled with random bits. The sequence
length is not a specification of the scrambling functionality. Because of the architecture
in the current RTL design in Section 4.3, the one-column transport block is reshaped to a
32-bit wide binary array.
Aside from the toolbox golden reference and the bitwise algorithm in [5], a function script
in MATLAB is created with a new approach to scrambling. Matrices are used to scram-
ble multiple bits in the same iteration cycle and increase throughput[24][23]. Since the
throughput at the input is the same as the output, the matrix should be square. The 32-bit
x2 and x1 sequences can be respectively updated by two 32-by-32 matrices. After the
scrambler matrices are found, other matrices can be created to calculate the first 1600 bits
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
19
==PAGE:30==
of the Gold scrambling sequence. The matrices are first tried by the other two MATLAB
functions and then printed in the RTL code of the hardware model.
4.2.1
Finding out the scrambler matrices
Take x2 sequence update for example. The algorithm can be expressed by the Boolean
vector operation below:
[
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
...
0
]


x2[0]
x2[1]
x2[2]
x2[3]
.
.
x2[30]


=
[
x2[31]
]
Other elements can be found simply by making the formula vector a matrix:


1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
...
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
...
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
...
0
...
...
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1




x2[0]
x2[1]
x2[2]
x2[3]
:
:
x2[30]


=


x2[31]
x2[32]
x2[33]
:
x2[58]


Due to the architecture of the hardware implementation, the algorithm should scramble 32
bits in one operation. The reason is explained in Section 4.3. The scrambling sequence
c[n] must be updated by 32 bits in every operation to meet the requirement. c[n] is essen-
tially the XOR of x2 and x1, so x2 and x1 should be updated by 32 bits in one operation.
The matrices of x2 and x1 thus should have 32 rows. The formula for x2[59] is the XOR of
the three Bit 1 and the formula expression of x2[31]. The formulas for x2[60], x2[61], x2[62],
and x2[63] are found in the same way that the operands beyond x2[30] are expressed by
the formulas. The matrix below could update 33 bits.


1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
...
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
...
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
...
...
...
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
...
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
...
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
...
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
...
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
...




x2[0]
x2[1]
x2[2]
x2[3]
:
:
x2[30]


=


x2[31]
x2[32]
x2[33]
:
x2[58]
x2[59]
x2[60]
x2[61]
x2[62]
x2[63]


The 32 new elements in x2 and x1 sequences are used in the next iteration to continue
this process. Therefore, the input of this matrix should be 32-bit long. Removing the first
row and adding a null column, the matrix now consumes 32 bits and offers 32 bits in one
20
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:31==
clock cycle.


0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
...
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
...
...
...
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
...
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
...
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
...
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
...
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
...
0




x2[0]
x2[1]
x2[2]
x2[3]
:
:
x2[30]
x2[31]


=


x2[32]
x2[33]
:
x2[58]
x2[59]
x2[60]
x2[61]
x2[62]
x2[63]


The initial composition of x1 is fixed[5], so the first 1600 bits and all the composition after-
wards are determined. The setup of x1 thus doesn’t need any calculation. On the other
hand, the initial value of x2 is given in the PDSCH configuration. To efficiently update the
first 1600 bits, the 32-by-32 matrix can be applied 50 times to produce a 32-by-32 matrix
that skips 1600 bits in one operation.


0
1
1
...
0
0
1
...
...
0
1
0
...




0
1
1
...
0
0
1
...
...
0
1
0
...

...(50 in total)...


0
1
1
...
0
0
1
...
...
0
1
0
...




x2[0]
x2[1]
:
:
x2[30]
x2[31]


=


0
1
1
1
0
0
...
0
0
1
1
1
0
...
0
0
0
1
1
1
...
...
1
0
0
0
1
0
...
1
0
1
1
0
1
...
0
1
0
1
1
0
...




x2[0]
x2[1]
x2[2]
:
:
x2[30]
x2[31]


=


x2[1600]
x2[1601]
:
x2[1628]
x2[1629]
x2[1630]
x2[1631]


4.3
RTL development
4.3.1
Data path of hardware design
There’s no explicit constraint for scrambler throughput. Yet, the minimum data rate can
be calculated given the throughput requirements of the backend sections. As described
in Section 3.2, complex amplitudes of subcarriers are sent into the OFDM module one
after another. Hence, the resource mapping module in front of the OFDM module on
every layer should receive one IQ symbol from the layer mapper in one clock cycle. For
the layer mapper to offer every layer one IQ symbol in one clock cycle, the QAM module
should receive enough binary data from the scrambler module. A scrambler processes
one codeword and one codeword corresponds to at most four layers of QAM symbols.
One QAM symbol can represent at most 8 bits of data given the capability of the MATLAB
toolbox. Hence, one scrambler should support at least 32 bits of data and two scramblers
thus support 64 bits of data for at most eight layers. The algorithm of Gold sequence
generation implies a memory of 31 bits. Since 32 bits is the minimum capacity for the next
module, two 32-by-32 matrices are calculated and used to scramble the shift registers x2
and x1.
4.3.2
Options of control logic design
The function core has two parallel data flows with different processing timings: a channel
for configuration and initialisation and another channel for user data. For the initialisation
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
21
==PAGE:32==
channel, one clock cycle is required to calculate the 1600-bit shifted sequence for the x1
register. Then the XOR operation can be performed between the incoming user data and
the generated pseudo-random sequence.
Input ROMs
function core
Verifier ROMs
Succeeding 
blocks
Centralized controller
Figure 4.1: The block diagram of a centralized control logic in the digital circuit.
Aside from the FIFO scheme, a centralized controller is an alternative to simplify the con-
trol logic design. This idea is used to control the data traffic in the testbench of the scram-
bler. Instead of communications between sections, the request and enabling signals are
all given by a controller in the centre. Given the fact that no other functional block or FIFO
is included in the testbench, the behaviour of all the pipelines in this section can be pre-
dicted with a simple counter. When the system is followed by other sections, as shown
in the right side of Figure 4.1, the scheduler should either be adapted to deal with the
back pressure signal o _data _ready, or be replaced by the FIFO scheme. This method
is also used to test and debug the FIFO scheme at the early stage of development but is
no longer needed after the FIFO scheme is utilized.
The detail of the controller design is presented in Figure 4.2. Without preceding modules
and succeeding modules, the counter keeps counting up until it is reset again. The en-
abling request signals update the corresponding registers when the counter value fulfils
certain conditions. The first and third signals from the left side are initialization control
signals, which are asserted only once every 512 clock cycles. The other signals are
kept HIGH in different intervals. The activities of the instances halt completely when the
counter comes to the value of 2053 and start again after the counter counts back to 0.
This design gives the whole system a recurrent behaviour with a period of 4096, which
ensures that every phase of the hardware movement can be observed in a limited time
window in ILA.
The back pressure signal, o _data _ready, slows down and suspends the processing of
a functional block. In Section 2.1, the ready signal pulls out data from a FIFO and asserts
the valid signal of the next stage. In the scrambler, x1 and x2 sequences are updated
22
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:33==
counter
512n + 2 
AND           
[0, 2049]
[3, 2050]
[4, 2051]
[5, 2052]
[0, 2048]
512n       
AND             
[0, 2047]
Input ROMs
function core
Verifier ROMs
Figure 4.2: Only for verification of scrambler section.
by their previous value except in the initialisation stage. A handshake between the valid
signal from the FIFO in the front and the ready signal from the FIFO in the back thus
controls the actions of these two registers. The valid signals of all the pipeline stages are
updated at the same time to simplify the design.
1
...
2
reg [1 : 0] pipeline_valid , pipeline_valid_nx;
3
always@* begin
4
pipeline_valid_nx = {pipeline_valid[0], read_data_valid && o_data_ready};
5
end
6
assign o_data_valid = pipeline_valid[1];
7
...
8
always@(posedge i_clock) begin
9
if(!i_resetn) begin
10
x1 <= 32'b0;
11
x2 <= {1'b0, 16'd0, 1'b0, 14'd0};
12
end else if(read_data_valid && o_data_ready) begin
13
x1 <= x1_next;
14
x2 <= x2_next;
15
end else begin
16
x1 <= x1;
17
x2 <= x2;
18
end
19
end
Listing 4.1: The control logic in the scrambler.
4.4
Verification
The input test vectors are generated by MATLAB random number function randi([0 1],
32, 512). The columns are 32-bit wide and are all coded in a 32-bit ROM. To balance the
memory utility in the device, the depth (maximum address number) is set to 2048. The
length of transport with a unique RNTI is hence set to 512, such that the DUV could be
offered at least four times of initialization. For each 32 by 512 transport block bit sequence,
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
23
==PAGE:34==
one pair of RNTI and Ncell,ID are generated by randi(49151, 1) and randi(1023, 1),
respectively. Codeword factor q is fixed at 0. Four initialization sequences are coded
into a ROM other than the 32 by 2048 user data ROM. The expected golden reference
is generated by the golden model in Section 4.2 and coded into the output ROM. The
golden reference contains precisely the same amount of bits as input user data, so the
dimension of the ROM is also 32 by 2048.
1
addrLeng = 16;
2
middle_str = ": memo <= 32'b"; out_str = ": memo <= 32'b";
3
InBw = 16; ceiling = 2^(InBw -1) - 1; MaxBw = 32;
4
% Just use the padded bitwidth of FFT core.
5
blockLength = 512; cfgNum = 2^addrLeng / blockLength;
Listing 4.2: The structure of scrambler verification
The bitwidth of data in each address is fixed to 32, and the length of a transport block is
fixed to 512. The total bit number in a transport block is 16384. The format of the test
vectors and the golden reference results are straightforward. An address in the input ROM
and the output ROM stores 32 bits. The test vector transmitter demands reconfiguration
in a fixed period. The length of input data is 512 times longer than the length of the
configuration vectors.
1
...
2
fileOpened = fopen('rom_in512.txt',
'w');
3
for index = 0 : (cfgNum -1)
4
...
5
RNTI = randi(49151, 1); Cellid = randi(1023, 1);
6
init_cfg = dec2bin(RNTI, 16) + "0" + dec2bin(Cellid , 14);
7
fprintf(fileConfig , (init_cfg + ";"));
8
fprintf(fileConfig , '\n');
9
10
inbit = randi([0 1], 32*blockLength , 1);
11
[scrambled , ~] = Func73_6(inbit, Cellid , RNTI);
12
inbit = reshape(inbit, 32, []).'; scrambled = reshape(scrambled , 32, [])
.';
13
for seq = 0 : (blockLength -1)
14
...
15
nx_line = nx_line + (num2str(flipud(datatext)).') + ";";
16
17
fprintf(fileOpened , nx_line); fprintf(fileOpened , '\n');
18
end
19
for seq = 0 : (blockLength -1)
20
...
21
nx_line = nx_line + out_str + (num2str(flipud(datatext)).') + ";";
22
fprintf(fileGold , nx_line); fprintf(fileGold , '\n');
23
end
24
end
25
fclose(fileConfig); fclose(fileOpened);
26
...
Listing 4.3: The generation of test vector and golden reference result
All control signals from the central scheduler and the failure indicator signal are probed
by VIO and ILA. To trace and diagnose in case of failures, the least significant 8 bits of the
data signals are also extracted and probed by VIO and ILA. The sample data depth of the
waveform monitor is limited to 1024 in light of memory utility. The expected waveform in
ILA will be a random segment of the periodical behaviour, which consists of a 2052-cycle
active phase and a 2044-cycle silent phase. The starting, process, and ending of the
operation can be captured multiple times by refreshing the ILA waveform window.
24
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.3: Signals probed in the starting phase of the verification loop.
Figure 4.4: The result of a recurring verification loop.
4.5
Discussion and conclusion
4.5.1
Observation
The design successfully provides scrambling functionality in an FPGA device. The module
can correctly and continuously process bit sequences under multiple reconfigurations.
The timing performance reaches the requirement of 200 MHz. The module thus provides
sufficient data for the subsequent section in the processing chain. The minimum data rate
of the following QAM and layer mapping block actually varies with the slot configuration.
The regulation and buffering of traffic will be made in the next section, while the scrambler
processes data at a fixed rate.
4.5.2
Improvement
Two viable approaches are available to improve the performance with the same through-
put: the combination of a lower clock rate and increased matrix size or the combination of a
higher clock rate and reduced matrix size. Alternatively, a higher data rate can be adopted
to gain flexibility for subsequent processing blocks. As will be explained in Section 6.3, a
higher throughput might be essential to make up for the limitation of the hardware archi-
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
25
==PAGE:36==
tecture of the following sections.
26
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:37==
5
From codewords to layer symbols
This section transforms the scrambled codewords to QAM symbols on transmission lay-
ers. It includes QAM mapping and layer mapping processing that are enumerated in [5].
In functional split, it lies between split option 6 and split option 7-3.
5.1
Processes and functions
The required configuration parameters in this section are QAM order Qm and layer num-
ber ν. Different modulations enumerated in [5] include two different BPSK mappings,
QPSK (equivalent to 4QAM), 16QAM, 64QAM, 256QAM, and 1024QAM. These QAMs
are described as functions of binary numbers. After mapping out all possible combina-
tions of binary data, the codewords represented by all symbols in the constellation follow
the Gray code principle. The symbols in the QPSK constellation are also used in the two
different BPSK modulations. Other modulations, however, don’t share any symbol in the
IQ plane. Hence, each QAM scheme should be independent.
The output QAM symbols are transmitted on numerous parallel layers. The number of
layers ν is a tunable parameter that can be reconfigured in every slot. The valid ν can be
any integer from 1 to 8. However, the codeword number, namely the number of parallel
transport blocks before scrambling, is implied in ν and both factors should be congruous.
When 1-4 layers are used, only one transport block can be transmitted at a time. On the
other hand, two parallel transport blocks can be read and processed at the same time
if 5-8 layers are used. Furthermore, the number of transmission antennae must equal
ν in the subsequent antenna mapping process. All the layers are loaded with the same
amount of QAM symbols, and the second codeword provides either the same or slightly
more data than the first codeword does[5]. Despite the fact that DM-RS consists of QPSK
symbols, the generation of these signals is placed in resource element mapping in this
project.
5.2
Golden model made in MATLAB
Two functions can fulfil the functionalities needed in this section. A function script Func7
_23() is written to wrap up necessary functions, as listed below. The two BPSK and
1024QAM are not supported by MATLAB function nrSymbolModulate(). Qm is thus cho-
sen arbitrarily from integers between 4 and 8. The data to be processed is a bit sequence,
the length of which should be a multiple of Qm. The second mandatory argument is the
QAM scheme contained in the PDSCH configuration. The data type of return could be
specified, ’double’ is chosen for a better precision. If two scrambled codewords in paral-
lel are given, the two codewords in different lengths should be processed separately, i.e.,
the argument cannot be a whole cell.
The layer mapping function is nrLayerMap(). The data to be processed is the QAM sym-
bols produced by the last function. The only two arguments of this function are the IQ
symbols and ν. In contrast to the QAM function, the IQ symbols can be a cell with two
arrays of IQ symbols. The length of each IQ array should be a multiple of the correspond-
ing layer number. Due to the development time limit, only one codeword is used; hence
the argument scrambled is not checked for being a cell or not.
1
function onLayer = Func7_23(N_gridSize , dataDLcfg , scrambled)
2
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
27
==PAGE:38==
3
symbs = nrSymbolModulate(scrambled , dataDLcfg.Modulation , 'OutputDataType', '
double');
4
onLayer = nrLayerMap(symbs, dataDLcfg.NumLayers);
5
6
end
Listing 5.1: Equivalent golden reference model of functionalities from codewords to layer
symbols
The snippet below shows the process to generate test vectors for RTL and hardware
verification. Input test vectors are exported to a text file, and so do the configuration to
another file. Since only one codeword is given, there are at most four layers of QAM
symbols. Four text files are created to store these golden reference results and are later
converted to RTL code of ROMs. The total length of the verification is determined in light
of memory resources and test pattern authority. The bitwidth of the ROM address is the
indicator of simulation length. For tests in behavioural simulation, the number is 16. That
is, there are almost 65536 lines of test vectors stored in ROMs. The address bitwidth
for tests in hardware debugging is 12. The number of transport blocks/slots, cfgNum,
is determined based on the depth of ROMs and the length of a transport block. The
variable blockLength is the number of QAM symbols on one layer in a slot. This number
is constant between any used layer in the same slot. From [5], the number is the product
of Nsc,RB, nCRB,µ, and Nsymb,data. To efficiently test different reconfiguration with many
transport blocks in a short time, blockLength is assigned a small number 432, where
Nsymb,data = 12, Nsc,RB = 12 as mentioned in Chapter 3, and nCRB,µ = 3. Random ν
and Qm parameters are generated by randperm() and other functions. The combination
of randperm() and modulo functions gives every valid configuration the same or close to
the same occurrence and is more predictable than just randi(). Empirically, the generated
array of configurations by randperm() is more uniform than that by randi().
(a) Constellation diagram of modulation sym-
bols specified in [5].
(b) Constellation diagram expressed by binary
integers.
The precision bitwidth is set to 16. To maximize the precision, a scalar is calculated based
on the maximum amplitude in all QAM constellations and the largest 2’s complement.
As shown in Figure 5.1a, the maximum amplitude is the outermost symbol in 256QAM,
15/
√
170 (roughly 1.15053). Instead of scaling up with a power of 2, which is just moving
28
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:39==
the fractional point, aligning the maximum amplitude with the biggest number in signed 16-
bit is more efficient and accurate. The symbols in Figure 5.1b are used in the hardware
design. It can be observed from the graphs that the scaled constellation has a similar
performance to the one in the stand.
The script then moves on to generate and process transport blocks in the first level of the
for-loop. Aside from the random ν and Qm arrays, nRNTI is also randomly generated and
used in the slot configuration. A valid length of the bit sequence must be exact multiples
of ν ∗Qm, so inBW is calculated and used to generate random binary data in the transport
block. The golden reference result is then calculated by the toolbox functions.
The configuration of each transport block is printed in the configuration text file. The
bitwidth of both the transport block and the scrambled codeword is 32, so the single-
column bit sequence is reshaped accordingly. The second level for-loop is then used
to read and print data into a text file. ROM address is printed first in a line. Then the
control signal that indicates the start of a slot is printed, making the total bitwidth of the
ROM 33. The 32-bit data of either the initial transport block or the scrambled codeword
is then printed. The initial transport block is printed by the script shown because DUTs
are scrambler and the second section. The scrambled codeword was printed when the
DUT was only the second section. In fact, the address bitwidth is too wide for the input
ROM since 32 bits correspond to more than 4 QAM symbols in most configuration cases.
The actual address bitwidth of input ROM is often shortened manually after running the
script. Only the ROM of the first layer consumes almost all the addresses, while other
layers are not used in every slot. The variable addr _InCnt records the total address of
the last finished slot in the first level for-loop.
1
2
...
3
fileOpened
= fopen('rom_in_short.txt',
'w');
4
fileGold(1) = fopen('rom_gold_1_short.txt', 'w');
5
...
6
addrLeng = 12;
7
blockLength = 432; cfgNum = floor(2^addrLeng / blockLength); Cellid = randi
(1023, 1);
8
dataDLcfg = nrPDSCHConfig;
9
dataDLcfg.PRBSet = 0 : 2;
10
11
arrayNlayers = mod(randperm(cfgNum), 4) + 1;
12
arrayQAMpow = mod(randperm(cfgNum), 4)*2 + 2;
13
OutBitwidth = 16; ceiling = 2^(OutBitwidth -1) - 1; scale = round(ceiling /
1.15053);
14
15
addr_InCnt = 0; addr1 = 0; ...
16
for index = 0 : (cfgNum -1)
17
dataDLcfg.RNTI
= randi(49151, 1);
18
QAMpow
= arrayQAMpow(index+1);
19
dataDLcfg.NumLayers = arrayNlayers(index+1);
20
inBW = dataDLcfg.NumLayers * QAMpow;
21
if (QAMpow < 4)
22
dataDLcfg.Modulation = "QPSK";
23
else
24
dataDLcfg.Modulation = (string(2^QAMpow) + "QAM");
25
end
26
27
inbit
= randi([0 1], (inBW * blockLength), 1);
28
scrambled = nrPUSCHScramble(inbit, Cellid , dataDLcfg.RNTI);
29
symbQAM
= Func7_23(3, dataDLcfg , scrambled);
30
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
29
==PAGE:40==
31
fprintf(fileConf , ("
4'b" + dec2bin(index, 4) + ": memo <= 55'b" ...
32
+ dec2bin(dataDLcfg.RNTI, 16) + "0" + dec2bin(Cellid , 14) ...
33
+ dec2bin(2^QAMpow, 9) + dec2bin(dataDLcfg.NumLayers -1, 3) + dec2bin(
blockLength , 12) ...
34
+ ";"));
35
fprintf(fileConf , '\n');
36
37
scrambled = reshape(scrambled , 32, []).'; inbit = reshape(inbit, 32, []).';
38
for seq = 0 : (size(inbit, 1) - 1)
39
addr = dec2bin(addr_InCnt + seq, addrLeng);
40
nx_line = "12'b" + addr;
41
42
datatext = transpose(inbit(seq+1, :));
43
nx_line = nx_line + ": memo <= 33'b";
44
if seq < 1
45
nx_line = nx_line + "1";
46
else
47
nx_line = nx_line + "0";
48
end
49
nx_line = nx_line + (num2str(flipud(datatext)).') + ";";
50
51
fprintf(fileOpened , nx_line); fprintf(fileOpened , '\n');
52
end
53
54
addr_InCnt = addr_InCnt + size(scrambled , 1);
55
...
56
end % Each slot
Listing 5.2: The generation of test vector
The golden reference outputs are scaled up and rounded to integers. Address and data
are printed into the corresponding text files. The boundaries between slots and the division
between the real part and the imaginary part can also be printed out to assist in debugging.
1
...
2
for seq = 0 : (size(symbQAM , 1)-1)
3
datatext = round(symbQAM(seq+1, :) * scale); % 4 elements
4
5
nx_line = header_str + dec2bin(addr1, addrLeng);
6
nx_line = nx_line + ": memo <= 32'h" + dec2hex(real(datatext(:, 1)), 4);
7
nx_line = nx_line + "_" + dec2hex(imag(datatext(:, 1)), 4) + ";";
8
fprintf(fileGold(1), (nx_line + "\n")); addr1 = addr1 + 1;
9
10
...
11
end % Each line
12
end % Each slot
13
fclose(fileOpened); fclose(fileGold(1));
14
...
Listing 5.3: The generation of golden reference result
5.3
RTL development
Aside from the processing of user data, the slot configuration is also shortened and simpli-
fied in the preceding functional block. Hence, the bitwidth and format of the configuration
are different from those of the preceding modules. The interface in the current design is
described in Chapter 2, where the control signal start of a slot, user data and configuration
are all buffered in the same FIFO.
The current design only supports one codeword. There’s only one stream of configuration
30
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:41==
and one stream of user data. In the proposed two-codeword design, two FIFOs are used
for scrambled codewords and one shorter FIFO is used for configuration.
5.3.1
Shift register and the gearbox state machine
Figure 5.2: Gearbox
The QAM and layer mapping logic produces ν QAM symbols in one clock cycle. Each
QAM symbol is calculated from Qm bits in the scrambled codeword. The scrambler offers
32 new codeword bits in a clock cycle, and the amount of ν ∗Qm does not always equal
32. In order to process νQm new bits while the FIFO bitwidth still remains 32, a gearbox
logic is implemented. A state machine is built to read different parts of the register at
different states and update the register with 32 new bits from the FIFO.
A concept of shifting and register update is depicted in Figure 5.2. For one codeword, two
layers, and 64QAM configuration, 12 bits are needed to perform modulation and layer
mapping, marked with blue stars in Figure 5.2. The X-axis indicates the indices of the
register, and the Y-axis is the clock cycles or states of this configuration. The gearbox
first reads the 12 bits from 11 down to 0 and then outputs the bits from 23 down to 12 in
Clock Cycle 1. At this moment, unread bits are under 12, so an update of the register is
necessary. 32 bits are then pulled from the FIFO to fill the register from 31 down to 0. The
unread bits from 31 down to 24 are preserved at -1 down to -8 at the next clock cycle. In
Figure 5.2, the first unread bit marked by the red dashed line shifts from index 24 to index
-8. The register and state machine moves on to shift the 12-bit output window, which is
marked by 12 blue stars and updated when the remaining bits are not enough. A loop is
finished when index 31 is the last bit to output[25]. 32 new bits are filled into the register,
and bits from 11 down to 0 are again the output.
The capacity of the register is 48 bits. When it’s necessary to push new data in, index 47
down to index 16 are updated with new data. The old 16 bits from index 47 down to index
32 are moved to the first 16 places. The number 48 is obtained by surveying the demand
for each route. Only in one state of Route bitwidth 18, the bit at index 0 is used.
The indices are corrected to be nonnegative integers in RTL code. For one codeword,
nine different conditions are considered. Table 5.1 enlists the nine conditions, each of that
could come from various combinations of Qm and ν.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
31
==PAGE:42==
Bitwidth
Configuration
Period (LCM)
2
QPSK*1
32
4
QPSK*2
16QAM*1
32
6
QPSK*3
64QAM*1
96
8
QPSK*4
16QAM*2
256QAM*1
32
12
16QAM*3
64QAM*2
96
16
16QAM*4
256QAM*2
32
18
64QAM*3
288
24
64QAM*4
256QAM*3
96
32
256QAM*4
32
Table 5.1: Different combinations of Qm and ν, and the required number of bits to modu-
late.
2 bits               
00
4 bits        
10
6 bits        
20
8 bits         
30
12 bits      
40
16 bits      
50
18 bits      
60
24 bits      
70
32 bits      
80
2 bits               
01
4 bits          
11
6 bits        
21
8 bits         
31
12 bits      
41
18 bits      
61
24 bits      
71
2 bits               
0F
4 bits        
17
6 bits        
2F
8 bits         
33
12 bits      
47
16 bits      
51
18 bits      
6F
24 bits      
73
FF
F0
Figure 5.3: State transition diagram.
1
always@* begin
2
recfg_state_nx = 8'dx;
3
case (rd_cfg_bw)
4
6'd2:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h00;
5
6'd4:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h10;
6
6'd6:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h20;
7
6'd8:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h30;
8
6'd12:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h40;
9
6'd16:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h50;
10
6'd18:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h60;
11
6'd24:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h70;
12
6'd32:
recfg_state_nx = 8'h80;
13
default: recfg_state_nx = 8'hFF;
14
endcase
15
end
16
17
always@* begin
18
loop_state_nx = 8'dx; state_reading = 0; ...
19
case (state)
20
8'hF0:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'hFF; ... state_reading = 1; end
21
8'hFF:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'hF0; ... end
22
...
23
8'h40:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h41; ... end
24
8'h41:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h42; ... state_reading = 1; end
25
8'h42:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h43; ... end
32
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:43==
26
8'h43:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h44; ... end
27
8'h44:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h45; ... state_reading = 1; end
28
8'h45:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h46; ... end
29
8'h46:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h47; ... end
30
8'h47:
begin loop_state_nx = 8'h40; ... state_reading = 1; end
31
...
32
default: begin loop_state_nx = 8'hFF; ... end
33
endcase
34
end
Listing 5.4: The state machine code about transition.
Before the gearbox starts switching between states, the register must be filled with valid
data from FIFO. Hence, the state F0 is attached to the idle state FF. When the ready
signal from the next FIFO is asserted, the state machine will proceed to state F0 and read
configuration and data from F0. Similarly, the last state of each route also updates the
register with new data, such that the next state in either the same route or a different route
can start output data and move on immediately.
1
always@* begin
2
... o_graycodes_data = 32'dx; state_reading = 0; ...
3
case (state)
4
8'hF0:begin ... o_graycodes_data= {(32){1'b1}};
state_reading = 1; ... end
5
8'hFF:begin ... o_graycodes_data= {(32){1'b1}}; ... end
6
...
7
8'h40:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[27:16]}; end
8
8'h41:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[39:28]};
state_reading = 1; end
9
8'h42:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[19: 8]}; end
10
8'h43:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[31:20]}; end
11
8'h44:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[43:32]};
state_reading = 1; end
12
8'h45:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[23:12]}; end
13
8'h46:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[35:24]}; end
14
8'h47:begin ... o_graycodes_data={{(20){1'b1}}, shift_memo[47:36]};
state_reading = 1; end
15
...
16
default: begin ... o_graycodes_data={(32){1'b1}}; ... end
17
endcase
18
end
19
...
20
always@(posedge i_clock) begin
21
if (!i_resetn) begin
22
shift_memo <= 'd0;
23
end else if (read_data_valid && read_enjoin) begin
24
shift_memo <= {read_data_out[31:0], shift_memo[47:32]};
25
end else begin
26
shift_memo <= shift_memo;
27
end
28
end
Listing 5.5: The state machine code of the gearbox.
The total bit number in a transport block must be a multiple of 32 due to the design of the
gearbox state machine. Once configured with the new context in the next slot, the state
machine goes down the chosen route and loops back. No branch out is designed in the
state transition until the state machine finishes one loop of the route. By the time the state
machine can reconfigure itself and switch to another route, the system has processed a
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
33
==PAGE:44==
scrambled bit sequence with a length of LCM between 32 and νQm, as enlisted in Table
5.1. Hence, the bit number in a transport block must be LCM between 32 and νQm.
The total bit number in a transport block with one or two codewords before scrambling is
Qm ∗Nsc,RB ∗nCRB,µ ∗Nsymb,data ∗ν. The layers assigned for one codeword are between
one layer to four layers following the specification in [5]. Since Qm is always an even
number and Nsc,RB = 12 in any situation, the bit number is always a multiple of 8, which
means the information always consists of bytes. If Nsymb,data is fixed to 12, then nCRB,ν
can be any number while the total bit number remains a multiple of 32. To correct this,
several discussions are made in Section 5.6.
5.3.2
Configuration and control logic
The signal that marks the start of a slot is stored in the FIFO alongside the configuration
and the data. Since the FIFO is synthesized to be FWFT, all the new data is available
at the output port. The start of the slot signal hence also presents at the FIFO output.
The state machine decides the timing to update the shift register with new data from the
FIFO, and the moment is also when the state machine switches routes and reconfigures
the data path. The state machine controls the effect of the ”start of a slot” signal, and
the ready signal from the next FIFO controls the update of the state machine. The state
machine is not designed to roll back, so the deassertion of the ready signal should pause
the progress of the state machine.
1
always@* begin
2
if (o_graycodes_ready) begin
3
if (read_data_valid) begin
4
state_nx =
cfg_enjoin ? recfg_state_nx : loop_state_nx;
5
o_graycodes_valid_nx = 1;
6
end else begin
7
state_nx =
state_reading ? state
: loop_state_nx;
8
o_graycodes_valid_nx = state_reading ? 0
: 1;
9
end
10
end else begin
11
state_nx = state;
12
end
13
end
Listing 5.6: The state control.
5.3.3
Data path of the hardware design
The bitwidth of a QAM symbol is 32, with a 16-bit real part and a 16-bit imaginary part. The
mechanism and reason for scaling are explained in Section 5.2, the scaled numbers are
rounded and printed as 16-bit signed numbers. Examples are listed in the code snippet
below. Modules of all modulation schemes are created in the form of a simple multiplexer.
The QPSK module is shown as an example in the snippet. The valid and meaningful part
in the 32-bit signal from the shift register is extracted and put into the generated array
of modulation instances. All the other generated arrays of different modulations receive
part of the 32-bit data, but only the correct result is picked by signal i _choose _qam
from the configuration register in the controller module. The layer mapper in the current
design only works for one codeword. Four valid signals are asserted respectively by the
configuration register. To further develop the design for two codewords, some proposals
are discussed in the discussion section.
1
module QAM4 (
2
input
[1
: 0] i_codeword ,
3
output [31 : 0] o_qam4_symbol
4
);
5
reg [31 : 0] o_symbol;
34
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:45==
6
always@* begin
7
case(i_codeword)
8
2'd0: o_symbol = 32'h4EAA_4EAA;
9
2'd1: o_symbol = 32'hB156_4EAA;
10
2'd2: o_symbol = 32'h4EAA_B156;
11
2'd3: o_symbol = 32'hB156_B156;
12
endcase
13
end
14
assign o_qam4_symbol = o_symbol;
15
endmodule
16
...
17
wire [7 : 0] qam4_vector = i_data_bits[7 : 0];
18
wire [1 : 0] qam4_array [0 : 3];
19
assign {qam4_array[3], qam4_array[2], qam4_array[1], qam4_array[0]} =
qam4_vector;
20
wire [31 : 0] qam4_symbols [0 : 3];
21
genvar h;
22
generate
23
for (h = 0; h < 4; h=h+1) begin: qam4_for_layers
24
QAM4 U4(
25
.i_codeword(qam4_array[h]),
26
.o_qam4_symbol(qam4_symbols[h])
27
);
28
end
29
endgenerate
30
...
31
reg [31 : 0] o_data_onlayers
[0 : 3];
32
reg [31 : 0] o_data_onlayers_nx [0 : 3];
33
always@* begin
34
for (w = 0; w < 4; w=w+1) begin
35
case(i_choose_qam)
36
4'b1000:o_data_onlayers_nx[w]= choose_layer[w]? qam256_symbols[w]: 'd0;
37
4'b0100:o_data_onlayers_nx[w]= choose_layer[w]? qam64_symbols[w] : 'd0;
38
4'b0010:o_data_onlayers_nx[w]= choose_layer[w]? qam16_symbols[w] : 'd0;
39
4'b0001:o_data_onlayers_nx[w]= choose_layer[w]? qam4_symbols[w]
: 'd0;
40
default:o_data_onlayers_nx[w]= -1;
41
endcase
42
end
43
end
44
assign o_data_symbols_vector = {o_data_onlayers[3], o_data_onlayers[2],
o_data_onlayers[1], o_data_onlayers[0]};
45
...
Listing 5.7: The generic data path building block.
5.4
Verification
In the input ROM module, the address counter of the configuration ROM is updated only
when a HIGH logic from the user data ROM signals the start of a new transport block. Un-
like FWFT FIFO, the address must be determined in the previous clock cycle before the
data in that address is available. In combination with the ready signal from the receiver
FIFO, the control logic is hard to design. The current design is based on a workaround
where the configuration only guarantees to match the first 32-bit data in a transport block,
as described in Section 3.6. Adding more pipelines could be the proper remedy and
a good way to improve timing performance. Nevertheless, the proposed configuration-
codeword separation is still the preferred way to save resources and simplify the verifica-
tion ROM module.
The receivers are expected to be eight resource mappers in a DL system. In other words,
the antenna mapper in Figure 3.2 essentially just connects all the inputs with outputs. In
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
35
==PAGE:46==
UL, the single antenna mapper performs more complex functions and hence should check
all the layers at the same time. The verification of this section is done by one input ROM
and four output ROMs. Each output ROM contains the golden reference result of the
corresponding layer and has its own address counter logic. Each address counter counts
up when the corresponding data valid signal, i _gold _req[ν], of the layer is received.
Every address is rolled back to be zeroth when the last address is reached. In fact, this
scheme can be further simplified to just one address counter for all ROMs since the data
transmission of every layer is correlated to each other. Instead, the data in all layers’
ROMs can be assigned to the addresses of the zeroth ROM. The zeroth layer is assigned
QAM symbols in every configuration, so the QAM symbols on other layers at the same
clock cycle can be assigned to the corresponding addresses.
1
if (i_gold_req[0]) begin
2
addr_gold1_nx = ('d3887 == addr_gold1) ? 'd0 : (addr_gold1 + 'd1);
3
end else begin
4
addr_gold1_nx = addr_gold1;
5
end
6
if (i_gold_req[1]) begin
7
addr_gold2_nx = (addr_gold2 == 'd3023) ? 'd0 : (addr_gold2 + 'd1);
8
end else begin
9
addr_gold2_nx = addr_gold2;
10
end
11
if (i_gold_req[2]) begin
12
addr_gold3_nx = (addr_gold3 == 'd1727) ? 'd0 : (addr_gold3 + 'd1);
13
end else begin
14
addr_gold3_nx = addr_gold3;
15
end
16
if (i_gold_req[3]) begin
17
addr_gold4_nx = (addr_gold4 == 'd863) ? 'd0 : (addr_gold4 + 'd1);
18
end else begin
19
addr_gold4_nx = addr_gold4;
20
end
Listing 5.8: The address counter logic of four layers
5.5
Evaluation and performance
Figure 5.4: Simulation of the long test vector set.
Behavioural simulation of PDSCH processing from scrambling to layer mapping with long
test vectors is shown in Figure 5.4. The behaviour of all signals follows the intended
functions and patterns. No error is presented, so the behaviour of the hardware design is
reliable.
36
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.5: Result of FPGA implementation.
Figure 5.5 shows the probed signals in the ILA waveform window. Two 4-bit parts of the
configuration channel at the Split option 7-3, the interface of scrambled codewords, are
probed and displayed as data _73 _cfg _probe _l _1 and data _73 _cfg _probe _r _1.
The probed segments are the most significant 8 bits, probe _l is the most significant and
probe _r is the less significant part. At the same interface, the least significant 8 bits of
the user data channel are probed and displayed, named data _73 _codeword _probe
_1 in the ILA window. The valid and ready signals at the interface of Split option 7-3
are also probed and presented. Signals at other interfaces are separated by the orange
dashed lines. The valid, ready signals and part of the QAM symbols at Split option 7-2,
the transmission layers’ interface, are shown between the two dashed lines. The least
significant 8 bits are probed because layer 0 at the least significant position of the vector
is assigned symbols in any configuration. The 8 bits are part of the imaginary branch of
the QAM symbol. The last two probed signals indicate the functionality of the hardware
design. The captured moment in ILA is the end of the verification loop. The valid signals
at both interfaces are deasserted after the last data is transmitted. As can be seen in the
figure, the signal result _fail _flag _1 suggests that no error is detected.
Figure 5.6: Result of FPGA implementation.
The unscrambled transport block channel is displayed in Figure 5.6. Different from Figure
5.5, the ILA captures the starting moment in a new verification loop. The valid signal is
asserted when the first user data is transmitted. A pink circle highlights that the configu-
ration channel at this interface, tx _init _cfg _probe _1, has been ready long before the
first user data in a slot. As described in Section 3.6, the configuration is updated to the
content of the next slot right after the system accepted the configuration of this slot.
Figure 5.7 above shows a verification with the same test vectors in ModelSim. The signals
at three interfaces in one verification loop are separated by dashed lines. The captured
signal behaviours in ILA match well with the simulated signal behaviours in ModelSim.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.7: Simulation of the short test vector set.
Hence, the hardware performs the intended functionality on the chosen FPGA board.
5.6
Discussion and conclusion
5.6.1
Observation
The implemented digital circuit shows the expected behaviours and functions. Since no
exceptional issue occurs, the design is expected to be improved by the proposed ideas
under the same timing and resource constraints.
Figure 5.8: Timing report of the design containing section 1 and section 2.
The attempt to increase the clock rate is yet to be achieved. Figure 5.8 depicts the timing
report in an attempt to implement a clock rate of 300 MHz. Vivado tool indicates that the
logic in the verification is the main concern of improving timing performance.
5.6.2
Improvement proposals
The implemented design only supports one-codeword transmission. A logic that sorts
QAM symbols from two different codewords should be included at the end of the layer
mapper module. A control circuit should be designed to ensure that the two FIFOs ac-
cepting different scrambled codewords are well synchronized.
In order to lift the flaw of 32-bit input, dummy bits should be included in the bit sequence
before scrambling. The number of bits could be padded to the next multiple of 32. The
dummy bits are either discarded by the state machine or modulated into dummy QAM
symbols. The number of dummy symbols on every active layer is the same. These dummy
symbols can be discarded in the resource mapping stage given the correct nCRB and
Ksc,grid,µ.
The verification module can be speeded up by using more pipeline stages. The ROMs
take considerable time to provide data at the output ports[24], so a pipeline stage behind
the ROMs is expected to improve the timing performance. Alternately, the verification
module can be equipped with FIFO such that this instance can be fixed at 200 MHz, a
38
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:49==
clock rate close to that of the specified RF sample rate. Meanwhile, the processing units
can be synthesized with a higher clock rate.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
39
==PAGE:50==
40
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:51==
6
From layer symbol to time domain
signal
This functional block lies between the functional split Option 7-2 and Option 8. The QAM
symbols on several layers are directly assigned to the antennae. Every antenna has its
own resource grid, which comprises subcarriers on the frequency axis and OFDM symbols
on the time axis. The resource elements in a table are assigned IQ symbols and sent to
the OFDM module of the antenna. The OFDM module then generates the samples of the
time domain signal, namely the input of RF functionalities.
6.1
Processes and functions
The IQ symbols on the transmission layers are mapped onto the antenna ports. As de-
scribed in Section 5.1, the number of antenna ports in use must equal ν in DL, and the
mapping is simply wiring[5]. The UL counterpart of antenna mapping is more complex.
A precoding weight matrix is configured by the higher layers to expand IQ symbols on ν
layers to ρ antennae. ρ must be chosen among 1, 2, or 4, and should be greater than
ν[5].
The QAM symbols from ν layers at the same time are precoded and assigned
to the ρ antennae. The symbols of each antenna are allocated resource elements in
the resource grid, namely the Ksc,grid,µ subcarriers of 14 OFDM symbols. On the time
axis, Nsymb,data symbols are allocated for the user data, the other symbols are used
for DM-RS or other reference signals generated in this section. On the frequency axis,
nCRB,µ out of Ngrid,µ PRBs are allocated. The number of IQ symbols is then given by
Nsc,RB ∗nCRB,µ ∗Nsymb,data ∗ν as explained in Chapter 3.
The complex number symbols are grouped into Nsymb,data sets. This process can be a
simple mapping or an interleaving mapping. If an interleaving mapping is configured,
bundles of PRBs should be formed before the process. A bundle size number, Li, is
given by the higher layer. Most bundles should include Li PRBs, but the first and the
last bundle could have fewer PRBs such that the total PRB number is nCRB. The even-
indexed bundles, indexed with 0, 2 and other even numbers, are placed in the first half of
BWP. The other odd-indexed bundles are placed in the latter half of BWP. The last bundle
is exempted, it remains at the end of the band in all cases.
The waveform samples of an OFDM symbol are calculated from Ksc,grid,µ subcarriers,
which consist of the BWPs and unused spectral resources. The resource elements are
placed between null subcarriers before the modulation, so the number of inputs is a power
of 2. CP is appended to the samples of an OFDM symbol. The first and the last symbol
in a subframe have a longer CP than other symbols in the middle, so the duration of a
subframe is fixed to 1 ms. The time domain signal is upconverted to the carrier frequency
with some phase compensation[5].
6.2
MATLAB model
A function script is composed to perform antenna mapping, DM-RS generation, and re-
source mapping. In the code snippet, carr and dataDLcfg in the argument parentheses
are configuration objects for the carrier and PDSCH. The bundle size and interleaving
setting are included in dataDLcfg. The bundle size should be chosen among 2 and 4.
rsrcGrid is the resource grid and the data type is a three-dimensional matrix of complex
numbers. Nantenna is the number of transmitter antennae, which equals the number of
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
41
==PAGE:52==
layers. symbTPC is the matrix of IQ symbols on transmission layers. These symbols
could be either the product of QAM in DL or precoded symbols in UL.
1
function fullGrid = Func7_12(carr, dataDLcfg , rsrcGrid , Nantenna , symbTPC)
2
3
symbDMRS = nrPDSCHDMRS(carr, dataDLcfg);
4
DMRSindices = nrPDSCHDMRSIndices(carr, dataDLcfg);
5
6
[SCindices , ~] = nrPDSCHIndices(carr, dataDLcfg);
7
8
[~, antennaIndices] = nrExtractResources(SCindices , rsrcGrid);
9
fullGrid = zeros(size(rsrcGrid));
10
11
weight = eye(Nantenna);
12
symbSlots = symbTPC * weight;
13
14
% PDSCH DM-RS precoding and mapping
15
for p = 1 : size(symbDMRS , 2)
16
[~, antenIndicesDMRS] = nrExtractResources(DMRSindices(:, p), rsrcGrid);
17
fullGrid(antenIndicesDMRS) = rsrcGrid(antenIndicesDMRS) ...
18
+ symbDMRS(:, p) * weight(p, :); % Matrix multiplication
19
end
20
fullGrid(antennaIndices) = symbSlots;
Listing 6.1: The golden reference model of antenna mapping and resource mapping
The IQ symbols for DM-RS are generated by the function nrPDSCHDMRS(). The sym-
bols for each antenna port are enlisted in a column in the two-dimensional matrix symb-
DMRS[15]. Another function nrPDSCHDMRSIndices() generates the corresponding in-
dices for these symbols DMRSindices and places them in a matrix of the same size
as symbDMRS. The indices generated are not described by two integers representing
”frequency-time”, but expressed by a single integer representing the order of all resource
elements for a port. Hence, it is crucial to ensure that the dimension of the resource grid
element is in the form of ”frequency-time-antenna” to place the symbols correctly. The
matrix weight is a placeholder for the precoding process. Antenna mapping in DL is just
a direct connection between the transmission layer and the antenna port, while in UL
precoding is used when there are more antennae than layers.
Likewise, the function nrPDSCHIndices() generates the indices of available resource el-
ements of each antenna port. The variable SCindices is also a two-dimension matrix in
the form of ”resource element-antenna”. On the other hand, the function nrExtractRe-
sources() in DL does more on the reception of data than the transmission of data. In func-
tion script Func7 _12, this function returns exactly the same indices given SCindices. In
other words, antennaIndices equals SCindices. On the other hand, the extraction func-
tion at the receiver side processes multiple frequency-time grids and returns received
subcarrier symbols[15]. In practice, the extraction may be removed from the transmitter
model[26].
1
[symbOFDM , radioInfo] = nrOFDMModulate(carr, rsrcGrid , 'CarrierFrequency',
f_carr);
Listing 6.2: The golden reference model of OFDM
The function nrOFDMModulate() provides all the functionality needed to process sub-
carriers and generate OFDM waveform. After loading the resource grid with data from
PDSCH, PDCCH, and other necessary processes, the function performs IFFT and gen-
erates the samples of the baseband signal. The information object radioInfo stores in-
42
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:53==
formation about the whole subframe, but the time span of the resource grid argument
and the output OFDM symbols are not bound to exactly 1 ms. The third argument in the
code snippet is the carrier frequency f _carr, which is set to 3.5 GHz, the new spectrum
released for 5G[17][22]. The carrier frequency will determine the phase compensation
needed in the upconverted signal[5].
6.3
Discussion
As the data flow approaches the final physical form in the air interface, more physical con-
straints should be dealt with. In this section, different BWPs gather at the same resource
grid in a subframe and thus make the process complicated[5]. An example of two BWPs’
waveforms is given in [27].
6.3.1
Proposed hardware design for future works
Interleaving in resource mapping
single bitwidth
~ half a grid size
double bitwidth
~ half a grid size
(a)
(b)
L = 4
Figure 6.1: Two proposals of interleaving. The bundle size is assumed 4 in the figure.
The bundle size should be included in the configuration channel. The bitwidth of this field
should be 3 bits. To disable interleaving, this field can be configured by 3 bits of zeros. A
counter could be used to count the incoming IQ symbols and mark the division between
bundles. To move the odd-indexed bundles, a memory unit like FIFO must be instantiated
to store the symbols briefly. In Figure 6.1, even-indexed bundles are coloured green and
odd-indexed ones are in red. With the same data rate from the previous sections, the
output is suspended when the input is a red bundle and should be stored in the memory.
The minimum memory length is around half of Ngrid,µ and the duration of input suspension
is also a half Ngrid,µ. If the input data flow is doubled, the output data flow continues
without suspension. On the other hand, the input suspension will last a half Ngrid,µ during
the transmission of stored odd-indexed bundles if the same amount of memory is used to
store red bundles. The cost of continuous output data flow is thus the doubled computation
resources in the previous section.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
43
==PAGE:54==
IFFT shifting before OFDM
Xilinx IFFT core performs OFDM and CP appending in the last module[20][11]. However, a
shifting operation, which is equivalent to the MATLAB function ifftshift(), should take place
before the processing in the IP core. The latter half of the subcarriers in the frequency
band should go first into the IFFT core. Empty subcarriers follow on, the total number
of which is NIFFT −Ksc,grid,µ. The timeslot of an OFDM symbol is ended with the first
half of the subcarriers, which should be buffered in memory. An alternative proposal is to
perform the shifting with the interleaver, such that the memory resources can be saved.
The cost of this scheme is the complexity of the control logic since reading and writing the
big memory are needed in both interleaving and non-interleaving configurations.
44
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:55==
7
Conclusion
The functionalities in 5G NR physical layer are studied. The processing chain from the
scrambler to the OFDM is determined as the goal of this project. The system is partitioned
into four sections, and each section is studied and modelled by the functions in MathWorks
MATLAB 5G Toolbox.
A golden reference model of DL transmitter in 5G NR physical layer is built with PDSCH
functions and other NR functions in MATLAB 5G Toolbox. Function scripts corresponding
to the four processing chain divisions are written or organized. Despite minor differences
between [5] and the toolbox specification, the MATLAB model is reliable in producing valid
results. Due to the complexity of NR technology, features such as parallel codewords and
BWP integration are omitted from the model.
Two divisions in the processing chain are successfully implemented on the Xilinx Kria
KV260 board. A data flow regulation scheme that utilizes XPM FIFOs is proposed and
used throughout the processing chain. The communication between the two sections is
well conducted, so it is concluded that the control scheme can be applied to all the sec-
tions in the processing chain. FPGA synthesis and implementation on the UltraScale type
KV260 board are explored with the hardware design tool Vivado ML. Online resources
from the device vendor are extensively used to conduct the implementation. The func-
tionalities of the two divisions are verified respectively and jointly. The DUT outputs are
confirmed identical to the golden reference results.
The ideal products of every physical layer division are computed and printed out by the
function scripts in the golden reference model. A verification scheme is developed to
deliver the test vectors to DUT and evaluate the outputs from DUT. The test vectors and
golden reference results are stored in ROMs in front of and behind the designed hardware.
The test vectors are read out by the input module and then processed by DUT one by one.
The output module compares the outputs from DUT and the golden reference results in the
same order. Counter of matching results and an indicator signal of mismatch in the output
module evaluate the functionality of the hardware design. The behaviour of the hardware
design is verified with long and convincing test vectors in the ModelSim simulator. On the
chosen FPGA board, the recurrent verification of the synthesized design captured by the
debugging core ILA also matches the simulation in ModelSim well.
Utilized resources are well within the constraint of the equipment, and further optimization
is feasible. The timing performance of the design meets the requirement of the assumed
frequency band. A clock rate of 200 MHz is reached, given that the sample rate of the
output should be 122.88 MHz for 90 MHz bandwidth. The output ROM controller is identi-
fied as the bottleneck of timing improvement, and optimization of the verification scheme
is proposed.
The golden reference model of the two unfinished sections is studied. Proposals of the
corresponding hardware architecture are described. Ideas for general performance opti-
mization, such as increasing the clock rate, adjusting the size of the FIFOs, and a watch-
dog logic, are discussed. It is confirmed that FPGA is a powerful platform to realize the
physical layer functions of 5G NR.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
45
==PAGE:56==
46
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Kim Sangyuep NTT Rising Researchers. Research into Ultra-high-speed Full Soft-
ware Access Networks that Virtualize the Physical Layer Functionality of Commu-
nications Networks. Tech. rep. vol. 20 No. 2. Josuikai Building. 6th Floor, 2-1-1,
Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0003 Japan: NTT Technical Review, 2022.
[2]
Hojin Kee et al. “FPGA-based design and implementation of the 3GPP-LTE physical
layer using parameterized synchronous dataflow techniques”. In: IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. 2010, pp. 1510–1513.
DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2010.5495504.
[3]
Mohamed Salah, Abdel-Halim Zekry, and Mohammed Kamel. “An efficient FPGA
implementation of OFDM physical layer for SDR-based applications”. In: 10th Inter-
national Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO). 2014, pp. 145–148. DOI:
10.1109/ICENCO.2014.7050447.
[4]
S Lakshmi V Venkataramanan. “Performance analysis of LTE physical layer using
hardware cosimulation techniques and implementation on FPGA for communication
systems”. In: International Journal of Communication System. Vol. 35. 2. 2022. DOI:
10.1002/DAC.4125.
[5]
TS38.211. 3GPP TS 38.211: NR; Physical channels and modulation. https://www.
etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts. Accessed: 2023-Jan-30. 2022.
[6]
UG892. Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Design Flows Overview. AMD Xilinx. San
Jose, California, 2022.
[7]
UG974. UltraScale Architecture Libraries Guide. AMD Xilinx. San Jose, California,
2022.
[8]
Intel Learning. Intel Stratix 10 FPGA Optimization: Loop Analysis and Solutions.
2018. URL: https : / / learning . intel . com / developer / learn / course / external / view /
elearning/405/intelr-stratixr-10-fpga-optimization-loop-analysis-and-solutions.
[9]
UG900. Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Logic Simulation. AMD Xilinx. San Jose,
California, 2022.
[10]
GitHub.Com/Xilinx. Xilinx/kria-vitis-platforms: Kria KV260 Vitis platforms and over-
lays. https://github.com/Xilinx/kria-vitis-platforms/kv260. Accessed: 2022-Jan-30.
2022.
[11]
Shih Chiao Sung. FPGA Implementation of 5G NR OFDM module. DTU. 2022.
[12]
Xilinx-Kria-Vision-AI. Getting Started with Kria KV260 Vision AI Starter Kit. https:
//www.xilinx.com/products/som/kria/kv260-vision-starter-kit/kv260-getting-started-
ubuntu. Accessed: 2022-Jan-30. 2022.
[13]
UG908. Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Programming and Debugging. AMD Xil-
inx. San Jose, California, 2022.
[14]
PG172. Integrated Logic Analyzer v6.2, LogiCORE IP Product Guide. AMD Xilinx.
San Jose, California, 2022.
[15]
MathWorks. DL-SCH and PDSCH Transmit and Receive Processing Chain. https:
/ / www . mathworks . com / help / 5g / gs / dl - sch - and - pdsch - transmit - and - receive -
processing-chain.html. Accessed: 2023-Feb-02.
[16]
UG901. Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Synthesis. AMD Xilinx. San Jose, Cali-
fornia, 2021.
[17]
Martin Sauter. “From GSM to LTE-Advanced Pro and 5G”. In: 4th ed. Chichester:
John Wiley and Sons, 2021. Chap. 6.
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
47
==PAGE:58==
[18]
L. M. Pyndt Larsen, A. Checko, and H. L. Christiansen. “A Survey of the Functional
Splits Proposed for 5G Mobile Crosshaul Networks”. In: IEEE Communications Sur-
veys and Tutorials 21(1) (2018), pp. 146–172.
[19]
TR38.801. Study on new radio access technology: Radio access architecture and
interfaces. Tech. rep. v14. 650 Route des Lucioles, Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne,
France: 3GPP, 2017.
[20]
PG109. Fast Fourier Transform v9.1, LogiCORE IP Product Guide. AMD Xilinx. San
Jose, California, 2022.
[21]
Jeongho Jeon. “NR Wide Bandwidth Operations”. In: IEEE Communications Mag-
azine 56.3 (2018), pp. 42–46. DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700736.
[22]
Chunghwa Telecom. (Mandarin) CHT 5G - CHT emome. 2020. URL: https://www.
cht.com.tw/home/campaign/5g/index.html.
[23]
Darko Zibar Søren Forchhammer Metodi Plamenov Yankov. 34230 Digital Commu-
nication lecture content. DTU, Lyngby, Denmark. Accessed: 2021-Sep-01. 2021.
[24]
Michael Stübert Berger. 34349 FPGA design for communication systems lecture
content. DTU, Lyngby, Denmark. Accessed: 2023-Jan-30. 2023.
[25]
Intel (Altera) Han Wang. P4FPGA, SONIC-Lite. 2014. URL: https://github.com/
hanw/sonic-lite/tree/master/hw/verilog/gearbox.
[26]
MathWorks. NR PDSCH Resource Allocation and DM-RS and PT-RS Reference
Signals. https://www.mathworks.com/help/5g/ug/nr-pdsch-resource-allocation-and-
dmrs-and-ptrs-reference-signals.html. Accessed: 2023-Feb-02.
[27]
MathWorks. 5G NR Downlink Vector Waveform Generation. https://www.mathworks.
com/help/5g/ug/downlink-carrier-waveform-generation.html. Accessed: 2023-Feb-
02.
48
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
==PAGE:59==
FPGA Implementation of Generic Physical Layer Functions in 5G New Radio Technology
49
==PAGE:60==
FPGA devices are a common solution to many digital and industrial applications. FPGA is flexible
to deploy as a hardware solution. It is also common to implement low-layer functionalities of mobile
communication systems with HDL design on FPGA. Mobile communication technology is constantly
updated and developed to fulfil the growing demand for data capacity. The newly commercialized
5th Generation mobile communication system offers a higher data rate and flexibility than the 4th
Generation. Several pieces of research have been done to implement some physical layer function-
alities in LTE and 4G technology with FPGA. However, FPGA implementation of 5G functionalities
is yet to be thoroughly studied under the spotlight to the best of the author’s knowledge. This thesis
attempts to realize the physical layer functionalities in 5G New Radio technology and point out the
principles and major bottlenecks during the HDL development on FPGA. Mathwork toolbox functions
in the numeric calculator software MATLAB are studied and used to build a golden reference model
of 5G NR physical layer processing chain for the hardware design. Xilinx UltraScale Kria KV260
board is chosen as the FPGA device to implement. The functionalities of the implemented circuit
can be confirmed by observing the signals recorded by debugging cores synthesized in the design.
Hardware design of 5G NR physical layer processing chain is proposed and partly implemented on
the FPGA device. The realized sections on the board are capable to provide specific functionalities.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
electro.dtu.dk
