==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
DTU  вҖ“  Technical University of Denmark 
 
Master Thesis 
28/06-2023 
 
 
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
 
DTU Energy вҖ“ Department of Energy Conversion and Storage 
 
Author: 
Marc Lindgaard (s174929) 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
Supervisors: 
Jens Oluf Jensen  вҖ“  Professor, DTU Energy 
Benedikt Axel Brandes  вҖ“  Development Engineer, DTU Energy 
Amado AndrГ©s VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela  вҖ“  Research Engineer, DTU Energy 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR   
                     I 
Acknowledgments 
Before continuing to the main work, IвҖҷd like to express my sincerest gratitude to everyone 
that helped me and made this project possible. 
First and foremost, IвҖҷd like to thank my co-supervisors, Benedikt Axel Brandes and Amado 
AndrГ©s VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela; both have been inspiring people to work with. They have been 
the guiding hands to encourage me from the beginning, from which IвҖҷve been able to draw 
invaluable knowledge and skill, which I intend to take to heart in my future endeavors. IвҖҷd like 
to thank VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela especially, whose patience has been integral in helping me 
throughout the project.  
IвҖҷd like to extend my thanks to Professor Jens Oluf Jensen. Although their involvement was 
somewhat limited, their patience and positive attitude were an inspiration to me and are 
something I intend to hold close going forward. IвҖҷd also like to thank the work of the 
laboratory technicians at DTU Energy for providing a good working environment. In addition, 
IвҖҷd like to thank fellow DTU Energy associates Yang Hu and Mikkel RykГҰr Kraglund for 
providing insightful discussions, along with generally being helpful. 
Last but certainly not least, IвҖҷd like to thank all of my friends and family that supported me 
throughout this project. This has been an important learning period, and IвҖҷm grateful to have 
been able to work with so many amazing people. Without everyoneвҖҷs support, I doubt that I 
would have been able to finish the project in a reasonable manner. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR   
                   II 
Abstract 
As the global energy demand soars in ways never seen before, hydrogen-based fuel cells loom 
on the horizon as a promising candidate for providing a clean and sustainable energy source. 
Of the two main reactions that facilitate their function, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 
proves the most challenging to control due to its sluggish kinetics. The most active and stable 
material used in the catalysis of the ORR is platinum: an expensive and high-demand material, 
and thus stands as a leading contributor to the high systems cost of hydrogen-based fuel cells.  
In an attempt to produce less expensive and more sustainable fuel cells, a scientific bid to 
gain better control over the ORR and reduce the loading of platinum required has seen major 
focus. One such method that remains prominent in current research is the alloying of 
platinum with rare-earth metals, such as Palladium and Neodymium, to alter the properties 
of the catalyst, proving to show superior activity and stability in the ORR. However, all 
methods of synthesizing these Pt-RE nanomaterials showcased in state-of-the-art literature 
use expensive, experimentally complex, and ultimately non-scalable physical methods. Of the 
works employing more scalable chemical methods, challenges with controlling the particle 
size distribution (PSD) and dispersion have been highlighted as limiting factors in synthesizing 
desired catalysts. 
This work discusses and investigates the development of the more simple and sustainable 
polyol method used in synthesizing Pt-RE nanomaterials by first synthesizing a Pt/C precursor. 
It is demonstrated that Pt/C nanoparticles could be synthesized using this procedure in any 
mean particle size up to 11 nm, with excellent particle size distributions and good dispersion. 
However, ongoing challenges with product purification are highlighted due to the use of the 
surfactant Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). 
Additionally, through the further development of an alloying procedure first demonstrated 
by Hu et al., 1 Pt5Nd alloy with 100% alloying using precursors of <7 nm and ~95% alloying 
using precursors <11 nm were synthesized, showing good dispersion and mass activity in the 
ORR. However, the alloying of samples of particle sizes >10 nm proved highly challenging in 
achieving good PSD and dispersion due to the high sensitivity of the alloying procedure. 
Although, despite this, the samples yet showed remarkable stability when tested through 
AST. The importance of further development of the alloying method is highlighted. 
Overall, the method was shown to have high potential in the development of scalable and 
commercially viable Pt-RE catalysts. Although the technology yet needs time to mature, the 
results of this work show a clear and bright pathway for Pt-RE catalysts in the further 
development of hydrogen-based fuel cells.
==PAGE:4==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR   
                  III 
Table of contents 
 
Nomenclature .................................................................................................................. 1 
1 
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 2 
1.1 
The Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) ........................................................................ 3 
1.2 
Use of rare-earth metal alloys as an alternative to pure platinum ............................ 5 
1.2.1 
Methods of synthesis of platinum alloy catalysts................................................ 8 
1.3 
Synthesis of Platinum nanoparticles ......................................................................... 10 
1.3.1 
Principles of nucleation and growth in chemical NP synthesis ......................... 11 
1.3.2 
The Polyol-method ............................................................................................. 13 
2 
Experimental methods ............................................................................................. 16 
2.1 
Polyol-method ........................................................................................................... 16 
2.1.1 
Growth from a seed catalyst .............................................................................. 17 
2.1.2 
Formation of- and growth of platinum nuclei ................................................... 18 
2.2 
Pt-Nd/C nanoalloy synthesis ..................................................................................... 20 
3 
Characterization methods ........................................................................................ 23 
3.1 
X-ray Diffraction (XRD) .............................................................................................. 23 
3.2 
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDX) .................................................................... 24 
3.3 
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) ................................................................. 25 
3.4 
Measurement of the ORR activity in catalytic materials .......................................... 26 
3.4.1 
Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) .................................................................................... 31 
4 
Modeling of particle size by atomistic simulation ..................................................... 34 
5 
Results and discussion ............................................................................................. 40 
5.1 
Platinum nanoparticle growth - modification of a seed catalyst .............................. 40 
5.2 
Synthesis of Pt nanoparticles by the formation and growth of Pt nuclei ................. 44 
5.2.1 
Control of platinum dispersion and loading ...................................................... 48 
5.3 
Pt-Nd/C alloy synthesis ............................................................................................. 56 
5.4 
Challenges with product recovery and purification .................................................. 60
==PAGE:5==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR   
                  IV 
5.5 
Electrochemical characterization .............................................................................. 63 
5.5.1 
Accelerated stability tests (AST) ........................................................................ 66 
6 
Conclusion and future work ..................................................................................... 69 
7 
Bibliography ............................................................................................................ 71 
Appendix I вҖ“ Code template used during ASE simulations ............................................... 78 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
1 
Nomenclature 
AST 
Accelerated stability test 
bcc 
Body-centered cubic 
CV 
Cyclic voltammetry 
ECSA 
Electrochemical surface area 
EDX 
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy 
EG 
Ethylene glycol 
FC 
Fuel cell 
fcc 
Face-centered cubic 
GC 
Glassy carbon 
GDE 
Gas diffusion electrode 
HOR 
Hydrogen oxidation reaction 
ico 
Icosahedron 
IPA 
Isopropyl alcohol 
LSV 
Linear sweep voltammetry 
MA 
Mass activity 
NPs 
Nanoparticles 
ORR 
Oxygen reduction reaction 
PEMFC 
Proton-exchange membrane fuel cell 
PSD 
Particle size distribution 
RDE 
Rotating disk electrode 
RE 
Rare-earth 
RHE 
Reversible hydrogen electrode 
SA 
Specific activity 
SEM 
Scanning electron microscopy 
TEM 
Transmission electron microscopy 
TGA 
Thermogravimetric Analysis 
XRD 
X-ray diffraction 
  
 
==PAGE:7==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
2 
1      Introduction 
The world is rapidly moving towards a time of great energy need. As countries continue to 
grow, and as the population is yet on the rise, 2 the global demand for energy remains one of 
the biggest challenges of modern science. In order to keep up, technologies are evolving 
faster than ever, and many of them continue to rely on the exploitation of fossil fuels as 
energy sources. 3 For this reason, as of 2021, around three-quarters of the global greenhouse 
gas emissions come from the energy sector. As projected by the International Energy Agency 
(IEA), the global annual energy demand will increase to 18 billion tons of oil equivalents, and 
43 gigatons of CO2 will enter the atmosphere annually by 2035. 4 This effect forces a heavy 
strain on the environment, raising global temperatures, rising sea levels, and acidifying the 
atmosphere. 3 As such, developing new and more sustainable technologies to meet the ever-
increasing energy demands without using non-renewable fuels has become of great 
importance. 
One such technology is the proton-exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC). 4 Fueled with 
renewable hydrogen, it is able to produce energy with only water and heat as by-products. 
As such, it is considered a promising option in the race to replace emission-heavy energy 
sources. It functions by an electrochemical mechanism by which a fuel (e.g., hydrogen) is 
typically oxidized on the anode, while oxygen is reduced on the cathode. These reactions, 
especially the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), are slow and thus need the presence of 
catalysts to show any viability. 
 
Figure 1.1 - Illustration of the working principle at play in a PEMFC. Reprinted from Li et al. (2019) 5 
==PAGE:8==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
3 
Though it is not entirely understood why, platinum (Pt) and Pt-based catalysts show the 
highest activity for the activation of these reactions and are thus preferred for use on the 
positive electrode of PEMFCs, as exceptionally high catalyst activity is required there. 
However, platinum is expensive and ultimately non-abundant, which has spurred researchers 
to reduce its loading in catalysts and find ways to achieve cheaper alternatives. 
 
1.1 
The Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 
Generally, two sets of reactions occur in a hydrogen-based fuel cell: the hydrogen oxidation 
reaction (HOR) at the anode and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode. In a 
PEMFC, the kinetics of the HOR is very fast. Voltage losses are almost non-existent, even for 
very low loadings of Pt (less than 5 mV loss at Pt anode loadings of 0.05 mg cm2). 6 As this is 
the case, the main focus of catalyst development lies in the counterpart, the ORR.  
In an acidic environment, there are two pathways in which the ORR can happen. 7 The 
preferred pathway involves the reduction of oxygen, leading to the direct formation of water: 
the вҖҳfour electronвҖҷ transfer process. First, the O2 adsorbs onto the metal surface, and the 
adsorbed oxygen is then protonated from the flow of H+ across the membrane: 
The oxygen intermediate is then protonated further: 
 
The surface-bound OH is further protonated and reduced to give the final product of water, 
which is then released from the metal surface: 
Giving an overall reaction as follows: 
Alternatively, if the catalyst is not effective enough to ultimately facilitate the cleaving of the 
O-O bond, the HO2 intermediate is reduced without the O-O splitting first: 
Leading to the formation of H2O2, rather than water. This is the вҖҳtwo-electronвҖҷ transfer process 
and poses major issues for the stability of fuel cells due to the highly corrosive nature of H2O2. 
 
O2 + H+ + eвҲ’+   вҲ—   
                 
вҶ’        HO2
   вҲ— 
 
(1.1) 
 
HO2
   вҲ—+ H+ + eвҲ’   
                 
вҶ’        OвҲ—+ H2O 
(1.2) 
 
OвҲ—+ H+ + eвҲ’   
                 
вҶ’        OHвҲ— 
(1.3) 
 
OHвҲ—+ H+ + eвҲ’   
                 
вҶ’        H2O +   вҲ— 
(1.4) 
 
O2 + 4H+ + 4eвҲ’   
                 
вҶ’        2H2O 
(1.5) 
 
HO2
   вҲ—+ H+ + eвҲ’   
                 
вҶ’        H2O2 +   вҲ— 
(1.6) 
==PAGE:9==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
4 
8 As such, it is highly desirable for catalysts to favor reaction 2.2 rather than 2.6. While this is 
the general understanding of the reaction scheme, the exact reaction mechanism and 
methods of catalysis remain a topic of discussion due to the difficulty of in-situ probing and 
the otherwise high theoretical complexity. 9 
The catalysis of these reactions in a fuel cell environment is highly challenging. This is partly 
because PEMFCs, in particular, show highly corrosive conditions at the cathode, under which 
the catalyst must remain stable for long periods of time while still maintaining high catalytic 
activity. 10  
In any case, choosing materials that fulfill every criterion remains a modern challenge. 
However, there do exist theoretical principles to use as guidelines.  
 
Figure 1.2 - The ORR activity as a function of the oxygen binding energy for different materials. 
Figure reprinted from Ono et al., 2010  11 
Figure 1.2 presents the relationship between the theoretical oxygen binding energy and 
catalytic activity in the ORR. It showcases the Sabatier principle, which states that there is an 
optimum regarding the interactions between the catalyst and the substrate. If the interaction 
is too weak, the substrate will fail to bind to the catalyst, thus limiting reaction potential, and 
if the interaction is too strong, then the product will fail to release after the reactions have 
finished. 11  
Graphically speaking, when this principle is visualized, materials tend to fall to either side of 
this вҖҳsweet spotвҖҷ. Due to the resulting shape, these plots are known as volcano plots. The one 
shown in Figure 2.1 shows that platinum and palladium are the two materials that 
theoretically land closest to the tip of the volcano and thus are seen as ideal materials for 
pure-phase catalysis of the ORR. 12 In addition to this, platinum catalysts generally favor the 
activation of the 4-electron pathway, making it an ideal candidate for use as a catalyst. 7 
==PAGE:10==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
5 
As a way to quantify which reactions in the reaction scheme above may be the rate-
determining steps, we may look at how the potential barriers to reaction scale with each 
reaction step. We may do this by plotting the change in Gibbs free energy for each reaction 
and observing which ones have a clear barrier of reaction. This investigation has already been 
done in the literature and can be seen for Pt(111) in Figure 1.3 below: 
 
Figure 1.3 - Gibbs free energy diagram for the ORR steps at 0.9 V vs. RHE on Pt(111). Figure 
adapted from Rossmeisl et al., 2009  13 
We see that two steps have an upward slope in the О”G diagram and could thus be rate-
determining steps: reaction (1.1), involving the formation of HO2*, and reaction (1.4), 
involving the release of OH*. Thus, intuitively, to improve the ORR activity, the catalyst must 
have a strong binding to HO2* and a weak binding to OH*. However, as it turns out, it is not 
possible to separate the binding energies of HO2* and OH*, as they are linearly linked on metal 
surfaces. [SOURCE] The morphology and structure of the metal lattice, and thus the affliction 
of this catalytic activity, can be affected in various ways. Even for pure platinum, the 
orientation of the base planes in Pt(hkl) has been shown to affect the transfer charge kinetics, 
with Pt(111) showing more favorable behavior than Pt(110) or Pt(100). 14  
 
1.2 
Use of rare-earth metal alloys as an alternative to pure platinum 
As briefly mentioned, platinum is costly and sought after in many industries. Because of this, 
and due to the ultimately limited supply of platinum available, finding ways to limit the 
loading of platinum while still achieving good electrochemical activity has become desirable. 
One such solution is alloying the platinum with another metal, typically a transition metal 
such as NI, Co, and Mn. Doing this may give the catalyst unique properties that it may 
otherwise not have. 8 
==PAGE:11==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
6 
As was mentioned earlier, a generally accepted explanation for the limited activity of the ORR 
is due to the adsorption kinetics of oxygen intermediates onto the metal surface. As such, it 
is desirable to be able to slightly change the electronic structure of the catalyst so that this 
optimal performance can be achieved.  
Similar to the pure metals, of the ORR activity is plotted against the hydroxyl binding energy, 
an understanding can be achieved of which materials exhibit the best theoretical 
performance: 
 
Figure 1.4 - Volcano-like relationships between the catalytic properties and electronic structure of 
various Pt3M alloys. 7 
Much like for pure-metal catalysts, the activity of bimetallic catalysts in the ORR can be 
arranged into a so-called volcano plot, in which Pt3Ni, along with Rare-metal (RE) alloys, such 
as Pt3Y and Pt5La alloys, appear at the top of the volcano and thus are supposed to exhibit 
higher ORR activity than that of other PtM alloys, and most certainly higher than pure Pt. 
Although this plot is not all-inclusive, it demonstrates that alloyed platinum shows a similar 
upwards trend in ORR activity as pure metals do. Because of this, extensive research has been 
conducted in the endeavor of further refining these bimetallic catalysts by tuning the 
component, shape, and size of the PtM nanostructures. 8  
==PAGE:12==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
7 
The current understanding leaves the enhanced performance of alloy materials in comparison 
to pure platinum attributed to two phenomena that occur during alloying. 15 
1. Strain and lattice effects: Alloying platinum with different atomic sizes can induce 
strain and lattice distortions in the crystal structure. These strain effects can modify 
the surface morphology and crystallographic orientation, leading to the exposure of 
different crystal facets. Certain facets can enhance catalytic activity by promoting 
oxygen adsorption and facilitating reaction intermediates' transport. This effect can 
also alter the binding strength of oxygen, promoting its activation and altering the 
reaction kinetics. 
2. Ligand effects: Alloying platinum with other metals introduces new electronic and 
geometric properties to the catalyst surface. The alloying elements act as вҖңligands,вҖқ 
so to speak, influencing the electronic structure of the platinum atoms. This 
modification in electronic properties may enhance the adsorption and activation of 
oxygen molecules during the ORR. 
This understanding, along with providing a generalized simulation environment for solid-state 
physics, comes from the density-functional theory (DFT), a computational modeling approach 
used to study the electronic structure and properties of materials, including catalytic 
materials. It provides a theoretical framework for understanding and predicting the behavior 
of electrons in a material based on the concept of the electron density. 7 
In any case, studies show that these nanoalloys, while showing good initial performance, are 
susceptible to degradation in long-term tests due to the effects of dealloying. In addition, 
though this is also true for catalysts of pure platinum, smaller particles are less stable than 
larger ones due to acid leaching. 16,17 Studies have shown that platinum alloys formed using 
rare-earth metals, PtxY and PtxGd, are more resistant to this degenerative effect. 18  
Escudero-Escribano et al. (2016) showcase platinum alloy catalysts synthesized using cluster-
source methods, which are analyzed and evaluated. Generally, they are seen to have excellent 
performance compared to pure platinum. Additionally, the samples alloyed with lanthanides 
(Gd, Y) performed better than alkaline-metal alloys and showed superior stability. 
Additionally, In the works of VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela et al., 19 Hernandez-Fernandez et al., 20 
and Perez-Alonso et al. 21, it is shown that nanoalloys of PtxY and PtxGd have very high ORR 
activity potential, and even after running extended stability tests, still show much higher mass 
activity than that of pure platinum. In addition to the superior performance, VelГЎzquez-
Palenzuela et al. also showcased the size effect of the materials on the ORR performance. As 
seen in Figure 1.5, an ascending trend between the ORR mass activity and the mean particle 
size can be observed, with an optimum particle size found to be between 8-9 nm. 
==PAGE:13==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
8 
 
Figure 1.5 - Mass activity over particle size for various rare-earth metal platinum alloys. Figure 
reprinted from VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela et al., 2015. 19 
This is attributed to the harsh environment that the catalysts are subjected to: as the catalysts 
de-alloy, an overlayer of pure platinum leaches to the surface of the nanoparticles. As the 
surface becomes increasingly dominated by pure platinum, the alloy metal's presence on the 
particle's surface dwindles, punishing catalytic performance. In smaller particles, as the 
surface area is larger, this effect happens much faster, leading to the trend found in Figure 
1.5. 7 Furthermore, as was studied by Stephens et al., 22 the crystalline phase of PtxRE has an 
influence on the stability of the particles in an acidic environment. It is shown that phases 
with a higher intermetallic content of Pt compared to the RE metal are much more resistant 
to acid leaching than materials with a high content of the RE metal. Because of this, it is more 
desirable to obtain the Pt5RE phase rather than the Pt3RE or Pt2RE phases. 
 
1.2.1 Methods of synthesis of platinum alloy catalysts 
There are generally two classes of methods of synthesizing these platinum alloy nano 
catalysts, as reported in the literature. 
1. Physical procedures: 
The physical procedures involve a larger structure of metal, which is broken down through 
some form of physical principle to form nanopowders. These methods include gas 
condensation, sputtering, and laser ablation. 23 However, studies show that these nanoalloys, 
while showing good initial performance, are susceptible to degradation in long-term tests due 
to the effects of dealloying. In addition, though this is also true for catalysts of pure platinum, 
smaller particles are less stable than larger ones due to acid leaching. 16,17  
==PAGE:14==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
9 
Studies have shown that platinum alloys formed using rare-earth metals PtxY and PtxGd are 
more resistant to this degenerative effect. 18 The catalytic materials that are shown in the 
works of VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela et al., 19 Hernandez-Fernandez et al. 20, and Perez-Alonso et 
al. 21 are all synthesized using these methods.  
While these methods produce highly dispersed and uniform bulk nanomaterials, it is 
challenging to scale and have high experimental complexity. 24 As such, it has become 
desirable to develop a more accessible and commercially viable method for the synthesis of 
alloyed nanomaterials, such as: 
2. Chemical procedures: 
Rather than the formation of bulk crystalline nanoparticles, these methods involve the 
synthesis of alloy nanoparticles through chemical processes. Generally, this involves a solid-
state reaction, in which salts of the alloy metals are used to form the precursors, along with 
an amount of carbon black to use as a high surface area support structure. The mixture is 
heated in a reductive atmosphere to reduce the salts to their zero valent forms, from which 
the heat will induce alloying of the pure metals. These chemical routes have a lower 
experimental complexity that may provide the potential for scale-up and use for commercial 
purposes. 
Fellow DTU Energy colleagues Zhou et al. 25 detailed a method used in synthesizing Pt5Ce 
nanomaterials. While the specific and mass activities did show substantial improvements 
from pure platinum, it was highlighted that the control of the size and particle size distribution 
(PSD) of the synthesized was a major challenge and that it was common to see particles 
between 2-20 nm in the same sample.  
More recently, in the work of Hu et al., 1 in a similar method used to synthesize PtNd catalysts, 
it is shown that the process of chemical alloy nanomaterial synthesis is remarkably sensitive, 
with even small changes in reaction conditions resulting in stark changes in the degree of 
alloying and morphology of the final catalyst. It is then suggested that synthesizing both metal 
precursors and inducing alloying between them, all in the same reaction step, may simply not 
provide enough control to control the size and morphology of the synthesized nanoparticles 
properly. It is theorized that synthesizing one or both precursors beforehand and ensuring 
good particle size distribution before alloying may help provide better control over the 
alloying result. 
This work aims to attempt to fulfill this gap in the literature: using a chemical route to 
synthesize platinum nanomaterial precursors with good size and dispersion control and 
subsequently using it in with the alloying procedure similar to what was detailed by Hu et al. 
to produce Pt5Nd nanoalloys. 
==PAGE:15==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
10 
The platinum precursor synthesis experiments will be separated into two sections: 
1. Growth of platinum catalysts using a commercial catalyst as a nucleation seed. 
2. Growth of nanoparticles from platinum nuclei. 
It is hoped that growing a catalyst from a commercially available species will help lower the 
complexity of the reaction and increase accessibility.  
 
1.3 
Synthesis of Platinum nanoparticles 
The synthesis of pure-Pt nanoparticles can be separated into physical, chemical, and, more 
recently, bio-assisted methods. The physical methods involve a larger structure of metal, 
which is then broken down through some form of physical principles to form nanopowders. 
These include gas condensation, sputtering, and laser ablation. 23 These processes often 
provide good control of size distribution and morphology. However, they are highly energy-
intensive, lengthy, and completely non-scalable. Biological methods involve the synthesis of 
nanoparticles employing biological systems, such as bacteria, fungi, viruses, yeasts, 
actinomycetes, and plant extracts. 24  
Very generally, microorganisms absorb target ions from their environment and then turn the 
metal ions into the element metal through enzymes generated by their cellular activities. 
These methods have the advantage of being able to produce NPs without the use of toxic or 
flammable chemicals, providing critical advantages for more sensitive applications, such as 
nanomedicines, antibacterial agents, or other biopharmaceutical applications. However, the 
state of the art of this technology is still quite novel and thus is not yet viable for large-scale 
commercial use. 26 
Lastly, and more relevant for this project, are the chemical methods. Like bio-assisted 
synthesis, rather than starting with large structures which are broken down, they involve the 
aggregation of atoms and molecules to form larger structures. In the chemical synthesis of 
platinum NPs, a platinum salt is dissolved in a solution containing various chemicals that can 
be used to control the final NP properties. A reduction agent is then added, and a 
microemulsion of platinum particles is formed. The addition of surfactants, along with the 
control of pH, concentration, and temperature, can be used to precisely control the size and 
shape of the resulting NPs. 27 Below is a table listing some advantages and disadvantages of 
the different state-of-the-art methods of producing platinum NPs: 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
11 
Properties 
Chemical synthesis 
Physical synthesis 
Biological synthesis 
Productivity 
High 
Low 
High 
Cost 
Low 
High 
Potentially very low 
Energy use 
High 
Very high 
Low 
Stability 
High 
Low 
Low 
Wastage 
High 
High 
Low 
Purity 
High 
Low 
Very high 
Use of chemicals 
Yes 
No 
No 
Scalability 
Currently difficult 
Currently difficult 
Potentially easier 
Table 1.1 - Advantages and disadvantages of different methods of Pt NPs synthesis. Table adapted 
from Gautam et al., 2020  27 
As can be seen from Table 1.1, each method has its pros and cons. However, for targeting 
closely controlled particle size distributions and morphology, the chemical route is generally 
considered the most viable and the easiest to perform. It also provides an easy pathway to 
the formation of hybrid structures. As such, it remains the most common method of platinum 
nanoparticle synthesis and will thus be used as the focal point of this report. 28 
 
1.3.1 Principles of nucleation and growth in chemical NP synthesis 
When discussing the synthesis of platinum NPs by chemical synthesis, it is generally 
understood that this happens in either one of two ways: decomposition or chemical 
reduction. A precursor compound containing platinum (e.g., H2PtCl6, PtCl2(H2O2)2) is either 
decomposed (through, e.g., heating or sonication) or chemically reduced to produce zero-
valent platinum atoms. As the concentration of metal atoms rises, it will eventually reach a 
point of supersaturation in solution, from which the atoms will start to aggregate into small 
clusters via homogenous nucleation. 29  
Once formed, these nuclei will continue to grow so long as the concentration of metal atoms 
remains high enough. If the concentration of atoms drops below this so-called minimum 
supersaturation concentration, no more nucleation events will occur, and the growth of the 
aggregates will cease. With a continued supply of atoms, the nuclei will eventually grow into 
nanocrystals until an equilibrium state is reached between the atoms on the surface of the 
nanocrystals and the atoms in the solution. 30,31 
==PAGE:17==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
12 
 
Figure 1.6 - Plot of atomic concentration against time, illustrating the generation of atoms, 
nucleation, and subsequent growth. Figure reprinted from Younan et al., 2008 29 
This mechanism can be affected in several ways, from changing the solution temperature (and 
thus the rate of reaction for the reduction of the precursor salt) to the concentration of 
precursor salt itself. However, from a general understanding, the final particle size may be 
controlled, and the maximum theoretical size may be reached without adding any chemicals. 
Although the exact mechanism of growth varies depending on many different conditions, 
most of which are not entirely understood due to the impossibility of in-situ measurement of 
the nucleation process. 29  
Besides the particle size, it is also essential to understand and control the form and shape of 
the nanoparticles. The commonly observed structures include face-centered cubic (fcc), body-
centered cubic (bcc), hexagonal close-packed (hcp), and icosahedral (ico) structures. The 
stability and thermophysical preference of each structure type depend on various factors, 
such as the synthesis method, materials used, and the size of the nanoclusters.  
When representing the size of a nanocluster during crystallite growth, it is assumed, and has 
been observed, that the clusters grow in вҖңshells,вҖқ meaning that the growth happens uniformly 
around a seed, one layer of atoms at a time. In literature Au13, Au20, Pt38, M55 (M=Au, Pt, and 
Rh), Pt309, Pd561, Pd1415, and Pd2057 nanoclusters have been observed. Most of these have been 
categorized into what is known as вҖңfull-shell clusters,вҖқ in which neighbor atoms form a closed 
geometry in an icosahedral formation, resulting in the closest packing possible. This formation 
is very stable and shows growth behavior similar to how metal nanocrystals are traditionally 
known to grow. 29,32 
==PAGE:18==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
13 
 
Figure 1.7 вҖ“ Visual representation of full-shell metal clusters with вҖңmagic numbersвҖқ of atoms built 
upon the densest sphere packing. Preprinted from Xia et al., 2009 29 
This representation of particle growth shows the closest correlation to perfect spherical 
growth in nano-crystallites that is known to occur. As the nanoclusters grow, the ico structure 
that characterizes these вҖңfull-shellвҖқ clusters becomes unfavorable due to, e.g., increased 
surface energy and, thus, the increased preference for symmetrical structures.  
It is debated precisely when this happens, though literature suggests it becomes favorable 
under typical synthesis conditions at around 55-250 atoms. Anything larger than four atomic 
layers and fcc is considered the most dominant structure in platinum nanoclusters.  With a 
mean Platinum atomic diameter of 0.135 nm 33, and the average Pt-Pt bond distance of 0.2869 
nm, one may calculate the particle size of this critical point as ranging from 1.84-3.12 nm.  
Past this size, an fcc structure is favored instead.  
 
1.3.2 The Polyol-method 
As was previously mentioned, there are several ways in which one can facilitate the release 
of platinum atoms into solution starting from a platinum salt. Most studies agree that the 
general pathway for the reduction of PtIV salts goes as follows:  
In which a PtIV salt is reduced first to its PtII form and then further into zero-valent Pt. 34,35 The 
rate and dynamics of this reduction are complicated and are a significant point of interest. 
However, it is known that the presence of PtII is a deciding factor for the ultimate release of 
platinum atoms in solution. In a case where the used salt contains a form of PtCl62-, it is 
generally considered that the reduction of PtIV is significantly faster than the reduction of PtII.  
 
PtIV 
              
вҶ’     PtII 
              
вҶ’     Pt0 
 
(1.7) 
==PAGE:19==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
14 
In addition, it has been suggested that the presence of PtCl62- may act as an inhibitor in the 
nucleation process and that no Pt0 will be formed until the concentration of precursor salt 
falls to nearly zero. 35 
 
Figure 1.8 - Illustration of the evolution of different Pt species over the reduction steps. Reprinted 
from Quinson et al., 2020  36 
Figure 1.8 shows roughly how this plays out, as well as how the different species of platinum 
respond to the presence of the unreacted precursor. This dynamic suggests that the rate and 
control of the redox reaction in which the platinum precursor is reduced plays a key role in 
the ultimate formation of the particles. This leads to the polyol method, in which any 
compound containing more than two hydroxyl groups (referred to as вҖңpolyolsвҖқ) is used as 
both a medium and reductant in which the redox reaction can occur. This has many vital 
advantages in the formation of transition metal nanoparticles: 
1. High boiling point: The presence of multiple hydroxyl groups generally means that the 
boiling points of polyols are much higher than other organic solvents. Since polyols, 
by themselves, are weak reducing agents, it is often necessary to increase the 
temperature to facilitate the reaction. With polyols, it is possible to do this without 
worrying about decomposition or solvent loss. 37 
2. High polarity: Due to the hydroxyl groups, polyols can be considered water-like 
solvents. Because of this, they can readily dissolve most simple transition metal salts, 
as well as other polar compounds (such as certain surfactants). 38 
3. Colloidal stability: Due to their surface active properties, as well as their much higher 
viscosity than water (e.g., the viscosity of ethylene glycol and water are 16.1 mPs and 
0.89 mPs, respectively)  
==PAGE:20==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
15 
provide polyols the ability to disperse nanoparticles very well, ensuring that there is 
minimal agglomeration during reaction. 37 This then also allows tighter control of the 
eventual size and the morphology of the synthesized nanoparticles. 
Although, as mentioned, since polyols are weak reducing agents, it is not always possible to 
complete the synthesis with the polyol alone.  
 
Figure 1.9 - Extract from the periodic table featuring the transition-, post-transition-, and the semi-
metals prepared as nanoparticles by the polyol process. Reprinted from FiГ©vet et al., 2018 37 
Figure 1.9 shows (as of 2018) which metals in which a successful method of nanoparticle 
synthesis using polyols has been reported in the literature. As can be seen, the synthesis of 
platinum nanoparticles happens readily in polyols without the addition of additional 
reductants. This may be attributed to the high standard electrode potential of platinum (as 
being E0 [V/SHE] = 1.18 39) and means that smaller polyols (e.g., ethylene glycol) may be used 
in favor of larger ones (e.g., polyethylene glycol), as polymeric solvents often bring additional 
challenges in recovery and purification. As a baseline, ethylene glycol was chosen as the 
solvent and reagent of choice during platinum reduction experiments.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
16 
2      Experimental methods 
The reactants and materials used for experiments and analysis are as follows: 
вҖў Ethylene glycol (99.0%, Sigma-Aldrich) 
вҖў Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550 commercial Pt/C catalyst 
вҖў Umicore Elyst Pt50 0690, commercial PtxCo/C catalyst 
вҖў Vulcan XC 72, carbon black powder 
вҖў Ketjenblack EC-300J, carbon black powder 
вҖў Chloroplatinic(IV) acid hexahydrate (H2PtCl6 пӮ  6H2O) (99.9%, METALOR) 
вҖў Neodymium(III) chloride hexahydrate (NdCl3 пӮ  6H2O) (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) 
вҖў Cyanamide (CN2H2) (99 %, Sigma-Aldrich) 
вҖў Polyvinylpyrrolidone K-90 (PVP) (Sigma-Aldrich) 
вҖў Sulfuric acid, (H2SO4) (99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich) 
вҖў Ethanol, 99.9% 
вҖў MilliQ-grade water 
The use of each individual material is stated in the relevant sections. 
 
2.1 
Polyol-method 
Figure 4.2 shows a flowchart showing the full experimental protocol for the polyol-method 
experiments. This reaction scheme was adapted from the work of Chen and Xing (2005) 40, 
along with other derivative works. 41вҖ“43 Adjustments were made to the use of reactants and 
the general methodology iteratively based on the results of previous experiments, but 
generally, the methodology shown in Figure 2.2 was followed throughout most nanoparticle 
growth experiments. Any exceptions will otherwise be noted.  
The reaction solution was prepared in a 250 mL beaker by adding chloroplatinic acid hexa-
hydrate (H2PtCl6 В· 6H2O) to 100 mL of ethylene glycol (EG). The concentration was varied 
between 0.1 mM and 15 mM, depending on reaction conditions and the target particle size. 
However, for the growth experiments with a seed catalyst, the concentration was always           
1 mM. If applicable, Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP K-90) was also added to the mixture (in a ratio 
of PVP monomers to Pt atoms between 0.1 and 1). The solution was then left under stirring 
for 15 minutes to ensure everything was dissolved.  
 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
17 
2.1.1 Growth from a seed catalyst 
From here, the process diverged slightly depending on the procedure used. As previously 
mentioned, one set of experiments involved the addition of a commercial catalyst directly 
into the mixture, from which it is theorized that the newly nucleated platinum will grow on 
the already existing particles. In this case, a mass of commercial catalyst was weighed out, 
corresponding to the desired growth based on Figure 4.6, was added to the solution, and left 
under sonication for 15 minutes. 
 
Figure 2.1 вҖ“ Picture and legend of the lab setup used for polyol-method-based experiments. 
The solution/slurry was then transferred to a round-bottom flask and affixed to a lab stand, 
along with adding a stir bar. The heating setup was then constructed using a heater/stirrer, 
where a silicone oil bath was placed. The heater was equipped with a thermocouple, which 
was submerged into the oil under low stirring to ensure even heating. Once the setup was 
ready, the oil was heated to 150 oC (unless stated otherwise). The flask was then partly 
submerged in the oil so that the liquid surface was covered with oil, and the stirring was 
turned up to 250 RPM. A picture of the reaction setup, with appropriate legend, can be seen 
in Figure 2.1. 
The reaction solution was then left under heating and stirring for the target growth time (2 
hours unless stated otherwise). During this period, in the case of having added a commercial 
catalyst beforehand, no visible change could be observed at any point, as the solution was 
pitch-black from the beginning. However, theoretically, it was expected that the solution, 
starting from a light yellow, progressively changes color to a darker orange.  
==PAGE:23==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
18 
Although it is not possible, in any scenario, to discern this change without ex-situ 
measurement, as the solution is submerged in dark oil, obscuring any subtle color changes.  
As the reduction progressed, no noticeable change could be observed. Be that as it may, the 
reduction and the subsequent nucleation of platinum atoms, and anchoring to the existing 
platinum catalyst, was continued until it was expected that no more platinum remained in 
solution. During this time, no visible change could be observed, and only ex-situ 
measurements were done by taking samples from the reaction flask to analyze at a later time. 
The solution was then removed from heating, cooled to room temperature with an ice bath, 
then set aside under sonication for 15 minutes. The precursor catalyst would now be 
recovered by centrifugation. The particles were washed once with ethanol and twice with 
MilliQ water, then left to dry in an oven overnight at 60 oC. The powder was then recovered 
the next day and stored in a vial for further use. 
 
2.1.2 Formation of- and growth of platinum nuclei 
In the case without the seed catalyst, the reaction conditions were the same, barring the 
changes in the platinum salt concentration, as mentioned prior. However, this time, as the 
carbon slurry no longer obscured the solution, the changed in the reaction state was much 
more apparent. As the reduction progressed, the solution would suddenly turn completely 
black. This change happened in a matter of seconds as the concentration of PtCl62- was nearly 
exhausted, and the nucleation of platinum particles began. From here began the growth 
phase.  
Like before, the reaction progressed until no more platinum was expected to remain in 
solution. However, this time, as no carbon was present during nucleation, it would be 
introduced after growth had ceased. The platinum particles would be added to a slurry 
containing carbon black. The carbon slurry is prepared by weighing out an amount of carbon 
black, corresponding to the target loading of 50% of platinum in the finished nanoparticles. 
The carbon black used is the Vulcan XC 72R unless stated otherwise. This was then added to 
100 mL of EG and left under stirring for 15 minutes, then under sonication for another                
15 minutes.  The platinum slurry was then added dropwise to the carbon slurry while both 
were under moderate stirring. This was done without a dosing device; however, the rate of 
addition was estimated to be around 5 mL/min. Once the addition was complete, the final 
slurry was left under stirring and sonication for another 10 minutes. Once the reaction and 
addition procedures were complete, like before, the particles were washed once with ethanol 
and twice with MilliQ water, then left to dry in an oven overnight at 60 oC. The powder was 
then likewise recovered the next day and stored in a vial for further use. 
==PAGE:24==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
19 
                           a) 
                                                            b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2 - Flowcharts of the procedures used in polyol-method-based experiments.  
a) Experiments with a seed catalyst,      b) Experiments without a seed catalyst. 
==PAGE:25==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
20 
2.2 
Pt-Nd/C nanoalloy synthesis 
The Pt-Nd alloy synthesis was performed using a method adapted from the work of Hu et al. 
(2021) 1 detailing a solid-state reaction using a tube furnace and readily available lab 
chemicals. The paper described the synthesis of Pt-RE alloys, where the metals and ions are 
first immobilized in a polymeric carbon nitride, generated through heating a nitrogen-rich 
compound in the presence of Pt and the RE salts. In this case, the method is adapted to use 
instead the Pt/C catalysts synthesized using the method detailed in Section 3 as the source of 
platinum and introduce Nd into the system in the form of NdCl3. The synthesis is otherwise 
separated into two steps. 
             Step 1:  Polymerization 
The precursor Pt/C catalyst is mixed with a Neodymium salt, NdCl3, and a nitrogen-rich 
compound, cyanamide (CN2H2). The mixture is made on a molar basis with Nd to Pt ratio of 
1.5 and a CN2H2 to Nd ratio of 31. This exact mixture was chosen based on the prior work of 
Hu et al., however, also the work of supervisor Amado AndrГ©s VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela, having 
previously done extensive experimentation, tuning various parameters of the synthesis in 
order to achieve the best result. This was done through the doping of the Umicore Elyst Pt50 
0550 catalyst with Nd. In theory, this ratio of Nd:Pt should result in the molar template 
needed to form the Pt5Nd/C nanoalloy. The components are mixed in an agate mortar and 
pestle. After mixing, a paste-like slurry is obtained, proposed by Hu et al. as the result of the 
hydrolysis between the cyanamide and the water-containing Nd salt. This вҖңpasteвҖқ is then 
transferred to a glass crucible and placed in a tube oven setup, pictured in Figure 2.3. The 
setup is sealed, a vacuum is pulled, and replaced with an Ar atmosphere. 12 
 
Figure 2.3 - Image of the synthesis setup and the products located at three different positions.  
==PAGE:26==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
21 
The mixture is heated in two steps. First, the mixture is heated to 180 oC at 20 oC/min and left 
to dwell for 20 minutes. This aims to eliminate any chemically bonded water present in the 
system so as not to interfere with the cyanamide polymerization. The temperature is then 
raised to 650 oC at 20 oC/min to fully induce the polymerization of the cyanamide into a 
network of its trimer, Melamine, creating the carbon-nitrogen network used to encapsulate 
the metals, stabilizing then for the alloying step. During this process, two by-products can be 
seen forming through the heating process that are seen to escape the product-boat.  
These are primarily products formed from the heating of nitrogen compounds (ammonia and 
NH4+) that are either sublimated and get stuck on the walls of the tubs where it is not as hot 
or vaporized and carried away by the water vapor as a white smoke. These products appear 
as the вҖңproduct-wallвҖқ and the вҖңproduct-gasвҖқ, as seen in Figure 2.3. 
             Step 2:  Alloying 
After the product had completely cooled from step 1, it was taken out of the setup and 
appeared to be a condensed вҖңpelletвҖқ at this stage. It is taken back into the mortar, crushed 
back down into a fine powder, transferred back into a clean product boat, and then back into 
the tube furnace.  
This time, the vacuum is replaced with a concentrated 40 vol% H2/Ar atmosphere. The system 
is once again heated to 180 oC at 20 oC/min and left to dwell for 20 minutes. This is to make 
absolutely sure that there is no moisture remaining. The system is then heated to 550 oC at 
20 oC/min and left to dwell for an hour. During this time, the Nd3+ ions are reduced by the H2 
to zero-valent Nd, and the heat over time causes the two metals to alloy together. Figure 2.4 
shows the heating profiles used for both steps of the alloying process. 
 
Figure 2.4 - Heating profiles of the two steps of the microalloying procedure. 
==PAGE:27==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
22 
The temperature, fractions of components in the precursor mixture, H2 concentration, and 
reaction time are all factors that have been tested and investigated, and it remains an ongoing 
challenge to find the best conditions to produce the best conditions to successfully produce 
the alloy using all the available platinum, as well as producing alloy of the desired phase. The 
results are evaluated with XRD, SEM, TEM, and RDE and can be seen in Section 5.  
After the synthesis is finished, the sample is washed in 0.5 M H2SO4 overnight, after which it 
is recovered through centrifugation, washed 3x with MilliQ water, and stored for future use. 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
23 
3      Characterization methods 
3.1 
X-ray Diffraction (XRD) 
XRD analysis was done as an initial form of characterization to find the crystallite size, verify 
particle growth, and verify alloy formation during synthesis, and was done as a verifying step. 
A sweep speed of 0.032 o/s was used at a generator power of 40kV/15mA. The Malvern 
PANalytical Aeris benchtop XRD system was used, using zero-background silicon backplates 
to support the samples. 
 
Figure 3.1 - The Malvern PANalytical Aeris, used for XRD measurements. 
The resulting data was analyzed using the Rigaku PDXL software, using the Whole-Powder-
Pattern Decomposition (WPPD) in the least-squared mode to fit the data.  
The crystallite size (рқңҸ) is then found using the Scherrer equation, written as: 
In which рқңҸ is the mean ordered size of the crystalline domains, K is the ScherrerвҖҷs constant 
(most commonly taken as 0.9), рқңҶ is the X-ray wavelength of the beam used,  рқӣҪ is the Full width 
at half maximum (FWHM) of the peak, and рқңғ is the Bragg angle. 44 It is important to note that 
the size obtained from this equation is only to be used as a guiding value as to the actual 
particle size of the sample, as equating the crystal size to the particle size assumes that the 
sample is monocrystalline. This is not always the case, especially for large particles and alloys. 
 
рқңҸ=
рқҗҫрқңҶ
рқӣҪcos рқңғ 
(3.1) 
==PAGE:29==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
24 
However, compared to a baseline sample with the same crystallinity, it may still be used to 
verify growth.  
 
3.2 
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDX) 
EDX analysis was done using a Zeiss EVO MA10 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) equipped 
with an Oxford Instruments X-max 150 EDX detector. The microscope was run with an             
EHT = 15.00 kV at a working distance of 8-9 mm, running in low-resolution mode (<3k 
magnification). EDX was used in this project to quantify the metal loading of the prepared 
samples. This was done by preparing pellets: around 10 mg of a sample was loaded into a 
powder mold, then put into a hydraulic press under around 5 tonnes of pressure for                     
15 minutes. The pellet was then retrieved and pressed onto a piece of carbon tape, which was 
then attached to a metal stand to load samples into the EVO MA10. 
 
Figure 3.2 - Example of a "pellet" of prepared catalyst loaded onto carbon tape. 
The idea was that forming the sample into a pellet thick enough would prevent the electron 
beam from the microscope from piercing through it and detecting the carbon tape below.       
As this is an unconventional method of determining metal loading, a series of the synthesized 
samples from this report were analyzed through Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA), and the 
loading obtained was compared with those obtained through EDX using the method 
described. 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
25 
           a) 
 
 
               b) 
 
Figure 3.3 - Results of comparison of metal loading determination between EDX and TGA, along 
with the percentage error between the two methods in each sample 
a)  Metal loadings of EDX and TGA,     b)  The absolute error of EDX measurements. 
The results of this can be seen in Figure 3.3. While the metal loadings obtained were never 
precisely the same, with the error varying between 4-10%, it was deemed satisfactory to use 
EDX as a guideline for obtaining the metal loading. However, if a more exact is desired, 
another method of determination, such as TGA or ICP, should be used instead. 
 
3.3 
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) 
TEM images were taken using the FEI Tecnai F20 microscope from the DTU Center for Electron 
Nanoscopy (CEN). The images were taken with the help of DTU Energy researcher and 
supervisor Amado AndrГ©s VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela.  
The images created from imaging exhibit varying contrast depending on the thickness or 
structures of the material analyzed. Images were taken at a variety of magnifications to try 
and resolve the material as best as possible. In general, the TEM images were used for the 
purpose of characterizing the prepared catalysts: determining the dispersion, morphology, 
and general appearance of the catalyst at various magnifications. In addition, the TEM images 
were used to determine the particle size distribution (PSD) by manually counting and 
measuring each particle using the ImageJ image processing program. At least 400 metal 
particles from at least five different TEM images, recorded at different regions, were counted 
to ensure the best possible distribution of particles, producing an aggregate of the overall 
PSD. All TEM images shown in this report are at a magnification of 195,000x, except for a few 
exceptions.  
==PAGE:31==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
26 
3.4 
Measurement of the ORR activity in catalytic materials 
The measurement of catalytic materials is typically done using voltammetric techniques. 
Typically, a simple three-electrode system is used, in which they are submerged in a suitable 
electrolyte. A potential is then applied to the working electrode, and the resulting current 
between the working electrode and the counter electrode is measured. This results in a plot 
of the measured current against the applied potentials: a voltammogram. This remains the 
most widely used technique due to its high sensitivity, low cost, and easy reproducibility 
across a wide variety of equipment. 
Voltammetry is typically separated into two categories: Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and 
cyclic voltammetry (CV). In LSVs, a potential is applied at a lower bound рқ‘Ҳрқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ, and is then 
increased with a fixed scan rate рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҳ/рқ‘‘рқ‘Ў, until an upper bound рқ‘Ҳрқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ is reached.  
In CVs, however, the potential cycles back and forth between the upper and lower bounds. 
The current and the potential will then continuously produce graph cycles until the desired 
number of cycles рқ‘Ғ is reached, and the experiment is halted.  
 
Figure 3.4 - Sketch of a CV scheme. 
The shape of the resulting voltammogram depends on various factors, including the potential 
range used, the scan rate, the electrolyte used, and of course, the catalyst being tested. LSV 
and CV are prominent techniques commonly used to identify a given species' oxidation and 
reduction kinetics and can also provide critical information regarding electron transfer-
initiated chemical reactions. 
==PAGE:32==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
27 
 
Figure 3.5 - Base CV for a monocrystalline, pure-platinum catalyst, in which the relevant 
interactions have been sketched.  
Figure 3.5 shows a base CV for a pure platinum catalyst in 0.1 M perchloric acid. In this 
context, a base CV denotes a CV performed in a non-interacting gas-saturated electrolyte 
(Argon, in this case). From here, it can be seen how the current responds to the H+ and OH- 
adsorption and desorption onto the platinum catalyst. This may then be used to investigate 
the behavior of catalysts under non-reactive conditions.  
Concerning this project, it may be used to identify catalyst properties before and after 
synthesis procedures and any changes that may happen to the catalyst during 
experimentation.  
When measuring the ORR activity of a catalyst, the same CV technique is performed,                 
but rather than saturating the electrolyte with a non-reactive gas, it is instead saturated with 
oxygen. The voltammogram will now produce a polarization curve of the ORR, which may be 
used to quantify the reaction rate and, more specifically, the specific activity of a catalyst. 
==PAGE:33==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
28 
 
Figure 3.6 - ORR polarization curve, as measured for the Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550 commercial 
catalyst, used as an example of a typical RDE LSV curve for a rotating Pt electrode in an acidic 
electrolyte saturated with oxygen.  
Figure 3.6 shows an ORR polarization curve measured for the Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550 
commercial catalyst using a rotating disc electrode (RDE). Additionally, the theoretical 
thermodynamic limit, U0 = 1.17 V is drawn in red. 7 The curve may be separated into three 
sections, characterized by which physical parameter is the controlling factor for the ORR 
kinetics: 45 
вҖў Kinetic-controlled region: The right region of the polarization curve, colored in red. 
Here, the overpotential is not sufficient to be able to drive the ORR in any substantial 
manner. The diffusion of reactants is much higher than the reaction kinetics. As such, 
the concentration of oxygen on the surface of the electrode is the same as in the bulk 
solution. 
вҖў Kinetic-diffusion controlled region:  The middle region of the polarization curve, 
colored in purple. Here, the overpotential becomes high enough that the ORR rapidly 
accelerates and continues doing so until the rate of reaction overcomes the mass 
transfer of oxygen, as seen in the diffusion-controlled region.   
вҖў Diffusion-controlled region: The left region of the polarization curve, colored in blue. 
Here, the reaction of oxygen on the electrode becomes so fast that the mass transfer 
of oxygen into solution, and thus onto the electrode, becomes the limiting factor. 
Assuming an ideal electrode where diffusion is constant, this results in a flat response 
with increasing overpotential, as the oxygen on the electrode is consumed almost 
immediately. At what overpotential this happens depends on the particular 
electrochemical setup, amount of stirring, and other physical parameters.  
==PAGE:34==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
29 
The kinetic-diffusion controlled region is used to evaluate the activity of electrocatalysts, as it 
is the most representative of such, reflecting both the effects of surface reaction and mass 
diffusion. In the literature, it is generally accepted that the current measured at an 
overpotential of 0.9 V is used when evaluating platinum electrocatalysts. However, as 
mentioned, the current measured at any point is governed both by the ORR kinetics and also 
by the mass transfer kinetics. As such, it is necessary to be able to discern how much of the 
current can be attributed to the electrocatalyst. Typically, this is not easy to do. However, in 
a situation with a big difference between the contribution of diffusion versus reaction, such 
as if the reaction kinetics are sluggish and diffusion is fast, it becomes possible to discern one 
from the other. 
One way this may be accomplished is by using a rotating disk electrode (RDE), in which a 
potential is applied to the working electrode, which then rotates during experiments. This has 
two effects: 
1. Creates a laminar flow around the electrode, according to the Reynolds number. This 
helps convey a steady stream of material from the bulk solution to the electrode 
surface. 
2. Provides mixing through convection, homogenizing the bulk solution.  
In fluid dynamics, flow by circulation follows principles of contour. Kelvin's circulation 
theorem states that the material of a contour in a circulating, closed system remains constant 
over time: 46 
Where О“ is the circulation around a material contour C(t). In practice, this means that, in the 
portion of fluid closest to the electrode, the oxygen concentration can be seen as relatively 
stagnant. This, along with the improved mixing, stabilizes the concentration gradient between 
the bulk solution and the electrode surface, thus also stabilizing the diffusion of oxygen, 
eliminating the need for involving complex fluid diffusion principles when determining the 
kinetic current from a polarization curve. This also allows the вҖңflat-lineвҖқ diffusion-limited 
pattern to occur, as seen in Figure 3.6.  
 
DО“
рқҗ·рқ‘Ў= 0 
(3.2) 
==PAGE:35==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
30 
 
Figure 3.7 - Example of a Koutecky-Levich Study. Reprinted from Peroff, 2023. 47 
Figure 3.7 shows an example of a so-called Koutecky-Levich Study, which showcases the effect 
of different rotation speeds on the shape of the voltammogram. The mass-transport limiting 
current occurs for lower rotation speeds at much lower overpotentials than at higher 
rotations. Additionally, as the rotation speed increases, so too does the maximum 
electrochemical activity, which can be seen by the slope of the potential at the point of 
рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҳ/рқ‘‘рқҗј = 0. This distortion of the ideal sigmoidal shape of the voltammogram can be used 
as a way to measure the standard rate constant, рқ‘ҳ0, although this wonвҖҷt be done in this 
report. 
Using an RDE setup, and thus assuming that the limiting current is constant, one may establish 
the KouteckГҪвҖ“Levich equation, relating the current at the electrode directly to the kinetic 
activity and mass transport of the reactants: 
Where рқҗјрқ‘Җ is the measured current, рқҗјрқҗҫ is the kinetic current and рқҗјрқҗҝ is the mass-transport 
limiting current. Using this relationship and knowing the limiting current from the ORR 
polarization curve, one may find the kinetic current describing the activity promoted by the 
relevant electrocatalyst at any point on a voltammogram. 
Another critical unit of measurement is the so-called Electrochemical surface area (ECSA), 
which measures the area of a catalyst surface that is electrochemically active. It can be 
determined by measuring either the charge it takes to adsorb and desorb a monolayer of 
hydrogen in the so-called hydrogen underpotential deposition (Qupd) area of a CV  
 
1
рқҗјрқ‘Җ
= 1
рқҗјрқҗҫ
+ 1
рқҗјрқҗҝ
 
(3.3) 
==PAGE:36==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
31 
or to oxidize a monolayer of CO to CO2. 48 When determined using the Qupd, an expression is 
used as follows: 
Where Lpt is the working electrode loading of platinum, Ageo is the geometric surface area of 
the electrode used (which, in the case of this report, is 0.196 cm2), and О“pt is the charge 
capacity of hydrogen on platinum per surface area. Classically, О“pt is taken at a value of             
210 ОјC/cm2, as was reported by Kinoshita et al. (1977). 49 However, this value is not absolute 
and is only used as a guideline, in addition, to enable proper comparison of materials between 
different works.  
When using the CO stripping method, the catalyst surface is first saturated with CO. The 
вҖңstrippingвҖқ refers to the oxidation of CO to CO2, thus removing it from the catalyst surface. 
The area of the subsequent oxidation peaks on the resulting CV can then be used to calculate 
the ECSA of the catalyst: 
Remembering that the oxidation of CO is a 2-electron process, so the corresponding charge 
should be cut in half from the case with hydrogen. 
As described by many prior works, both methods are standard when obtaining the ECSA. 
However, as was reported by Garrick et al. (2017), 50 the CO stripping method is preferred 
when working with nanoalloys, as the altered electric properties of alloys may weaken the 
hydrogen adsorption capacity and could thus possibly result in underestimating the ECSA if 
determined using hydrogen. Thus, the CO stripping method is used instead. 
 
3.4.1 Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) 
The setup used for CV measurements was adapted from the work of advisor Benedikt Axel 
Brandes 51 detailing a typical 3-electrode setup. The setup consisted of a glass enclosure that 
would be filled with electrolyte, with compartments for each of the electrodes, along with an 
insert for a gas to bubble directly into the electrolyte. The working electrode consisted of the 
prepared catalyst deposited onto glassy carbon, and the counter electrode was a simple 
platinum wire.  The electrolyte used was 0.1 M HClO4. 
The cell was boiled in fresh Milli-Q water for 30 minutes several times before use. The 
reference used was a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). It was prepared by filling the 
holder of the reference electrode with electrolyte.  
 
ECSAPt [m2/g] =
Qupd
О“Pt вӢ…LPt вӢ…Ageo
 
(3.4) 
 
ECSAPt[m2/g] =
рқҗ»CO stripping
О“Pt вӢ…LPt вӢ…Ag
вӢ…1
2 
(3.5) 
==PAGE:37==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
32 
The holder contains a platinum wire that would be connected as the working electrode. The 
platinum wire, which would otherwise function as the counter electrode, would be connected 
as both the counter and the reference electrode. All wires were connected to the Biologic VSP 
multichannel potentiostat, and a negative current of -5 mA was applied for 15 minutes to fill 
the upper half of its inner compartment with hydrogen. From then on, this compartment, 
now filled with hydrogen, would function as the RHE used during experimentation. The setup 
was otherwise used as a typical 3-electrode system.   
 
Figure 3.8 - Picture of the RDE setup with appropriate legend. 
An ink was prepared by weighing an amount of the prepared catalyst corresponding to a wt.% 
of platinum in the finished ink of around 2-3%. The exact mass was dependent on the metal 
loading of the used catalyst. Typically, this was around 4-5 mg. This was added to 3.5g of 
isopropanol, 1.2g of Milli-Q water, and 9 mg of a Nafion 5 wt.% solution. This mixture was 
used, as it previously proved to provide consistent results of making an ink with a good 
enough dispersion to use during testing. However, in cases where the dispersion was not good 
enough with the above recipe, slightly more isopropanol and Nafion solution were added until 
a good dispersion was achieved. To form the film, around 8-9 mg was then deposited onto 
the glassy carbon surface of a glassy carbon (GC) electrode: a glassy carbon rod encased in 
Teflon with a surface diameter of 5 mm. The amount of ink deposited corresponds to 3-4 mg 
platinum loading.  
The solution was dried by rotating it in the RDE setup, slowly ramping up the rotation speed 
to around 700 RPM, ensuring that the material deposited was evenly distributed as the liquid 
phase dried.  
==PAGE:38==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
33 
This method was found to produce a good, uniform firm on the glassy carbon surface. The 
surface of the GC electrode was wet with a droplet of Milli-Q water to prevent the formation 
of a bubble as the electrode was submerged in the electrolyte. 
The ORR tests could begin once the glassy carbon electrode had been prepared and the cell 
was filled with fresh electrolyte and affixed in the proper place. The electrochemical testing 
performed was done using the following protocol: 
1. RHE preparation: The RHE is prepared using the method described earlier in this 
section. Once it was certain that the reference electrode compartment was 
completely filled with H2, the setup was restored to the proper 3-electrode 
configuration. 
2. Catalyst conditioning: The solution is saturated with Ar, and the potential is scanned 
between 0.025 V and 1.025 V three times at 200 mV/s. This was continued until a 
stable CV curve was achieved, which usually took around 400-600 cycles.  
At this point, the electrolyte is removed from the cell and filled with fresh electrolyte. 
3. Uncompensated electrolyte resistance (Ru) measurement: While under the open 
circuit potential, a signal of 10 mV is applied in the frequency range from 200 kHz to 
10 Hz. The resistance from the interception of the Nyquist impedance plot is recorded. 
4. RHE correction: The solution is saturated with H2, and the open circuit voltage (OCV) 
is measured, corresponding to the difference between the working and reference 
electrodes.  
5. ORR activity measurement: The electrolyte is saturated with O2. The electrode is then 
scanned between 0.025 V and 0.025 V at 20 mV/s while rotating at 1600 RPM. This is 
done until a stable CV curve is achieved and is subsequently recorded. 
6. ECSA determination through CO stripping: CO is bubbled into the electrolyte for          
~5 minutes to saturate the catalyst surface with CO, after which Ar is bubbled into the 
electrolyte for ~15 minutes until all the CO has been removed from solution. The 
potential is then scanned from 0.025 V to 1.025 V for a couple of cycles, and the 
resulting CV is used to obtain the ECSA. 
7. Accelerated stability test (AST): The potential is scanned from 0.025 V to 1.025 V in 
fresh electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mV/s. Depending on the catalyst used, this is 
done for at least 10,000 cycles, sometimes up to 40,000. After the cycling has finished, 
the corrections, ORR measurements, and CO stripping are performed a second time, 
and the results are compared to the first run of measurements.  
Once all relevant measurements have been taken, the RDE setup is dismantled, and the cell 
is again boiled in Milli-Q water before storing it for subsequent use. 
==PAGE:39==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
34 
4      Modeling of particle size by atomistic simulation 
For the Pt-Nd synthesis, Pt/C was to be used as a precursor. For this purpose, a commercial 
catalyst (Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550) was initially chosen as a seed for nanoparticle growth. 
However, before experiments could be conducted, it was decided that a model for the 
estimation of particle size growth would be necessary. To do this, TEM images were taken for 
the commercial sample, and they were used to obtain a particle size distribution using the 
software ImageJ, in which the scaling data could be used to obtain the size of particles by 
manually measuring them. (see Section 3.3) 
 
Figure 4.1 вҖ“ Selected TEM images of the Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550 commercial Pt/C catalyst. 
Before estimation is done, a set of guiding assumptions is established: 
1. The particles are spherical. While this is a generous assumption, it is necessary to 
reduce the computational complexity of the problem relative to this report. A 
correction for this will be made later. 
2. The particles grow equally in all directions. From the literature, it is known that this is 
not the case and that certain facets of Pt-particles will grow faster in certain 
conditions. However, correcting for this is outside of the scope of this report. 
3. The size distribution of the particles will remain the same before and after growth.  
All of the particles are separated into ultra-fine bins (рқ‘ҳрқ‘–) with a bin size of 0.1 nm and their 
respective frequencies are found. The fraction of total particles x is taken by dividing the 
frequency of an individual bin by the sum of frequencies: 
==PAGE:40==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
35 
Assuming spherical particles, we can calculate the volume fraction (рқ‘үрқ‘“рқ‘ҹрқ‘Һрқ‘һ) of each bin and add 
them all together to get an aggregate volume (рқ‘үрқ‘Һрқ‘”рқ‘”) of the measured particles: 
 
This volume may then be converted into mass, knowing that the used commercial catalyst is 
a Umicore Elyst 550, containing 50 wt.% of Pt. It is known that the density of platinum at          
25 oC is 21.45 g/cm3 (= 2.145 пӮ  107 g/m3), and of carbon is 2.01 g/cm3 (= 2.01 пӮ  106 g/m3). Thus: 
The volumes may then be converted to mass as follows: 
A situation now arises where one would like to know how much Pt should exist in solution 
along with the commercial catalyst to achieve a specific size. The average size of the 
commercial catalyst, as determined from the TEM analysis, is 4.84 nm. An optimistic target 
size of 10.47 nm is chosen to add 6 nm to the initial average particle size of the commercial 
catalyst. To do this, 6 nm is added to every bin in the initial histogram analysis, and the 
volumetric calculations are performed again, resulting in a new aggregated sample mass. We 
may then calculate the ratio between this вҖңtargetвҖқ mass and the initial one of the unchanged 
catalyst, calling it the particle growth factor denoted by the symbol ПҲ: 
This would then mean that to achieve the target size of 10.47 nm, the final catalyst would 
contain, by weight, 10.66x more platinum than it did initially. This assumes that the particle 
size distribution remains unchanged after the particles have grown. This calculation loop is 
then performed for a multitude of growth targets. 
 
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘–=
рқ‘“рқ‘–
вҲ‘
рқ‘“рқ‘–
рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘–=1
 
(4.1) 
 
рқ‘үрқ‘“рқ‘ҹрқ‘Һрқ‘һ,рқ‘–= 4
3рқңӢвӢ…(рқ‘ҳрқ‘–
2 )
3
вӢ…рқ‘Ҙрқ‘– 
(4.2) 
 
рқ‘үрқ‘Һрқ‘”рқ‘”= вҲ‘рқ‘үрқ‘“рқ‘ҹрқ‘Һрқ‘һ,рқ‘–
рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘–=1
 
(4.3) 
 
рқңҢрқҗё550 =
2.01 вӢ…106 рқ‘”
рқ‘ҡ3 + 2.145 вӢ…107 рқ‘”
рқ‘ҡ3
2
= 1.173 вӢ…107 рқ‘”
рқ‘ҡ3 
(4.4) 
 
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘”рқ‘”= рқ‘үрқ‘Һрқ‘”рқ‘”вӢ…рқңҢрқҗё550 
(4.5) 
 
рқң“= рқ‘ҡМ…10 рқ‘ӣрқ‘ҡ
рқ‘ҡМ…4.47 рқ‘ӣрқ‘ҡ
= 7.424 вӢ…10вҲ’18 рқ‘”
6.967 вӢ…10вҲ’19 рқ‘”= 10.66 
(4.6) 
==PAGE:41==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
36 
 
Figure 4.2 - Expected particle size, plotted against the particle growth factor ПҲ. 
Figure 4.2 shows the resulting relationship between the particle growth factor ПҲ and the 
expected particle size based on the above calculations. From observation, the amount of 
platinum needed for growth increases by the nature of a power law, as is expected from the 
spherical assumption that was made previously. As such, when judging what the 
concentration of platinum should be in solution during the growth experiments, this 
relationship may be used as a guideline by imposing a limiting factor in the amount of 
platinum available for nucleation and growth.  
To further optimize the model, additional assumptions need to be corrected. When 
approximating the particle size of the nanoparticles, it is preferred to use a spherical 
approximation, as it vastly simplifies the computational complexity of the problem at hand. 
However, the ability to use such an approximation is highly dependent on which stage of the 
growth process the particle has reached. In general, ico-structures particles are more 
symmetrical than fcc ones and will thus show a better correlation to perfect spherical 
particles. However, despite this, as can intuitively be understood, this discrepancy between 
the actual particle structure and a spherical assumption will increase as the particle grows. 
This difference becomes large enough for very small nanoparticles, so correction is necessary 
to achieve accurate results. 
To correct this, it was opted to construct an atomic simulation of fcc-structured platinum 
nanoparticles and use this to generate a correlation between the real size of a particle and its 
spherical counterpart, assuming equal volume.  
This is done using the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE), a set of Python modules for 
setting up, manipulating, running, visualizing, and analyzing atomistic simulations.  
==PAGE:42==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
37 
It is an open-source project, co-developed by researchers from DTU, and the code is freely 
available under the GNU LGPL license. 52 For the purposes of this project, ASE contains 
modules for creating nanoparticles with a given crystal structure by specifying either the 
number of layers in different directions or by making a Wulff construction.  
In order to construct an fcc cluster, ASE takes the following arguments: 
вҖў Element(s): This is only used if no physical information is otherwise provided and as a 
cosmetic factor. 
 
вҖў Surfaces: Specification of the Miller indices of the surfaces of the particle that the user 
wishes to specify. In this case, they are Pt(100), Pt(110) and Pt(111) 
 
вҖў Layers: The atomistic size of the layers, constructed around the center, corresponding 
to the Miller indices in the вҖңsurfacesвҖқ argument. 
 
вҖў Lc: The lattice constant. For platinum, this is set to 3.962 Г….  
Doing so produces a visual representation of the specified nanocluster, along with a set of 
atomic data, based on which elements have been selected and the lattice structure 
generated. 
 
Figure 4.3 - Visual representation generated by ASE for fcc-structured platinum nanoparticles with 
1, 2, and 3 atomic shells, respectively. The atomic scale is 0.82.  
ASE can then calculate the size of the simulated nanocluster by one of two methods. 
вҖў volume: This method returns the diameter of a sphere, given the same total volume 
as the generated cluster. 
 
вҖў shape: This method returns the averaged diameter calculated from the directions 
given by the defined surfaces. 
==PAGE:43==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
38 
As such, these two methods can describe the two scenarios we wish to form a correlation 
between.  
We may then calculate particle sizes for various nanoclusters, increasing in size, 
representative of the size range relevant to this report. This is done only under the bounds of 
the performed simulation. The absolute percentage error is then taken between the вҖңvolumeвҖқ 
particle size and the вҖңshapeвҖқ particle size: 
Which then provides a measure of the relative error that can be perceived by assuming a 
spherical morphology. Plotting the values calculated from equation (4.7) against the particle 
sizes calculated using the вҖңshapeвҖқ method in ASE, we may find the following plot: 
 
Figure 4.4 - Particle size, plotted against the absolute error of the spherical assumption, simulated 
using ASE. 
Figure 4.4 shows clearly how the absolute error between the two calculated particle sizes 
decreases as the particle size increases. As such, the smaller the particles that are analyzed, 
the more necessary it becomes to make this correction. It is important to note, however, that 
the simulation only models individual particles and does so while trying to force an fcc-
structure, even while calculating using a number of particles that would result in uneven 
growth. This is why the calculated errors fluctuate so wildly. As the particles grow much larger, 
this error will stabilize, and this zig-zag effect will disappear. 
Plotting the two calculated particle sizes against each other yields the following: 
 
Error = |1 вҲ’рқ‘‘"рқ‘ в„Һрқ‘Һрқ‘қрқ‘’"
рқ‘‘"рқ‘Јрқ‘ңрқ‘ҷрқ‘ўрқ‘ҡрқ‘’"
| 
(4.7) 
==PAGE:44==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
39 
 
Figure 4.5 - Particle size of an fcc-structured particle against the diameter of a spherical structure. 
This provides a linear correlation that may be used as a rough estimation of how large a 
nanoparticle is expected to be, knowing the diameter of the corresponding assumed spherical 
structure. We may then use this correlation to adjust the particle size estimations found prior, 
to yield the following plot: 
 
Figure 4.6 - Expected particle size, plotted against the particle growth factor ПҲ (using an initial size 
based on the Umicore Pt50 commercial catalyst), for both the uncorrected particle size and the 
particle size corrected using the correlation from Figure 4.5. 
Figure 4.6 shows how this correction changes the expected particle size after growth. 
Generally, the real particle size is expected to be slightly larger than those with a pure 
spherical form factor. This new correlation is thus what will be used to estimate the necessary 
platinum concentration during experimentation. 
==PAGE:45==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
40 
5      Results and discussion 
5.1 
Platinum nanoparticle growth - modification of a seed catalyst 
The experimentation of growth using an existing Pt/C catalyst as a seed for additional 
platinum growth was conducted from the experiment scheme A found in Figure 2.2. PVP was 
not used during these experiments. Initially, the growth was done using the Umicore Elyst 
Pt50 0550 commercial catalyst as the seed. The particle size of the catalysts of growth was 
estimated by XRD using the methodology detailed in Section 3.1. 
           a) 
 
 
                  b) 
 
Figure 5.1 вҖ“ Results of polyol growth experiments conducted using the Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550 
and the XRD spectra for all three samples. PVP:Pt = 0 
a)  XRD spectra,     b)  Particle size compared to the predicted particle size 
The results of doing so are shown in Figure 5.1. It is seen that the particles show substantial 
growth using the proposed method. Additionally, the accuracy of the size estimation model 
is seen to be quite good at larger values of ПҲ. However, as the value of ПҲ decreases, and thus 
also the ratio between platinum salt in solution and platinum of the pre-existing catalyst, the 
size of the crystallites is seen to fall short of expectations. This may suggest that, at lower 
values of ПҲ, the particle size distribution is not maintained from the seed catalyst and that a 
smaller platinum salt presence could encourage the formation of new particles of smaller size 
rather than growing from existing ones. 
TEM images were taken using the methodology outlined in Section 3.3 to investigate this and 
further characterize the grown catalysts.  
==PAGE:46==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
41 
As shown in Figure 5.2, several observations can be made. Firstly, the particles show heavy 
agglomeration, to the point that it has become difficult to reasonably discern the particles 
from one another.  
This effect is more exaggerated for higher values of ПҲ. In certain regions, the z-contrast 
difference is so poor that the TEM images come out as almost entirely black, making the 
proper determination of the particle size distribution impractical. 
           a) 
 
 
                  b) 
 
           c) 
 
 
                  d)  
 
Figure 5.2 - TEM images of the catalysts grown from the Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550. 
a) рққҚ = 1 (before growth),     b) рққҚ = 2.9,     c) рққҚ = 5.4,     d) рққҚ = 10.6 
==PAGE:47==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
42 
Secondly, the loading of platinum is much higher after growth. Although this is inconclusive 
from merely looking at the TEM images, it is estimated to be upwards of 90% in the case of  
ПҲ = 10.6. Here, it is essential to note that the nominal platinum loading of the Umicore Elyst 
Pt50 0550 that was used was 47.84%.  
As such, this result is not unexpected but results in synthesizing catalysts with a much higher 
platinum loading than is desirable from a practical standpoint.  Any catalyst grown from the 
Elyst Pt50 would thus have, at minimum, a platinum loading of 50%. However, despite this, it 
is clear that the particles have grown substantially. It also seems that the proposed method 
has favored the growth of existing particles rather than the nucleation of new ones, i.e., there 
do not appear to have formed a large fraction of particles that are smaller than the smallest 
ones in the unmodified catalyst. 
 
в–  Mean = 4.47 nm, St.d. = 1.16,     в–  Mean = 5.85 nm, St.d. = 1.80 
Figure 5.3 - Particle size distributions (and normal distributions thereof) of the cases of рққҚ = 1 
(before growth) and рққҚ = 2.9. 
Looking at the particle size distributions in Figure 5.3, one may observe a shift in the normal 
distributions, where the particles have grown. Although it also seems that the particles have 
not grown uniformly, an assumption made during the size estimation. This has caused the 
particle size distribution to вҖңsmear,вҖқ making the normal distribution wider and the standard 
deviation greater than before the modification. Intuitively, an uneven particle dispersion will 
result in uneven growth. As such, seeing as how poor the dispersion ended up, this result falls, 
in part, within expectations. To correct this, lower loadings and better dispersion are desired. 
Incurring this while still using the growth method, additional experiments were conducted by 
further lowering the value of ПҲ, and therefore the ratio between catalyst and platinum.  
==PAGE:48==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
43 
Doing so yielded results which may be seen in Figure 5.4. Here, it can be seen that for low 
values of ПҲ, the XRD-reported crystallite size can actually be seen to decrease from the initial 
catalyst size quite significantly. This suggests that, while the growth of particles was favored 
with a high ratio of pure platinum catalyst, as this ratio falls, the formation of new particles is 
favored instead.  
This causes the mean crystallite size to fall drastically, resulting in a lower crystallite size. 
While this was not supported by TEM imaging, it was judged that these XRD results were 
sufficient to judge the lack of viability for these low-ПҲ catalysts. 
 
Figure 5.4 - XRD-measured results of polyol growth experiments conducted using the Umicore Elyst 
Pt50 0550 for low values of ПҲ. 
As such, while growing a catalyst from an existing seed shows clear results and confirms the 
ability to grow larger catalysts from existing ones, it also imposes limitations. The loading of 
the final catalyst is derivative of the initial catalyst: meaning that the loading will always follow 
the growth trend based on the amount of platinum added. It was then theorized that this 
limitation might be overcome by using a seed catalyst with a lower loading.  
==PAGE:49==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
44 
 
Figure 5.5 - Expected growth of particle size and loading of the HiSPECВ® 2000 commercial catalyst, 
assuming the same growth behavior shown in Figure 5.2. 
New calculations were done using the HiSPECВ® 2000 commercial catalyst (nominal Loading: 
10%, average particle size: 1.98 nm). Here, instead of measuring growth by the addition of 
platinum, the change in loading was used instead. The amount of platinum added was 
calculated using the ПҲ-factor, as before, and expected loading was then calculated based on 
how much platinum salt was used, assuming all of it would be consumed during growth. 
As shown in Figure 5.5, the projected growth of this new catalyst to a larger particle size is 
expected to result in the synthesis of a catalyst that is almost the same as the Elyst Pt50 0550 
that was initially used. Indeed, so long as the particle size and loading remain linked, as seems 
to be the case, the synthesis of more specialized catalysts will be difficult.  
Additionally, most commercial catalysts are expected (though not proven) to fall somewhere 
in the curve shown in Figure 5.5. Ideally, a seed catalyst would have a larger particle size and 
lower loading. However, commercial platinum catalysts are often marketed by how small 
their particles are, as smaller particles have a higher overall surface area and, thus, higher 
catalytic performance.  Because of this, finding a commercial catalyst that fulfills all the 
necessary criteria is expected to be quite challenging. As such, it was decided to switch to 
synthesizing a platinum catalyst from scratch, expecting that this may produce better results 
in terms of particle size, loading, and dispersion control. 
 
5.2 
Synthesis of Pt nanoparticles by the formation and growth of Pt nuclei 
Experiments were performed employing scheme B found in Figure 2.2. Contrary to the growth 
experiments, the aim was to induce the nucleation of new particles and then grow them 
under the same conditions as previous experiments.  
==PAGE:50==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
45 
As such, no seed catalyst was present during the following experiments. Additionally, in 
previous experiments, the concentration of platinum salt was fixed to 1 mM, and the seed 
catalyst mass was varied to achieve different ratios of existing platinum to newly formed 
platinum.  
However, as there is no seed catalyst anymore, the concentration of platinum salt is now the 
only real way to quantify the amount of platinum relative to the growth of the particles. The 
growth is thus still quantified using the same factor of ПҲ as previously. However, whereas ПҲ 
previously noted the growth from the initial seed catalyst, it will now express the particle 
growth immediately after the formation of the nuclei when the particles only have one atomic 
shell (corresponding to a crystallite size of ~0.31 nm). Refer to Section 4 for further details on 
how this was determined. An example of how ПҲ is calculated from H2PtCl6 concentration can 
be seen below: 
 
During the nucleation experiments, Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was used as a surfactant to 
promote better dispersion, as the lack of PVP showed abysmal results in terms of particle 
dispersion. (Refer to Figure 5.10) The ratio of surfactant to platinum is reported in the results 
figures. 
           a) 
 
 
                  b) 
 
 
Figure 5.6 - XRD-measured results of polyol-method-based synthesis without a catalyst seed with 
H2PtCl6 concentrations, along with the XRD spectra for selected samples. PVP:Pt = 0.1 
a)  XRD spectra,     b)  Particle size compared to the predicted particle size 
 
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ғрқ‘Ў=
[рқҗ»2рқ‘ғрқ‘Ўрқҗ¶рқ‘ҷ6 вӢ…6рқҗ»2рқ‘Ӯ]
рқ‘үрқҗёрқҗә (always 100 mL) вӢ…рқ‘Җрқҗ»2рқ‘ғрқ‘Ўрқҗ¶рқ‘ҷ6вӢ…6рқҗ»2рқ‘Ӯ 
(5.1) 
 
рқң“=
рқ‘ҡМ…Pt (single shell)
рқ‘ҡМ…рқ‘ғрқ‘Ў
 
(5.2) 
==PAGE:51==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
46 
The results can be seen in Figure 5.6. It can be seen that the particles show significant growth 
by carrying the initial concentration of H2PtCl6, and also shows the same trend of growth as 
was shown in the expected growth model. This suggests that, just as how the maximum 
growth of seed particles depended on the ratio of existing platinum to new platinum, the 
same principle can also be applied here.  
An increase in initial platinum concentration promotes the growth of already existing particles 
(i.e., particles that have already been formed by nucleation) rather than the formation of even 
more new particles. As the concentration of platinum in solution increases and the amount 
of available platinum salt in solution decreases, the growth is expected to slow until the 
maximum growth has been reached. Ex-situ measurements of the particle growth were taken 
during one of the experiments and measured through XRD. As seen in Figure 5.7, the particles 
grow fastest initially when the concentration of platinum salt is highest.  
As per expectations, the growth rate falls with time, eventually reaching a plateau after 
around 120 minutes. After which, the growth happens slowly enough that it is not detectable 
through the performed XRD analysis. It was chosen not to take images through TEM, as it is 
intended to be used as a guideline for the growth rate over time.  
 
Figure 5.7 - XRD-measured results of polyol-method-based synthesis, showcasing how the particles 
grow over time, c0(H2PtCl6) = 5.13 mM 
The dispersion and particle size distribution were quantified through TEM imaging, the same 
as was done previously. As seen in Figure 5.8, the dispersion is seen to have improved from 
the synthesis growth from the Umicore. In addition, the particles seem more evenly 
distributed, as not as many very small or very large particles can be seen from the TEM 
images.  
==PAGE:52==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
47 
It is also still clearly agglomerating into clusters that are difficult to measure. However, it is 
not happening nearly to the extent it was previously. 
           a) 
 
 
               b) 
 
Figure 5.8 - TEM images of the catalysts synthesized using the polyol method. PVP:Pt = 0.1 
a)  Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550,     b)  c0(H2PtCl6) = 6.5 mM 
 
в–  Mean = 4.47 nm, St.d. = 1.16,   в–  Mean = 6.68 nm, St.d. = 1.21,   в–  Mean = 7.93 nm, St.d. = 1.34 
Figure 5.9 - Particle size distributions (and normal distributions thereof) of selected polyol-
synthesized platinum nanoparticles. 
Figure 5.9 shows that the samples have a much tighter particle size distribution than 
previously, showing standard deviations only slightly higher than the commercial sample 
while still showing a significantly larger mean particle size.  
==PAGE:53==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
48 
This shows that the synthesis method outlined in this report provides an excellent foundation 
for controlling the particle size while remaining with a good PSD. This also confirms that 
varying just the initial concentration of platinum salt is sufficient to control the average size 
of the final particles. This then seems to suggest that the particle size distribution, and thus 
the growth behavior of the nuclei, is dependent on some other factor that has not been 
identified in this experimentation. 
Favilla et al. (2013) 41 showed that the size of the particles was most clearly affected by the 
initial salt concentration. As such, from the performed experimentation, the growth trend is 
clear and matches with what is found in the literature. 
 
5.2.1 Control of platinum dispersion and loading 
According to the literature, it is possible to achieve better dispersion through the same 
conditions. It is to be noted that вҖңdispersion,вҖқ in this case, refers to the dispersion of particles 
on the carbon support. Huy et al. (2015) 53 performed an EG-assisted reduction using NaBH4. 
According to their results, the particle size is seen to be inversely proportional to the pH and 
proportional to the synthesis temperature.  
However, it also seems that dispersion improves proportionately to the synthesis 
temperature: a higher temperature resulted in better dispersion up to the highest 
temperature tested at 60 oC. Papa et al. (2011) 54 also showed that alkaline reaction conditions 
would encourage the formation of smaller particles and showed excellent particle dispersion. 
However, this was done with a much higher PVP:Pt ratio of 5 rather than the proposed ratio 
of 0.1. 
In addition, all previous polyol-method experiments found in the literature are performed in 
the presence of carbon black, contrary to what is done in this project, in which the grown 
particles are added to carbon black after synthesis has concluded. Seeing as this is the case, 
several theories were established to explain the poor dispersion, along with strategies as to 
how to improve them:  
1. Agglomeration of the platinum during synthesis. This would suggest that the mixture 
of EG and PVP, despite its dispersive nature, is not good enough not keep the particles 
well enough dispersed during synthesis.  
 
2. Insufficient mixing during the addition of the platinum nanoparticles to the carbon 
black. If contact between the platinum and the carbon is impaired by inadequate 
mixing or dispersion, it is possible that this would cause the platinum not to disperse 
properly as the platinum and the carbon black are added together.  
==PAGE:54==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
49 
Point 1 was addressed by increasing the ratio of platinum to PVP from 0.1 to between 0.25 to 
0.5. Since, in the literature, the amount of PVP varied widely depending on the procedure, it 
was decided to try various concentrations of PVP. The ratios of PVP to Pt used during 
experimentation varied from 1:10 to 1:4. It was chosen not to increase the PVP further than 
that due to challenges with the purification and recovery of the final product. (refer to Section 
5.2 for details on this matter)  
           a) 
 
 
                  b) 
 
           c) 
 
 
                  d)  
 
Figure 5.10 - TEM images of catalysts synthesized with varying concentrations of PVP. All samples 
were prepared with c0(H2PtCl6) = 6.5 mM 
a)  No PVP,      b)  PVP:Pt = 0.1,      c)  PVP:Pt = 0.25,      d)  PVP:Pt = 0.5 
==PAGE:55==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
50 
As seen in Figure 5.10, the necessity of PVP as a stabilizing agent is made clear: most of the 
platinum agglomerated into huge chunks around 0.3-1 Ојm in diameter, unsuitable for further 
consideration. Besides that, it seems that the dispersion does indeed improve with an 
increasing concentration of PVP. However, curiously, just looking at the density of platinum 
particles in the TEM images suggests that the loading of platinum is much lower in the case 
of PVP:Pt being 0.25 and 0.5, despite all samples having added the same initial concentration 
of H2PtCl6 to the same mass of carbon black. 
This was investigated by EDX using the method described in Section 3.2. The results of this 
can be seen in Figure 5.11, confirming that the samples prepared using higher concentrations 
of PVP result in a much lower platinum loading, despite roughly the same fraction of catalyst 
being recovered in each case. As such, somewhere in the process of synthesis and recovery, 
a majority of platinum is lost, rather than an equal mixture of platinum and carbon. This, along 
with the inconsistent correlation between PVP amount and final loading, suggests either a 
problem with the presence of the PVP itself or with the recovery after the fact. 
Note that the no-PVP case was not included in Figure 5.11 due to the fact that it produced 
very inconsistent results, varying anywhere from 35 wt.% to 50 wt.%, depending on the site 
that was analyzed. Furthermore, since the dispersion was so poor, it was decided not to take 
the no-PVP sample into any more consideration.  
 
Figure 5.11 - EDX results of the samples shown in Figure 5.10, showing inconsistent metal loadings 
across the different samples. 
This result, however, does agree with the findings in the literature. Chen and Xing (2005) 40 
reported that the loadings of platinum would fall drastically out of range of the expected 
loadings as the amount of PVP and the target loading increased.  
==PAGE:56==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
51 
This was attributed to the fact that the PVP may be over-stabilizing the platinum, keeping it 
trapped in solution and unable to make it onto the carbon black. It would then be lost during 
recovery. Refer to Section 5.4 for further discussion of this matter.  
Point 2 was investigated by a few different methods. Firstly, the carbon black used was 
switched out with two alternatives: Ketjenblack EC-300J and the previously used Vulcan XC 
72 functionalized using 0.1 M H2O2.  
The latter was prepared using a method adapted from the work of Fuente et al. (2005) 55 in 
which PtRu nanoparticles were prepared and deposited onto a Vulcan XC-72R functionalized 
with H2O2 for 48h. It is theorized that introducing oxygen-containing functional groups on the 
surface of the carbon black increases the surface area and provides oxygen-rich sites where 
particles may anchor. It was reported that changing the surface morphology of the carbon 
black would encourage improved stability and dispersion during deposition. This has since 
been heavily investigated in derivative works, and it was hoped that this could also be applied 
in this case.  
a) 
 
 
               b) 
 
Figure 5.12 - TEM images of catalysts synthesized with different carbon blacks. Both samples were 
prepared with c0(H2PtCl6) = 6.5 mM and PVP:Pt = 0.1. 
a)  Ketjenblack EC-300J,      b)  H2O2 - functionalized Vulcan XC 72 
However, as seen in Figure 5.12, it seems this did not help dispersion with this projectвҖҷs 
methodology. Both cases have similar, if worse, dispersion than the samples prepared with 
unmodified Vulcan XC 72. It also seems that the H2O2-treated sample has a very low platinum 
loading, but they were both confirmed through EDX to be 40.2% and 38.9%, respectively.  
==PAGE:57==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
52 
In any case, functionalization did not have the effect desired. It is theorized that while 
introducing oxygen-containing functional groups on the surface of the carbon black may 
improve adsorption and binding potential on their own, the presence of PVP would essentially 
prevent this. Perhaps in a form of steric hindrance, having the PVP stuck on the platinum 
particles prevents interaction between the oxygenated active sites and the platinum particles.  
It is also possible that this is an effect of electrostatic repulsion: as PVP-capped nanoparticles 
have very low isoelectric points, their functional groups will remain net-negatively charged, 
even in acidic environments. 56 Looking at the TEM pictures, it seems like the Pt particles tend 
to arrange themselves in circles, almost as if to favor the adsorption to the edges of the carbon 
black particles rather than the faces. This also happens in higher PVP cases, not just with the 
functionalized carbon black. It is known that carbon blacks have higher surface energy around 
the edges of the particles, and in combination with the poor dispersion, causing this effect. 
All in all, a combination of these effects may cause the oxygenation to have no net benefit, 
resulting in the dispersion being no better than otherwise. However, this would have to be 
further investigated in future works.  
Lastly, the dispersion was thought to improve by manipulating the degree of mixing during 
synthesis by lowering the reaction volume, as well as during the addition of the platinum 
particles to the carbon black, from 100 mL down to 20 mL. Additionally, it was attempted to 
add the two slurries together under sonication of varying intensities. 
a) 
 
 
               b) 
 
Figure 5.13 - TEM images of catalysts grown under various mixing conditions. Both samples were 
prepared with c0(H2PtCl6) = 6.5 mM 
a)  20 mL working volume. PVP:Pt = 0.1,      b)  Sonication during mixing of slurries. PVP:Pt = 0.25 
==PAGE:58==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
53 
The sonication was done using a Branson Digital Sonifier SFX 250, running at 20% power. The 
sample with sonication was also done with the PVP to platinum ratio of 0.25. As seen in           
Figure 5.13, the decrease in the working volume resulted in a worsening agglomeration. 
However, the addition through sonication shows a clear improvement over the previous 
experiment. Interestingly, the loading also seems to have drastically increased from the 
previous experiment using PVP:Pt = 0.25. Measuring with EDX, it is seen to be 45.7%, as 
opposed to 23.6% as it was before. This would suggest that the sonication was sufficient to 
disrupt the PVP and free a portion of the platinum that may have been sterically trapped. 
Although this seems true for all samples, the particle size distribution is relatively narrow, and 
none of the proposed methods have affected it much, adding to the reliability of the synthesis 
method proposed.  
Seeing this result, it was decided to run yet another set of experiments, increasing the 
concentration of H2PtCl6 to target a larger mean particle size. These experiments were run 
using sonication during addition, as shown in Figure 5.13. The concentrations used were 
determined by following the growth pattern previously shown in Figure 5.6. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
54 
           a) 
 
           b) 
 
в–  Mean = 4.47 nm, St.d. = 1.16,   в–  Mean = 8.86 nm, St.d. = 1.36,   в–  Mean = 10.9 nm, St.d. = 1.71 
Figure 5.14 - Particle size distributions (and normal distributions) of selected polyol-synthesized 
platinum nanoparticles, along with growth results thereof. PVP:Pt = 0.25 
a)  Particle size, compared to the predicted particle size,     b)  Histogram with normal distributions 
It can now be observed in Figure 5.14 that the particle size is increasing roughly as expected, 
with the same deviation level observed prior. The particle size distribution is also seen to 
broaden slightly as the mean particle size increases, with the particle distribution being the 
widest for the sample with the largest mean particle size of 10.95 nm. Looking at the TEM 
images of the two samples in Figure 5.15, the dispersion does not seem to have worsened by 
increasing the particle size. Clear agglomeration also indicates that the dispersion somewhere 
during the synthesis process remains non-ideal. 
==PAGE:60==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
55 
a) 
 
 
               b) 
 
Figure 5.15 - TEM images of catalysts grown with higher H2PtCl6 concentrations. PVP:Pt = 0.25 
a)  c0(H2PtCl6) = 10.5 mM,     b)  c0(H2PtCl6) = 15.0 mM 
However, perhaps more of interest, measurements with EDX show the platinum loadings to 
have fallen again, being 26.7% and 28.1%, respectively. Thus, even under the same conditions 
as previously, having the particles grow seems to have reintroduced the issue of platinum 
being lost somewhere during the synthesis, presumably due to steric entrapment by the PVP. 
As the platinum particles grow, colloidal theory dictates that they will have an easier time 
remaining to disperse properly. However, in the method used, the platinum particles grow 
from the nuclei stage, where they are very small and their surface energy is very high. 35 At 
this stage, the risk of agglomeration is highest, and thus it is here that the stabilizing effect of 
PVP is most important.  However, as the particles grow, their surface energy decreases; thus, 
the difference in surface energy between the PVP and the platinum also decreases. As the 
total interfacial energy of the system decreases, the surface strain on the PVP may lessen, 
causing more energy to be required to release the remaining PVP from the platinum 
nanoparticles. 57 It could be that increasing the sonication power would help alleviate this. 
In any scenario, the growth of platinum nanoparticles was shown up to ~11 nm, with a good 
particle size distribution and reasonable dispersion. While there are still many things that 
could be considered, there was no time to continue experimentation for this report. Thus, it 
was decided to put focus on the alloying process for the remaining time.  
 
==PAGE:61==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
56 
5.3 
Pt-Nd/C alloy synthesis 
The alloying was done as per the method described in Section 2.2. The first sample treated 
was вҖңbвҖқ in figure Figure 5.8. That is, a PVP:Pt ratio of 0.1 and an initial H2PtCl6 concentration 
of 6.5 mM.  
 
Figure 5.16 - Plot of XRD data taken before and after alloying, with characteristic peaks for Pt and 
Pt5Nd. Precursor synthesis conditions are: PVP:Pt = 0.1, c0(H2PtCl6) = 6.5 mM  
Figure 5.16 shows the XRD spectrum for the unalloyed and alloyed samples. The alloyed 
sample shows no characteristic peaks for pure platinum (particularly at ~46o and ~67o), 
suggesting that all the precursor catalysts had been alloyed. Deconvolution also shows that 
the phase obtained was indeed Pt5Nd, indicating that the procedure was successful and that 
the reaction had reached complete conversion. In addition, analysis of the XRD data indicates 
that the particles have gotten larger after alloying by almost 1 nm (from 6.6 to 7.7 nm).  
The sample was then analyzed with TEM, the results of which can be seen in Figure 5.17. It 
can be seen that the particle size distribution has widened considerably after alloying, with a 
higher standard deviation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
57 
a) 
 
 
               b) 
 
c) 
 
в–  Mean = 6.68 nm, St.d. = 1.21,      в–  Mean = 6.76 nm, St.d. = 2.00 
Figure 5.17 - TEM images and histogram of the alloyed particles compared with the unalloyed 
catalyst. Precursor synthesis conditions are: PVP:Pt = 0.1, c0(H2PtCl6) = 6.5 mM 
a)  TEM image before alloying,    b)  TEM image after alloying,    c)  PSD and normal distributions 
The particles have grown slightly on average, with the minimum and maximum particle sizes 
getting smaller and larger, respectively. Looking at the TEM, it can also be seen that the 
dispersion has gotten worse, with many particles seemingly having joined together during 
alloying. This explains the greater prevalence of larger particles. It also seems that the alloying 
procedure has forced the disintegration of some of the particles, resulting in the presence of 
very small particles well beyond the expected range.  
==PAGE:63==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
58 
Now that the method was proven working, at least in the tested conditions, it was decided to 
proceed with the synthesis of alloys using a precursor synthesized with a higher PVP 
concentration and particles with a larger mean particle size. To this end, sample вҖңcвҖқ in Figure 
5.10 and sample вҖңbвҖқ in Figure 5.15 was chosen for use.  Even though it was understood that 
these samples still contained a certain concentration of impurities (see Section 5.4), it was 
decided to proceed with the synthesis in either case.  
 
Figure 5.18 - Plot of XRD spectrum taken for the alloying using precursors with varying particle 
sizes. Precursor synthesis PVP to Pt ratio for both samples is: PVP:Pt = 0.25 
a) 
 
 
               b) 
 
Figure 5.19 - TEM images of the alloyed particles, starting with precursors of varying particle sizes. 
Precursor synthesis PVP to Pt ratio for both samples is: PVP:Pt = 0.25 
a)  c0(H2PtCl6) = 6.5 mM,    b)  c0(H2PtCl6) = 15 mM 
==PAGE:64==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
59 
The result of this experiment can likewise be observed in Figure 5.18 and Figure 5.19. Here, 
pure platinum characteristic peaks are seen to appear. Particularly the peaks around 46o and 
81o clearly indicate that some amount of platinum remained unalloyed and that the catalyst 
now had multiple solid phases. Quantitative analysis shows the percentage of the Pt5Nd and 
Pt phases to be ~94% and ~6%, respectively. As such, most of the platinum could form the 
desired alloy with the Nd, owing to the general reliability of the alloying method used. 
However, there was now a fraction of platinum that could not form the alloy completely.  
Additionally, it seems that the PSD for the larger sample has widened significantly, with a 
standard deviation of 6.3.  
There were a number of possible explanations for this outcome: 
1. For one, the precursor particles were much larger this time. It may be that the larger 
particles simply did not have enough time to form the alloy all the way to the core, 
and leaving the second step of the alloying for longer may help alleviate this.  
Although perhaps the poor results may be attributed to how the dispersion is poorer than 
previously seen and that an even greater prevalence of tiny and huge particles can be 
observed. 
2. It could also be that the larger particles would prefer a slightly higher alloying 
temperature and that it would be possible to do so without seeing an overwhelming 
formation of the Pt2Nd phase.  
In either scenario, a number of experiments were performed using the same alloying 
procedure as previously, with the same catalyst twice more, but with some changes.  First, 
with the peak temperature during alloying being held for 5 hours instead of 1 hour, and 
second, raising the peak temperature from 550 oC to 600 oC. 
The result of both of these experiments can likewise be seen in Figure 5.20. The five-hour 
experiment still showed clear characteristic platinum peaks, albeit with a lower intensity than 
last time, indicating that, while the alloying was indeed better, it was still bottlenecked by 
something else of unknown origin. In addition to both samples still showing peaks indicating 
the presence of pure platinum, they also show the possible presence of the Pt2Nd phase, seen 
by the displacement of the PtxNd peaks in the XRD spectrum and the extra peaks around 21o. 
While it is not entirely sure that this is Pt2Nd phase, something indeed persists in the sample 
that was not there previously.  
==PAGE:65==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
60 
 
Figure 5.20 - Plot of XRD data from alloying experiments at various alloying conditions. Precursor 
synthesis conditions are: PVP:Pt = 0.25, c0(H2PtCl6) = 15.0 mM 
Since the recipe and method used were the same, it is assumed that this extra material is 
either impurities in the precursor or the result of the formation of various PtxNd alloys other 
than the desired Pt5Nd. 
 
5.4 
Challenges with product recovery and purification 
To that end, it now becomes essential to consider the purity of the recovered product during 
the alloying and, subsequently, during the precursor synthesis process. As was previously 
mentioned, once the platinum synthesis was concluded, it was recovered and washed 
through centrifugation. It is done at 10k RPM, but the length of time it was run was highly 
dependent on the synthesis conditions. 
For procedures performed without the presence of PVP, the recovery posed no challenges. 
However, once PVP was introduced into the synthesis, the platinum-carbon slurry obtained 
was remarkably stable. The particles would, quite literally, never fall out of suspension, even 
after having been left for weeks: a batch of precursor, synthesized with a PVP:Pt ratio of 0.25, 
was left untouched for about a month due to technical difficulties with the centrifuge. After 
it was returned to, the suspension was still remarkably good, with almost no sedimentation 
to speak of. The higher the ratio of PVP during synthesis, the more difficult the recovery 
became. In addition, seeing as the loadings obtained become inconsistent with higher 
concentrations of PVP, as was seen in Figure 5.10, it was placed into question whether the 
washings performed were sufficient to clean the product properly. Given the apparent 
sensitivity of the alloying procedure, it is possible that any remaining impurities could have a 
negative impact on the alloying result. 
==PAGE:66==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
61 
To that end, TGA was performed on a few of the samples in order to attempt to identify if 
there were any unexpected impurities. The TGA cycles were done in the temperature range 
of 25 oC to 1000 oC, at a rate of 4 oC/min in an oxygen atmosphere. If there are any organics 
present, perhaps smaller chains of PVP, it should be expected to see a drop well before the 
burning of the carbon support, which happens at around 400 oC. 58 
 
Figure 5.21 - TGA results of catalysts synthesized with various concentrations of PVP. Here, вҖңlmвҖқ 
denotes the fraction of impurities. Synthesis conditions for all samples were: c0(H2PtCl6) = 15.0 mM. 
(*) After alloying 
As seen in Figure 5.21, it can be seen that all three samples contain some fraction of 
impurities. For the case of PVP:Pt = 0.5, as much as 22% of the sample can be attributed to 
some external component. However, it does become somewhat unclear, as something 
appears to burn at a temperature lower than that of the carbon black. As such, the exact 
percentage of impurities remains uncertain.  
However, it is evident that the numerous washings performed are insufficient to clean the 
product, and quite a significant fraction of the material remains. It can also be seen that a 
higher PVP concentration results in an inconsistent final metal loading.  
As for what these impurities are, that is still to be discussed. Due to the fact that the final Pt/C 
slurry is so tricky to separate, and the apparent colloid-stabilizing effect of PVP, it would be a 
reasonable first assumption to say that most of the remaining organics are, in fact, pieces of 
the PVP that the purification process failed to remove. In addition, performing calculation of 
the maximum weight percentage of PVP, assuming that all of it remains after purification. 
==PAGE:67==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
62 
 
Figure 5.22  - Figure showing agreement between the maximum wt.% of PVP and the fraction of 
impurities measured through TGA. 
Doing so yields a result close to the fraction of impurities measured in the TGA analysis (3.3% 
vs. 4.4%, 10.1% vs. 11%, and 22.3% vs. 20%). Of course, this result does not prove that 
whatever  remains is, in fact, only PVP.  However, if that is indeed the case, then this suggests 
that the ethanol and water washings performed during purification have been ineffective in 
removing the PVP. In any scenario, a significant fraction of impurities yet remain, and as such, 
the purification procedure still needs to be further developed.  
As for whether or not this fraction of impurities is causing issues in the alloying synthesis: that 
is not easy to say. The first step (see Section 2.2) of the alloying is heating to 650 oC, a 
procedure that takes about an hour from start to finish. As seen in the TGA, it seems that any 
impurities present have finished decomposition at around 350 oC. As such, it is within the 
expectation that any impurities would have decomposed during this first step as well, leaving 
the remaining precursor clean before the actual alloying begins in step 2.  However, as shown 
in Figure 5.21, 3% of impurities remain, even after the alloying procedure. Perhaps the 
decomposition is hindered due to the inert atmosphere in which the alloying takes place. 
However, this does not necessarily have to be PVP, as the alloying introduces cyanamide and 
its polymerized derivatives. As such, whatever remains could be any number of residual by-
products of this procedure. In addition, as was mentioned previously, it seems the pure 
platinum phase persists, even while running the alloying for five times longer than the 
standard procedure. It is likely that if any PVP remains, it does indeed decompose, as 
expected, but is not eliminated from the system. It is possible that when the Pt gets 
incorporated into the polymerized cyanamide network,  
==PAGE:68==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
63 
some of the PVP gets trapped along with it. Much like its effect in altering the loading, this 
suggests a steric interaction between the PVP and the different compounds in the system.  
Determining the mechanism behind the incomplete alloying and the role of PVP in this 
process would be a focal point in the future work of this project. Additionally, developing 
better purification procedures to properly clean the catalyst before it is used in alloying would 
also be beneficial. 
 
5.5 
Electrochemical characterization 
RDE experiments were performed in either scenario using the protocol described in         
Section 3.4.1.  Electrochemical measurements were only performed on samples, in which it 
was confirmed that the alloying had been successful and that the Pt5Nd had been exclusively 
obtained. It was also decided to perform RDE testing on the 10.9 nm sample, seen in          
Figure 5.18, even though it was confirmed to contain ~5% of unalloyed platinum. This was 
done to provide a comparison point between experiments, but the incomplete alloying should 
otherwise be taken into consideration when comparing results.  
The specific activity, js (0.9 V vs. RHE), mass activity (jm (0.9 V vs. RHE), and the electrochemical 
surface area (ECSA) are all measured from the obtained results using the methods described 
in Section 3.4.1. The results have been summarized in the below table: 
Particle size [nm] ECSA [m2/g]  Specific activity [mA/cm2] Mass activity [A/mgpt]  
Umicore Elyst Pt50 0550 (Pt/C, 50% loading) 
4.47 Вұ 1.2 
60.19 
 0.50 
0.37 
 
Umicore Elyst Pt50 0690 (PtxCo/C, 50% loading) 
6.0 Вұ 2.5  
52.1 
 2.40 
1.25 
 
Synthesized Pt5Nd/C nanoalloy catalysts 
6.70 Вұ 2.0 [ex. 1] 
44.8 
 2.47 
1.11 
 
6.70 Вұ 2.0 [ex. 2] 
42.2 
 4.32 
1.82 
 
7.13 Вұ 2.8 
38.7 
 2.95 
1.14 
 
9.28 Вұ 6.3 * 
25.1 
 2.89 
0.73 
 
Table 5.1 - Results of RDE testing of selected samples after alloying, along with the Elyst Pt50 0550 
Pt/C and the Elyst Pt50 0690 PtxCo/C catalyst in comparison to pure platinum, including specific 
and mass activities and the ECSA. 
* This sample did not reach full conversion during alloying and contained ~5% pure platinum. 
As can be seen, the mass and specific activities are notably better than the ones obtained 
from pure platinum, supporting that the alloy was successfully formed during synthesis.  
==PAGE:69==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
64 
Furthermore, the Pt5Nd alloys prepared are able to provide excellent ORR activity compared 
to pure platinum on carbon catalysts. In addition, compared to the Umicore Elyst Pt50 0690 
commercial PtxCo catalyst, the synthesized nanoalloys seem to show comparable activity. One 
experiment even showed specific and mass activity superior to that of the Umicore PtxCo. 
When compared to data for the model platinum nanoalloys prepared by physical methods, 
as reported in the literature, it is seen that the trend of the mass activity obtained in this 
report does not seem to follow the upwards trend that is generally indicated: 
 
Figure 5.23 - Mass activity over particle size for various rare-earth metal platinum alloys with pure 
platinum as reference 19,21,59, including the data from the experiments performed using the 
synthesized Pt5Nd/C nanoalloy catalysts.  
The mass activity generally seems to fall short of other alloys, as reported in the literature. 
However, compared to results reported from the use of Pt2Nd and Pt5Nd, the data obtained 
in this report seems quite good. Fan et al. 60 reported the electrochemical activity of Pt5Nd 
catalysts prepared through molten-salt electrochemical deoxidation. It is seen that, for a 
Pt5Nd prepared on Vulcan XC 72R, with a particle size between 5-15 nm, the mass activity at 
0.9 V vs. RHE was reported as 0.40 A/mgpt.  
It is important to note that the study of Pt-Nd catalysts is entirely novel, so not many results 
have yet been reported in the literature. As such, only a modest comparison can be made. 
The fact that the results obtained in this report are so much better than what was reported 
by Fan et al. is merely an indication that the reaction kinetics are not entirely understood. 
However, there is still some relevant discussion on why the results differ widely. For one, the 
samples prepared by Fan et al., while showing excellent dispersion, have a very wide particle 
size distribution, with most samples having a standard deviation of 4 or higher. In addition, 
the span of particles is very high, showing particles between 4-25 nm in the same sample.  
==PAGE:70==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
65 
It is possible that the high fraction of small particles, being more susceptible to acid leaching, 
is having a significant negative impact on the ORR activity. This follows the same principle as 
suggested by VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela et al., that the negative impact of small particles can 
prove to be quite devastating, and that this is also why larger particles tend to exhibit better 
activity in the ORR. 
As for why the catalysts prepared in this report do not exhibit this behavior, that is difficult to 
say. It could very well be an effect of residual PVP or other impurities that have not been 
removed in the sulfuric acid washing. In Figure 5.21, it was shown that about 3% of impurities 
remain, even after having been subjected to the high-temperature environment of the 
alloying procedure. It was theorized before that the residual material is probably not PVP but 
assorted organics leftover from the alloying procedure. It is possible that whatever remains 
may have a negative effect on the ORR activity. The results could very simply also be 
attributed to the poor dispersion and PSD that the alloying procedure seems to result in, as 
seen in Figure 5.19, in addition to the fact that the larger samples had not been alloyed 
completely. Only once more work on better cleaning of the catalyst and a better 
understanding of the mechanisms at play during alloying has been performed can this be 
confirmed. 
One may also compare the ECSA to the specific surface area (SSA) to determine how much of 
the catalyst is being used for catalytic activity, thus as a way to quantify the quality of the 
prepared catalysts. The SSA is estimated employing a spherical, utilizing the density of the 
material and the mean particle size: 61 
Where d is the particle size, рқңҢ is the density, and 6000 is a constant, which is the result of the 
contraction of units, knowing that the volume of a sphere is (4/3)рқңӢрқ‘ҹ3, and the surface area 
to be 4рқңӢрқ‘ҹ2. This is used to provide a rough estimation of the SSA, remembering that a fraction 
of the samples are carbon support and thus do not have any electrochemical activity.  
 
рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқҗҙ [рқ‘ҡ2/рқ‘”] =
6000
рқ‘‘ [рқ‘ӣрқ‘ҡ] вӢ…рқңҢ [рқ‘”/рқ‘җрқ‘ҡ3] 
(5.3) 
==PAGE:71==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
66 
 
Figure 5.24 - Calculated values of ECSA obtained using CO stripping, plotted alongside the 
estimated SSA (with the carbon fraction disregarded). 
It can be seen that there is an excellent agreement between the ECSA and the estimated SSA. 
Although this comparison may only be used as a guideline, it is a general indicator that the 
quality of catalysts prepared is good, as most of the available surface area is electrochemically 
available for use in the ORR. 
 
5.5.1 Accelerated stability tests (AST) 
The stability of the prepared catalysts was tested using accelerated stability testing, as 
described in Section 3.4.1. 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
67 
Particle size [nm] 
No. of cycles 
ECSA [m2/g] 
SA [mA/cm2] 
MA [A/mgpt] 
Synthesized PtxCo/C nanoalloy catalysts 
6.0 Вұ 2.5  
0 
52.1 
2.40  
1.25 
 
10,000 
50.9      -2% 
2.79      -25% 
0.91      -27% 
 
30,000 
50.3      -3% 
1.70      -29% 
0.86      -32% 
Synthesized Pt5Nd/C nanoalloy catalysts 
6.70 Вұ 2.0 [ex. 1] 
0 
44.8 
2.47 
1.11 
 
10,000 
42.2      -6% 
2.65      +7% 
1.12      +1% 
 
40,000 
40.6      -9% 
2.10      -15% 
0.86      -23% 
6.70 Вұ 2.0 [ex. 2] 
0 
42.2 
4.32 
1.82 
 
10,000 
40.3      -5% 
3.74      -13% 
1.50      -18% 
 
30,000 
37.4      -11% 
3.13      -28% 
1.17      -36% 
9.28 Вұ 6.3 
0 
25.14 
2.89 
0.73 
 
10,000 
25.01      -0.5% 
2.32      -20% 
0.58      -20% 
Table 5.2 - Results of AST experiments, with % of performance change from testing after the given 
number of cycles highlighted in red or green. 
It can be seen that most of the samples prepared show similar stability, losing about 20% 
performance after 10,000 cycles and about 20-30% after 30,000 cycles. It also seems that the 
catalysts with a larger particle size do not seem to be more stable than the ones prepared 
with a smaller particle size. It is also seen that samples with higher initial activity show a bigger 
percentage drop in performance after stability testing. Compared to the commercial PtxCo 
catalyst, it seems to follow the same trends, with roughly the same drop in performance after 
10,000 cycles. In most cases, the ECSA holds relatively steady, indicating that a potential loss 
of surface area cannot be attributed to the loss of ORR activity. 
There is, however, an outlier in the вҖң6.70 ex. 1вҖқ sample, which showed remarkable stability, 
dropping only about 20%, even after 40,000 cycles. This same sample also showed an increase 
in activity after 10,000 cycles. As to why that particular sample behaves like that, that is to be 
discussed. It could simply be an anomaly during testing, but it is already known that these     
Pt-RE catalysts need to be conditioned before reaching a steady state during experimentation. 
The increase in activity, however, can most likely be attributed to unideal conditions during 
catalyst conditioning. Perhaps the activation continued during the AST, resulting in this 
strange behavior.  
The results may also be compared to the PtxGd and PtxY alloys reported in the literature, 
summarized in Figure 5.25.  
==PAGE:73==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
68 
Thus, the stability is comparable to that of other Pt-RE alloys reported in the literature. 
Although, this may merely be an extension of an effect that is also seen in the results from 
this report: the losses are greater if the initial activities are also greater. However, looking at 
the literature-reported results in Figure 5.25, this seems not to be the case. Thus, it is not 
possible to conclude that the prepared catalysts are, in fact, more stable than the ones 
reported in the literature. 
 
Figure 5.25 - Comparison of AST results between the literature study and the results reported in 
this report, with remaining performance in percentage after 10,000 cycles (9,000 in the case of 
PtxY) 
However, it can be said that since the mass activity loss is so similar to what is already 
reported, the prepared catalysts are not more stable than what others have found. The reason 
for this could be attributed to the same things as for the lower-than-expected activity: a wide 
PSD and a high prevalence of very small and large particles, which is known to have a profound 
effect on the ORR activity. This widening effect on the PSD is exasperated by the so-called 
Ostwald ripening, which states that, in solid solutions, small particles have a tendency to 
dissolve or redeposit into larger ones: an effect that is favored if there is a large prevalence 
of both small and large particles. 62 
As the problems with the synthesis become ironed out and a method for synthesizing more 
uniform Pt-RE particles is further developed, it may be that the stability and general ORR 
performance would improve as well. 
==PAGE:74==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
69 
6      Conclusion and future work 
Through the use of theoretical practices, along with the formation of a model to predict the 
particle size of growing platinum nanoparticles by atomistic simulation using the ASE 
simulation package, a method was developed and demonstrated in which Pt/C nanoparticles 
could be synthesized using a straightforward chemical route in any mean particle size up to 
11 nm. The synthesis was performed using the polyol method, using ethylene glycol as both 
a dispersive solvent and a reduction agent and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as a stabilization 
agent. The catalysts synthesized show an excellent particle size distribution with a small 
standard deviation (рқңҺ < 1.5), rivaling those of commercially available Pt/C catalysts. The 
catalysts also show an acceptable dispersion, but improving this proved challenging and can 
still be improved upon through further development of the synthesis method. 
However, the use of PVP came with its own challenges with recovery and purification. Even 
after repeated water and ethanol washings, TGA results show that there yet remains a 
significant fraction of impurities in the finished catalysts. Additionally, a higher fraction of PVP 
would often result in a lower-than-expected platinum loading, presumably from the steric 
interactions between the PVP and the platinum nanoparticles. The formation of a better 
understanding of the steric interactions in the EG/PVP system and the development of a 
better methodology in the purification and removal of impurities after the synthesis remain 
a challenge to be undertaken in future works.  
Once acceptable Pt/C precursors were synthesized, a method for the reliable synthesis of       
Pt-RE nanoalloy catalysts, based on the experimentally fast and straightforward method 
developed by Hu et al. (2021) 1, was developed and demonstrated. The method successfully 
produced Pt5Nd alloy with 100% alloying using Pt/C precursors of <7 nm and was also able to 
reach ~95% conversion using precursors <11 nm, showing good dispersion. However, at 
larger particle sizes, TEM imaging showed that the particles would tend to disintegrate and 
merge together, thus forming a fraction of very small and very large particles, widening the 
particle size distribution. As such, proper control of the particle size distribution for alloying 
of larger samples needs yet further development to allow the ability to prepare ideal catalysts. 
RDE experiments of the alloyed catalysts show mass activities at 0.9 V vs. RHE of up to            
1.82 A/mgpt, which is the highest ever reported ORR activity for Pt-Nd catalysts but falls short 
of other lanthanide nanoalloys reported in the literature, such as PtxGd or PtxY. In addition, 
the ascending trend of ORR activity vs. particle size shown for other alloys in the literature 
was not supported by the results in this report. However, due to the uneven morphology and 
incomplete alloying of the prepared nanoalloy catalysts, it remains to be seen whether this 
may change once a methodology for synthesizing more uniform particles has been developed. 
==PAGE:75==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
70 
The stability of the prepared catalysts was tested through ASTs and have shown decent 
results, showing losses of between 15-20% after 10,000 cycles between 0.025 V to 1.025 V at 
a scan rate of 100 mV/s. This rivals and even slightly improves upon other Pt-RE alloys 
previously reported in the literature.  
In conclusion, the results obtained in this project show that it is possible to synthesize very 
uniform platinum nanoparticles of any size up to 11 nm by a very simple chemical method, 
mainly using common chemicals, which leaves ample opportunity for scaling up and 
commercialization. In addition, the alloying of said catalysts with rare-earth metals, while not 
yet perfected, has been demonstrated with, at minimum, 95% conversion. There remain 
many facets of the complete procedure that have room for improvement. However, the 
results leave a rich foundation to build upon and may help form the blueprints for the future 
sustainability of hydrogen-based fuel cells using Pt-RE alloy catalysts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
71 
7      Bibliography 
1. Hu, Y., Jensen, J. O., Norby, P., Cleemann, L. N., Yang, F., & Li, Q. (2021). Mechanistic 
Insights into the Synthesis of PlatinumвҖ“Rare Earth Metal Nanoalloys by a Solid-State 
Chemical Route. Chemistry of Materials, 33(2), 535вҖ“546. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c03291 
2. World Bank Open DataвҖ”Population, total. (n.d.). World Bank Open Data. Retrieved June 
26, 2023, from https://data.worldbank.org 
3. World Energy Outlook 2022 вҖ“ Analysis. (n.d.). IEA. Retrieved June 26, 2023, from 
https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022 
4. IEA. (2021). Net Zero by 2050. https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050 
5. Li, C., Liu, Y., Xu, B., & Ma, Z. (2019). Finite Time Thermodynamic Optimization of an 
Irreversible Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell for Vehicle Use. Processes, 7, 419. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/pr7070419 
6. Holton, O., & Stevenson, J. (2013). The Role of Platinum in Proton Exchange Membrane 
Fuel Cells. Platinum Metals Review, 57, 259вҖ“271. 
https://doi.org/10.1595/147106713X671222 
7. Stephens, I. E. L., Bondarenko, A. S., GrГёnbjerg, U., Rossmeisl, J., & Chorkendorff, I. 
(2012). Understanding the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction on platinum and its 
alloys. Energy & Environmental Science, 5(5), 6744. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c2ee03590a 
8. Wang, X., Li, Z., Qu, Y., Yuan, T., Wang, W., Wu, Y., & Li, Y. (2019). Review of Metal 
Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction: From Nanoscale Engineering to Atomic 
Design. Chem, 5(6), 1486вҖ“1511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chempr.2019.03.002 
9. Julukian, A., Fadnes, T., Raaen, S., & Balci, M. (2011). Size effect on thermal desorption of 
CO from Pt nanostructures on graphite. Journal of Applied Physics, 109(12), 123503. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3596572 
10. Murphy, S., Strebel, C., Vendelbo, S. B., Conradsen, C., Tison, Y., Nielsen, K., Bech, L., 
Nielsen, R. M., Johansson, M., Chorkendorff, I., & Nielsen, J. H. (2011). Probing the 
crossover in CO desorption from single crystal to nanoparticulate Ru model catalysts. 
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 13(21), 10333. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c1cp20371a 
==PAGE:77==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
72 
11. Ono, L. K., Yuan, B., Heinrich, H., & Cuenya, B. R. (2010). Formation and Thermal Stability 
of Platinum Oxides on Size-Selected Platinum Nanoparticles: Support Effects. The 
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 114(50), 22119вҖ“22133. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp1086703 
12. Michely, T., & Comsa, G. (1991). Temperature dependence of the sputtering morphology 
of Pt(111). Surface Science, 256(3), 217вҖ“226. https://doi.org/10.1016/0039-
6028(91)90865-P 
13. Rossmeisl, J., Karlberg, G. S., Jaramillo, T., & NГёrskov, J. K. (2008). Steady state oxygen 
reduction and cyclic voltammetry. Faraday Discussions, 140(0), 337вҖ“346. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/B802129E 
14. Garcia-Araez, N., Climent, V., & Feliu, J. (2009). Potential-Dependent Water Orientation 
on Pt(111), Pt(100), and Pt(110), As Inferred from Laser-Pulsed Experiments. 
Electrostatic and Chemical Effects. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 113(21), 
9290вҖ“9304. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp900792q 
15. Suzuki, S., Onodera, T., Kawaji, J., Mizukami, T., & Yamaga, K. (2012). Effect of support 
materials on platinum lattice strain and its oxygen reduction activity. Applied 
Catalysis A: General, 427вҖ“428, 92вҖ“97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2012.03.034 
16. Mayrhofer, K. J. J., Hartl, K., Juhart, V., & Arenz, M. (2009). Degradation of carbon-
supported Pt bimetallic nanoparticles by surface segregation. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 131(45), 16348вҖ“16349. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja9074216 
17. Dubau, L., Lopez-Haro, M., Castanheira, L., Durst, J., Chatenet, M., Bayle-Guillemaud, P., 
GuГ©taz, L., CaquГ©, N., Rossinot, E., & Maillard, F. (2013). Probing the structure, the 
composition and the ORR activity of Pt3Co/C nanocrystallites during a 3422h PEMFC 
ageing test. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 142вҖ“143, 801вҖ“808. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2013.06.011 
18. Escudero-Escribano, M., Malacrida, P., Hansen, M. H., Vej-Hansen, U. G., VelГЎzquez-
Palenzuela, A., Tripkovic, V., SchiГёtz, J., Rossmeisl, J., Stephens, I. E. L., & 
Chorkendorff, I. (2016). Tuning the activity of Pt alloy electrocatalysts by means of 
the lanthanide contraction. Science, 352(6281), 73вҖ“76. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad8892 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
73 
19. VelГЎzquez-Palenzuela, A., Masini, F., Pedersen, A. F., Escudero-Escribano, M., Deiana, D., 
Malacrida, P., Hansen, T. W., Friebel, D., Nilsson, A., Stephens, I. E. L., & 
Chorkendorff, I. (2015). The enhanced activity of mass-selected PtxGd nanoparticles 
for oxygen electroreduction. Journal of Catalysis, 328, 297вҖ“307. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcat.2014.12.012 
20. Hernandez-Fernandez, P., Masini, F., McCarthy, D. N., Strebel, C. E., Friebel, D., Deiana, 
D., Malacrida, P., Nierhoff, A., Bodin, A., Wise, A. M., Nielsen, J. H., Hansen, T. W., 
Nilsson, A., Stephens, I. E. L., & Chorkendorff, I. (2014). Mass-selected nanoparticles 
of PtxY as model catalysts for oxygen electroreduction. Nature Chemistry, 6(8), 
Article 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.2001 
21. Perez-Alonso, F. J., McCarthy, D. N., Nierhoff, A., Hernandez-Fernandez, P., Strebel, C., 
Stephens, I. E. L., Nielsen, J. H., & Chorkendorff, I. (2012). The Effect of Size on the 
Oxygen Electroreduction Activity of Mass-Selected Platinum Nanoparticles. 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 51(19), 4641вҖ“4643. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201200586 
22. Stephens, I. E. L., Bondarenko, A. S., Bech, L., & Chorkendorff, I. (2012). Oxygen 
Electroreduction Activity and X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Platinum and 
Early Transition Metal Alloys. ChemCatChem, 4(3), 341вҖ“349. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cctc.201100343 
23. Nichols, W. T., Sasaki, T., & Koshizaki, N. (2006). Laser ablation of a platinum target in 
water. III. Laser-induced reactions. Journal of Applied Physics, 100(11), 114913. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2390642 
24. Dhand, C., Dwivedi, N., Loh, X. J., Ying, A. N. J., Verma, N. K., Beuerman, R. W., 
Lakshminarayanan, R., & Ramakrishna, S. (2015). Methods and strategies for the 
synthesis of diverse nanoparticles and their applications: A comprehensive overview. 
RSC Advances, 5(127), 105003вҖ“105037. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA19388E 
25. Zhou, Q., Jensen, J. O., Cleemann, L. N., Li, Q.-F., & Hu, Y. (2022). Tailoring the particle 
sizes of Pt5Ce alloy nanoparticles for the oxygen reduction reaction. Advanced 
Sensor and Energy Materials, 1(3), 100025. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asems.2022.100025 
26. Fang, X., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., Jiang, Z., & Dong, M. (2019). Microorganism Assisted 
Synthesized Nanoparticles for Catalytic Applications. Energies, 12(1), Article 1. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en12010190 
==PAGE:79==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
74 
27. Gautam, A., Guleria, P., & Kumar, V. (2020). Platinum Nanoparticles: Synthesis Strategies 
and Applications. Nanoarchitectonics, 70вҖ“86. 
https://doi.org/10.37256/nat.122020286.70-86 
28. Khan, Md. A. R., Mamun, M. S. A., & Ara, M. H. (2021). Review on platinum 
nanoparticles: Synthesis, characterization, and applications. Microchemical Journal, 
171, 106840. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2021.106840 
29. Xia, Y., Xiong, Y., Lim, B., & Skrabalak, S. E. (2009). Shape-Controlled Synthesis of Metal 
Nanocrystals: Simple Chemistry Meets Complex Physics? Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition, 48(1), 60вҖ“103. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200802248 
30. Watzky, M. A., & Finke, R. G. (1997). Transition Metal Nanocluster Formation Kinetic and 
Mechanistic Studies. A New Mechanism When Hydrogen Is the Reductant: Slow, 
Continuous Nucleation and Fast Autocatalytic Surface Growth. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 119(43), 10382вҖ“10400. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja9705102 
31. Quinson, J., & Jensen, K. M. Гҳ. (2020). From platinum atoms in molecules to colloidal 
nanoparticles: A review on reduction, nucleation and growth mechanisms. Advances 
in Colloid and Interface Science, 286, 102300. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2020.102300 
32. Semagina, N., & Kiwi, L. (2009). Recent Advances in the Liquid-Phase Synthesis of Metal 
Nanostructures with Controlled Shape and Size for Catalysis. Catalysis Reviews, 51. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01614940802480379 
33. WebElements Periodic TableвҖҜВ» PlatinumвҖҜВ» radii of atoms and ions. (n.d.). Retrieved 
March 13, 2023, from https://webelements.com/platinum/atom_sizes.html 
34. Chen, S., Yang, Q., Wang, H., Zhang, S., Li, J., Wang, Y., Chu, W., Ye, Q., & Song, L. (2015). 
Initial Reaction Mechanism of Platinum Nanoparticle in MethanolвҖ“Water System and 
the Anomalous Catalytic Effect of Water. Nano Letters, 15(9), 5961вҖ“5968. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b02098 
35. Harada, M., & Kamigaito, Y. (2012). Nucleation and Aggregative Growth Process of 
Platinum Nanoparticles Studied by in Situ Quick XAFS Spectroscopy. Langmuir, 28(5), 
2415вҖ“2428. https://doi.org/10.1021/la204031j 
36. From platinum atoms in molecules to colloidal nanoparticles: A review on reduction, 
nucleation and growth mechanisms | Elsevier Enhanced Reader. (n.d.). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2020.102300 
==PAGE:80==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
75 
37. FiГ©vet, F., Ammar-Merah, S., Brayner, R., Chau, F., Giraud, M., Mammeri, F., Peron, J., 
Piquemal, J.-Y., Sicard, L., & Viau, G. (2018). The polyol process: A unique method for 
easy access to metal nanoparticles with tailored sizes, shapes and compositions. 
Chemical Society Reviews, 47(14), 5187вҖ“5233. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00777A 
38. Reichardt, C. (1994). Solvatochromic Dyes as Solvent Polarity Indicators. Chemical 
Reviews, 94(8), 2319вҖ“2358. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr00032a005 
39. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (87th ed.). (2007). CRC Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja069813z 
40. Chen, M., & Xing, Y. (2005). Polymer-Mediated Synthesis of Highly Dispersed Pt 
Nanoparticles on Carbon Black. Langmuir, 21(20), 9334вҖ“9338. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/la051892p 
41. Favilla, P. C., Acosta, J. J., Schvezov, C. E., Sercovich, D. J., & Collet-Lacoste, J. R. (2013). 
Size control of carbon-supported platinum nanoparticles made using polyol method 
for low temperature fuel cells. Chemical Engineering Science, 101, 27вҖ“34. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2013.05.067 
42. Steinfeldt, N. (2012). In Situ Monitoring of Pt Nanoparticle Formation in Ethylene Glycol 
Solution by SAXSвҖ”Influence of the NaOH to Pt Ratio. Langmuir, 28(36), 13072вҖ“
13079. https://doi.org/10.1021/la3026232 
43. Bundli, S., Dhak, P., Jensen, M., GunnГҰs, A. E., Nguyen, P. D., FjellvГҘg, H., & SjГҘstad, A. O. 
(2019). Controlled alloying of Pt-Rh nanoparticles by the polyol approach. Journal of 
Alloys and Compounds, 779, 879вҖ“885. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2018.11.301 
44. Thomas, S., Kalarikkal, N., & Abraham, A. R. (Eds.). (2022). Design, fabrication, and 
characterization of multifunctional nanomaterials. Elsevier. 
45. Quantitative kinetic analysis on oxygen reduction reaction: A perspective | Elsevier 
Enhanced Reader. (n.d.). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoms.2021.03.006 
46. Chem Europe. (n.d.). KelvinвҖҷs Circulation Theorem. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.chemeurope.com/en/encyclopedia/Kelvin%27s_circulation_theorem.h
tml 
47. Peroff, A. (2023, May 1). Levich Study (RDE). Pine Research Instrumentation Store. 
https://pineresearch.com/shop/kb/theory/hydrodynamic-electrochemistry/levich-
study-rde/ 
==PAGE:81==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
76 
48. Friedrich, K. A., Henglein, F., Stimming, U., & Unkauf, W. (2000). Size dependence of the 
CO monolayer oxidation on nanosized Pt particles supported on gold. Electrochimica 
Acta, 45(20), 3283вҖ“3293. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0013-4686(00)00430-8 
49. Kinoshita, K., & Stonehart, P. (1977). Preparation and Characterization of Highly 
Dispersed Electrocatalytic Materials. In J. O. Bockris & B. E. Conway (Eds.), Modern 
Aspects of Electrochemistry: No. 12 (pp. 183вҖ“266). Springer US. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-7452-1_4 
50. Garrick, T. R., Moylan, T. E., Carpenter, M. K., & Kongkanand, A. (2016). 
Electrochemically Active Surface Area Measurement of Aged Pt Alloy Catalysts in 
PEM Fuel Cells by CO Stripping. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 164(2), F55. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0381702jes 
51. Brandes, B. A. (n.d.). Novel Synthesis Routes of Platinum Rare Earth Metal Alloy 
Nanoparticles as Catalysts for Hydrogen Fuel Cells. 
52. GNU Lesser General Public License. (2007). Free Software Foundation. 
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.html 
53. Huy, H. A., & Van, H. T. T. (n.d.). EFFECTS OF ETHYLENE GLYCOL, TEMPERATURE AND pH 
ON THE SIZE AND THE DISPERSION OF THE PLATINUM NANOPARTICLE CATALYST ON 
CARBON SUPPORT. JOURNAL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 1(12). 
54. Papa, F., Negrila, C., Miyazaki, A., & Balint, I. (2011). Morphology and chemical state of 
PVP-protected Pt, PtвҖ“Cu, and PtвҖ“Ag nanoparticles prepared by alkaline polyol 
method. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 13(10), 5057вҖ“5064. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-011-0486-9 
55. GГіmez de la Fuente, J. L., MartГӯnez-Huerta, M. V., Rojas, S., Terreros, P., Fierro, J. L. G., & 
PeГұa, M. A. (2005). Enhanced methanol electrooxidation activity of PtRu 
nanoparticles supported on H2O2-functionalized carbon black. Carbon, 43(14), 
3002вҖ“3005. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2005.06.015 
56. nanoComposix. (n.d.). Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) Surface. NanoComposix. Retrieved 
June 26, 2023, from https://nanocomposix.com/pages/polyvinylpyrrolidone-pvp-
surface 
57. Tarachand, Sathe, V. G., & Okram, G. S. (2018). Zeta potential and Raman studies of PVP 
capped Bi2S3 nanoparticles synthesized by polyol method. AIP Conference 
Proceedings, 1953(1), 030190. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5032525 
==PAGE:82==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
77 
58. Purgato, F., Montoro, L., Ribeiro, J., Kokoh, K., & Olivi, P. (2010). The Effect of Heat 
Treatment on the Preparation of Pt-RuO 2 /C Electrocatalysts. Electrocatalysis, 1, 
122вҖ“128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12678-010-0019-9 
59. Luo, Y., Habrioux, A., Calvillo, L., Granozzi, G., & Alonso-Vante, N. (2014). Yttrium 
Oxide/Gadolinium Oxide-Modified Platinum Nanoparticles as Cathodes for the 
Oxygen Reduction Reaction. ChemPhysChem, 15(10), 2136вҖ“2144. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.201400042 
60. Fan, C., Li, G., Gu, J., Wang, Q., Li, S., & Li, B. (n.d.). Molten-Salt Electrochemical 
Deoxidation Synthesis of Platinum-Neodymium Nanoalloy Catalysts for Oxygen 
Reduction Reaction. Small, n/a(n/a), 2300110. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202300110 
61. Thiele, G., Poston, M., & Brown, R. (n.d.). A Case Study in Sizing Nanoparticles. 
62. Tadros, T. (2013). Ostwald Ripening. In T. Tadros (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Colloid and 
Interface Science (pp. 820вҖ“820). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20665-
8_124 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
The size effect of Platinum Neodymium nanoparticles on the ORR  
78 
Appendix I вҖ“ Code template used during ASE simulations 
""" 
Script to generate platinum particles using the ASE library. 
date: 26/02-2023 
@author: Marc Lindgaard 
""" 
 
# Import 
from ase import * 
from ase.cluster.cubic import FaceCenteredCubic 
from ase.cluster.cluster import Cluster 
 
# Specifying the Miller indices of the surfaces of the particle 
surfaces = [(1, 0, 0), (1, 1, 1), (1, -1, 1)] 
 
# Lattice constant for Pt 
lc = 3.962 
 
# Init lists 
layer_list = [] 
d_vol_list = [] 
d_shape_list = [] 
 
# Loop through number of lattice full-shells, from 1 to 20 
for x in range(1, 20, 1): 
    layer_no = x 
     
    # Set no. of layers, corresponding to the Miller indices in list 'surfaces' 
    layers = [layer_no, layer_no, layer_no] 
     
    # Using the 'FaceCenteredCubic' function to generate an fcc particle 
    atoms = FaceCenteredCubic('Pt', surfaces, layers, latticeconstant=lc) 
     
    # Using the 'get.diameter' function to generate diameters of the particles 
    diameter_vol = Cluster.get_diameter(atoms, method='volume') 
    diameter_shp = Cluster.get_diameter(atoms, method='shape') 
     
    # Append to lists before loop ends 
    layer_list.append(layer_no) 
    d_vol_list.append(diameter_vol) 
    d_shape_list.append(diameter_shp) 
     
    # Draw particle in edit-mode if shell size is 1, 2 or 3 
    if x in (1,2,3): 
        atoms.edit() 
 
