==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Fast Querying for
Gapped Pattern Search
Adamantios
Alexandros
Kounis
(s202789)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis focuses on the complex problem of gapped pattern matching, drawing
from the work of Cáceres et al. [CPZ20] on fast indexing of gapped patterns. The
primary objective was to replicate the author’s findings and make improvements in
the mentioned algorithmic implementations and offer alternatives while considering
other state-of-the-art algorithms that could yield equally or more effective results.
To this effect, a benchmarking solution was developed during this process using a
modular implementation approach to compare the eﬀiciency of various algorithms in
a controlled and easy-to-replicate environment every time an execution was initiated.
The solution is meant to break down each algorithm into three modules: one for
identifying occurrences in text, another for filtering these occurrences, and a final
module for tallying results in relation to the gaps. The modular approach facilitated
the reuse of several fragments across multiple implementations, allowing for quick
evaluation of untested approaches.
In the findings, definitive improvements were noticed, especially in the implemen-
tations of the second and third modules. The advances made in selected areas of the
algorithms are not particularly exotic, but they were capable of achieving a noticeable
improvement in the runtime of the algorithms. Additionally, this thesis sheds light
on the potential usage of much faster algorithms, whose pre-processing time is time-
consuming but essential to their gains in performance and draws lines for comparing
them within specific use cases. Lastly, a key outcome of this study is the develop-
ment of a comprehensive, reusable solution that can evaluate and compare various
algorithms for gapped pattern matching, thereby setting the stage for future research
in this area.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Denne afhandling fokuserer på problemet “gapped pattern matching”, og bygger
videre på Cáceres’s et al. [CPZ20] arbejde med “fast indexing of gapped patterns”.
Afhandlingens primære formål er at duplikere Cácere’s resultater, og forbedre dem
i konteksten af de algoritmiske implementationer han foreslår for på den måde at
tilbyde alternativer tilgange. Derudover er der foretaget en sammenligning med an-
dre state-of the-art algoritmer der i de samme scenarier potentielt kunne producere
lignende eller bedre resultater.
For at gøre det muligt at producere sammenlignelige resultater blev der, ved brug
af en modulær implementerings strategi, udviklet en benchmarking løsning. Formålet
med løsningen er at have et let tilgængeligt værktøj til at genskabe resultater i et
kontrolleret miljø ved hver eksekvering. Løsningens formål er at inddele de forskellige
algoritmer ind i 3 moduler: Det første modul har til opgave at identificere antallet af
forekomster i en tekst, det andet modul filtrerer forekomsterne og det sidste modul
optæller resultaterne i relation til mellemrummene. Den modulære tilgang til ud-
viklingen faciliterede genbrug af flere fragmenter af tidligere løsninger, hvilket har
tilladt hurtigere evaluering af tilgange der endnu ikke var testede.
Resultaterne viser definitive forbedringer, især i implementeringen af det andet
og tredje modul. Fremskridtene i de udvalgte dele af løsningen er ikke af eksotisk
karakter, men har ikke desto mindre resulteret i ikke-negligerbare forbedringer i
algoritmernes køretider. Udover de ovennævnte emner afdækker denne afhandling
også hvorledes andre algoritmer, der har kortere køretid, men er afhængige af en
tidskrævende klargørings proces for at opnå deres resultater, kan anvendes i speci-
fikke scenarier. Afslutningsvis er et af afhandlingens vigtigste resultater udviklingen
af en omfattende genanvendelig løsning der kan evaluere og sammenligne forskellige
“gapped pattern matching” algoritmer, for på den måde at lægge an til videre research
inden for dette område.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 1, 2023
Adamantios Alexandros Kounis (s202789)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my profound gratitude to my supervisors, Inge Li Gørtz and
Philip Bille, for the guidance and support they provided during this Master’s thesis
period, and throughout the courses they taught me at DTU in the past years.
On a personal note, I want to acknowledge my family: my father Pantelis, my
mother Jolanta, my sister Victoria, and my uncle Giorgos, as well as my extended
family, my girlfriend Alina, and my closest friends, for the support and encouragement
they offered me throughout these intense years. I would not have reached this point
without them.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Real world applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Overview of the thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Code repository and Project Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Algorithm
7
2.1
Overview of Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Find Occurrences Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Filtering Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Intersect Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Auxiliary Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results & Findings
29
3.1
Filter Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Intersection Algorithm Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Finding Occurrences Algorithm Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Methodology
39
4.1
Description of the data sets used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Explanation of the evaluation metrics used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Verifying the Accuracy of the Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5
Conclusion
45
5.1
Recap of main findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Suggestions for future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Bibliography
47
A
Code Structure
49
B
Bench marking Results
51
C
Project Description
65
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The exponential rise in the size of data sets has prompted the development of more
sophisticated techniques for pattern matching. These newly discovered methods must
handle larger volumes of data, be adaptable to various patterns, and be flexible enough
to suit different data types and testing scenarios. Particular attention is given to the
approaches that allow for tackling gapped pattern-matching problems.
These advanced methods offer a more dynamic and high-performing solution for
pattern matching in extensive data sets. Unlike exact string matching, gapped pattern
matching allows for gaps with variable lengths within patterns within data sets of any
size. They are enabling a more nuanced and flexible approach to pattern recognition.
These approaches mainly apply to areas like bioinformatics, which are used in prac-
tices like aligning DNA sequences. But its use isn’t limited there, with its practises
increasing performance in search engines, natural language processing, and machine
learning.
This thesis thoroughly explores the well-established state-of-the-art approaches
to solving the problem of gapped pattern matching.
It analyzes their functional
performance in different test cases and practical applications while considering their
appropriate usage scenarios.
1.1
Problem definition
Gapped pattern search is a method that allows us to find all valid instances of sub-
strings in a given text string T that satisfy certain gap constraints.
The gapped
pattern P consists of a sequence of strings and variable length gaps, where a gap
gδ,∆is a string of any length between δ and ∆from the alphabet Σ. The gapped
pattern P is formed by alternating between strings and variable length gaps and can
be expressed in this manner.
P = P1 · [ gδ,∆] · P2 · [gδ,∆] · · · [gδ,∆] · Pk
A gapped pattern P matches a sub-string S of T if and only if S = P1· G · · · G· Pk,
where each G is any string of length between δ and ∆, for values predetermined and
constant for all the gaps between all pattern occurrences.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Related work
Within the area of Gapped pattern matching, a primary focus as a starting point
was the works by Manuel , Simon J. Puglisi, and Bella Zhukova, authors of ”Fast
Indexes for Gapped Pattern Matching” [CPZ20] who proposed quite innovative in-
dexing strategies that enhance the eﬀiciency of pattern matching, even in the presence
of gaps. This paper revolutionizes traditional string matching by demonstrating how
fast indexes can be utilized to speed up pattern-matching processes significantly, pro-
vided the search of a series of different combinations of patterns was made on the
exact text T. This was achieved by taking advantage of a suﬀix array calculation prior
to the indexing stage of the algorithm, this way pre-processing the more significant
variable the instance consists of. Regarding the actual running phase of the proposed
algorithm, the paper presents a method for VLG matching that works by sorting and
intersecting ranges of the suﬀix array that contain the occurrences of all patterns,
which is also explained in much more detail in a subsequent section. Cáceres et al.
also introduce filtering techniques and a direct text-checking approach that can lead
to significant performance gains, particularly when the number of pattern matches
increases.
Another paper that was considered when testing the different approaches was the
influential work of Philip Bille and Inge Li Gørtz, authors of ”The String Matching
with Variable Length Gaps” [Bil+12].
This paper presents a unique approach to
handling variable gap lengths in string matching that do not require extraordinary
time spent on preprocessing any data but instead focuses on the patterns themselves.
Bille’s et al. ingenious strategies made retrieving the number of occurrences simple
without dealing with the potentially exponential number of iterations when comparing
the gap ranges but rather focusing on the first and last occurrence of the indexes found
within the range.
1.3
Real world applications
Fast indexing for gapped pattern matching is a crucial algorithm that has various
applications in the real world and is applied in various industries. This section will
discuss some of the most significant areas where this algorithm is utilized.
Genomics and Bio informatics
In genomics and bioinformatics, fast indexing for gapped pattern-matching algo-
rithms is used for sequence alignment and searching for specific DNA patterns. The
human genome, with its more than 3 billion base pairs in letter form, is a prime appli-
cation for this kind of variable length pattern matching. This pattern-finding method
has been useful in detecting genetic diseases and mutations and in pre-diagnosing the
effectiveness of different drugs based on the genetic signature of a test subject. For ex-
ample, the algorithm can detect single nucleotide variations, insertions, deletions, or
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Real world applications
3
mutations in DNA sequences. These variations can be the seeds of the development of
genetic diseases, and their identification can help in early diagnosis and treatment of
diseases and conditions. Also, with a more eﬀicient algorithm, it is possible to speed
up the analysis time and the comparison of genomes, which in turn can accelerate
research in the field and make custom-made medicine more affordable. Additionally,
the algorithm is used to identify the potential drug effectiveness by analysing gene
expression data on test subjects to identify genes significantly impacting disease pro-
gression and how different genes respond to different medicines. [AKO04]
Text Retrieval and Search Engines
Fast indexing for gapped pattern matching is also widely used in search engines
and text retrieval systems to quickly retrieve relevant documents based on specific
queries. Improving these systems’ eﬀiciency and ensuring relevant results are deliv-
ered to users is essential. For instance, the algorithm is used in academic databases
to identify papers that mention all of the search query terms, even if they are not
side by side in the text. This is the case, too, in social media posts and web search
engines, where the structure of the text and how it is presented to the users vary
widely depending on the medium that is going to be read and presented to the reader.
Additionally, the algorithm is used to identify patterns in text data, such as identify-
ing the sentiment of a text. [ZM06]
Natural Language Processing
Fast indexing for gapped pattern matching plays a crucial role in natural lan-
guage processing, specifically in the domain of sentiment analysis. It is widely used
to identify specific patterns of words and phrases that indicate positive or negative
sentiment, allowing for more accurate analysis of large data sets. This can be done
by looping through the different grammatically correct iterations and combinations
of subject, object, adjectives, and verbs within sentences. The algorithm is used to
identify relationships between these entities in text data. [PL08]
Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning
Fast indexing for gapped pattern matching is utilized in pattern recognition and
machine learning, specifically in feature extraction. It is used to identify specific pat-
terns within large data sets, allowing for more eﬀicient feature extraction and more
accurate predictions. For instance, the algorithm is used to identify facial features
in images, detect objects in images, and identify patterns in financial data.
This
allows machine learning models not to be dependent on the size of the individual
input, i.e., an image size, or the span of the financial results of a commodities market
and find common underlying patterns that allow for the recognition of elements that
can then be aggregated into the recognition of more complex entities in large data
sets. Additionally, the algorithm is used to identify patterns in speech data, such as
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
identifying the speaker’s emotions and gender. And in more recent approaches, the
patterns found in someone’s voice can become their signature and be applied in a
text-to-speech machine learning model to reproduce their voice.[Bis06]
1.4
Research objectives
The goal of this thesis is threefold: to design and implement the state-of-the-art algo-
rithms for gapped pattern search mentioned in the paper by Cáceres et al. [CPZ20],
and attempt to verify their findings. Secondly, an attempt will be made to improve
the performance of the proposed solution and consider the cases in which their per-
formance is the most optimal. Lastly, a comparison with other state-of-the-art ap-
proaches will be made, with which there will be an exchange of implemented sections.
Some of the potential directions for investigation will be (1) seeing how the filters
described by Cáceres et al. [CPZ20] betters or worsens the running time of other
gapped pattern search algorithms such as Bille’s [Bil+12] usage of the AC automa-
ton. (2) Investigating improvements to the SA-Scan mentioned and elaborating on a
solution with more technical insights when considering the pattern count being higher
than two. (3) Lastly, exploring suggestions for usages for these combinations of ap-
proaches, which as mentioned before, do vary primarily on the presence and absence
of the pre-processing element of the solution. Given the specific case scenario drawn
from Cáceres et al., [CPZ20], even though not precisely stated, the algorithm is ex-
pected to be run on a large selection of varied lists of different patterns of different
sizes which are not precisely known at the start of the algorithm, except for text T
which is known and all pattern search would all occur against the exact text T. Given
this specific use-case the author takes advantage of the usage of the SA (suﬀix array),
which is pre-calculated and this way offers an edge to the proposed solution.
At the end of the thesis, it is one of the objectives to be able to determine which
algorithm, with its most compatible number of filters and occurrence intersecting
methods, for the number of pattern searches made, leads in effectiveness. The com-
parison will be considered by considering the entire solution as an algorithm runtime,
therefore including the amount of time spent for the preprocessing of the suﬀix array
used by the SA scan algorithm. The algorithms will both include any improvements
that were made to all segments of the proposed solutions.
The algorithms are implemented in C# and evaluated on a set of benchmark
instances. As mentioned above, the benchmark instances will be derived from real-
world data sets to best represent their expected performance on realistic applications.
The performance of the algorithms will be evaluated in terms of the overall query
time (execution time in ms). No multi-threading or concurrent calculations when it
comes to the implementation of the solution are to be considered.
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Overview of the thesis structure
5
1.5
Overview of the thesis structure
The thesis is organized into five sections, with each of them serving an essential role
in explaining the research process and the outcomes drawn from it.
Chapter 2 offers insights into all the algorithms that were considered and imple-
mented during this thesis. It provides a structured analysis of the overall solution
and detailed explanations for each step of the algorithmic process.
Chapter 3 presents the results derived from various test cases, highlighting the
implementations that showed superior performance during the testing phase.
Chapter 4 outlines the methodological approach adopted during this thesis, pro-
viding detailed information on the characteristics of the test cases and the criteria
used for evaluating algorithmic performance.
Chapter 5 draws conclusions about the advancements made in this thesis. It
provides insights into potential future work that can build upon these developments
and concludes with reflections on the implications of the findings.
1.6
Code repository and Project Resources
This paper’s code and project resources can be accessed on GitHub at https://
github.com/adamantiosK/Fast-Querying-For-Gapped-Pattern-Search. Addition-
ally, Vikas Awadhiya has utilised an external project for suﬀix sorting. Although it
was considered for incorporation at one stage using the DC3 algorithm, it was not used
in the final version of the code. However, the external project remains in the directory
of the repository as an externally imported project within the solution. The exter-
nal project can be found at https://github.com/vikasawadhiya/DC3-Algorithm.
Lastly, a significant part of the implementation of the variation of the Prefix Dou-
bling algorithm is contributed to Nidhi Goel posted on the GeeksForGeeks.
The
work can be found at https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/suffix-array-set-2-a-
nlognlogn-algorithm/.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Algorithm
This section elaborates on the gapped pattern-matching algorithm’s implementation
details. It examines the individual operations and processes that make up the algo-
rithm as a whole, demonstrating how they operate together and in what order. The
objective is to thoroughly examine the methodology’s actual use, emphasising how
the theoretical foundations are translated into a practical algorithm for resolving the
gapped pattern matching challenge. This completes the overall design by providing
a link between the data selection and evaluation metrics and the algorithm’s actual
use and functionality.
2.1
Overview of Solution
The main goal of this approach is to create a tool that can compare various gapped
pattern-matching algorithms. The tool’s structure is centred around a shell method,
creating a standardised environment for executing and evaluating different algorithms
and their implementations. This method is utilized by the higher-level implementa-
tion, which is responsible for preparing data sets, constraint tuples, and variations
of implementations to run the shell command for every available combination. This
approach guarantees consistent output across multiple runs since all implementa-
tions are executed against the same prepared sets of data, which are created at the
instantiation of the benchmarking component. This ensures accurate performance
comparisons regardless of the pattern-matching result.
In each run, the shell method receives three primary arguments alongside the data
set and constraints necessary to perform the search:
• Find Occurrences Implementation: This argument represents an imple-
mentation responsible for identifying the occurrences of each pattern within
the provided text. (See 2.2 for the different algorithms which can be plugged
into this function to locate pattern occurrences in the provided text)
• Filter Implementation(s): A list of implementations provided as the second
argument, these functions serve as filters, disqualifying candidate positions that,
under no circumstances, could satisfy the gap constraints and pattern matching
conditions. Within a specific case, this step is optional as filtering increases
the performance, but it’s not necessary for the algorithm to return all sets of
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Algorithm
results. (See 2.3 for the different algorithms which can be plugged into this list
of functions)
• Intersect Implementation: The third argument is an algorithm for inter-
secting the occurrences of the patterns and returning all possible combinations
where a pattern combination is matched within the gap constraints. This fi-
nal implementation is crucial in identifying the exact matches that satisfy all
conditions. (See 2.4 for the different algorithms which can be plugged into this
function to intersect the occurrences of the patterns)
By structuring the solution in this modular way, it is possible to seamlessly inte-
grate different implementations for each argument, enabling comprehensive and flexi-
ble benchmarking of various gapped pattern-matching algorithms. The shell method
is also responsible for handling the input and output of the algorithm, as well as the
evaluation of the results. This ensures that the results are consistent and comparable
across different implementations.
2.2
Find Occurrences Function
This section describes the algorithmic strategies used to find patterns in a given input
text. These algorithms aim to identify the locations of each occurrence of the patterns
and list them in ascending order if required by the intersecting implementation (2.4).
This helps avoid unnecessary computational steps when sorting the occurrences. The
output is provided as a tuple, which includes the index of the pattern in the pattern
list and a list of all the matched occurrences.
Two different implementations are
considered: one focuses on structuring the text, while the other focuses on the pattern
itself.
2.2.1
SA-Scan
The SA-scan algorithm is based on the concept of a suﬀix array, a data structure
that contains a permutation of a list of integers equal to the length of the text,
such that the suﬀixes of said text are in lexicographical order. This lexicographical
ordering allows all suﬀixes starting with a given pattern to form an interval in the
suﬀix array by comparing the first characters of each suﬀix, and the suﬀix array can
eﬀiciently identify all suﬀixes starting with a given pattern and group them together
in contiguous intervals within the array.
For the construction of the Suﬀix Array, several implementation methods were
considered.
At the initial stages of the Thesis, the usage of the C# built-in Ar-
ray.Sort() method was used, which used a variant of the quick-sort implementation
behind the scenes. That proved to be ineffective with much higher sets of data. In
the paper of Cáceres et al. [CPZ20], the authors do not specify the algorithm used
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Find Occurrences Function
9
for the construction of the Suﬀix Array, as mentioned in a previous section, is con-
sidered to be pre-calculated due to the text T being a known variable. Considering
the research objectives of this thesis and the construction of the suﬀix array being
part of the running time, a state-of-the-art string sorting algorithm had to be im-
plemented. Initially, the implementation of the Difference Cover 3(DC3) algorithm
was considered due to its liner running time and storage complexities, but due to the
limited time and the DC3’s added complexity when its implementation is concerned,
a different implementation was selected. For the construction of the Suﬀix Array,
the thesis incorporated a variant of the Prefix Doubling method.
This technique
provides a sorted array of all the suﬀixes of a given string, enabling eﬀicient string
operations like pattern matching used in the SA-Scan implementation. The Prefix
Doubling algorithm begins by initializing two arrays: suﬀixes and indexes. The array
suﬀixes consist of custom objects where each object represents a suﬀix and its first
two characters, while indexes are an array of indexes. Initially, the algorithm creates
a new suﬀix for each character in the text and sorts these suﬀixes based on their first
two characters. This step is followed by the prefix doubling stage, where a loop starts
with k = 4 and doubles k with each iteration while k < 2n. During this process, the
rank of each suﬀix, based on the first k characters, is updated. If two suﬀixes have
the same rank, they share the same first k characters. The ranks and indexes of the
suﬀixes are updated in the suﬀixes and indexes arrays, respectively, and the suﬀixes
array is sorted based on the first k characters at the end of each iteration. After the
prefix doubling loop, the algorithm constructs the final suﬀix array that contains the
indexes of the sorted suﬀixes, forming the Suﬀix Array of the input text. The Prefix
Doubling method constructs a Suﬀix Array in O(n log2 n) time complexity and O(n)
space complexity, where n is the length of the input text, as it only creates a couple
of auxiliary arrays proportional to the input size.
The time complexity of the SA-Scan algorithm, or at least the portion of the
algorithm responsible for identifying the starting positions of each pattern occurrence
in the input text and generating a list of corresponding integers, can be broken down
into two main parts:
• Finding the intervals of pattern occurrences in the suﬀix array: This
step involves using the lexicographic ordering of the suﬀix array to eﬀiciently
identify all suﬀixes starting with a given pattern, thereby forming an interval
in the suﬀix array. A binary search(2.5.1) can then be used to find the starting
position of each pattern occurrence within the identified interval. This process
is repeated for each of the k patterns, resulting in k ranges of the suﬀix array
containing the pattern occurrences. The time complexity of this step is O(m
log n), where m is the aggregated sum of the lengths of all the patterns.
• Sorting the positions of pattern occurrences: For each range, the algo-
rithm employs the usage of the LSD Radix sort (2.5.3) implementation, which
eﬀiciently returns the found positions in ascending order.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Algorithm
The pseudo-code in Algorithm 1 demonstrates the variant of the Prefix Doubling
method explained above. The method Prefix-Doubling takes only a string text as an
argument, and it returns the Suﬀix Array in the form of an integer list, each pointing
to the index in the original Text.
Algorithm 1 Prefix Doubling Method for Suﬀix Array Construction
1: procedure PrefixDoubling(text)
2:
Define n as the length of the text.
3:
Create an array suﬀixes[0..n-1] to store the suﬀixes of the text.
4:
Create an array indexes[0..n-1] to store the indexes of the suﬀixes.
5:
for each index i from 0 to n-1 do
6:
Create a new suﬀix with the ith character of the text and its next character,
and insert it into the suﬀixes array at position i.
7:
end for
8:
Sort the suﬀixes array based on the first two characters (ranks) of each suﬀix.
9:
for every k from 4 to 2*n, doubling k at each step do
10:
Initialize rank and prev_rank as 0, and assign the first rank of the first
suﬀix to prev_rank.
11:
Assign rank to the first rank of the first suﬀix, and update the correspond-
ing index in indexes array.
12:
for each index i from 1 to n-1 do
13:
if the first rank of the ith suﬀix and its previous suﬀix are the same,
and their second ranks are also the same then
14:
Keep the rank of the ith suﬀix the same.
15:
else
16:
Increment the rank and assign it to the ith suﬀix.
17:
end if
18:
Update the corresponding index in indexes array.
19:
end for
20:
for each index i from 0 to n-1 do
21:
Calculate the index of the next suﬀix and assign the ith suﬀix’s second
rank based on the next suﬀix’s first rank, if the next suﬀix exists. Otherwise,
assign it to -1.
22:
end for
23:
Sort the suﬀixes array based on the first k characters of each suﬀix.
24:
end for
25:
Create an array suﬀixArr to store the final suﬀix array.
26:
for each index i from 0 to n-1 do
27:
Assign the index of the ith suﬀix from suﬀixes array to suﬀixArr.
28:
end for
29:
return suﬀixArr, which is the final suﬀix array.
30: end procedure
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Find Occurrences Function
11
Example:
Consider the following example to understand the workings of the algo-
rithm. We start with the text string ’BANANA’ and task the algorithm to create a
list of integers corresponding to the lexicographic order of the derived suﬀixes from
the original string. These suﬀixes include ’BANANA’, ’ANANA’, ’NANA’, ’ANA’,
’NA’, and ’A’. Each suﬀix is assigned an integer representing its position within the
original string. To illustrate this process, refer to Table 2.1.
In this table, ’i’ is the index indicating the lexicographic order, ’SA[i]’ is the po-
sition of the suﬀix in the original string, and ’Suﬀix’ is the actual substring. For
example, the substring ’A’ has a lexicographic order of 0 (i.e., it appears first when
all substrings are sorted alphabetically), and it originates from the 5th position in the
original string ’BANANA’. This way, the algorithm goes through multiple iterations,
eﬀiciently sorting the suﬀixes to construct the Suﬀix Array, ultimately leading to the
lexicographically sorted order of the substrings.
This implementation of the Prefix Doubling method constructs a Suﬀix Array in
O(n log2 n) time complexity, where n is the length of the input text.
The space
complexity of this algorithm is O(n) as it only creates a couple of auxiliary arrays
proportional to the input size. It is worth noting that a more recent variant of the
Prefix Doubling algorithm [MM90] incorporates Radix sorting(256), which improves
the running time from O(n log2 n) to O(n log n). This use of Radix sorting eliminates
the need for expensive comparison-based sorting algorithms and leverages the eﬀiciency
of Radix sorting, which has a linear time complexity for sorting elements with a fixed
number of digits or characters.
2.2.2
Aho-Corasick Automaton Implementation
For the following implementation, inspiration was drawn from the use of the AC-
Automaton by Bille et al. [Bil+12]. The Aho-Corasick Automaton, developed by
Alfred V. Aho and Margaret J. Corasick in 1975[AC75], is a string-matching algorithm
that is capable of searching for multiple patterns in a single pass through the input
text. It is an extension of the Trie data structure, a tree-like structure that stores
a set of strings in a way that allows for eﬀicient string matching. The Aho-Corasick
Automaton augments the Trie with additional functionality to enable eﬀicient string
i
SA[i]
Suﬀix
0
5
A
1
3
ANA
2
1
ANANA
3
0
BANANA
4
4
NA
5
2
NANA
Table 2.1: Suﬀix Array for ’BANANA’.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Algorithm
matching. The pseudo-code in Algorithm 2 demonstrates the implementations used
to construct the AC automaton using the BuildAhoCorasickAutomaton procedure
and AcoCorasickSearch which finds the indexes of the patterns with which the Trie
was constructed.
Algorithm 2 Aho-Corasick Algorithm
1: procedure BuildAhoCorasickAutomaton(Patterns)
2:
Define goto and output functions.
3:
for each pattern in Patterns do
4:
Insert pattern into trie and set output for its ending vertex.
5:
end for
6:
Initialize an empty queue q, push the root into it.
7:
while q is not empty do
8:
Extract current vertex from q.
9:
for each character c coming out from the current vertex do
10:
Find the next vertex from the current vertex with edge labelled c and
push it into q.
11:
Find the vertex of the longest proper suﬀix for the current pattern in
the trie.
12:
if the longest suﬀix ends at a keyword then
13:
Insert it into output of the current vertex.
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
end while
17: end procedure
18: procedure AcoCorasickSearch(Text)
19:
Start at the root of the trie.
20:
for each character c in Text do
21:
Find the next vertex from the current vertex with an edge labelled c, if
not exist, follow the failure function of the current vertex.
22:
if the new vertex has an output then
23:
It’s a match.
24:
end if
25:
end for
26: end procedure
The algorithm works by building a finite state machine representing all the pat-
terns that must be searched in the text. Each state in the machine corresponds to
a prefix of one or more patterns. The transitions between the states are labelled
with the characters of the alphabet, it being the set of characters from which the set
of patterns is constructed. Each transition leads to a state that represents a longer
prefix of some pattern. The algorithm involves two main steps:
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Find Occurrences Function
13
• Pre-processing (BuildAhoCorasickAutomaton) : In this stage, the algo-
rithm builds the automaton. At an initial step, the algorithm fills the Trie with
all the patterns, enabling this way the possibility to traverse the Trie with the
pattern used to construct it and lead to a leaf node or match it at an earlier
stage if there is a pattern that is a prefix of another pattern. Following that
step, ’goto’ and ’failure’ functions are added, transforming the Trie into an
automaton. The ’failure’ function is used when a character mismatch occurs,
whereas the ’goto’ function is used to move to the next state given the current
state and an input character. The ’failure’ links are being set up in a ’breath
first search” (BFS)’ manner, which matches each node that is further from the
root than one character. The node it points to matches the longest prefix route
from the ’root’ to any node, which is a suﬀix of the state from which the pointer
is drawn.
• Matching Patterns (AcoCorasickSearch) : The algorithm uses the au-
tomaton to process the text from left to right during the pattern-matching
phase. It employs the ’goto’ function to cycle through the states beginning at
the automaton’s root. When it reaches a state where the current character does
not have a matching edge, it utilizes the ’failure’ function to select another state
to move into. This process ensures that all occurrences of all patterns are found
in a single pass through the text. The matching process is eﬀicient due to the
’failure’ function, which allows the algorithm to skip states that do not lead to
a match, thus avoiding unnecessary comparisons.
One of the key strengths of the Aho-Corasick algorithm lies in its eﬀiciency. After
a preprocessing phase, the algorithm is capable of scanning a string for the presence
of multiple patterns in a time complexity linear to the length of the string, denoted as
O(n), where n is the length of the text. This eﬀiciency holds true irrespective of the
number of patterns being searched. The complexity for the construction of the AC
automaton is O(2m) or reduced to O(m), where m is the total length of all patterns.
That is because initially, the trie is constructed by iterating through all the patterns
once and passing once more through each node, adding the failure links. In terms of
space complexity, the Aho-Corasick algorithm is also eﬀicient, with a complexity of
O(m). This is due to the fact that each character in the pattern set is stored once
in the Trie data structure, and the ’failure’ links require a constant amount of space
for each node in the Trie. It is worth noting that these links enable the algorithm
to identify all pattern occurrences, including overlapping ones, without any negative
impact on the running time.
AC-Automaton Example
To further comprehend the mechanics of the Aho-Corasick algorithm, let’s explore
an illustrative example. This section provides a graphical representation of an Aho-
Corasick automaton built from a set of given patterns. The patterns used for this
instance are ’he’, ’she’, ’his’, and ’hers’.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Algorithm
The automaton starts as a trie data structure, where each node represents a
character in a keyword, and each path from the root to a node represents a prefix of
one or more patterns. The automaton incorporates ’failure’ links, followed whenever
a character mismatch occurs. The coloured bright-green nodes represent the nodes
which contain a matched pattern.
Figure 2.1 presents the completed trie structure built from the provided patterns
after incorporating all ’go to’ and ’failure’ links. This example builds on top of an
ordinary Trie that would be identical to the one presented in Figure 2.1 without
the dotted pointers. These links ensure the algorithm’s linear time pattern-matching
eﬀiciency.
root
s
h
e
h
e
r
s
i
s
Figure 2.1: An AC automaton for patterns ”he”, ”she”, ”his” and ”hers”.
Consider the application of the AhoCorasickSearch function on this instance of the
Aho-Corasick Automaton, with the input text being ’hershers’. At first glance, the
input text appears to simply repeat the ’hers’ pattern. However, upon closer inspec-
tion, it becomes evident that the patterns ’he’ and ’she’ are also present, overlapping
within the text.
Upon initiating the Aho-Corasick search, the algorithm begins by traversing to
the leaf node of ’s’, following the path through the characters ’h’, ’e’, and ’r’. At
this juncture, the algorithm identifies two pattern matches corresponding to ’he’ and
’hers’. Subsequently, the failure link directs the algorithm to the node representing
the character ’s’. A further traversal of two characters leads to another pattern match
at the leaf node of ’e’. This node, in turn, points via a failure link to another node,
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Filtering Function
15
which represents yet another pattern match. This scenario exemplifies a case where
one pattern (’he’) is a suﬀix of another pattern (’she’).
Continuing the traversal through the remaining two characters in the input text,
the algorithm arrives once again at the leaf node of ’s’, identifying a final match for
the ’hers’ pattern. In conclusion, the search function eﬀiciently identifies a total of
five pattern matches within the input text ’hershers’, demonstrating the algorithm’s
ability to perform multiple pattern matches in a single, linear traversal of the Trie.
2.3
Filtering Function
The Filtering function is a crucial component in the area of gapped pattern matching.
Even though its usage is not necessary for the algorithm to conclude successfully
and it’s running time complexity does not change, the overall execution time of the
algorithm gets faster. This approach takes into account two main implementations:
the direct text-checking implementation and the bit-vector implementation, which
includes an optimised version.
2.3.1
Bit-Vector Implementation
The Bit-Vector Implementation method utilizes a bit-vector filter to reduce the time
spent per pattern occurrence matched in the intersecting part of the algorithm. The
implementation of this algorithm is introduced by Cáceres et al. [CPZ20], and its
implementation is particularly effective when the number of occurrences of a pattern
is significantly less frequent than those of its predecessor pattern.
The bit-vector filter is designed to fit into the L3 cache of the CPU to access
it quickly and temporarily, as it is only stored for a very short interval. The bit-
vector implementation operates by setting bits in the filter for each occurrence of
each pattern to then compare it with the following, reiterating this step for all the
patterns. The gap constraints between the patterns determine the number of bits set
in the filter per occurrence. The time complexity of this implementation is influenced
mainly by the time needed to set bits in the filter. In terms of time complexity, the bit-
vector implementation has a time complexity of O(k·occavg), where k is the number
of patterns searched and occavg is the average count of the pattern occurrences. This
is because all pattern occurrences are filtered with the successor’s occurrences. This
makes k-1 comparisons, with each one having a running time of O(occi +occi+1). The
space complexity is determined by the size of the bit-vector filter, which is designed
to be small and is affected by the variable ’b’, which affects the bit-vector size and is
designed to fit into the L3 cache of the CPU. It is essential to mention that for the
specifications of this thesis, three different sizes were chosen for the block size, and
they were all dependent on the gap constraint for which the runtime was considered.
After a number of attempts, a minimum number that seemed to affect performance
was chosen.
These numbers ended up being b = 1024, b = 102 and b = 10 for
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Algorithm
Algorithm 3 Apply Bit Vector Filter
1: procedure ApplyBitVectorFilter(intervalModels, T, min_gap, max_gap)
2:
Define the block size, b, as 64.
3:
for i from 0 to intervalModels.Count do
4:
Define F_vector as a new integer array of size T.Length/b + 1.
5:
for each pa in intervalModels[i].PatternArray do
6:
min ←max((pa + min_gap)/b, 0)
7:
max ←min((pa + max_gap)/b, F_vector.Length −1)
8:
for j from min to max do
9:
F_vector[j] ←1
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
Define filteredPatternArrayList as a new empty list of integers.
13:
for each array in intervalModels[i + 1].PatternArray do
14:
blockIndex ←array/b
15:
if blockIndex < F_vector.Length and F_vector[blockIndex] = 1
then
16:
Add array to filteredPatternArrayList.
17:
end if
18:
end for
19:
intervalModels[i + 1].PatternArray ←filteredPatternArrayList
20:
end for
21:
return intervalModels
22: end procedure
constraints Cl,Cm and Cs respectively..Naturally, a really high number which could
be close to the actual number of occurrences, would result in a meaningless set of
comparisons which would return the specific number of correct instances for them to
be calculated again by the intersecting function which would follow.
Bit-Vector with Back Tracking In their work, Cáceres et al.[CPZ20] elabo-
rate on the adaptive nature of the bit-vector creation formula, capable of dismissing
candidate positions within discovered indexes by filtering patterns in reverse order,
from the last to the first. Even though the standalone application of this backwards-
applied bit-vector does not inherently enhance the running time, its integration with
a backtracking bit-vector application, meaning iterating one pattern backwards after
an effective single forward, can prove significantly beneficial when the bit-vector filter
successfully eliminates a substantial number of indexes. This configuration can po-
tentially boost the running time at high success rates, all without elevating running
time or space complexities.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Filtering Function
17
2.3.2
Direct Text Checking Implementation
The direct text checking implementation, which was also mentioned and tested out
to be satisfactory in the works of Cáceres et al. [CPZ20], is another method that
aims to optimize the process of gapped pattern matching. This method involves scan-
ning over only the occurrences of the less frequent patterns and, for each occurrence,
checking directly in the sub-string of text for any occurrences of the far more frequent
succeeding pattern. The algorithm is presented in the pseudo-code 4. As the authors
do not disclose details of the implementation used for the direct text checking filter,
chosen was a linear time pattern matching algorithm, in this case, the KMP algorithm
(2.5.2), to search for the occurrences of the second pattern.
Algorithm 4 Direct Text Checking Filter
1: procedure DirectTextCheckingFilter(T, p1Indexes, p2, minGap, maxGap)
2:
Define filteredIndexes as a new empty list of integers.
3:
for each p1Index in p1Indexes do
4:
start ←p1Index + minGap
5:
end ←p1Index + maxGap + pattern2.Length
6:
end ←min(end, T.Length −1)
7:
Define p2Matches as a new empty list of integers.
8:
if start < T.Length then
9:
p2Matches ←KMPSearch(T.Substring(start, end −start + 1), p2)
10:
end if
11:
Add all elements in p2Matches to filteredIndexes.
12:
end for
13:
return new SA_Scan_Model with PatternArray as filteredIndexes.
14: end procedure
The direct text-checking implementation can lead to significant performance gains,
mainly when the pattern occurrence count of each succeeding pattern is significantly
larger than the previous one. However, this can not be employed by itself for all
instances, as this kind of text checking can lead to poor performance when all occur-
rences of all patterns are significant. Therefore, it is often employed in concert with a
filter, such as the bit-vector filter used in the bit-vector implementation, which could
disqualify many candidate positions first. When the direct text checking was being
implemented for use in the thesis, a boundary needed to be set for the instances in
which the filter was to be used. Similarly to the block size in the bit-vector filter, a
number of different percentage points for the fractions of the occurrences that the
pattern had versus the number of its successor were tested. The percentage is set to
20%, consistently returning the more optimal results, with the only exception being
the cases of the constraint gap being the very large one thousand character gap. In
order to tackle that instance, a secondary boundary for the usage of the filter was
added; considering the linear KMP algorithm employed, the lump sum value of the
occurrences of the successor pattern had to be higher than the gap constraint em-
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Algorithm
ployed, which serves as an interesting boundary for the rest of the gap constraint and
for the instances with not as many matching results.
The time complexity of the direct text checking implementation is O(occ1·(∆−
δ)), where ￿and ￿are the upper and lower bounds of the gap constraints, respectively—
making the overall running time O(m·(∆−δ)), where m is the total length of all
patterns. Naturally, the actual running was lower as the text checking is computed
only when the boundaries for its execution are fulfilled.
2.4
Intersect Function
The following subsections discuss two implementations of a pattern intersection algo-
rithm that eﬀiciently matches a set of patterns to a given text, taking into account
gap constraints between the patterns. The algorithm employs either a DFS-like or a
BFS-like approach to identify all valid combinations of pattern occurrences.
2.4.1
Pattern Intersection with DFS-like Implementation
Considering the first implementation for the intersection of the pattern occurrences
and concluding on the complete results, inspiration was drawn from the pseudo-code
presented by Cáceres et al.
[CPZ20].
Their suggested implementation showcased
the logic for only 2 patterns being indexed, and it had a naive approach in which
each occurrence of the first pattern would be compared with all sorted occurrences
of the second pattern reaching the first valid one by naively interacting through the
occurrences and ending the iteration process on the last occurrences that satisfied the
gap, given the specifications of this thesis and the need for test cases which included
more than two patterns, an alternation of the same approach was implemented, which
is presented in Algorithm 5. The implementation incorporates a recursive call to itself
if the secondary pattern being compared is not the last from the list of patterns queried
and then subsequently compares that pattern with the locations of the following one.
The algorithm uses the same logic presented by Cáceres et al.[CPZ20] with the road
map of the current compared iteration being indexed to be returned if it successfully
reaches the last pattern while satisfying all the gap constraints.
This subsection considers an algorithm that intersects the occurrences located
with respect to the gap constraints between multiple patterns. The original imple-
mentation for this algorithm is based on a pseudo-code from a study by Cáceres et
al [CPZ20]. The pseudo-code from Cáceres et al. outlines a naive method where
each occurrence of the first pattern is checked against every occurrence of the second
pattern in a sorted order. This process continues until a match no longer satisfies the
specified constraints, at which stage no additional matches can be found. The scope
of this thesis required an algorithm that can handle more than just two patterns. As
such, an adaptation of the Cáceres et al. method was created, illustrated in Algo-
rithm 5, to cater to this requirement. The modified algorithm examines each pattern
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Intersect Function
19
sequentially, comparing one pattern’s indexes with the next. It employs a recursive
technique that keeps looping back on itself if the pattern being compared isn’t the
last in the list.
Like the original method, the updated algorithm also stops when it identifies a
match that adheres to the predefined ’gap’ requirements. The algorithm tracks each
iteration of pattern comparison, returning the steps followed (the ’roadmap’) if it
successfully navigates to the last pattern while complying with the gap criteria. This
algorithm is reasonably an equivalent adaptation of the original implementation by
the authors, which builds upon it to function with multiple patterns.
Algorithm 5 Find All Occurrences
1: procedure FindAllOccurrences(A, B, patterns, min_g, max_g,
currentRoadMap, results)
2:
for i ←0 to A.Length −1 do
3:
j ←0
4:
while j < B.Length and Bj < (Ai + min_g) do
5:
j ←j + 1
6:
end while
7:
while j < B.Length and Bj ≤(Ai + max_g) do
8:
intervalsRoadMap ←currentRoadMap.
GetRange(0, currentRoadMap.Count)
9:
intervalsRoadMap.Add(Ai)
10:
if patterns.Count > 0 then
11:
patternLocationsToReturn ←
FindAllOccurrences(Bj, patterns[0].Indexes, patterns.Skip(1), min_g, max_g,
intervalsRoadMap, patternLocationsToReturn)
12:
else
13:
intervalsRoadMap.Add(Bj)
14:
results.Add(intervalsRoadMap)
15:
end if
16:
j ←j + 1
17:
end while
18:
j ←0
19:
end for
20:
return results
21: end procedure
The first variation included a straightforward but very effective usage of the bi-
nary search algorithm in the part of the algorithm responsible for finding the first
occurrence in the range of the indexes of the second pattern. This variation ultimately
reduced the running time of this specific part from O(occi), where occ is the number
of occurrences of the ith index to O(logocci) on each iteration. This reduction was
particularly made noticeable in this thesis’s instance because of the text T being this
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Algorithm
large while it was also dealing with patterns which were the most frequent, resulting
in very large list of occurrences for each pattern.
The secondary implementation consisted of a more complex variation which in-
cluded ’pruning’ of the indexes of nodes which were being calculated. Dealing with an
implementation that has nodes potentially be met multiple times as each occurrence
of a pattern could match with all occurrences of the following pattern and so on and
so forth. The updated algorithm focuses on indexing the results of the occurrences
for the number of combinations which it calculated, this way returning the saved
set once that occurrence was met again by another instance of a predecessor pattern
occurrence. The running time complexity remained the same after this alternation
as it only incorporated a constant number of actions for each iteration, not altering
this way the complexity of the algorithm, but in reality, due to mentioned indexing
the algorithm could perform much better. The resulting implementation resulted in
a much higher space complexity as each node stored a dictionary of size O(nůlogn2)
for each node.
Within the number of solutions, two variations of this implementation were de-
signed, implemented and tested using selected data sets.
The first version makes a simple yet effective use of the binary search algorithm as
presented in Algorithm 7. This is applied when finding the initial occurrence within
the range of indexes for the second pattern. This adaptation dramatically reduced
the running time of this specific part from O(occi), where occi is the number of
occurrences of the ith index, to O(logocci) for each iteration. The beneficial effects of
this reduction were especially apparent in the context of this thesis, given the large
size of the text T and the high frequency of patterns, which together resulted in an
extensive list of occurrences for each pattern.
The second variation of the implementation is more complex and involves ’pruning’
the indexes of nodes during calculations. This approach addresses a challenge with
the original implementation where nodes could be encountered multiple times since
each pattern’s occurrence could match all occurrences of the succeeding pattern and
so forth. The revised algorithm emphasizes indexing the results of the combinations
it computes. When an occurrence is met again by another instance of a predecessor
pattern occurrence, it quickly returns a saved set.
While the time complexity re-
mained unchanged due to the addition of a constant number of actions per iteration,
the actual performance of the algorithm could be significantly improved because of
this indexing. However, this approach did increase the space complexity as each node
now stores a dictionary of size O(n · log n2) .
At this stage, it is valuable to reflect on the experiences with the ’pruning’ approach.
Despite its theoretical appeal and logical consistency, the approach was dismissed from
further consideration for these specific test cases after an evaluation of one of the
data sets. This action was prompted by the fact that the algorithm’s additional, albeit
minor, steps did not deliver the anticipated results, especially when considering the
negligible gaps in comparison to the data set range. It is noteworthy that the approach
was tested in several simple cases with a minimum gap of one and no maximum
gap. In these scenarios, the pruning method was highly eﬀicient, circumventing a
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Intersect Function
21
significant amount of unnecessary calculations.
However, due to the considerable
storage complexity, testing the approach with larger constraint gaps was not feasible,
as it led to memory shortages and significant disk usage.
2.4.2
Pattern Intersection with BFS-like Implementation
The intersection function presented here employs a structure similar to a breadth-
first search (BFS) algorithm, a variation of this algorithm is found in the black box
implementation of the works of Bille’s et all.
[Bil+12].
It constructs an implicit
gap graph, leveraging a design that holds a list of valid index ranges for all depth
levels. The algorithm commences by iterating over all indices of the first pattern,
appending the valid range of each pattern occurrence index to the ranges after adding
the minimum and maximum gaps to the indices.
Subsequently, the algorithm traverses all indices of each pattern, starting with the
second pattern in the list, verifying for the indexes which fall within any of the ranges
stored in the predecessor’s valid ranges. If it does, the range for the current depth is
added to the valid ranges, considering this pattern’s index as the range after adding
the min and max gap to the index. This process continues until the last pattern is
reached.
Upon confirming that the last pattern is correctly within a valid range, the algo-
rithm backtracks and enumerates the number of possible combinations, considering
the last match being the last index of each of the found combinations. The resulting
matches are added to the collection, along with all the resultant matches for all the
valid occurrences and the combinations for each last pattern instance within a valid
range.
It’s crucial to note that this implementation does not rely on the occurrences of
each pattern being sorted to yield accurate results. This approach can significantly
reduce computation time when using the SA Scan function to index all occurrences
from the suﬀix array, as the computationally intensive sorting process of all the indices
is not required.
The proposed algorithm exhibits eﬀicient performance in terms of time and space
complexities. The algorithm’s time complexity is O(p·i·r), where p is the number
of all patterns, i is the average number of indexes per pattern, and r is the average
number of ranges assigned. This time complexity does not include the backtracking
process to locate all the possible combinations of pattern matches. As it can be clearly
seen, this process’s complexity could grow exponentially depending on the number of
valid matches and the operations performed for each match.
The space complexity is O(p·r), as the only additional information stored is the
valid ranges. This complexity depends on the pattern count and the average number
of valid ranges assigned while the ranges occupy constant space and therefore does not
alter the space complexity of the algorithm. Algorithm 6 presents an oversimplified
pseudo code of the inner working of the implementation.
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Algorithm
Algorithm 6 Find Occurrences (Black Box Implementation)
1: procedure FindOccurrences(occurrences, patternLength, min_gap, max_gap)
2:
results ←Initialize collection for located redults
3:
relevantRanges ←Create empty List of Lists for the valid ranges
4:
for each occurrence in occurrences do
5:
if Occourances.Index is 0 OR occourance.positions within ValidRanges[Index-1]
then
6:
relevantRanges[Index] ←Insert ranges for positions within previous range
7:
end if
8:
if Occourances.Index is Last AND within ValidRanges[Index-1] then
9:
results ←Back track through valid ranges locating all combinations of patterns
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
return results
13: end procedure
2.5
Auxiliary Concepts
To fully understand the proposed implementation, it is crucial to thoroughly under-
stand the auxiliary concepts that serve as the foundation of the approaches mentioned
above. While not immediately recognizable to all readers, these concepts play an
indispensable role in the construction, operation, and eﬀiciency gains of our imple-
mentation. A comprehensive overview of these concepts will be covered, ensuring
their explanations are accessible and conducive to an improved understanding of the
implementations.
2.5.1
Binary Search
Binary search is a classic algorithm in computer science, renowned for its effectiveness
and eﬀiciency in searching for a specific target value within a sorted dataset. The
algorithm significantly reduces the number of comparisons required by recursively
dividing the data set in half and determining which half of the data the target might
exist in. The version of the binary search algorithm implemented in this solution is
presented in Algorithm 7.
Explanation:
The algorithm provided is a variant of binary search.
It searches for the first
occurrence in an array that is greater than or equal to a target value. The algorithm
maintains two pointers, ’low’ and ’high’, that define the current search interval. Each
iteration compares the middle value of this interval to the target. If the middle value
is greater or equal to the target, it updates the ’high’ pointer and stores the mid-index.
If it is less, it updates the ’low’ pointer. It repeats this process until ’low’ exceeds
’high’, effectively halving the search space each time.
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Auxiliary Concepts
23
Algorithm 7 Binary Search: First Occurrence Greater or Equal
1: procedure BinarySearchLookup(arr, target)
2:
Define the array length as n, which is the length(arr).
3:
Define the lower limit of the search space, low, as 0.
4:
Define the upper limit of the search space, high, as n-1.
5:
Define a variable result to store the result and initialize it to -1.
6:
while low is less than or equal to high do
7:
Calculate the middle index, mid, as the floor of (low + high) / 2.
8:
if the element at the mid index of array is greater than or equal to target
then
9:
Update result to the current mid index.
10:
Update the high to mid - 1, reducing the search space to the left half.
11:
else
12:
Update low to mid + 1, moving the search space to the right half.
13:
end if
14:
end while
15:
return result, which is the index of the first occurrence greater or equal to
the target. If no such element exists, result remains -1.
16: end procedure
The algorithm’s time complexity is O(log n), where n is the size of the array due
to the halving of the search space with each iteration. The space complexity is O(1),
indicating constant space usage, as it only stores a fixed number of variables and does
not require extra space that scales with the input size. The algorithm operates under
the assumption the input array is sorted in ascending order, a precondition for its
proper function. The time complexity analysis does not include the potential sorting
step.
2.5.2
Knuth–Morris–Pratt Algorithm
The Knuth–Morris–Pratt (KMP) algorithm is a string-searching algorithm invented
by Donald Knuth, Vaughan Pratt, and James H. Morris in 1977 [Cor+09]. It in-
troduces an innovative technique that eﬀiciently locates all occurrences of a given
pattern within a specific text. This algorithm reduces the amount of time taken to
find a pattern by cleverly avoiding the reiteration of the text which does not contain
the pattern.
A key aspect of the KMP algorithm is its use of an auxiliary structure referred
to as the Longest Proper Prefix-Suﬀix (LPS) array. The LPS array is essential for
understanding how the algorithm avoids unnecessary character comparisons. Each
entry of the LPS array at position i in the pattern string represents the length of
the longest proper prefix of the pattern string that matches the suﬀix ending at
position i. In other words, it allows the algorithm to continue the linear iteration of
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Algorithm
all the characters in the given text and managing to align it’s compared index to the
appropriate of within the searched pattern.
The algorithm begins by pre-computing the LPS array using the ComputeLPSAr-
ray function as shown in Algorithm 8. This process has a time complexity of O(m),
where m is the length of the pattern.
Algorithm 8 ComputeLPSArray
1: procedure ComputeLPSArray(pattern)
2:
Define lps as a new array of length equal to the size of pattern.
3:
Set lps[0] as 0.
4:
Define len and i as 0.
5:
while i is less than the size of pattern do
6:
if pattern[i] is equal to pattern[len] then
7:
Increment len and assign it to lps[i].
8:
Increment i.
9:
else
10:
if len is not equal to 0 then
11:
Update len to lps[len −1].
12:
else
13:
Assign 0 to lps[i].
14:
Increment i.
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
end while
18:
return lps.
19: end procedure
After creating the LPS array, the algorithm concludes the search using the KMP
Search function shown in Algorithm 9. This process traverses through the given text
only once, ensuring that the search is executed in O(n) time, where n is the length
of the text.
A significant benefit of the KMP algorithm is its eﬀiciency when dealing with large
texts. Given that it only needs to traverse the text once without any backtracking.
Also, the LPS array enables the algorithm to skip comparisons with characters in the
pattern that have already been matched, making it substantially more eﬀicient in this
use case as the search is conducted for a single very repetitive short pattern.
Explanation: The KMP Search function initializes an empty list called result to
store the starting indices of pattern occurrences within the text. It sets the lengths of
the pattern and text as m and n, respectively. The LPS array is computed using the
pattern, and the algorithm maintains two pointers, i and j, representing the current
indices of the text and pattern, respectively.
During the search process, the algorithm compares characters at the i and j indices.
If they match, both pointers are incremented. If the entire pattern has been matched
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Auxiliary Concepts
25
Algorithm 9 KMP Search
1: procedure KMPSearch(text, pattern)
2:
Define result as a new empty list of integers.
3:
Define m as the length of pattern.
4:
Define n as the length of text.
5:
Define lps as the result of ComputeLPSArray(pattern).
6:
Define i and j as 0.
7:
while i < n do
8:
if pattern[j] = text[i] then
9:
Increment j and i.
10:
end if
11:
if j = m then
12:
Add i −j to result.
13:
j ←lps[j −1].
14:
else if i < n and pattern[j] ̸= text[i] then
15:
if j ̸= 0 then
16:
j ←lps[j −1].
17:
else
18:
Increment i.
19:
end if
20:
end if
21:
end while
22:
return result.
23: end procedure
(i.e., j = m), the algorithm adds the starting index (i−j) to the result list, indicating
a pattern occurrence. The pointer j is then updated to the value in the LPS array at
index j −1, allowing the algorithm to continue searching for subsequent occurrences.
If a mismatch occurs while comparing characters, the algorithm checks if j is not
equal to 0. If so, it updates j to the value in the LPS array at index j −1 and
continues the search. Otherwise, it increments i with the value of j + 1 and moves to
the next character in the text.
Finally, the algorithm returns the result list, which contains the starting indices
of all occurrences of the pattern within the text.
The time complexity of the KMP algorithm is O(n + m) (or simply O(n) as m is
significantly smaller then n), where n and m are the lengths of the text and pattern,
respectively. The space complexity is O(m), as it requires the LPS array to store the
computed values for the pattern.
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Algorithm
2.5.3
Least-Significant-Digit (LSD) Radix Sort
The Least Significant Digit (LSD) Radix Sort algorithm is an integer sorting algorithm
which is capable of sorting all the integer occurrences in linear time. It operates by
processing an integer array digit-by-digit, commencing from the least significant digit
to the most significant digit.
The Radix sort implementation was completed with the Counting Sort Function,
which uses a stable digit sorting approach for each digit from the right-most digit
to the left-most method appearing in Algorithm 10. Considering the fact that the
numbers are of base ten, which means every value of every digit needs to be between
the values of zero to nine, the algorithm employs a form of a partitioning system,
which we can refer to as buckets(named 0-9). Considering the integer in the array
with the highest value, the algorithm settles on a number of iterations based on the
number of digits the higher number contains.
Algorithm 10 Least Significant Digit Radix Sort
1: procedure RadixSort(arr)
2:
Define max as the maximum value in arr.
3:
for each digit exp from 1 until the number of digits in max do
4:
results ←CountingSortByDigit(arr, exp).
5:
end for
6: end procedure
7: procedure CountingSortByDigit(arr, exp)
8:
Initialize an empty array output of the same length as arr.
9:
Initialize an empty array count of length 10 (for each digit from 0 to 9).
10:
for each number num in arr do
11:
Increment the count of the digit at place exp in num.
12:
end for
13:
for each index i from 1 to 9 do
14:
Update count[i] to be the sum of count[i] and count[i - 1].
15:
end for
16:
for each number num in arr in reverse order do
17:
Update output at the position count[(num / exp) % 10] - 1 with num.
18:
Decrement the count of the digit at place exp in num.
19:
end for
20:
return output.
21: end procedure
When the process of iteration begins, starting with the rightmost digit, all the
numbers are placed in the according bucket depending on the number their digit
ends with. After iterating through all the indices, all numbers are placed back into
the original array, with their last digit being sorted.
This procedure is then repeated for all the digit locations until the length of the
highest valued number is reached. At the end of this procedure, this method returns
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Auxiliary Concepts
27
an array sorted in ascending order.
This approach has a runtime complexity equal to O(nk), where n is the number
of digits required to be sorted, and m is the number of digits the highest-valued
integer has. This implementation reaches the highest degree of effectiveness when the
number of occurrences is significantly larger than the number of digits, meaning it
would prove relatively ineffective with very few indices but a very large digit count.
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Results & Findings
This chapter details the results garnered from the benchmarking solution against
various collected data sets. A separate evaluation of the performance of each dis-
tinct element of the solution is offered, including the filter methods, the intersection
algorithms, and the algorithms for identifying pattern occurrences within the text.
Firstly, emphasis shall be placed on the comparison of filter methods and intersec-
tion algorithms, as their performance remains consistent, given identical parameters.
Unlike the latter, per the findings of this thesis, the eﬀiciency of the pattern findings
implementation significantly depends on the number of times it is executed.
The data set selected to illustrate the results of the benchmarks for this section
is the Proteins data set mentioned on page 40. This data set, with its lower number
of pattern occurrence combinations for the most frequent patterns, permits more
extensive testing given the timeline of this thesis and, thus, offers a comprehensive
characterisation of the solution’s performance. (The raw data from all conducted tests
on all data sets are available in Appendix B)
3.1
Filter Comparison
In the following section, a comparison of the filtering methods, as detailed in Sec-
tion 2.3, will be conducted to evaluate their impact on overall execution time. To
ensure fairness in this comparison, the rest of the implementation components must
remain consistent across all instances of the filtering methods. To conduct this exam-
ple illustrated in Figure 3.1 the selected algorithm for locating the occurrences of the
patterns is the SA Scan (2.2.1) and the algorithm for intersecting the occurrences with
regards to the constraints is the original version of the DFS like Algorithm(2.4.1).
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Results & Findings
N/A
BV
BBV
TC
TCBV TCBBV
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
·104
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the Proteins 50mb data set performance using the un-
changed SA Scan algorithm and the naive intersection algorithm fixed
across all the filter use cases.
To provide more insight into the specifics of what can be seen in Figure 3.1, the
following are the descriptions of the plot abbreviation in the graph.
• N/A or Not Applicable is the abbreviation used for cases where a filter was not
used.
• BV or Bit Vector references the filter mentioned in subsection 2.3.1
• BBV or Back-Tracking Bit Vector references the filter mentioned in the back-
tracking bit vector paragraph in subsection 2.3.1
• TC or Direct Text Checking references the filter mentioned in subsection 2.3.2
• TCBV: This filter abbreviation describes the combination of the Bit Vector &
the Direct Text Checking filter.
• TCBBV: This filter abbreviation describes the combination of the Back Track-
ing Bit Vector & the Direct Text Checking filter.
The presented results encapsulate precise runtimes for all instances that produce
identical outcomes. Each outcome is derived from runtimes across all three constraints
highlighted in this thesis, spanning all three pattern lengths and every selection of ’k’.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Filter Comparison
31
As the most expensive part of an algorithm is the one intersecting the occurrences
and it’s highly exponential running time is bound to the results found. As the amount
of matches gets smaller with patterns of smaller size, so does the running time. This
can be seen in Figure 3.2 where the N/A instance of Figure 3.1 is broken down to
the running times of the three different pattern lengths.
3
5
7
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Figure 3.2: A breakdown of the running times of the N/A plot in Figure 3.1 into
the different pattern lengths.
As illustrated in Figure 3.2, patterns of lengths 5 and 7 exhibit a decrease in
running time across all combinations of gap constraints and pattern counts (k). This
decrease can be attributed to the reduced number of discovered indexes, which in
turn facilitates quicker intersections.
The initial running time instance, as shown in Figure 3.1, includes the swift results
of these shorter lengths. However, to gain a more precise understanding of the results,
Figure 3.3 offers a visualization of outcomes from Figure 3.1, focusing exclusively on
results with pattern lengths equal to three. This exclusion of low runtime results
uncovers a sharper view of the performance.
In this subset, the most significant improvements are discernible in the application
of the BV and, more markedly, the BBV filter. Similar enhancements are mirrored
in the TCBV and TCBBV instances where the filters are combined.
The application of direct text checking does not yield any substantial improve-
ments to the running time in this context. Nevertheless, since its application does
not adversely impact the running time when the BV or BBV filters are employed,
it is advisable to use it for less frequent instances where the filter could contribute
positively to the overall runtime.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Results & Findings
N/A
BV
BBV
TC
TCBV TCBBV
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Figure 3.3: All filter combinations for SA scan, BFS like intersecting and pattern
length fixed to three.
N/A
BV
BBV
TC
TCBV TCBBV
0
200
400
600
Figure 3.4: Few final results case using SA scan, BFS like intersecting and pattern
length fixed to three.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Intersection Algorithm Comparison
33
It’s important to note that while filters improve the overall running time, this is
closely linked to the fact that the queries are drawn from the most common patterns
in the data sets. It’s expected that these will yield positive results in most cases,
a characteristic that becomes increasingly evident as the number of occurrences in
the text increases or in instances where the text size grows exponentially. However,
this effect does not seem to occur when the number of occurrences is very low. In
such cases, any filtering applied merely adds computational steps to the running time
without affecting the overall performance, and in some instances, it may even worsen
it, as visible in Figure 3.4.
In terms of the performance of each of the filter methods, all filters except the
Direct Text Checking showed positive results in many cases, with only a few cases
being unsatisfactory. The Direct Text Checking filter was found to be the least eﬀicient,
as its benefits were not significant. However, even though its effectiveness was limited,
its use did not noticeably impact the running time. Therefore, it was unnecessary to
avoid using it due to the potential upside it offered.
3.2
Intersection Algorithm Comparison
The algorithms for identifying all combinations of pattern occurrences while adhering
to the gap constraints were compared via three solutions: the naive BFS implemen-
tation, an enhanced version of the BFS-like approach, and a third DFS-like imple-
mentation derived from the implicit graph approach. The results of this part of the
algorithm proved a very consistent degree of performance.
The graph in Figure 3.5 illustrates a specific test case, identical to those presented
earlier, with no filter applied. The only variation comes from the different intersection
methods employed during the collection of results. Consistent with previous outcomes,
the graph features data representing various selections of pattern counts (k) and gap
constraint parameters, with the pattern length consistently fixed at three.
It’s worth noting that the results depicted in Figure 3.5 were consistent across all
data sets, and the performance of the different approaches became even more evident
in cases in which the number of combinations for the pattern occurrences increased.
Based on these observations, it is safe to infer that the binary improvement of
the BFS-like implementation proved to be the most reliable and well-performing ap-
proach. This methodology consistently delivered superior results, particularly as the
complexity and volume of pattern occurrences escalated.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Results & Findings
Naive BFS
Binary BFS Graph Search
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
·104
Figure 3.5: Intersection method comparison with SA scan used, no filters and pat-
tern length fixed to three.
3.3
Finding Occurrences Algorithm Comparison
In this final comparison, the focus is on contrasting the two methods for identifying all
indexes of the patterns: the Suﬀix Array (SA) and the Aho-Corasick (AC) Automaton
approaches. As previously mentioned, due to the substantially larger size of text T in
relation to the queried patterns, constructing the suﬀix array from text T proves to
be a lengthier process than creating the AC Automaton based on the much shorter
patterns.
Given the context of this thesis, where text T is predetermined prior to the algo-
rithm’s execution and all execution variables (gap constraints, patterns) are subjected
to testing, an approach was adopted to facilitate the comparison of these algorithms’
runtimes. The Suﬀix Array was computed only once for all pattern combinations.
This allowed for an assessment of the expected number of different executions, as-
suming all other parts of the algorithm remain constant. This approach aimed to
pinpoint the tipping point where the use of the Suﬀix Array method would become
more advantageous.
It’s important to underscore that in a singular execution involving one gap con-
straint selection and one set of patterns; the AC Automaton would naturally be the
preferred choice due to its superior eﬀiciency, as its focal point is the patterns queried.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Finding Occurrences Algorithm Comparison
35
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
0
2
4
6
·105
Time(ms)
SA-B (50mb)
AC-B(50mb)
SA-B(100mb)
AC-B(100mb)
140th
138th
Figure 3.6: SA scan and AC Automaton Comparison of the running time incorporat-
ing the pre-processing time for the Proteins data set (both incorporate
no filters and the BFS like with the Binary Search improvement).
Figure 3.6 compares the number of times the pre-computed Suﬀix Array—with its
rapid pattern occurrence indexing—needs to be employed in order for the amortized
running time of all instances to exceed the running time of the ones employed using the
AC Automaton for the same data set. This figure provides an intriguing observation
related to the ’Proteins’ data set. Despite the different sizes of the data sets, 50mb
and 100mb, the number of test cases that need to be executed is nearly identical
for both sizes.
This equates to approximately 138 and 140 test cases on average,
respectively.
To better understand the graph, note how the red and green lines rapidly escalate
to a high running time. This represents the expected running time given this solution,
assuming a single execution. As the graph demonstrates incremental executions, the
running time grows marginally until it eventually surpasses the other implementations
for their respective sizes in terms of the amortized runtime across all executions.
It’s worth noting that the performance of the Proteins data set is not replicated
across all data sets. For other tested data sets, the expected intersection point of
the different methods does increase, but not substantially, as the size of the data
sets expands. This can be seen for the English Text data set, the Source Code data
set, and the DNA data set in the graphs in Figure 3.7, Figure 3.8 and Figure 3.9,
respectively.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Results & Findings
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
·106
Time(ms)
SA-B (50mb)
AC-B(50mb)
SA-B(100mb)
AC-B(100mb)
234th
165th
Figure 3.7: SA scan and AC Automaton Comparison of the running time incor-
porating the pre-processing time for the English Text data set (both
incorporate no filters and the BFS like with the Binary Search improve-
ment).
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
2
4
6
8
·105
Time(ms)
SA-B (50mb)
AC-B(50mb)
SA-B(100mb)
AC-B(100mb)
225th
180th
Figure 3.8: SA scan and AC Automaton Comparison of the running time incor-
porating the pre-processing time for the Source Code data set (both
incorporate no filters and the BFS like with the Binary Search improve-
ment).
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Finding Occurrences Algorithm Comparison
37
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
0
2
4
6
8
·105
Time(ms)
SA-B (50mb)
AC-B(50mb)
SA-B(100mb)
AC-B(100mb)
137th
113th
Figure 3.9: SA scan and AC Automaton Comparison of the running time incorpo-
rating the pre-processing time for the DNA data set (both incorporate
no filters and the BFS like with the Binary Search improvement).
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
In this section, we will go through a more in-depth review of the research methodology,
and we will visit a thorough description of the data sets involved in this thesis and
their origins. An overview is provided of the rationale behind data set selection and
their sizes and variability.
Furthermore, a description of the testing environment
used is given and an elaboration on the methods adopted to maintain the consistency
and correctness of the algorithms used in the study. This section, therefore, offers
a comprehensive understanding of the research process and the step-by-step process
taken to ensure the validity and correctness of each newly introduced algorithm before
its usage and conduction of the findings.
4.1
Description of the data sets used
The solution was engineered to be deliberately diverse by incorporating various pat-
terns and textual content in the data sets. By assembling data sets with a broader
variability of features, it was possible to hone in on the strengths and weaknesses
of the different algorithms present in the study.
Specifically, by doing so, it was
possible to get an insight into what the impact of frequency changes in the patterns
and size variations in the alphabet had on the results for each algorithm. The data
sets used in this study were obtained from the Pizza & Chili Corpus, available at
http://pizzachili.dcc.uchile.cl. The data sets span different application do-
mains; this is heavily inspired by the paper of Cáceres et al. [CPZ20]. These include:
Texts: Four distinct data sets were considered, each carefully chosen on the basis
of its unique characteristics and the possible impact of these on the gaped pattern
search results. To ensure a comprehensive analysis across different scales, each data
set was utilized twice with sizes of 50MB and 100MB, respectively. This approach
allowed for a thorough investigation of the data at both scales, enabling the collection
of more valuable insights. This also allowed me to check the impact of the data set’s
size on the algorithms’ performance.
• SOURCES (source program code): The contents of this file consist of
C/Java source code extracted from merging all the .c, .h, .C, and .java files
found in the linux-2.6.11.6 and gcc-4.0.0 distributions.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Methodology
• PROTEINS (protein sequences): The contents of this file comprise a series
of protein sequences obtained from the Swissprot database. Each of the 4 bases
is coded as an uppercase letter A, G, C, or T, and there are a few occurrences
of other special characters.
• DNA (gene DNA sequences): The contents of this file consist of a series of
gene DNA sequences. These sequences are separated by newline characters and
do not include descriptions, only the raw DNA code. Each of the four bases (A,
G, C, T) is represented by an uppercase letter, with a few instances of special
characters appearing as well.
• ENGLISH (English texts): The content of this file is a compilation of En-
glish text files sourced from the Gutenberg Project. (The headers associated
with the project have been removed)
Test Machine and Environment
A 12th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-12700H CPU running at 2.3 GHz was used. The
CPU was equipped with 24 MiB of L3 cache and backed by 1 TiB of main memory.
During the experiments, no other significant CPU tasks were running, and only a sin-
gle thread of execution was utilized. The machine operated on Windows 11 Business,
64-bit, version 22H2 as the operating system. The Roslyn compiler version 10 was
utilized for compilation, targeting the .NET 6.0 framework.
4.2
Explanation of the evaluation metrics used
The evaluation metrics employed in this thesis are grounded in the methodology
considered by Cáceres [CPZ20]. The process was initiated by the creation of data set
models, which were subsequently utilized to produce the running times of the selected
combinations.
The rationale for this methodology is twofold. Firstly, it enables a straightforward
validation and consistency of the results. The expectation is that if various algorithm
sets are implemented accurately, they should yield consistent results when applied to
the same data sets, and the only variability in the results from the same data sets
should be the result of the performance of each algorithm and not any other factor
in the equation.
Secondly, given that the program is designed to re-run and arbitrarily select pat-
terns from a pool for each text, a high incidence of pattern matches per run is im-
probable. Consequently, when running time is significantly reduced due to a lack
of pattern occurrences, one would expect a similar reduction across all algorithm
combinations for each instance. This is because the sets tested against them remain
consistent; therefore, while the number of matches may be lower, the rate of reduction
should be constant and thereby, the impact of the algorithm’s performance should
be even more noticeable.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Verifying the Accuracy of the Implementation
41
The mentioned data set model included information such as the text T, which was
meant to be queried, a list of patterns, and, as previously mentioned, the length of
the list would determine the variable k, and the length of any of the patterns would
determine the variable p, a gap for the selected query which would consist of the
minimum gap and the maximum gap.
The chosen experimental approach involved the selection of a gap model from three
available brackets: 100 to 110, 1000 to 1100, and 10000 to 1100, which are referred
to as CS, CM and CL, respectively. These intervals symbolized the minimum and
maximum gaps, respectively. In an effort to foster variety in the study, patterns were
imported as a diverse list, with sizes chosen from an array of length k ∈{21 . . . 24}.
Each pattern length, in turn, was set to p ∈{3, 5, 7}.
To maintain a controlled
variability in the approach, all patterns within a given data set tested maintained a
consistent length.
The instantiation of the pattern creation process for each textual subject, referred
to as T, commenced simultaneously with the text’s insertion into the database. This
information set would later serve as the central point for the program’s data retrieval
during the solution’s execution.
The post-insertion stage referred to the pattern
creation algorithm, which generated a list of the most frequently occurring sub-strings
of lengths 3, 5, and 7. The results of this operation formed a collection of all possible
patterns, of which the algorithm selected the one hundred most frequent to be stored.
This process resulted in a repository of 300 patterns, each distinct from any other
entry.
As each model was selected for evaluation of the running time of the algorithms,
the program randomly drew a set of 20 of the most frequent patterns from the afore-
mentioned database instance. Considering this set as a starting point, lists of the
predefined k sizes were formulated for each respective pattern length.
Rather than merely extracting a subset from a list of patterns with greater k
values, spawning new lists for each pattern length was deliberate. This approach was
expected to engender a broader spectrum of results, ensuring a holistic representation
of the data set in analysing the results. This approach was expected to engender a
broader spectrum of results, ensuring a holistic representation of the data set in
analysing the results.
4.3
Verifying the Accuracy of the Implementation
In the process of developing the primary algorithm, it was crucial to ensure the cor-
rectness of the implementation of each of its sub-components. As a measure to achieve
this, a parallel project dedicated to rigorous testing of each algorithmic segment was
initiated. This complementary testing project played an essential role in supporting
the overall credibility and integrity of the results of the main algorithm.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Methodology
Creation of the Testing Project
Even though the Testing Project is housed within the benchmarking system’s solution,
it functions as an isolated unit that is dependent on the benchmarking solution. The
rationale for this approach was to create an environment where each implementation
could be isolated and thoroughly tested. This enabled varied, consistent, and frequent
testing against every new piece of code introduced into the solution.
Moreover, as several methods were reused across multiple end-to-end cases, mod-
ifications to a single case could lead to errors in unrelated areas. A specific test case
was created for each unique combination of implementation parts to manage this.
These test cases were executed every time the solution was built and prepared for a
benchmarking attempt.
This meticulous and thorough testing strategy eliminated doubts about the accu-
racy and credibility of the solution, thereby ensuring that it consistently produced
reliable results and therefore ensuring that any new addition to the code base would
not interfere with previous implementation.
Testing Approach and Procedure
As described in the previous section, all the end-to-end cases share the same struc-
ture and share components between them. Each case comprises different components:
the ’Finding Occurrences’ algorithm, a variety of possible filter functions, and a fi-
nal ’Intersection’ algorithm that returns the end result. A specific test occurrence
was established for each unique combination of these components inside the testing
project.
Following the initial implementation, several straightforward test cases were es-
tablished. These were based on simple sample data and configured to return results
that are easy to calculate and verify.
This approach served as an essential building block strategy that streamlined the
incorporation of more complex cases and models that incorporated sets yielding bor-
der case results. All tests were subsequently applied to every possible combination of
implementations, ensuring their comprehensive evaluation. The fundamental expec-
tation was for all tests to yield the same result regardless of their complexity or the
particular combination of components they were assessing.
As a result, each time a new implementation was prepared for the overall algo-
rithm, the process of verifying its correctness became straightforward and simple.
This testing framework ensured that every iteration of the algorithm could be confi-
dently validated for accuracy.
Test Cases and Results
Configuring each specific test case is crucial. It’s essential to remember that all cases,
whether simple, complicated, or on the border, must be considered. Creating hand-
written examples of lengthy texts can be challenging, especially when dealing with
a particular alphabet size. These challenges include identifying patterns in the con-
figured sequences, ensuring their placement at the proper indexes within the text,
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Verifying the Accuracy of the Implementation
43
and being confident of the results. It becomes even more complicated when deal-
ing with more straightforward examples. The task becomes practically impossible
when we start considering more complex edge cases. In these instances, the possi-
bility of errors increases. These mistakes could lead to false conclusions, such as an
incorrect implementation of the tested method. It’s crucial to remember that these
mistakes could stem from the test itself rather than the method. An example of this
approach can be found in a test case instance presented in the referred code snippet
in Listing 4.1. The method employed uses a logical approach. All the necessary in-
formation is passed as method arguments, resulting in a ready model that algorithms
can consume.
1 [TestMethod]
2 public void TestWithThreePatternsOfLengthThree()
3 {
4
var IndexPositionsOfPatterns = new List<List<int>>()
5
{
6
new List<int> { 3 },
7
new List<int> { 103, 111 },
8
new List<int> { 203, 213 },
9
};
10
var p = 3;
11
var expectedResult = 3;
12
13
var algoData = TestCaseDataProvider.GetGenomeInstanceWithSmallConstraint
(p, IndexPositionsOfPatterns);
14
var PatternsFound = ClassInstansiation().
RunAlgoWithDataSetsAndSaveResults(algoData);
15
16
Assert.AreEqual(expectedResult , PatternsFound);
17 }
Listing 4.1: Testing Method with Three Patterns of Length Three..
For added clarity, let’s explore this in more detail. The initial variable discussed
refers to the indexes where the patterns should be found. The number of lists indicates
the number of queried patterns. Meanwhile, the indexes within each list show where
each pattern is located.
In our specific example, the TestCaseDataProvider service supplies three different
patterns. The occurrences of these patterns are situated at different indexes: index
3 for the first pattern, indexes 103 and 111 for the second pattern, and indexes 203
and 213 for the third pattern.
Alongside the index positions, we also pass variable ’p’ to the GetGenomeIn-
stanceWithSmallConstraint method. This method then returns a model. This model
includes a text ’T’ that contains, in this case, three different pattern occurrences at
the stated indexes.
The GetGenomeInstanceWithSmallConstraint method comes with default values
for the test’s constraint and the alphabet. However, altering these defaults or creating
additional methods for other instances is straightforward.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Methodology
Lastly, the variable ’expectedResult’ defined in the test is ultimately compared
with the returned value to access the test being successful if proven equal to variable
’PatternsFound’ and unsuccessful otherwise.
Impact on the Main Project
The development process was significantly accelerated by the strategic utilization of
multiple simple test cases. This innovative approach facilitated the swift identification
and correction of bugs. The execution of numerous, well-structured test cases was
instrumental in effectively pinpointing potential issues.
As a result, the need for
extensive debugging or the running of tests against large data sets was circumvented.
Notably, the debugging of the solution was also executed through the testing interface,
adding another layer of eﬀiciency. This method significantly increased the pace of
development, ensured prompt discovery and rectification of errors, and ultimately
resulted in an enhanced overall quality of the final version of the code.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated and evaluated the performance of state-of-the-art al-
gorithms, and it has compared the results when it comes to a selection of certain
test cases. Naturally, making conclusions on such topics can be diﬀicult, especially
when they are made out of this many multi-variable equations. This chapter aims to
summarise the key takeaways of the thesis and offer suggestions for potential future
research in this area.
5.1
Recap of main findings
The conclusion of this thesis has led to a deeper understanding of the performance
of various elements that constitute each solution.
The results have demonstrated
the significant benefits of filtering methods on the running times of these algorithms.
This is particularly true in instances where indexes of occurrences span over poten-
tially one million occurrences. Reducing that number to a fraction using these linear
methods significantly improves the performance of the subsequent runs’ exponential
time intersection methods.
Testing has also revealed that in scenarios dealing with large data sets, where
the queried patterns are infrequent or potentially absent, omitting the filters entirely
could be beneficial. Furthermore, it has been insightful to determine that depending
on the number of searches prepared for a specific data set, opting for more intensive
pre-processing could improve overall running time instead of spending repetitive time
processing the patterns at each query. At this point, it can be worth noting that the
alternative solution combining the AC automaton and the Binary BFS without any
filtering can be an excellent implementation for gapped pattern search over the text of
insignificant size as well and can very well compare its performance with other state-
of-the-art approaches for this use case. , Overall, the key takeaways revolve around
examining in detail the use case in which the selected algorithm would be best suited
for optimal performance. In cases where the same data set is expected to be tested
against multiple scenarios, depending on the data set size, preprocessing the suﬀix
array can prove beneficial. Conversely, this approach is not recommended when con-
sidering a single execution. Moreover, depending on the size of the gap constraints, it
might be advantageous to consider indexing the results at each level to avoid unneces-
sary computations. However, this implementation was found to be highly ineﬀicient
when dealing with a large number of pattern occurrences and constraint sizes found
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Conclusion
in this thesis. Lastly, an interesting finding was that the effectiveness of each imple-
mentation was minimally impacted by the type of data it handled. Naturally, the
overall time varied, however, that was primarily due to the number of occurrences
of the most frequent patterns, rather than the effectiveness of the algorithms across
different data sets.
5.2
Suggestions for future work
As an extension to the work presented in this thesis, it would be valuable to explore
the performance and effectiveness of other state-of-the-art approaches in compari-
son to the implementations proposed here. Furthermore, it would be intriguing to
investigate the impact of incorporating certain aspects, such as the filtering meth-
ods introduced in this thesis, into other existing solutions, assessing their accuracy
and performance. Additionally, considering the exponentially high number of pat-
tern combinations, particularly in data sets with a limited alphabet size, it would be
worthwhile to explore faster and lightweight algorithms that prioritize execution time
over absolute accuracy.
5.3
Concluding remarks
In conclusion, this thesis effectively extends the work of Cáceres et al.
[CPZ20],
incorporating most of the suggested advancements and providing practical insights
into their implementation. It also elucidates certain nuances of the authors’ work
and proposes enhancements. Furthermore, the developed benchmarking tool, with
its high degree of modularity, is well-positioned to facilitate further development and
testing in the area of pattern-matching search.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[AC75]
Alfred V Aho and Margaret J Corasick. “Eﬀicient string matching: an
aid to bibliographic search.” In: Communications of the ACM 18.6 (1975),
pages 333–340.
[AKO04]
Mohamed Ibrahim Abouelhoda, Stefan Kurtz, and Enno Ohlebusch. “The
enhanced suﬀix array and its applications to genome analysis.” In: Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Volume 3109. 2004, pages 449–463.
[BGP16]
J. Bader, S. Gog, and M. Petri. Practical variable length gap pattern match-
ing. Experimental Algorithms: 15th International Symposium, SEA 2016,
St. Petersburg, Russia, June 5-8, 2016, Proceedings 15. pp. 1-16. 2016.
[Bil+12]
P. Bille et al. String matching with variable length gaps. Theoretical Com-
puter Science. Vol. 443, pp. 25-34. 2012.
[Bis06]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Vol-
ume 4. New York: Springer, 2006.
[Cor+09]
Thomas H Cormen et al. Introduction to algorithms. MIT press, 2009.
[CPZ20]
M. Cáceres, S. Puglisi, and B. Zhukova. Fast indexes for gapped pattern
matching. SOFSEM 2020: Theory And Practice Of Computer Science:
46th International Conference On Current Trends In Theory And Practice
Of Informatics, SOFSEM 2020, Limassol, Cyprus, January 20–24, 2020,
Proceedings 46. pp. 493-504. 2020.
[MM90]
Udi Manber and Gene Myers. Prefix doubling: Simpler, faster pattern
matching and parsing. 1990.
[PL08]
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. “Opinion mining and sentiment analysis.” In:
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 2.1-2 (2008), pages 1–
135.
[ZM06]
Justin Zobel and Alistair Moffat. “Inverted files for text search engines.”
In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 38.2 (2006), pages 1–39.
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A
Code Structure
This appendix provides an overview of the code structure within the repository, out-
lining the projects and components that constitute the whole solution. The codebase
encompasses the benchmarking solution which has been implemented using C# .NET
Core and Entity Framework, consisting of multiple projects within the solution. The
solution on its outer scope consists of a very simple react single page application
which facilitates navigation and initialization of the benchmarking process.
A.0.1
Frontend React Application
The React application serves as the user interface for interacting with the benchmark-
ing system. It allows users to initialize a new benchmarking runtime and it keeps the
user updated on its progress status as it can take an extensive amount of time de-
pending on the number of implementation as well as the number and size of the data
sets. The React app also provides a view of all the runtimes which have completed
and offers a table visualization for all of the results of the selected benchmark.
A.0.2
Bench-marking Solution
The benchmarking solution, developed using C# .NET Core and Entity Framework,
constitutes the core functionality of the system. It encompasses multiple projects
within the solution, each serving a specific purpose. The following projects are in-
cluded:
1. FSGMP: This project summarizes all the functionality of the bench-marking
solution. It is a API based project which is paired with a swagger visual for all
the endpoints its consisted of. Subsequently, it uses a database connection to a
ms SQL server instance which is enagaged uning entity framework(EF) for the
database initialization, model migration & model seeding.
2. FSGPM Testing Project: This project is responsible creating all the testing
classes which are to validate the correctness of the implementations inside the
FSGPM project. The project consist of a data provider class as well which
implements additional functionality needed for the testing.
==PAGE:62==
50
A Code Structure
To provide more insight regarding to the structure of the code-base of the bench-
marking project within the solution, the following folders and their contents are in-
cluded:
1. Controllers: This folder includes only one class which creates all the API
endpoints of the solution. Via those, the creation of new data-sets is completed.
New pattern collections for created data-sets is completed. New runtimes are
initiated and bench-mark results are retrieved.
2. Services: This folder includes all the services used by the controllers and other
services. These incorporate all the functionality which is used by the aforemen-
tioned controllers.
3. Data Access: This folder consists of all the repository classes which in turn
interact with the context class for the database connection.
All the models
mentioned in the Database context class correspond to a table in the database.
4. Enum: This folder contains all the enum classes, meaning all the instances
in which there is a fixed value for which a refference is made to increase code
readability and limit the changes to a single place in case of data alternation.
5. Algorithms: This folder contains two main files. One being the algoContext
class which consists of the shell method in which all the implementations are
placed in as arguments. This shell method is then used in the second file located
in this folder it being the Implementation of algorithms class which consists
of all the different combinations of algorithms which the solutions consists of
and all inherit from the same Interface and all contain the same shell method
mentioned previously.
6. Algo Helper Implementation: This folder consists of all the implementa-
tions of each component and each seperate algorithm within their scope files.
These files consist of the classes and methods whose combination within the
Implementation of algorithms class which form the solutions.
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX B
Bench marking Results
The following tables contain all the results gathered during the benchmarking process.
Due to the large number of implementations considered, the tables had to be split
into multiple ones dividing the found results. Each table has either a specific selection
of k patterns queried fix as well as the pattern length to the smallest one (3), or it
contains the combination of a fixed k with the constraint being fixed to the smallest
one(Cs = ⟨100, 110⟩).
At the leftmost of each table, the first column refers to the algorithm employed
and it’s assigned with its chosen abbreviation. The following is a guide to decoding
the implementations. Each naming convention is made out of at most three parts
p1 −p2 −p3, with part 2 and part 3 being optional.
• Part 1 can have two possible values (SA, AC), translating to the first part of
the implementation for finding the occurrences; it is either the SA scan or the
AC automaton.
• Part 2 signifies the filter used and can have the following values.
BV(Bit-
Vector), BBV(Back-Tracking Bit-Vector), TC(Text Checking), TCBV(Combination
of TC and BV), TCBBV(combination of TC and BBV). No filter is applied if
none of these abbreviations appears.
• Part 3 constitutes the implementation for intersecting all occurrences.
Its
values can be: B (Binary BFS-Like approach), G (DFS-like approach or Graph
search), and the absence of these abbreviations points to the naive BFS-like
approach.
As mentioned in previous sections, all implementations employing the SA Scan
take advantage of a pre-calculated suﬀix array for the data set used, adding to the
running times presented in the tables below. The running time to calculate said Suﬀix
Arrays is mentioned below for each data set:
• Proteins 50mb - 167904 ms
• English Text 50mb - 213164 ms
• Source Code 50mb - 169143 ms
• DNA 50mb - 162811 ms
• Proteins 100mb - 379209 ms
• English Text 100mb - 526713 ms
• Source Code 100mb - 387566 ms
• DNA 100mb - 362802 ms
==PAGE:64==
52
B Bench marking Results
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=2 & p=3
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
SA
1055
1051
1104
5445
5401
5496
2402
2412
2433
146
151
150
SA-BV
25
176
615
266
1838
5011
77
371
1274
145
158
161
SA-BBV
13
20
311
33
205
4239
20
45
733
149
162
261
SA-TC
1039
1080
1044
5363
5357
5396
2410
2410
2421
148
147
149
SA-TCBV
25
169
600
261
1817
4979
78
367
1274
146
156
154
SA-TCBBV
11
20
306
34
209
4269
20
48
730
148
160
260
SA-B
6
7
10
24
26
32
14
16
17
142
141
147
SA-BV-B
10
8
9
27
29
34
19
14
20
147
148
150
SA-BBV-B
11
13
19
29
32
50
20
21
31
145
165
260
SA-TC-B
6
6
7
26
28
35
14
15
17
140
146
142
SA-TCBV-B
8
6
8
28
26
33
18
17
17
169
152
187
SA-TCBBV-B
11
12
19
29
33
52
19
22
32
149
161
262
SA-G
13668
13645
13612
75360
74728
70523
31718
31523
30721
328
317
331
SA-BV-G
236
1094
8485
3197
23861
65069
770
4464
15777
222
571
342
SA-BBV-G
14
103
3628
101
2401
53544
37
331
9323
151
164
263
SA-TC-G
13698
13676
13549
76765
75360
71705
31632
31545
30554
338
326
336
SA-TCBV-G
225
2097
8492
3234
23793
65118
767
4474
15817
217
330
334
SA-TCBBV-G
13
103
3615
108
2453
54137
33
330
9304
148
171
259
AC
2050
2057
2427
5743
5846
5790
3032
3039
3044
1144
1144
2002
AC-BV
1023
1167
1597
1288
2467
5295
927
1165
1943
1150
1156
1160
AC-BBV
1015
1022
1309
1117
1246
4458
885
909
1436
1151
1159
1265
AC-TC
2032
2031
2046
5729
5710
5752
3038
3031
3041
1152
1151
1145
AC-TCBV
1039
1202
1606
1294
2463
5257
926
1165
1941
1153
1158
1161
AC-TCBBV
1011
1022
1319
1111
1257
4462
883
903
1439
1148
1166
1262
AC-B
1012
1014
1247
1131
1109
1108
884
881
888
1137
1144
1141
AC-BV-B
1008
1008
1011
1122
1107
1109
883
880
884
1171
1160
1162
AC-BBV-B
1014
1022
1021
1125
1114
1131
886
891
901
1130
1154
1255
AC-TC-B
1011
1011
1009
1102
1114
1116
879
876
879
1148
1138
1143
AC-TCBV-B
1008
1008
1010
1115
1109
1117
879
877
879
1145
1145
1156
AC-TCBBV-B
1012
1011
1027
1111
1116
1135
883
888
897
1142
1152
1254
AC-G
14639
14556
14666
66609
66050
62362
28863
28627
28002
1319
1336
1365
AC-BV-G
1226
3076
9499
3518
19145
55657
1438
4395
13941
1199
1314
1317
AC-BBV-G
1012
1101
4599
1162
2883
44058
892
1129
8162
1145
1155
1249
AC-TC-G
14696
14608
14509
67139
66499
62846
28967
28794
27774
1328
1319
1319
AC-TCBV-G
1225
3104
9493
3377
18984
55144
1461
4396
14000
1190
1312
1315
AC-TCBBV-G
1094
1101
4603
1165
2882
44121
894
1131
8151
1217
1230
1313
Table B.1: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed pattern length
equal to three and k equal to two.
==PAGE:65==
B Bench marking Results
53
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=2 & Cs
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
SA
1055
24
23
5445
1621
210
2402
397
445
146
20600
180
SA-BV
25
1
1
266
73
8
77
11
38
145
793
9
SA-BBV
13
9
9
33
21
10
20
12
14
149
100
12
SA-TC
1039
24
24
5363
1624
208
2410
399
446
148
20566
176
SA-TCBV
25
1
2
261
71
9
78
10
39
146
797
9
SA-TCBBV
11
9
8
34
23
16
20
12
14
148
105
10
SA-B
6
1
1
24
16
6
14
6
7
142
54
3
SA-BV-B
10
1
1
27
19
9
19
9
8
147
65
7
SA-BBV-B
11
8
8
29
23
11
20
12
13
145
59
10
SA-TC-B
6
1
1
26
18
9
14
5
7
140
54
3
SA-TCBV-B
8
1
1
28
29
8
18
10
8
169
64
5
SA-TCBBV-B
11
9
8
29
21
19
19
14
13
149
60
17
SA-G
13668
340
322
75360
20813
3288
31718
6163
7667
328
290818
2566
SA-BV-G
236
2
4
3197
715
29
770
44
559
222
10752
33
SA-BBV-G
14
9
9
101
25
11
37
10
13
151
621
12
SA-TC-G
13698
341
318
76765
21141
3316
31632
6088
7680
338
290831
2557
SA-TCBV-G
225
2
7
3234
717
29
767
43
545
217
10754
37
SA-TCBBV-G
13
8
8
108
29
17
33
11
13
148
619
14
AC
2050
922
939
5743
3317
1078
3032
1233
1257
1144
21939
1613
AC-BV
1023
891
912
1288
1096
890
927
766
851
1150
2056
1437
AC-BBV
1015
903
920
1117
1030
886
885
766
824
1151
1354
1452
AC-TC
2032
917
936
5729
3184
1081
3038
1234
1259
1152
21910
1613
AC-TCBV
1039
901
915
1294
1096
897
926
767
858
1153
2051
1441
AC-TCBBV
1011
910
934
1111
1027
886
883
765
825
1148
1350
1450
AC-B
1012
891
915
1131
1025
885
884
762
817
1137
1314
1430
AC-BV-B
1008
898
914
1122
1020
886
883
762
825
1171
1313
1428
AC-BBV-B
1014
914
928
1125
1026
884
886
766
826
1130
1305
1430
AC-TC-B
1011
900
915
1102
1042
885
879
759
820
1148
1309
1425
AC-TCBV-B
1008
900
925
1115
1055
895
879
765
823
1145
1304
1437
AC-TCBBV-B
1012
907
935
1111
1025
888
883
774
827
1142
1305
1434
AC-G
14639
1231
1232
66609
30097
3904
28863
8924
8420
1319
291540
3938
AC-BV-G
1226
902
919
3518
2016
916
1438
817
1356
1199
12026
1454
AC-BBV-G
1012
906
921
1162
1035
890
892
766
824
1145
1862
1429
AC-TC-G
14696
1237
1237
67139
29874
4043
28967
8829
8402
1328
292076
3976
AC-TCBV-G
1225
900
924
3377
2010
916
1461
819
1352
1190
11923
1454
AC-TCBBV-G
1094
905
938
1165
1042
893
894
767
825
1217
1893
1455
Table B.2: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed k equal to two
and gap constraints Cs = ⟨100, 110⟩.
==PAGE:66==
54
B Bench marking Results
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=4 & p=3
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
SA
790
845
1838
29
28
30
4902
5366
47078
453
493
3751
SA-BV
31
114
791
42
34
32
112
659
13196
461
451
456
SA-BBV
32
35
181
48
45
52
72
78
5217
467
480
554
SA-TC
796
856
1846
29
32
37
4917
5356
46770
446
436
489
SA-TCBV
29
113
768
37
30
29
112
658
13161
439
450
498
SA-TCBBV
31
31
176
52
52
30
69
77
5214
457
453
587
SA-B
10
11
21
30
30
41
50
51
202
430
432
435
SA-BV-B
24
12
22
45
35
30
62
54
168
449
445
448
SA-BBV-B
30
30
86
49
57
48
73
72
204
462
466
545
SA-TC-B
9
11
19
32
31
32
49
51
162
437
434
461
SA-TCBV-B
22
10
18
39
30
43
60
66
163
445
451
476
SA-TCBBV-B
28
31
47
48
47
35
69
73
196
450
455
563
SA-G
11744
12076
17387
49
50
68
69448
73254
268558
796
1704
27573
SA-BV-G
151
1200
8690
56
38
32
605
6521
197375
532
742
24391
SA-BBV-G
30
36
1481
51
51
50
69
130
49030
473
475
571
SA-TC-G
11725
12114
17373
44
43
32
69713
73023
267661
911
856
513267
SA-TCBV-G
153
1201
8710
42
31
31
608
6520
199889
508
866
464227
SA-TCBBV-G
30
37
1491
53
55
33
70
130
49117
453
454
917
AC
1979
2031
2998
6130
7053
27758
5518
5894
41322
1932
1983
5181
AC-BV
1226
1310
1966
1511
2753
25113
932
1411
11931
1934
1937
1933
AC-BBV
1224
1222
1367
1439
1396
18727
877
905
5049
1926
1939
2025
AC-TC
1975
2040
2999
6143
7093
27811
5521
5900
41344
1909
1924
1954
AC-TCBV
1223
1304
1973
1515
2753
24921
918
1412
11923
1917
1921
2319
AC-TCBBV
1229
1227
1372
1379
1406
18251
879
888
5036
1909
1929
2046
AC-B
1211
1205
1215
1351
1353
1508
862
872
997
1917
1917
1913
AC-BV-B
1219
1225
1222
1364
1356
1446
871
861
1050
2012
1918
1914
AC-BBV-B
1230
1247
1246
1368
1382
1494
880
883
991
1932
1936
2210
AC-TC-B
1205
1209
1214
1349
1406
1448
857
863
958
1909
1900
1941
AC-TCBV-B
1222
1209
1218
1368
1357
1447
872
862
962
1915
1908
1952
AC-TCBBV-B
1232
1230
1250
1374
1840
1486
877
882
994
1914
1935
2029
AC-G
12836
13182
18529
76303
83970
266786
67267
69538
234040
2514
2746
28764
AC-BV-G
1338
2395
9839
3050
16644
244886
1363
6763
175611
1983
2273
25502
AC-BBV-G
1227
1233
2677
1371
1562
164049
882
937
42144
1923
1932
2017
AC-TC-G
12878
13223
18590
76597
85913
266899
67036
70223
235204
2047
2324
506730
AC-TCBV-G
1348
2397
9902
3031
16947
245090
1362
6813
171136
1996
3049
508031
AC-TCBBV-G
1225
1231
2686
1387
1562
174991
882
934
42079
1964
1986
2447
Table B.3: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed pattern length
equal to three and k equal to four.
==PAGE:67==
B Bench marking Results
55
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=4 & Cs
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
SA
790
27
20
29
1484
109
4902
1146
915
453
7075
1136
SA-BV
31
2
5
42
45
16
112
23
40
461
443
34
SA-BBV
32
18
35
48
37
29
72
32
44
467
80
42
SA-TC
796
28
21
29
1487
108
4917
1149
913
446
7026
33
SA-TCBV
29
2
3
37
48
15
112
23
42
439
448
35
SA-TCBBV
31
15
16
52
44
27
69
31
43
457
76
37
SA-B
10
1
1
30
19
5
50
15
26
430
53
17
SA-BV-B
24
10
4
45
29
28
62
28
31
449
66
29
SA-BBV-B
30
16
17
49
42
23
73
32
44
462
70
38
SA-TC-B
9
1
1
32
20
5
49
17
29
437
53
22
SA-TCBV-B
22
2
2
39
32
17
60
25
34
445
67
26
SA-TCBBV-B
28
15
16
48
38
22
69
33
42
450
74
38
SA-G
11744
369
387
49
19811
1903
69448
18980
25565
796
101484
15469
SA-BV-G
151
7
6
56
205
25
605
34
151
532
4416
91
SA-BBV-G
30
15
20
51
44
29
69
33
43
473
76
39
SA-TC-G
11725
370
382
44
19953
1897
69713
19105
25266
911
102576
55
SA-TCBV-G
153
7
5
42
193
29
608
29
149
508
4410
54
SA-TCBBV-G
30
19
17
53
41
23
70
33
43
453
85
41
AC
1979
1148
1069
6130
2605
1239
5518
2009
1834
1932
8565
2595
AC-BV
1226
1132
1049
1511
1260
1172
932
976
964
1934
1937
1476
AC-BBV
1224
1139
1062
1439
1251
1173
877
980
963
1926
1549
1495
AC-TC
1975
1159
1068
6143
2619
1244
5521
2015
1835
1909
8599
1474
AC-TCBV
1223
1142
1055
1515
1265
1170
918
981
964
1917
1917
1483
AC-TCBBV
1229
1147
1075
1379
1287
1171
879
983
960
1909
1552
1482
AC-B
1211
1126
1047
1351
1226
1160
862
973
945
1917
1528
1463
AC-BV-B
1219
1132
1049
1364
1239
1166
871
979
952
2012
1527
1465
AC-BBV-B
1230
1149
1069
1368
1248
1169
880
988
968
1932
1534
1472
AC-TC-B
1205
1127
1052
1349
1221
1175
857
970
945
1909
1520
1459
AC-TCBV-B
1222
1131
1055
1368
1237
1168
872
978
963
1915
1534
1472
AC-TCBBV-B
1232
1152
1077
1374
1250
1173
877
986
969
1914
1540
1482
AC-G
12836
1498
1428
76303
20031
2809
67267
18500
26256
2514
103703
16869
AC-BV-G
1338
1135
1052
3050
1390
1163
1363
988
1073
1983
5870
1532
AC-BBV-G
1227
1146
1068
1371
1248
1178
882
988
962
1923
1546
1475
AC-TC-G
12878
1515
1446
76597
20095
2813
67036
18619
26373
2047
102542
1500
AC-TCBV-G
1348
1138
1062
3031
1384
1170
1362
981
1065
1996
5871
1493
AC-TCBBV-G
1225
1147
1074
1387
1249
1179
882
991
962
1964
1560
1503
Table B.4: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed k equal to four
and gap constraints Cs = ⟨100, 110⟩.
==PAGE:68==
56
B Bench marking Results
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=8 & p=3
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
SA
732
774
2361
8664
10011
1646605
3725
4499
44052
644
645
649
SA-BV
57
88
692
499
3133
1462159
217
763
8375
656
639
640
SA-BBV
61
66
206
155
219
826625
114
136
1176
684
681
685
SA-TC
731
774
2378
8613
9999
1644676
3744
4493
43557
630
627
669
SA-TCBV
52
86
687
499
3123
1462169
216
756
8297
648
637
665
SA-TCBBV
72
64
230
164
213
825621
114
136
1203
664
646
679
SA-B
16
19
41
109
116
7776
77
80
314
630
642
626
SA-BV-B
46
19
39
143
123
7591
102
82
295
657
635
635
SA-BBV-B
57
63
84
164
172
7728
114
118
194
681
675
708
SA-TC-B
15
15
34
111
117
7843
75
79
259
631
635
667
SA-TCBV-B
45
20
35
144
121
7310
101
83
243
651
629
662
SA-TCBBV-B
57
60
81
148
161
8012
114
123
197
666
652
679
SA-G
8660
9055
15653
125199
132803
8960924
52092
56621
84344
1207
1453
1197
SA-BV-G
121
727
6086
3836
32305
8947923
1313
6273
32776
726
688
665
SA-BBV-G
57
61
1301
168
632
8679037
120
249
6790
726
688
682
SA-TC-G
8682
9110
15683
124636
133011
8959773
52592
56548
84436
844
634
690
SA-TCBV-G
119
688
6097
3855
31893
8926446
1494
6176
32362
671
634
671
SA-TCBBV-G
57
64
1288
182
610
8629434
118
244
6678
671
638
690
AC
2046
2112
3697
9513
10776
1359173
4633
5295
36249
1889
1895
1878
AC-BV
1385
1411
2008
1890
4284
1179343
1263
1783
8157
1896
1877
1877
AC-BBV
1382
1382
1520
1560
1617
643976
1161
1181
2127
1923
1931
1918
AC-TC
2083
2088
3671
9509
10823
1361717
4620
5308
36352
1870
1858
1901
AC-TCBV
1418
1423
2016
1896
4287
1188480
1255
1774
8034
1898
1859
1906
AC-TCBBV
1383
1383
1573
1576
1891
645005
1155
1179
2111
2306
1881
1924
AC-B
1354
1376
1377
1533
1533
9660
1123
1129
1271
1864
1867
1943
AC-BV-B
1372
1341
1388
1557
1547
8028
1152
1175
1376
1900
1863
1865
AC-BBV-B
1393
1391
1436
1574
1580
8810
1164
1247
1239
1936
2385
2072
AC-TC-B
1385
1339
1364
1533
1528
8424
1154
1122
1271
1856
2020
1985
AC-TCBV-B
1399
1364
1359
1570
1549
7976
1139
1127
1261
1893
1862
1894
AC-TCBBV-B
1411
1394
1441
1563
1589
7761
1152
1166
1414
1899
1997
2136
AC-G
9940
10443
16903
119182
126504
7285522
51198
54560
75523
2339
2376
2468
AC-BV-G
1442
2054
7395
4989
31626
7195908
2326
7115
28426
1900
2291
1869
AC-BBV-G
1381
1390
2618
1588
2022
7035665
1164
1292
7022
1897
1903
1904
AC-TC-G
9991
10400
16970
119818
126249
7235131
51575
55124
76358
2054
1871
1901
AC-TCBV-G
1459
2017
7502
4953
31495
7171268
2333
7107
28437
1888
1877
1909
AC-TCBBV-G
1406
1390
2615
1624
2135
7024194
1313
1289
7197
1948
1916
1955
Table B.5: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed pattern length
equal to three and k equal to eight.
==PAGE:69==
B Bench marking Results
57
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=8 & Cs
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
SA
732
25
18
8664
1410
50
3725
674
420
644
10274
301
SA-BV
57
7
7
499
87
38
217
63
83
656
488
53
SA-BBV
61
20
42
155
62
44
114
69
96
684
147
42
SA-TC
731
26
19
8613
1414
50
3744
680
419
630
10252
294
SA-TCBV
52
9
7
499
95
67
216
63
86
648
484
51
SA-TCBBV
72
18
18
164
67
52
114
70
100
664
154
54
SA-B
16
2
1
109
27
10
77
40
63
630
108
16
SA-BV-B
46
15
5
143
57
37
102
56
80
657
143
42
SA-BBV-B
57
42
18
164
64
47
114
67
94
681
147
56
SA-TC-B
15
2
2
111
28
13
75
42
69
631
117
15
SA-TCBV-B
45
5
5
144
52
43
101
56
81
651
132
42
SA-TCBBV-B
57
78
29
148
54
48
114
294
99
666
160
52
SA-G
8660
343
254
125199
19461
837
52092
9036
5352
1207
137678
4168
SA-BV-G
121
10
25
3836
419
43
1313
123
138
726
3562
72
SA-BBV-G
57
31
21
168
85
57
120
71
92
726
172
66
SA-TC-G
8682
344
254
124636
19183
851
52592
9079
5227
844
137640
4146
SA-TCBV-G
119
11
8
3855
425
41
1494
125
135
671
3559
68
SA-TCBBV-G
57
20
24
182
73
48
118
66
98
671
146
56
AC
2046
1314
1286
9513
2699
1489
4633
1570
1370
1889
12033
1897
AC-BV
1385
1307
1272
1890
1375
1467
1263
1029
1041
1896
2136
1631
AC-BBV
1382
1310
1282
1560
1344
1477
1161
1183
1048
1923
1812
1652
AC-TC
2083
1320
1283
9509
2703
1494
4620
1574
1368
1870
12024
1892
AC-TCBV
1418
1313
1291
1896
1373
1477
1255
1026
1039
1898
2127
1635
AC-TCBBV
1383
1323
1281
1576
1472
1570
1155
1029
1054
2306
1809
1648
AC-B
1354
1303
1276
1533
1309
1455
1123
1015
1016
1864
1857
1670
AC-BV-B
1372
1305
1274
1557
1340
1475
1152
1022
1180
1900
1835
1634
AC-BBV-B
1393
1329
1287
1574
1339
1507
1164
1182
1047
1936
1791
1631
AC-TC-B
1385
1298
1269
1533
1326
1451
1154
1015
1022
1856
1756
1606
AC-TCBV-B
1399
1305
1313
1570
1358
1461
1139
1026
1045
1893
1787
1626
AC-TCBBV-B
1411
1345
1296
1563
1349
1484
1152
1035
1053
1899
1798
1666
AC-G
9940
1642
1511
119182
20566
2257
51198
8754
6272
2339
139744
5713
AC-BV-G
1442
1315
1276
4989
1706
1484
2326
1067
1092
1900
5198
1651
AC-BBV-G
1381
1326
1279
1588
1361
1487
1164
1037
1147
1897
1801
1635
AC-TC-G
9991
1637
1527
119818
21121
2270
51575
8828
6079
2054
138742
5730
AC-TCBV-G
1459
1312
1271
4953
1860
1480
2333
1069
1095
1888
5398
1745
AC-TCBBV-G
1406
1316
1325
1624
1345
1482
1313
1045
1056
1948
1846
1644
Table B.6: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed k equal to eight
and gap constraints Cs = ⟨100, 110⟩.
==PAGE:70==
58
B Bench marking Results
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=16 & p=3
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
SA
719
767
2471
-
-
-
3575
3673
154934
-
-
-
SA-BV
118
152
768
-
-
-
203
200
6137
-
-
-
SA-BBV
116
139
270
-
-
-
203
218
2018
-
-
-
SA-TC
717
764
2435
-
-
-
3596
3712
154442
-
-
-
SA-TCBV
107
142
771
-
-
-
191
200
5695
-
-
-
SA-TCBBV
202
145
255
-
-
-
203
206
1825
-
-
-
SA-B
34
34
60
-
-
-
125
136
2091
-
-
-
SA-BV-B
93
38
59
-
-
-
186
131
1966
-
-
-
SA-BBV-B
116
118
164
-
-
-
204
208
1468
-
-
-
SA-TC-B
29
30
55
-
-
-
120
121
2083
-
-
-
SA-TCBV-B
122
39
57
-
-
-
179
132
2032
-
-
-
SA-TCBBV-B
113
152
163
-
-
-
204
447
1525
-
-
-
SA-G
10540
10799
15814
-
-
-
54745
55642
62666
-
-
-
SA-BV-G
213
1119
6654
-
-
-
307
768
3832
-
-
-
SA-BBV-G
129
127
881
-
-
-
197
460
433
-
-
-
SA-TC-G
10590
10850
15866
-
-
-
54994
55621
62848
-
-
-
SA-TCBV-G
229
1131
6628
-
-
-
314
1028
3704
-
-
-
SA-TCBBV-G
127
155
851
-
-
-
200
437
462
-
-
-
AC
2224
2273
3920
-
-
-
4389
4454
119033
-
-
-
AC-BV
1640
1656
2271
-
-
-
1314
1320
5678
-
-
-
AC-BBV
1641
1678
1774
-
-
-
1408
1339
2525
-
-
-
AC-TC
2239
2281
3921
-
-
-
4379
4468
118663
-
-
-
AC-TCBV
1626
1671
2284
-
-
-
1322
1315
5581
-
-
-
AC-TCBBV
1634
1670
1808
-
-
-
1350
1613
2509
-
-
-
AC-B
1550
1554
1569
-
-
-
1258
1265
2896
-
-
-
AC-BV-B
1629
1569
1569
-
-
-
1329
1271
2808
-
-
-
AC-BBV-B
1673
1678
1719
-
-
-
1333
1339
2308
-
-
-
AC-TC-B
1551
1553
1603
-
-
-
1264
1259
2961
-
-
-
AC-TCBV-B
1611
1564
1576
-
-
-
1308
1272
2975
-
-
-
AC-TCBBV-B
1690
1646
1679
-
-
-
1334
1343
2352
-
-
-
AC-G
11973
12327
17303
-
-
-
50117
50394
56876
-
-
-
AC-BV-G
1748
2633
8156
-
-
-
1388
1772
4276
-
-
-
AC-BBV-G
1660
1661
2375
-
-
-
1340
1341
1554
-
-
-
AC-TC-G
12105
12344
17346
-
-
-
50045
50295
56916
-
-
-
AC-TCBV-G
1765
2666
8167
-
-
-
1396
1733
4295
-
-
-
AC-TCBBV-G
1641
1661
2316
-
-
-
1340
1344
1545
-
-
-
Table B.7: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed pattern length
equal to three and k equal to sixteen.
==PAGE:71==
B Bench marking Results
59
Method
Proteins 50mb
English Text 50mb
Source Code 50mb
DNA 50mb
k=16 & Cs
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
SA
719
39
20
-
-
-
3575
363
143
-
-
-
SA-BV
118
19
17
-
-
-
203
98
64
-
-
-
SA-BBV
116
55
177
-
-
-
203
106
74
-
-
-
SA-TC
717
38
20
-
-
-
3596
361
142
-
-
-
SA-TCBV
107
28
11
-
-
-
191
87
58
-
-
-
SA-TCBBV
202
78
40
-
-
-
203
106
75
-
-
-
SA-B
34
4
3
-
-
-
125
52
32
-
-
-
SA-BV-B
93
27
16
-
-
-
186
95
58
-
-
-
SA-BBV-B
116
24
35
-
-
-
204
116
72
-
-
-
SA-TC-B
29
3
3
-
-
-
120
54
30
-
-
-
SA-TCBV-B
122
15
11
-
-
-
179
90
61
-
-
-
SA-TCBBV-B
113
36
30
-
-
-
204
115
79
-
-
-
SA-G
10540
416
257
-
-
-
54745
5121
1690
-
-
-
SA-BV-G
213
40
12
-
-
-
307
377
72
-
-
-
SA-BBV-G
129
62
25
-
-
-
197
105
73
-
-
-
SA-TC-G
10590
411
257
-
-
-
54994
5118
1668
-
-
-
SA-TCBV-G
229
23
19
-
-
-
314
97
69
-
-
-
SA-TCBBV-G
127
49
29
-
-
-
200
106
80
-
-
-
AC
2224
1492
1500
-
-
-
4389
1431
1336
-
-
-
AC-BV
1640
1467
1495
-
-
-
1314
1158
1262
-
-
-
AC-BBV
1641
1487
1533
-
-
-
1408
1395
1278
-
-
-
AC-TC
2239
1492
1503
-
-
-
4379
1428
1341
-
-
-
AC-TCBV
1626
1485
1498
-
-
-
1322
1171
1258
-
-
-
AC-TCBBV
1634
1511
1510
-
-
-
1350
1176
1278
-
-
-
AC-B
1550
1548
1492
-
-
-
1258
1123
1228
-
-
-
AC-BV-B
1629
1469
1499
-
-
-
1329
1161
1259
-
-
-
AC-BBV-B
1673
1517
1518
-
-
-
1333
1166
1273
-
-
-
AC-TC-B
1551
1456
1488
-
-
-
1264
1115
1233
-
-
-
AC-TCBV-B
1611
1470
1502
-
-
-
1308
1168
1266
-
-
-
AC-TCBBV-B
1690
1517
1519
-
-
-
1334
1171
1548
-
-
-
AC-G
11973
1872
1742
-
-
-
50117
6187
2763
-
-
-
AC-BV-G
1748
1479
1508
-
-
-
1388
1158
1271
-
-
-
AC-BBV-G
1660
1496
1513
-
-
-
1340
1169
1282
-
-
-
AC-TC-G
12105
1890
1742
-
-
-
50045
6181
2779
-
-
-
AC-TCBV-G
1765
1480
1500
-
-
-
1396
1160
1260
-
-
-
AC-TCBBV-G
1641
1503
1540
-
-
-
1340
1168
1279
-
-
-
Table B.8: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed k equal to
sixteen and gap constraints Cs = ⟨100, 110⟩.
==PAGE:72==
60
B Bench marking Results
Method
Proteins 100mb
English Text 100mb
Source Code 100mb
DNA 100mb
k=2 & p=3
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
SA
2429
2450
2462
89804
89275
91484
56821
56839
56950
315839
318344
316192
SA-BV
45
327
1439
8681
56877
90154
944
4066
16818
99936
299284
315299
SA-BBV
23
38
481
367
7866
74139
125
184
1798
4714
57028
252608
SA-TC
2423
2453
2456
89363
90112
89813
57105
57185
57112
315717
315471
316121
SA-TCBV
46
328
1692
8676
56362
89629
941
3977
17211
99610
294246
318174
SA-TCBBV
22
37
552
352
7706
74246
125
185
1817
4504
54127
246904
SA-B
10
12
12
118
122
212
124
127
136
329
349
505
SA-BV-B
17
12
12
123
132
288
129
128
140
340
358
513
SA-BBV-B
22
26
39
203
138
324
121
132
227
318
384
772
SA-TC-B
13
13
12
121
123
212
124
125
134
324
343
499
SA-TCBV-B
17
11
13
120
128
274
131
126
137
337
358
515
SA-TCBBV-B
23
26
38
115
139
266
123
133
223
299
371
737
SA-G
34474
34131
33693
1144411
1111955
1045904
644080
635550
621453
4409432
4286297
4266838
SA-BV-G
454
4154
20482
107332
697199
1011244
9735
40162
164308
1360329
3992334
4227971
SA-BBV-G
27
200
5954
3337
97779
876634
146
869
13692
60104
793549
3344935
SA-TC-G
34476
34398
33577
1143588
1111432
1051028
640206
638426
623934
4519767
4353323
4365092
SA-TCBV-G
446
4119
20313
107039
693078
1033986
9673
39833
163878
1331698
4013046
4094803
SA-TCBBV-G
27
193
5908
3367
97402
847659
155
636
13781
58630
753032
3441692
AC
4774
4666
4661
88870
88533
87501
61009
61163
60674
289102
292336
287115
AC-BV
2250
2628
3652
10260
57521
89713
2421
5597
18413
94135
271594
287728
AC-BBV
2251
2253
2691
2308
9363
74304
1606
1662
3353
6561
52099
228760
AC-TC
4668
4644
4650
87624
87789
87483
60839
60767
61053
294751
288358
293256
AC-TCBV
2243
2533
3620
10177
55072
87854
2441
5602
18643
93979
270356
291596
AC-TCBBV
2271
2266
2678
2244
9220
74688
1623
1692
3354
6492
51757
227312
AC-B
2217
2225
2221
2010
2571
2083
1608
1613
1616
3221
2864
2993
AC-BV-B
2236
2235
2256
2034
2007
2037
1613
1620
1625
2719
2733
2949
AC-BBV-B
2269
2290
2247
1992
1999
2121
1605
1620
1710
2646
2700
3034
AC-TC-B
2241
2262
2238
1976
2009
2026
1613
1615
1630
2875
2816
2954
AC-TCBV-B
2219
2226
2222
2023
2012
2177
1650
1611
1625
3671
2849
3066
AC-TCBBV-B
2235
2239
2247
2240
2225
2204
1600
1606
1702
2792
2817
3197
AC-G
37017
36753
36288
1114755
1072620
1010772
673204
667607
650826
4326547
4126482
4090650
AC-BV-G
2669
6396
22605
105599
674638
1004610
11294
43606
173487
1327932
3894406
4123996
AC-BBV-G
2250
2419
8154
5118
96823
879637
1616
2104
16202
61270
782450
3294673
AC-TC-G
36774
36952
35970
1125121
1096137
987096
670556
669864
653792
4360450
4306678
4124303
AC-TCBV-G
2736
6353
22610
106079
677052
1040663
11344
43811
175770
1372770
3965561
4267673
AC-TCBBV-G
2265
2424
8214
5212
98968
918036
1616
2119
17378
59154
767374
3616988
Table B.9: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed pattern length
equal to three and k equal to two.
==PAGE:73==
B Bench marking Results
61
Method
Proteins 100mb
English Text 100mb
Source Code 100mb
DNA 100mb
k=2 & Cs
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
SA
2429
39
19
89804
6194
310
56821
20065
540
315839
29408
1010
SA-BV
45
3
1
8681
85
14
944
2737
12
99936
1297
24
SA-BBV
23
19
20
367
48
17
125
312
24
4714
110
26
SA-TC
2423
36
19
89363
6240
285
57105
20042
536
315717
29384
983
SA-TCBV
46
4
3
8676
79
12
941
2746
14
99610
1260
69
SA-TCBBV
22
17
16
352
52
19
125
302
22
4504
100
25
SA-B
10
1
1
118
44
4
124
48
6
329
61
9
SA-BV-B
17
1
1
123
41
11
129
52
12
340
68
22
SA-BBV-B
22
17
16
203
49
17
121
56
20
318
73
18
SA-TC-B
13
1
1
121
42
5
124
54
6
324
62
16
SA-TCBV-B
17
1
1
120
46
13
131
52
11
337
75
16
SA-TCBBV-B
23
17
18
115
52
17
123
57
20
299
73
32
SA-G
34474
457
262
1144411
122951
3582
644080
284979
7423
4409432
401891
14245
SA-BV-G
454
19
7
107332
902
27
9735
38097
31
1360329
17269
111
SA-BBV-G
27
23
18
3337
46
18
146
3431
22
60104
475
25
SA-TC-G
34476
428
259
1143588
122494
3560
640206
288059
7710
4519767
401700
14262
SA-TCBV-G
446
18
7
107039
895
25
9673
37619
27
1331698
17642
112
SA-TCBBV-G
27
18
17
3367
64
22
155
3417
29
58630
466
26
AC
4774
2073
2152
88870
8345
2463
61009
21623
1932
289102
29405
2984
AC-BV
2250
2146
2168
10260
2348
2080
2421
4266
1435
94135
3824
2173
AC-BBV
2251
2057
2195
2308
2286
2131
1606
1851
1418
6561
2662
2113
AC-TC
4668
2087
2173
87624
8281
2356
60839
21494
1928
294751
29252
3035
AC-TCBV
2243
2062
2145
10177
2292
2079
2441
4285
1425
93979
3768
2092
AC-TCBBV
2271
2067
2165
2244
2264
2067
1623
1845
1432
6492
2663
2108
AC-B
2217
2040
2141
2010
2228
2062
1608
1595
1406
3221
2707
2179
AC-BV-B
2236
2087
2145
2034
2234
2204
1613
1602
1415
2719
2639
2096
AC-BBV-B
2269
2089
2185
1992
2207
2054
1605
1604
1421
2646
2627
2100
AC-TC-B
2241
2110
2151
1976
2269
2191
1613
1624
1428
2875
2766
2192
AC-TCBV-B
2219
2052
2136
2023
2236
2055
1650
1608
1428
3671
2762
2219
AC-TCBBV-B
2235
2085
2194
2240
2370
2124
1600
1604
1424
2792
2738
2288
AC-G
37017
2487
2400
1114755
123406
5588
673204
291973
8956
4326547
405186
16366
AC-BV-G
2669
2061
2140
105599
3063
2086
11294
39403
1447
1327932
20193
2367
AC-BBV-G
2250
2067
2158
5118
2286
2083
1616
4887
1417
61270
3223
2276
AC-TC-G
36774
2535
2408
1125121
123874
5596
670556
289567
8791
4360450
409325
16373
AC-TCBV-G
2736
2074
2133
106079
3062
2085
11344
39230
1438
1372770
19341
2224
AC-TCBBV-G
2265
2052
2143
5212
2239
2064
1616
4870
1428
59154
3009
2231
Table B.10: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed k equal to
two and gap constraints Cs = ⟨100, 110⟩.
==PAGE:74==
62
B Bench marking Results
Method
Proteins 100mb
English Text 100mb
Source Code 100mb
DNA 100mb
k=4 & p=3
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
Cs
Cm
Cl
SA
4450
4709
8896
61983
75951
708281
3391
4368
22946
562
612
1088
SA-BV
102
604
4582
2806
23180
643529
127
384
8301
575
562
559
SA-BBV
65
76
1136
220
1022
454529
109
125
2675
583
592
608
SA-TC
4425
4686
8860
62165
75472
703485
3400
4395
22826
534
542
580
SA-TCBV
96
594
4408
2801
23346
642140
149
388
8388
539
532
558
SA-TCBBV
62
67
1103
218
1014
451403
107
119
2651
572
557
554
SA-B
20
23
46
203
206
1418
57
58
109
539
533
534
SA-BV-B
46
42
47
205
205
1340
81
62
112
559
548
548
SA-BBV-B
64
67
100
249
239
1430
101
103
146
594
603
606
SA-TC-B
20
22
45
277
205
1327
57
59
108
533
534
555
SA-TCBV-B
46
24
46
208
207
1342
80
61
110
542
534
547
SA-TCBBV-B
64
66
103
213
231
1402
101
103
146
565
553
549
SA-G
65628
67349
93569
839334
1068194
5760296
51460
63268
188508
1232
1816
7885
SA-BV-G
667
6873
52718
27926
253982
5508719
567
3562
80678
565
547
564
SA-BBV-G
68
84
12833
249
8798
4122192
102
148
39189
578
598
598
SA-TC-G
65789
67312
95033
837205
1084052
5014521
51898
63697
185459
537
538
562
SA-TCBV-G
660
6863
53072
27867
259203
4983419
582
3561
78751
540
542
573
SA-TCBBV-G
62
90
12853
254
8726
4177498
103
206
38223
566
553
564
AC
6745
6973
11065
57201
69416
633457
9243
11164
50703
3054
3064
3470
AC-BV
2314
2819
6646
4818
21602
574364
2299
3347
28436
2999
3061
3000
AC-BBV
2302
2296
3357
2606
3246
396621
2119
2120
11533
2957
2997
3058
AC-TC
6623
6898
11105
56246
70763
636442
9246
11143
50293
3030
2965
3112
AC-TCBV
2311
2800
6652
4923
21501
574426
2327
3423
28909
3023
3001
3059
AC-TCBBV
2277
2296
3350
2639
3235
394152
2086
2109
12183
2997
3145
2987
AC-B
2248
2245
2267
2572
2940
3317
2049
2053
2173
3076
3035
3077
AC-BV-B
2285
2254
2268
2667
2641
3675
2075
2061
2195
3070
3030
2954
AC-BBV-B
2329
2338
2361
2626
2769
3403
2085
2108
2212
2935
2978
2975
AC-TC-B
2258
2264
2306
2619
2616
5536
2092
2093
2177
3155
3094
3081
AC-TCBV-B
2275
2253
2277
2554
2579
3267
2080
2055
2178
3126
3081
3068
AC-TCBBV-B
2303
2311
2349
2642
2610
4000
2084
2099
2210
3136
3090
3143
AC-G
68171
70148
97484
754667
901197
4732993
105152
125593
385426
3963
4529
10122
AC-BV-G
2882
9043
54791
25599
216380
4390408
4127
15976
256143
3230
3223
3182
AC-BBV-G
2286
2305
15198
2676
9824
3639795
2105
2271
144650
3249
3221
3237
AC-TC-G
67613
69613
97090
755903
935958
5601555
105395
125321
397851
3155
3142
3262
AC-TCBV-G
2892
9304
54446
26339
219788
5296049
4172
15922
258193
2979
3026
3001
AC-TCBBV-G
2292
2324
15186
2787
10012
3852851
2099
2263
144207
3235
3137
3215
Table B.11: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed pattern length
equal to three and k equal to four.
==PAGE:75==
B Bench marking Results
63
Method
Proteins 100mb
English Text 100mb
Source Code 100mb
DNA 100mb
k=4 & Cs
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
3
5
7
SA
4450
26
19
61983
3624
504
3391
5280
1661
562
89261
1441
SA-BV
102
3
3
2806
145
49
127
87
23
575
2859
60
SA-BBV
65
36
30
220
66
56
109
88
38
583
223
70
SA-TC
4425
26
17
62165
3643
505
3400
5255
1682
534
87240
1431
SA-TCBV
96
3
3
2801
156
52
149
88
28
539
2773
57
SA-TCBBV
62
36
26
218
74
62
107
75
33
572
228
67
SA-B
20
1
1
203
34
20
57
35
21
539
203
21
SA-BV-B
46
3
2
205
60
42
81
49
21
559
215
44
SA-BBV-B
64
35
27
249
75
60
101
72
31
594
441
48
SA-TC-B
20
1
1
277
34
23
57
34
19
533
182
27
SA-TCBV-B
46
3
4
208
58
38
80
49
22
542
207
49
SA-TCBBV-B
64
35
33
213
84
65
101
77
39
565
228
54
SA-G
65628
396
275
839334
52409
8871
51460
73145
23029
1232
1219851
20693
SA-BV-G
667
7
11
27926
1034
117
567
442
29
565
29708
137
SA-BBV-G
68
33
239
249
80
63
102
77
39
578
330
67
SA-TC-G
65789
400
259
837205
52410
8904
51898
74396
22942
537
1258690
20714
SA-TCBV-G
660
8
9
27867
1042
128
582
453
32
540
29179
139
SA-TCBBV-G
62
36
26
254
86
64
103
88
42
566
284
66
AC
6745
2586
2325
57201
5300
2599
9243
6035
3521
3054
81563
4037
AC-BV
2314
2525
2317
4818
2528
2256
2299
1888
1877
2999
5258
2756
AC-BBV
2302
2557
2323
2606
2405
2168
2119
1889
1893
2957
2902
2790
AC-TC
6623
2555
2321
56246
5173
2694
9246
6036
3517
3030
81971
4058
AC-TCBV
2311
2530
2333
4923
2546
2220
2327
1888
1889
3023
5226
2721
AC-TCBBV
2277
2555
2328
2639
2405
2167
2086
1873
1886
2997
3081
2934
AC-B
2248
2554
2294
2572
2527
2199
2049
1828
1889
3076
2974
2966
AC-BV-B
2285
2543
2306
2667
2380
2134
2075
1850
1883
3070
2849
2687
AC-BBV-B
2329
2581
2351
2626
2399
2199
2085
1872
1895
2935
2860
2832
AC-TC-B
2258
2530
2313
2619
2359
2178
2092
1835
1871
3155
2959
2839
AC-TCBV-B
2275
2529
2292
2554
2402
2132
2080
1840
1865
3126
3035
2900
AC-TCBBV-B
2303
2585
2322
2642
2508
2244
2084
1860
1884
3136
2957
2921
AC-G
68171
2975
2578
754667
44674
10927
105152
65746
25831
3963
1225331
23690
AC-BV-G
2882
2530
2317
25599
3120
2251
4127
2201
1911
3230
32265
3027
AC-BBV-G
2286
2650
2337
2676
2434
2193
2105
1874
1911
3249
3200
2934
AC-TC-G
67613
2930
2581
755903
44486
10940
105395
65299
25155
3155
1248170
23819
AC-TCBV-G
2892
2557
2309
26339
3103
2235
4172
2200
1882
2979
30536
2868
AC-TCBBV-G
2292
2550
2348
2787
2382
2159
2099
1867
1881
3235
2910
2757
Table B.12: Total query time in milliseconds on all data sets for fixed k equal to
four and gap constraints Cs = ⟨100, 110⟩.
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C
Project Description
Problem Description:
Fast Querying for Gapped Pattern Search
Adamantios Alexandros Kounis
Problem definition
The objective of gapped pattern search, given a text string T
and a gapped pattern P consisting of a sequence of strings and variable length gaps,
is to identify all valid occurrences in T of sub-strings that satisfy the specified gap
constraints. In this problem, a variable length gap gδ,∆is an arbitrary string over Σ of
length between δ and ∆, where δ ≤∆. A gapped pattern P is the concatenation of an
alternating sequence of strings and variable length gaps, which can also be expressed
as:
P = P1 · [ gδ1,∆1] · P2 · [gδ2,∆2] · · · [gδk−1,∆k−1] · Pk
A gapped pattern P matches a sub-string S of T if and only if S = P1· G1 · · · Gk−1·
Pk, where each Gi is any string of length between δi and ∆i, for i = 1, . . . , k −1.
Previous work
Solutions for gapped pattern search has focused on improving
the eﬀiciency of the algorithms used for indexing large text collections.
Bille et
al. [Bil+12] proposed the use of a suﬀix automaton for the pattern combined with
dynamic programming, which ultimately avoids an exponential number of match po-
sitions between pattern and text. Bader et al. [BGP16] proposed a wavelet tree-based
index for eﬀicient gapped pattern matching which was combined with the use of suf-
fix arrays. In more recent works Cáceres et al [CPZ20] have proposed improvements
to the SA-Scan algorithm by using filters, text checking and sub-pattern processing
which were able to outperform the wavelet tree approach. The authors also suggest
==PAGE:78==
66
C Project Description
that using compressed indexes based on the Burrows-Wheeler transform could be a
promising direction for future work.
Aim of project
The goal of this thesis is to design and implement new algorithms
for gapped pattern search that improve upon the previous state-of-the-art algorithms.
Some potential directions for improvement are (1) to explore the use of wavelet trees,
which have been shown to be useful in other string matching problems, (2) build on
top of the SA-Scan improvements mentioned above as well as (3) explore suggestions
for future work mentioned in the paper. The new algorithms will be analyzed both
theoretically and experimentally, and their real-world applicability will be evaluated
using a selection of data that closely resembles the types of data used by Cáceres et
al. [CPZ20].
The proposed algorithms will build upon the techniques used in the algorithm
proposed by Cáceres et al. [CPZ20]. Their algorithm along side some trivial imple-
mentations will serve as a starting point and a benchmark for the new algorithms.
The new algorithms will aim to improve upon the query time and/or pre-processing
time of the algorithm proposed by Cáceres et al. by modifying or replacing certain
components of their algorithm.
The algorithms will be implemented in C# and evaluated on a set of benchmark
instances. The benchmark instances will be derived as mentioned above from real-
world data sets to best represent their expected performance on realistic applications.
The performance of the algorithms will be evaluated in terms of query time being
prioritized, both in terms of computational steps and execution time. Subsequently,
the pre-processing time performance will be evaluated, as well as a measurement of
memory usage if deemed necessary.
==PAGE:79==
==PAGE:80==
