==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Automating Detection of Minimal Residual Disease
Cells for Disease Monitoring of Patients undergoing
Treatment for Leukemia
Bernadette Kofoed Christiansen &
Ida Frich Hansen
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Minimal residual disease (MRD) monitoring has emerged as a robust and valuable prognostic tool in
the management of B-cell lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). However, the current clinical
practice relies on manual gating which is a resource-intensive and subjective procedure. This study
proposes using machine learning to overcome the limitations associated with the existing monitoring
method. Two primary analyses were conducted based on flow cytometry data obtained from patients
diagnosed with B-cell lineage ALL:
(1) The objective of the first analysis was to construct a holistic landscape for the characterization
of MRD sub-populations in B-cell lineage ALL. The flow cytometry data was clustered using Self-
Organizing Maps (SOM), followed by meta-clustering.
Simultaneously, the clusters were visualized
and interpreted using the dimensionality reduction algorithm UMAP. The analysis revealed an over-
all agreement between the identified meta-clusters and the spacial separations observed in the UMAP.
However, the investigation uncovered a predominantly homogeneous MRD landscape lacking distinct
clusters. The analysis was hereby unable to detect MRD sub-populations in the study cohort. The
observed homogeneity could be attributed to the usage of robust marker panels effective in capturing
MRD or limitations in the employed batch correction algorithm.
(2) The objective of the second analysis was to establish predictive models for automated detection of
MRD. The ambition is to apply the models in a clinical setting and hereby save clinicians a substantial
amount of time and effort. A random forest classification (RFC) algorithm was employed and evaluated
using the metric ROC-AUC. The models demonstrated overall high performance with ROC-AUC values
above 0.98. This indicates that the algorithms exhibit a strong ability to distinguish between MRD cells
and healthy cells. However, on certain samples, the performance was not acceptable with PPV values
below 0.5. These limitations were partially attributed to constraints in the batch correction algorithm
utilized.
In conclusion, the analyses demonstrated promising results in advancing MRD monitoring in B-cell
lineage ALL. However, the effectiveness of the investigations was restricted by the batch correction
algorithm employed. The algorithm proved inadequate in handling the mixed distributions present in
the data. Consequently, additional research is necessary before the models can be applied in clinical
practice.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was conducted as the final project of the M.Sc.Eng. degree in Bioinformatics and Systems
Biology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The research project was supervised by As-
sociate Professor Lars Rønn Olsen and PhD Søren Helweg Dam from the Single Cell Omics Group at
the Section for Bioinformatics at the Department of Health Technology. The project was co-supervised
by Signe Modvig Stausbøll from the Department of Clinical Immunology at Copenhagen University
Hospital (Rigshospitalet). The work was carried out in the spring of 2023 and covers a workload of 30
ECTS points each.
First, we would like to express our gratitude to our main supervisor Lars. Your guidance, motivation,
and never-ending supply of fresh ideas have been invaluable in shaping the outcome of the thesis. We
would like to extend our appreciation to Søren for his contribution in developing the tools used in the
study and for being available for questions.
A special thanks to Signe for sharing her expert knowledge in the field and for patiently answering all
our stupid questions. Your assistance and understanding during those frustrating moments in the data
collection process were truly appreciated.
Lastly, we would like to acknowledge our collaborating partners from the Department of Clinical Im-
munology at Rigshospitalet. We thank them for providing the data necessary for the completion of our
research.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2023
Bernadette Kofoed Christiansen
Ida Frich Hansen
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Leukemia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Flow Cytometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Markers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Batch Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Dimensionality Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Materials & Methods
11
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Exploration of Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Marker Modulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
The MRD Landscape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Unsupervised Characterization of MRD vs Healthy Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.7
Supervised Classification of MRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results & Discussion
19
4.1
Data Preprocess
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Data Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Marker Modulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
The MRD Landscape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Unsupervised Identification of MRD Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6
Supervised Classification of MRD Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.7
Backtracking Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Future Work
50
5.1
Data Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Downsampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Batch Correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Panel-merging & Imputation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Unsupervised Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
Supervised Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion
53
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
A
Literature Reviews
54
A.1 Systematic Literature Review of Markers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.2 Systematic Literature Review of Modulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B
Data exploration
56
B.1 Tube trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C
Results
57
C.1 Data Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
C.2 Marker Modulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C.3 Supervised Classification Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy in children and adolescents ac-
counting for around 25% of all cases.[8, 21, 30] Despite the high survival rate of approximately 89% [30],
chemotherapy-induced toxicities can cause long-term health problems.[7, 8] One approach to managing
ALL is the use of monitoring tools to detect and track minimal residual disease (MRD). MRD is the
small number of cancer cells that persist in the body during and after treatment. The assessment of
MRD levels is recognized as a valuable prognostic factor and it is highly associated with the clinical
outcomes of patients with B-cell precursor (BCP) ALL.[31] Consequently, MRD monitoring has become
a commonly used parameter for risk stratification to optimize the treatment course.[1]
Today, manual gating serves as the golden standard for MRD monitoring. However, manual gating is
a resource-intense and time-consuming process that requires extensive domain knowledge.[23] Despite
the expertise of clinicians, operator bias and subjectivity of manual gating can introduce variability
and inconsistency in the results.[23, 44] These limitations highlight the need for automated methods for
accurate and reproducible MRD monitoring. This study aims to explore the use of artificial intelligence
for MRD monitoring of patients undergoing treatment for B-cell lineage ALL. Ideally, classification
should be followed by a reverse engineering step, which allows clinicians to review and modify the re-
sults. However, this step is not demonstrated in this project.
BCP-ALL is known for being heterogeneous, which gives rise to different MRD sub-populations[31].
Characterization of these MRD sub-populations in a patient may be useful for disease monitoring and
treatment evaluation. Therefore, another aim of this study is to construct a comprehensive landscape
for the characterization of MRD cells. By integrating data from multiple patients, this approach allows
for a holistic exploration that captures the diversity and complexity of MRD. Moreover, this framework
can leverage the multidimensional nature of flow cytometry data, which may be overlooked in the two-
dimensional approach of manual gating[50]. The future goal is to build an MRD landscape that enables
the characterization of new samples and aids informed decision-making in clinical practices.
Aims & Objectives
This study aims at overcoming the limitations associated with the current approaches for MRD mon-
itoring. This resulted in the two-fold purpose: (1) Characterizing MRD sub-populations and (2) Au-
tomating MRD detection. To achieve this two-fold purpose, the following objectives were established:
• Remove potential batch effects to enhance the comparability across samples in the study cohort.
• Impute missing marker values to enable a joint analysis across multiple marker panels.
• Investigate trajectories of immunophenotypic marker modulations during induction therapy.
• Conduct unsupervised clustering and dimensionality reduction to establish a landscape for MRD
characterization.
• Utilize unsupervised learning to explore the variability between MRD and healthy cells.
• Employ machine learning algorithms to construct predictive models, which can distinguish MRD
cells from healthy cells.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Leukemia
Leukemia is a group of blood cancers[25] that originate from hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells,
which have undergone genetic mutations resulting in excessive production.[12] Leukemia is a diverse
illness that encompasses multiple subtypes, each of which is characterized by different genetic aberra-
tions responsible for their pathogenesis.[12] On a high level, leukemia can be differentiated into types
based on the cell type of origin, myeloid or lymphoid, and based on the pace of progression, acute (fast)
or chronic (slow).[25] Figure 2.1 illustrates the differentiation of different blood and immune cells, and
hereby the origin of different leukemia subtypes.
Figure 2.1: A high-level overview of blood cell development. Different types of blood and immune
cells develop from a common stem cell. Created with BioRender.com, with inspiration from [3].
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy in children. It develops from the
unregulated growth of lymphoid cells in the bone marrow. The most common type of ALL arises from
precursors of B lymphocytes in the bone marrow (80-85%)[8, 25]. Less common types of ALL arise
from T lymphocytes (10-15%) and mature B lymphocytes (< 5%).[8]
==PAGE:9==
2.2 Flow Cytometry
3
2.1.1
Minimal Residual Disease
Minimal residual disease, also called measurable residual disease or MRD, describes the small number
of cancer cells that persist in the body during and after treatment.[4] The level of MRD remaining after
induction therapy has appeared to be the most important prognostic factor for the clinical outcome
in patients with B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL) [31].
MRD monitoring
is therefore a commonly used parameter for risk assessment and stratification in ALL to optimize
treatment.[1] The technique of flow cytometry is frequently used to distinguish leukemic cells from
hematogones, the normal immature B lineage counterparts, and other blood cells, both for diagnosis
and MRD monitoring.[32]
2.2
Flow Cytometry
Flow cytometry is a single-cell profiling technique that can be used to characterize and sort each cell
in a heterogeneous sample of cells such as the bone marrow. The technique enables the assessment of
multiple proteins or antibodies in a selected panel.[19, 40] Flow cytometry has become a routine tool
in the clinic for the diagnosis and monitoring of cancer patients, as the technique can identify different
antigen expression patterns in and on the cells. This can lead to the identification and quantification
of the MRD cells and characterization of the distinct immunophenotype of the malignancy.
Flow
cytometry hereby provides information about the prognosis as well as information to select the specific
therapy.[20]
2.2.1
The Flow Cytometry Technique
The main principle behind the flow cytometry technique is based on the scattering of light and the
emission of fluorescence occurring at the interrogation point when a cell passes through a laser beam[49],
as visualized in Figure 2.2. The cells are stained with a panel of fluorescent monoclonal antibodies before
they are introduced into the flow cytometer.[19]
Figure 2.2: A flow cell, an integral part of the flow cytometer. Fluorescent-stained cells flow through
the flow cell and exit one at a time. A laser beam interrogates the cell, emitting scattered light and
fluorescence. The signals are captured by different detectors. Created with BioRender.com
A central part of the flow cytometer is the flow cell, a small cuvette that contains a narrow channel
which a stream of cells flows through. A fluid called the sheath fluid flows around the channel to create
==PAGE:10==
2.3 Markers
4
a steady stream. When the cells are added to the channel, hydrodynamic focusing aligns the cells in
a single line. This causes the cells to flow through the laser beam one at a time, enabling single-cell
profiling. The laser beam interacts with the cell, emitting scattered light and fluorescence that provides
immunophenotypic information about the cell, as illustrated in Figure 2.2.[19, 49]
The scattered light is measured with two parameters: forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC). FSC
is a measure of cell size, whereas SSC is measured diagonally to the SSC and measures the granularity
and nuclear complexity of the cell.[49] The fluorophore-labeled antibodies are measured by their emitted
fluorescence.
The cytometer consists of multiple detectors, making the system sensitive to several
different wavelengths, which allows for the detection of multiple surface markers simultaneously.[19, 49]
Spillover of fluorescence into wrong detectors due to overlapping wavelengths of some fluorophores must
be compensated for to ensure that one detector only reports signal from one fluorophore.[19]
2.2.2
Manual Gating of Flow Cytometry Data
To be able to detect the leukemic cells, it is essential to choose an appropriate set of antibodies, called
markers, to include in the flow cytometry process. A set of markers is called a tube, and the usage of
one or more tubes is called a panel. If the panel is too restricted one might miss differential signals or
fail to determine the immunophenotypic characteristics of the leukemia.[40] Traditionally, monitoring
of MRD involves sequential gating of the flow cytometry data. In bi-axial scatter plots, the expressions
of two markers are evaluated at a time. Then clinicians manually draw gates to isolate the desired cell
population. Each derived population of cells can undergo further gating steps until a potential MRD
population is identified.[50]
2.3
Markers
It can be challenging to distinguish the leukemic cells from hematogones as they share multiple im-
munophenotypic characteristics.[33] Therefore, selecting an appropriate set of antibodies for MRD
monitoring is crucial. To investigate the expression pattern of the different markers present in our
dataset, a systematic literature review was conducted, c.f. Appendix A.1.
MRD monitoring panels for BCP-ALL commonly incorporate a combination of lineage-specific, non-
lineage, and aberrant markers.[17] Lineage-specific markers are antigens that are expressed primarily
on a particular cell lineage, such as B-cells and their progenitors. Surface B-cell lineage markers used
for MRD monitoring include CD19, CD20, and CD22. These markers are often used in the initial gates
and serve as the primary identification of B-lineage cells.[31, 42]
In this thesis, non-lineage markers refer to antigens that are not associated with a particular lineage.
These include the maturation-stage antigens CD10 and CD34, which are expressed by precursor stages
across multiple cell lineages. On the contrary, the expression of CD45 increases during B-cell maturation
and remains stable in mature cells.[48]
Aberrant markers are often needed to identify and characterize MRD sub-populations. Aberrant
markers refer to the expression of markers that would not typically be expressed in that cell type
or population. These include cross-lineage markers such as T-cell antigens and myeloid antigens.[17]
Among the commonly included T-cell markers are CD2, CD3, and CD7 whereas CD13, CD33, CD15,
and CD66C are associated with the myeloid blood cell lineage.[31, 42] CD123 is typically found on
plasmacytoid dendritic cells and basophils.[39]
Throughout the thesis backbone markers refer to CD10, CD19, CD20, CD34, CD38, and CD45.
==PAGE:11==
2.4 Batch Effects
5
2.3.1
Marker Modulations
Residual blast cells in patients with BCP-ALL are frequently subject to drug-induced immunopheno-
typic modulations[6, 11, 46]. Several studies suggest that the modulations are induced by steroids in
the early stages of induction therapy [1, 6, 11, 15, 29]. These alterations include aberrant expressions,
lineage switch, and gain or loss of antigens that deviates from the phenotypic pattern observed at di-
agnosis[1, 6, 14]. This complicates the identification and classification of MRD cells, since it becomes
diﬀicult to establish a consistent gating strategy that remains applicable across different timepoints
and treatment conditions. Additionally, immunophenotypic modulations can lead to overlap between
leukemic cells and the normal B-cell population[34]. This ultimately impacts the flow cytometry ac-
curacy [6] and introduces a risk of false negative quantification [1, 46]. The dynamic nature of these
modulations can occur heterogeneously within a MRD population. This intra-sample heterogeneity
further complicates manual gating, as it requires the identification and characterization of multiple
sub-populations within a single sample.[38]
2.4
Batch Effects
In flow cytometry, variations in measurements or experimental designs between batches can introduce
technical variance into the data, which is commonly referred to as batch effects. These variations can
arise from a range of factors, including differences in antibody panels, cytometer settings, cell staining
protocols, reagent instabilities, measuring equipment, or operators. Batch effects in flow cytometry are
often characterized by differing signal intensities on cells with similar phenotypes, or in situations where
signal intensity should not vary.
These observations may significantly impact data-driven analyses,
particularly when combining data from multiple experimental sources. This can lead to inaccurate
or spurious conclusions by detecting differences between batches instead of the underlying biological
variation.[35, 37]
2.4.1
Batch Correction with cyCombine
Many different computational tools have been developed to correct the batch effects in flow cytometry
data, of which cyCombine appears to be superior in its performance.[35, 37] CyCombine succeeds with
maintaining the biological variance and structure of the data while minimizing the technical noise
between batches. The method is furthermore independent of technical replicates across batches and
can handle massive data sets.[35, 45]
The batch correction module of cyCombine utilizes the tool ComBat to remove batch effects from
the data.
ComBat alone is not suitable for single-cell cytometry data, as it does not consider the
intra-sample heterogeneity observed between different cells in a sample.[35] To address this challenge,
cyCombine treats each individual cell as a separate sample and focuses on reducing batch effects for
groups of similar cells. The architecture of the module is visualized in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3:
The architecture of cyCombine’s batch correction module.
Expression values within
each batch are transformed and clustering is performed across batches using a self-organizing map.
Transformed expression values are reverted back and the ComBat algorithm is applied on each cluster
to remove batch effects. The figure is from cyCombines original article[35].
==PAGE:12==
2.4 Batch Effects
6
The module first standardizes the marker expression values within each batch to make them comparable
across batches. It then employs a self-organizing map (SOM), c.f. Section 2.6.1, to group similar cells
into clusters. The number of clusters was chosen as a trade-off between effectively capturing the diversity
in the data and ensuring suﬀicient representation of both cells from the same batches and from different
batches in each cluster. Each cluster hereby captures both biological and technical variation. Batch
effects are corrected by ComBat in each group of cells, to effectively remove the technical variance while
preserving the biological signal.[35] If there are no batch effects present in the data, the tool does not
remove any variance, hereby still preserving the underlying biological heterogeneity within the data.
2.4.2
Evaluation of Batch Correction with cyCombine
CyCombine has developed a module utilizing two metrics for evaluating the effect of batch correction:
the reduction in Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) and the Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) score.
EMD is a measure of dissimilarity between two distributions. In cyCombine, it is used to compare
marker distributions within each SOM cluster between all pairs of batches. Calculations are performed
per SOM node rather than globally to ensure that the EMDs are calculated for highly similar cells. The
EMD reduction score compares EMD values before and after batch correction. Note that a small EMD
reduction could simply imply minimal batch effects.
MAD serves as a quantification of variability within a data set, and it is utilized by cyCombine to
identify possible systemic information loss following batch correction. MAD scores are calculated per
batch, per marker, per cluster for both the corrected and uncorrected data. The absolute difference
between each pair of corresponding MAD values (uncorrected vs corrected) is then computed. The final
MAD score is then calculated as the median of these differences. To summarise, the EMD reduction
score evaluates the inter-batch effects, while the MAD score quantifies intra-batch effects before and
after batch correction.[35]
2.4.3
Panel-merging with cyCombine
In order to combine data from experiments using different marker panels, cyCombine offers a module to
integrate two panels. By leveraging the information from overlapping markers, cyCombine imputes the
missing values for the non-overlapping set. This allows for comprehensive holistic analyses involving all
markers across the used panels. The workflow of the panel-merging module is visualized in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: The architecture of cyCombine’s panel-merging module. The data sets for two different
marker panels are combined, and self-organizing map clustering is performed on their overlapping mark-
ers. Non-overlapping marker values are imputed based on the cells from the opposite panel clustered
within the same node. The figure is from cyCombines original article[35].
The panel-merging module employs SOM clustering to group cells based on their overlapping markers.
Subsequently, the module utilizes a probability-based imputation method to replace the missing values
in the non-overlapping markers.
Missing values are imputed based on the co-clustered cells of the
opposite panel. This process involves selecting a value from a randomly chosen cell in the opposite
panel and introducing a Gaussian error based on the bandwidth of the marker. The idea behind the
density based approach is to impute the values in the same frequency as they are present in the original
data, and hereby preserve the global structure of the data.[35]
==PAGE:13==
2.5 Dimensionality Reduction
7
2.5
Dimensionality Reduction
Dimensionality reduction techniques have emerged as a state of the art method for interpretation and
visualizing high-dimensional datasets generated by single-cell flow cytometry. Dimensionality reduc-
tion transforms high dimensional datasets into lower dimensional spaces, typically 2 or 3 dimensions,
while retaining the maximum amount of data variability. This enables data visualization, which aids
the interpretation of underlying patterns and gaining valuable insights for downstream analysis and
exploration.
Historically, principal component analysis (PCA) has been the most commonly used dimensionality
reduction technique. PCA utilizes linear transformations to identify the directions with most variation
in the data, called principal components, and projects the high dimensional data onto those. However,
PCA may not fully capture the complex nature of the highly variable flow cytometry data, which ex-
hibits nonlinear relationships and complex cellular dynamics. Instead, the importance of non-linear
dimensionality reduction techniques have been recognized, as these should be able to avoid ”overcrowd-
ing” of the low dimensional data representation, and hereby prevent that distinct clusters overlap in the
space. Examples of such non-linear techniques are t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)
and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP).[2]
Different dimensionality reduction techniques exhibit different qualities and advantages. When it
comes to preserving the data structure, t-SNE excels at capturing the local relationships within the
data, whereas PCA performs well in maintaining the overall or global structure.
However, UMAP
distinguishes itself by preserving both the local and global structures of the data[2, 16]. For single cell
data, UMAPs have been suggested to be a great alternative to t-SNEs, due to an increased speed and
a better preservation of the global structure.[2]
2.5.1
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
UMAP is state of the art dimensionality reduction and visualization method.[16]. UMAP utilizes graph
layout algorithms to build a high-dimensional graph representation of the underlying data, which is
then transformed into a structurally similar low-dimensional graph. The graph is constructed of nodes
and edges, where each node correspond to a data point and each edge connects a pair of nodes. Weights
are assigned to the edges based on the probability that the two nodes are connected. When the graph
is constructed, the local neighborhood of each node is considered. Two nodes are connected when their
radii overlap. The size of the radius is what balances preservation of local vs global structure. A small
radius leads to smaller isolated clusters and a large radius may connect everything.
The UMAP algorithm requires that each node is connected to at least its nearest neighbor to preserve
the overall connectivity of the data.[27] The algorithm of a UMAP uses nonlinear transformations to help
preserve more complex relationships. This nonlinearity helps avoid overcrowding of the low dimensional
representation, which prevents the occurrence of overlapping regions among distinct clusters.[2, 27]
2.6
Clustering
Clustering is an unsupervised technique that groups similar observations together based on their data
values. It enables the identification of hidden patterns or structures in the data without prior knowledge
or guidance. It is a powerful tool for analyzing flow cytometry data, as it offers an unbiased data
exploration which is ideal for the discovery of novel sub-populations. Moreover, clustering facilitates
the characterization of cell populations and provides insights into the variance and heterogeneity within
ones dataset.[26] Due to the high dimensionality and diversity in flow cytometry data, conventional
clustering algorithms may not perform well. Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) offer a promising alternative
and has proven to perform well compared to other clustering techniques for flow cytometry data.[50,
36]
==PAGE:14==
2.7 Classification
8
2.6.1
Self-Organizing Maps
A SOM is an unsupervised learning technique, that generates a low-dimensional representation of the
data. A SOM maps a high-dimensional input space onto a two-dimensional plane representation, as
seen in Figure 2.5. This mapping arrangement is based on the local density of the data and ensures that
similar data points are positioned in close proximity. The underlying structure of the data is hereby
preserved in a way that maintains the topology between the input and output spaces.[52, 36]
Figure 2.5: The architecture of a Self-Organizing Map. Each variable in the high-dimensional input
layer is connected with a weighted edge to each node in the 2-dimensional output grid.
The Best
Mathing Unit (BMU) to the input observation and its nearest neighbors are updated. Created with
Lucidchart.com.
A SOM is a form of unsupervised artificial neural network that has one input layer; the high dimensional
data set, and one output layer; the 2 dimensional output grid or plane. The grid is composed of n x m
nodes, where each node corresponds to a cluster. Each node is linked to every feature in the input layer
and possesses a unique weight value. SOM utilizes competitive learning, where nodes in the output
layer compete to be activated. The process involves finding the most similar node to the input pattern,
which is referred to as the Best Matching Unit (BMU). The similarity is most often measured with the
Euclidean distance, where the BMU will be the node with the shortest distance from the input pattern.
After identifying the BMU, the weights of both the BMU and its neighboring nodes are adjusted towards
the input pattern. [36, 51, 52]
The SOM algorithm undergoes multiple iterations where the nodes in the output layer are updated.
For flow cytometry data, each node in the grid will consist of cells containing similar expression profiles,
and cells in nodes located in close proximity will be more similar than cells in nodes located further
away. In addition to cells being mapped to each node in the grid, the nodes themselves are represented
by a ’code’ vector that portrays the data within that node.[52, 36] This capability of SOMs allows for
the combined benefits of dimensionality reduction and clustering when analyzing and interpreting flow
cytometry data.
2.7
Classification
Classification is a machine learning technique used to categorize data into different classes, such as
healthy cells and cancerous cells. It is most often applied using a supervised approach, where a machine
learning model learns patterns and relationships from labelled training data. The learned patterns are
then utilized to predict the class labels of new unseen data.[41]
==PAGE:15==
2.7 Classification
9
2.7.1
Random Forest
Random Forest is an ensemble method used for both classification and regression tasks. In Random
Forest Classification, multiple classification trees are trained and their outputs are combined into a
single model. The final classification is made by taking the majority vote of the trees, as visualized
in Figure 2.6. The idea behind ensemble models is that multiple uncorrelated models obtain a better
predictive performance compared to each individual model.
Random forest utilizes bagging by constructing each tree in the forest from a different subset (boot-
strap sample) of the training data. It further de-correlates the trees by randomly selecting a subset of
variables to choose from at each split. The combination of bagging and variable subset selection intro-
duces randomness and reduces variance, while maintaining the bias of the individual trees. Random
forest generally avoids overfitting, however having a high number of variables to choose from at each
split can lead to correlated trees.
Figure 2.6: Random forest classification model. Each tree is constructed using a bootstrap sample.
At each split in the tree, a limited number of randomly selected features are available.
The final
classification is determined by a majority vote among the ensemble of trees.
Figure created with
Lucidchart.com
RF is a non-parametric model that does not make any assumptions about the training data, making it
suitable for high dimensional data such as flow cytometry data. The algorithm can capture non-linear
relationships in the data, making it applicable for classification of MRD cells versus healthy cells in flow
cytometry data. It can handle both numerical and categorical features, enabling the integration of flow
cytometry measurements in combination with metadata.[5, 41]
2.7.2
Performance Metrics
To evaluate the performance of a Random forest classification model, four metrics are commonly used:
Sensitivity, Specificity, Positive Predictive Value (PPV), and Negative Predictive Value (NPV). The
metrics are derived from different combinations of true positives, false positives, true negatives, and
false negatives, as visualised in Table 2.1.
The metrics provide insights into the model’s ability to correctly identify positive instances (sen-
sitivity) and negative instances (specificity), as well as assessing the precision of positive predictions
(PPV) and negative predictions (NPV), enabling assessment of classification accuracy and reliability.
==PAGE:16==
2.7 Classification
10
Case
Control
Predicted
Positive
True Positive
(TP )
False Positive
(FP )
PPV:
TP
TP + FP
Predicted
Negative
False Negative
(FN)
True Negative
(TN)
NPV:
TN
TN + FN
Sensitivity:
TP
TP + FN
Specificity:
TN
TN + FP
Table 2.1: Confusion matrix with additional evaluation metrics.
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve represents the relationship between sensitivity and
specificity. The curve illustrates how the classifier’s sensitivity and specificity change as the decision
threshold is varied across various cut-off points. The area under the curve (ROC-AUC) provides a single
measure of the model’s performance.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Materials & Methods
3.1
Data
The following section presents the data utilized in the study, which comprises both single-cell flow
cytometry measurements and clinical information. The data was obtained from Rigshospitalet and
consists of patients aged 1-45 years diagnosed with B-cell precursor (BCP) ALL / B-ALL. The patients
were treated and monitored in Denmark according to the standardized Nordic Society of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology (NOPHO) ALL2008 protocol in the time period: July 2008 to February
2016.
Following the NOPHO ALL2008 protocol, patients were initially stratified to induction therapy, and
MRD levels were determined mainly at the time of diagnosis (day 0), during induction therapy (day
15), end of induction therapy (day 29), and end of early consolidation (day 79). Consolidation refers to
a phase of cancer therapy that follows the initial induction phase. The recorded MRD levels were used
for treatment stratification, where standard-risk patients continued to receive induction therapy, and
intermediate- or high-risk patients would change treatment plans.
Single Cell Flow Cytometry Data
The MRD levels are determined during treatment based on flow cytometry data from blood or bone
marrow samples. At the point of diagnosis, a broad selection of six-color tubes is applied according to
the NOPHO ALL2008 guidelines. Based on the observed expression profiles, 1-3 tubes are chosen by
clinicians for the subsequent time points. The marker expressions from each tube are recorded as FCS
files and analyzed by clinicians at Rigshospitalet using Diva software. In Diva, the clinicians manually
gate the cells based on the marker expressions to identify the MRD cells, and the analyses are saved as
XML files. This process yields multiple XML and FCS files for each patient.
Clinical Information
Besides from the flow cytometry measurements, other relevant data for each sample were recorded in
a metadata file. This includes social security number, sample identifier, diagnosis, reporting the MRD
status, and the informative tube. The informative tube refers to the tube selected for reporting the
MRD status of the patient at the time of evaluation.
3.2
Data Preprocessing
The following section outlines the preprocessing steps undertaken to transform the raw data sources into
a clean format that is suitable for analysis and modeling. The data consists of confidential and sensitive
information that requires careful handling to ensure privacy and comply with data protection regulations.
The data was therefore transferred to and analyzed through the Danish National Supercomputer for
Life Sciences Computerome 2.0.
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Data Preprocessing
12
3.2.1
Data Assembling
To obtain an integrated and holistic perspective of the data, the initial stages involved linking the two
data sources: flow cytometry data and clinical metadata. This process entailed examining the compati-
bility of the data sources in terms of their structural aspects and identifying key variables that overlap
between them. The mapping process relied on the social security number and the sample identifier to
establish a link between the two sources. A complete match between the two variables was required
to secure data integrity throughout the process. Samples that lacked a match were manually investi-
gated to prevent substantial data loss. The remaining samples were excluded due to anonymization
limitations, inconsistencies in naming conventions, and instances where the samples did not overlap
between the two data sources. Moreover, the informative tube specified in the metadata file was used
to determine which FCS file to keep for the subsequent steps.
3.2.2
Data Filtering
Prior to analysis, a comprehensive data filtering process was performed using the Tidyverse package in
R[53]. The filtering process excluded samples that were deemed unreliable, invalid, or of low quality.
This step aimed to enhance the quality of the data set and ensure that only trustworthy data points
were retained for the subsequent analyses.
1. Diagnosis: This study concentrated on a cohort of patients diagnosed with BCP or B-ALL to
obtain a set of comparative samples.
2. Protocol: All patients included were treated and monitored in Denmark according to the stan-
dardized NOPHO ALL2008 protocol.
3. Time-points: To decrease the complexity of the analysis and minimize the impact of treatment
interference, only samples following induction therapy were kept.
4. Recurrent cancer: Recurrent cancer samples were not included.
5. Consent: All samples were cross-checked to ensure patient consent was given.
6. Missing information: Samples with missing social security numbers, sample identifiers, or infor-
mative tubes were excluded.
3.2.3
Data Transformation
To establish a meaningful comparison between this study and the manual gating performed at the
hospital, it is necessary to apply a consistent transformation to the flow cytometry measurements. All
marker channels were subjected to the logicle transformation and all scatter values underwent a linear
transformation using the R package FlowCore[18]. The primary objective of data transformation is
to establish compatibility between the analysis outcomes and the manual gating results. Additionally,
these transformations are carried out to facilitate visualization of the data.
In flow cytometry, markers are measured at different wavelengths, making it unable to compare their
absolute expression values. Therefore, before some of the subsequent analyses, a z-score normalization
was applied to each marker to bring them onto the same scale while ensuring that they have equal
weights. This transformation aligns the marker distributions by centering them around a mean of zero
and scaling them to a standard deviation of one. The forward and side scatter measurements were
brought onto a similar scale using the median absolute deviation (MAD) method, which is robust to
outliers. This normalization method aligns the scatter distributions by centering them around a median
instead of zero and scales the variables using the median absolute deviation.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Data Preprocessing
13
3.2.4
Data Annotation
The FCS file obtained from Rigshospitalet lacks information regarding the cancerous and non-cancerous
cell populations. This information is needed in order to explore the MRD space. Instead, the results of
the manual gating analysis are available in the form of complex XML files. The gating coordinates for
MRD cells were extracted for each sample’s informative tube and mapped to the corresponding FCS
file to annotate the MRD cells using the R packages cytoML[13] and FlowCore[18]. In this process,
the manual gating strategy was reverse-engineered to obtain labeled data needed for the subsequent
analyses.
The XML files furthermore contain information about the gate that identifies monocytes. This gate
was likewise extracted, which allowed us to exclude non-monocytes as well as eliminate dead cells and
doublets. This filtering step effectively removes unwanted heterogeneity in the data and focuses the
analysis on the relevant cell types, specifically monocytes.
3.2.5
Feature Engineering
The data exhibits numerous inconsistencies as it is based on manual entries without any clear data
standards, formats, or naming conventions. In addition, it is susceptible to human mistakes such as
typographical errors, omissions, and false information.
Consequently, substantial efforts, time, and
resources were allocated to streamline the data and implement necessary adjustments to handle these
issues. New features were created from the existing data to capture the features in a more meaningful
manner. To generate a unique identifier without redundancy, the CPR and sample ID were merged
together. This combination ensured that each sample had a distinct identifier that was not duplicated
within the dataset. Additionally, a single risk profile per patient was constructed by combining five
different stratification values.
3.2.6
Downsampling
The flow cytometry data employed in this study is characterized by a substantial scale, with each sample
comprising measurements of multiple markers across a range of 100,000 to 5,000,000 individual cells.
Considering the computational and memory constraints posed by the large dataset, downsampling was
necessary. All MRD cells were kept during the downsampling process, as they are the primary focus of
the investigation. To maintain the representation and distribution of healthy cells, a clustering-based
downsampling approach was utilized. To cluster the cells, self-organizing maps were applied using the
tools FlowSOM[47] and Kohonen[52]. A subset of healthy cells was randomly removed pr sample from
each cluster, allowing for a maximum of 20,000 healthy cells in each sample.
We opted for a large output layer, utilizing 64 nodes, to over-cluster the cells. A large output layer
minimizes the risk of discarding subtle nuances in the data compared to a smaller output layer. The
hyperparameter rlen specifies the number of iterations of the SOM. Increasing the value enhances the
training of the network, but also results in longer computational time. As the number of iterations
increases the mean distance between each input and its closest unit decrease, meaning that the network
resembles the input patterns better.[52]
3.2.7
Proof of Concept Subset
The dataset comprised 62 distinct tubes, which were employed across 1648 samples.
Each sample
corresponded to a bone marrow or blood sample collected from a patient at a specific time point. Certain
tubes and markers have limited sample representation which can lead to an incomplete representation
of the underlying biology. Of the 62 tubes, 45 were selected in less than five samples. Due to the sparse
representation of certain tubes and markers, samples measured for a specific subset of the tubes served
as a proof of concept subset for further analysis. The subset was carefully chosen to include tubes
encompassing markers that were broadly represented. The selection criterion aimed to strike a balance
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Data Preprocessing
14
between panel merging reliability, data preservation, project simplicity, and computational time. The
final subset consisted of a total of 353 patients and 1110 samples, incorporating data from 10 distinct
tubes containing 14 different markers. The final tubes and markers as well as their presence in the
dataset are listed in Table 3.1.
Tubes
Markers
CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
557
CD19, CD34, CD45
1110
CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
324
CD10
786
CD10-CD123-CD19-CD20-CD22-CD34-CD38-CD45
104
CD20
709
CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
46
CD38
706
CD10-CD19-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
25
CD123, CD22
428
CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
20
CD66C
324
CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45-CD49F
12
CD49F
63
CD10-CD19-CD20-CD33-CD34-CD45
10
CD133, CD58
46
CD10-CD13-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45
6
CD13
12
CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F
6
CD33
10
Table 3.1: The number of samples in the final data set having the respective tubes and markers.
3.2.8
Batch Correction
The study data was measured over a long period of time, using different instruments, and with in-
volvement from various operators. It is therefore important to acknowledge the potential presence of
batch effects. Potential batch effects were corrected using cyCombine’s batch_correct module[35], a
tool suitable for single-cell flow cytometry data that considers the intra-sample heterogeneity. Batch
correction was applied individually to each tube, as the module requires that the samples are measured
on the same markers. The default grid size of 64 nodes was utilized. The metrics EMD reduction and
MAD score, and visual assessments were conducted to evaluate the batch corrections.
3.2.9
Panel-merge
A direct comparison of samples derived from different marker tubes is not possible due to missing
expression values in non-overlapping markers. Hence, prior to conducting a joint analysis, the data must
be integrated across tubes. cyCombine’s panel merging module impute_across_panels was employed,
a tool specifically designed for integrating multi-panel cytometry data.[35] The module estimates the
expression values of non-overlapping markers across two datasets. The integration process involved
iterative pairwise merging of tubes until a comprehensive data set comprising of all 10 panels was
obtained. For each pairwise tube-merge, the two key steps were performed:
Step 1 - Batch Correction of Overlapping Markers:
To minimize technical variance between
two tubes, batch correction was applied to the common markers. This step enhances the comparability
of the overlapping markers.
Step 2 - Imputation of Non-Overlapping Markers:
Following batch correction, the next step
involved the imputation of the missing expression values in the non-overlapping markers. To accomplish
this, clustering analysis was performed on overlapping markers. Subsequently, the missing values were
imputed based on co-clustered cells of the other tube. This imputation process allowed for a complete
and comprehensive dataset, ensuring that all markers were included in the analysis.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Exploration of Data
15
Iterative Pairwise Merging:
When determining the order of the pairwise merging, two key consid-
erations were taken into account:
1. Size of overlap: The reliability and accuracy of the imputation rely on information from the
overlapping markers. An insuﬀicient overlap could compromise the imputation process, resulting
in unreliable expression values for non-overlapping markers.
2. Shared aberrant markers: The second focus was tubes that shared aberrant markers.
These
markers, if present, could have a large impact on differentiating MRD cells from healthy cells.
This approach ensured that tubes with higher shared information were prioritized, leading to a more
robust and accurate dataset for subsequent analysis. For certain analyses, panel merging was performed
on all cells, whereas for other analyses specifically targeting MRD, panel merging was carried out
exclusively among MRD cells. Visual assessments were conducted to evaluate the panel merging.
3.3
Exploration of Data
The first part of the analysis relies on exploring the data to gain an understanding of its underlying
characteristics. The following aspects were investigated:
• Data distributions: investigating the distribution of the scatter and marker values, as well as other
categorical variables within the dataset, utilizing density plots, violin plots, and bar charts.
• Tube usage in the clinic: mapping out the utilization of tubes at Rigshospitalet using Sankey
plots. This is done to gain immediate insights into the extent of possible switches in the leukemia-
associated immunophenotypes.
3.4
Marker Modulations
Assessment of Immunophenotypic Modulations on a Patient Level
To evaluate the immunophenotypic modulations on a patient level, the MRD populations within each
sample were analyzed collectively as opposed to a cell-wise approach. This allows for an assessment of
the high-level modulation patterns for each patient. First, each sample was classified into one of three
groups based on their phenotypic characteristics: stable, up-modulated, or down-modulated.
To investigate drug-induced modulations, baselines were established using the day 0 samples. The
expression level of each marker for each patient at day 0 served as the reference point. Subsequently,
the median expression values at later time points were compared to their respective day 0 baseline.
Samples with a median expression level above the 75th percentile of the baseline were categorized as up-
modulated. Conversely, samples with a median expression level below the 25th percentile of the baseline
were considered down-modulated. All remaining samples were labeled as stable. By categorizing the
samples based on their day 0 baselines, the analysis is focused on capturing modulations resulting from
induction therapy. This method enables the identification and characterization of modulatory changes
that occur in response to treatment, shedding light on the impact of therapy on MRD cells.
Visualization of Marker Modulations
To visualize and analyze the marker modulations, Sankey diagrams were constructed, providing a
comprehensive landscape of each marker’s dynamics. The diagram visually represents the transitions
and patterns of marker modulations observed across the different time points of treatment.
==PAGE:22==
3.5 The MRD Landscape
16
3.5
The MRD Landscape
In order to investigate the full MRD space and characterize potential MRD sub-populations, a multi-
step approach was utilized. These steps combine over-clustering through the implementation of self-
organizing maps and meta-clustering utilizing hierarchical clustering. Subsequently, the resulting clus-
ters were examined and evaluated using visual assessments with UMAPs, Minimal Spanning Trees
(MST) and heatmaps.
Data Pre-processing
Downsampling was conducted on the data set to address imbalances in the data. The data set exhibited
a higher prevalence of day 0 samples compared to other time points, which introduces bias towards the
majority class and potentially results in a loss of information from the minority class. To address these
challenges, the maximum number of cells per sample was restricted to 100 MRD cells from samples at
time points day 0, day 15, and day 29. However, for day 79 and the odd time points, 500 MRD cells
were allowed pr sample. Moreover, a z-score normalization was applied to each marker to bring them
onto the same scale. Scatter values were excluded as they did not provide any additional information
to the analysis.
Step 1 - Over-clustering using Self-Organizing Maps
Self-Organizing Maps were applied using the R package Kohonen[52]. The SOM algorithm was selected
due to its ability to effectively preserve the underlying topological structure and facilitate the grouping
of similar cells, c.f. Section 2.6.1. Multiple grid sizes were explored to strike a balance between ensuring
over-clustering and feasibility for evaluating the clusters. The training progress was assessed by mea-
suring the mean distances between each unit and the cells it represented. The final grid size consisted
of 36 nodes and the SOM was run for 500 iterations.
Step 2 - Meta-clustering & Evaluation
To prevent the loss of subtle and small cell populations, meta-clustering was employed instead of creating
a smaller-sized SOM. Reducing the number of nodes in the SOM introduces the risk of splitting sparsely
populated nodes into larger nodes, and thereby losing the representation of delicate cell populations. By
employing meta-clustering, these subtle and small cell populations are preserved. The process involves
applying hierarchical clustering on the SOM’s code vectors which exploit their similarities.
It is necessary to specify the number of meta-clusters beforehand, however, the number of potential
sub-populations of MRD is unknown. An iterative approach was conducted, where hierarchical cluster-
ing was applied with 3 clusters in the first iteration. The number of meta-clusters was increased until
all noticeable spatial clusters observed in the UMAP were assigned to a meta-cluster. For each iteration
of the meta-clustering process, the outcome was evaluated using two visualization techniques:
1. An MST: The MST is a graphical tree representation that captures the relationship and similar-
ities between clusters. It reveals the hierarchical organization of the SOM nodes and shows their
relationship to the meta-clusters. The R package igraph was utilized[9, 10].
2. A UMAP projection: A UMAP projection was created based on the same set of MRD cells as
the SOM, providing visual insight into the spatial distribution and separability of the cells. By
coloring the cells based on their meta-cluster assignment, it was possible to evaluate the UMAP
representation with the meta-cluster results. The hyperparameters n_neighbors and min_dist
were adjusted to achieve an optimal projection, using the R package uwot[28].
Step 3 - Final MRD Space
After determining the meta-clusters through the hierarchical clustering process, a closer examination of
the clusters was conducted. A heatmap was created, displaying the median expression values of each
marker for each cluster. This allowed us to investigate the expression patterns within each meta-cluster,
providing insights into biological differences and potential phenotypic characteristics.
==PAGE:23==
3.6 Unsupervised Characterization of MRD vs Healthy Cells
17
3.6
Unsupervised Characterization of MRD vs Healthy Cells
The variability between MRD cells and healthy cells was investigated in a low-dimensional space. This
approach enables an unbiased exploration of hidden relationships and patterns between the two groups.
Data Pre-processing
Prior to dimensionality reduction, downsampling was performed following a similar approach as the
MRD landscape analysis. To assess the variability between MRD cells and healthy cells the data in-
cluded 100 healthy cells for all samples. Again, a z-score normalization was applied to each marker and
the scatter values were excluded.
Dimensionality Reduction
Unsupervised dimensionality reduction was employed to interpret the variability between MRD and
healthy cells. The high-dimensional data was projected into a two-dimensional space using the UMAP
algorithm, implemented through the R package uwot[28].
The hyperparameters n_neighbors and
min_dist were adjusted to achieve the best projection for effectively distinguishing cancer and MRD
cells in accordance with the study objectives.
3.7
Supervised Classification of MRD
The main objective of this analysis is to develop an algorithm capable of identifying MRD cells within a
cell population. The goal is to automate the manual gating procedure conducted by clinicians, thereby
saving them vast amounts of time and work effort. This section outlines the methodology employed
for the supervised classification of MRD cells.
The central machine learning workflow is presented
in Figure 3.1, which highlights the sequential process from data selection to model evaluation. Each
specific step within this workflow will be elaborated on in subsequent sections.
Figure 3.1: High-level overview of the machine learning workflow applied in the study. Figure created
with Lucidchart.com.
Data Selection
While exploring the overall perspective of the data is considered acceptable when including imputed
values, the classification of individual cells based on imputed values may lead to unreliable and inac-
curate results. Therefore, a strategy was employed to create a distinct model for each tube. As a
proof-of-concept, a single tube was selected from the data set. The tube was chosen based on its size
and inclusion of both backbone and aberrant markers. The selected tube consisted of 323 samples that
were measured using the six markers: CD66C, CD123, CD34, CD19, CD22, and CD45.
==PAGE:24==
3.7 Supervised Classification of MRD
18
Data Partitioning
A test set was kept separate from the training process and served as an independent measure to assess
the models’ ability to generalize to unseen data. To ensure a comprehensive evaluation, 11 samples were
carefully selected to represent a diverse range of scenarios, including different time points, risk profiles,
and modulation patterns. The remaining samples constitute the training set that was used to fit the
model. The training set was downsampled to include a maximum of 100 cancer and 100 healthy cells
per sample.
Model Construction
Random Forest Classification (RFC) was implemented using the R package randomForest[24]. The
package utilizes the Gini impurity function to determine the optimal split for each node in the decision
trees. The caret[22] toolkit provided an interface to the randomForest function, facilitating the model
construction process. Prior to training, each cell was annotated as either cancerous or non-cancerous,
as outlined in Section 3.2.4. These annotations served as the binary labels for the classification models.
Hyperparameter Tuning
Hyperparameter tuning was conducted to optimize the model’s performance using the caret package’s
functionality. Three hyperparameters were tuned to adjust the RFC models:
• The number of trees in the forest
• The number of randomly sampled variables considered for each split in the trees
• The minimum size of the terminal nodes
An exhaustive grid search approach was employed to explore a range of values for each hyperparameter
using a 3-fold cross-validation (CV) technique. The optimal values for the hyperparameters were se-
lected based on the model’s performance across the CV folds, aiming to maximize the ROC-AUC metric.
Cross Validation
To prevent data leakage between the train and validation sets during hyperparameter tuning, a careful
data split was performed. Cells from the same sample were not separated into different cross-validation
folds to ensure independence. The caret function groupKFold was utilized for a grouped 3-fold cross-
validation, which ensured that no sample was present in both the modeling and holdout sets.
Model Evaluation
The performance of the models was assessed based on their performance on the held-out test set. In
order to obtain a comprehensive assessment, multiple metrics were employed to evaluate the RFC mod-
els. These metrics include sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive
value (NPV), and ROC-AUC.
Feature Importance
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) is a method used to increase the interpretability of machine
learning models. SHAP values were utilized to reveal the contribution and importance of each feature
in the model’s predictions. Plotting SHAP values provides a straightforward way to interpret them and
gain insights into the model’s predictions at both local and global levels. Note that it does not assess
the quality of the predictions.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Results & Discussion
4.1
Data Preprocess
4.1.1
Transformation & Normalization of Data
To mimic the transformation applied during manual gating, all markers were subjected to a logicle
transformation and all scatter values underwent a linear transformation. Figure 4.1 depicts the distri-
bution of CD22 expression before and after transformation for a randomly chosen patient. As seen in
the figure, the transformation improves the interpretability and visualization possibilities of the data.
Figure 4.1: The expression distribution of marker CD22 for a randomly selected patient. The left plot
represents the raw expression distribution, and the right depicts the logicle transformation expression.
The distributions of markers in the POC data set before and after applying z-score normalization are
visualized in Figure 4.2.
Marker distributions
Figure 4.2: The distribution of the markers before (left) and after (right) z-score normalization for
the POC data set included in the analyses of this study. Visualized with density graphs.
==PAGE:26==
4.1 Data Preprocess
20
When subsequently interpreting the expression values for individual samples or subsets, a transformed
value above 0 indicates a higher expression compared to the mean, whereas a value below 0 indicates a
lower expression relative to the rest of the data.
The scatter values exhibit a heavy-tailed distribution as seen in the left density graph of Figure 4.3.
They were therefore normalized using the median absolute deviation (MAD) method, which is robust
to outliers. The normalized values are visualized on the right-hand graph of the figure. We observe that
the overall distributions for both marker values and scatter values are retained after the normalizations.
Scatter distributions
Figure 4.3: The distribution of the scatter values before (left) and after (right) MAD-score normal-
ization for the POC data set included in the analyses of this study. Visualized with density graphs.
4.1.2
Batch Correction
The impact of batch correction was assessed by visually examining the data distribution before and
after correction as well as calculating the EMD reduction and MAD scores. As described in Section 2.4,
the EMD reduction score captures inter-batch effects while the MAD score evaluates intra-batch effects.
For the 10 tubes, the EMD reduction scores ranged from 0.06 to 0.77, indicating a moderate to
substantial improvement in the comparability of the data between batches. The MAD scores ranged
from 0.05 to 0.08, indicating that batch correction has successfully preserved the marker variability.
These scores indicate a successful batch correction, reducing the inter-batch variability and minimizing
information loss, hereby making the data comparable.
In order to visually assess the impact of batch correction on the data, the distribution of each marker
per sample before and after batch correction was compared. Given the substantial number of samples,
a subset of 8 samples from each tube was randomly selected. The visual assessment was conducted
by evaluating a density diagram of the expression of each marker. The primary focus was on ensuring
that the distribution of each marker was not altered to maintain the integrity of the original data while
adjusting the alignment of the high-density regions (peaks) to match other the samples. The alignment
of peaks is an indication that the correction has removed batch-specific variations in the data, making
the expression of markers comparable across samples.
Figure 4.4 visualizes the effects of batch correction for tube CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
on the left and tube CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F on the right. These tubes were selected
for visualization due to their contrasting sample sizes and the presence of at least one aberrant marker
in each. Plots for the remaining tubes are located in Appendix C.1.1. The orange curves represent the
distribution of each marker for each sample before applying batch correction, while the green curves
represent the corresponding distributions after applying batch correction.
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Data Preprocess
21
CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F
Figure 4.4: Density plot of eight randomly selected samples from two distinct tubes (CD123-CD19-
CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C to the left; CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F to the right). Each plot
represents a marker with a density curve for each sample for the uncorrected (orange) and the corrected
(green) data.
Tube CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C:
For markers CD66C and CD22, the distribu-
tions varied between samples prior to batch correction. The batch correction did not necessarily priori-
tize aligning the highest peaks but aimed to align the spread of the distributions. Similar observations
are seen for CD123 and CD34. Most samples displayed two peaks, while the others had a single peak
with a longer tail. Before batch correction, distributions showed varying intensities in the high-density
regions, which became aligned after batch correction. Similarly, CD19 showed a mix of unimodal and
multimodal distributions. Batch correction improved the comparability, however, a few samples showed
slight additional peaks, resembling the bimodal distribution observed in the other samples. Regarding
CD45, the rightmost peaks were aligned after batch correction even if they were small, as seen for the
bottom sample in the plot.
It is expected to observe different distributions among samples as they encompass both healthy and
cancerous cells. The higher expression peaks observed for CD19 in certain samples may be explained by
the variation in the abundance of MRD cells among the samples. Furthermore, an increased expression
of markers like CD123 in certain cancers likely explains the bimodal distributions, while other cancers
may not express this marker.
Tube CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F:
Similar distributions across samples for most
markers are observed.
CD10 and CD34 exhibit unimodal distributions in the majority of samples,
with a few displaying a tendency to a small additional peak at higher expression levels. The alignment
of the high-density peaks is evident even before batch correction. This indicates smaller batch effects.
CD19 shows a bimodal distribution with improved alignment of both peaks after batch correction.
The distribution of CD49F shows a large dispersion with a fat tail to the left. Some samples exhibit a
secondary low-density peak on higher expression levels. CD13 and CD45 exhibit narrow distributions,
predominantly with a single peak. These distributions are well-aligned after batch correction.
Overall, the density curves indicate that the batch correction successfully aligns the peaks and distri-
butions of the samples for tube CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F. This alignment process appears
to be more suitable when the samples exhibit similar distributions, in contrast to the observations made
for tube CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C.
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Data Preprocess
22
Spatial Distributions
To gain a deeper understanding of the effects of batch correction, a UMAP analysis was conducted to
visualize the spatial distribution of the samples in a two-dimensional space. By comparing the UMAPs
before and after batch correction, we could assess potential changes in the spatial relationships among
the samples. UMAPs conducted on all samples for tube CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C are
visualized in Figure 4.5, where each color in the UMAP corresponds to a sample.
All samples in tube CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
Figure 4.5: UMAP for all samples in tube CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C before (left) and
after (right) batch correction. The UMAPs include all cells and are colored on sample.
The uncorrected UMAP on the left-hand side reveals that the samples form ”clouds” or ”stripes” within
the clusters. This pattern is clearly reduced on the corrected UMAP on the right-hand side, where the
samples are more evenly scattered throughout the space. This indicates a reduction of batch effects
which makes the data directly comparable. We furthermore observe that the two large clusters have
become more densely packed after batch correction, suggesting a higher degree of similarity within each
cluster.
To conduct a clearer visualization of the effects of batch correction and avoid overcrowding, UMAPs
were conducted for randomly selected subsets of the samples for each tube, c.f. Appendix C.1.1. The
UMAP for tube CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F is visualized in Figure 4.6. When considering a
smaller set of samples, the distinctness of each sample becomes more evident. The spatial arrangement
of the samples prior to correction highlights their individuality and lack of comparability. However,
these tendencies are resolved and the samples become more cohesive after batch correction.
To summarise, the evaluation of EMD reduction and MAD values indicated that the batch correction
was successfully applied to all tubes. Additionally, the UMAP analyses revealed a resolution of the cloud-
like patterns of the samples in the 2D space. These findings indicate that the batch correction process
succeeded in mitigating the batch effects and that the data can be used for subsequent analyses. Some
changes were observed in the distributions of certain markers. However since the overall spread and
alignment of the distributions were maintained, the batch correction was deemed acceptable.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Data Preprocess
23
Eight samples with tube CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F
Figure 4.6: UMAP conducted for a randomly selected subset of eight samples in tube CD10-CD13-
CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F before (left) and after (right) batch correction. The UMAP is colored on
sample.
4.1.3
Panel Merge
After batch correction, the data from the 10 selected tubes were combined into a single comprehensive
dataset. This set served as the foundation for holistic analyses incorporating all available information.
Due to a large number of tubes, panel merging was conducted in multiple rounds, imputing markers
between two tubes at a time. The panel-merging process was conducted for all cells combined and
for MRD cells alone, as they served as the foundation for different analyses. To evaluate the impact
of the multiple batch corrections during panel merging, density plots were examined using the same
methodology as the initial batch correction assessment.
The marker distributions before and after panel merging were investigated to evaluate if substantial
data was lost. The plots for the two tubes used for the initial batch correction assessment are visualized
in Figure 4.7. The figure includes both healthy and MRD cells. Similar plots for the remaining tubes
are listed in Appendix C.1.2. The green curves represent the markers after the initial batch correction,
and the purple curves depict the markers after the final panel merging step.
Minimal changes are observed for tube CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C after the final panel
merging step. In the case of CD19, the high-density regions at the lower expression level of the bimodal
distributions appear flattened. Similarly, for CD22, some samples show flatter peaks and a slightly
larger dispersion. However, for the remaining markers, the spread and distribution are well-maintained.
For tube CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F, most markers exhibit shifts in their peaks as a
result of batch correction with the samples from other tubes. Notably, CD13 shows no apparent change.
CD19 continues to exhibit a bimodal expression pattern, however, the distance between the two peaks
is reduced. This suggests a potentially less distinct difference between cancer and healthy cells, which is
presumed to contribute to the bimodal distribution. The distributions of CD45 for all samples after the
panel-merging process show a slightly thicker tail to the left. Despite this change, the overall alignment
with the initial distribution is well maintained. Small changes are observed in the distributions of CD10,
CD34, and CD49F after panel merge. These markers exhibit a slightly broader dispersion and a flatter
peak. Notably, the samples that initially showed a tendency towards a second peak for CD10 still
maintain this characteristic. Additionally, CD49F continues to display thick tails to the left.
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Data Exploration
24
CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F
Figure 4.7: Density plots of randomly selected samples from two distinct tubes (CD123-CD19-CD22-
CD34-CD45-CD66C to the left; CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F to the right). Each plot repre-
sents a marker, with a density curve for each sample. The green curves depict the markers after batch
correction, while the purple curves represent the markers after the final panel-merging step.
In summary, the panel merging process exhibited a successful reduction of batch effects in some cases,
while the process led to distribution changes in other cases. The effects of these changes should be
considered in the context of evaluating the subsequent holistic analyses. Panel merging resulted in a
unified dataset making a joint analysis across tubes feasible. The panel merging conducted exclusively
on MRD cells displayed similar-to-improved maintenance of data integrity.
4.2
Data Exploration
4.2.1
Distribution of Data Variables
Figure 4.8 shows a violin plot for each of the three scatter values present in the data; forward scatter area
(FSC-A), forward scatter height (FSC-H), and side scatter area (SSC-A). Each violin plot represents the
distribution of a scatter value for a particular tube with cells categorized as either healthy (purple) or
cancer (yellow). The plot reveals minimal differences between the two cell groups, with the high-density
parts of the violins located at nearly identical positions. This lack of noticeable distinction suggests
that the scatter values may not contribute to the identification of cancer cells in this data.
The distribution of each of the 14 markers was investigated to get an indication of the differences in
marker expression between cancer and healthy cells. Figure 4.9 illustrates a violin per marker, where
half of the violin shows the distribution of cancer cells (yellow) and the other half shows the distribution
of healthy cells (purple) across all tubes.
The violin plot indicates that there are different expression patterns between healthy and cancer
cells for various markers within the dataset. The markers CD10, CD19, CD34, CD20, and CD123 show
a trend toward an increased expression of cancer cells compared to healthy ones. CD45 on the other
hand is the only marker that appears to have an overall lower expression in cancer cells compared to
healthy. CD45 expression increases during B-cell maturation and remains stable in mature cells. The
low expression in our MRD population is expected since the majority of patients suffer from BCP-ALL.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Data Exploration
25
Figure 4.8: Violin plots depicting the distribution of each scatter value for cancer (yellow) and healthy
(purple) cells for each tube.
Figure 4.9: Violin plots depicting the distribution of each marker value for cancer (yellow) and healthy
(purple) cells.
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Data Exploration
26
Besides exploring whether any of the scatter or marker values appeared distinct, the distribution of cells
across different time points was investigated, see Figure 4.10. The charts include the four main time
points during induction therapy; day 0, day 15, day 29, and day 79. These time points were selected as
they represent key stages in induction therapy. Odd time points were not included in the charts due to
the limited number of cells measured.
Figure 4.10: Bar charts representing the proportion of cells across the four main time points during
induction therapy: day 0, day 15, day 29, and day 79. Left: healthy cells, Right: MRD cells.
It is evident from the charts that the distribution of healthy cells remains relatively consistent across all
time points. In contrast, the proportion of MRD cells gradually decreases over time, which aligns with
the anticipated response to treatment. There is a substantial difference in the number of cancer cells
observed at day 0 compared to later time points, especially on day 79. This difference in abundance may
significantly impact and drive the subsequent analyses, which emphasizes the importance of accounting
for potential biases towards the majority group.
4.2.2
Tube Usage in the Clinic
During treatment, it may be necessary to change the informative tube as a result of disease progression,
modulations, or treatment response. To gain insights into the extent of possible switches, Rigshospi-
talet’s utilization of informative tubes was mapped across time. The mapping was conducted using
a Sankey visualization, which effectively illustrates the flow or trajectories of the tubes used over the
different time points during induction therapy. The tube trajectories are visualized for the 10 tubes
included in the proof-of-concept subset in Figure 4.11. Including all 62 tubes resulted in an exceedingly
convoluted trajectory plot, see Appendix B.1.
An initial observation is that a greater diversity of tubes is employed at later time points compared to
day 0. This suggests a tendency for tube switching as the treatment and disease progress. Furthermore,
the visualization unveils a dominant usage of two tubes as informative, CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-
CD45 (orange) and CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C (purple). Tube CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-
CD38-CD45 solely contains backbone markers, which can characterize B-cell populations and assess
their maturation stages. This observation suggests that MRD cells can be successfully captured using
only the backbone markers, and further indicates that there is an altered expression in at least one of the
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Marker Modulations
27
Figure 4.11: Overview of the flow of tubes used for monitoring MRD during induction therapy at
Rigshospitalet.
backbone markers. The second most frequently utilized informative tube, CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-
CD45-CD66C, includes the aberrant markers CD123 and CD66C in addition to backbone markers.
CD123 is typically found on plasmacytoid dendritic cells and basophils, whereas CD66C is associated
with the myeloid blood cell lineage. These cross-lineage markers are typically not expressed on healthy
B cells. The presence of these markers in a frequently used tube suggests that there might be sub-
populations of MRD cells expressing at least one of these two markers. However, these observations are
not definitive and will be subject to further examination in this study.
From the tube trajectory overview, it is worth noting that a considerable number of patients ex-
hibit a switch in the informative tube. This suggests the requirement to tailor monitoring methods to
effectively capture diverse and changing MRD sub-populations. Moreover, it indicates the likelihood of
marker modulations induced by induction therapy. Therefore, further investigation into marker modu-
lations is conducted.
4.3
Marker Modulations
As described in Section 2.3.1, the presence of marker modulations in malignant blasts complicates the
identification and classification of MRD cells. One of the primary challenges is the establishment of a
consistent gating strategy that remains applicable across different time points and treatment conditions.
This section aims to evaluate the magnitude of this challenge by presenting the investigation of marker
modulations in both literature and this study’s cohort.
4.3.1
Findings from Systematic Literature Study
The systematic literature review revealed several immunophenotypic modulations that have been con-
sistently observed across multiple studies, see Appendix A.2. The most prevalent reported expression
changes were the downregulation of CD10 and CD34 along with the upregulation of CD20. An overview
==PAGE:34==
4.3 Marker Modulations
28
of the six backbone markers included in this study and their predictable shift based on literature are
listed in Table 4.1.
Marker
Immunophenotypic modulation
CD10
Downmodulated
CD19
Upmodulated
CD20
Upmodulated
CD34
Downmodulated
CD38
Downmodulated
CD45
Upmodulated
Table 4.1: Overview of the six backbone markers and their predictable shift in expression as a response
to treatment.
However, conflicting findings are observed between and within different individual studies. These in-
consistencies highlight the need for further investigation and understanding of the underlying factors
contributing to these discrepancies.
4.3.2
Assessment of Single Marker Modulations within the Study Cohort
In this section, the investigation of single marker trajectories within the study cohort is presented. The
main objective was to assess whether the trajectories align with the findings reported in literature or if
any contradicting or novel insights emerge. Sankey diagrams were employed to visualize and analyze
the marker modulations. These diagrams provide a visual representation of modulation patterns across
different time points during induction therapy. Day 0 is the established baseline, hence all day 0 samples
are classified as stable.
Figure 4.12 illustrates the dynamic modulation trajectories of CD19. The height of the boxes at each
time point represents the number of samples in the respective category. The reduction in sample size
observed across the time points can be attributed to several factors; effective treatment leading to the
absence of MRD populations at later time points, high-risk patients undergoing alternative treatment
protocols, the use of tubes not included in this cohort, or legitimate missing data.
Figure 4.12: Sankey diagram visualizing CD19 modulation patterns. The x-axis represents the four
measuring times: time of diagnosis (day 0), early treatment (day 15), end of induction therapy (day
29), and end of early consolidation (day 79). The y-axis represents the frequency, providing a measure
of the proportion of samples that exhibit either up or down-modulation of CD19.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Marker Modulations
29
The diagram reveals that the majority of patients exhibit upregulation of CD19 during induction ther-
apy. The shift is evident early in the treatment course (day 15) and increases across subsequent time
points. These findings are consistent with the existing literature, suggesting that induction therapy
may lead to increased CD19 expression levels.
The sankey diagrams for CD20, CD22, CD45, and
CD123 demonstrate similar patterns of up-modulation, although to a lesser extent, see Appendix C.2.
The up-modulation of CD45 expression can complicate the quantification of MRD cells in BCP-ALL.
This is due to CD45 enabling appropriate BCP gating during flow cytometric analysis based on lower
expression values.
Figure 4.13 illustrates the dynamic modulation trajectories of CD10. The majority of patients show
stable expression levels throughout the treatment course. However, a noteworthy subset of patients
exhibits down-modulation or potential loss of expression in response to treatment. These observations
are consistent with previous literature findings.
Figure 4.13: Sankey diagram visualizing CD10 modulation patterns. The x-axis represents the four
measuring timepoints: Day 0, day 15, day 29 & day 79. The y-axis represents the proportion of samples.
CD10 expression is high on B-cell precursors, and gradually decreases during maturation until even-
tually absent in mature B cells. Consequently, the downmodulation of CD10 expression may present
challenges in accurately gating immature B cells. The Sankey diagrams for CD38 and CD66C demon-
strate similar patterns of down-modulation, see Appendix C.2.
Figure 4.14 visualizes the dynamic
modulation trajectories of CD34.
Figure 4.14: Sankey diagram visualizing CD34 modulation patterns. The x-axis represents the four
measuring time points: Day 0, day 15, day 29 & day 79.
The y-axis represents the proportion of
samples.
==PAGE:36==
4.4 The MRD Landscape
30
CD34 is the only marker in this study exhibiting contradicting results with the findings from literature.
The predictable shift from literature is down-modulation, however, a larger proportion of the patients
show up-modulation. The contradicting results could indicate a loss of biological information during
pre-processing steps. Alternatively, down-modulations may be more frequently emphasized than up-
modulations as it poses a greater challenge when monitoring MRD.
The comparison of expression values at diagnosis and during treatment revealed that CD13, CD33,
CD49F, CD58, and CD133 are the most stable markers.
The trajectory for CD13 is visualized in
Figure 4.15 and the remaining are located in Appendix C.2. This makes them useful for MRD detection,
as they show a consistent and robust pattern across time. However, a limited number of samples were
originally measured on these markers, resulting in a reduced variance in the data and patterns based
on mainly imputed values. Moreover, the data does not contain any day 0 samples measured on CD13
and CD49F making these baselines unreliable.
Figure 4.15: Sankey diagram visualizing lack of modulation patterns in CD13. The x-axis represents
the four measuring time points: Day 0, day 15, day 29 & day 79. The y-axis represents the proportion
of samples.
This methodology disregards detailed variations within the distributions, potentially resulting in the loss
of important information. For example, the method does not account for intra-sample heterogeneity
that may be present within a single sample. Instead, it represents a higher-level perspective on the
modulations observed in the MRD populations.
For future investigations, it could be valuable to
explore individual trajectories in detail. This could entail an examination of the true expression values
of the cells or potential associations with clinical factors.
4.4
The MRD Landscape
The following section presents the results from the MRD landscape analysis. It is worth noting that scat-
ter values were omitted from the final SOM and UMAPs, as we observed that they mainly contributed
to increased complexity and had no noticeable impact on the analysis outcomes.
4.4.1
Self-Organizing Map
The self-organizing map was applied to the MRD cells in the POC dataset. The training of the SOM
converged when the mean distance between all cells and their closest unit reached a plateau. The plateau
was reached at 500 iterations, as displayed in Figure 4.16. To evaluate the relationships between nodes,
the distances between each node and its neighbors were visualized in the right panel of Figure 4.16.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 The MRD Landscape
31
Figure 4.16: Self-Organizing Map run on MRD cells. Left: training progress. Right: node neighbour
distances.
Darker areas represent regions of lower neighbor distances, indicating higher similarity among nodes
compared to brighter regions. The visualization confirmed that an adequate number of nodes were
selected for the SOM. Different grid sizes were explored, and it was determined that a grid size of 36
units provided a suﬀicient representation of the data.
4.4.2
Meta-clustering
As described in Section 3.5, an iterative approach was conducted to determine the optimal meta-
clusters of the 36-node SOM. This involved applying hierarchical clustering and evaluating the results
using UMAPs and MSTs. The final UMAP representation was conducted with n_neighbors = 10 and
min_dist = 0. Figure 4.17 illustrates the MST and UMAP of 3, 6, 8, and 10 meta-clusters respectively.
The spatial separations observed in the UMAP gradually become more aligned as the number of
meta-clusters increases. This suggests a gradual refinement and organization of potential subpopulations
of MRD. With the utilization of 10 meta-clusters, it is apparent that the spatial groups observed in
the UMAP projection is assigned to different meta-clusters. This highlights the ability of the meta-
clustering approach to capture the same heterogeneity as the UMAP.
Up until 10 meta-clusters, we observe a strong concordance between the MST representation of the
36 SOM nodes and the hierarchical meta-clustering. This indicates that hierarchical clustering is able
to group similar SOM nodes. However, at 10 meta-clusters, we observe a deviation for meta-cluster 7
(yellow). Meta-cluster 7 appears to combine two SOM nodes located far apart on the MST. Interestingly,
the UMAP projection appears to capture the same pattern as the hierarchical meta-clustering, where
meta-cluster 7 is rather isolated. This suggests that at 10 meta-clusters, the hierarchical clustering
captures distinct relationships between SOM nodes that align with the UMAP’s spatial separation.
Overall, there appears to be good consistency across the different analytical techniques; meta-clustering
of the SOM and a UMAP. This provides confidence in the UMAP’s ability to represent heterogeneity
in the MRD cells.
After 10 meta-clusters, we observe that increasing the number of meta-clusters does not correspond
to the expected splitting observed in the UMAP projection. Additional meta-clusters appear as clouds
within the larger well-defined meta-clusters 1 (turquoise) and 10 (red). Meta-cluster 5 (green) and 8
(deep pink) appear in two different locations on the UMAP, where a split would have been expected.
Next, it was explored if an additional dimension could explain a connection between the multiple
locations of these clusters.
==PAGE:38==
4.4 The MRD Landscape
32
Figure 4.17: Iterative process of increasing the number of meta-clusters identified through hierarchical
clustering of the 36 SOM nodes. Left: Minimal Spanning Tree representation. Right: UMAP of MRD
cells.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 The MRD Landscape
33
Figure 4.18 illustrates a 3D UMAP representation, highlighting meta-cluster 8 alongside meta-cluster
1 on the left-hand plot, and meta-cluster 5 and 8 alongside meta-cluster 10 on the right-hand plot.
Figure 4.18: 3-dimensional UMAP representation of MRD cells. Left plot highlights how meta-cluster
8 (deep pink) surrounds the large meta-cluster 1 (turquoise). Right plot highlights how meta-cluster 10
(red) overlaps with parts of meta-clusters 5 (green) and 8 (deep pink)
We observe that meta-cluster 5 exhibits a scattered distribution across a large part of the space while
exhibiting two concentrated regions as observed in the 2D projection. The observations imply that the
UMAPs have limitations in representing the complete underlying structure of the data. Meta-cluster 8
appears to be gathered on the surface of meta-cluster 1, indicating that the third dimension explains
the clustering of these cells. The right-hand 3D UMAP shows that the large meta-cluster 10 overlaps
with parts of meta-clusters 5 and 8, which suggest that these clusters exhibit less distinct boundaries.
These findings are more evident from the dynamic version of the visualizations. The 3D projection for
the remaining meta-clusters was consistent with the observations in the 2D projection, hence their 3D
plots are not included.
These observations indicate that while the UMAP captures the main structure of the data, the
meta-clustering approach is better at capturing the complex variations within the data. To gain deeper
insights into the expression profiles of each meta-cluster, a heatmap analysis was conducted.
4.4.3
Heatmap Analysis
Figure 4.19 is a heatmap representation of the 10 meta-clusters. Each column represents a specific meta-
cluster, while each row represents a marker. The color of each square indicates the marker expression
in the respective meta-cluster compared to the remaining meta-clusters. A higher expression is red, a
mean expression is white, and a lower expression is blue.
Meta-clusters located on the left side of the heatmap are characterized by lower expression values
for multiple markers. In contrast, meta-clusters on the right side show higher expression levels for most
markers, while meta-clusters in the middle exhibit mixed expression patterns.
The heatmap reveals that the largest meta-cluster (1) is characterized by expression values close to
the mean for all markers. However, CD45, CD13, and CD33 show a trend of slightly lower expression in
the meta-cluster. CD13 and CD33 are cross-lineage markers used for gating MRD in a limited number
of samples. These samples might represent a unique sub-type of MRD. Therefore, it is expected that
the largest meta-cluster does not exhibit a higher expression of CD13 and CD33.
==PAGE:40==
4.4 The MRD Landscape
34
Figure 4.19: Heatmap showing the median expression of each marker pr meta-cluster.
Meta-cluster (10) demonstrates a close relationship to meta-cluster 1, which is supported by their
overlapping regions observed in the UMAP. Moreover, meta-cluster 10 exhibits the highest expression
of CD20 and CD34 among the meta-clusters. A study shows that this asynchronous co-expression is
frequently observed in B-ALL[43].
Meta-cluster 7 displays the highest expression of the aberrant markers CD13, CD133, and D66C
among all the meta-clusters. These markers are present in different tubes within the data, and this
meta-cluster might be a result of unreliable imputations during panel merging. Clusters 6, 8, and 9
exhibit different combinations of markers with both higher and lower expression values compared to the
average, while still maintaining connections to the larger clusters on the right side. On the other hand,
Meta-clusters 3, 4, and 2 demonstrate similarity, with lower expression values for the majority of the
markers. These clusters might include MRD populations of the frequently reported down-modulations
of CD10, CD34, and CD38. These clusters form a separate branch in the hierarchy and are also spatially
grouped together in both the UMAP and MST analyses.
4.4.4
Exploration of Suspicious Meta-clusters
Meta-clusters 5 and 6 are primarily characterized by very low values of the aberrant markers CD49F
and CD58 respectively, while their remaining expression patterns are similar to the average. These
leukemia-associated markers are utilized to detect MRD populations based on higher expression values
than healthy cells. Therefore, clusters characterized by lower values of these markers appear suspicious
or biologically irrelevant. The heatmap does not exhibit the true expression values, and it is uncertain
whether the expressions are truly low or absent. The expressions of CD49F and CD58 are simply low
compared to the rest of the MRD space.
Figure 4.20 shows how the expressions of these two markers are distributed across different subsets
of the data. The UMAPs clearly confirm that meta-cluster 5 and 6 are characterized by low values of
CD49F and CD58 respectively. The figure reveals that cells originally measured for CD58 or CD49F
are present in the two meta-clusters alleviating the concern of failed marker imputation. Only a few
cells originally measured for CD58 contributed to meta-cluster 6, while a larger portion of the cells
originally measured for CD49F contributed to meta-cluster 5. The samples that contributed with these
low values were further investigated.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 The MRD Landscape
35
UMAPs colored by CD58
UMAPs colored by CD49F
Figure 4.20: The top row shows UMAPs colored by the CD58 expression, whereas the bottom row
shows UMAPs colored by CD49F expression. The left column shows all MRD cells in the UMAP; the
middle column shows the MRD cells in cluster 6 for CD58 and cluster 5 for CD49F; the right column
shows the MRD originally measured on the particular aberrant marker
Meta-cluster 5 consisted of MRD cells from 15 different samples, where CD49F is present in the infor-
mative tube. The highest contribution from a single sample accounted for only 10% of the total MRD
population in the sample. These findings suggest potential heterogeneity in the expression of CD49F
among the gated MRD cells.
Cells from seven different samples, where CD58 is present in the informative tube, contributed to
meta-cluster 6. Again, only a small fraction of each sample’s MRD cells were assigned to this cluster.
Noteworthy, the majority of samples were measurements from day 0 and had high total MRD counts.
It is diﬀicult to establish a clear separating gate when a large number of MRD cells are present. At
day 0, the final MRD gate are often drawn through dense areas. This raises the question of whether
non-MRD cells have been mistakenly included. In this study, it is not feasible to determine whether
non-MRD cells have been included. Alternatively, it suggests the possibility of heterogeneity in the
marker expression among the MRD cells.
4.4.5
A Homogeneous MRD Space
As described in the theoretical framework, it is widely acknowledged that different sub-populations of
cancer exist. The primary objective of exploring the MRD landscape was to identify and characterize
such distinct sub-populations for BCP-ALL, which would be represented as separate clusters in a UMAP
visualization. This should eventually enable projection of new samples into the space for MRD subtype
determination.
==PAGE:42==
4.4 The MRD Landscape
36
The expectation was that each sample would belong to a sub-population and consequently be pre-
dominantly present in one specific cluster. However, the meta-clusters and the spatial groupings in
the UMAP did not appear to be based on specific subsets of samples. We observed that cells from
samples were scattered across the entire MRD space, and appeared in multiple clusters, as illustrated
in Figure 4.21. This pattern suggests a more homogeneous population, where the clusters represent
smaller heterogeneous variations in the marker expressions rather than distinct MRD sub-populations.
Therefore, further investigations should be conducted before moving on to clinical applications.
Figure 4.21: UMAP on the total MRD space colored by sample.
This homogeneous observation could be attributed to clinicians utilizing robust and effective tubes. It
is not surprising, considering the efforts clinicians have dedicated over decades to refine these tubes.
Our findings suggest that these efforts have resulted in tubes that are eﬀicient and reliable in capturing
MRD cells. The most frequently used tubes consist of 14 markers, that are able to capture the diverse
aspects of BCP-ALL MRD. It would make sense if the markers have been selected to capture most
MRD sub-types while minimizing unnecessary variations that could complicate the quantification.
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Unsupervised Identification of MRD Cells
37
4.5
Unsupervised Identification of MRD Cells
The unsupervised identification of MRD cells builds upon the methodology used in the analysis of the
MRD landscape. In this analysis, both MRD and healthy cells are incorporated in a UMAP analysis to
enable an assessment of the variability between these cell populations. The final UMAP representation
was conducted with n_neighbors = 20 and min_dist = 0. The resulting UMAP visualization is colored
on cell condition and visualized in Figure 4.22.
Figure 4.22: UMAP of all cells in dataset colored by cell condition, where purple is healthy cells and
yellow is MRD cells.
The UMAP demonstrates an ability to spatially separate healthy and MRD cells. This indicates distinct
differences between the two cell conditions and suggests a potential for classifying cancer cells. However,
it should be noted that both MRD and healthy cells remain scattered across the entire space, as seen
from Figure 4.23. Since UMAP is an unsupervised approach, it was not explicitly guided to find patterns
specific to MRD detection. As a result, the visualization may reveal underlying patterns that are not
directly relevant to this analysis.
Figure 4.23: UMAPs on all cells in the dataset.
The left-hand plot only visualizes healthy cells,
whereas the right-hand plot only visualizes MRD cells.
Further investigation was conducted to determine if any specific marker values influenced the UMAP
representation. Figure 4.24 displays a UMAP colored on the normalized expression values of CD19 and
==PAGE:44==
4.6 Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
38
CD34. The color scale spans from dark blue, indicating expression values below the mean of the data,
to red, indicating values above the mean of the data. White values represent the mean.
Figure 4.24: UMAPs of all cells in dataset. The UMAP on the left-hand side is colored by the z-score
normalized expression of CD19, whereas the UMAP on the right-hand side is colored by the z-score
normalized expression of CD34.
The UMAP reveals a distinct pattern for both markers. Higher expression values dominate the left
cluster consisting mostly of MRD cells, whereas lower expression values dominate the right cluster
mainly composed of healthy cells. This indicates a potential association between higher values of CD10
and CD34 with MRD. The presence of values close to the mean is observed in both clusters. UMAPs
colored on the normalized expression values of the remaining markers did not show distinct patterns
between healthy and MRD cells.
In summary, the unsupervised approach successfully identified some relevant patterns for separating
healthy and MRD cells. However, it became evident that the UMAP also captured underlying patterns
that are not directly relevant for MRD detection. This indicates that unsupervised learning alone may
not be adequate for the accurate classification of MRD cells.
4.6
Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
The main objective of this analysis is to develop an algorithm capable of automatically identifying MRD
cells within a population of cells. The goal is to streamline the gating procedure conducted by clinicians,
hereby reducing their time and work efforts. The previous section indicated that unsupervised learning
may be insuﬀicient for accurate classification of MRD cells. To overcome this limitation, a supervised
learning approach was employed.
By incorporating supervision, the algorithm was directed toward
the identification of MRD cells. The results presented are from a POC experiment including samples
measured on the following six markers: CD66C, CD123, CD34, CD19, CD22, and CD45.
4.6.1
Test Set
To accurately assess the model’s classification performance on unseen data, 11 samples were excluded
from the learning process. This test set enabled an independent evaluation of the model’s generalization
ability. The samples were selected to represent a broad range of different scenarios, including various
time points, risk profiles, and modulation patterns. Moreover, 4 of the samples stem from a single
patient and include the four main time points. In total, the test set comprised 341,263 cells, consisting
of 135,532 MRD cells and 205,731 healthy cells.
As demonstrated in Section 4.3, MRD cells are frequently subject to modulations induced by in-
duction therapy. Three samples were chosen based on their modulation patterns to assess the model’s
==PAGE:45==
4.6 Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
39
capability in these scenarios.
The density distributions for the three samples are presented in Fig-
ure 4.25. Additionally, the figure includes the expression values of previous time points to highlight the
expression variations across induction therapy.
Figure 4.25: Density distributions of the six markers for sample 9-11. Expression values of previous
measurement points are included.
Considering the variability in modulations among patients, three distinct scenarios were chosen for
testing. As shown in Figure 4.25, sample 9 exhibits up-regulation of CD123, CD19, CD22, and CD45.
Sample 10 was selected based on a down-regulation of CD66C and CD34. Lastly, sample 11 displays
a pattern characterized by slight down-regulation of all non-backbone markers: CD22, CD66C, and
CD123. This down-regulation may limit the predictive power of the model if the MRD cells closely
resemble the healthy cells.
4.6.2
Evaluation of the Baseline Model
The training data was fitted to a RF classification algorithm as described in Section 3.7. The baseline
models were exclusively fitted to the six markers: CD66C, CD123, CD34, CD19, CD22, and CD45.
During the model tuning process, the following three hyperparameters were investigated: ntrees (number
of trees to grow), mtry (available features for each split), and nodesize (maximum number of cells in each
terminal node). A grid search was performed, exploring 100 combinations of these hyperparameters
across a 3-fold CV. The results of the hyperparameter tuning process are visualized in Figure 4.26.
Figure 4.26 illustrates that the number of decision trees has the largest impact on the performance.
Generally, increasing the number of trees improves the predictive power of the classifier.
Limited
improvement in performance was observed after 50 trees, indicating that the model’s performance had
reached a plateau. Furthermore, lower values of mtry yielded higher performance. This observation
aligns with the idea, that considering all features at each split undermines the random forest concept.
The different values of nodesize did not have a noticeable effect on the performance. Using the metric
ROC-AUC, the optimal hyperparameter values were determined as mtry = 2, ntree = 100, and nodesize
= 500.
==PAGE:46==
4.6 Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
40
Figure 4.26: Performance comparison of hyperparameter combinations for the baseline model. The
performance was determined through a 3-fold cross-validation using ROC-AUC as the evaluation metric.
The performance of the final model was evaluated on the test set using the metrics sensitivity, specificity,
PPV, NPV, and ROC-AUC, see Table 4.2. Based on the results listed in the table, the baseline model
demonstrates high performance. This indicates that the model exhibits a strong ability to distinguish
between MRD cells and healthy cells.
Sensitivity
Specificity
PPV
NPV
ROC-AUC
0.93
0.94
0.91
0.95
0.98
Table 4.2: Performance table for the baseline model.
By analyzing the model’s performance on a sample level, it became evident that the model performs
poorly on samples with low MRD counts. This is illustrated by confusion matrices in Figure 4.27, where
we observe a large number of false positives. This is further supported in Table 4.3, which shows that
multiple samples exhibit a low PPV. Consequently, the model is less accurate in correctly identifying
positive cases, leading to a higher likelihood of false positive results.
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
Sen
0.89
0.95
0.91
NA
0.98
0.99
0.59
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.66
Spe
0.75
0.91
0.95
0.94
0.99
0.96
0.93
0.98
0.93
0.94
0.92
PPV
0.98
0.17
0.18
NA
0.99
0.80
0.04
0.87
0.37
0.28
0.21
NPV
0.36
0.99
0.99
NA
0.95
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
Table 4.3: Overview of the performance of the baseline model for each sample in the test set. ”S” in
column names refers to sample.
==PAGE:47==
4.6 Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
41
Figure 4.27: Confusion matrices for the 11 samples in the test set predicted using the baseline model.
To gain further insights into the falsely predicted cells, the samples were plotted in two-dimensional
spaces resembling the manual gating view, see Figure 4.28. The model correctly classifies nearly all of
the MRD cells, which are colored green. However, a proportion of the normal cells are misclassified as
MRD cells (orange). These misclassified cells are scattered among other healthy cells (grey). This may
occur because the model classifies each cell individually. MRD cells are expected to display distinct
characteristics within their own population.
However, the model does not acknowledge the nested
nature of the data and fails to assess a cell in relation to its sample population.
Figure 4.28: Two-dimensional scatter plots for Sample 9. Each cell is colored by its prediction outcome
from the baseline model.
==PAGE:48==
4.6 Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
42
Fortunately, the model demonstrates higher certainty on the correctly classified cells as illustrated in
Figure 4.29.
The figure shows that the falsely predicted cells tend to have prediction probabilities
closer to the cut-off value of 0.5. This suggests, that the decision trees in the random forest are not in
agreement on how to classify these cells.
Figure 4.29: Overview of the prediction probabilities from the baseline model for MRD in the four
groups: False Healthy, True Healthy, False MRD, and True MRD.
4.6.3
Performance of the Extended Model
In order to enhance the performance of the baseline model, additional features were introduced to
incorporate sample-level information. The extended model incorporated marker expression features
that characterized the overall cell population of each sample. These features encompassed the sample
median, the first quantile (25th percentile), and the third quantile (75th percentile) for each of the
six markers. Additionally, the time point variable was included in the model by employing one-hot
encoding, resulting in the addition of four new features.
The extended model was tuned with the same three hyperparameters as the baseline model, c.f.
Appendix C.3.1. The hyperparameters demonstrated similar patterns to those observed in the baseline
model with one exception. Setting very low values for mtry resulted in poor performance due to the
increased number of features. The combination of mtry = 15, ntree = 50, and nodesize = 100 yielded
the best performance for the model.
The performance table across the 11 samples is visualized in
Table 4.4
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
Sen
0.95
0.97
0.92
NA
0.99
0.46
0.5
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.58
Spe
0.76
0.96
0.94
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
PPV
0.98
0.30
0.18
NA
0.99
0.96
0.16
0.90
0.64
0.60
0.41
NPV
0.57
0.99
0.99
NA
0.98
0.93
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
Table 4.4: Overview of the performance of the extended model for each sample in the test set. ”S” in
column names refers to sample.
The table shows that fewer cells are misclassified as MRD compared to the baseline model with an
increase in the PPV for eight samples. This finding is reinforced by the corresponding confusion matrix
for each of the 11 test samples, as shown in Figure 4.30. The results suggest that the extended model
==PAGE:49==
4.6 Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
43
demonstrates improved accuracy in correctly identifying positive cases, thereby reducing the likelihood
of false positive results.
Figure 4.30: Confusion matrices for the 11 samples in the test set predicted using the extended model.
Global Feature Importance
SHAP values are used to reveal the contribution and importance of each feature in the extended model.
Globally, the impact of each feature is assessed by considering the magnitude of its importance and
whether it has a positive or negative relationship with MRD. Figure 4.31 shows the SHAP values of
the 6 markers. For visualization and interpretation reasons 500 randomly chosen MRD cells and 500
randomly chosen healthy cells are shown. Based on the SHAP plot, CD19 expression appears to be
the most important marker for MRD detection. This association does not imply that elevated CD19
expressions directly indicate the presence of cancer. Rather it signifies an increased likelihood of the
cell being a B-cell. This aligns with the established practice of manual gating, where CD19 typically
serves as the primary gating criterion for isolating B-lineage cells, see Appendix C.3.2.
The model found that the second most influential marker is CD45, where a lower level of CD45
expression contributes to a higher risk of MRD. This is not surprising, as CD45 expression increases
throughout B-cell maturation. CD34 is the backbone marker with the least predicting power in the
model. Higher CD34 values indicate an association with MRD, aligning with existing literature where
CD34 is commonly utilized as an immaturity marker.
Among the three non-backbone markers, CD123 demonstrated the highest predictive power. Consis-
tent with the literature, CD123 is frequently over-expressed in MRD cells, which validates our findings.
CD22 exhibited similar patterns but with lower importance. Surprisingly, CD66C did not display any
clear patterns, as neither high nor low values were predictive of MRD. This observation can be at-
tributed to the model’s limited emphasis on this feature, as its overall importance was found to be
relatively low.
==PAGE:50==
4.6 Supervised Classification of MRD Cells
44
Figure 4.31: SHAP values for the 6 markers in the extended model. Each data point in the figure
represents an individual cell, and the color represents the original feature value. The plot is based on
500 samples from the training set.
Investigation of False Negative Predictions
Sample 6 exhibited a higher number of false negatives in comparison to the baseline model. In order
to investigate this, both global and local approaches were employed using SHAP values. The global
investigation revealed that the sample-level features had a negative impact, which partially led to the
false negatives in the sample. This indicates the need for a reconsideration of how sample-level features
are incorporated into the model.
Additionally, individual cells were randomly selected and subjected to a localized examination. By
utilizing SHAP values, valuable insights were obtained regarding the contribution of each feature to-
ward the negative prediction of these specific cells. A noteworthy proportion of the misclassified cells
were primarily influenced by the sample level features, as demonstrated in Figure 4.32. The plot illus-
trates that the sample level feature CD19-quantile75 dragged the prediction of the cell towards being
healthy. This observation further emphasizes the potential requirement for an alternative approach for
incorporating sample-level features in the analysis.
Figure 4.32: Local SHAP values for a randomly chosen false negative cell in sample 6, predicted by
the extended model.
==PAGE:51==
4.7 Backtracking Analysis
45
Investigation of False Positive Predictions
Sample 3 exhibited an elevated count of false positive predictions. The global investigation revealed
that the predictions of these cells closely resembled the general pattern in the model, see Figure 4.33.
Higher levels of CD19 and CD123 drive the prediction towards MRD, while higher levels of CD45 drive
Figure 4.33: Global SHAP values of the false positive predictions in the extended model.
it toward healthy. Again, CD34, CD22, and CD66C have a lower impact on the predictions. This
suggests that a proportion of the healthy cells exhibit a high degree of resemblance to certain MRD
cells. Consequently, distinguishing between healthy and MRD cells becomes challenging, with a lack of
clear differentiation.
4.7
Backtracking Analysis
Considering the feasibility of manual gating of MRD cells, it is evident that the patterns necessary
for classification exist in the data. Therefore, higher performance was expected from the supervised
models, which initiated a comprehensive backtrack analysis. The analysis revealed that the utilized
batch correction technique could not handle mixed distributions across samples. In the study cohort,
samples exhibit varying distributions as visualized in Figure 4.34.
Sample 1-4 illustrates the distribution of marker CD66C for healthy and MRD cells. Samples 1, 2,
and 4 all exhibit unimodal distributions. Sample 1 consists solely of healthy cells leading to a single
peak. Sample 3 contains both healthy and MRD cells with similar expression levels. Sample 4 consists
of a small number of healthy cells that do not drive a second peak. In contrast, sample 2 demonstrates
a bimodal distribution, as the expression level of CD66C is higher in its MRD cells compared to the
healthy cells.
==PAGE:52==
4.7 Backtracking Analysis
46
Figure 4.34: Histograms illustrating the presence of mixed distributions across samples for markers
CD66C and CD19. Healthy cells are purple, and MRD cells are yellow.
Samples 5 and 6 are illustrated for CD19, both showing bimodal distributions. However, it is noteworthy
that the bimodal distribution in sample 6 is not solely driven by MRD cells and that the distribution
of the healthy cells has two peaks.
As CD19 is normally expressed on both B-cells and follicular
dendritic cells, it is not unexpected that a bimodal CD19 expression among healthy cells is observed.
The unimodal distribution of CD19 among the healthy cells in sample 5 could potentially be explained
by all its B-cells being cancerous.
Exploration of Batch Correction
Our initial investigation of the batch correction process showed promising results, although a small
convergence of peaks was observed, as discussed in Section 4.1.2. However, upon further examinations,
it became clear that the effects of batch correction were more pronounced than initially observed.
Figure 4.35 highlights two selected examples that illustrate the negative effects of batch correction.
The left-hand sample displays a gain of bimodal distribution for marker CD123, while the right-hand
sample demonstrates a smoothing of the two peaks for marker CD22.
The backtracking analysis hereby revealed that the batch correction method alters the underlying
distributions of the data, which raises concerns about the reliability of the corrected data. This occurred
when mixed distributions (unimodal and multi-modal) of a marker were present across different samples.
Initially, an assessment was conducted to determine if the utilization of 64 clusters in the self-
organizing map (SOM) for grouping similar cells during batch correction was insuﬀicient. However, this
was not the case.
CyCombine has been tested on peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) data, which exhibits
similar distributions across samples. It has not been benchmarked against samples with mixed distri-
butions, as encountered in our dataset. The issue likely arises as a result of the normalization method
employed during batch correction (z-score or rank). This potentially causes the clustering algorithm to
incorrectly group samples when mixed distributions exist across samples. The following batch correc-
tion step will then adjust these different distributions towards each other. The findings suggest that
the performance of cyCombine is limited when applied to datasets with mixed distributions. However,
further benchmarking and optimization are needed to address this limitation.
==PAGE:53==
4.7 Backtracking Analysis
47
Figure 4.35: Density curves of two samples from the data set before (green) and after (blue) batch
correction. The sample on the left-hand plot shows a gain of bimodality as a result of batch correction,
whereas the sample on the right-hand plot shows a loss of bimodality as a result of batch correction.
4.7.1
Assessing the Impact on MRD Classification
To assess the impact of the batch correction on the classification model, we decided to re-run the
baseline model using the uncorrected data. The baseline model was selected instead of the extended
model because we recognized that the incorporation of sample information was suboptimal.
An identical configuration was employed on the uncorrected data, utilizing an RF classification
model fitted to the six markers; CD123, CD19, CD22, CD34, CD45, and CD66C. Moreover, the training
process retained the same 11 samples for performance evaluation. Through a grid search, the optimal
hyperparameter values were determined as mtry = 2, ntree = 100, and nodesize = 100. The performance
of the model evaluated on the test set showed improved results compared to the baseline model on
corrected data. We observed an overall increase in sensitivity from 0.93 to 0.99, in specificity from 0.94
to 0.98, in PPV from 0.91 to 0.97, an NPV from 0.95 to 0.99, and a ROC-AUC from 0.98 to 0.99. This
indicates a very high overall performance. However, it should be noted that the overall picture may be
influenced by the substantial number of cells. Therefore, the performance of each individual sample in
the test set was examined. Table 4.5 presents the five used evaluation metrics for each sample in the
test set. Red cells indicate a decrease in the metric value, light green indicates an increase below 0.05,
and green indicates an increase of more than 0.05 compared to the baseline model on corrected data.
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
Sen
0.99
0.85
0.77
NA
0.99
0.99
0.45
0.99
0.99
1.0
0.95
Spe
0.50
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
PPV
0.96
0.95
0.78
NA
0.99
0.94
0.23
0.99
0.86
0.87
0.80
NPV
0.98
0.99
0.99
NA
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.0
0.99
Table 4.5: Overview of the performance of the baseline model on the uncorrected data for each sample
in the test set. ”S” in column names refers to sample. Red table colors indicate any decrease compared
to the baseline model on corrected data. Light green indicates a small increase (<=0.05), and darker
green indicates an increase > 0.05.
The sensitivity of the model shows varying changes compared to the baseline model on corrected data.
There is a general increase in specificity, indicating improved performance in correctly identifying healthy
cells.
The PPV shows a notable overall increase, with substantial improvements observed in most
samples. This suggests that this model has a lower likelihood of false positive results compared to
the baseline model on the corrected data. Minimal changes are observed in the NPV. The confusion
matrices for each sample in the test set are visualized in Figure 4.36.
==PAGE:54==
4.7 Backtracking Analysis
48
Figure 4.36: Confusion matrices for the 11 samples in the test set. They depicts the performance of
the baseline model trained on the uncorrected data.
The predictions of samples 4, 6, 8, 10, and 11 improved compared to the baseline model on corrected
data. The samples demonstrate a large decrease in false positives and a small decrease in false negatives.
No evaluation metrics decreased using the uncorrected data. Similarly, samples 2, 3, 7, and 9 exhibits
a large decrease in false positives, however with a slight increase in false negatives. This is considered
an overall improvement in the prediction of these particular samples.
In sample 1, there is a notable amount of false positives.
While this may seem significant, the
misclassification is deemed acceptable, as the outcome for the patient would be the same. The presence
of ∼3000 misclassified MRD cells does not impact the treatment course when the number of true MRD
cells is more than 76,000. The model is not able to successfully identify the MRD cells in sample 7
with an unacceptable low sensitivity of 0.45. However, the baseline model on the corrected data did
not obtain an acceptable performance either. More investigation is needed to understand why sample
7 cannot be correctly predicted.
To directly compare the misclassified cells to the baseline model on corrected data, the samples were
again plotted in two-dimensional spaces resembling the manual gating view. Sample 9 is presented in
Figure 4.37.
A comparison with the same scatter plot of the baseline model on the corrected data (Figure 4.28)
reveals a clear improvement. First of all, the true MRD cells form more distinct clusters, validating
our assumptions regarding the unsuccessful batch correction. Moreover, the uncorrected model shows a
noticeable reduction in the number of falsely predicted MRD cells (orange). These findings demonstrate
an improvement in the performance of the model on the uncorrected data compared to the corrected
data. Again, this supports the evidence that the batch correction process altered the underlying data
distributions. On the contrary, the results indicate that successful classification of MRD cells is feasible.
Building a model on accurately batch-corrected data might further improve the classification of MRD,
and make it acceptable for clinical use.
==PAGE:55==
4.7 Backtracking Analysis
49
Figure 4.37: Two-dimensional scatter plots for Sample 9. Each cell is colored by its predict outcome
in the uncorrected model.
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5
Future Work
5.1
Data Limitations
The use of manually gated flow cytometry data to annotate MRD cells presents potential challenges and
limitations that require thoughtful consideration. Variability between operators can lead to discrepan-
cies within the data, as different experts may interpret the same data differently. This subjectivity and
variability become inherent in the study’s data. Moreover, human-made labels may not fully capture
the complexity of the data. Despite these challenges, manual gating serves as the golden standard for
identifying MRD in ALL. The use of these labels leverages the extensive domain knowledge held by
clinicians. As an alternative to our study, carefully chosen and validated samples could be employed to
ensure data reliability. However, this approach is time and resource intensive and may result in data
loss.
The data utilized in this study exhibits numerous inconsistencies as a result of manual entries. Most
concerning, the data may exhibit false information or errors as a result of human mistakes. These
manual errors or inconsistencies are not a concern when analyzing each sample individually in the
clinic. Although these mistakes do not impact the course of treatment for the individual patient, they
may undermine the quality and reliability of the cohesive analysis conducted in this study.
Sparse data can pose challenges and impact the interpretation and generalizability of results. The
limited sample representation of certain markers can lead to an incomplete representation of the under-
lying biology. As a result, some markers or samples might be overlooked in the full picture, as the data
is skewered towards more represented markers. Thus, the findings may not fully capture the diversity
and nuances present in the data.
5.2
Downsampling
A random downsampling approach was conducted prior to the UMAP analyses as well as for the
training set used to fit the classification models. Each sample was limited to a maximum of 100/500
MRD and 100 healthy randomly chosen cells. While we acknowledge the potential loss of valuable
information through random downsampling, it was selected to obtain a comprehensive overview of all
samples collectively. Moreover, the downsampling technique prevented that the analyses were heavily
influenced by over-represented groups. To prevent information loss, a density-dependent downsampling
approach could be considered as an alternative method.
5.3
Batch Correction
Batch correction was implemented to address potential batch effects and improve the comparability
across samples. However, the results indicated a failure of the correction process. This raises concerns
regarding the reliability of the subsequent analyses. There might be a need to reconsider the inter-
pretation of the homogeneous MRD landscape. The initial findings indicated a more homogeneous
MRD space than expected due to the known heterogeneity of cancer. This observation may result
from the use of robust panels that effectively capture MRD cells. However, the failed batch correction
could have affected the distinctiveness of different MRD subgroups leading to the appearance of a more
homogeneous population.
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Panel-merging & Imputation
51
For the investigation of marker modulations, the batch correction process may have distorted the
modulation patterns.
On the contrary, the effects of batch correction may not be reflected in the
median expression values at the sample level. Therefore, it is possible that the magnitude of the impact
is alleviated by the sample-level approach.
In relation to MRD classification, our backtracking investigation revealed that batch correction
blurred the boundary between healthy and MRD cells. However, despite this limitation, the model
still achieved high performance. If the model had been trained on properly corrected data it could
potentially yield even higher results.
Overall, the failed batch correction process raises significant concerns regarding the reliability and in-
terpretability of our investigations. These limitations emphasize the need for a batch-correcting method
that is suitable for mixed data distributions. However, it is worth noting that the relatively acceptable
performance of the classification model suggests that the data may not be completely compromised and
the global trends and findings may still be reliable.
5.4
Panel-merging & Imputation
It is important to consider the implications and potential limitations associated with the use of imputed
values. One concern of imputing missing data is the potential risk of introducing bias, as the imputed
values may not accurately reflect the true underlying biology. The method applied ensures that cells
closely resemble the cells they obtained their imputed values from, thereby preserving the existing
expression profiles. This aspect is crucial in maintaining data integrity.
In the MRD landscape analysis and marker modulation investigation, imputation was based solely on
MRD cells. The idea was to ensure that MRD cells only obtained values from other MRD cells, hereby
maintaining their MRD characteristics. However, upon further consideration, our initial assumption
may not have been accurate. It is likely that certain groups of MRD exhibit expression value that
resemble healthy cells for some markers. Cancer is known for its heterogeneity, and the restriction of
imputing markers solely based on MRD may have oversimplified the complexity of the space. The issue
is particularly relevant for some of the aberrant markers measured on a small subset of the data, such as
CD13 and CD33. When an aberrant marker is present in the informative tube for a sample, the marker
will likely be expressed in its MRD population. With our approach, these high expression values were
imputed to the entire MRD space. However, it is likely that some MRD populations do not express
these aberrant markers. This could explain the stable expression patterns observed for certain aberrant
markers in the marker modulation investigation and the homogeneous MRD space. Including healthy
cells in the imputation process of these analyses could improve the representation of marker profiles
and enhance the reliability of the data.
Additionally, it is important to consider the marker overlap as it directly impacts the reliability
and accuracy of the imputation process. Although considerable effort was made to achieve a suﬀicient
overlap of both backbone and aberrant markers, it could not be fully achieved in all panel merges.
As a result, aberrant markers were imputed based solely on the overlap of backbone markers in some
instances. If this overlap does not accurately represent the underlying biology, the imputation process
may introduce artificial patterns.
The imputation process offered advantages such as addressing missing data and incorporating all
markers into a comprehensive analysis. However, it is important to acknowledge the limitations associ-
ated with the use of imputed values.
5.5
Unsupervised Models
Although a portion of interesting variability was captured in our unsupervised models, the UMAPs
exhibited patterns or potential artifacts that were irrelevant to the objectives of our project.
This
highlights a limitation of unsupervised learning that lacks domain knowledge to direct the learning
process. The algorithms operate solely based on mathematical patterns without incorporating additional
==PAGE:58==
5.6 Supervised Models
52
information about the underlying biology. Consequently, the UMAP, designed to distinguish MRD from
healthy cells, was inadequate for application in clinical practice.
In the MRD landscape, there is a risk that non-MRD clusters are present due to mistakes or
uncertainties in the annotation process.
For future clinical usage, the aim is to establish a space
where new samples can be projected into for MRD characterization. The non-MRD clusters pose little
harm, as new MRD cells will not be projected into these clusters. In this study, it is not feasible to
determine whether non-MRD cells have been included. Hence, it might be safer to retain the uncertain
cells rather than excluding potential unique MRD sub-populations.
Despite these limitations, unsupervised clustering provides the advantage of unbiased data explo-
ration. It allows for the discovery of novel sub-populations that may exist within the dataset, which can
be valuable for exploring previously unknown variability. Considering the drawbacks of unsupervised
methods, a semi-supervised approach might be an alternative solution. For instance, meta-clustering
can be conducted by incorporating domain knowledge. This could allow researchers to consider both
biological knowledge and the data values to manually guide the formation of meta-clusters. This inte-
gration of biological insights during the meta-clustering process can enhance the accuracy and biological
relevance of the results.
5.6
Supervised Models
Evaluation of the baseline model showed that it fails to assess a cell in relation to the other cells within
its sample.
The incorporation of sample-level features partly resolved this, but introduced another
issue. These features were mistakenly relied upon by the model resulting in misclassifications. Some
cells were primarily classified based on the sample-level features, which raised concerns about reliability.
It became evident that the approach may not be appropriate for addressing the problem. Instead, it is
suggested to employ a different algorithm. The new algorithm should be capable of effectively handling
nested data structures, allowing it to capture the relationships between cells within a sample.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to utilize bioinformatics tools to overcome the limitations associated with the
current approaches for MRD monitoring in B-cell lineage ALL. The ambition is to apply the algorithms
in a clinical setting and hereby save clinicians a substantial amount of time and effort.
The investigation of drug-induced immunophenotypic modulations identified CD13, CD33, CD133,
CD58, and CD49F as the most stable markers, exhibiting minimal changes in expression levels. Their
stability could be influenced by their low representation in the data. The trajectories for CD10, CD38,
and CD66C revealed a negative modulation pattern, whereas up-modulation was noted for CD19, CD20,
CD22, CD45, and CD123. These findings align with the existing literature. Notably, literature often
reports a down-modulation of CD34, whereas this study observed a higher frequency of up-modulation.
The discrepancy may stem from the loss of biological information during batch correction or panel
merging.
The primary aim of the MRD landscape analysis was to define and characterize distinct sub-populations.
Application in clinical practice could hereby serve as a characterization tool to support the management
of B-cell lineage ALL. The analysis revealed a predominantly homogeneous MRD landscape lacking dis-
tinct clusters. Subtle patterns required to detect MRD sub-populations may have been compromised
during batch correction or panel merging.
The establishment of predictive models aimed to reduce the time required for MRD detection in the
clinic. The models exhibited a strong overall ability to distinguish between MRD cells and healthy cells
(ROC-AUC ∼0.98). However, the sample-level assessment revealed that the models performed poorly
on samples with low MRD counts. This is partially attributed to the failed batch correction since the
model trained on uncorrected data exhibited better performance on all evaluated metrics.
In conclusion, this study unveiled valuable findings and demonstrated promising results in advancing
MRD monitoring in B-cell lineage ALL. However, all results were constrained by the batch correction
algorithm employed, which proved inadequate in handling the mixed distributions present in the data.
Further research is necessary before the models can be applied in clinical practice.
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX A
Literature Reviews
A.1
Systematic Literature Review of Markers
A systematic literature review was conducted to investigate the markers used included in BCP ALL
antibody panels, and their expression pattern. DTU Findit, a Open Science oriented Library Services
Platform of DTU, was used to perform the search.
• Search String:
(title:(”Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lymphoid Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lym-
phoblastic Leukemia”) OR abstract:(”Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lymphoid
Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia”)) AND (MRD OR ”Minimal residual dis-
ease” OR ”Measurable Residual Disease”) AND ”Flow Cytometry” AND (CD45 OR CD19
OR CD34 OR CD10 OR CD20 OR CD38 OR CD123 OR CD22 OR CD66 OR CD13
OR CD49F OR CD133 OR CD58 OR CD81 OR CD33) AND (B-cell OR ”B cell” OR
B-lymphocyte OR ”B lymphocyte”)
– Search string includes non-rare markers from our data
• Filter options:
– Online
– Journal Article
– English or Undetermined language
– From latest 15 years
• Result:
120 articles on 06/02/2023
The 120 articles were sorted based on title and abstract, excluding 88 articles. The 32 articles included
were all read thoroughly.
A.2
Systematic Literature Review of Modulations
A systematic literature review was conducted to investigate what marker modulations are observed
in literature. DTU Findit, a Open Science oriented Library Services Platform of DTU, was used to
perform the search.
• Search String:
(title:(”Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lymphoid Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lym-
phoblastic Leukemia”) OR abstract:(”Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lymphoid
Leukemia” OR ”Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia”)) AND abstract:(”immunophenotypic change”
OR ”immunophenotypic alteration” OR modulation OR immunomodulation) AND (MRD
OR ”Minimal residual disease” OR ”measurable residual disease”) AND ”Flow Cytometry”
AND (B-cell OR ”B cell” OR B-lymphocyte OR ”B lymphocyte”)
==PAGE:61==
A.2 Systematic Literature Review of Modulations
55
• Filter options:
None
• Result:
20 articles on 08/03/2023
The 20 articles were sorted based on title and abstract, excluding 8 articles. The 12 articles included
were all read thoroughly.
==PAGE:62==
APPENDIX B
Data exploration
B.1
Tube trajectories
A Sankey plot showing the trajectories of all the tubes utilized over the different timepoints at Rigshos-
pitalet.
Figure B.1: Overview of the flow of tubes used for monitoring MRD during induction therapy at
Rigshospitalet
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX C
Results
C.1
Data Pre-processing
C.1.1
Batch Correction Check
Batch correction was performed on each of the 10 tubes prior to panel-merging. Some samples within
the same tube were only measured on two of the scatter values, FSC-A and SSC-A, whereas others were
additionally measured on the scatter value FSC-H. These were therefore batch corrected separately. A
file was created with all samples belonging to each tube based on their number of scatter values, where
df2 refers to samples having two scatter values and df3 refers to samples having three scatter values, as
seen from the list below.
• df2-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
• df3-CD10-CD13-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD49F (included in results)
• df3-CD10-CD13-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45
• df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45-CD49F
• df2-CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
• df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD33-CD34-CD45
• df2-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
• df3-CD10-CD19-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
• df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
• df3-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
• df3-CD10-CD123-CD19-CD20-CD22-CD34-CD38-CD45
• df3-CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C (included in results)
• df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
Density plots for the remaining tubes included in the study cohort. All tubes show 8 randomly selected
samples.
Orange curves depicts the distribution of the uncorrected data pr marker, whereas green
curves depicts the distribution of the corrected data pr marker.
==PAGE:64==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
58
df2-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
df2-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
df2-CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
df3-CD10-CD123-CD19-CD20-CD22-CD34-CD38-CD45
df3-CD10-CD13-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45
df3-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
Figure C.1: Density plot pr marker for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. Orange curves are
uncorrected data. Green curves are corrected data.
==PAGE:65==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
59
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD33-CD34-CD45
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45-CD49F
df3-CD10-CD19-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
Figure C.2: Density plot pr marker for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. Orange curves are
uncorrected data. Green curves are corrected data.
==PAGE:66==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
60
UMAPs were generated for the remaining tubes included in the study cohort. Each UMAP was per-
formed on eight randomly selected samples, which is also the color-code of the plots.
df2-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
df2-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
df2-CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
Figure C.3: UMAP plots for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. The UMAPs are colored on
sample.
==PAGE:67==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
61
df3-CD10-CD123-CD19-CD20-CD22-CD34-CD38-CD45
df3-CD10-CD13-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45
df3-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
Figure C.4: UMAP plots for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. The UMAPs are colored on
sample.
==PAGE:68==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
62
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD33-CD34-CD45
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
Figure C.5: UMAP plots for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. The UMAPs are colored on
sample.
==PAGE:69==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
63
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45-CD49F
df3-CD10-CD19-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
df3-CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
Figure C.6: UMAP plots for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. The UMAPs are colored on
sample.
==PAGE:70==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
64
C.1.2
Panel Merging Check
Density plots pr marker for the remaining tubes included in the study cohort. All tubes show 8 randomly
selected samples. Purple curves depicts the distribution of the final panel-merged data, whereas green
curves depicts the distribution of the data corrected between samples belonging to that tube.
df2-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
df2-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
df2-CD123-CD19-CD22-CD34-CD45-CD66C
df3-CD10-CD123-CD19-CD20-CD22-CD34-CD38-CD45
df3-CD10-CD13-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45
df3-CD10-CD133-CD19-CD34-CD45-CD58
Figure C.7: Density plot pr marker for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. Purple curves are
the final panel-merged data. Green curves are corrected data.
==PAGE:71==
C.1 Data Pre-processing
65
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD33-CD34-CD45
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD38-CD45
df3-CD10-CD19-CD20-CD34-CD45-CD49F
df3-CD10-CD19-CD34-CD38-CD45-CD49F
Figure C.8: Density plot pr marker for eight randomly selected samples pr tube. Purple curves are
the final panel-merged data. Green curves are corrected data.
==PAGE:72==
C.2 Marker Modulations
66
C.2
Marker Modulations
Sankey plots for the remaining marker modulations across the four main time points during induction
therapy are listed here.
Figure C.9: Modulations pattern for CD20.
Figure C.10: Modulations pattern for CD22.
==PAGE:73==
C.2 Marker Modulations
67
Figure C.11: Modulations pattern for CD45.
Figure C.12: Modulations pattern for CD123.
Figure C.13: Modulations pattern for CD38.
==PAGE:74==
C.2 Marker Modulations
68
Figure C.14: Modulations pattern for CD66C.
Figure C.15: Modulations pattern for CD33.
Figure C.16: Modulations pattern for CD49F.
==PAGE:75==
C.3 Supervised Classification Model
69
Figure C.17: Modulations pattern for CD58.
Figure C.18: Modulations pattern for CD133.
C.3
Supervised Classification Model
C.3.1
Hyperparameter Tuning of the Extended Model
==PAGE:76==
C.3 Supervised Classification Model
70
Figure C.19: Performance comparison of hyperparameter combinations for the extended model. The
performance was determined through a 3-fold cross validation using ROC-AUC as the evaluation metric.
C.3.2
Hyperparameter Tuning of the Extended Model
Figure C.20: Example from a MRD detection analysis at the hospital.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
Jhansi Rani Arumugam et al. “Immunophenotypic expression and immunomodulation in minimal
residual disease analysis of pediatric B acute lymphoblastic leukemia by high sensitive flow cytom-
etry.” eng. In: Leukemia and Lymphoma 63.3 (2022), pages 644–652. issn: 10292403, 10428194.
doi: 10.1080/10428194.2021.1992755.
[2]
Etienne Becht et al. “Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using UMAP.” eng.
In: Nature Biotechnology 37.1 (2019), pages 38–47. issn: 15461696, 10870156. doi: 10.1038/nbt.
4314.
[3]
MD Bethesda. National Cancer Institute: PDQ® Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Treatment. url:
https://www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/patient/adult-all-treatment-pdq. (accessed:
14.03.2023).
[4]
MD Bethesda. National Cancer Institute: PDQ® Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Treatment. url:
https://www.cancer.gov/publications/dictionaries/cancer-terms/def/mrd. (accessed:
15.03.2023).
[5]
Leo Breiman. “Random forests.” eng. In: Machine Learning 45.1 (2001), pages 5–32. issn: 15730565,
08856125. doi: 10.1023/A:1010933404324.
[6]
Hasan A. Burnusuzov et al. “Immunophenotypic Modulation of the Blast Cells in Childhood
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Minimal Residual Disease Detection.” eng. In: Folia Medica 58.1
(2016), pages 28–35. doi: 10.1515/folmed-2016-0004.
[7]
Darlen Cardoso de Carvalho et al. “Pharmacogenomics and variations in the risk of toxicity during
the consolidation/maintenance phases of the treatment of pediatric B-cell leukemia patients from
an admixed population in the Brazilian Amazon.” eng. In: Leukemia Research 74 (2018), pages 10–
13. issn: 18735835, 01452126. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2018.09.003.
[8]
John Han Chih Chang et al. “Acute lymphoblastic leukemia.” eng. In: Pediatric Blood and Cancer
68.2 (2021), e28371. issn: 15455017, 15455009. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28371.
[9]
Gabor Csardi and Tamas Nepusz. “The igraph software package for complex network research.”
In: InterJournal Complex Systems (2006), page 1695. url: https://igraph.org.
[10]
Gábor Csárdi et al. igraph: Network Analysis and Visualization in R. R package version 1.5.0.
2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7682609. url: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=igraph.
[11]
Michael N. Dworzak et al. “Modulation of antigen expression in B-cell precursor acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia during induction therapy is partly transient: Evidence for a drug-induced
regulatory phenomenon. Results of the AIEOP-BFM-ALL-FLOW-MRD-study group.” eng. In:
Cytometry Part B - Clinical Cytometry 78.3 (2010), pages 147–153. issn: 15524957, 15524949.
doi: 10.1002/cyto.b.20516.
[12]
Minenori Eguchi-Ishimae and Mariko Eguchi. “Leukemia.” jpn. In: Japanese Journal of Cancer
and Chemotherapy 43.11 (2016), pages 1341–1345. issn: 21872449, 03850684.
[13]
Greg Finak, Wenxin Jiang, and Raphael Gottardo. “CytoML for cross-platform cytometry data
sharing.” eng. In: Cytometry Part a 93.12 (2018), pages 1189–1196. issn: 15524930, 15524922. doi:
10.1002/cyto.a.23663.
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
72
[14]
G. Gaipa et al. “Drug-induced immunophenotypic modulation in childhood ALL: Implications for
minimal residual disease detection.” eng. In: Leukemia 19.1 (2005), pages 49–56. issn: 08876924,
14765551. doi: 10.1038/sj.leu.2403559.
[15]
Giuseppe Gaipa et al. “Prednisone induces immunophenotypic modulation of CD10 and CD34 in
nonapoptotic B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells.” eng. In: Cytometry Part B -
Clinical Cytometry 74.3 (2008), pages 150–155. issn: 15524957, 15524949. doi: 10.1002/cyto.b.
20408.
[16]
Benyamin Ghojogh et al. “Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP).” eng. In:
Elements of Dimensionality Reduction and Manifold Learning (2023), pages 479–497. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-031-10602-6_17.
[17]
Monika Gupta et al. “Immunophenotypic aberrancies in acute leukemia: A tertiary care centre
experience.” eng. In: Oman Medical Journal 36.1 (2021), pages 1–6. issn: 20705204, 1999768x.
doi: 10.5001/OMJ.2021.03.
[18]
Florian Hahne et al. “flowCore: A Bioconductor package for high throughput flow cytometry.” eng.
In: Bmc Bioinformatics 10.1 (2009), page 106. issn: 14712105. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-106.
[19]
Richard R. Jahan-Tigh et al. “Flow cytometry.” eng. In: Journal of Investigative Dermatology
132.10 (2012), pages 1–6. issn: 15231747, 0022202x. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.282.
[20]
David L. Jaye et al. “Translational applications of flow cytometry in clinical practice.” eng. In:
Journal of Immunology 188.10 (2012), pages 4715–4719. issn: 15506606, 00221767. doi: 10.4049/
jimmunol.1290017.
[21]
Emma Kroeze et al. “Pediatric Precursor B-Cell Lymphoblastic Malignancies: From Extramedullary
to Medullary Involvement.” eng. In: Cancers 14.16 (2022). Edited by Ferenc Gallyas Jr, page 3895.
issn: 20726694. doi: 10.3390/cancers14163895.
[22]
Kuhn and Max. “Building Predictive Models in R Using the caret Package.” In: Journal of Sta-
tistical Software 28.5 (2008), pages 1–26. doi: 10.18637/jss.v028.i05. url: https://www.
jstatsoft.org/index.php/jss/article/view/v028i05.
[23]
Hunjoong Lee et al. “High-throughput analysis of clinical flow cytometry data by automated
gating.” eng. In: Bioinformatics and Biology Insights 13 (2019), page 1177932219838851. issn:
11779322. doi: 10.1177/1177932219838851.
[24]
Andy Liaw and Matthew Wiener. “Classification and Regression by randomForest.” In: R News
2.3 (2002), pages 18–22. url: https://CRAN.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/.
[25]
Tracy Lightfoot, Alexandra Smith, and Eve Roman. “Leukemia.” eng. In: International Encyclo-
pedia of Public Health (2016), pages 410–418. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-803678-5.00253-8.
[26]
Lin Liu et al. “Comparing and clustering flow cytometry data.” eng. In: Proceedings - Ieee Inter-
national Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine, Bibm 2008 (2008), pages 305–309. issn:
21561133, 21561125. doi: 10.1109/BIBM.2008.61.
[27]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform manifold approximation and
projection for dimension reduction. eng. 2018.
[28]
James Melville et al. The Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) Method for
Dimensionality Reduction. R package version 0.1.16.9000. 2021. url: https://github.com/
jlmelville/uwot.
[29]
Ekaterina Mikhailova et al. “Reliable Flow-Cytometric Approach for Minimal Residual Disease
Monitoring in Patients with B-Cell Precursor Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia after CD19-Targeted
Therapy.” eng. In: Cancers 14.21 (2022), page 5445. issn: 20726694. doi: 10.3390/cancers14215445.
[30]
Kimberly D. Miller et al. “Cancer treatment and survivorship statistics, 2022.” eng. In: Ca Cancer
Journal for Clinicians 72.5 (2022), pages 409–436. issn: 15424863, 00079235. doi: 10.3322/caac.
21731.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
73
[31]
Signe Modvig et al. “High CD34 surface expression in BCP-ALL predicts poor induction therapy
response and is associated with altered expression of genes related to cell migration and adhesion.”
eng. In: Molecular Oncology 16.10 (2022), pages 2015–2030. issn: 18780261, 15747891. doi: 10.
1002/1878-0261.13207.
[32]
Tariq Muzzafar et al. “Aberrant underexpression of CD81 in precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia: Utility in detection of minimal residual disease by flow cytometry.” eng. In: American
Journal of Clinical Pathology 132.5 (2009), pages 692–698. issn: 19437722, 00029173. doi: 10.
1309/AJCP02RPVOKTNWEC.
[33]
Carole Nagant et al. “Easy discrimination of hematogones from lymphoblasts in B-cell progenitor
acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients using CD81/CD58 expression ratio.” eng. In: International
Journal of Laboratory Hematology 40.6 (2018), pages 734–739. issn: 1751553x, 17515521. doi:
10.1111/ijlh.12912.
[34]
Nina F. Øbro et al. “Identification of residual leukemic cells by flow cytometry in childhood B-cell
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia: Verification of leukemic state by flow-sorting and molec-
ular/cytogenetic methods.” eng. In: Haematologica 97.1 (2012), pages 137–141. issn: 15928721,
03906078. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.051383.
[35]
Christina Bligaard Pedersen et al. “cyCombine allows for robust integration of single-cell cy-
tometry datasets within and across technologies.” eng. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (2022),
page 1698. issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29383-5.
[36]
Katrien Quintelier et al. “Analyzing high-dimensional cytometry data using FlowSOM.” eng. In:
Nature Protocols 16.8 (2021), pages 3775–3801. issn: 17502799, 17542189. doi: 10.1038/s41596-
021-00550-0.
[37]
Jonathan A. Rebhahn et al. “SwiftReg cluster registration automatically reduces flow cytometry
data variability including batch effects.” eng. In: Communications Biology 3.1 (2020), page 218.
issn: 23993642. doi: 10.1038/s42003-020-0938-9.
[38]
Nina Rolf et al. “A cross-standardized flow cytometry platform to assess phenotypic stability in
precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) xenografts.” eng. In: Cytometry Part a
101.1 (2022), pages 57–71. issn: 15524930, 15524922. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.24473.
[39]
Alexandra F. Santos et al. “The expression of CD123 can decrease with basophil activation: Impli-
cations for the gating strategy of the basophil activation test.” eng. In: Clinical and Translational
Allergy 6.1 (2016), page 11. issn: 20457022. doi: 10.1186/s13601-016-0100-4.
[40]
Renu Saxena and Hema Anand. “Flow cytometry in acute leukemia.” eng. In: Indian Journal of
Hematology and Blood Transfusion 24.4 (2008), pages 146–150. issn: 09714502, 09740449. doi:
10.1007/s12288-008-0037-4.
[41]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learning and Data
Mining. eng. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[42]
Łukasz S￿dek et al. “Multicolor flow cytometric immunophenotyping for diagnosis of childhood
precursor-B-ALL and monitoring of minimal residual disease.” eng. In: Central-european Journal
of Immunology 33.3 (2008), pages 108–113. issn: 14263912, 16444124.
[43]
Adam C. Seegmiller et al. “Characterization of immunophenotypic aberrancies in 200 cases of
B acute lymphoblastic leukemia.” eng. In: American Journal of Clinical Pathology 132.6 (2009),
pages 940–949. issn: 19437722, 00029173. doi: 10.1309/AJCP8G5RMTWUEMUU.
[44]
Janet Staats et al. “Guidelines for Gating Flow Cytometry Data for Immunological Assays.”
eng. In: Methods in Molecular Biology 2032 (2019), pages 81–104. issn: 19406029, 10643745. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4939-9650-6_5.
[45]
Aleksandra Suwalska et al. “Comparison of Batch Effect Removal Methods for High Dimensional
Mass Cytometry Data.” eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 13347 (2022), pages 399–410.
issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-07802-6_34.
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
74
[46]
Ramalingam Thulasi Raman et al. “Immunophenotypic modulation in pediatric B lymphoblastic
leukemia and its implications in MRD detection.” eng. In: Leukemia and Lymphoma 61.8 (2020),
pages 1974–1980. issn: 10292403, 10428194. doi: 10.1080/10428194.2020.1742902.
[47]
Sofie Van Gassen et al. “FlowSOM: Using self-organizing maps for visualization and interpreta-
tion of cytometry data.” eng. In: Cytometry Part a 87.7 (2015), pages 636–645. issn: 15524930,
15524922. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.22625.
[48]
E. G. Van Lochem et al. “Immunophenotypic differentiation patterns of normal hematopoiesis in
human bone marrow: Reference patterns for age-related changes and disease-induced shifts.” eng.
In: Cytometry Part B - Clinical Cytometry 60.1 (2004), pages 1–13. issn: 15524957, 15524949,
10970320, 01964763. doi: 10.1002/cyto.b.20008.
[49]
Paul F. Virgo and Graham J. Gibbs. “Flow cytometry in clinical pathology.” eng. In: Annals of
Clinical Biochemistry 49.1 (2012), pages 17–28. issn: 17581001, 00045632. doi: 10.1258/acb.
2011.011128.
[50]
Lukas M. Weber and Mark D. Robinson. “Comparison of clustering methods for high-dimensional
single-cell flow and mass cytometry data.” eng. In: Cytometry Part a 89.12 (2016), pages 1084–
1096. issn: 15524930, 15524922. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.23030.
[51]
Ron Wehrens and Lutgarde M. C. Buydens. “Self- and Super-Organizing Maps in R: The kohonen
Package.” In: Journal of Statistical Software 21.5 (2007), pages 1–19. doi: 10.18637/jss.v021.
i05.
[52]
Ron Wehrens and Johannes Kruisselbrink. “Flexible self-organizing maps in kohonen 3.0.” eng. In:
Journal of Statistical Software 87.7 (2018). issn: 15487660. doi: 10.18637/jss.v087.i07.
[53]
Hadley Wickham et al. “Welcome to the tidyverse.” In: Journal of Open Source Software 4.43
(2019), page 1686. doi: 10.21105/joss.01686.
