==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Biopolymers processed and used as
enzyme carriers
D´aniel M´esz´aros
Supervisor:
Anders Egede Daugaard
Danish Polymer Centre,
Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor:
Ulrica Edlund
Department of Fibre and Polymer
Technology,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Preface
This document concludes my work for the thesis project that represents the final milestone
of my education in the Joint Nordic Five Tech Master’s Programme. The project was
carried out from January until June 2023, in the Danish Polymer Centre at DTU. This
work was supervised by Anders Egede Daugaard, Associate Professor from the Department
of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at DTU, and co-supervised by Ulrica Edlund,
Professor in Polymer Technology, from the Department of Fibre and Polymer Technology
at KTH.
I would first of all like to thank Anders Egede Daugaard for providing me with this
interesting master thesis project. In addition, I would like to thank the valuable discussion
and guidance that I have received during the semester. I would like to acknowledge Ulrica
Edlund, for her remote provision of valuable feedback and guidance when needed.
I would like to thank for the help of Arianna Rech, I am deeply grateful for the invaluable
practical and intellectual support regarding the material I worked with during the thesis
project.
Last but not least, I express my deep gratitude for the invaluable opportunity to pursue
my studies in the Joint Nordic Five Tech master’s programme, which has afforded me the
chance to explore new countries, cities, and cultures, while connecting with remarkable
individuals. Furthermore, I am grateful to my family for their constant support throughout
my educational journey, always prioritizing my growth, as well as to my friends for their
constant encouragement.
June 2023,
D´aniel M´esz´aros
1
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Abstract
The aim of this master project was to investigate the possibility to use bio-based, plas-
ticized sodium alginate (NaAlg) as enzyme carrier. The alginates are traditionally made
processable by adding various plasticizers, such as polyols (glycerol, sorbitol, etc.), in this
work glycerol was used. The experimental aspect of the project involved the lab-scale
preparation of samples, which encompassed compounding, hot pressing, potential treat-
ment with a calcium bath immersion, and subsequent drying. The loss of chemicals during
processing was quantified using Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and Ultraviolet-Visible
spectroscopy (UV-Vis). The prepared processed samples were characterized by extraction
experiments. In the first half of the project, the colorant loading of the samples was in-
vestigated for simplicity. Later the loaded compound was exchanged for enzymes. UV-Vis
measurements were employed in both cases to characterize the samples effectively. The
initially prepared plasticized sodium alginate samples were too sensitive and readily dis-
solved in water. Consequently, experiments were performed to improve the stability of the
matrix to a sufficient level by ion exchange of sodium ions to calcium ions. This process
significantly improved the water stability of the samples. From the results, it seems the
release of the loaded compound can be controlled by the ion exchange treatment. Once
enhanced water stability of the matrix was found, the effect of the plasticizer was investi-
gated by changing the mixing ratio of glycerol. It was found that the level of glycerol in
the sample is inversely proportional to the restrainability of the loaded compound. The
enzyme loaded samples first were implemented by the use of lipase enzymes due to being
readily available in the laboratory. Shortly, it was found that the assay to quantify lipase
activity is performed in 2-methyl-2-butanol (2M2B), which did not cause any swelling in
the samples as observed before. Therefore, the loaded enzyme was switched to Horseradish
Peroxidase (HRP). It was found that HRP loaded samples possessed activity after pro-
cessing. The water stabilized HRP loaded samples possessed measurable activity over four
hours of exposure to the assay. In addition to enzymatic assay, the release profile of pro-
tein was also monitored using Bradford assay. It was seen that after an initial moderate
release of the enzymes, the release leveled off and stopped after four hours. The results of
the Bradford assay aligned with the enzymatic activity measurements.
It should be noted, that the original formulation of the project was heavily based on a
recently developed processing method, extrusion for alginate composites. Unfortunately,
no tests were performed with extrusion due to technical difficulties with the instrument.
2
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Contents
Preface
1
Abstract
2
Learning objectives
5
Symbol list
6
1
Introduction
7
2
Literature overview
8
2.1
Alginate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Biopolymer processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Limitation of TPS based materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Characterization of alginate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Enzyme immobilisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.1
Enzyme immobilisation techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Biopolymers / Alginate as enzyme carriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Explerimental plan
25
4
Results and discussion
26
4.1
Preparation of plasticized sodium alginate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Hot press
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Drying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Moisture content of the used materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Composition of the processed sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Calibration line of sodium fluorescein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
Establishing method for extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.8
Improving the water stability of plasticized sodium alginate sample by
crosslinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.9
Impact of plasticizer on the extraction profile of the loaded compound . . .
42
4.10 Enzyme activity experiment using lipase loaded plasticized sodium alginate
43
4.11 Enzyme activity experiment using HRP loaded plasticized sodium alginate
45
4.12 Bradford assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.12.1 Protein release profile of enzyme loaded plasticized sodium alginate
52
5
Conclusion
57
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
6
Experimental work
59
6.1
Weight loss during drying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Composition of the processed sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Calibration line of sodium fluorescein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.4
Establishing method for extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.5
Improving the water stability of plasticized sodium alginate sample by
crosslinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.6
Impact of plasticizer on the loaded colorant extraction resistance . . . . . .
65
6.7
Enzyme activity experiment using lipase loaded plasticized sodium alginate
66
6.8
Enzyme activity experiment using HRP loaded plasticized sodium alginate
68
6.9
Bradford assay and calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.10 Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.11 Perfomed methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
References
73
Appendix
79
A NaFl calibration points
79
B UV-Vis spectra from NaFl loaded experiments
80
C UV-Vis spectra HRP enzyme activity experiments
84
D UV-Vis spectra from HRP extraction profile experiments
86
E TGA result of A HRPl 1dRTD
89
4
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
Learning objectives
Through this project I want to gain substantial experience in being able to:
- Create a realistic project/problem formulation, describe the underlying motivation, and
specific project objectives.
- Survey and describe relevant state-of-art and background literature and theory.
- Given the available resources, selectively apply the methods and theory to optimally
achieve the objectives. Provide an argumentation for my choice of method.
- Plan and continuously manage my project and argument for my management decisions.
- Account for my methods so the results can be reproduced, and evaluate sources of errors
and results’ uncertainty.
- Critically comment on limitations of the theory and method, and if assumptions are
made, estimate the sensitivity of my conclusions to the assumptions.
- Discuss the obtained results in relation to the achievement of objectives and to state-of-
art.
- Summarize and conclude on the study’s answers to the stated objectives and problem.
- Represent data at a proficient level using Origin
- Present an outlook to improvements of the work and how to further advance state-of-art.
- Utilize the current state-of-art of the field to undertake independent research to expand
knowledge and understanding of an unexplored system.
- Apply and improve critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
- Report on the project in a thesis and oral presentation – clear, concise and comprehensive
with only the necessary and sufficient information. The report will account for how I
achieved the above list of objectives.
5
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
Symbol list
Nomenclature
σ
Tensile strength
ABTS
2,2-Azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)diammonium salt
AW
alginate and water based film
AWGX
alginate-water and glycerol based film, X weight % glycerol of the alginate
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
CHY
Chitosan
CRL
Candida rugose lipase
DSC
Differential scanning calorimetry
E
Young’s modulus
FT-IR
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
G
α-L-guluronic acid residue
HPMC
Hydroxypropyl-methyl-cellulose
M
β-D-mannuronic acid residue
NaAlg
Sodium alginate
NaFl
Fluorescein sodium salt
PHA
parts per hundred alginate
RPM
Revolutions per minute
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
TGA
Thermogravimetric analysis
UV-Vis
Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy
6
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
The increasing trend in plastic production has led to a rise in plastic waste and pollution,
which poses a significant threat to the environment and human health [1]. To address this
issue, researchers are exploring alternative solutions to replace fossil-based plastics with
more environmentally-friendly materials. These efforts include developing biodegradable
plastics made from renewable sources such as plants and algae. The development and
adoption of these alternative materials could have a significant impact on reducing plastic
waste and promoting a more sustainable future. A biopolymer found in macroalgae, al-
ginate is biocompatible, hydrophilic, and biodegradable [2]. For its attractive properties,
alginate has been identified as a promising material for use in various applications, includ-
ing enzyme immobilization. The use of alginate as a carrier matrix for enzymes has several
advantages, including improved enzyme stability and reusability, which can lead to cost
savings in industries such as food, pharmaceuticals, biomedical engineering, and many
more [3]. To date, alginate has only been investigated as a form of crosslinked beads for
enzyme immobilization. However, despite the potential benefits of alginate-based enzyme
immobilization, there are still challenges to be addressed. One of the main challenges
generally is the optimization of the immobilization process to ensure that enzymes are ef-
fectively retained within the alginate matrix and retain their activity. During this project,
a novel method of enzyme immobilization using alginate will be presented. The aim was
to successfully perform the immobilization of enzymes by biopolymer entrapment using
thermoprocessing. The prepared samples were characterized using TGA and extraction
measurements. The efficiency of the enzyme immobilization was investigated by measur-
ing the enzymatic activity using screening assays. The findings of this work can contribute
to the development of more effective and efficient enzyme immobilization systems, which
can have a significant impact on a range of industries.
7
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
2
Literature overview
2.1
Alginate
Traditionally the cultivation of seaweed originated in East Asia. This region is in fact
the highest producer of seaweed still, with more than 95 % of the total production. The
global annual production was estimated to be 35.8 million tonnes roughly in 2019 [4]. The
cultivation of seaweed in Europe could offer solutions to many of the modern world’s prob-
lems. On one hand, it absorbs nutrients from the ocean such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and
carbon. Additionally, the cultivation of seaweed requires no land, not even fresh water,
there is a growing application of algae in wastewater treatment. The demand for seaweed
bio-based products in different markets are fast growing. Besides the general biofuel pro-
duction from biomasses, a variety of value-added chemicals can be refined from seaweed,
such as pigments, vitamins, proteins, and polysaccharides [5]. The cultivation and the
biorefinery of seaweed in Europe could offer solutions to many of the modern world prob-
lems. On one hand, it absorbs nutrients from the ocean such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and
carbon. Additionally, the cultivation of seaweed requires no land, not even fresh water,
there is a growing application of algae in wastewater treatment [6]. A sample image of
brown macroalgae is shown on the left side of Figure 2.1.
In recent decades alginate, a polysaccharide found in the cell wall of brown seaweed has
been gaining more attention. The alginate content in brown algae ranges roughly between
20 to 30 % of the dry mass [7]. Alginate is a negatively charged, water soluble polysac-
charide. Commercially alginate is sold in the form of the sodium salt of alginic acid, as
NaAlg powder. A sample image of NaAlg powder is shown on the right side of Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Sample images of brown seaweed on the left and NaAlg powder on the right. The
brown seaweed image is taken from [8] and the NaAlg powder image is taken from [9].
Alginate is composed of two uronic acid building units, D-mannuronic (M) and L-
guluronic (G) seen in Figure 2.2a and b. The structure of the polymer chain is linear,
consisting of three different types of blocks. The blocks include homopolymeric regions of
D-mannuronic acid (MM) and L-guluronic acid (GG) and an alternating sequence of the
two building units (MG) [10]. A schematic image of the structure of alginate is shown in
Figure 2.2c.
8
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
Figure 2.2: Relavant structures with regards to alginate. The building blocks a, D-mannuronic
acid (M) and b, L-guluronic acid (G). C, shows a schematic structure of sodium alginate. Figures
are redrawn based on [11].
The material properties of alginate biopolymers are influenced by the quantity of M,
G, and MG blocks. MG blocks possess higher flexibility compared to the other sequences
found in the molecule. This is due to the alternating axial–equatorial and equatorial–axial
glycosidic bonds between the two uronic acids.
The amount of G-blocks defines the
strength the stability of gels formed from alginate. The reactivity with divalent cations
causing gel formation depends on the length of the G blocks in the molecule. The sug-
gested mechanism for these observations is that G blocks in the polymer are primarily
involved in ion chelation with the divalent cations for the gelation. The formation of a
junction is the result of the intermolecular interaction between different G-blocks and the
divalent cation [11, 12]
Figure 2.3: A schematic figure of the mentioned ion chelation mechanism for the gelation. The
zig-zag part of the molecule represents the G units. Figure taken from [11].
Gels made from alginate have been prepared since the second half of the twentieth
century [13]. Since then, alginate hydrogels have been extensively studied and thanks
to their versatility many applications have been developed over the years in the food,
9
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
medical and cosmetic industry [14, 15]. In addition, it has been shown that alginate gels
can effectively deliver low molecular weight drugs. This is for the reason, that the pore
size of the surface of the alginate gel is much bigger than the size of the drug molecule
[16]. Moreover, the release profiles of drugs can be controlled by modifying the surface
of the gels [17]. The reason why alginate based hydrogels are so attractive materials is
for the reason of their biocompatibility, biodegradable nature, ease of gelation conditions,
low toxicity, and relatively low cost [16]. Moreover, alginates promote wound healing and
are used as a wound dressing. There are already commercially available products based
on alginate for such applications, for instance, Biatain® Alginate Ag by Coloplast [18].
Alginate has been granted the “generally referred as safe” material status by The Food
and Drug Administration [19]. In addition, multiple products have been approved by the
European Medicine Agency that is based on alginates [20].
2.2
Biopolymer processing
Commodity polymers like polyethylene, polypropylene, and polyethylene terephthalate are
thermoplastic and can be easily melted and shaped using processes like injection mould-
ing and extrusion blow moulding.
Plastic products based of commodity polymers are
problematic due to their heavy reliance on fossil-based resources and slow biodegradation
rate leading to significant environmental impact and sustainability concerns [21]. Fossil-
based plastics, while some can be engineered to be biodegradable, often pose challenges
due to their very stable structure.
This can be the case even for biobased polymers.
However, since biobased polymers are derived from renewable sources, they contribute to
reducing the overall environmental footprint. In response to environmental concerns and
heavy dependence on fossil-based products, the development of biobased polymer prod-
ucts has emerged as a promising alternative. Biopolymer processing offers opportunities
for developing sustainable plastic products with good mechanical properties and reduced
environmental impact, contributing to a circular economy.
Among polysaccharides, starch based plastics have been the most extensively studied. For
this reason, yet to this date, most studies in the field of biopolymer processing are based
on thermoplastic starch. Starch is a biobased, biodegradable, widely available and renew-
able material, consisting of two biopolymer components, amylose, and amylopectin seen
in Figure 2.4. The linear polymer amylose, is made up of α-D-glucose units connected by
α-1,4 glycosidic linkages. A branched polymer of α-D-glucose units connected by α-1,4
and α-1,6 glycosidic linkages is amylopectin.
10
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
Figure 2.4: The structure of the two biopolymers found in starch. The figure is taken from [22].
Starch in itself is not a thermoplastic and needs plasticizers to be processable. Nu-
merous studies have been done on the plasticization of starch using various low molecu-
lar weight compounds. The used additives include glycerol, sorbitol, ethanolamine, for-
mamide, acetamide and urea and many others [23]. Mainly for TPS plasticizers the used
functional group is hydroxyl or amide, so that the formed hydrogen bonds between the
polymer and plasticizer would disintegrate the polymer-polymer interactions.
As mentioned above, in Section 2.1 alginate biopolymer has been mostly studied as a form
of a hydrogel. The thermal processing of alginate has not been investigated to a high
extent to date. Gao et al. investigated the properties of alginate films produced by ther-
momechanical mixing and by a sequence of thermomechanical mixing and compression
moulding [24] [25]. Only one study prior to this has used extrusion to process alginate,
for alginate based composites [26].
The first problem that arises with the processing of alginate is the fact that the melt-
ing temperature of alginate is higher than the degradation temperature. Thus, without
any additives, alginate would start to degrade before being processable [25].
The hy-
drogen bonds between alginate molecules have to be weakened so the polymer can be
melt-processable. To overcome this issue, plasticizers are added to the alginate in order
to lower the processing temperature. To achieve a plasticizing effect, the additive needs
to decrease the intermolecular interactions between the alginate molecules and increase
molecular spacing between them. Plasticizers this effect by establishing intermolecular
interactions with the polymer chains, hence replacing polymer-polymer intermolecular
interactions. A schematic illustration of the structural changes in alginate due to plasti-
cization is seen in Figure 2.5.
11
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
Figure 2.5: A schematic illustration of the plasicization with regards to the structure of alginate
before and after plasticization with glycerol and water. The figure was redrawn based on [26].
In practice, plasticization was implemented by adding hydrogen bonding additives
that have a higher affinity to form hydrogen bonds than the intermolecular polymer hy-
drogen bonds. In the case of alginate, the most obvious choice of material that can fulfill
these conditions is water [27]. Deionized water has been used to help the processability
of biopolymers such as starch, chitosan, and alginate [24]. According to the literature,
water acts as a destructuring agent during processing. Once water is dried off after the
processing the structure of the biopolymer system is restored, the distance between the
polymer chains is reduced back to the initial level. Hence, the properties of the final prod-
uct were not modified to a high extent. On the other hand, plasticizers not only help the
processability like water but also modify the properties of the final product as they cannot
simply be dried off from the product. For the preparation of alginate films by solution
casting many plasticizers have been investigated, namely glycerol, sorbitol, xylitol, man-
nitol, PEG, fructose, lactate. The majority of the used plasticizers are biobased polyols.
Among of them, glycerol and sorbitol are the two main biobased polyols used to plasticize
polysaccharide-based materials [25].
The majority of the studies where the effect of plasticizers has been investigated are for
producing biobased films by solvent casting. The purpose of using plasticizers in this case
is to increase the flexibility and reduce the brittleness of the produced films. During solu-
tion casting the polymer is dissolved at low concentration, then the solution is casted on
a surface (in a petri dish in the laboratory) at an elevated temperature until the solvent
completely evaporates. For laboratory scale, solvent casting is a relatively easy method
although, from the production point of view, it is not a convenient technique.
The efficient processing of polymers is crucial for the high productivity and commercial
viability of polymer-based materials.
For example, solvent casting, while widely used,
12
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
may not be the best choice for high productivity due to its slow processing time and high
solvent use. Moreover, the producible film thickness is limited and the productivity is low.
In contrast, extrusion is an excellent choice for high productivity due to its fast processing
time and ability to produce continuous lengths of materials with consistent properties.
Therefore, choosing the right processing method is essential for achieving high productiv-
ity and commercial success in polymer-based material production [28]. Additionally, the
problem with the limited thickness of films is also resolved with extrusion. Both sheets
and films can be produced depending on the outlet of the slit die [29].
Biopolymer processing also offers opportunities for the development of novel composite
materials by incorporating natural fillers, such as cellulose or lignin, to further enhance
the material properties and sustainability. In the previous study, where plasticized al-
ginate was processed by extrusion, alginate composites were produced by incorporating
biomass waste (seagrass, depectinized apple pomace, barley malt sprouts, barley spent
grains) into the polymer matrix [26]. The addition of biomass waste has also a list of
benefits. These benefits can include biodegradability, high toughness, strength, thermal
stability, low density, low cost, and non-abrasiveness to processing equipment [26]. Based
on the author’s comments NaAlg was processable by extrusion when only destructuring
agent (water) was used for plasticization. However, the obtained material was too fragile
and distorted. When only glycerol was added to NaAlg, the formed plastic was sticky
and soft. An optimum condition of water:alginate:glycerol weight content of 1:1:0.25 was
found. The extruded sample using optimized ratios of water and glycerol appeared as a
hard but flexible material after drying. Its mechanical properties of it were superior, with
Tensile strength (σ) of 103 MPa and Young’s modulus (E) of 4 GPa. Based on this, it can
be concluded that this process enabled the creation of a high-performing bio-based plastic
that could be processed using standard thermoprocessing techniques. The issue with it
is that the raw price of alginate is approximately three times more expensive than other
commodity polymers.
In order to reduce the cost, five different biobased wastes were incorporated into the al-
ginate as fillers. The used filler content was between 10, 25 and 50% of the weight of the
alginate. As a result, the TS and elongation at break decreased. For most of the prepared
composites, E was not decreased. In every case, shrinkage, weight loss, and density fell as
filler content rose.
This work also investigated the recyclability and reprocessability of the produced compos-
ites. The dried extrudates were put into water, which softened the material and it became
reprocessable. In appearance, the extruded samples darkened in color over the recycling
cycles. The change of color is believed to have been caused by the degradation or oxidation
by repeated exposures to elevated temperature and pressure during processing. In terms
of mechanical properties, no statistically singnificant change was observed up to recycling
four times for most of the composites. However, after the 5 recycling cycles except for
one composite material, the loss of mechanical properties was statistically significant. An
13
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
example of the effect of recycling on mechanical properties is shown below in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: The Young’s modulus as a function of recycling cycles in case using seagrass as filler
[26].
All in all, this study revealed a successful method to process alginate by extrusion. By
incorporating fillers, costs can be reduced and still acceptable properties were obtained or
even improved in some properties.
2.2.1
Limitation of TPS based materials
An observed problem with TPS is the aging of the material. Recrystallization (retrogra-
dation) of TPS and phase separation occurred between the polymer and the plasticizers
during storage [30]. Retrogradation is one of the biggest challenges of TPS. Plastics based
on TPS are fragile and retrogradation further increases it with time. Retrogradation has
not been studied regarding NaAlg samples. Although, in one study NaAlg was used to
investigate the anti-retrogradation mechanism in normal cornstarch [31]. Another limita-
tion of TPS is moisture sensitivity. When exposed to moisture, starch degrades in water
and loses its characteristics. Presumably, this is the case of plastics made of alginate based
on the similarities between the structure (hydrophilic polymers) of TPS and alginate.
2.2.2
Characterization of alginate
In order to be able to evaluate the effects of the used plasticizers and processing, the prop-
erties of the starting material must be known. Fortunately, there are available studies that
already measured relevant experiments to this work in NaAlg and NaAlg films. For the
characterization of the processed NaAlg films, the applied measurements include mechan-
ical testing, thermal analyses such as TGA, Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and
spectroscopic measurements for instance, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-
IR). Frequently performed experiments are scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at frac-
tural point, X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), and dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA).
According to the literature of FT-IR spectra results based on neat alginate films, the
14
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
broad peak around 3265 cm−1 is from the stretching vibrations of O-H bonds, and the
peak at 2906 cm−1 is from the stretching vibration of C-H bonds. The peaks at 1595
and 1406 cm−1 are characteristic of the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations
of the –COO−group respectively. The peaks at 1023 and 1079 cm−1 are assigned to the
stretching vibration of the C-O-C bond [32].
Figure 2.7 shows an FT-IR spectrum of
alginate film without the addition of any non-volatile plasticizer.
Figure 2.7: FT-IR spectra of neat NaAlg film, without any non-volatile plasticizer. Figure taken
from [32].
Gao et al.
investigated the structural changes of alginate films in the case of the
addition of glycerol, a non-volatile plasticizer [24]. The used alginate concentration was
35 weight %. They found that the peak characteristic peak for the asymmetric stretching
vibrations of the –COO−group (1594 cm−1) and the stretching vibration of C-O-C bond
(1079 cm−1 slid to higher frequencies as a function of the glycerol content. The higher
the glycerol content was in the film, the more displaced the peaks were. This is shown in
Figure 2.8 below [24].
15
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
Figure 2.8: FT-IR spectra of NaAlg powder and alginate films with different glycerol content. The
numbers after G in the sample names refer to the weight % of glycerol compared to alginate weight.
Figure taken from [24].
The greater water-glycerol affinity caused the hydrogen bonds between water and al-
ginate to decrease, which is likely what caused the observed changes. At the same time,
they are partially replaced by the comparably weaker hydrogen bonds between glycerol
and alginate. The broad hydroxyl peak around 3253 cm−1 increased too with glycerol
content due to the increased concentration of hydroxyl group from glycerol.
Another interesting finding of the same study of Gao et al. was the relation between water
content and the amount of plasticizer in the sample. An increasing amount of water con-
tent in equilibrium (57 % relative humidity 25°C for 14 days) was found with increasing
glycerol content in the sample. The water content of neat NaAlg was 18 % and the water
content increased up to 29 %, when the used glycerol weight was 50 % of the weight of the
alginate in the sample. The same observation of water content was reported in [25]. This
is an important remark since water acts as a destructuring agent and further improves
the plasticization of alginate. The moisture content of different alginate film samples after
reaching equilibrium are shown in 2.1. AW is short for alginate and water based film, and
AWGX is the short for alginate-water and glycerol in X weight % of the alginate.
Table 2.1: The results of the moisture content of the samples after 14 days in 57 % relative humidity
at 25°C. Table remade based on [24].
Sample
Water Content (%)
AW
18
AWG10
17
AWG20
19
AWG30
22
AWG40
27
AWG50
29
16
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
SEM images from cryogenic fractures can be a useful tool to study the microstructure
of the produced samples. It can reveal the presence of voids and give information about
the heterogeneity of the sample. For instance, heterogeneity in the fracture samples would
indicate that the destruction of the alginate particles was not complete. Voids can be
generated during the by water evaporation processing of films if the polymer molecules
cannot cohere [28].
The above mentioned samples from Table 2.1 were analyzed with SEM. The recorded
cryogenic fracture surface images are shown in Figure 2.9. The unplasticized alginate films
had a fracture surface that was sharp and harsh, but plasticized alginates had a smoother
surface texture. The SEM images point out that the homogeneity of the alginate films
is significantly enhanced by the addition of glycerol.
However, the fracture surface of
AWG50 seen in Fig 2.9 displayed signs of a liquid phase likely due to phase separation.
Moreover, the fracture surface was reported to be sticky. Based on this, adding up to 50%
weight glycerol of the weight of alginate was too much plasticizer and unfavorable for the
product.
Figure 2.9: The micrographs of the cryogenic fracture surface of unplasticized and glycerol plasti-
cized alginate films. Figure is taken from [24].
Thermal properties of alginate based materials have been investigated in many studies.
Still in the same work by Gao et al. the TGA in helium atmosphere revealed a three step
degradation for the measured alginate films [24]. The TGA results in helium atmosphere
are shown in Figure 2.10a. Initially, for neat alginate water evaporation takes place until
200 °C, where free and bound water is removed from the sample. Then, above 200°C
a sharp, large shoulder peak was found, which is attributed to the thermal decomposi-
tion, presumably depolymerization reactions. Nearly 40% of the initial weight of the films
was left after the degradation until 550°C. Above 550°C, a new step in the degradation
mechanism starts. Likely, this step is the degradation of the formed fragments from the
depolymerization degradation step. The non-plasticized alginate film (AW) showed the
same degradation profile as neat alginate. In the plasticized alginate films, the weight loss
in the initial step was bigger due to the evaporation of both water and glycerol. Addition-
ally, the derivative thermogravimetry peak (Tdmax) appeared at higher temperatures for
plasticizer samples, due to the higher boiling point of glycerol compared to water. The
starting temperature (Tonset) of the second thermal degradation step was decreased for
plasticized alginate samples. In addition, for this degradation step a relation of lowered
onset temperature was found for increased glycerol contents. Thus, the addition of plasti-
17
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
Table 2.2: The results of Tonset and Tonset of the TGA measurements in different alginate samples.
NaAlg refers to the neat NaAlg powder, while the rest of the samples mentioned in the table are
alginate (AW) films or plasticizer alginate films (AWG). Table made based on the results of [24].
Sample
Helium
Air
Tonset (°C)
Tdmax (°C)
Tonset (°C)
Tdmax (°C)
NaAlg
216
246
200
229
AW
212
246
196
229
AWG10
211
222
197
206
AWG20
207
216
193
202
AWG30
205
214
188
198
AWG40
202
213
190
198
AWG50
201
211
190
198
cizer to the alginate films decreased the thermal stability. The TGA measurements in the
oxidative atmosphere (air) seen in 2.10b showed a similar, three step degradation profile
as in helium atmosphere. One major difference was found, in the last step. The neat
alginate powder and the non-plasticized alginate film showed a sharp, peak of weight loss
roughly around 570°C. This is presumably some oxidation reaction of carbon residues. A
summary of the above mentioned TGA measurements of the second degradation step is
shown in Table 2.2.
Figure 2.10: TGA curves of neat alginate powder, different alginate films, and glycerol a, in helium
atmosphere b, in air atmosphere. Figure made from [24].
In addition to TGA measurement DSC can be used as an alternative to monitoring the
thermal transitions of polymeric materials. In an early study by Soares et al. neat NaAlg
powder was measured by DSC [33]. Figure 2.11a shows the DSC curves of NaAlg under
non-oxidative (N2) atmosphere. An endothermic peak was observed of the dehydration of
the NaAlg before 100°C. This was followed by an exothermic peak around 240 °C, which
is the depolymerization, the cleavage of the glycoside bonds in the biopolymer. In an
oxidative atmosphere, a similar curve was obtained seen in Figure 2.11b. The dehydration
and biopolymer decomposition occurred roughly at the same temperatures as in nitrogen.
The start of the decomposition of the formed fragments from the main exothermic peak
was evidenced above 300°C. These DSC measurements are in alignment with the TGA
results mentioned before.
18
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
Pereira et al. investigated the properties of different alginate based films produced by
solvent casting [34]. They performed DSC measurements on on sodium alginate films in
N2 atmosphere. Similarly, as neat NaAlg powder mentioned above an endothermic peak
was observed below 100 °C and a sharp exothermic peak around 250 °C. Similar results
were reported by [35, 36].
The starting endothermic peak is likely caused due to the
loss of moisture from the hydrophilic groups. The sharp exothermic peak is the signal of
the thermal decomposition, presumably depolymerization, and decomposition reactions.
From the comparison of the temperatures of the exothermic peak neat NaAlg powder and
NaAlg film it seems that solvent casting of films had no effect of the thermal stability.
The DSC thermogram of NaAlg film is shown below in 2.11c.
Figure 2.11: Figure a, and b, are DSC curves of NaAlg powder with a heating rate of 5°C / min in
a, N2 b, air flow of 90ml /min. Figure a, and b, were made based on [33]. In c, a DSC thermogram
of NaAlg film is shown with a heating rate of 10°C / min under N2 flow of 20ml/min. Figure c, is
taken from from[34].
2.3
Enzyme immobilisation
Enzymes are active proteins (except RNAse) with the ability to act as a catalyst in bio-
chemical reactions. In these biocatalysed reactions, higher reaction rates are achieved by
lowering the energy needed for activation. Thus, more products are formed and the equilib-
rium state is reached faster. The change of reaction rate is millions between the enzymatic
reactions and the uncatalyzed reactions [37]. However, in order for these bioderived cat-
alysts to be widely commercialized, their reusability factor becomes essential; otherwise,
19
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
they would cease to be profitable. It is extremely difficult to maintain their structural
stability during any biochemical reaction as they as are susceptible to reaction conditions
[38].
To overcome these issues related to the use of biocatalysis, enzyme immobiliza-
tion has been developed. Enzyme immobilization makes it simpler to separate and reuse
enzymes while also improving the robustness and efficiency of production processes. Addi-
tionally, in some cases, it was reported that the enzymes became more resistant to process
conditions by immobilization [39].
2.3.1
Enzyme immobilisation techniques
Immobilized enzymes and whole cells can be prepared by multiple methods. In all types,
the enzyme or whole cell is restrained as an enzyme aggregate or in a different matrix
phase than the substrate or product. The matrix can be made from a variety of materials
(polymer, inorganic, and so forth) as long as they fulfill their purpose.
They need to
be low-cost, widely available and must be inert, and possess good mechanical properties.
Moreover, in order for the immobilized enzyme to be economically feasible, the matrix
has to be stable, and regenerable. In addition to this, the enzyme activity should not be
decreased [38].
Techniques for enzyme immobilization:
- Adsorption: In this technique, there is no permanent bond formation between the
support material and the enzyme. Only secondary interactions (Hydrogen bonding, ionic,
Van der Waal forces) stick the enzymes to the support. Commonly used method for its
simplicity and mild reaction conditions. Enzyme leakage is a potential disadvantage of
this method due to the weak interaction with the support material [40].
- Crosslinking: This method uses no support material for the enzyme immobilization.
The enzymes are directly crosslinked with each other. Crosslinking is achieved by reacting
the enzymes with bi/multifunctional reagents such as glutaraldehyde and hexamethylene-
diamine. A potential downside of this method is that the activity of the enzymes can be
decreased due to the conformational changes made by the crosslinking [41, 42].
- Covalent binding: The enzyme is directly linked to the support material with a
covalent bond. This bonding is established between the functional group of the enzyme and
the surface of the matrix. In practise, first the surface is activated using multifunctional
reagents such as glutaraldehyde, bisdiazobenzidine. Then, the enzymes are bounded to
the surface [41].
- Entrapment of the enzyme: Enzymes can be immobilized in three-dimensional matrix
of high molecular weight compounds. There are three different types of entrapment: fiber,
gel, and micro-capsule entrapment. A general drawback of this entrapment method is that
some of the enzymes could lose activity due to diffusion barriers formed by the entrapment
[43].
20
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
Figure 2.12: Schematic illustration of the different enzyme immobilization methods. The figure is
taken from [41].
Environmental monitoring, biotransformation, diagnostics, pharmaceutical, and food
sectors use biotechnology. Due to their efficiency, faster reaction time, and versatility,
enzyme-based techniques are increasingly replacing traditional chemical processes in both
laboratory and business settings. Considering the extensive amount of study on enzyme
immobilization, we can say that it is one of the most promising methods for extremely
effective and can be made economically feasible. At the same time, immobilized enzymes’
price and storage issues prevent them from being commercialized at a faster rate. Overcom-
ing these limitations, as well as making them applicable for a wider range of applications
should be in focus in the future [38].
2.4
Biopolymers / Alginate as enzyme carriers
Natural polymers such as alginate can be used for enzyme entrapment. Historically, the
limitation of biopolymers compared to the used synthetical polymers such as polyacry-
lamide is the inferior mechanical properties. Although, if the mechanical properties of
natural polymer systems could be improved and made to be more stable, they would be
more appealing than synthetic polymers. This is for the reason that biopolymers are non-
toxic, mild conditions are used in the process and the microenvironment in the entrapment
is not harmful to the enzymes [43].
Shen et al. used a multicomponent capsulation system containing an alginate capsule
covered with gelatin film in a calcified shell. Their capsules managed to maintain more
than 60% of the enzyme activity after the 20th cycle and roughly 90% activity after 30
days of storage time. Moreover, the entrapped enzymes were less susceptible towards pH
and temperature compared to the free enzymes [44].
The available studies seem to focus heavily on the gel or the microencapsulation entrap-
ment techniques. The fiber entrapment as a possible technique seems to be overlooked
yet. In the fiber entrapment method, the enzymes are restrained in position in the porous
cavities of the fiber matrix. General preparation of this method includes, first, that fiber is
dissolved in a solvent. Then, the enzyme is added to the solution and emulsified. Lastly,
21
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
the polymer fibers are extruded into a solution, where the polymer precipitates or the
solvent is dried off [45] [46]. Alginate-based polymer matrix could offer advantages to
enzyme immobilization by entrapment method. Firstly, alginate is readily water-soluble,
therefore there is no need to use ionic liquids or organic solvents. For this reason, the
precipitation step is no longer required to remove the solvent from the polymer as water
is not toxic, and is environmentally friendly. Thus, the solution can be readily processed
under mild conditions with the addition of plasticizers.
Unfortunately, no studies have investigated the fiber entrapment method using thermo-
plastic alginate before. However, the possibility of using carbohydrate based polymers
for enzyme entrapment has been investigated. Badgujar et al. successfully synthesized a
biocompatible polymeric blend consisting of hydroxypropyl-methyl-cellulose (HPMC) and
chitosan (CHY) for the immobilization of lipase enzymes [46]. For the enzyme immobi-
lization, first, the components were solubilized, mixed together thoroughly, and finally, the
solvent was dried off. The HPMC and the lipase was solubilized in deionized water, and
CHY was solubilized in 1–1.5 % w/w acetic acid solution. Water was dried off from the
HPMC:CHY:lipase system in 48 hours at 40-45°C. Initially, multiple lipases were screened
(Candida rugosa lipase (CRL), Rhizopus niveus lipase, Aspergillus niger lipase) for the
kinetic resolution of (±1)-phenyl ethanol. The reaction is shown in Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13: The screened reaction of kinetic resolution of (±1)-phenyl ethanol for the selection of
lipase for further optimization. The figure is taken from [46].
The results of the initial enzyme screening is shown in Figure 2.14.
The achieved
conversions indicated that the immobilization was successful for all types of lipases. The
conversions were higher for all three immobilized lipases than the conversion of the crude
lipases. CRL was chosen for further investigation as it has performed the best out of the
three based on terms conversion of the above-mentioned reaction.
22
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
Figure 2.14: Effect of different lipases (crude/HPMC:CHY immobilized lipase) (reaction conditions:
1-phenyl ethanol, 1 mmol; isopropenyl acetate, 3 mmol; solvent toluene up to 2 mL; immobilized
HPMC:CHY:lipase (300:100:150); temperature 48°C; reaction time 13 h). The figure is taken from
[46].
In addition, TGA results indicated that the immobilized HPMC:CHY:CRL was ther-
mally more stable than crude CRL. 40 % weight loss occurred at around 300°C for crude
CRL, while for immobilized HPMC:CHY:CRL it was at 360°C, seen in Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: The TGA analysis results of the enzyme immobilization. The figure is taken from the
supplementary information of [46].
After optimizing the reaction conditions the polymer blend entrapped lipase was re-
cyclable up to 5 times. Both the conversion and the enantiomeric excess of product and
substrate showed a slight decrease upon recycling, shown in Figure 2.16.
23
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
Figure 2.16: Effect of recycling in respect to conversion and enantiomeric excess of substrate and
product. Reaction conditions: 1-phenyl ethanol: vinyl acetate 1:2.5 mmol; solvent n-hexane up to
2 mL; immobilized biocatalyst HPMC:CHY:CRL (300:100:120) 70 mg; temperature 48 °C; time
12–13 hours. The figure is taken from [46].
This study in general is a great example that the requirements that are expected with
enzyme immobilization such as inertness, recyclability, and better if no loss in enzyme
activity can be reached with the physical entrapment method using biopolymers.
24
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
3
Explerimental plan
During this master project, the processing of plasticized alginate will be investigated for
the use as an enzyme carrier.
Initially, a routine procedure needs to be established for measuring the efficiency of the
immobilization of the polymer matrix. The starting solution of plasticized alginate will be
prepared at an optimal composition found in a preliminary study, which is Alginate, 100
parts per hundred alginate (PHA) water and 25 PHA glycerol. For simplicity, instead of
extrusion, hot press processing will be carried out and tracer molecule of sodium fluorescein
will be used instead of enzymes. For the reliable determination of the tracer molecules,
a calibration curve will be prepared for Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis). The
hot pressed samples will be analyzed with extraction measurements to investigate the
retention of the tracer molecules by the biopolymer matrix.
Once, the procedure for the extraction of the tracer molecule is optimized, the use of
extrusion will be implemented. In this part of the project, the effect of the composition
and the addition of additives will be studied. This includes changing the concentration
of the used plasticizers to 12.5 and 37.5 pha and the use of different plasticizers namely,
glycerol and sorbitol. The addition of crosslinking additive, polyvalent ions in a form of
calcium is also worth investigating. If time permits, the effect of the addition of calcium
ions directly into the polymer solution or as post-treatment of extruded samples in calcium
ion containing solution could be interesting to study.
Finally, the use of enzymes would be introduced into the system. The used composition
for enzymes will be based on the acquired knowledge and results from the tracer molecules
study. The enzymatic activity of lipase enzyme will be measured using screening assays.
Based on the results, the efficiency of the studied system can be evaluated for the use
of enzyme immobilization. Moreover, the produced samples from optimized conditions
should be fully characterized using analytical methods such as tensile testing, FT-IR,
DSC and TGA.
25
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
4
Results and discussion
Materials based on plasticized alginate are promising due to their unique properties. In
particular, one characteristic that makes alginate-based products exceptional is the possi-
bility to incorporate various components into the water phase. This provides the opportu-
nity to load active compounds such as drugs or enzymes. This is particularly relevant in
the development of biomedical materials, where the controlled delivery of drugs or other
therapeutic agents can be critical.
Another characteristic of NaAlg that is unparalleled, is the option to control the water
solubility of the processed sample by exchanging sodium ions for calcium ions. Depending
on the application, it could be preferred to have a quick release of the loaded compound
(when the matrix readily dissolves in water) or to have a controlled release (diffusion
controlled, when the matrix is stable in water).
4.1
Preparation of plasticized sodium alginate
Loaded compounds were implemented into the material by dissolving them in water, which
was then mixed with glycerol and NaAlg. After speed mixing, the obtained material was
soft, which appeared in agglomerates, seen in Figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: The appearance of plasticized alginate after speed mixing.
4.2
Hot press
For the processing in the early stage of the project, hot pressing was selected. The reason
for hot pressing was the convenience that it offers. Quick processing is achieved in hot
pressing, by applying heat and pressure at the same, whereas the force is gradually built
up through a die in extrusion. What is more, handling hot pressing is just loading material
between two plates, while in extrusion the feeding of the material and steady state needs to
be ensured continuously during the process. With regards to cleaning, hot pressing is more
convenient cleaning is not necessary after each prepared sample. Whereas for extrusion,
26
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
some residues are left in the instrument. To ensure that there is no cross-contamination
between different samples for extrusion, cleaning is required.
Unfortunately, there have been different technical difficulties with the repair of the ex-
truder, thus hot pressing was utilized more extensively than originally planned for the
experiments.
Due to this, at the end hot pressing was only employed for the sample
thermal processing for this project. Nevertheless, in the broader context, considering the
possibility to commercialize a product based on plasticized sodium alginate, the use of
extrusion would be the advisable method to implement for continuous production.
In the Figure below, the prepared plasticized sodium alginate samples are seen in the
mold, on which they were later hot pressed.
Figure 4.2: The used mold for hot pressing.
The plasticized alginate samples after hot pressing are shown below in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Plasticized alginate after hot pressing. The sample on the left was dried at 60°C for
24 hours after hot pressing, sample on the right without any drying.
After the hot-pressed circular samples cooled down, subsequently were cut by a scissor
into smaller rectangular shapes with a wet weight of approximately 100 milligrams. The
cutting was performed so that the samples could be better utilized later in the extraction
experiments based on their consistent geometry and size. Figure 4.12 below shows the cut
27
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
samples.
Figure 4.4: Hot pressed, cut plasticized alginate samples.
Figure 4.5: A schematic illustration showing the mentioned steps of processing of plasticized sodium
alginate samples.
4.3
Drying
To make the plasticized sodium alginate samples less sensitive to water, it was recom-
mended based on previous experience that water content from inside the material needs
to be removed prior to water extraction [47]. This can be done by putting the material
into an oven under mild conditions (60°C), to avoid any possibility of degradation.
After drying the material was no longer soft in fact, it was rigid, yet they did not seem to
be fragile. The appearance of the samples did not change significantly compared to before
drying. Some of the sample ’bars’ from hot pressing became slightly curved due to the
28
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
drying step.
In order to know how long drying is sufficient to remove the excess moisture and water
content from the material, two different drying times were compared 24 and 72 hours.
The weight loss of individual samples are summaried for 72 hours in Table 4.1 and for 24
hours in Table 4.2.
Table 4.1: Weight loss of plasticized alginate during 72 hours of drying at 60°C.
Weight before drying [g]
Weight after drying [g]
Weight change (%)
0.6520
0.3834
-41.2
0.6435
0.3862
-40.0
0.6485
0.3724
-42.6
Average
-41.3
Standard deviation
±1.3
Table 4.2: Weight loss of plasticized alginate during 24 hours of drying at 60°C.
Weight before drying [g]
Weight after drying [g]
Weight change (%)
0.6488
0.3788
41.6
0.6636
0.3930
40.8
0.6623
0.3843
42.0
Average
-41.5
Standard deviation
±0.6
As seen, no significant difference in terms of weight loss was observed between 24 and
72 hours of drying. Therefore, in the following experiments, 24 hours of 60°C drying was
used.
4.4
Moisture content of the used materials
The moisture content of NaAlg powder and glycerol was determined by using TGA. The
measured TGA data is plotted in Figure 4.6
29
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.6: The plotted TGA results for NaAlg powder and glycerol.
Multiple TGA results of NaAlg based material described above in the literature overview
found, that the thermal degradation of NaAlg occurs in multiple steps starting from
roughly 250°C. From the measured data it is seen that the water evaporation from the
material did not stop at 100°C, judging from the continuous residue weight % loss. This
can be due to the hydrophilic nature of NaAlg. It is possible, that due to strong hydro-
gen bonding interactions with NaAlg, some of the water molecules are ’trapped’ between
polymer chains. These water molecules can only be evaporated at elevated temperatures
compared to free water.
The moisture content was measured to be the weight loss until 190°C [48]. Approxi-
mately, this is the temperature where the first derivate of the TGA curve returns to its
baseline, indicating the completion of moisture evaporation. Additionally, the first ther-
mal degradation step of NaAlg occurs at a significantly higher temperature, therefore only
weight loss from moisture is expected.
In the case of glycerol, the moisture content determination was fairly simple. Weight loss
was measured at 100°C. The results of moisture content determination are shown below
in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Measured moisture contents by TGA.
Material
Moisture content [%]
Standard derivation [%]
NaAlg
13.75
±0.23
Glycerol
0.91
±0.25
4.5
Composition of the processed sample
In order to ensure precise results in subsequent experiments, it is crucial to have knowledge
of the composition of processed and dried samples. In order to know exactly how the
30
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
composition changes, TGA measurements were performed on NaAlg powder and on the
hot-pressed dried plasticized sodium alginate. The determination of mixed compounds
presents a complexity due to the overlapping degradation peaks of glycerol and alginate.For
the hot-pressed dried plasticized sodium alginate, he determination of the remaining water
(moisture) content of the hot-pressed, dried plasticized alginate was fairly easy at this
point.
It was determined the same way as it was used for NaAlg powder, the weight
loss until 190°C. However, resolving the alginate and glycerol content from the TGA is
more complex. The NaAlg powder characteristic peak in the TGA graph can be used
to proportionally calculate the content of alginate in the hot-pressed, dried plasticized
alginate.
The TGA graph of NaAlg powder is shown in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: TGA graph of NaAlg powder
The TGA graph of hot pressed, dried plasticized alginate is shown in Figure 4.8.
31
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.8: TGA graph of Hot pressed, dried plasticized alginate
As seen, the drying was effective on the processed sample, the moisture content after
drying was reduced to 2.8%. As mentioned, The first degradation step of NaAlg over-
laps with the degradation of glycerol (shown in Figure 4.6). However, using the second
degradation step of NaAlg compared to the first degradation step can resolve this issue.
For both samples, the residue weight percentage has been determined at the start and at
the end temperatures of the first and second degradation steps using the first derivate of
the TGA curve. The starting and ending positions of a degradation peak in the DTGA
plot can be accurately determined by monitoring the increase from the baseline and the
subsequent return to the baseline. These values are highlighted in both graphs in Figure
4.7 and Figure 4.8. The exact residue weight percentage values are summarised in Table
4.4.
Table 4.4: Data related to the degradation peaks from TGA graphs for NaAlg powder and Hot-
press,dried plasticized alginate.
Degradation status
NaAlg
Hot-press,dried plasticized alginate
°C
Weight (%)
°C
Weight (%)
T1,onset
205
85.3
190
97.2
T1,end
275
50.8
283
47.5
T2,onset
580
38.3
750
32.2
T2,end
670
23.3
823
20.0
1./2. ratio
2.30
Using the proportion of the first and second degradation step of NaAlg, the glycerol
content of the hot pressed, dried sample can be calculated. The excess height in the first
degradation step is the glycerol content.
The calculated glycerol content resulted (21.7 %), which is close to the content from
mixing (21.4 %). The difference is very likely coming from human error or from minor
32
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
inhomogeneity of the sample. Based on the similarity of the results it can be assumed
that during drying only water is evaporated and the glycerol content is not changed. This
finding will be used later in the calculation of extraction measurements.
4.6
Calibration line of sodium fluorescein
It is more practical and straightforward to evaluate the retention of the matrix by using
a colorant rather than enzymes. Colorants replace complicated methods like enzymatic
assays by offering a direct signal and indicating their presence.
For a number of reasons, sodium fluorescein was selected as the loaded colorant for eval-
uating the retention of the matrix. First of all, sodium fluorescein is easily incorporated
into the aqueous phase since it is water soluble. Secondly, sodium fluorescein is a highly
fluorescent dye, emitting a bright green color in the visible spectrum. This makes the de-
termination of the dye easy even at low concentrations. Furthermore, sodium fluorescein
is stable and has low toxicity.
In order to precisely characterize the release profile of a loaded compound inside plasti-
cized sodium alginate. A calibration for the determination of the loaded compound prior
to the experiments was needed. Firstly, a calibration line was established for the deter-
mination of Fluorescein sodium salt (NaFl) using US-Vis spectroscopy. NaFl has a peak
in absorbance at 490 nm. Therefore, for the determination absorbance at this wavelength
will be used. Initially, different solutions ranging from 10−7 M to 10−2 M of NaFl were
prepared to screen the working range of the dye. From this, it was seen that solutions
that are 10−4 M or below in concentration did not cause oversaturation in the UV-Vis
detector. The signal in the detector of solution with concentration 10−6 M or below was
comparable to the signal of the blank sample. Based on this experience, it was decided
not to use any dye solutions above 10−4 M and below 10−6 M.
The set up calibration line for NaFl solution is shown in the Figure below.
33
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.9: In this figure the measured absorbances by UV-Vis at 490 nm are shown for the
prepared calibration points.
According to the Beer-Lambert Law, the absorbance and concentration relation is
linear starting from the origin. There is some deviation from the linear fit as expected
which can be accounted for by instrumental noise. Nevertheless, the calibration point
does not seem to have any systematic error, and its use should be acceptable. Since, for
each calibration point, the same volume of solution was measured, the molar absorption
coefficient (ϵ) can be calculated from the slope of the linear fit.
The calculated molar absorption coefficient for NaFl was 87068 M−1 · cm−1. This value
is reasonably close compared to the data published with a molar extinction coefficient value
of 85000 M−1 · cm−1 at pH 7.4 [49].
4.7
Establishing method for extraction
The extraction of colorant over time provided a quantitative measure of the retention capa-
bility. A liquid immersion approach was used to quantify the retention of loaded molecules
in the samples. Due to a lack of prior data regarding the material’s characteristics in terms
of keeping loaded molecules, screening under various situations was necessary. To find a
setup that would produce the necessary signal during the extraction process, various pa-
rameters, including colorant loading and water-to-solid mass ratio, were screened. The
’detection’ during the screening was judged based on how colorful the liquid appeared in
each run. Two different colorant loading concentrations were tested, 10−3 M and 10−2 M
water solutions. The use of 3000 µl of DI-water and 10000 µl of DI-water were also tested.
The rectangular-shaped samples were embedded in water inside the vials and were put
into a rolling board. For 3000 µl of DI-water a small vial and for the 10000 µl of DI-water
a bigger, mixing cup was used.
From the comparison, 10−2 M seemed to provide enough intensity to be measurable even
34
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
after 5 minutes. For the same reason, it was discovered that using 3000 µl ml of liquid
was preferable than 10000 µl ml. Small vials were appropriate for the experiment with a
volume of 4 cm3. Employing 3 ml of water as the liquid medium gave off a good signal for
detection without oversaturating it. Based on this, later similar experiments were carried
out using 3000 µl of DI-water in small vials, and 50-80 mg dried samples were embedded
in water.
From the recorded spectra the concentration of NaFl in the solution can be calculated
by using the earlier set up calibration line. Using the measured dried weight of the sam-
ples, the weight of NaAlg in the sample can be calculated, by using the results from the
composition of the processed sample (Section 4.5). Since the amount of NaFl and NaAlg
are constant during the processing, the total content of NaFl in the dried samples can be
calculated in the processed samples. By performing these calculations for the samples that
were measured by the extraction experiment, an extraction profile can be created. This
can provide valuable information on how fast the samples leach the loaded compound. For
applications such as drug delivery, having a controlled release profile is essential.
Throughout most part of the project, a fixed sample composition of AW100G25 was used.
For this reason, in the entries of the different samples, A will refer to a composition of
AW100G25 that has been hot pressed. The only time when the composition was changed
will be discussed in Section 4.9.
The first sample with a composition of A NaFl0.01 D was measured for extraction, where
NaFl0.01 refers to 10−2 M NaFl water solution loading and D for drying before being mea-
sured for extraction. The extraction profile of A NaFl0.01 D can be seen in the Figure
below.
Figure 4.10: The extracted amount of colorant of the total content as a function of time.
During the experiment, it was observed that the sample was rapidly releasing NaFl
into the solution judged by its intense color. After 40 minutes the plasticized alginate
35
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
matrix was destructed and much of it was dissolved in the solution. After a few hours,
the sample could no longer be spotted. It has completely dissolved and a homogenous,
viscous solution was obtained. The observations align with the results seen on 4.10. A
sharp release is seen at minutes 5 and 10. This is followed by a moderate decrease in
extraction rate. This could be for the reason that in order to extract more NaFl, the
colorant needs to diffuse into the surface of the matrix and the matrix needs some time
to be destructed by water. Note that no extraction sample was taken after 40 minutes as
the viscosity increased so drastically, that the results would not have been reliable. The
solution became too viscous for precise volume measurements using a micropipette.
Figure 4.11 illustrates the process, starting from the extraction measurement until the
characterization of their extraction profile.
Figure 4.11: Schematic illustration of the procedure from sampling to the evaluation of the inves-
tigated samples.
4.8
Improving the water stability of plasticized sodium alginate sample
by crosslinking
In order to improve the stability and restrain capability of the matrix, NaAlg molecules
can be crosslinked with each other. As mentioned earlier, a widely used method for this
is the addition of divalent cations.
Earlier, Rhim et al. prepared water resistant NaAlg films [50]. During his experiments,
NaAlg was crosslinked using two different methods. In one, the addition of calcium ions
was directly mixed in the solution that was solvent casted later. The other, immersion
method included putting the produced samples into a calcium ion solution for five min-
utes. After that the calcium solution was removed and the films were dried. His results
highlighted that complete water insolubility was reached only by the immersion method.
Since, there was no available data for hot pressed not for extruded plasticized alginate,
both methods were investigated.
36
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
With regards to this project, the direct mixing of calcium ions instead compared to the
immersion method is simpler and does not add an extra step into processing. Moreover,
since the system includes water soluble additives (colorant or enzyme) the direct mixing
of calcium ions would be advantageous compared to the immersion method as there would
be no loss of material that needs to be accounted for. For this reason, first, the direct
mixing of calcium ions was studied. The direct addition of calcium ions into the plasticized
alginate was performed by substituting DI water from the recipe with calcium chloride
(CaCl2) solution.
The downside of using this method is that the amount of available
calcium ions in the sample is limited compared to the immersion method.
Figure 4.12: A schematic figure showing the processing steps after cutting for the different samples.
Images after the immersion and drying are not added to the figure as their appearance did not
change noticeably.
Note that as mentioned above, the direct Ca2+ addition was implemented
during the mixing step.
For the direct addition of calcium ion into the plasticized sodium alginate, concentra-
tions of 0.2 M and 0.4M CaCl2 solutions with 10−2 M NaFl were prepared. The mixed
samples with the direct addition of calcium ions made the appearance of the material
more powder alike and the color was brighter than the original A NaFl0.01. The results
of extraction experiments of the direct calcium addition are seen in Figure 4.13.
37
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.13: The extracted amount of colorant of the total content as a function of time for the
reference and for the direct addition of calcium ion samples. In this figure, A NaFl0.01 D represents
the 0 M Ca2+ sample.
All the mentioned samples were not stable in water during the extraction. After minute
40, the samples could not be removed from the water by tweezers, since there was such
a small amount that has not dissolved yet. The sample after 1 hour could no longer be
spotted as they dissolved completely. Samples for the extraction profile were not taken
after 40 minutes because the solution became too viscous to precisely pipette.
Figure 4.13 highlights that there was no significant difference in the restrain ability of the
matrix with regards to colorant leaching between 0, 0.2, and 0.4 M Ca2+ samples. What
is also noticeable, is the high deviation between the same samples. This can be due to the
lack of water stability in all samples by the matrix. A possible explanation for why there
was not any significant difference in terms of water stability and the restrain ability of the
matrix, coould be understood by calculating the available amount of Ca2+ compared to
the Na+ in the NaAlg sample. In order to crosslink two NaAlg molecules, two Na+ are
exchanged by one Ca2+. For this reason the molar ratio of 2·Ca2+:Na+ was calculated.
The Na+ ions in the sample can be calculated by dividing the mass of the NaAlg by the
molar mass of the repeating unit in the NaAlg since each repeating unit contains one Na+
molecule. Table 4.5 shows the calculated molar ratio of 2·Ca2+:Na+ for the two different
directly mixed samples.
Table 4.5: The calculated Ca2+:Na+ ratio for the prepared samples.
0.2 M Ca2+
0.4 M Ca2+
NaAlg (g)
7.623
6.021
CaCl2 (g)
0.163
0.233
Ca2+ (mol)
1.47E-03
2.10E-03
Repeating unit NaAlg (mol)
3.85E-02
3.04E-02
molar ratio 2·Ca2+:Na+
0.08
0.14
38
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
As depicted in the Table above, the loaded amount of Ca2+ in the samples were
limited compared to the amount of Na+.
To follow up wether further increasing the
concentration of the loaded CaCl2 solution would make any improvement, 1.0 M Ca2+
was prepared. Unfortunately, this high amount of Ca2+ caused the material to be too
excessively powdery. The 1.0 M Ca2+ samples did not form a stable sample after hot
pressing and just by touching it fell apart into tiny pieces.
As a conclusion of the direct mixing of Ca2+ into the plasticized sodium alginate, it was
found that no water-stable samples could be prepared using this method. For this reason,
the investigation was continued with the immersion method.
The main advantage of the immersion method compared to the direct addition of Ca2+
is that mainly NaAlg from the surface will be crosslinked, which is essential to the water
stability. Moreover, the samples can be exposed to much higher Ca2+, as it does not need
to be loaded into the samples.
As a starting point, 5g / 100 ml concentration of Ca2+ was used similarly as in [50]. Rhim
reported that by immersing films for 5 minutes in 5g / 100 ml Ca2+ solution, films became
completely water-insoluble.
The loss of colorant was calculated by measuring the UV-Vis absorbance of the CaCl2
bath after the treatment. This turned out to be 12.1 ± 0.6 % of the original NaFl content.
In order to be able to precisely follow the calculations, it is important to account for the
losses of the colorant/enzyme if possible. However, it should be noted that if the samples
would have been put into a Ca2+ bath that already contained colorant, the loss could have
been limited, as the driving force of the process would have been much smaller.
While carrying out the experiments, it was noted that the samples appeared to be im-
proved significantly in terms of water stability. To investigate the long-term stability of
the samples, they were left on the rolling board for an extended period of time. How-
ever, the samples after 16 hours were completely dissolved. The figure below shows the
A NaFl0.01 CaI5 ND samples after 1 hour and after 16 hours of being exposed to water.
39
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.14: A NaFl0.01 CaI5 ND samples after 1 hour (top) and after 16 hours (bottom) of being
exposed to water.
As seen, the samples appeared to be much more stable after 1 hour compared to the
direct calcium addition, although in a longer time they were not stable enough.
The extraction test results of both wet tested after crosslinking and after drying are shown
in Figure 4.15. The total NaFl content of each sample was calculated on the weight of the
alginate from the dried weight.
Figure 4.15: The extracted amount of colorant of the total content as a function of time for
5-minute dip in the Ca2+ bath. The shown extracted amount is referring to the content after
immersion.
The results indicated that water stability and the restrain ability of the colorant were
improved by immersing the samples in Ca2+ from minute 5 until minute 20. However, the
samples are still not stable in aqueous media for longer times, which is crucial for using
40
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
enzyme immobilized samples as a reusable catalyst.
After this experiment, it was suggested that the drying step before immersion is non-vital,
as one drying step after the immersion is enough to remove the water content from the
sample [51].
To investigate why the immersion was not sufficient, the molar ratio 2·Ca2+:Na+ was
calculated for the above mentioned immersion method. In case of a sample weighing 70
mg dried, the molar ratio 2·Ca2+:Na+ is 33.2. This indicates that the available amount
of Ca2+ is more than adequate to crosslink NaAlg. The other possibility, for why the
samples after immersion were still water soluble is the time spent in the Ca2+ bath. in
the subsequent experiment, the immersion times were increased from 5 minutes to 15
minutes. The concentration of the bath was not changed. The loss of colorant during the
15 minutes of immersion was determined as 27.9 ± 0.8 %. The results of both wet tested
after crosslinking and after drying are shown in Figure 4.17.
Figure 4.16: The extracted amount of colorant of the total content as a function of time for
15-minute dip in the Ca2+ bath. The shown extracted amount is referring to the content after
immersion.
The figure above showcases that the restrain ability of the matrix was significantly
improved by using 15 minutes of immersion in Ca2+ bath. The water stability was also
improved for the non-dried samples, however over the time of a few days their structure
was destructed. By increasing the immersion time to 15 minutes, the samples that were
dried after the immersion became water-insoluble. At the time of writing the thesis, they
are still stable even though they have been exposed to water for more than a month.
To conclude the crosslinking investigation by using Ca2+, the direct addition of Ca2+ did
not modify the stability and extraction profile significantly. However, with the immersion
method, a material was prepared that is stable in an aqueous medium with a moderate
leaching profile of the loaded compound.
The results suggest that by using different
immersion times in the Ca2+ bath and drying treatment, the leaching profile of the loaded
41
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
plasticized sodium alginate can be modified. The main advantage of stabilized plasticized
alginate samples is that a controlled release profile of the loaded colorant was achieved,
with an approximately directly proportional release over time.
4.9
Impact of plasticizer on the extraction profile of the loaded com-
pound
The applied composition of AW100G25, which was used for the majority of the project
was suggested based on previous experiences.
Prior to this project, experiments have
been carried out on plasticized sodium alginate to investigate the processing and material
properties. It was found that AW100G25 provides a composition with regard to material
properties and processability.
The materials used in drug delivery and in enzyme immobilization do not need to compete
with the mechanical properties of commercial polymers, given the fact that their appli-
cation does not demand it. This provides the opportunity to find a compromise between
the properties of the material, aiming to enhance its restrainability. With this goal, the
glycerol content was changed to two different levels in the composition of the samples.
The extraction profiles of the prepared samples are shown below in the Figure.
It was noted during the sample processing (when the mixture was put into the hot pressing
mold) that samples with increased glycerol content were much softer. while the sample
with decreased glycerol level was much stiffer and it was more challenging to form into
the desired shape in the mold.
Figure 4.17: The extracted amount of colorant of the loaded content as a function of time. The
shown extracted results are referring to the expected content after immersion.
The results suggest that with increased glycerol content, the leachability of the loaded
compound increased. There is a significant difference between AW100G37.5 and AW100G25
from minute 10. Higher glycerol content increased the distance between sodium alginate
42
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
due to its plasticizing effect. The increased chains between the polymer chains could be re-
sponsible for why more NaFl could be extracted over a given time. This increased spacing
inside the material allows for improved accessibility of NaFl by water.
The results of AW100G12.5 demonstrated a significant improvement at minute 5 and
10 compared to AW100G25. Unfortunately, the samples of AW100G12.5 exhibited un-
expectedly high deviations from minute 20.
The observed high deviation between the
samples could be possibly due to possible inhomogeneity in the sample. As it was men-
tioned, it was noted during processing that the sample with decreased glycerol levels was
more challenging to take out from the speed mixing cup into the hot pressing mold. It is
possible that due to the increased rigidity of the sample (by the lack of plasticizer), the
speed mixing was not entirely sufficient to ensure uniformity in this case.
The results imply that that the restrain ability of the plasticized sodium alginate matrix
is inversely proportional to the level of plasticizer in the matrix. However, the statistical
analysis did not provide conclusive evidence in the case of AW100G12.5.
4.10
Enzyme activity experiment using lipase loaded plasticized sodium
alginate
During the waiting period for the arrival of chemicals required for the enzyme assay, a
calibration line was established for the chromogenic substrate. As later discussed, the
calibration line remained unused for subsequent calculations due to the inactivity of the
loaded enzymes.
Figure 4.18: The calibration line of the chromogenic substrate (4-Nitrophenol) of the lipase enzyme
assay.
Lipase enzymes In order to eschew the denaturalization of the enzymes by being ex-
posed to elevated temperatures, samples were dried at room temperature for one day after
hot pressing.
For the investigation of the initial activity of the lipase, samples were taken after 5, 15,
and 30 minutes. To ensure that the lipase solution contains active enzymes, 100 µl enzyme
43
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
solution was measured directly into the assay and samples were taken at the same time.
In the case of enzyme solution, a peak was observed on the UV-Vis spectra at 400 nm.
No signal of lipase activity was observed in the lipase loaded plasticized alginate samples.
Figure 4.19 shows the UV-Vis peak of the formed chromogenic substrate (4-Nitrophenol).
Figure 4.20 shows the same region of the UV-Vis spectra, as seen there was not any
compound exhibiting absorption at that particular wavelength.
Figure 4.19: The progress of absorbance spectra over time of direct lipase addition into the assay.
Figure 4.20: The progress of absorbance spectra over time by immersing A˙Ld in the assay.
The same samples were measured after one day. The reaction of the directly added
enzymes further proceeded as indicated from the peak of absorbance of roughly 2.5 at
400nm. On the other hand, still, no signal was observed by the enzyme loaded plasticized
alginate. It was noted that the sample after one day still has not significantly disintegrated
or neither swollen in the 2-methyl-2butanol, shown in Figure 4.21.
44
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.21: Lipase loaded plasticized alginate sample did not get swollen in 2M2B in a day.
The recorded UV-Vis spectra of the enzymatic assay after one day is shown in Figure
4.22.
Figure 4.22: The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra of after one day in the enzyme assay.
The reason why no enzymatic was found could be because of multiple possibilities.
The enzymes might have lost their activity during processing or the enzymes inside the
sample could not actively catalyze the reaction due to the lack of swelling. In case to
avoid the possibility that the results were due to an error during sample preparation,
the experiment with lipase loaded plasticized alginate was repeated. Similar results were
attained as discussed above, no activity was seen in the enzyme loaded samples.
4.11
Enzyme activity experiment using HRP loaded plasticized sodium
alginate
In order to investigate why no enzymatic activity was found in the lipase assay, HRP
loaded plasticized alginate samples were prepared. The reason for this choice was that this
enzyme was readily available at the laboratory and the enzymatic assay is carried out in
a phosphate buffer solution. By using water based enzyme assay, the plasticized alginate
can be swollen and dissolved. The HRP assay operates by catalyzing the oxidation of
2,2-Azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)diammonium salt (ABTS), producing
45
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
colorful oxidized ABTS radicals. The oxidation reaction of ABTS by hydrogen peroxide
with the presence of HRP is seen below in Figure 4.24.
Figure 4.23: Schematic reaction of ABTS and H2O2 in the presence of HRP.
In contrast to the unsuccessful lipase activity tests, the HRP loaded plasticized sodium
alginate samples had signals of active HRP during the enzymatic assay indicated by color
change of the solution.
Initially, there was some unexpected signal coming from the
blank assay sample during the first HRP assay tests. The origin of the signal was not
completely understood, there might have been some cross-contamination with the direct
enzyme addition when the blank was prepared. To overcome this issue, a blank from a
similar later experiment was used for the evaluation. The blank samples for the HRP
assays consisted of ABTS solution in buffer with the addition of hydrogen peroxide. In
the following experiments, this signal of the blank was a baseline, without any signal,
indicating that there should have been some error in the beginning.
oxidized ABTS radical has multiple characteristic absorbance peaks at wavelengths 415
nm, 645 nm, 734 nm, and 815 nm. The most commonly used among of these peaks is at
415 nm, due to the highest absorption [52]. From the recorded spectra it was noted that
the blank and the samples possessed high absorbance in the UV region, of which caused
not complete separation with the peak of oxidized ABTS peak at 415 nm. For this reason,
the second most absorbing peak around 734 nm was selected for the oxidized ABTS radical
identification. In the measured samples, the peak located at 734nm in the literature was
usually between 738-742 nm. This shift can be due to, different assay conditions such as
temperature, pH. The absorbance at 740 nm was used for the evaluation.
The blank corrected absorbance results at 740 nm are shown in the Figure below for
sample A HRPl 1dRTD.
46
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.24: Absorbance at 740 nm of the enzymatic assay for HRP activity experiment using
A HRPl 1dRTD samples.
The obtained results had a notable amount of deviation between different samples.
From the corrected results it seems that there was already a significant amount of HRP
activity by minute 5. Unfortunately, this was overlooked during the first evaluation of
the experiment due to the error with the blank sample. The original conclusion of this
experiment was that the sample needs more time to reach a significant activity, but it
contains active enzymes. It would have been interesting to investigate the kinetics of the
active HRP enzymes by measuring HRP activity for instance after every minute in the
assay.
Based on previous observations, working with the protein solutions used in the Brad-
ford assay (discussed in detail in Section 4.12) typically had concentrations ranging from
approximately 1-10 µg/mL. Similarly, in the work of Behrouzifar et al. the concentration
in which deposition of HRP was made to a surface fell within a comparable concentration
range [53]. Grounded on this fact and the experience, a solution of HRP was prepared so
that the final HRP concentration in the assay would be in the range of 1-10 µg/mL.
In order to acquire information about how much of the enzyme activity decreased by pro-
cessing, a direct enzyme solution of HRP was added to the assay. The used concentration
of HRP was lower than the calculated dissolved amount at 5 minutes of A HRPl 1dRTD
(from Bradford assay results, ∼12 µg/mL). It was expected that the enzyme activity
of direct added of HRP would be considerably higher than the processed samples. The
measured absorbance at 740nm of A HRPl 1dRTD after 5 minutes in the assay was 0.21
± 0.03. While for the directly added enzyme, it was 1.77 ± 0.07 throughout the first 30
min. The value is given for the first 30 min, since only one direct added enzyme sample
was prepared and the absorbance was not increasing over time, indicating that likely the
reaction stopped. The fact that the direct added enzyme with 7.8 µg/mL catalyzed the
reaction so that absorbance of 1.77 was measured while when 12 µg/mL was dissolved
47
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis
from the HRP loaded plasticized sodium alginate it was only 0.21 implies that a significant
amount of enzyme lost their activity during processing.
The problem with the blank sample in the experiment of A HRPl 1dRTD led to follow-
up experiments, which might no longer be the most optimal choice. It was decided that
stabilized samples with similar composition will be measured for HRP activity with sam-
ples taken after 10, 30, 120, and 240 minutes of extraction in the assay. The samples were
taken after longer durations to ensure sufficient time for the HRP enzymes to become
active. This decision was based on the expectation that stabilized samples would release
fewer enzymes into the assay.
Due to time constraints, it was not possible to thoroughly investigate all the factors that
could potentially impact enzyme activity. As a consequence, it was decided to forego the
room temperature drying of the stabilized samples at room temperature. Instead, they
were stored in a refrigerator after processing. This alternative approach was chosen to
ensure the samples remained stable and viable while minimizing the risk of any undesired
changes or degradation.
The blank corrected absorbance results at 740 nm for the stabilized A HRPl CaI15 ND
below is plotted below in Figure
Figure 4.25: Absorbance at 740 nm of the enzymatic assay for HRP activity experiment using
A HRPl CaI15 ND samples.
There was no significant difference between the absorbance of samples at 10, 30, and
120 minutes which indicates that it is possible that the reaction has stopped. The signal
in the sample after 240 minutes was substantially reduced. To further investigate why the
absorbance reduced over time, all the vials were stored overnight after the experiments.
The next day it was found that all of the extracts had lost their signal (color vanished),
indicating that the color source (oxidized ABTS radical) was not stable enough.
In a final experiment, both the activity and extraction of HRP into the assay were
monitored. In the meantime, from parallelly carried out Bradford assay measurements,
48
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis
it seemed necessary to increase the HRP loading in order to have enough signal for the
evaluation of the Bradford assay experiments. For this reason, the HRP loading for this
experiment was increased to three times the level of the previously mentioned samples
(A HRPl 1dRTD and A HRPl CaI15 ND).
In the Figure below, the HRP activity is shown for A CCHRPl CaI15 ND. The samples
were subjected hourly to a new assay to evaluate their reusability and measure the activity.
Figure 4.26: Absorbance at 740 nm of the enzymatic assay for HRP activity experiment using
A CCHRPl CaI15 ND samples.
Figure 4.27 depicts the relative HRP activity of the individual samples compared to
their activity in the first hour.
Figure 4.27: The calculated relative activity compared to the first hour based on the absorbance
at 740 nm for the A CCHRPl CaI15 ND samples.
As seen in Figure 4.26 and Figure 4.27, The HRP activity was the highest in the first
hour and gradually decreased with each subsequent hour until hour 5, where no HRP
49
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
activity was measured.
This experiment showed that HRP loaded plasticized sodium
alginate samples can be reused, while the loaded HRP stays active. However, the samples
showed to provide limited activity compared to direct loaded enzyme or to non stabilized
HRP loaded with one third amount.
4.12
Bradford assay
Another important way to characterize the enzyme loaded plasticized sodium alginate
samples is by measuring the total dissolved protein concentration in the solution by Brad-
ford assay. Combining the results from the enzymatic activity and from the Bradford
assay can provide more information on what state the active enzymes are located.
The loaded enzymes in the plasticized sodium alginate can exist in various forms. The
enzymes can be located in the surface or in parts of the material where water can extract
them into the solution. It is also possible that due to restrictions of the crosslinked polymer
molecules, the enzymes can no longer be dissolved but they can still provide activity (suc-
cessful immobilization). Additionally, enzymes can be located in the ”bulk” of the sample
where essentially they have no contact with the liquid phase. Lastly, enzymes could have
also become denatured or aggregated due to elevated temperatures during processing.
First, a calibration was necessary in order to precisely evaluate the results from the Brad-
ford assay. The setup of the calibration line was performed when activity tests with lipase
loaded plasticized alginate was ongoing. Since the exact protein concentration of the orig-
inally used lipase solution was not disclosed by the producer (Novozymes), calibration
was prepared based on readily available Bovine serum albumin (BSA). The assumption
with the use of BSA was that it would have the same activity as other proteins. As later
mentioned, the Bradford assay was carried out on HRP loaded plasticized sodium algi-
nate samples. The structure of BSA and HRP proteins have similarities, their molecular
weight does not differ in magnitude (40 and 66 kDa for HRP and BSA respectively [54,
55]). Moreover, both are globular in nature. Therefore it should be an acceptable approx-
imation. However, for more reliable results, calibration based on HRP should have been
carried out.
From the screening calibration experiment, it was observed that the magnitude of the sig-
nal derived from protein concentrations below 2.5 · 10−6 µg/ml is insufficient for accurate
handling or precise analysis. This is shown in Figure 4.28 below.
50
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.28: Absorbance results from the screening experiment of the Bradford assay.
Unfortunately, from the screening experiment, the upper working limit for the linear
range was not observed. This was performed during the calibration, using triplicate mea-
surements.
The samples prepared for the calibration revealed that the protein concentration of 2.5 ·
10−5 µg/ml was off from the linear fit, seen in Figure 4.29. For this reason, this measuring
point was removed from the calibration line fitting.
Figure 4.29: Absorbance results from the calibration experiment of the Bradford assay.
Finally, the linear fit for the calibration line for the Bradford assay. As seen in Figure
E.1, the points generally fit well the calibration line, although some deviation is noted for
the calibration points.
51
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.30: Absorbance as a function of concentration for the Bradford assay.
4.12.1
Protein release profile of enzyme loaded plasticized sodium alginate
These experiments were performed on the peroxidase-loaded plasticized alginate samples,
to check the relation between the activity and the release of the proteins from the sample.
Bradford assay was not carried out for the lipase-loaded samples, since the results wouldn’t
have correlated with the activity tests due to the applied different aqueous media, as lipase
assay was performed in 2M2B, while Bradford assay in buffer solution.
First, non-stabilized (without Ca2+ bath immersion) HRP loaded plasticized alginate sam-
ples were tested. As expected, from earlier experiments on the same material with colorant
loading, the sample is readily dissolving in water. This process made the determination of
the dissolved enzyme more challenging, as the samples released more enzymes than what
was earlier determined for the working range for the Bradford assay. To resolve this and
have the desired protein concentration for the assay, the taken samples were diluted with
DI-water in a small vial.
It was noted that some of the recorded spectra were shifted with a constant value at all
wavelengths during Bradford assay measurements. This phenomenon led to an additional
’baseline’, which, if not corrected for, would have yielded incomprehensible results. An ex-
ample is shown below in Figure 4.31. This of error was more significant and was discovered
when stabilized samples were tested.
52
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.31: The recorded absorbance of A HRPl 1dRTD samples. As seen some of the spectra
are shifted at all wavelengths compared to the others.
The origin of this error was not identified, it could have been coming from different
sources such as impurities in the solution or in the microplate, instrument noise, or from
particles. From the calibration of the Bradford Assay by BSA it was seen that the peak
at 596 nm is not symmetrical due to the dye shifting in absorbance. In the evaluation of
the Bradford assay experiments, to account for this error the absorbance of the peak was
calculated by deducting the absorbance of 800 nanometers from the absorbance at 596
nm. The absorbance at 800 nm was chosen to be used as correction since no compounds
in the samples exhibited absorption in that region, and the absorbance returned to the
baseline value from the peak of the assay.
The TGA results of A HRPl 1dRTD indicated that the moisture content was exten-
sively reduced to roughly 7% by 1 day room temperature drying after processing. The
calculated extraction profile of HRP from sample A HRPl 1dRTD is shown below in Figure
4.32.
53
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.32: Extraction of proteins from HRP-loaded plasticized sodium alginate samples as a
function of time.
Comparing the Figure above with the same material just with colorant loading (Figure
4.10), shows that more colorant was extracted than protein at all measuring points. How-
ever, after 40 minutes the results are no longer significantly different. Likely, the colorant
loaded samples exhibited a higher rate of extraction in the beginning than the enzyme
loaded due to the size difference of the molecules. NaFl molecules could potentially diffuse
to the surface and be extracted much easier than peroxidase enzyme.
After a certain
amount of time, the diffusion may no longer be the main source of extraction, as much
of the NaAlg matrix is destructed and dissolved by this time. This can be the reason
why after 40 minutes no significant difference was seen since all of the remaining loaded
molecules are readily available for water extraction.
Stabilized samples of similar HRP loading level as above mention non-stabilized were also
prepared. The applied conditions of the Ca2+ bath immersion was the same when using
colorant, one sample was placed into 10 ml of 5g CaCl2 / 100 ml for 15 minutes. After the
immersion, excess water was removed from the surface of the samples by a paper tissue.
The instruction manual of a commercial Bradford protein assay by Bio-Rad [56], high-
lights that the Bradford assay is compatible with up to 40mM CaCl2. The concentration
of CaCl2 in the immersion bath is roughly ten times more than that limit. For this rea-
son, the loss of the enzyme during the immersion was not measured. For this reason, for
the evaluation of samples by Bradford assay that underwent Ca2+ bath immersion, the
extracted amount of the total loading is shown.
In the following Figure, the extraction profile of HRP from sample A HRPl CaI15 ND
is shown.
54
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.33: The calculated release profile of HRP from sample A HRPl CaI15 ND.
As seen, the calculated results are not interpretable completely, as the calculated ex-
tracted amount of HRP is negative. In addition, the results are characterized by high
deviation. To investigate what could have caused this problem, a thorough examination
of the recorded spectra data was conducted. It was discovered that the high retention of
stabilized plasticized sodium alginate, coupled with the considerable loading of HRP was
the root cause. This led to an insufficient amount of HRP being extracted from the assay.
Additionally, the extracted HRP levels did not reach the signal intensity required to align
with the established calibration line for the assay.
To successfully characterize the extraction profile of HRP stabilized plasticized sodium
alginate, samples were prepared with four times increased HRP loading. To make sure
that enough signal is coming from the extracts, samples were taken every hour for five
hours. The results of this experiment are shown in Figure 4.34.
55
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis
Figure 4.34: Extraction of proteins from sample A CCHRPl CaI15 ND.
The results indicate that the majority of the extracted HRP was dissolved in the first
two hours and then gradually leveled off. It seems that the extraction of HRP stopped
after 4 hours. These results align well with the HRP activity experiments, where similarly
the activity decreased over time and no activity was found at the fifth hour. Roughly
3.5% of the original loaded HRP was extracted after 4 hours. This does not justify the
quality of plasticized sodium alginate as a carrier matrix for loaded compounds such as
enzymes. The hypothesis of whether why no HRP activity was found by the fifth hour
was not tested. Several possibilities exist, including the potential deactivation of HRP due
to prolonged exposure, and the loss of enzyme viability during processing. As a follow-up
to this project, it would be advantageous to examine the behavior of various kinds of
loaded chemicals or do additional research on the samples of stabilized plasticized alginate
that have been known to remain stable over time. This line of research would provide
valuable insights into the suitability of the carrier matrix for various loaded substances
and contribute to the academic understanding of the material’s performance and potential
applications.
56
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis
5
Conclusion
Thermoprocessable plasticized sodium alginate was prepared by speed mixing water and
glycerol with sodium alginate. The loss of chemicals during processing was investigated
by using TGA and UV-Vis. It was found that from the hot pressed plasticized sodium al-
ginate samples only water was evaporated from 60°C drying. Applying 24 hours of drying
at 60°C was effective to reduce the moisture in the processed samples.
Calibration was set up for the NaFl loading and an extraction method was established to
characterize the produced samples. It was found that plasticized sodium alginate samples
without any treatment after processing were dissolving in water. To improve the water
stability of the samples, ion exchange of Ca2+ was investigated. It was found that direct
mixing of Ca2+ did not change the water stability nor the leachability of the colorant.
However, it was found that immersion in Ca2+ bath after hot pressing significantly im-
proved water stability. Yet, the time spent in the immersion bath and applying drying
after the immersion was crucial. It was discovered that applying 15 minute immersion fol-
lowed by drying made the samples completely water insoluble and significantly enhanced
the leachability of the colorant. Later, the effect of plasticizer loading was explored. The
results indicated that the restrain ability of the plasticized sodium alginate matrix is in-
versely proportional to the level of plasticizer in the matrix.
Subsequently, The colorant loading was replaced with enzymes. The activity of loaded
enzymes was monitored using an enzymatic assay. The extraction profile of the enzyme
loaded samples was followed by using the Bradford assay.
First, lipase enzymes were
loaded, though there was a problem with the enzymatic assay. The alcohol used in the
assay did not swell nor dissolve the plasticized sodium alginate samples. Lipase enzyme
loading were replaced to HRP. It was revealed, that the loaded HRP was still active after
processing. However, from the comparison to directly loaded HRP, it seems that the ma-
jority of the loaded HRP lost its activity. Water stabilized HRP loaded samples remained
active after four hours exposed to the assay. From the Bradford assay experiments, it
seems that the HRP activity was coming from dissolved enzymes. When the extraction
of enzymes leveled off by the fifth hour, no HRP activity was measured in the peroxidase
assay.
All in all, thermoprocessable plasticized sodium alginate might be a suitable material to
use as a bio-based enzyme carrier. However, more extensive research is needed on the ma-
terial in terms of the effect of processing and using different loaded compounds. There is
evidence that the release of the loaded compound from plasticized sodium alginate could
be controlled by Ca2+ ion exchange using the immersion method. The option to con-
trol the extraction profile of the loaded compound by a simple ion exchange widens the
potential of the material for more application.
57
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis
5.1
Future work
Due to the limited time, there are still numerous possible options that would be interesting
to investigate. For instance, the kinetic activity of HRP loaded plasticized alginate could
be assessed to gain valuable information about the performance of the loaded enzymes.
Additionally, in order to increase the precision of the Bradford assay, calibration could be
made by using HRP solutions as standard. Also, more systematically built up experimen-
tal work for to assess enzymatic activity and protein release of the samples.
In future work, it would be interesting to apply extrusion as a processing technique to
produce plasticized sodium alginate samples. Extrusion could be evaluated by comparing
the properties of the produced samples with the ones from hot pressing. Extruded plasti-
cized sodium alginate samples could be suitable for different applications such as 3D food
printing, functional food ingredients, biomedical materials, and biocatalysis.
Additionally, it would be beneficial to consider the influence of different types of sodium
alginate with varying M:G ratios, explore alternative plasticizers, and optimize the plas-
ticized sodium alginate formulation for specific product requirements. Enzymatic activity
of the loaded enzyme could be assessed using different enzymes, that are less prone to lose
activity under elevated temperature. It would be also helpful, to optimize the plasticized
sodium alginate with regard to one specific application, as it seems that the properties of
the material can be highly controlled by the processing.
58
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis
6
Experimental work
6.1
Weight loss during drying
To investigate the weight lost during drying, samples with the same composition were put
into the oven for 24 and 72 hours at 60°C. The weight of the samples was measured before
putting them into the oven (directly after hot pressing) and after taking them out of the
oven. The composition of the mixed sample for this experiment is shown below in Table
6.1.
Table 6.1: The composition of the used sample.
Added amount (g)
Entry
Comment
Alginate
Glycerol
Water
Process test
Drying step test
4.4269
1.0746
3.5556
59
==PAGE:61==
Master Thesis
6.2
Composition of the processed sample
TGA measurements were conducted on samples that underwent hot pressing followed by
a 24-hour drying period at 60°C. Additionally, TGA testing was done on pure NaAlg
powder. For this experiment, the above-mentioned Process test sample was used. The
composition of the plasticized sodium alginate sample is shown in Table 6.1.
The TGA measurements were performed on a Discovery TGA from TA Instruments.
Samples weighing between 10 to 30 mg were put into the instrument. A heating rate of
10 °C /minute was applied, and the measuring temperature range was from 25°C to 900°C
under N2 atmosphere. Table 6.2 shows the measured samples by TGA.
Table 6.2: The measured samples by TGA.
Entry
Comment
AW100G25 HP D
hot pressed and dried plasticized sodium alginate
NaAlg
pure sodium alginate powder
60
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis
6.3
Calibration line of sodium fluorescein
To screen the linear ’working’ range of the colorant NaFl solution, a concentrated 10−2
M solution was prepared by dissolving 0.1889 g NaFl in 50 cm3 DI-water. Some of the
prepared solution was diliuted in 1:1 and a 1:9 ratio by DI-water, resulting 5·10−3 and 10−3
M concentrations respectively. Further diluted solutions were prepared by 1:9 dilution of
DI water. In the end, the prepared range of solutions were between 10−2 M and 10−7 M.
Following the initial screening, three stock solution of 10−4 M was prepared at 250 cm3.
The actual concentrations are shown in Table 6.3. Further dilutions of the stock solutions
were prepared according to Table 6.4. The diluted solutions of the stock solutions were
mixed thoroughly. From each prepared solution (stock solution and their dilution), 200 µl
was taken pipetted into a microplate and was measured by UV-Vis spectrometer.
Table 6.3: Measured weights of NaFl to make the stock solutions and their concentration at 250
cm3.
Sample number
Weight [g]
Concentration at 250 cm3 [M]
1
0.0099
1.05·10−4
2
0.0105
1.12·10−4
3
0.0099
1.05·10−4
Table 6.4: Dilution of NaFl stock solutions for the calibration.
Desired concentration [M]
Amount of stock solution (10−4M) [µl]
Amount of DI-water [µl]
7.5·10−5
1500
500
5·10−5
1000
1000
2.5·10−5
500
1500
10−5
200
1800
7.5·10−6
150
1850
5·10−6
100
1900
Table 6.17 summarises the prepared solutions to obtain the calibration line of NaFl by
UV-Vis spectroscopy.
Table 6.5: Prepared solutions for NaFl calibration.
Entry
Comment
Concentration range
1
Screening
10−2-10−7 M
2
Calibration, triplicate
10−4 to 5·10−6M
61
==PAGE:63==
Master Thesis
6.4
Establishing method for extraction
Plasticized sodium alginate samples were prepared at two different NaFl loading levels,
10−3 M and 10−2 M. The loading of NaFl was performed by replacing DI water to NaFl
solution during the sample preparation.
The 10−2 M NaFl solution was prepared by
dissolving 0.1880 g NaFl in 50cm3 water. The 10−3 M solution was obtained by tenfold
dilution of the 10−2 M solution.
The compositions of the prepared samples are seen in Table 6.6 below.
Table 6.6: Mixtures of plasticized alginates and their loadings.
Added amount (g)
Entry
Alginate
Glycerol
Aqueous phase
Aqueous phase loading
Initial extraction test 1
4.4174
1.0662
3.5717
10−3 M NaFl
Initial extraction test 2
4.4859
1.0448
3.5609
10−2 M NaFl
Once conditions for extraction were set ( 3000 µl of DI-water in a small vial), plasticized
sodium alginate sample with 10−2 M NaFl loading was tested. First, 3000 µl of DI-water
was pipetted into a small vial using a micropipette. Then the sample was put into the
water. The vials were sealed and put into a rolling board. After the desired time, 200 µl
of the solution was measured into a microplate. Samples were taken after 5, 10, 20, and,
40 minutes of mixing to monitor the extraction of the loaded compound. A blank sample
was also used without any colorant loading with a similar composition to use as a blank
(reference) spectra. The pipetted samples in the microplate were measured using UV-Vis
spectrometer.
Table 6.7: The weight of the samples that were tested by extraction experiment.
Sample name
Weight (mg)
Replicate I.
Replicate II.
Replicate III.
A NaFl0.01 Ca0 5&10min
58.3
53.0
47.5
A NaFl0.01 Ca0 20&40min
65.2
48.3
64.8
62
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis
6.5
Improving the water stability of plasticized sodium alginate sample
by crosslinking
Direct Ca2+ addition: CaCl2 was dissolved into the aqueous phase (in NaFl solution or
in water) to prepare the samples. Other than the addition of CaCl2 all processing steps
were identical as before, including the mixing of the compounds and hot pressing, finally
drying. Table 6.8 summarises the composition of the prepared samples for direct Ca2+
addition, except the last row, which is for the samples by Ca2+ immersion. All of the
prepared samples (regardless of the method by which they were prepared) were texted
with water extraction as explained above in Section 6.4.
Immersion method: Hot-pressed plasticized alginate samples were dried for 24 hours at
60°C, then put into 10 ml of 5g CaCl2 / 100 ml solution for 5 or 15 minutes. After the Ca2+
bath treatment some of the samples were directly tested in the extraction experiment and
others were dried again for 24 hours at 60°C in the oven. To be able to account for the
loss of colorant during the immersion, the UV-Vis absorbance was measured of the Ca2+
baths after the immersion. For the samples with 15-minute immersion, no prior drying
took place before the immersion. The samples from the immersion method were left on
the rolling board for longer times after the extraction measurement was finished. However,
the extraction profile was only recorded for up to 40 minutes for all the samples. Leaving
the samples provided the option to see by the naked eye if the samples are dissolving in
a longer time span. Table 6.8 shows the composition of the prepared samples for these
experiments.
Table 6.8: The prepared and hot pressed samples for the experiments for improving water stability.
Added amount (g)
Entry
Alginate
Glycerol
Aqueous phase
Aqueous phase loading
A NaFl0.01 Ca0.2
8.8382
2.0415
7.3624
0.2 M Ca2+ & 10−2 M NaFl
A NaFl0 Ca0.2
11.1945
2.5500
9.1723
0.2 M Ca2+
A NaFl0.01 Ca0.4
6.9811
1.5121
5.2631
0.4 M Ca2+ & 10−2 M NaFl
A NaFl0 Ca0.4
6.9852
1.5146
5.2499
0.4 M Ca2+
A NaFl0.01 Ca1.0
6.9820
1.5204
5.5964
1.0 M Ca2+ & 10−2 M NaFl
A NaFl0 Ca1.0
7.0102
5.5586
1.5221
1.0 M Ca2+
CaI samples
23.1882
5.0559
16.8257
10−2 M NaFl
The Table below highlights the names for the different samples prepared by Ca2+
immersion method.
Entry
Comment
A NaFl0.01 CaI5 ND
Ca2+ immersion for 5 minutes,non-dried
A NaFl0.01 CaI5 D
Ca2+ immersion for 5 minutes,dried
A NaFl0.01 CaI15 ND
Ca2+ immersion for 15 minutes,non-dried
A NaFl0.01 CaI15 D
Ca2+ immersion for 15 minutes,dried
Table 6.9 lists the weights of the relevant samples that were measured by the extraction
63
==PAGE:65==
Master Thesis
measurement.
Table 6.9: The weight of the samples that were tested by extraction experiment.
Sample name
Weight (mg)
Replicate I.
Replicate II.
Replicate III.
A NaFl0.01 Ca0.2 D 5&10min
56.0
69.6
57.6
A NaFl0.01 Ca0.2 D 20&40min
57.8
53.6
53.8
A NaFl0.01 Ca0.4 D 5&10min
53.1
55.1
68.9
A NaFl0.01 Ca0.4 D 20&40min
57.9
53.0
65.3
A NaFl0.01 Ca1.0 D 5&10min
62.5
64.8
65.3
A NaFl0.01 CaI5 ND 5&10min
70.8
50.0
65.6
A NaFl0.01 CaI5 ND 20&40min
67.5
61.5
61.9
A NaFl0.01 CaI5 D 5&10min
66.5
61.5
63.4
A NaFl0.01 CaI5 D 20&40min
57.3
65.0
55.7
A NaFl0.01 CaI15 ND 5&10min
115.4
110.0
112.8
A NaFl0.01 CaI15 ND 20&40min
107.6
128.1
92.8
A NaFl0.01 CaI15 D 5&10min
69.7
56.0
77.5
A NaFl0.01 CaI15 D 20&40min
65.6
50.7
58.0
64
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis
6.6
Impact of plasticizer on the loaded colorant extraction resistance
During the project, this was the only experiment, where the composition of the plasticized
sodium alginate was changed.
Since in this section, the loading level and processing
conditions are not changed, the entry of the samples will be distinguished only by their
composition. The sample preparation consisted of speed mixing of the components hot
pressing, Ca2+ bath immersion for 15 minutes, and drying for 24 hours at 60°C. All the
processing steps were performed as explained above and in Section 6.11.
Table 6.10: The different CaI samples that were investigated.
Entry
Alginate
Glycerol
Aqueous phase
Aqueous phase loading
AW100G25
23.1882
5.0559
16.8257
10−2 M NaFl
AW100G12.5
4.6406
0.4995
3.3648
10−2 M NaFl
AW100G37.5
4.6384
1.5647
3.3633
10−2 M NaFl
Table 6.11: The weight of the samples that were tested by extraction experiment.
Sample name
Weight (mg)
Replicate I.
Replicate II.
Replicate III.
AW100G25 5&10min
69.7
56.0
77.5
AW100G25 20&40min
65.6
50.7
58.0
AW100G12.5
63.9
76.0
65.3
AW100G37.5
58.9
70.2
61.9
”””The composition of the plasticizer was changed from the original AW100G25 to
AW100G12.5 and AW100G37.5.
65
==PAGE:67==
Master Thesis
6.7
Enzyme activity experiment using lipase loaded plasticized sodium
alginate
Calibration of the colorful product of the enzymatic assay was prepared. A stock solution
with a concentration of 15 mM 4-nitrophenol was prepared by dissolving 0.0222 g in 10
ml 2-methyl-2-butanol. Further dilutions were made from the 15mM stock solution of 15
mM 4-nitrophenol (9, 6, 3 and 1.5 mM). The dilutions were performed according to the
table below.
Table 6.12: Dilution of 4-nitrophenol 15 mM stock solutions for the calibration.
Desired concentration [M]
Amount of stock solution (15 mM) [µl]
Amount of DI-water [µl]
9.0 mM
3000
2000
6.0 mM
2000
3000
3.0 mM
1000
4000
1.5 mM
500
4500
To make the calibration line of 4-nitrophenol, 10 µL was pipetted from each of the
prepared solutions and transferred to a microliter plate. A buffer solution containing Tris
(50 mM) added HCl (1 M) 5 mL per 100 mL and 0.1 V/V% Triton x-100 surfactant was
prepared. The pH of the samples was adjusted to 8 with 250 µL buffer solution. The
plate was shaken at 700 revolutions per minute (RPM) for 60 seconds and absorbance was
measured (peak at 400 nm).
Sample preparation: For the preparation of lipase loaded plasticized sodium alginate
samples, first, the enzyme solution was measured in a speed mixing cup. The enzymes
prior to use were stored in the fridge. This was followed by a similar procedure for the
preparation of the samples and by hot pressing as explained in the performed methods
Section 6.11. The only difference in terms of sample preparation was that lipase solution
replaced the use of DI water.
Table 6.13: The prepared and hot pressed sample to investigate lipase activity.
Added amount (g)
Entry
Comment
Alginate
Glycerol
Lipase solution
A Ll
Lipase loaded
9.2748
2.0730
6.7071
Colorimetric enzymatic assay of 4-nitrophenyl palmitate ester hydrolysis was followed
by UV-Vis measurements. The processed plasticized alginate sample was introduced to a
solution of 4-nitrophenyl palmitate (6 mM) in 2-methyl-2-butanol (1 ml). To characterize
the enzyme activity, 10µL was extracted after 5, 15, and 30 minutes and after 1.5 days and
transferred to a microliter plate. The pH was adjusted to 8 with 250µL buffer solution.
The plate was shaken at 700 RPM for 60 seconds and absorbance was measured. The blank
sample was measured from the 4-nitrophenyl palmitate solution without the addition of
any sample.
66
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis
Table 6.14: The weight of the measured samples by palmitate assay for lipase activity.
Sample name
Weight (mg)
Replicate I.
Replicate II.
Replicate III.
A Ll 1dD
57.1
63.9
-
Simultaneously to verify the activity of the lipase solution, 100 µL of the original lipase
solution was added to the assay. Samples from the direct enzyme addition (referred as
Ld) were taken at the same time as the loaded plasticized sodium alginate samples.
67
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis
6.8
Enzyme activity experiment using HRP loaded plasticized sodium
alginate
For the preparation of enzyme-loaded plasticized sodium alginate samples, first, the en-
zyme was measured in a speed mixing cup. The enzymes prior to use were stored in the
fridge. Subsequently, water was added to the cup and mixed to prepare a solution. This
was followed by a similar procedure for the preparation of the samples and by hot pressing
as explained in the Performed methods section 6.11.
Table 6.15: The prepared and hot pressed samples to investigate HRP activity.
Added amount (g)
Entry
Comment
Alginate
Glycerol
Water
HRP
A HRPl
HRP loaded
9.2604
1.9934
6.7405
0.0355
A ccHRPl
increased HRP loading
1.7391
0.3838
1.2626
0.0205
A HRPl˙re
Lipase loaded, ND experiment
2.3180
0.5146
1.6701
0.0071
For the quantification of the activity of peroxide enzymes, 1 mM concentration solution
was prepared by dissolving 0.01 gram of 2,2-Azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic
acid)diammonium salt (ABTS) in 20.0 ml phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Similarly to earlier
measurements, the enzymatic assays were measured in a small vial (4 ml). 2 ml of the
above mentioned ABTS solution was measured into a small vial. The ABTS solutions
were always directly prepared before every assay in order to avoid any chance of ABTS
oxidation. Then, 50 µL 3% H2O2 was added into the solution. Finally, enzyme loaded
samples or direct enzyme solution was added into the vial. For the assay, blank samples
consisted of mixing 2ml of the ABTS solution with 50 µL 3% H2O2. After a certain amount
of time, 100 µl sample was taken from the vial to a microplate. UV-Vis absorbance was
recorded of the samples in the microplate.
Table 6.16: The weight of the measured samples by peroxidase assay.
Sample name
Weight (mg)
Replicate I.
Replicate II.
Replicate III.
A HRPl 1dRTD
74.5
76.1
75.8
A HRPl CaI15 ND
104.0
97.7
97.8
A CCHRPl CaI15 ND
98.2
117.2
98.4
For sample A CCHRPl CaI15 ND, where the reusability of the samples was investi-
gated. The activity of HRP was measured by exposing the samples to assay for one hour.
After an hour the samples were removed with the help of a tweezer, the surface of the
samples was dried using a paper towel, and finally, the samples were put into a new assay.
This was performed for each sample for a total of five hours.
Simultaneously to verify the activity of the HRP, a solution was prepared from the
enzyme powder. For that 0.0082 g of HRP powder was dissolved in 50 cm3 DI water.
from this solution, 100 µL was added into the assay. Samples from the direct enzyme
68
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis
addition were taken at the same time as the loaded plasticized sodium alginate samples.
69
==PAGE:71==
Master Thesis
6.9
Bradford assay and calibration
For the determination of dissolved total protein concentration, Bradford assay was used.
The assay procedure included pipetting 150 µL protein-containing solution into a mi-
croplate and mixing with 150 µL Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 dye solution. The mixing
was performed using the micropipette. After the mixing, the sample was left for incubation
at room temperature for 5 minutes and the UV-Vis spectra of the sample was recorded.
The blank samples for the Bradford assay consisted of mixing 150 µL DI-water with 150
µL Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 dye solution.
The dye solution was not available in the lab before the experiment, therefore it was pre-
pared. For this, 0.01 g Coomassie Brilliant blue G 250 was dissolved in 10 ml methanol.
This was followed by the addition of 20 ml phosphoric acid and 170 ml DI-water. The dye
solution was mixed and stored in the fridge before use.
For the calibration of the Bradford assay, Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was dissolved in
water. Initially, the linear working range was screened for the assay with regard to the
protein concentration. BSA solutions were prepared from 1.25 · 10−6 µg/ml until 10−5
µg/ml. The BSA solutions for the screening were prepared from the dilution of a 10−5
µg/ml stock solution.
Consequently, for the calibration line BSA solutions between 5 · 10−6 µg/ml and 5 · 10−5
µg/ml were prepared from a stock solution of 10−3 µg/ml.
Table 6.17: Prepared solutions for BSA calibration.
Entry
Comment
Concentration range [ g/ml]
1
Screening
6.3·10−7 to 5·10−6
2
Calibration, triplicate
5·10−6 to 5·10−5
Note that the measured concentration by the UV-Vis equipment was half of the listed
values, as the assay procedure included 1:1 dilution through the addition of the dye solu-
tion.
After the calibration, samples were characterized using the Bradford assay. enzyme-loaded
plasticized sodium alginate samples were put into a small vial of 2000 µL DI-water. This
to results and discussion: The reason for that amount was that it would have similar
conditions to the peroxidase assay. The small vial was placed into a rolling board under
moderate rolling speed. After the designated times, 150 µL samples were taken from the
vial. The 150 µL sample was then mixed with 150 µL dye solution and proceeded as
explained above.
70
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis
Table 6.18: The weight of the measured samples by the Bradford assay.
Sample name
Weight (mg)
Replicate I.
Replicate II.
Replicate III.
A HRPl 1dD
74.5
76.1
75.8
A HRPl CaI15 ND
95.7
102.0
117.1
A CCHRPl CaI15 ND
95.7
100.9
97.0
Samples of A HRPl 1dD required further dilution before being measured in the assay.
Table 6.19 below shows the used dilutions that resulted in protein concentrations in the
linear range for the Bradford assay.
Table 6.19: The mixed amount of extract from the samples and DI-water before using it in the
Bradford assay.
Time (min)
Volume of sample (µL)
Volume of DI-water (µL)
5
150
0
10
150
150
20
150
600
40
150
750
71
==PAGE:73==
Master Thesis
6.10
Materials
Sodium alginate was supplied by Dupont, Germany. The appearance of sodium alginate
is a yellow-brownish particle, where at least 99 % of the particles can pass through a 25
mesh BS. The viscosity of 1 % solution is between 50 and 70 mPa·s. Bio-based glycerol
(C3H8O3, 99.5 %) was obtained from Emmelev A/S, Denmark.
All other reagents and solvents were of analytical grade and used without further purifi-
cation as obtained from commercial suppliers unless otherwise specified.
6.11
Perfomed methods
Preparation of plasticized sodium alginate Deionized water (100 PHA) and glycerol
(25 PHA) were measured into a speed mixing cup and mixed by shaking for approximately
one minute. Once homogenous a liquid phase was obtained, and sodium alginate was
introduced into the liquid. After the addition of alginate, the cup was sealed and speed
mixed for 1 minute at 3500 RPM.
Hot pressing Hot pressing was performed through a benchtop laboratory manual press
with electrically heated platens model 4386 from Carver. Hot-pressing was performed on
selected samples in circular molds with a diameter of approx. 1.5 cm and a thickness of
approximately 1.5 mm. The applied temperature was set to 100°C and the pressure was
around 300 bar. After 5 minutes of hot pressing, the samples were left to cool until they
could be removed in fragments from the foil on which they had been hot pressed.
TGA measurements were performed on a Discovery TGA from TA Instruments. Samples
weighing between 10 to 30 mg were put into the instrument. A heating rate of 10 °C
/minute was applied, and the measuring temperature range was from 25°C to 900°C under
N2 atmosphere.
UV-Vis spectroscopy was measured using a POLARstar OMEGA from BMG Labtech
equipped with an UV-VIS probe with a resolution of 2 nm between 220 nm and 1000 nm.
In the settings of the software, the correction for the height of the sample was used for
each measurement.
72
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis
References
[1]
Statista. “Annual production of plastics worldwide from 1950 to 2021”. In: (Accessed
20th February 2023). url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/282732/
global-production-of-plastics-since-1950/.
[2]
Sabrina Sultana et al. “Chapter 1 - Polymer blends, IPNs, gels, composites, and
nanocomposites from chitin and chitosan; manufacturing, and applications”. In:
Handbook of Chitin and Chitosan. Ed. by Sreerag Gopi, Sabu Thomas, and Anitha
Pius. Elsevier, 2020, pp. 1–41. isbn: 978-0-12-817966-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/B978-0-12-817966-6.00001-7.
[3]
Mohamed Hassan et al. “Impact of immobilization technology in industrial and
pharmaceutical applications”. In: 3 Biotech 9.440 (2019). doi: 10.1007/s13205-
019-1969-0.
[4]
Junning Cai. “Global status of seaweed production, trade and utilization”. In: (Sea-
weed Innovation Forum Belize, 2021). url: https : / / www . competecaribbean .
org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Global-status-of-seaweed-production-
trade-and-utilization-Junning-Cai-FAO.pdf.
[5]
Rajiv Chandra Rajak, Samuel Jacob, and Beom Soo Kim. “A holistic zero waste
biorefinery approach for macroalgal biomass utilization: A review”. In: Science of
The Total Environment 716.137067 (2020). issn: 0048-9697. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137067.
[6]
Seaweed for Europe. “Hidden champion of the ocean - Seaweed as a growth engine for
a sustainable European future”. In: (Accessed 6th February 2023). url: https://
www.seaweedeurope.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Seaweed_for_Europe-
Hidden_Champion_of_the_ocean-Report.pdf.
[7]
Anatolii Usov, G. Smirnova, and Nina Klochkova. “Polysaccharides of Algae: 55.
Polysaccharide Composition of Several Brown Algae from Kamchatka”. In: Rus-
sian Journal of Bioorganic Chemistry 27 (2001), pp. 395–399. doi: 10.1023/A:
1012992820204.
[8]
AlgeCenter Danmark. “AlgeCenter Danmark publications”. In: (Accessed 17th Febru-
ary 2023). url: https://algecenterdanmark.com/publications.
[9]
Ltd. Qingdao Tian Ronda Agricultural Development Co. “Sodium Alginate for Food
Grade”. In: (Accessed 17th February 2023). url: https://jinlongpang.en.made-
in- china.com/product/vXTmetjyCYkP/China- Sodium- Alginate- for- Food-
Grade-white-powder-.html.
[10]
Arne Haug, Bjørn Larsen, and Olav Smidsrød. “Uronic acid sequence in alginate
from different sources”. In: Carbohydrate Research 32.2 (1974), pp. 217–225. issn:
0008-6215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0008-6215(00)82100-X.
73
==PAGE:75==
Master Thesis
[11]
Ivan Donati and Sergio Paoletti. “Material Properties of Alginates”. In: Alginates:
Biology and Applications. Ed. by Bernd H. A. Rehm. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2009, pp. 1–53. isbn: 978-3-540-92679-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-92679-5_1.
[12]
Øyvind Skaugrud et al. “Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Applications of Alginate
and Chitosan”. In: Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering Reviews 16.1 (1999).
PMID: 10819076, pp. 23–40. doi: 10.1080/02648725.1999.10647970.
[13]
Franklin Lim and Anthony M. Sun. “Microencapsulated Islets as Bioartificial En-
docrine Pancreas”. In: Science 210.4472 (1980), pp. 908–910. issn: 00368075, 10959203.
doi: http://doi.org/10.1126/science.6776628.
[14]
Roxana Gheorghita Puscaselu et al. “Alginate: From food industry to biomedical
applications and management of metabolic disorders”. In: Polymers 12.10 (2020),
pp. 1–30. doi: 10.3390/polym12102417.
[15]
S. Mitura, Alina Sionkowska, and Amit Jaiswal. “Biopolymers for hydrogels in
cosmetics: review”. In: Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Medicine 31.50
(2020). doi: 10.1007/s10856-020-06390-w.
[16]
Kuen Yong Lee and David J. Mooney. “Alginate: Properties and biomedical appli-
cations”. In: Progress in Polymer Science 37.1 (2012), pp. 106–126. issn: 0079-6700.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2011.06.003.
[17]
Sabyasachi Maiti et al. “Adipic acid dihydrazide treated partially oxidized algi-
nate beads for sustained oral delivery of flurbiprofen”. In: Pharmaceutical Develop-
ment and Technology 14.5 (2009). PMID: 19235554, pp. 461–470. doi: 10.1080/
10837450802712658.
[18]
Coloplast US website. “Ostomy, Continence, Interventional Urology, Wound Skin
Care Products”. In: (Accessed 26th January 2023). url: https://www.coloplast.
us/biatain-alginate-en-us.aspx.
[19]
US Food and Drug administration. “Code of Federal Regulations Title 21”. In:
(Accessed 26th January 2023). url: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/
cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=184.1724.
[20]
European Medicines Agency. “Decision regarding sodium alginate products”. In:
(Published 5th March 2021, Accessed 26th January 2023). url: https://www.ema.
europa.eu/en/medicines/human/paediatric- investigation- plans/emea-
002321-pip01-17.
[21]
Gerald Scott. “Why Degradable Polymers?” In: Degradable Polymers: Principles
and Applications. Ed. by Gerald Scott. Springer Netherlands, 2002, pp. 1–15. isbn:
978-94-017-1217-0. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-1217-0_1.
74
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis
[22]
Henry Omoregie Egharevba. “Chemical Properties of Starch and Its Application
in the Food Industry”. In: Chemical Properties of Starch. Ed. by Martins Emeje.
Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2019. Chap. 5, pp. 1–15. isbn: 978-1-83880-116-8. doi: DOI:
10.5772/intechopen.87777.
[23]
Aarsha Surendren et al. “A review of biodegradable thermoplastic starches, their
blends and composites: recent developments and opportunities for single-use plastic
packaging alternatives”. In: Green Chem. 24 (22 2022), pp. 8606–8636. doi: 10.
1039/D2GC02169B.
[24]
Chengcheng Gao, Eric Pollet, and Luc Av´erous. “Properties of glycerol-plasticized
alginate films obtained by thermo-mechanical mixing”. In: Food Hydrocolloids 63
(2017), pp. 414–420. issn: 0268-005X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.
2016.09.023.
[25]
Chengcheng Gao, Eric Pollet, and Luc Av´erous. “Innovative plasticized alginate
obtained by thermo-mechanical mixing: Effect of different biobased polyols systems”.
In: Carbohydrate Polymers 157 (2017), pp. 669–676. issn: 0144-8617. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.10.037.
[26]
Arianna Rech et al. “Recyclable Extrudable Biopolymer Composites from Alginate
and Lignocellulosic Biomass Waste”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
11.24 (2023), pp. 8939–8947. doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.3c01119.
[27]
John W. Donovan. “Phase transitions of the starch–water system”. In: Biopolymers
18.2 (1979), pp. 263–275. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/bip.1979.360180204.
[28]
Marie Matet et al. “Innovative thermoplastic chitosan obtained by thermo-mechanical
mixing with polyol plasticizers”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 95.1 (2013), pp. 241–
251. issn: 0144-8617. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.02.052.
[29]
Hongsheng Liu et al. “Thermal processing of starch-based polymers”. In: Progress
in Polymer Science 34.12 (2009), pp. 1348–1368. issn: 0079-6700. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2009.07.001.
[30]
Abdorreza Nafchi et al. “Thermoplastic starches: Properties, challenges, and prospects”.
In: Starch-St¨arke 65 (2013), pp. 61–72. doi: 10.1002/star.201200201.
[31]
Qian-Qian Li et al. “Retardant effect of sodium alginate on the retrogradation prop-
erties of normal cornstarch and anti-retrogradation mechanism”. In: Food Hydrocol-
loids 69 (2017), pp. 1–9. issn: 0268-005X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodhyd.2017.01.016.
[32]
Seda Bekin et al. “Dielectric, thermal, and swelling properties of calcium ion-crosslinked
sodium alginate film”. In: Polymer Engineering and Science 54.6 (2014), pp. 1372–
1382. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.23678.
75
==PAGE:77==
Master Thesis
[33]
J. P. Soares et al. “Thermal behavior of alginic acid and its sodium salt”. In: Ecl´etica
Qu´ımica 29.Eclet. Qu´ım., 2004 29(2) (2004). issn: 0100-4670. doi: 10.1590/S0100-
46702004000200009.
[34]
R´uben Pereira et al. “Preparation and Characterization of Films Based on Alginate
and Aloe Vera”. In: International Journal of Polymer Analysis and Characterization
16.7 (2011), pp. 449–464. doi: 10.1080/1023666X.2011.599923.
[35]
K. Madhusudana Rao et al. “Synthesis and Characterization of pH Sensitive Poly
(Hydroxy Ethyl Methacrylate-co-acrylamidoglycolic Acid) Based Hydrogels for Con-
trolled Release Studies of 5-Fluorouracil”. In: International Journal of Polymeric
Materials and Polymeric Biomaterials 62.11 (2013), pp. 565–571. doi: 10.1080/
00914037.2013.769160.
[36]
Mutasem O. Taha et al. “Sodium lauryl sulfate impedes drug release from zinc-
crosslinked alginate beads: Switching from enteric coating release into biphasic pro-
files”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 350.1 (2008), pp. 291–300. issn:
0378-5173. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2007.09.010.
[37]
Anil Kumar Patel, Reeta Rani Singhania, and Ashok Pandey. “Chapter 2 - Pro-
duction, Purification, and Application of Microbial Enzymes”. In: Biotechnology of
Microbial Enzymes. Ed. by Goutam Brahmachari. Academic Press, 2017, pp. 13–41.
isbn: 978-0-12-803725-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803725-
6.00002-9.
[38]
Sumitra Datta, Rene Christena, and Yamuna Rajaram. “Enzyme immobilization:
An overview on techniques and support materials”. In: 3 Biotech 3 (1 2012), pp. 1–
9. doi: 10.1007/s13205-012-0071-7.
[39]
ChiralVision. “ChiralVision product list 2022”. In: (Accessed 27th January 2023).
url: http://www.chiralvision.nl/chiralvision_product_list.pdf.
[40]
Jingjing Wang et al. “Chapter 4 - Mesoporous Carbon-Based Enzyme Biocatalyst
for Aquatic Recalcitrant Pollutant Treatment”. In: Nanohybrid and Nanoporous
Materials for Aquatic Pollution Control. Ed. by Lin Tang et al. Micro and Nano
Technologies. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 103–124. isbn: 978-0-12-814154-0. doi: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814154-0.00004-9.
[41]
Constantin Apetrei and Mahdi Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti. “Chapter 11 - Biosensors in
Food PDO Authentication”. In: Food Protected Designation of Origin. Ed. by Miguel
de la Guardia and Ana Gonz´alvez. Vol. 60. Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry.
Elsevier, 2013, pp. 279–297. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-59562-
1.00011-6.
76
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis
[42]
Dong Hwan Lee et al. “Lipase immobilization on silica gel using a cross-linking
method”. In: Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 12.5 (2006), pp. 777–
782. issn: 1226-086X. url: https://www.cheric.org/PDF/JIEC/IE12/IE12-5-
0777.pdf.
[43]
Shaofen Li. “Chapter 11 - Fundamentals of Biochemical Reaction Engineering”. In:
Reaction Engineering. Ed. by Shaofen Li. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2017,
pp. 491–539. isbn: 978-0-12-410416-7. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12-410416-7.00011-2.
[44]
Qiuyun Shen et al. “Gelatin-templated biomimetic calcification for β-galactosidase
immobilization”. In: Process Biochemistry 46 (2011), pp. 1565–1571. doi: 10.1016/
j.procbio.2011.04.010.
[45]
Dino Dinelli, Walter Marconi, and Franco Morisi. “[18] Fiber-entrapped enzymes”.
In: Immobilized Enzymes. Vol. 44. Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press, 1976,
pp. 227–243. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0076-6879(76)44020-X.
[46]
Kirtikumar Chandulal Badgujar and Bhalchandra Mahadeo Bhanage. “Carbohy-
drate base co-polymers as an efficient immobilization matrix to enhance lipase ac-
tivity for potential biocatalytic applications”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 134 (2015),
pp. 709–717. issn: 0144-8617. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.
08.036.
[47]
Anders E. Daugaard. Personal conversation. Mar. 2023.
[48]
Arianna Rech. Personal conversation. Mar. 2023.
[49]
J. Ramalho E. Leite M.C. Mota P. Carvalho. “Spectrophotometric analysis of sodium
fluorescein aqueous solutions. Determination of molar absorption coefficient”. In:
International Ophthalmology 15 (1991), pp. 321–326. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00128951.
[50]
Jong-Whan Rhim. “Physical and mechanical properties of water resistant sodium
alginate films”. In: LWT - Food Science and Technology 37.3 (2004), pp. 323–330.
issn: 0023-6438. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2003.09.008.
[51]
Anders E. Daugaard. Personal conversation. Apr. 2023.
[52]
Re R et al. “Antioxidant activity applying an improved ABTS radical cation decol-
orization assay.” In: Free Radical Biology & Medicine 26 (1999), pp. 1231–1237. doi:
10.1016/s0891-5849(98)00315-3.
[53]
Fatemeh Behrouzifar et al. “Colorimetric assay based on horseradish peroxidase/reduced
graphene oxide hybrid for sensitive detection of hydrogen peroxide in beverages”. In:
Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 257 (2021),
p. 119761. issn: 1386-1425. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2021.119761.
77
==PAGE:79==
Master Thesis
[54]
Domenico Ribatti. “Chapter 3 - The Discovery of the Blood–Thymus Barrier”. In:
Milestones in Immunology. Ed. by Domenico Ribatti. Academic Press, 2017, pp. 37–
46. isbn: 978-0-12-811313-4. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811313-
4.00003-6.
[55]
Sigma Aldrich. “ALBUMIN FROM BOVINE SERUM - Product information”. In:
(Accessed 17th June 2023). url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/deepweb/
assets/sigmaaldrich/product/documents/261/593/a2153pis.pd.
[56]
Bio-Rad. “Quick Start™Bradford Protein Assay - Instruction manual”. In: (Accessed
16th June 2023). url: https://www.bio- rad.com/webroot/web/pdf/lsr/
literature/4110065A.pdf.
78
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis
Appendix
A
NaFl calibration points
Figure A.1: The blank corrected absorbance of NaFl calibration samples values in the UV-Vis
spectra around NaFl absorbance peak.
Figure A.2: The blank corrected absorbance of NaFl calibration samples values in the UV-Vis
spectra around NaFl absorbance peak in lower concentration.
79
==PAGE:81==
Master Thesis
B
UV-Vis spectra from NaFl loaded experiments
Figure B.1: The blank corrected absorbance data of A NaFl0.01 Ca0 D samples from UV-Vis
measurements.
Figure B.2: The blank corrected absorbance data of A NaFl0.01 Ca0.2 D samples from UV-Vis
measurements.
80
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis
Figure B.3: The blank corrected absorbance data of A NaFl0.01 Ca0.4 D samples from UV-Vis
measurements.
Figure B.4: The blank corrected absorbance data of A NaFl0.01 CaI5 ND samples from UV-Vis
measurements.
81
==PAGE:83==
Master Thesis
Figure B.5: The blank corrected absorbance data of A NaFl0.01 CaI5 D samples from UV-Vis
measurements.
Figure B.6: The blank corrected absorbance data of A NaFl0.01 CaI15 ND samples from UV-Vis
measurements.
82
==PAGE:84==
Master Thesis
Figure B.7: The blank corrected absorbance data of A NaFl0.01 CaI15 D samples from UV-Vis
measurements.
Figure B.8: The blank corrected absorbance data of AW100G12.5 samples from UV-Vis measure-
ments.
83
==PAGE:85==
Master Thesis
Figure B.9: The blank corrected absorbance data of AW100G37.5 samples from UV-Vis measure-
ments.
C
UV-Vis spectra HRP enzyme activity experiments
Figure C.1: The raw UV-Vis spectra of the enzymatic assay of peroxidase from A HRPl 1dRTD
samples.
84
==PAGE:86==
Master Thesis
Figure C.2:
The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra of the enzymatic assay of peroxidase from
A HRPl 1dRTD samples.
Figure C.3:
The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra of the enzymatic assay of peroxidase from
A HRPl CaI15 ND samples.
85
==PAGE:87==
Master Thesis
Figure C.4:
The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra of the enzymatic assay of peroxidase from
A CCHRPl CaI15 ND samples.
D
UV-Vis spectra from HRP extraction profile experiments
Figure D.1: The raw UV-Vis spectra from the Bradford assay calibration.
86
==PAGE:88==
Master Thesis
Figure D.2: The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra from the Bradford assay calibration.
Figure D.3: The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra of the Bradford assay from A HRPl 1dRTD
samples.
87
==PAGE:89==
Master Thesis
Figure D.4: The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra of the Bradford assay from A HRPl CaI15 ND
samples.
Figure D.5: The blank corrected UV-Vis spectra of the Bradford assay from A CCHRPl CaI15 ND
samples.
88
==PAGE:90==
Master Thesis
E
TGA result of A HRPl 1dRTD
Figure E.1: Measured data plotted from TGA experiment using A HRPl 1dRTD sample.
89
