==PAGE:1==
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
Payload Design and Mission Analysis for a
Rapidly Launched Sea and Land Radar Detec­
tion and Geolocation Satellite
Master Thesis
DTU Space
DTU Security
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
Payload Design and Mission Analysis for a Rapidly Launched Sea and Land Radar De­
tection and Geolocation Satellite
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Adam Hoxeng
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Author’s own figure.
Published by:
DTU, DTU Security, Anker Engelunds Vej 101, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den­
mark
www.security.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Security at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Earth and Space
Physics and Engineering, MSc Eng.
This thesis was prepared and is finalized under supervision of Henning Heiselberg, Head
of Security DTU, Samel Arslanagic, Associate Professor and Head of Electromagnetic
Systems, and Dennis Bo Hansen, Senior System Engineer at Space Inventor A/S.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of the electromagnetics, antennas,
radar, remote sensing, and current security events.
Adam Hoxeng ­ s213081
Signature
Date
ii
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
June 15, 2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis, a novel concept for a rapid­response Cubesat designed to detect radar
emitters on both land and sea is proposed. The context of the world security situation is
provided to show the motivation and utility of the mission. Mission analysis and design is
executed for relevant aspects such as orbital parameters, launch procurement, and sub­
systems design. The main payload for this mission, an array or U­slot rectangular patch
antennas, is designed and simulated using CST and MATLAB to meet the specifications
needed to complete such a mission. Finally, the algorithms necessary to complete the
geolocation process are tested and verified.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Henning Heiselberg, for his help, guidance, and ad­
vice throughout the preparation of this thesis. Thank you to my antenna supervisor Samel
Arslanagic for his knowledge and guidance on antenna design, a field that was largely new
to me at the beginning of this thesis. Thank you to Dennis Hansen of Space Inventor for
his introduction to the company and for first planting the idea of a rapid­response satel­
lite. Thank you to Sandra Martos for volunteering to build upon this thesis in her own
masters thesis. Thank you also to the PhD students of DTU security, Nicolai Birkholm,
Peder Heiselberg, and Kristian Sørensen for their input and support over the course of
the semester. Finally, thank you to Catarina and my parents for their support and encour­
agement throughout the semester.
iv
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Justification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
6
2.1
Geolocation Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
The Patch Antenna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Mission Analysis
11
3.1
Orbital Parameter Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Launch Procurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Satellite Bus Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Key Systems Engineering Tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Radars of Interest
21
4.1
Naval Navigation Radars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Application to Land Based Radars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Land Based Military Radars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Selection of Krasukha 4 as a Radar of Interest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Antenna Array Payload Design
25
5.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Inspiration from Previous ESM Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Initial Design Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Patch Antenna Array Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.5
Antenna Array Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Antenna Simulation Results
51
6.1
Initial Patch Antenna Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Upgraded U­Slot Patch Antenna Simulation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.3
U­Slot Patch Antenna Array Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
7
Geolocation Algorithms
76
7.1
MUSIC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7.2
ESPRIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7.3
Selection of MUSIC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7.4
MUSIC Performance Confirmation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
8
Conclusion and Future Work
80
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
8.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
83
A Additional Rectangular Patch Performance Plots
85
B U­Slot Patch Antenna Paramter Modification Table
87
vi
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
The Security Case for Land and Sea RF Detection and Geolocation
Several realities make a satellite which can be launched on very short notice to detect
and geolocate RF emitters on sea and land a necessity. The ongoing Russian invasion
of Ukraine is the biggest conventional conflict in Europe since World War II, tensions in
the South China Sea continue between China and the US and its allies, and conflict in the
Middle East continues as it has over the past decades. A visual representation of the ever
present necessity to detect and geolocate RF emitters can be seen below in Figure 1.1.
Produced by ESA, this figure shows the probability of RF emitters present around the
world and particularly in Europe. Hotspots seen in the Figure 1.1 correspond with conflict
zones in Ukraine, the Turkish­Syrian border, the South China Sea, as well as major cities.
Figure 1.1: World and European RF emission probabilities 27/11/2022 ­ 11/12/2022. [1]
Currently, there are active and designed RF detection missions that detect and geolocate
RF signals coming from ocean going ships. The prime example of this is Norway’s Nor­
sat 3 missions, which is discussed in more detail later in this report. However, there is
no active or designed satellites which also seek to detect and geolocate RF emitters on
land. The increase in satellite manufacturing technology and efficiency, along with the
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
1
==PAGE:10==
proliferation of reusable and quickly relaunchable rockets presents another relevant pos­
sibility. National governments and militaries have begun expressing interest in satellites
which can be manufactured quickly and easily, and then either kept in storage until a cri­
sis which warrants their launch and subsequent use, or launched immediately. Therefore,
the concept of a rapidly buildable and launchable satellite which can detect RF emitters
or both land and sea represents a mission with double utility. With the case for such a
satellite mission presented above, the following paragraphs will explain in greater detail
the relevant use cases.
1.1.2
Norsat 3 ­ An Navigation Radar Detection Case Study
Geolocation of ships through detection of their naval navigation radars is a proven and
successful concept. An example of a navigation radar detection (NRD) mission currently
underway is the Norwegian Space Agency’s Norsat 3, seen in Figure 1.2. The latest
iteration of the country’s successful space based maritime surveillance program. Up until
Norsat 3, the Norwegian Space Agency’s maritime surveillance satellites were equipped
only with AIS antennas. AIS, or Automatic Identification System, is a maritime tracking
system used for vessel identification, navigation, and collision avoidance. It operates
through VHF radio frequencies and is mandated for most commercial vessels and certain
types of large recreational boats. While this allows the detection and identification of the
majority of ships, there are still several reasons why a ship may not be transmitting its AIS.
Ships in distress from adverse weather conditions may have a destroyed or damaged AIS
transmitters. Ships traveling through areas with increased security risks may turn off their
AIS to help avoid threats, and ships participating in illegal activity often turn off their AIS
to avoid detection by authorities. However, it is much less often the case that ships turn
off their navigation radars, as they serve as a primary means of collision avoidance, way
finding, and overall safety when underway. These radar emissions are another way in
which ships can be geolocated. Seeing this opportunity, Norsat 3 was equipped with an
experimental four patch antenna array to help give the Norwegian government a more
complete picture of the maritime traffic in the waters around their country.
Figure 1.2: Norsat 3 Components Image [2]
2
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Justification
There are several justifications for the mission which will be described throughout the rest
of this thesis. They are organized in two categories: use cases and technology trends.
1.2.1
Use Case: Maritime Security and Law Enforcement
A rapid­response cubesat for radar emitter detection and geolocation proves highly useful
to address many range of illicit activities on water, such as piracy, illegal fishing, and
smuggling.
Marine conservation areas are often prone to illegal fishing activities, posing a significant
threat to marine biodiversity and sustainability. In such a scenario, the rapid­launch ca­
pability of the cubesat allows for immediate deployment to monitor the area. By detecting
navigation radars coming from fishing vessels, the cubesat helps to identify unauthorized
fishing. The collected data can be relayed to maritime authorities, enabling them to stop
the illegal fishing and safeguard the marine ecosystem.
The cubesat can also help combat smuggling. Whether it involves narcotics, weapons,
or contraband goods, maritime smuggling poses a serious threat to national security. In
response to intelligence on potential smuggling routes or suspicious vessels, the cubesat
can be tasked to monitor the areas of interest. By detecting radar emitters from vessels
engaged in smuggling activities, the cubesat contributes to the early detection and inter­
ception of illegal operations. The gathered information can be shared with relevant law
enforcement agencies or the military, allowing them to coordinate efforts and apprehend
the smugglers.
One scenario where a rapid­response cubesat for radar emitter detection would be in­
valuable is in addressing maritime security challenges, particularly piracy. With the ability
to detect radar emitters from ships and small boats, the cubesat can provide critical infor­
mation to maritime authorities and security forces. During a piracy crisis the rapid­launch
capability of the cubesat enables quick deployment to the affected area. By detecting
and tracking radar signals from suspicious vessels, the cubesat helps find potential pirate
activities, enhancing situational awareness, and facilitating targeted response measures
to protect those on the water.
A rapid­response cubesat’s ability to detect radar emitters in real­time enhances situa­
tional awareness and enables a proactive response to illicit activities on water. Its de­
ployment during events such as piracy, illegal fishing, and smuggling helps maritime au­
thorities safeguard marine resources and ecosystems, and preserve national security. By
leveraging the cubesat’s capabilities, governments and international organizations can es­
tablish a more robust surveillance framework, effectively deterring and combating illegal
activities in marine environments.
1.2.2
Use Case: Military Radar Emitter Detection
The rapid­response cubesat equipped with radar emitter detection capabilities proves in­
valuable in military operations, particularly in detecting and countering electronic warfare
radars and anti­aircraft radars.
In modern warfare, electronic warfare plays a crucial role in disrupting enemy communi­
cation, surveillance, and weapon systems. The cubesat’s ability to detect radar emitters
enables the identification and tracking of enemy electronic warfare radars. By rapidly de­
ploying the cubesat to the designated area of interest, military forces can gather critical
intelligence on the location and frequency of these radars. This information allows them
to assess the enemy’s electronic warfare capabilities and devise appropriate countermea­
sures. With real­time monitoring and analysis of radar emissions, the cubesat assists in
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
3
==PAGE:12==
identifying potential threats and developing strategies to neutralize or mitigate the impact
of electronic warfare operations.
In military operations involving air superiority, the detection and monitoring of enemy anti­
aircraft radars are paramount. The cubesat’s radar emitter detection capability contributes
to the identification and tracking of these radars. By rapidly deploying the cubesat to the
theater of operations, military commanders gain real­time situational awareness regard­
ing the presence and location of enemy anti­aircraft radars. This information helps in
planning aerial missions, choosing safe flight corridors, and implementing effective coun­
termeasures to evade or neutralize enemy air defenses. The cubesat’s ability to detect
radar signals at multiple frequencies ensures wide coverage and reliable identification of
anti­aircraft radar systems.
A rapid­response cubesat’s radar emitter detection capabilities provide military forces with
critical information for situational awareness, threat assessment, and decision­making
processes. By promptly deploying the cubesat to target areas, military commanders can
gain an edge in detecting and countering electronic warfare radars and anti­aircraft radars,
enhancing mission success and the safety of personnel and assets. The cubesat’s com­
pact size, rapid manufacturing, and storage capabilities make it a valuable asset for mili­
tary operations in times of crisis or conflict.
1.2.3
Technology Trend: Commercial Space & Satellite Companies
In recent years, there has been a remarkable increase in the number of commercial space
companies, including smaller companies that specialize in designing and manufacturing
satellites. This trend is driven by advancements in technology, cheaper space access,
and the growing demand for satellite­based services. Smaller commercial companies
have brought fresh perspectives and agile approaches to the space industry, challenging
the dominance of traditional aerospace giants. These companies are leveraging inno­
vative technologies to develop cost­effective and efficient satellite solutions. Their focus
on smaller, more nimble satellites allows for quicker development cycles, rapid deploy­
ment, and increased accessibility to space. The rise of commercial space companies has
spurred competition, fostering a dynamic market environment that promotes innovation.
As a result, we are witnessing an exciting era of space exploration and utilization, with
a diverse range of satellites being deployed for several mission types. This proliferation
of smaller commercial companies makes it realistic to invest time and money it a rapid­
deployment mission concept such as this.
1.2.4
Technology Trend: Rapid Response Satellites for Governments
Building on the trends started by commercial space and satellite companies, governments
have started to invest in and test the performance of satellites which can be ordered, built,
and launched in a very short time span. In June 2021, the United States Space Force
established the Space Safari Office as part of its Space and Missile Systems Center.
The Space Safari Office’s mission is to ”respond to high­priority, urgent space needs by
rapidly acquiring, integrating and executing missions. [3]” Shortly after its establishment,
the office acquired, integrated, and launched the Tactically Responsive Launch­2 (TacRL­
2) mission, a LEO technology demonstration satellite. The mission was conceived, de­
signed, acquired, integrated, and launched all within 11 months. This concept of rapidly
acquiring and launching satellite’s is being aggressively pursued by all of NATO, and is
certainly worth more study [4].
4
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Purpose
With the preceding background and justifications presented, the necessary information is
set to describe the purpose of this thesis report. The purpose of this thesis is to establish
the critical design parameters for a rapid response cubesat which can detect and geolo­
cate radar emitters regardless of their location on sea or land. To accomplish this purpose,
several specific steps are necessary. The performance specifications that must be met
to successfully executed the mission must be defined. The main payload for this mission,
an array of antennas, must be designed and its performance successfully simulated as
satisfying the list of specifications already established. The algorithms and calculations
necessary to perform the geolocation of emitters after receipt of their signals by the pay­
load must be chosen and successfully simulated. It is the hope of the author that this
thesis report can serve as a starting point for future work on such a satellite mission that
can ultimately make it a reality. To further this goal, Dennis Bo Hansen of Space Inven­
tor A/S was made a supervisor of the thesis and Space Inventor’s cubesat offerings and
technology are cited throughout the report to simulate what the acquisition process for
this satellite might look like in reality. At the time of submission, a fellow DTU masters
student and Space Inventor employee, Sandra Martos, has volunteered to build upon this
thesis for her own masters thesis.
1.4
Range
This thesis report is organized in the following manner. After this introduction in chapter
1, a basic overview of the pieces of theory relevant for this report are presented in chap­
ter 2. The mission analysis and systems engineering work done in this report are found in
chapter 3. In chapter 4, information about the radar emitters of interest, particularly their
electromagnetic properties, methods of operation, and relevance to the purpose just men­
tioned, is introduced. The main antenna array payload design occurs in chapter 5 and the
results of the design are found in chapter 6. The methods and verification used for geolo­
cation of the emitters are found in chapter 7. Finally, a conclusion and recommendations
for future work come in chapter 8.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Theory
2.1
Geolocation Methods
In geolocation techniques, several types of measurements can be employed so that the
location can be estimated. For the sake of brevity and applicability to the following re­
search, not all techniques are considered in this theoretical introduction. In the specified
techniques below, we consider an emitter source at some location pe = [x, y]T and L
sensors, each with some position si = [x, y]T , where i = 1, ..., L.
2.1.1
Time Delay of Arrival (TDoA)
Time delay of arrival (TDoA) is a geolocation method that calculates a hyperboloid whose
surface represents all of the possible signal transmitter locations. By measuring the TDoA
of a signal between two or more spatially separated receivers, a unique hyperboloid is
calculated that contains all possible locations of the signal transmitter [5].
τi1 = di −d1
c
(2.1)
Figure 2.1: Time Delay of Arrival (TDoA) Concept [5]
2.1.2
Angle of Arrival (AoA)
Angle of Arrival (AoA) is another geolocation method which calculates the angle from
which a signal is propagating in order to produce a line of bearing from an array of sensors
to the emitter. Based on the direct measurement accuracy of ±θ, the location of the emitter
will be determined about the Line of Bearing (LOB) path by 2θ angular spread. A graphical
depiction of the components of the line of bearing is seen in Figure 2.2. A simple AoA
triangulation can determine the location of the emitter, as shown graphically in Figure 2.3
and mathematically in Equation 2.2 [5].
6
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:15==
θi = tan−1[ y −yi
x −xi
]
(2.2)
Figure 2.2: LOB Component Angles. ϕ is measured from a side view and θ from a top­
down view. [6]
Figure 2.3: Angle of Arrival (AoA) Concept [5]
The various sensors in Figure 2.3 are depicted as being on separate platforms, however
it is also possible to perform AoA geolocation using an array of slightly spaced antennas
on the same platform [6]. This is especially useful for the study of satellite based AoA
measurements and will now be discussed in further detail.
Consider a linear antenna array like the one seen in Figure 2.4 with N antennas (repre­
sented by the green squares) numbered sequentially and with spacing, D, equal to half
the target wavelength (λ/2). s(t) is the propagated signal, θ is the angle of arrival of the
signal, N is the number of antenna in the array, k is the element number of the array,
∆tk is the time difference between when the signal arrives at element zero and element
k, and x(k(t)) is the signal data that is detected at array element k at time t.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Angle of Arrival (AoA) Concept in a Linear Antenna Array [6]
The propagation delay across this array is much less than the period T in which the signal
is sampled [7].
T ≫∆tk, k = 0, 1..., N −1
(2.3)
and so the signal of the array can be approximated as below [7].
xk(nT) ≈s(nT)e−j2πfc∆tk
(2.4)
With a signal measured by the array as just described, an algorithm is needed to produce
lines of bearing and calculate a final geolocation solution. Since the intention of this the­
sis report is to produce a design for a single satellite which can successfully detect and
geolocate RF emitters, the AoA method will be used.There are numerous other combina­
tions of geolocation methods and algorithms besides those described in this section [5].
However, these are the most pertinent to this thesis.
2.2
The Patch Antenna
As described later in this thesis, a patch antenna array was designed to detect the RF
waves as is necessary to perform space based AoA geolocation. Here, the basic theory
of how patch antennas operate is presented.
2.2.1
Patch Antenna Components
In its simplest form, a patch antenna is comprised of 4 components. These components
are the conducting patch, the ground plane, the dielectric substrate, and the feed. These
will now be described in more detail.
8
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: A basic patch antenna diagram. [8]
Radiating Patch
The radiating patch is a very thin (much thinner than the free space wavelength of the
antennas resonant frequency) metal strip located on one side of the dielectric substrate.
The patch is usually composed of metal, with should be highly conductive and resistant
to the relevant environmental challenges of its ambient operating environment. Radiating
patches exist in a wide variety of shapes and configurations, and can even include slots
cut out of their interior, all of these affect the patch antennas operating characteristics.
The radiating patch is normally made of a thin metal foil, often copper, that is treated to
be corrosion resistant [8].
Dielectric Substrate
A dielectric substrate plays a crucial role in the function of a patch antenna. It serves
as the material on which the patch structure is mounted and thus provides mechanical
support while influencing the antenna’s electrical properties. The substrate’s dielectric
constant, denoted as ϵr, and thickness determine the antenna’s impedance matching,
bandwidth, and radiation characteristics. By selecting a dielectric substrate with appro­
priate properties, the patch antenna can achieve efficient energy transfer, enhanced ra­
diation performance, and specified operational frequencies. The dielectric substrate also
helps maintain the structural integrity of the patch antenna, protecting it from environmen­
tal stressors and providing insulation between the patch and ground plane[8].
Ground Plane
The ground plane of the antenna serves multiple crucial functions. It acts as a reflec­
tive surface that helps establish a reference point for the antenna’s radiation pattern and
contributes to its directivity. The ground plane provides a conductive surface that acts
as a mirror, reflecting and redirecting the radiated energy from the patch antenna in the
desired direction. This reflection helps in shaping the radiation pattern and gain of the
antenna. The ground plane plays a vital role in achieving impedance matching and en­
hancing the antenna’s performance. It provides a return path for the electromagnetic
waves and creates a balanced current distribution. This balance minimizes the loss of
energy and improves the antenna’s efficiency. The ground plane also aids in suppress­
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
9
==PAGE:18==
ing unwanted radiation and reducing interference from other sources. The ground plane
provides structural support and stability to the patch antenna. It ensures proper align­
ment and positioning of the radiating element, maintaining the integrity of the antenna’s
geometry. The ground plane also acts as a shield, protecting the antenna from external
electromagnetic interference and minimizing the impact of environmental factors [8].
Feeding Mechanism
The feed is a vital component in a patch antenna, responsible for transferring the RF
energy to and from the radiating patch. Its primary function is to provide a pathway for
the input signal to excite the patch and convert it into electromagnetic waves. The feed
structure, such as a microstrip line (pictured in Figure 2.5) or a coaxial cable (pictured
later in Figure 5.10), is connected to the patch antenna, enabling the transmission or
reception of electromagnetic signals. The feed helps achieve impedance matching be­
tween the transmission line and the radiating element. It ensures that the characteristic
impedance of the feed structure matches the impedance of the patch antenna, optimizing
power transfer and minimizing signal reflections. Proper impedance matching leads to
improved efficiency and enhanced radiation performance of the antenna. The feed’s de­
sign and positioning influence the radiation pattern and polarization of the patch antenna.
By controlling the feed location and shape, desired radiation properties and polarization
is achievable. The feed also plays a role in choosing desired operating frequencies and
bandwidths as will be seen later in the antenna array design [8].
2.2.2
Patch Antenna Method of Operation
A patch antenna operates based on the principles of electromagnetic radiation and wave
propagation. When an RF signal is applied to the patch antenna through a feed struc­
ture, such as a microstrip line or coaxial cable, it generates an electric field across the
patch. The combination of the conductive patch and the ground plane creates a resonant
structure that supports the generation and propagation of electromagnetic waves. As the
RF signal passes through the patch, it excites the conductive surface, causing current to
flow. This current generates electromagnetic waves that radiate outward from the patch
into free space. The geometry and dimensions of the patch antenna, along with the dielec­
tric properties of the substrate, determine the operating frequency, radiation pattern, and
polarization characteristics of the antenna. Constructive interference, allows the waves
from different parts of the patch combine to create a coherent and directional radiation
pattern. By carefully designing the shape, size, and feed position of the patch, control of
the radiation properties of the antenna, such as beamwidth, directivity, and polarization is
possible. To model this operation, two main models exist: the transmission line model and
the cavity model. It is beyond the scope of this report to explain these in depth, however
the transmission line model is explained briefly in section 5.4.1 [8].
10
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:19==
3
Mission Analysis
3.1
Orbital Parameter Selection
To conduct space based AoA geolocation, the position of the satellite on which the re­
ceivers are located must be known. Knowledge of a satellite’s position in its orbit at a
given moment in time allows the geolocation solution for that time to be calculated. Prop­
agation of the satellite through its orbit allows for the simulation of a satellite passing over
a transmitter which is the basis of the experiments conducted for this research. One of the
most common ways to describe a satellite’s orbit are the 6 Keplerian elements. The 6 el­
ements are the semimajor axis, a, the eccentricity,e, the inclination, i, the right ascension
of the ascending node, Ω, the argument of perigee, ω, and the true anomaly, ν [9].
Figure 3.1: Visual Representation of the Keplerian Elements. [10]
Eccentricity, e
The eccentricity of a satellite is a unitless parameter that determines the amount by which
its orbit deviates from a perfectly circular orbit [9]. A circular orbit has an eccentricity of 0,
and because a circular orbit is desired for this mission, the satellite’s eccentricity will be
0.
Semimajor Axis, a
The semimajor axis is the sum of the periapsis and apoapsis distances divided by two.
For the case of our circular orbit, this means the semimajor axis is equal to the radius
of the Earth plus the orbital altitude [9]. Given the inherent characteristics of a radio fre­
quency detection satellite’s mission, it is immediately apparent that the mission must have
a low Earth orbit (LEO) altitude. There are, however, a wide range of altitudes which are
considered to be characteristic of LEO orbits. Each of these has their own traits which
will not only affect the main mission of detecting land and sea radar emitters, but also
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
11
==PAGE:20==
other aspects of the mission such as its operational lifespan. The desire to keep the op­
erational lifetime of the mission at 5 years or greater dictates a lower altitude limit of 475
km, assuming a 12 kg 6U cubesat [9]. However, as will be shown in the following launch
procurement section, launch offerings are often made in the 500­600 km altitdue range.
A 525 km orbital altitude will give enough height to maintain a lifetime of greater than 5
years, but be low enough to ensure enough signal strength to properly detect and geolo­
cate relevant radar signals. Given the Earth’s radius of 6378.16 km and the chosen 525
km orbit, this results in a semimajor axis of 6903.16 km
Inclination, i
Inclination is the orbital parameter that measures the tilt of a satellite’s orbit relative to
Earth. It is measured as the angle between the Equatorial Plane and the orbital plane
of the satellite [9]. An inclination of 0 degrees indicates an equatorial orbit, while an
inclination of 90 indicates a perfectly polar orbit. In general, orbits which are considered
polar orbits can deviate away from this 90 degree mark. Sun synchronous orbits (SSOs)
are a very popular and useful type of polar orbit in which the satellite passes over any
given point on Earth at the same local mean solar time. These orbits have inclinations
around 98 degrees that varies monotonically given the altitude of the satellite. A further
classification of SSOs is the dawn­dusk SSO. In a dawn­dusk SSO, the satellite is orbiting
along the terminator line, the line seperating day and night on the Earth’s surface. This
allows the satellite’s solar panels a constant view of the Sun, which is critical to provide
a conisistent power supply to the patch antenna array on this mission. Given the 525 km
orbit of the satellite, an inclination of 97.50 degrees is selected to maintain a dawn­dusk
SSO. Synthetic aperature radar (SAR) satellites usually have dawn­dusk SSO orbits as
well.
Right Ascension of the Ascending Node, Ω
The right ascension of the ascending node (RAAN) is the angle from a specified refer­
ence direction, called the origin of longitude, to the direction of the ascending node, as
measured in a specified reference plane [9]. The ascending node is the point where the
orbit of the object passes through the plane of reference, as seen in the adjacent image.
For geocentric orbits, Earth’s equatorial plane as the reference plane, and the First Point
of Aries as the origin of longitude. In this case, the longitude is also called the right as­
cension of the ascending node. In the case of the specified orbit, the RAAN will be 0.52
degrees.
Argument of Perigee, ω
The argument of perigee is the angle from the satellite’s ascending node to its periapsis,
measured in the direction of the satellite’s motion. In the case of our circular orbit, the
argument of perigee is 0 degrees, as there is no distinct perigee [9].
True Anomaly, ν
The true anomaly is the angle between the direction of periapsis and the current position
of the body. It can therefore be seen as the satellite’s ”current position” in its orbit and
thus is constantly changing in value between 0 and 360 degrees [9].
Using SPENVIS to simulate and visualize the desired orbit, the following figures and table
were produced [11].
12
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: A Sample Ground Track of the Specified Orbit. [11]
Figure 3.3: A 3D Image of the Specified Orbit. [11]
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: The Desired Orbit’s Keplerian Elements. [11]
3.2
Launch Procurement
This mission type possesses its own benefits and challenges when it comes to launch pro­
curement. This creates its own set of challenges and benefits when it comes to procuring
a launch vehicle to place the satellite in a desirable orbit. The specified dawn­dusk SSO
orbit is a very standard LEO orbit that several launch providers launch to regularly [9].
This should be conducive to executing a launch on a rapid time schedule. However, the
same need to launch rapidly could prove to be a challenge for launch providers which are
more accustomed to multi­year planning and logistics before a launch.
3.2.1
Legacy Launch Providers
The first type of launch provider considered are those of national governments and estab­
lished large aerospace companies. It is also worth mentioning the geopolitcal tensions
that exist with Russia, one of the leading launch providers in this category. Several satel­
lites of a similar mass and desired orbit have been launched on Russian Soyuz rockets.
Given the mission of this satellite, Russian rockets are certainly not considered available.
The Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) operates the Polar Satellite Launch Ve­
hicle (PSLV) which specializes in sun synchronous orbit launches. The PSLV has spe­
14
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:23==
cialized in launching satellites to sunsynchronous orbits since 1993, and has launched
hundreds of small satellites for both the Indian Government and foreign customers. The
European Space Agency (ESA) operates the Vega rocket, also designed specifically to
launch small satellites into LEO.
(a) The PSLV Rocket of ISRO [12]
(b) The Vega Rocket of ESA [13]
Figure 3.5: Suitable Launch Vehicles from Legacy Launch Providers
3.2.2
Small Satellite Launch Providers
Several private companies from countries all over the world currently operate satellites
dedicated to launching smaller satellites into LEO orbits, with several more systems in
development. Given the sheer number of potential launch providers in this category, the
focus will be on launchers with proven flight heritage. A popular choice among small
satellite launchers is the Electron rocket from Rocket Lab.
3.2.3
Selection of Launch Provider
Given the ability of the above described launchers, any of them could be used to place the
satellite into orbit. Final selection of a launch provider would be a function of scheduling
availability and time between order and launch, final launch price, and any geopolitical
considerations of restrictions imposed by either the satellite or launcher manufacturers.
3.2.4
Strategic Storage Location
Storing a rapid response cubesat near or at its launch vehicle site offers several advan­
tages for efficient deployment and quick response in times of crisis. Proximity to the
launch vehicle site minimizes transportation time and logistical complexities associated
with moving the cubesat from a distant storage location. This ensures that the cubesat can
be rapidly accessed and prepared for launch on short notice. Storing the cubesat near the
launch vehicle site streamlines the coordination and integration processes. Close prox­
imity allows for seamless collaboration between the cubesat manufacturing team and the
launch vehicle provider, facilitating efficient communication and synchronization of activ­
ities. This helps in ensuring that the cubesat is fully compatible with the launch vehicle
and can be readily integrated into the mission payload. Furthermore, storing the cubesat
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) SpaceX’s Falcon 9 Transporter
Configuration [14]
(b) The Electron Rocket of Rocket Lab
[15]
Figure 3.6: Suitable Launch Vehicles from Commercial Launch Providers
near the launch vehicle site reduces the risk of potential damage or disruptions during
transportation. Long­distance transportation increases the chances of mishaps or un­
foreseen circumstances that could compromise the cubesat’s readiness or even lead to
loss or damage. By keeping the cubesat in close proximity to the launch vehicle site,
the potential risks associated with transportation are significantly minimized, especially in
crisis scenarios where time is of the essence and a delay for transportation damage is
unacceptable.
3.3
Satellite Bus Design
Cubesat sizing is measured in units, often denoted with a capital U, that measure 10 X 10
X 10 cm. Combining multiple units together yields progressively larger cubesats [9]. Given
the fact that the overall length of the array payload exceeds 10 cm, it will be necessary to
have at least 2U in one dimension in order to accommodate the payload. Space Inventor
offers 6U, 12U, 16U, and custom made cubesat bus options, as well as a wide variety of
satellite subsystems and components which can all be added and subtracted as needed
to produce key mission objectives. After a consideration of the various models, the 6U
Space Inventor cubesat bus was deemed a sufficient choice for this mission [16]. The
key factors which enabled this decision, and a brief introduction to the key subsystems
necessary for the mission are included in the next section.
3.4
Key Systems Engineering Tasks
The overall satellite systems engineering portion of this thesis was conducted in con­
sultation with Space Inventor. This allowed me to gain greater insight into the systems
engineering process at a satellite company that is actively producing satellites for paying
customers.
16
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.7: Space Inventor’s 6U Cubesat. [16]
3.4.1
Position and Attitude Determination and Control
The attitude determination accuracy requirement for Norsat 3 was quoted as 0.05 de­
grees. A GNSS receiver, star tracker, and sun tracker will all be included on the satellite
to ensure accurate position and attitude knowledge. During the manufacturing and inte­
gration stages of the satellite, special attention to be paid to the precision with which the
star tracker and antenna array are installed relative to each other and the satellite bus as
a whole.
Sun Tracker
The dawn­dusk SSO orbit described earlier not only gives a contant power supply for the
satellite’s solar panels, but also allows for the continuous use of a sun tracker to pre­
cisely locate the satellite and its attitude. Space Inventor offers the FSS­P4 compact sun
tracker. This sun sensor uses four photodiodes to estimate the sun’s direction vector with
1 degree precision. The module has a built­in microcontroller which enables connectivity
to a CSP network via CAN bus and readily integrates the fine sun sensor with the attitude
determination and control system. Space Inventor’s satellite busses can all accommodate
up to 6 sun trackers, ensuring that no matter the satellite’s orientation relative to the sun,
a sun tracker can provide valuable position and attitude data [16].
Star Tracker
Space Inventor also offers the STR­P4 high precision star tracker. The STR­P4 features
an integrated processing unit which holds the star catalogue and software algorithms
for autonomous attitude determination during initial acquisition and continuous tracking
throughout the mission duration [16].
GNSS Receiver
The sun tracker and star tracker mentioned previously in this section are valuable sources
of position and attitude data. GNSS receivers also provide such data, with some valuable
additional data and overall robustness. GNSS provides precise timing data which is crit­
ical for several functions on the satellite, and does not come from any of the previous
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
17
==PAGE:26==
ADCS data sources. In terms of data robustness, GNSS signals are globally available
and redundant through systems such as GPS and Galileo. This makes them a reliable
source of positioning and timing information for LEO satellites [9]. Space Inventor offers
the acquisition and integration of GNSS receivers into the satellite’s they build [16].
Momentum Wheels
With the valuable position and attitude data provided from the sources above, the ability
to properly act upon them is of paramount importance. By operating at a near constant
speed of rotation, momentum wheels provide the spacecraft the ability to precisely rotate
around an axis, which will be critically important when aiming the antenna array toward
an area of interest [9]. Space Inventor produces 4 different models of momentum wheel,
ranging from 100 to 1000 Nms of momentum. Space Inventor’s recommendation for
complete 3 axis control is to use a momentum wheel assembly, which uses four powerful
reaction wheels that are integrated into the classic tetrahedron or pyramid configuration
for the benefit of both redundancy and elimination of zero crossing the wheel speeds [16].
3.4.2
Power Generation, Storage, and Distribution
The various systems onboard the satellite, especially the patch antenna array, require
a robust power generation system in the form of solar panel arrays. To support this,
the dawn­dusk SSO orbit described earlier ensures constant sunlight for the solar panel
arrays [9].
Solar Panels
The Space Inventor 6U spacecraft, when in its deployable solar panel configuration, can
produce up to 100 W of power [16]. As will be explained in the next chapter, the satellite
will be placed in a dawn­dusk SSO orbit, which will afford a constant supply of sunlight to
the solar panels. The exact power requirements of all payloads and subsystems on the
satellite are not exactly calculated, and are beyond the scope of this report. However, for
context the NRD payload of Norsat 3 used 30 W [2]. So for the purposes of this report,
the 100 W provided by the 6U satellite’s solar panels is assumed to be sufficient for the
RF detection and geolocation payload and all other subsystems.
Power Distribution
With sufficient power provided by the solar panels in the dawn­dusk SSO orbit, that power
must be properly managed and then distributed to the various subsystems on the satellite.
Space Inventor offer power distributors with 1, 4, and 8 channels from which to send power
around the spacecraft [16]. It would be wise to have redundant power distribution lines to
the antenna array, so the 8 channel power distributor would likely be the ideal choice.
3.4.3
Communications and Command and Control
Given the nature of the main payload of this mission, it must be ensured that the com­
munications system onboard the satellite does not interfere with the patch antenna array.
An immediate step in this crucial direction is ensuring the communication system is trans­
mitting and receiving in a frequency that is outside the patch antenna array’s operational
frequency range. The S and X bands are both commonly used for satellite uplink and
downlink communications. Since the ESM patch antenna array will be operating in the
X­band, it is wise to choose a S­band antenna for uplink and downlink communications.
Space Inventor’s standard main communications link is a 4 Mbps S­band antenna, which
is well suited for general communications needs given the fact that Norsat 3 launched and
is operating with S band communications patch antenna with 2 Mbps transmission speed
[16][2].
3.4.4
Data Processing and Handling
The processing of detecting and geolocating the radar emitters of interest using the ESM
patch antenna array will certainly be a data intensive process.
18
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:27==
AIS Antenna Payload Integration
As the mission’s main objective is to detect radar emitters on both sea and land, an AIS
antenna to detect ships is a mandatory payload to accompany the geolocation antenna
array. AIS antennas on satellites detect AIS signals from ships, which helps expand the
coverage of the global AIS network when ships are beyond the horizon as seen the shore.
The AIS antenna and antenna array payload integrate together in order to improve each
other’s performance. As is already being done in the ongoing Norsat 3 mission, known and
AIS confirmed ship positions are cross referenced with positions given by that satellite’s
geolocation antenna array payload. Through this cross referencing, continuous refine­
ments and calibrations of the geolocation payload can be made, with a visual example of
this process seen below in Figure 3.8. This same cross referencing process can also be
accomplished with remote sensing from entirely different satellite platforms, further im­
proving the Cubesat’s geolocation accuracy and precision. A graphic representation of
this process as it occurs on Norsat 3 is seen in Figure 3.8. This is especially pertinent in
the case of a satellite that is also looking to geolocate land based emitters.
Integration of battlefield and espionage gained intelligence
Several methods of gaining valuable intelligence on radar emitters of interest exist. Satel­
lite imagery reconnaissance, human intelligence, and capture of equipment can all yield
information which can make the detection and geolocation process more accurate and
efficient. As mentioned before, a Krasukha­4 system was captured in Ukraine shortly af­
ter the invasion. Such key discoveries can be distilled into actionable information which
is then transmitted to the satellite for future work.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.8: Calibration of geolocation radar array via integration with AIS antenna. [2]
20
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:29==
4
Radars of Interest
This chapter will list and describe sea and land based radars of interest for this mission.
For convenient reference, Figure 4.1 shows the IEEE radar bands’ frequency and wave­
length allocations.
Figure 4.1: IEEE Radar Frequency and Wavelength Bands
4.1
Naval Navigation Radars
Naval navigation radars are found in 2 frequency bands, X­band and S­band. They will
be discussed in additional detail below.
4.1.1
S­Band Navigation Radar
S band navigation radars, often operating somewhere in the frequency range of 2.9 to 3.1
GHz, is one portion of the electromagnetic spectrum dedicated to naval navigation. It is
employed as the long range object detection and early warning purposes. The S band is
also much less susceptible to interference from atmospheric and weather disturbances,
making it reliable in adverse weather conditions at sea when situational awareness is
paramount [2].
4.1.2
X­Band Navigation Radar
The other most common type of naval navigation radar is found in the X­band. Most com­
monly transmitting in frequencies between 9.3 and 9.5 GHz, the X band provides a sharper
resolution and more detailed object detection at shorter ranges than S­band radars due
to this higher frequency. According to Chapter 5 of The International Convention for the
Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), the preeminent international agreement on naval safety,
all ships above 300 tons of gross tonnage or longer than 45 meters, and all passenger
ships irrespective of tonnage must have a X­band radar. If the ship meets any of these
criteria, it should operate its X­band radar for the entirety of its journey [2].
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
21
==PAGE:30==
4.2
Application to Land Based Radars
The theoretical basis for RF detection and geolocation from space described earlier is
not dependent on the terrain from which the RF waves are emitted. Given the young but
so far successful history of NRD in relatively small satellite configurations, the applica­
bility of the underlying principles to detecting and geolocating land based radars seems
like a worthwhile topic of exploration. There are, however, some practical differences in
how land based radars operate and how they can best be detected. Understanding and
describing these differences is the first step in applying RF detection and geolocation to
ground based radars.
Naval navigation radars almost exclusively emit their pulses aimed at the horizon. This
is the only sensible method to achieve the main goal of navigation radars–obstacle de­
tection, ranging, and avoidance. Any obstacles to a ship underway will be located at sea
level, and so of course it makes the most sense to focus the main lobe of the radar to­
wards the location where these obstacles will be detected. This has direct influence in
the most effective ways to detect naval navigation radars from space. As evidenced by
Norsat­3’s operating methodology, NRD satellites must point their antennas to be aligned
with the horizon [2]. Land based radars will not direct their pulses to the horizon as ex­
clusively as naval navigation radars. Factors such as obstructing terrain and the radar’s
intended target or function will cause its emissions to have some elevation angle. Thus,
geolocation of them will require different operation of the detecting antennas than NRD.
4.3
Land Based Military Radars
With the standard X and S band naval NRD systems described above, an appropriate
example of a land based military radar target must be selected. As the goal of this thesis
is to apply the process of geolocating ships with NRD to geolocating land based military
radars, it was decided that the radars of interest should also transmit in either X or S band.
Relevance, prevalence, and applicability to current geopolitical events were also criteria
in the search.
4.3.1
Krasukha Russian Mobile Electronic Warfare Jamming System
The primary equipment complex in Russian electronic warfare (EW) brigades is the Kra­
sukha EW complex. One complex consists of 4 vehicles, with 2 of those being of particular
interest to this thesis. These particularly interesting radars, the Krasukha 2 and Krasukha
4, are S­band and X­band radar jammers, respectively. Each of the Krasukha systems is
purposely designed to combat a specific type of NATO aircraft radar in order to protect vi­
tal targets within a Russian formation. Given the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine, the
choice to focus on Russian electronic warfare radars satisfies the requirement for radars
of geopolitical pertinence [17].
Krasukha 2
The Krasukha 2 is used to jam S­band airborne radars with an effective range of 250 km.
It is often used to protect mobile high value targets such as Iskander short range ballistic
missile launcher platforms. One of its more interesting reported capabilities is its ability
to jam and redirect radar guided munitions by providing falsified target coordinates to the
munition, thereby protecting the original intended target from harm [18].
Krasukha 4
The Krasukha 4 is effective against X­band and Ku­band airborne radars (8.5GHz to
10.68GHz and 13.4GHz to 14GHz/15.7GHz to 17.7GHz respectively) up to a range of
300 km. The Russian State news service TASS states that Krasukha­4 specifically is
intended to protect command posts, troops, GBAD systems and industrial facilities from
22
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:31==
radar reconnaissance and precision weapons [18]. It employs broadband active jam­
ming. Several Russian sources have also commented on the Krasukha 4’s considerable
emission power. Both American and Russian sources have cited the system’s ability to
interfere with American Lacrosse and Onyx class radar reconnaissance satellites [18]. In
March of 2022, Ukrainian forces captured a fully intact Krasukha 4 system abandoned
by Russian forces retreating from the failed push to take the Ukrainian capital Kyiv in the
opening weeks of the war. Shortly after its capture, the system was sent to the United
States for intelligence study [17].
(a) The Krasukha 2
(b) The Krasukha 4
Figure 4.2: Krasukha Electronic Warfare System [18]
4.4
Selection of Krasukha 4 as a Radar of Interest
After consideration of the facts and characteristics of the Krasukha 2 and 4, the follow­
ing conclusions and assumptions were made. The capture of a Krasukha 4 during the
Russian invasion of Ukraine and its shipment to the United States for study is assumed
to have provided insights into its exact operating parameters, capabilities, and character­
istics that make it a more easily identifiable target. The ability to detect a system which
threatens valuable LEO reconnaissance satellites is certainly valuable for operators of
such satellites. The Krasukha 4’s ability to interfere with satellites in orbit also gives cred­
ibility to the assumption that its emitted energy will be strong enough to reach and interact
with the designed antenna array. Additionally, the fact that the Krasukha 4 and Krasukha
2 are designed to operate together in a complex means that geolocating one likely means
the other is somewhere nearby. With all these factors combined, the selection of the
Krasukha 4 as the principal land radar of interest for this thesis was made.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:33==
5
Antenna Array Payload Design
5.1
Literature Review
The process to design the antenna system began with considerations and limitations in­
herent to any antenna system placed on a cubesat. The initial goal of the system is to
make it mountable on a 6U cubesat surface. In an effort to keep the antenna design as ro­
bust and simple and to minimize possible failure points, an antenna system that required
some sort of deployment mechanism was considered to be avoided if it all possible. Fi­
nally, as illustrated in Chapter 1, an array of multiple antennas is necessary to perform
AoA geolocation. With these immediate considerations in mind, a literature review of an­
tennas was conducted. Recently published surveys in this area proved to be great starting
points in this process, as they concisely summarize the state of the art and provide sev­
eral publications detailing antenna system designs that can serve as inspiration for the
following design [19].
5.2
Inspiration from Previous ESM Missions
The credibility and inspiration drawn from previous mission designs is always a welcome
and utilized resource in payload design and mission analysis development. Missions
with similar objectives and payloads were studied early and often throughout the design
process, and their influence on the antenna design is described here.
5.2.1
Norsat 3
As stated previously in the brief introduction of Norsat 3 in Chapter 2, Norsat 3 is a mar­
itime surveillance satellite operated by the Norwegian government. Much of the details of
Norsat 3’s antenna array and its operation are classified and thus not available to the gen­
eral public. However, there are still unclassified sources about Norsat 3 which provided
inspiration to the antenna array design.
Array Field of View
The field of view, and thus amount of RF emitters that can be seen, of any ESM an­
tenna system is a critical design specification. Norsat 3 provided the first source in this
direction. In a paper published in 2001, a concept study was performed that showed Nor­
wegian Defence Research Establishment’s interest in designing a satellite that could per­
form ”passive detection of X­band navigation radars from a micro­satellite in polar LEO.”
That paper contained diagrams which showed the field of view on Earth that this concept
satellite could view in a 10 minute increment, but did not provide exact details on the exact
on­ground dimensions of the field of view shown. These same diagrams were used in a
official Norsat 3 document published 18 years later, in which the authors specified that
Norsat 3 has a ”ca. 10 degree field of view” and provided measurements of the area on
Earth which the satellite can detect RF emitters at any given time, 450 km across by 1800
km long. These diagrams are seen below.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
25
==PAGE:34==
(a) Phase A Study Antenna FOV (Published 2001) [20]
(b) Antenna FOV from Norsat 3 Paper (Published 2019) [2]
Figure 5.1: Evolution of Norsat 3 Field of View Depictions
5.2.2
Ulloriaq
With the name meaning ”star” in the Greenlandic language, Ulloriaq is the Danish De­
fense Ministry’s first dedicated satellite. Launched in 2018 from China, Ulloriaq’s pri­
mary mission is Arctic surveillance and to demonstrate and test inter­satellite linking (ISL)
procedures with its twin satellite that was commissioned by ESA. To complete its Arctic
surveillance mission, Ulloriaq was originally envisioned to have a hyperspectral imager,
AIS detection system, and an ESM payload to detect naval navigation radars. Unfor­
tunately, the ESM payload was removed from Ulloriaq before its shipment to China for
26
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:35==
launch because of security concerns given the sensitive nature of some parts of its de­
sign. However, documents describing the technical specifications and design process are
still accessible and were used as inspiration and direction for the antenna array design
[21]. These documents were received early in the design process and provided specific
help as described below.
Individual Patch Antenna Shape
As seen in Figure 5.2, the patch antennas that comprise Ulloriaq’s antenna array are
rectangular with a U shaped slot etched into them, which are cited as providing ”multi­
resonant geometry” and thus a wide bandwidth. This commentary regarding the individual
patch antennas’ shape served as a useful reminder of the wide variety of patch shapes
that can be used. This ensured an optimal patch shape would be found during the antenna
design process.
Figure 5.2: Diagram showing the U­slot patch antenna array designed for the Ulloriaq
mission. [21]
Array Field of View
Ulloriaq’s array field of view is described with more detail when compared with that of
Norsat 3.
In the antenna specification table, Ulloriaq’s field of view is defined by its
beamwidths in both the elevation and azimuth axes. The original design specifications
were a 10 degree elevation beamwidth and that the azimuth beamwidth should be made
”as wide as possible. [21]”
5.3
Initial Design Requirements
After description of the antenna array’s desired performance and specifications and analy­
sis of the sources and missions described above, the following initial design requirements
were assembled.
5.3.1
Antenna Type ­ U­Slot Patch Antenna
The space rated design and flight heritage of patch antennas seen in the previous two
example missions ultimately inspired their use in the payload design.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
27
==PAGE:36==
Necessity of an Antenna Array
Individual patch antennas often suffer from poor performance in key metrics such as gain,
bandwidth, and directivity. All of which are necessary to achieve the stated mission ob­
jectives. Thankfully, improvements in all of these performance metrics can be achieved
through the design of an array of patch antennas. As described above in the cases of
Norsat 3 and Ulloriaq, patch antenna arrays have proven heritage for similar missions,
and therefore is the chosen antenna type for this mission.
5.3.2
Center Frequency
Given the center frequency of X­band naval navigation radars and of the Krashukha 4 as
described previously, a center frequency of 9.40 GHz is desired. This frequency repre­
sents a center point on the 9.4 GHz frequency used in naval navigation radars and close
to the 9.59 GHz frequency of the Krashukha 4. The specific 9.4 GHz center frequency is
desired over a center point in between 9.4 and 9.59 GHZ becasue of the nature of the two
targets. The naval navigation radars are guaranteed to fall within a very limited bandwidth,
while the Krashukha 4 can operate over a remarkably wide one. Centering on the more
consistent emitter ensures that the antenna array can successfully execute the proven
mission of navigation radar detection while also serving as a proof of technology for land
radar detection. Additionally, the comparitively larger emission power of the Krashukha 4
means that even with a less than ideal return loss at finge frequencies means a possibility
of still producing geolocation results.
5.3.3
Desired Bandwidth
The desired bandwidth of the array is 1 GHz (10.5%), as defined by the ­10 dB return loss.
This yields an array that can reliably detect radar waves in a range from 9 to 10 GHz, thus
covering all naval navigation radars in the X band and 45.8% of the Krashukha 4 X band
bandwidth.
5.3.4
Desired Realized Gain & Side Lobe Levels
The desired realized gain in the broadside direction is 15 dBi and the desired side lovel
levels is better than ­10 db.
5.3.5
Desired Array Field of View
With the consistent pattern of a 10 degree field of view shown by Norsat 3 and Ulloriaq,
this was chosen as the desired field of view, defined as the beamwidth at the ­3dB point
in the array’s main lobe.
5.3.6
Desired Dimensions
The array should have dimenions that never exceed 20 cm in any axis, as to facilitate
integration onto one side of a 6U cubesat bus.
5.3.7
Summary Table of Initial Design Requirements
A table summarizing the initial design requirements listed above is presented below.
28
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:37==
Table 5.1: Summary Table of Initial Design Requirements
Center Frequency
9.4 ± 0.1 GHz
Desired ­10 dB Bandwidth
> 1 GHz
Desired Realized Gain
15 dBi
Desired Side Lobe Levels
­10 dB or better
Array Field of View
10 ± 2 degrees
Polarization
Linear
Outgassing
Total Mass Loss < 1%
Dimensions
No axis > 20 cm
5.4
Patch Antenna Array Design
Once it was decided that a patch antenna array would be the optimal type of antenna
system, work began to design the constituent patch antennas as well as the total array.
The following calculations are done using the transmission­line model to model the patch
antenna’s operation.
5.4.1
Individual Rectangular Patch Antenna Design
The Transmission­Line Model and Fringing
First, it is worth describing the transmission­line model in more detail, as it forms the theo­
retical basis for the start of the patch antenna design. The model states that a rectangular
patch antenna can be represented by an array of two radiating narrow apertures (slots),
each of width W and height h, separated by a distance L [8]. The length and width di­
mensions of the patch on the antenna are finite. Thus, the electric fields at the edges of
the patch undergo fringing. Fringing occurs when the electric field lines that extend out
from the edges of the patch into the surrounding dielectric substrate. This is is shown in
Figure 5.3. Fringing is a function of the patch dimensions and the substrate height. For
the principal E­plane (xy­plane) fringing is a function of the ratio of the length of the patch
L to the height h of the substrate (L/h) and the dielectric constant ϵr of the substrate.
Since microstrip antennas often satisfy L/h ≫1, fringing is reduced, but still must be
considered because it affects the resonant frequency of the antenna. The necessary ad­
justments to the relevant design equations are shown below in the radiating patch design
section.
Figure 5.3: A side view of a patch antenna showing fringing electric field lines coming out
of the patch into the dielectric substrate. [8]
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
29
==PAGE:38==
Dielectric Substrate Design Process
The selection and design of the dielectric substrate in a space based patch antenna is
highly important due to its impact on the mechanical, thermal, and electrical performance
of the antenna [22]. As mentioned in the introduction, the substrate provides mechanical
support to the entire antenna and uniform spacing between the patch and ground plate
[22]. The chosen substrate material and thickness also dictates much about the radiating
patch of the antenna. This will be described in more detail later in the section. Placing
a patch antenna on a spacecraft, however, introduces several new challenges that an
identical patch antenna on Earth would not face. The first of these challenges is the harsh
thermal environment in space. Large swings in temperature, 273 ± 100 K in LEO, are
commonplace [22]. This can degrade the antenna’s performance through temperature
dependant polarization and thermal expansion of the substrate [23].
The substrate design process begins with general design considerations and relation­
ships. The substrate design has several direct impacts on the bandwidth of the antenna
[24]. The bandwidth is inversely proportional to the dielectric constant of the antenna, ϵr.
Bandwidth is directly proportional to the substrate thickness, h (see Figure 5.4a). How­
ever, once h begins to be greater than the antenna’s resonant wavelength by a factor
of 0.05λ0, inductance matching begins to become difficult. The directivity of the patch
antenna is affected by the substrate design as well [24]. Lower ϵr values lead to higher
directivity, while directivity is has a weak positive correlation with substrate thickness (see
Figure 5.4b). Next, the impact of the substrate design on the radiation efficiency of the
patch antenna is considered. If we factor all 3 power losses that cause the antenna to have
less than 100% efficiency, which include conductor loss, dielectric loss, and surface­wave
power loss, the graph seen in Figure 5.5 is produced [24]. The general relationships be­
tween the substrate and key performance indicators of patch antennas described above
provide a solid foundation in the substrate design and selection process.
(a) Relationship between impedence band­
width and substrate thickness.
(b) Relationship between directivity and
substrate thickness.
Figure 5.4: Relationships between substrate thickness and common antenna perfor­
mance parameters. [25]
30
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.5: Relationship between Radiation Efficiency of a Patch Antenna and the ratio
of substrate thickness to resonant wavelength [24].
Criteria for dielectric substrate selection and design for a patch antenna in the X­band is
now presented [26]. The paper mainly focused on maximizing the radiation efficiency of
the patch antenna. While this is certainly not the only metric for measuring overall antenna
performance, it provides some insights which will influence the final dielectric substrate
design. Figure 5.6 through Figure 5.9 provide relationships between the radiation effi­
ciency and various design parameters of an individual patch antenna.
Figure 5.6 plots the relationship between radiation efficiency and the substrate’s rela­
tive dielectric constant. Assuming throughout that the 10 GHz line provides an accurate
enough representation of a 9.5 GHz antenna, it’s clear to see that minimizing the relative
dielectric constant, ϵr, maximizes the radiation efficiency.
Figure 5.6: Relationship between Radiation Efficiency of a Patch Antenna and Substrate
Relative Dielectric Constant [26].
Figure 5.7 plots the relationship between radiation efficiency and various substrate ma­
terials given the antenna’s resonant frequency. Beginning on the x­axis at 10 GHz, we
see the low ϵr substrate materials PTFE and Taconic TLY­5 provide the highest radiation
efficiency performance with a value near 0.80.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.7: Relationship between Radiation Efficiency of a Patch Antenna and Resonant
Frequency, given various Substrate Materials [26].
Figure 5.8 plots the relationship between radiation efficiency and the height of various
substrate materials. No matter the substrate material, a thinner substrate yields a higher
radiation efficiency.
Figure 5.8: Relationship between Radiation Efficiency of a Patch Antenna and Substrate
Relative Dielectric Constant [26].
Finally, Figure 5.9 plots the relationship between radiation efficiency and substrate thick­
ness given different operating frequencies. Looking at the 10 GHz line, we again see that
increasing the thickness of the substrate begins to degrade the radiation efficiency of the
patch antenna.
32
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.9: Relationship between Radiation Efficiency of a Patch Antenna and Substrate
Relative Dielectric Constant [26].
Given the information of the previous relationships and figures that describe them, there is
now a wide variety of data points for the substrate selection of the X­band patch antenna.
It is now worth discussing how the final selection of substrate material will influence the
design.
It is clear from the relationships that a low ϵr substrate will help the antenna meet its de­
sired performance. Low ϵr substrates increase the impedance bandwidth of the antenna
as well as its directivity, both of which are key to the antenna’s successful operation. The
determination of the thickness of the substrate is slightly less straightforward. Increased
bandwidth and slightly increased directivity support thicker substrates. However, thicker
substrates lead to moderate decreases in radiation efficiency. At a certain thickness, usu­
ally cited as 0.05λ0, the benefits of increased substrate thickness are negated by other
detriments. Therefore, some sort of balance must be achieved between the performance
increases and detriment increases brought on by increased substrate thickness. An up­
per limit on this thickness can easily be established using the 0.05λ0 guideline established
earlier. Figure 5.5 can be used to establish a lower limit of 0.02λ0 as represented by the
maximum radiation efficiency found at this point of an ϵr = 2.2 substrate, which is often
given as a common value for a low ϵr substrate. Given our antenna’s 9.50 GHz resonant
frequency and corresponding 3.155 cm wavelength, this gives a lower bound of 0.631
mm and an upper bound of 1.5775 mm. The authors who published Figure 5.6 through
Figure 5.9 also recommend a maximum substrate thickness of 1.5 mm for X­band patch
antennas operating at 10 GHz and below. This corresponds to a thickness of 0.0475λ0 in
the case of our 9.5 GHz antenna. Taking into account all of these recommendations, it is
determined that a substrate with the smallest ϵr possible, at a thickness of 1.5 mm is the
design of the substrate.
After research of substrate materials with previous spaceflight heritage, the RT/duroid
5880LZ laminate substrate from Rogers Corporation is selected as the substrate mate­
rial for the patch antenna. With a value of 2.00, it is the lowest ϵr substrate material
offered by Rogers Corporation, a world leader in advanced electronics materials. 5880LZ
has also been satisfactorily tested to NASA test procedure SP­R­0022A for outgassing in
spacecraft applications, where it lost only 0.01% of its total mass at 125 C and 0.00133
Pa. Rogers produces 5880LZ sheets measured in inches and in 0.005 in increments.
Therefore, the closest achievable thickness to 1.5 mm is 0.06 in (1.524 mm).
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
33
==PAGE:42==
Radiating Patch Design
There exist equations that given the correct input information, an efficiently radiating rect­
angular patch can be designed [8]. The necessary initial input values are c, the speed of
light in a vacuum, fr, the resonant frequency of the antenna, and ϵr, the dielectric constant
of the substrate.
The first of these describes the width of the patch, W, with the equation
W =
c
2fr
√
2
ϵr + 1 = 12.89mm
(5.1)
Next, we calculate εreff the effective dielectric constant using the Rogers 5880LZ substrate
with a thickness of 1.524 mm.
εreff = εr + 1
2
+ εr −1
2
[
1 + 12 h
W
]−1/2
= 1.919
(5.2)
To calculate ∆L, the amount of ”length” added to the yet to be calculated length due to
electric fringing effects, the follow equation is used.
∆L = 0.412h(ϵreff + 0.3)(W
h + 0.264)
(ϵreff −0.258)(W
h −0.8) = 0.955 mm
(5.3)
This allows the calculation of the physical length of the patch.
L =
30
2fr√ϵreff
−2∆L = 9.19 mm
(5.4)
Rogers Corporation sells 5880LZ with copper radiating patch element already deposited
on top of the substrate and the copper ground plate similarly deposited underneath the
substrate. Standard offered thicknesses of the copper are 18 µm or 35 µm. Since both
offered thicknesses are well above the required skin depth of copper at 9.5 GHz, the 18
µm thickness is selected for both the patch thickness and ground plane thickness.
The dimensions of the substrate are dictated by the patch size as well. Now that the
dimensions of the patch have been calculated, the dimensions of the substrate are calcu­
lated. In an ideal case the substrate dimensions would be infinite, however the two below
equations provide as good a approximation to this as realistically possible.
Lsub = 6h + L = 18.334 mm
(5.5)
Wsub = 6h + W = 22.034 mm
(5.6)
The next portion of the individual patch that must be designed is the feeding mechanism.
The feed is the element that is used to transfer the energy from the transmission line to
the patch radiator. The feed design and location can significantly impact the antenna’s
performance. The most popular methods of feeding a patch antenna include the microstrip
line, coaxial probe, aperture coupling, and proximity coupling [8]. These techniques all
have strengths and weaknesses, however the coaxial probe provides several strengths
which are particularly attractive for this design. Coaxial feeds are known for producing
34
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:43==
the lowest levels of spurious radiation of the previoiusly mentioned methods and are also
easier to successfully complete impedance matching in the antenna [27]. Therefore, a
coaxial probe will be used in the following design.
Figure 5.10: A diagram showing a coaxial probe feed in a patch antenna [28].
As shown in Figure 5.10, the coaxial probe feed consists of 3 main components. First
is the inner feeding wire, usually annealed copper, which runs the entire length of the
feed and eventually connects into the patch in order to excite it. The inner feeding wire
is surrounded by a coating of dielectric material, very often PTFE (teflon), which runs up
until the inner feeding wire makes contact with the radiating patch. Finally, the dielectric
material is covered by a thin layer of the same material used in the inner feeding wire. To
calculate the dimensions of the coaxial feed, we must first choose an input impedance of
the feed. A 50 Ωinput impedance is often chosen in patch antennas as it represents the
best compromise between maximum power, maximum voltage, and minimum loss in the
feed [8]. This is accomplished by a series of concentric cylinders, which when given the
appropriate ratios of radii, produce the desired impedance through the line. This allows
the feed to also be a suitable size in comparison to the patch. Equation 5.7 describes
the relationship between the two radii, D and d, and the dielectric constant of the material
used in the substrate used within the feed, ϵr. Starting with a desired impedance, Z0, of
50 ohm, a 0.5 mm inner radius, d, and a PTFE teflon dielectric substrate, ϵr of 2.1, we
can calculate a outer radius of 1.674 mm.
Z0 = 138 · log10 D
d
√ϵr
(5.7)
Figure 5.11 below shows a calculator that verifies the dimensions and impedance of the
probe used throughout the patch antenna designs presented in this thesis.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
35
==PAGE:44==
Patch Width, L
12.89 mm
Patch Length, W
0.919 mm
Substrate Width, Wsub
22.034 mm
Substrate Length, Lsub
5.29 mm
Substrate Thickness, hs
1.524 mm
Feed Inner Radius, d
0.5 mm
Feed Outer Radius, D
1.674 mm
Feed Location along W axis
Centered (6.445 mm)
Feed Location along L axis
6.665 mm
Table 5.2: Summary rectangular patch antenna dimensions table.
Figure 5.11: A diagram showing a coaxial probe feed calculations within CST Studio Suite.
The position of the feed is centered along the width of the patch and its position along the
length of the patch is a function of ϵeff as seen in the equations below.
xfeed = W/2
(5.8)
yfeed = L/√ϵeff
(5.9)
These dictate that the patch should be centered along the width axis and inset from the
same axis by 6.65 mm.
A summary table of the simple rectangular patch is seen below in Table 5.2.
The results of this initial design are seen in section 6.3. In short, the initial patch design
does not meet the requirements listed in section 5.3, particularly in the bandwidth and
field of view requirements. This is no surprise given the usual performance metrics of a
standard rectangular patch antenna. In addition, the center frequency of the antenna has
been increased to roughly 10.1 GHz. This is largely a consequence of the assumptions
and simplifications used in the previous design equations. Therefore, measures must be
36
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:45==
taken to improve the patch’s performance and lower the central frequency of the individual
patch before it can be expanded into a full array. The first step towards this improvement
was undertaken in the changing of the length of the patch, L. By changing the length
of the patch to 10.096 mm, a much more accurate and resonant center frequency was
achieved, as seen in Figure A.3.
5.4.2
U­Slot Patch Antenna Design
Several methods exist for improving the bandwidth of patch antennas [29]. Among these
methods are the introduction of slots in the radiating patch. One of popular techniques to
enhance the bandwidth is cutting slots in the patch of half wavelength along the desired
resonance frequency. The slots are implanted on the patch to enhance the impedance
matching, especially at higher frequencies. The current distribution on the patch is changed
as a result of the cut slots, hence the input impedance and current path length changes.
By adding new slots into the patch, new resonance frequencies are created. The positions
and dimensions of the slots should be properly optimized where the first two broadside ra­
diation modes of the radiating patch are perturbed where the resonance frequencies of the
patch become close to each other to achieve a wider bandwidth. Unfortunately, attempts
to produce empirical design formulas for the dimensions of U­slots are rare for multiple
reasons. The U­slot has design heritage from the Ulloriaq antenna array as shown pre­
viously in this report and consistently provide improved bandwidths when compared to
simple rectangular patches [29].
To begin designing a wideband U­slot patch antenna on paper, the lower boundary fre­
quency, center frequency, and upper boundary frequency must be established. In the
notation of the following equations these will be referenced respectively as fLB, fCF , and
fUB. It is stated that the center frequency chosen for calculations should be made slightly
higher than the true desired center frequency, and that the lower and upper boundaries
should be made further away from the center frequency than the true boundary frequen­
cies [30]. Therefore, the following respective frequencies were used for the purposes of
the U­slot patch calculations: 8.3125 GHz, 9.5 GHz, and 10.6875 GHz.
It is also worth mentioning that the method described below does not guarantee that the
desired frequency range will be at an acceptable S11 value (ie ­10 dB and under). The
original authors of this method describe it as a ”good first­pass design that can then be
fine­tuned [30].” With the preceding characteristics and limitations in mind, the design of
the U­slot patch antenna can begin.
Existing literature and parametric studies have concluded that wideband operation of a U­
slot patch antennas is only possible when the substrate thickness h satisfies the following
equation.
h ≥0.06λcenterfreq
√ϵr
(5.10)
In the case of a 9.5 GHz center frequency this equates to a minimum substrate thickness
of 1.33 mm. Given the 1.524 mm substrate thickness used in the initial slotless patch
antenna design, no modification of the substrate thickness should be necessary in the
initial design.
Next, the electrically extended length of the antenna is calculated.
L + 2∆L =
c
2√ϵrfCF
= 11.16 mm
(5.11)
The width of the patch is calculated from the electrically extended length as follows.
W = 1.5(L + 2∆L) = 16.74 mm
(5.12)
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
37
==PAGE:46==
Next, the effective dielectric constant is calculated using Equation 5.2.
εreff = 2 + 1
2
+ 2 −1
2
[
1 + 121.524
1.674
]−1/2
= 1.636
(5.13)
Next, the true length of the patch is calculated by calculating ∆L using Equation 3.6 and
then subtracting it from L.
2∆L = 0.824 · 1.524(1.8456 + 0.3)(16.74
1.524 + 0.264)
(1.8456 −0.258)(16.74
1.524 −0.8) = 1.919mm
(5.14)
This yields a length of
L = 11.16mm −1.636mm = 9.524mm
(5.15)
Existing literature and parametric studies have also established that the thickness of the
slot will be most effective when it satisfies the following equation.
T = λCF
60
(5.16)
With the corresponding wavelength of the 9.5 GHz center frequency of the patch antenna
being this gives a thickness of
T = 31.557 mm
60
= 0.525 mm
(5.17)
Next the width of the slot can be calculated.
Wslot =
c
√ϵefffLB
−2(L + 2∆L −T) = 5.29mm
(5.18)
The next step is to choose the length of the slot, Lslot. This step does not have a exact
design equation, but rather two ratios which Lslot should satisfy.
Lslot
W
≥0.3 and Lslot
Wslot
≥0.75
(5.19)
Rearranging these above relationships yields the following requirements.
Lslot ≥0.3 · 1.674 cm ≥0.502 cm and Lslot ≥0.75 · 0.529 cm ≥0.396 cm
(5.20)
To support ease of manufacturing an Lslot value of 5.25 mm is chosen.
With the dimensions of the patch established, an electrically different ’pseudopatch’ has
been created that must be characterized. The first step that must be done in this process is
calculated the effective dielectric constant of the pseudopatch, ϵeff­pp. The equation used
for this is quite similar to the original effective dielectric constant equation seen above in
Equation 5.2.
εreff−pp = εr + 1
2
+ εr −1
2
[
1 + 12
h
Wslot −2T
]−1/2
= 1.716
(5.21)
The other half of the pseudopatch characterization is calculating the extension length,
which was denoted as ∆L in the rectangular patch example above and in the U­slot patch
example is denoted as ∆L−T−H.
∆L−T−H = 0.412h(ϵreff−pp + 0.3)(Wslot−2T
h
+ 0.264)
(ϵreff−pp −0.258)(Wslot−2T
h
−0.8)
(5.22)
38
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:47==
This yields the following pseudopatch extension length.
∆L−T−H = 0.412 · 1.524(1.716 + 0.3)(5.29−2·0.525
1.524
+ 0.264)
(1.716 −0.258)(5.29−2·0.525
1.524
−0.8) = 1.334 mm
(5.23)
Finally, to calculate the distance of the U­slot from the width edge the following equation
is used.
H = L −T + 2∆L−T−H −
1
√ϵeff−pp
( c
fUB
−(2Lslot + Wslot))
(5.24)
This yields the following distance, H.
H = 9.542 −0.525 + (2 · 1.334) −
1
√
1.716(
30
1.06875 −(2 · 5.25 + 5.29)) = 2.027 mm (5.25)
The vast majority of U­slot patch antennas described in the literature, including the real
world example of the Ulloriaq antenna design, position the coaxial probe feed in the center
of the patch. Thus, the design described here will do the same. The same probe described
in the rectangular patch design will be used in the U­slot patch antenna as well.
Using Equations 3.9 and 3.10 the substrate dimensions are calculated.
Lsub = 6 · 1.524 + 9.542 = 18.686 mm
(5.26)
Wsub = 6 · 1.524 + 16.74 = 25.884 mm
(5.27)
As seen in Figure 5.12 below, the antenna yields a wider bandwidth than the simple rect­
angular patch, but not sufficiently wide. In addition, the center frequency is again too high
when compared to the desired frequency. As will be discussed in more detail later in this
report, this appears to be an artifact of using design procedures that were developed for
higher ϵr values.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.12: S11 plot of the first pass U­slot patch antenna.
40
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:49==
To produce more desirable results, additional literature on U­slot patch antenna design
were consulted in order to efficiently lead to an improved design. A more recent study
sought to combine the strengths of two different U­slot patch antenna design method­
ologies: the resonant frequency method described above and the dimensional invari­
ance technique [31]. The dimensional invariance technique leverages previous paramet­
ric studies to argue that there is an ideal range of dimensional relationships that permit
wideband U­slot patch antennas [32]. Each of the two methodologies also possess short­
comings that this most recent study seek to remove. The hybrid methodology can be best
represented in the flow chart seen below in Figure 5.13a. This flowchart was utilized to
help produce a new antenna design, as well as provide insight and analysis on another
method of U­slot antenna design. After each step of the flowchart was carried out, the
S11 parameter performance of the interim antenna was studied to see the effect of the
process on the antenna.
(a) Flowchart showing the DIResF
method of U­slot patch antenna design.
(b) Corresponding antenna dimensions
Figure 5.13: Dimensional invariance and resonant frequency hybrid technique (DIResF)
for U­slot patch design.[31]
The first condition to follow is the choosing of a distance of the bottom of the U­slot from
the bottom edge of the patch, denoted as H earlier in this report’s designs and as b in
Figure 5.13a. A H value of 1.5 mm was selected arbitrarily to begin. Then, a Ls value
had to be chosen to satisfy the following relation.
3.5 ≤Ls
H ≤6.0
(5.28)
Consulting Figure B.1 shows that an increased Ls should decrease the resonant fre­
quency of the following antenna designs. Therefore, an Ls value increase from 5.25 mm
to 6.6 mm is selected, producing a value in Equation 5.28 that satisfies the relation. The
next step is to see if the following relationship holds true.
1.37 ≤L
Ls
≤1.49
(5.29)
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
41
==PAGE:50==
Beginning in this project with the dimensions from the previously described ”first pass”
U­slot patch, the antenna has a L value of 9.524. With a Ls value of 6.6, this satisfies
the requirement with a value of 1.44. This design which resulted in S11 performance
shown by the red line in Figure 5.14 below. Attempts to conduct impedance matching on
this design by altering the feed location immediately deteriorated the ­10 dB impedance
bandwidth.
In an attempt to rectify this, the next modified parameter was the substrate height. In­
creasing the height of the substrate from 1.524 mm to 2 mm greatly improved the reso­
nance of the antenna while simultaneously lowering the resonant frequency as shown in
Figure 5.14. This shift in resonant frequency makes a dimensional change to the patch
necessary to recenter the resonant frequency on 9.4 GHz. Referencing Figure B.1 in
Appendix A shows that a modification of the patch length, L, should accomplish this. By
shortening L to 9.339 mm the resonant frequency is shifted to the desired frequency,
while still maintaining a desirable S11 parameter value as seen in Figure 5.15. With an
antenna properly centered in terms of its center frequency and ample peak S11 return
loss, an increased bandwidth was desired. Several parametric changes could be made
to increase the bandwidth, but only one change would preserve the center bandwidth–
moving the feed location. By moving the feed in the Y­ direction (towards the bottom of
the U) a slight impedance mismatch was made the widened the bandwidth of the antenna
while maintaining the center frequency, at the cost of slightly degrading the S11 return
loss performance. See Figure 5.16 for the visual represention of these changes. Up until
0.26 mm of offset, the peak return loss continued to increase while increasing the band­
width. After this point, the bandwidth began to increase at the upper end of the bandwidth
range. Thus, this was considered the maximum bandwidth that could be achieved with
this parametric change. Considering the antenna before the feed movement had an ­33
dB return loss, it was deemed an advantageous trade.
42
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.14: S11 plot showing the difference in performance between a substrate height
of 1.524 mm (red) and 2 mm (green).
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.15: S11 plot showing the difference in performance between a patch length of
9.524 mm (green) and 9.339 mm (red).
44
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.16: S11 plot showing the difference in performance between a Y­ feed offset of
0 mm (red), 0.13 mm (green), and 0.26 mm (blue).
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
45
==PAGE:54==
The addition of a support substrate in which to hold the feeding structure is necessary.
It is desirable to choose a material which will introduce no new negative considerations
on the overall performance of the antenna and ideally will improve the overall antenna
performance as well. A previously written Masters thesis at DTU investigated the impact
of support substrates on patch antenna performance [33]. Some of the key takeaways
in this thesis report focus on the relationship between the support structure’s size and
ϵr and the performance of the antenna in terms of S11 parameter and radiation pattern
when compared to a reference antenna. Of particular interest to this paper is support
substrate materials with a high ϵr value, which had limited. Therefore, a high ϵr support
substrate with physical properties that make it resistant to the harsh space environment
was selected. Aluminium oxide, with an ϵr of 9.8 and no outgassing or other space envi­
ronment performance risks, satisfied the requirements well and was modeled to surround
the coaxial probe feed until the level of the copper ground plane.
Table 5.3 summarizes the final design dimensions of the U­slot patch antenna. Finally,
Figure 5.17 and Figure 5.18 below show a visual representation of the U­slot patch di­
mensions described above. The yellow portions in the figures represent the copper patch
and ground plane, the light white and beige material directly underneath the copper is
the Rogers 5880LZ substrate, and the grey material below that is the aluminium oxide
support substrate.
Patch Width, L
16.736 mm
Patch Length, W
9.339 mm
Substrate Width, Ws
28.736 mm
Substrate Length, Ls
21.339 mm
Substrate Thickness, Hs
2.0 mm
Support Substrate Thickness, Hss
6.0 mm
Feed Offset from Center (Y direction), yoffset
­0.26 mm
U­Slot Width, Wslot
5.285 mm
U­Slot Length, Lslot
6.6 mm
U­Slot Distance from Patch Edge, H
1.5 mm
U­Slot Thickness, T
0.526 mm
Inner Feed Diameter, d
0.5 mm
Outer Feed Diamter, D
1.674 mm
Table 5.3: Summary U­slot patch antenna dimensions table.
46
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.17: Single U­slot patch dimensions. Not pictured–the ­0.26 mm Y axis feed offset
from center and H = 1.5 mm distance between bottom of patch and bottom of U­slot.
Figure 5.18: Single U­slot patch thickness dimensions.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
47
==PAGE:56==
5.5
Antenna Array Design
Array Spacing
The simplest way to remove ambiguity is to place the array’s two antennas less than half
of a wavelength apart from each other. However, this distance is often shorter than the
physical dimensions of a single antenna element, as is the case in this report. Regard­
less of this limitation, the effect of array spacing is substantial no matter the method of
geolocation and will be discussed here.
First, it is worth mentioning the methods to address the ambiguities that arise when the
spacing between a two element array becomes larger than half the wavelength. The
simplest method is to add more antenna elements to the array. This also the creation of
multiple subarrays as shown in the uniform linear array below in Figure 5.19.
Figure 5.19: A 3 element linear array showing the different subarrays present (s12, s23,
s13). [34]
In Figure 5.20 you can see an example of how two subarrays can be used to remove
ambiguity. Subarrays A and B each give multiple power peaks which represnt angles
from which a singal may have come. However, there is only one peak that is common
between the two, which represents the true angle of arrival of the signal.
Figure 5.20: A representation of how two subarrays can be used together to eliminate
ambiguity in DOA measurement. [35]
The use of subarrays is also useful for dealing with another major challenge in DOA es­
timation, correlated signals. The establishment of subarrays allows the use of spatial
48
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:57==
smoothing. For each element in a given subarray, the effective measurements of that
subarray are partially uncorrelated to a neighboring subarray not containing the element
element [36]. The use of spatial smoothing is often a necessary trade off between the
accuracy and robustness of DOA estimators as it effectively decreases the array size.
Based on these previously mentioned factors, it follows that the dimensions of the array,
at a minimum, should be 3 X 3 in order to eliminate phase ambiguity and enable spatial
smoothing.
Increasing the number of antenna elements increases the DOA performance of an array
feeding data into the MUSIC algorithm. An increased number of snapshots of a particular
emitter will also increase MUSIC performance, as will a higher SNR. None of the previous
statements come as a surprise, but they are certainly important for formulating an array
design. Past research has also discovered that even if a half wavelength spacing or less
is necessary to reduce phase ambiguities, this does not automatically make it the ideal
array spacing when other important factors are considered. In terms of DOA accuracy,
researchers have found that element spacing of 0.55 wavelength produce the best results,
and that array spacing overall has a very limited impact on DOA accuracy.
Compared with other DOA estimation methods, MUSIC performs better when receiving
incident RF waves from multiple sources [37]. Given the greater likelihood of several
emitters operating in close proximity on land when compared to the likelihood of several
close emitters on water, this fact makes MUSIC an attractive choice.
Producing the desired ­3 dB beamwidth was an important determining factor in the 3 X
5 antenna array dimensions. This was the first dimension of antenna arrays studied that
satisfied the 10 ± 1.5 degrees ­3dB beamwidth requirement and the minimum 3 X 3 array
dimensions. With this dimension in mind, MUSIC performance tests were carried out to
ensure the array’s ability to perform at the required level.
Figure 5.21: Overall array dimensions.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.22: Spacing between the individual array elements.
Assumptions and Simplifications of the Individual Antenna and Antenna Array
Designs
It is worth noting the simplifications used in modeling the feeding system of the array.
The coaxial probe designed and described in the individual patch design was kept and
replicated across all 15 array elements, to which 15 separate port elements were added.
Therefore, there was no modeling or consideration of a greater interconnected feeding
network and its impact on the overall antenna array performance.
Additionally, the impact of the satellite bus mounted to the rear of the antenna was also
not explicitly considered. This is due to the not exactly known components and materials
that will be directly beneath and around the antenna array. However, it can be argued
that the introduction of the aluminium oxide support substrate provides an approximate
indication of what the affects of the satellite bus may be, given aluminium and aluminium
oxide’s similar ϵr values.
50
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:59==
6
Antenna Simulation Results
To simulate and assess the performance of the above designed antenna, CST Studio
Suite was used. CST Studio Suite is a high­performance 3D EM analysis software pack­
age for designing, analyzing and optimizing electromagnetic (EM) components and sys­
tems. CST Studio Suite can perform EM simulations using a wide variety of EM solvers
such as such as the finite element method (FEM) the finite integration technique (FIT),
and the transmission line matrix method (TLM).
6.1
Initial Patch Antenna Simulation Results
The first and most arguably most relevant result of the initial rectangular patch antenna de­
sign in the S11 parameter plot, also known as the impedance bandwidth. The impedance
bandwidth of an antenna refers to the range of frequencies over which the antenna exhibits
acceptable impedance matching and efficient power transfer. It represents the frequency
range within which the antenna can effectively transmit or receive signals without signifi­
cant reflection or loss of power. A wider impedance bandwidth indicates that the antenna
can operate over a broader range of frequencies. The impedance bandwidth is an essen­
tial characteristic to consider in this design process, as it determines the antenna’s ability
to operate efficiently across the desired frequency range.
As expected, the S11 parameter does not perform to the level required of the mission.
The ­10dB impedance bandwidth stretches from 9.8307 GHz to 10.389 GHz, with a center
frequency of 9.8307 GHz that dips down to ­14.937 dB. This gives a bandwidth of 5.67
%. This also means that the center frequency has shifted 0.3307 GHz higher than the
original intended center frequency of 9.5 GHz. This is a consequence of the simplifying
assumptions used in the equations used to design the antenna [8]. Naturally, this will need
to be accounted for and corrected in the final antenna design. U­slot patch antennas,
which improve the lacking bandwidth of this simple rectangular patch antenna, also lower
the center frequency of an antenna when all else is kept equal. The U­slot patch antenna
designed above, whose results appear in the next section, will show this.
Next, the radiation pattern of the antenna is shown in Figure 6.2, in terms of directivity. The
directivity of an antenna is a measure of its ability to concentrate radiation in a particular
direction. It quantifies this with the unit dBi, a measure of the antenna’s power radiated in
the desired direction compared to an ideal isotropic radiator. A higher directivity indicates
a more focused radiation pattern in a specific direction, while a lower directivity suggests
a more evenly distributed radiation pattern. Overall, the simple rectangular patch exhibits
the typical characteristics of such an antenna, in terms of its directivity, ­3 dB beamwidth,
and side lobe levels. The patch radiates in the broadside direction with a 7.82 dBi mag­
nitude at 9.5 GHz and a 3dB angular width of 71.7 degrees.
No additional plots regarding the simple rectangular are added in this results chapter of
this report, as it is very quickly apparent that the simple rectangular patch antenna does
not meet the required performance parameters. However, additional plots can be found
in Appendix A. The construction of the rectangular patch antenna and its associated per­
formance are included to show the theoretical background of patch antennas and to form
a basis from which to improve until the desired performance is reached. The construction
and performance of this antenna can also be used similarly in further work as a starting
point for more complicated and higher performing patch antennas.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.1: S11 parameter plot of the constructed rectangular patch antenna.
52
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.2: 9.5 GHz radiation pattern of the constructed rectangular patch antenna.
6.2
Upgraded U­Slot Patch Antenna Simulation Results
The previously described U­slot patch antenna design produced the S11 parameter plot
seen below in Figure 6.3. A center frequency of 9.388 GHz is established with a ­10 dB
impedance bandwidth of 8.49 GHz to 10.174 GHz (18%). The center frequency is within
the specified range listed in the payload requirements, meaning the antenna is best suited
for detecting X­band naval navigation radars. The total bandwidth exceeds requirements.
The Z matrix plot of the antenna seen in Figure 6.4 represents the impedance matrix of
the antenna system, which relates the voltage and current at the ports of the antenna. The
real part of the impedance is the resistive component, indicating the power dissipated in
the antenna system. It characterizes the loss or absorption of energy in the antenna and
is associated with resistive losses such as conductor and dielectric losses. The imaginary
part of the impedance is the reactive component, indicating the storage and exchange of
energy in the antenna system. It is associated with reactive elements such as inductance
and capacitance and affects the phase relationship between voltage and current. By
analyzing the Z matrix plot, one can assess the impedance characteristics of the antenna
system, including its resistance, reactance, and the overall behavior of the antenna at
different frequencies or operating conditions. The real portion (solid red line) reaches its
peak at 9.30 GHz and the imaginary portion (dashed red line) changes signs also at 9.30
GHz and minimizes at ­20 impedance per ohm shortly after. The fact that the real portion
of the Z matrix maximizes and the imaginary part changes signs occurs at essentially the
same frequency implies that the antenna is well matched at this frequency. These both
correspond well with the impedance bandwidth and radiation pattern performance seen
in Figure 6.3 and Figure 6.5. Figure 6.5 shows the radiation pattern characteristics of a
single U­slot patch. This design yields 7.79 dB of realized gain, a ­3dB angular width of
67.9 degrees, and side lobe levels of ­18.5 dB. Comparing these results to those of the
simple rectangular patch in Figure 6.2 shows a general similarity in terms of the qualitative
aspects of the radiation pattern, but also the quantitative improvements to performance
that are brought by the U­slot design.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.3: Impedance bandwidth of the final U­slot patch antenna.
54
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.4: Z matrix (real and imaginary) of the final U­slot patch antenna showing a linear
polarization.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.5: Radiation pattern of U­slot patch antenna.
56
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:65==
The axial ratio figures in Figure 6.6 and Figure 6.7 show the overall linear polarization
of the final antenna design. The axial ratio of an antenna is a measure of the polariza­
tion purity of the radiated electromagnetic wave. It quantifies the degree to which the
antenna’s radiation pattern deviates from ideal circular or linear polarization. The axial
ratio is defined as the ratio of the major to the minor axes of the polarization ellipse, which
represents the shape of the polarization state of the radiated wave. The 3D image shows
some slight deviations from a perfectly linear polarized antenna attributed to the bottom
of the U­slot.
Figure 6.6: Axial ratio of the final U­slot patch antenna showing a linear polarization.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.7: 3D axial ratio of the final U­slot patch antenna showing a linear polarization.
58
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:67==
The efficiency plots seen below in Figure 6.8 shows exceptional performance. The radi­
ation efficiency stays above 95% for the entire frequency range studied, and above 97%
for the ­10 dB impedance bandwidth range. This consistently high level of radiation effi­
ciency means a very small amount of variation between the antenna’s directivity and gain.
The total efficiency maximizes around 9.5 GHz at nearly 95% and stays above 87.5% for
the ­10 dB impedance bandwidth range. Given the antenna’s large distance between
themselves in space and their emitters on the Earth’s surface, this exceptional efficiency
performance will help ensure the array’s successful performance.
In the efficiencies plot below, it’s clear that few losses are occurring in the antenna through­
out the frequency range studied. As seen below in Figure 6.9, the normalized losses in
the dielectric materials (Rogers 5800LZ and aluminium oxide) are the higher of the two
losses, yet still stay below a normalized value of 0.01 W for the virtually the entire fre­
quency range. Losses in metal material (the copper in the feed, patch, and ground plane)
are even lower and stay below a normalized value of 0.004 W.
Figure 6.10 shows an interesting occurrence on the U­slot patch antenna is the change
in the electric field along the edges the slot, and particularly at the corners of the bottom
portion of the U. To provide a reference value, the electric field values on the patch away
from the slot stay around 1000 to 4000 V/m. Along the straight edges of the patch, these
increase up to 10,000 to 20,000 V/m, with a clear trend showing the farther towards the
bottom of the U­slot, the higher the value. Finally, the electric field at the inner bottom
corners of the U is much greater when compared to other regions of the patch, spiking
all the way to over 37,000 V/m as shown by the large red arrows. The predominantly
normal, but also tangential portions of the E field are also described by the directions of
the arrows. Figure 6.11 again shows the E­field on the single patch, but instead plotted
with dB scale values to emphasize the overall trend described in the previous paragraph.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.8: Radiation efficiency and total efficiency of the final U­slot patch antenna.
60
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.9: Power losses in dielectric and metal materials normalized to 1 Watt.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.10: E­field values on the U­slot patch at 9.5 GHz.
62
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.11: E­field contour values on the U­slot patch at 9.5 GHz, plotted with dB values.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
63
==PAGE:72==
6.3
U­Slot Patch Antenna Array Simulation Results
With the considerations and design described previously, the results of the final array are
presented below. The first, and arguably most relevant figure is the impedance band­
width performance of the 15 array elements. Seen in Figure 6.12, the elements have all
maintained the same general performance characteristics, albeit with some notable im­
provements and slight degradation. The first notable improvement in performance is in
the peak S parameter of each element. The various interactions between the array ele­
ments have introduced a greater amount of small ”peaks and valleys” in the S parameter
plots. These interactions are the driving factors behind all of the changes of the elements’
performances when compared to the individual U­slot patch. As seen in Figure 6.3, the
single patch showed a ­15.2 dB performance. While the peak performance of all elements
are ­16 dB or below. This signals mutual coupling and array effects that are causing this
improved performance in this regard. However, there has been a small yet consistent
degradation of the ­10 dB impedance bandwidth of the elements when compared to the
individual patch antenna. This degradation primarily occurs on the lower end of the band­
width range, with the upper end of the elements’ bandwidths largely unchanged when
compared to the single U­slot patch. Another change is in the center frequency of the
elements. They have all been shifted to slightly higher frequencies. While the center fre­
quency of the single patch is 9.388 GHz, the elements have shifted closer to 9.425 GHz,
a small change that still falls within the desired central frequency range.
In the Z parameter performances seen below in Figure 6.13, a satisfactory agreement with
the individual U­slot patch antenna of Figure 6.4 is seen. The real portions of the matrices
appear to have reduced by roughly 3 impedance / ohm on average, while the imaginary
portions have increased by the same amount, on average. The imaginary portions change
sign at the same frequency seen in the single U­slot patch. This signifies resonance at
the same frequencies between the array elements and the single antenna.
In the following figures, the radiation pattern characteristics of the antenna array when
uniformly excited will be shown. Figure 6.14 shows the realized gain of the array. The ar­
ray exhibits 20 dB of realized gain and an 11.1 degree ­3 dB beamwidth, thus falling within
the stated requirements. The array has a side lobe level of ­13 dB, which for reference,
is a worse performance when compared to the Ulloriaq antenna, which sits between ­20
and ­25 dB depending on the ground plane and antenna iteration considered. There are
also grating lobes at ± 90 degrees that have a magnitude of 3 db. These are an effect
of the spacing of the array elements. As mentioned previously, the following figures are
produced in the case that the array is simultaneously and uniformly excited. This decision
is worth discussing more, as it is not conducive to reducing the side lobe levels that can be
seen in Figure 6.14. Tapered currents, changes in phase, and other methods are avail­
able to reduce side lobe levels. However for the purposes of this report, these were not
considered in the simulations. The primary reason for this omission is discussed in sec­
tion 7.4. Figure 6.15 and Figure 6.16 give a visual representation of the array’s radiation
pattern in 3D. The relatively high gain of the main broadside beam are clearly evident, and
a visual relationship between it and the side lobes can also be seen. Below in Figure 6.17,
the crosspolar pattern of the array is seen. The minimized crosspolar component of the
antenna at the main beam direction of 0 degrees shows the array’s rejection of incoming
cross polarized RF signals. The copolar performance of the array is shown below in Fig­
ure 6.18. In contrast to he crosspolar performance above, the copolar performance shows
favorable performance in terms of the array’s acceptance of copolar radaition incident to
it.
64
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.12: Impedance bandwidth performance for the 15 array elements.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 6.13: Real and imaginary Z­parameter performance of the 15 array elements.
66
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:75==
Figure 6.14: Array Realized Gain Radiation Pattern.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 6.15: 3D array radiation pattern in a top down viewing angle.
68
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.16: 3D array radiation pattern in an oblique viewing angle.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 6.17: Crosspolar pattern of the antenna array.
70
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:79==
Figure 6.18: Copolar pattern of the antenna array.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
71
==PAGE:80==
Ground Field of View
Naturally, a very important performance metric to visually present is the area over which
the antenna array can detect emitters. This area’s shape and size changes given different
relationships between the target emitter and the satellite’s current position in its orbit. In
Figure 6.19, Figure 6.20, and Figure 6.21 below, 3 examples of this are shown.
In Figure 6.19, the case in which the satellite is a relatively short distance away from
the target emitter as shown. The FOV on the ground is quite close to the 11.1 degree
nominal beamwidth of the array and has a slightly elliptical shape. This begins the overall
trend that positively correlates distance between the satellite and emitter, and the elliptical
shape of the FOV on the ground.
Figure 6.19: Antenna array FOV at short satellite­emitter distance.
Figure 6.20 shows an intermediate distance between the satellite and emitter and the
resultant more elliptical FOV when compared to Figure 6.19.
Figure 6.20: Antenna array FOV at medium satellite­emitter distance.
72
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:81==
Figure 6.21 shows what occurs in the array’s FOV when the target emitter is located
relatively far away, and thus the attitude of the satellite is closer to parallel to the Earth’s
surface. The general shape of the FOV is reminiscent of Norsat 3’s FOV as seen in
Figure 5.1.
Figure 6.21: Antenna array FOV at long satellite­emitter distance.
The previous 3 images show the evolution of the array FOV as it progresses through an
orbit relative to a target emitter. Several different factors will dictate generally which shape
of array FOV will be available and which will be most suitable for different missions. In the
case of naval navigation radar detection, an operation of the antenna closer to that seen
in Figure 6.21, as it permits a greater FOV over the vast areas of ocean which will have
relatively few emitters when compared to a land based scene. Therefore, in the search
for and geolocation of land based emitters, especially in a military context, a more specific
FOV like that in Figure 6.19 will likely be desired.
Of course, the location of the satellite within its orbit will dictate this process, as well as
the nature of the emitter target. Namely, if there is a specific location which emitters are
known to be and more precise geolocation is desired. Or perhaps the desired mission is
to see where and when new emitters enter an area which previously was empty or more
sparsely populated.
6.3.1
Commentary on Overall Design Process in CST Studio Suite
In addition to the various antenna designs presented above, there were several lessons
learned on the design procedure and process itself within CST Studio Suite. One of the
larger points of struggle within the process was the proper construction of the coaxial feed
and its implementation in relation to the other components of the patch antenna. First, the
proper construction of the feed will be discussed. There are multiple port options within
CST Studio Suite. Namely, the waveguide port, the discrete port, and the plane wave
port. Through these ports the antenna can be excited and data about its performance
can be collected. Of course, choosing 1 of these 3 options is the first step in the feed de­
sign process. The plane wave option can immediately be removed, as it does not provide
the S11 parameter data needed to properly assess the impedance bandwidth of the an­
tenna. Instead it provides stimulation amplitude data. Next, is the discrete port. Benefits
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
73
==PAGE:82==
of the discrete port are its fast and simple implementation into a CST simulation. The user
can easily specify the desired impedance and location of the port all in the same menu,
and edit its location from the same menu if desired at a later time. At first, this made
the discrete port seem like an attractive option for simulating the feed, especially given
some early challenges encountered when dealing with the waveguide port that will be
mentioned shortly. However, the discrete port also has drawbacks that ultimately make
it unsuited for the antennas in this thesis. The discrete port assumes a perfect electric
conductor throughout its length, which is helpful in rough approximation calculations, but
is undesirable in more detailed and accurate simulations in which the loss throughout the
feed should be accounted. At higher frequencies, when the length of the discrete port is
longer than a tenth of a wavelength, the S­parameters may differ from those when us­
ing waveguide ports because of the improper match between the port and the structure.
Given the fact that the antennas in this thesis lie within that area of limitation, the discrete
port cannot be used to confidently produce accurate results. Therefore, the use of a dis­
crete port to excite the antenna was ruled out. This leaves the waveguide port as the
last remaining option. Waveguide ports are used to simulate an infinitely long waveguide,
which make them especially suited for simulating a rectangular waveguide, coaxial cable
or microstrip line. They deliver a better match to the mode pattern as well as higher accu­
racy in S­Parameters than the previously mentioned port types [38]. The waveguide port,
however, is not a self­contained feeding mechanism like the discrete port. It requires the
user to build the physical structure that carries the electrical energy to and from the port,
such as a microstrip or a coaxial cable. This can be seen as a strength and a weakness for
the waveguide port. One one hand, if the physical structure is modeled accurately both in
its own structure and interactions with the rest of the overall structure, it provides a much
more accurate simulation. On the other hand, this structure construction and interactions
make a deep understanding of CST’s solvers and interaction logic a critical necessity.
Overall, these facts and characteristics make the waveguide port the correct method for
simulating the coaxial feed.
As mentioned and shown above, a coaxial cable structure was necessary to utilize the
waveguide port. The initial construction of this structure proved to be of little difficulty,
thanks to plentiful literature describing the usual materials of such a structure and the
coaxial cable Macro in CST Studio Suite seen in Figure 5.11. Integration of the struc­
ture into the rest of the patch antenna required a sufficient knowledge of the interaction
of the two, such as the inner conductor completely integrating with the patch, the dura­
tion for which the teflon outer coating runs in parallel with the inner conductor, and the
integration of the outer cover into the ground plane. To realize those relationships, an
understanding of the various boolean operators in CST and their end results was needed
to ensure everything interacted properly. This issue persisted for multiple days of study,
and resulted in several ultimately wasted hours of constructing and reconstructing a new
coaxial feed every time a different feed position was desired. After piecing together infor­
mation from the CST user guide and several tutorial videos a method was developed to
move the location of an existing feed when desired. The first step of this solution entailed
constructing every component of the antenna, excluding the feeding mechanism, on the
global coordinate system of the CST simulation environment. Next, the mid point of the
antennas ground plane is selected using the pick face middle point menu option. With the
middle point selected, a new local coordinate system is aligned to the ground plane center
point and given a set of two parametric center point values, xfeedmove and yfeedmove,
which are initially set to 0. After this local coordinate system has been established, the
feed can be constructed as normal, with all its coordinates and dimensions specified to
reside within the local coordinate system. Whenever the user desires to move the feed
74
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:83==
position, only the xfeedmove and yfeedmove parameters must be changed and the entire
feed assembly will instantly be moved while maintaining all the other parameters of the
patch antenna construction. This proved to be a crucial breakthrough during the antenna
design process of this thesis, as positioning of the feed directly and greatly impacted the
final impedance bandwidth performance.
Once the design of the patch dimensions was deemed satisfactory, the movement of the
feeding structure was used to finalize the design of the overall patch antenna. By moving
the patch in the Y­ Direction, the peak return loss of ­33 dB was increased to ­15 dB and
the bandwidth was increased from to span from 8.49 GHz to 10.17 GHz while maintaining
the same center frequency. This represents a conscious design decision regarding the
trade off between peak S11 return loss and overall bandwidth. For a mission such as
this, which seeks to detect a wide variety of frequencies, compared to a dedicated naval
navigation radar detection mission, in which a much narrower bandwidth with a peak
return loss centered on a single frequency would be more desirable.
It is also worth mentioning the insights gained on designing a patch antenna with a low
ϵr value dielectric substrate material–in this case Rogers 5880LZ. Common and popular
dielectric substrate materials, excluding air’s ϵr value of 1, are almost exclusively greater
than 2. This means the vast majority of literature regarding both empirical and theoretical
patch and U­slot patch antenna design focuses on substrates with ϵr values greater than
2. In fact, the lowest ϵr used in the 3 U­slot design papers consulted in this report was 2.2
[30][31][32]. The design process and iterations of the Ulloriaq patch were not accessible
to the author. Additionally, the Ulloriaq patch antenna is a multilayer design with a quite
complex feeding mechanism. So while the Ulloriaq antenna was the closest source of
qualitative inspiration, it could not much be used for empirical reference. Therefore, the
design process described in this report is somewhat novel in terms of a very low ϵr single
layer U­slot patch antenna.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
75
==PAGE:84==
7
Geolocation Algorithms
Once the path antenna array has detected and recorded incoming RF energy, an algo­
rithm must be employed to process the signals and give a geolocation solution. Several
methods exist to accomplish this task, each with their unique set of strengths and weak­
nesses. Literature review of these methods provided enough information and testing to
narrow consideration to two algorithms: MUSIC and ESPRIT.
7.1
MUSIC
Developed by Schimdt and colleagues in 1978, the basic approach of MUSIC is the Eigen­
value decomposition of the received signal covariance matrix. The generated covariance
matrix is diagonal in nature due to the uncorrelated noise taken into account. Here the
signal and the noise subspaces are computed using matrix algebra and are found to be
orthogonal to one another. Exploiting this orthogonality property makes it possible iso­
late the signal and noise subspaces. Then, the entire steering vector matrix is searched
for those which are exactly orthogonal. These correspond to the angles of arrival of the
incoming signal [39].
7.2
ESPRIT
Another algorithm is the ”estimation of signal parameters via rotational invariant tech­
niques” algorithm, commonly reffered to as ESPRIT. Initially developed by Roy and Kailath
for frequency estimation in 1985 and later expanded to AoA estimation, ESPRIT uses the
shift­invariance of the involved antenna array in order to perform DOA estimation. This
is possible after partitioning the antenna array into smaller divisions or subarrays. The
shift or rotational invariance amongst these subarrays refers to the relationship between
the steering matrix of each subarray that can be described by a relative phase rotation or
rotation operator, which is equal to the true DOA angle of the source [36].
7.3
Selection of MUSIC
Literature review of several papers comparing the use of MUSIC and ESPRIT’s AoA per­
formance characteristics in a wide variety of use cases was conducted. During initial
literature in the context of AoA detection of drones, MUSIC obtained the finest angular
resolution in the conducted tests and can guarantee consistently high resolution when
using spatial smoothing with subarrays. ESPRIT can obtain accurate estimates for low­
SNR scenarios using only a few snapshots and has the lowest computational complexity.
Later real world tests with a MIMO X­band radar array showed that MUSIC with subar­
ray partitioning is best­suited to resolve the targets of interest. Therefore, MUSIC was
selected as the algorithm of choice for the mission.
7.4
MUSIC Performance Confirmation
To simulate the performance of the designed antenna array as the input source to the
MUSIC algorithm, the performance characteristics of the antenna array were transferred
into a MATLAB script that runs the MUSIC algorithm. From there, different variables
regarding the scenario in which the array is receiving RF waves are specified. These
include the number of incident RF sources, the number of snapshots received from these
sources, the true direction angles of these sources, and the noise power of each array
element.
76
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:85==
A shortcoming of the MUSIC simulation provided by MATLAB is its insistence on identical
parameters among all antennas used in the simulation. Therefore, it is not possible to
specify any differences in terms of current tapering, phase changes between the antenna,
and any other of the numerous ways that the array elements can be different from each
other. The thought process in still choosing to use MATLAB for confirmation of MUSIC’s
utility is twofold. First, the time and workload requirement . Second, if the array is still able
to successfully conduct geolocation operations with no sidelobe mitigation and a simple
feeding mechanism, it can be argued than any further work in this area would only increase
the performance of the array. Therefore, the decision to proceed with the simulation in
MATLAB was made.
The following solution parameters were given to the simulation: 1 W thermal noise, 100
snapshots of the emitters, and two incident RF signals coming from angles (0, ­3) and
(­3,­3) degrees. The results of the simulation are plotted below.
The simulated array and MUSIC algorithm were able to successfully resolve the two emit­
ters angles of arrival. Figure 7.1 shows the result of the MUSIC algorithm, measured in dB
power, across a range of azimuth and elevation angles. A key phenomena to notice are
the several points at which an elevated power level exists at an incorrect solution. This is
the result of the greater than a half wavelength spacing between the array elements that
was mentioned earlier in section 5.5. However, because the array satisfies the 3 array
dimensional minimum necessary to resolve this ambiguity, MUSIC is still able to produce
the correct angles of arrival, signified by the dark yellow pixels in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: MUSIC performance plotted in 2D.
The same parameters are again plotted in Figure 7.2 but in 3D, to illustrate better the
”peaks” which signal a AoA solution as calculated by MUSIC, as well as the numerous
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
77
==PAGE:86==
but smaller peaks that are products of the greater than half wavelength spacing present
in the array.
Figure 7.2: MUSIC performance plotted in 3D.
78
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:87==
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
79
==PAGE:88==
8
Conclusion and Future Work
8.1
Conclusion
In the preceding thesis report, a novel concept for a rapid­response cubesat designed
to detect radar emitters on both land and sea is presented. The main radar detection
and geolocation antenna array payload is designed, along with relevant mission analysis
and execution requirements. Context of the world’s current security environment was
given to help the reader understand the appeal and need for a satellite platform that can
be launched on very short notice to detect RF emitters no matter their location. Theory
regarding detection and geolocation of RF emitters by a space­based platform, patch
antennas, and orbital mechanics were all presented. Inspiration from previous and current
RF detection and geolocation satellite missions were found and analyzed so they could
be incorporated into the payload design and overall mission analysis. Then, a detailed
design process of the U­slot patch antenna that would ultimately comprise the elements
of the final array was described. A simple rectangular patch antenna with no U­slot was
first designed to provide overall context to the performance of patch antennas and as an
initial launch point towards the final design. A variety of literature regarding U­slot patch
antennas were then consulted and parametrically iterated upon to produce a final U­slot
patch antenna design that met the established mission requirements. This antenna design
was then studied in an array context in order to design a final antenna array that can,
according to relevant simulations, effectively detect and geolocate RF emitters on both
land and sea. Included in this array design process were considerations regarding the
number of antenna elements and their spacing. The algorithms used for AoA calculation
and ultimate geolocation were studied, chosen, and verified. Recommendations for future
work and expansion on this thesis are presented below.
8.2
Future Work
The expansion of the design method contained in this report for a wideband, single layer,
low ϵr value, U­slot patch antenna into a fully developed empirical design method would
certainly be a worthy topic of future work. As mentioned previously, there is little literature
that caters to this specific type of patch antenna (very low ϵr single layer), so new work
can easily provide new scholarly value.
Construction of the U­slot antenna and final array of antennas and subsequent testing of
their performance is of course necessary to verify the performance calculated by CST. The
challenges of working with patch antenna manufacturers and the necessary equipment
were described in more detail in the Ulloraiq antenna report. These included bending and
distortion of the first batch of delivered substrate material, drilling and milling accuracy
and precision optimization, and the proper coupling of the primary dielectric substrate
and the support substrate. The use of a single layer antenna design negates some of
these challenges, however it is still worth mentioning. Deeper research into methods to
reduce the side lobe levels and grating lobes of the array are also highly relevant. This
is arguably the greateset weakness in the current design, and will certainly need to be
addressed in the future.
Once greater investment into the array design has been completed, reverification of the
new design’s ability to use MUSIC to geolocate RF emitters will be necessary as well.
80
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:89==
More detailed work on the specifics of the mission’s systems engineering tasks mentioned
throughout this report will be necessary if this mission is to be brought to reality. The
systems engineering work presented in this thesis report represents a first level check
that the desired mission requirements are realistically obtainable using a standard cubesat
platform.
Summarized, any fully developed and appealing satellite mission deserves more work and
research than can be provided by a single Masters thesis. However, this report hopes to
begin discussions towards making a mission of this type a reality.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
81
==PAGE:90==
82
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Earth Observation Programme Board and European Space Agency. Block 3: Mis­
sion Management Quarterly Status Report October 2022 – December 2022. 2022.
[2]
Andreas Nordmo Skauen et al. “NorSat­3–next generation Norwegian maritime
surveillance”. In: (2019).
[3]
US Space Force. SMC stands up new Space Safari program office. 2021. URL:
https://www.losangeles.spaceforce.mil/News/Article/2653453/smc-stands-up-new-
space-safari-program-office/.
[4]
David Lingard et al. “Demonstration of a Heterogeneous Satellite Architecture Dur­
ing RIMPAC 2018”. In: (2019).
[5]
Abulasad Elgamoudi et al. “A Survey for Recent Techniques and Algorithms of Ge­
olocation and Target Tracking in Wireless and Satellite Systems”. In: Applied Sci­
ences 11.13 (2021). ISSN: 2076­3417. DOI: 10 . 3390 / app11136079. URL: https :
//www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/13/6079.
[6]
James P Basel. “Analysis of geolocation approaches using satellites”. In: (2014).
[7]
Jeffrey Foutz. Narrowband Direction of Arrival Estimation for Antenna Arrays. eng.
Springer, 2008. ISBN: 3031004094, 3031015371, 9783031004094, 9783031015373.
[8]
Constantine A Balanis. Antenna theory: analysis and design. John wiley & sons,
2015.
[9]
Peter Fortescue, Graham Swinerd, and John Stark. Spacecraft systems engineer­
ing. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[10]
Phil Plait. How do you calculate the orbit of an object in space? Oct. 2021. URL:
https://www.syfy.com/syfy-wire/how-do-you-calculate-the-orbit-of-an-object-in-
space.
[11]
effects Space environment and education system. SPENVIS Orbit Generator. URL:
https://www.spenvis.oma.be/.
[12]
ISRO. Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle. 2019. URL: https://www.isro.gov.in/PSLV_
CON.html.
[13]
ESA. Vega Rocket. 2022. URL: https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Space_
Transportation/Launch_vehicles/Vega.
[14]
SpaceX. Falcon 9 Rocket. 2022. URL: https://www.spacex.com/vehicles/falcon-9/.
[15]
Rocket Lab. Electron Rocket. 2022. URL: https://www.rocketlabusa.com/launch/
electron/.
[16]
Space Inventor A/S. 6U Satellite. May 2023. URL: https://space- inventor.com/
satellites/6u-satellite/.
[17]
Samuel Cranny­Evans. Russia’s electronic warfare capabilities ­ global defence
technology: Issue 133: March 2022. Mar. 2022. URL: https://defence.nridigital.
com/global_defence_technology_mar22/russia_electronic_warfare.
[18]
Swedish Ministry of Defense. Russian Electronic Warfare. Sept. 2018. URL: https:
//www.foi.se/rest-api/report/FOI-R--4625--SE.
[19]
Sining Liu et al. “A survey on CubeSat missions and their antenna designs”. In:
Electronics 11.13 (2022), p. 2021.
[20]
Torkild Eriksen et al. “New microsatellite­based concept for monitoring of maritime
traffic by navigation radar detection”. In: Sensors, Systems, and Next­Generation
Satellites V. Vol. 4540. SPIE. 2001, pp. 166–175.
[21]
S. Jama and O. Breinbjerg. 2017.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
83
==PAGE:92==
[22]
William A. Imbriale, Steven Shichang Gao, and Luigi Boccia. Space Antenna Hand­
book. eng. John Wiley and Sons, 2012. ISBN: 1119945135. DOI: 10.1002/9781119945147.
[23]
Pawel Kabacik and Marek E Bialkowski. “The temperture dependence of substrate
parameters and their effect on microstrip antenna performance”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Antennas and Propagation 47.6 (1999), pp. 1042–1049.
[24]
David R Jackson. “Overview of microstrip antennas”. In: Department of Electrical
Communication Engineering, University of Houston (2011).
[25]
Rod Waterhouse. Microstrip Patch Antennas: A Designer’s Guide. Springer Science
& Business Media, 2003.
[26]
Md Tanvir Ishtaique­ul Huque et al. “Design and performance analysis of microstrip
array antennas with optimum parameters for X­band applications”. In: International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 2.4 (2011).
[27]
Kai Fong Lee and Kin­Fai Tong. “Microstrip Patch Antennas”. eng. In: Handbook of
Antenna Technologies (2015), pp. 1–55. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-4560-75-7_29-1.
[28]
SE Jasim et al. “Finding the best feeding point location of patch antenna using
HFSS”. In: ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 10.23 (2015), pp. 17444–
17449.
[29]
Ahmad H Abdelgwad. “Microstrip patch antenna enhancement techniques”. In: In­
ternational Journal of Electronics and Communication Engineering 12.10 (2018),
pp. 703–710.
[30]
Steven Weigand et al. “Analysis and design of broad­band single­layer rectangular
U­slot microstrip patch antennas”. In: IEEE transactions on antennas and propaga­
tion 51.3 (2003), pp. 457–468.
[31]
Mahrukh Khan and Deb Chatterjee. “Characteristic mode analysis of a class of em­
pirical design techniques for probe­fed, U­slot microstrip patch antennas”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 64.7 (2016), pp. 2758–2770.
[32]
Venkataraman Natarajan and Deb Chatterjee. “An Empirical Approach for Design
of Wideband, Prob­Fed, U­Slot Microstrip Patch Antennas on Single­Layer, Infinite,
Grounded Substrates”. In: Applied Computational Electromagnetics Society Journal
18 (Nov. 2003), pp. 191–201.
[33]
Lasse Lehmann. “Reduction of Support Structure Effects on Short Range Device
Antennas by Use of Metamaterials”. PhD thesis. 2015.
[34]
D Guerin, S Jackson, and J Kelly. “Passive Direction Finding–A Phase Interferom­
etry Direction Finding System for an Airborne Platform. 2012”. In: URL: https://www.
wpi. edu/Pubs/E­project/Available/E­project­101012­211424/unrestricted/DirectionFindingPaper.
pdf (besucht am 02. 08. 2016) ().
[35]
Yue Guo, Hong­Yuan Wang, and Zou Zhou. “Effect of array elements spacing on
music algorithm”. In: ACTA ELECTONICA SINICA 35.9 (2007), p. 1675.
[36]
Lasse Lehmann. “Multiple­Input Multiple­Output Radar for Drone Detection”. PhD
thesis. 2023.
[37]
Cui Zhen Sun. “The application of MUSIC algorithm in the planar array antenna”.
eng. In: 2015 Ieee International Conference on Signal Processing, Communications
and Computing, Icspcc 2015 (2015), p. 7338882. DOI: 10 . 1109 / ICSPCC . 2015 .
7338882.
[38]
CST User Guide. Waveguide Port Overview. URL: https://space.mit.edu/RADIO/
CST_online/mergedProjects/3D/special_overview/special_overview_waveguideover.
htm#Port_Mode_Coplanar.
[39]
Pooja Gupta and S.P. Kar. “MUSIC and improved MUSIC algorithm to estimate di­
rection of arrival”. In: 2015 International Conference on Communications and Signal
Processing (ICCSP). 2015, pp. 0757–0761. DOI: 10.1109/ICCSP.2015.7322593.
84
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:93==
A
Additional Rectangular Patch
Performance Plots
Two efficiency plots, radiation and total, are presented. Radiation efficiency is the ratio
of the power radiated by an antenna to the total input power supplied to the antenna,
accounting for losses in the antenna structure. It measures how effectively the antenna
converts input power into radiated electromagnetic energy. Total efficiency, on the other
hand, accounts for both radiation efficiency and other losses in the antenna system, such
as mismatch losses, ground losses, and losses in the feed network. It represents the over­
all efficiency of the antenna system in converting input power into useful radiation, taking
into account all losses in the system. The results also show typical rectangular patch an­
tenna performance characteristics with 96.64% and 68.154% efficiencies, respectively.
Figure A.1: Radiation efficiency of the constructed rectangular patch antenna.
Figure A.2: Total efficiency of the constructed rectangular patch antenna.
Below is the resultant S11 plot after changing the length of the original rectangular patch
to have a more accurate and resonant center frequency. It shows the low bandwidth and
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
85
==PAGE:94==
deep resonance commonly associated with rectangular patch antennas.
Figure A.3: S11 parameter plot after adjustment of the patch length, L.
86
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:95==
B
U­Slot Patch Antenna Paramter
Modification Table
The two figures in this appendix represent the resultant performance changes that occur
given various parametric changes of the design of a U­slot patch antenna [30]. The chart
is interpreted as follows. The top row letters correspond to positive parametric changes
of the respective dimensions. For example, A+ would refer to an increase of the width of
the patch. The corresponding column indicates whether such a change either increases
(+) the relevant performance metric, decreases (­) it, or has no effect (0) on it. A ”0”
followed by a ”(+)” or ”(­)” indicates a very slight increase or decrease of the relevant
performance metric. The asterisk (*) indicates that further consideration of the relationship
between C and A and C and D must be especially considered. The ”Λ” and ”V” indicate
inconclusive results that require further testing. Consult the original source for a more in
depth interpretation guide.
Figure B.1: Table of parametric modifications and their corresponding performance mod­
ifications.
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure B.2: U­slot patch antenna dimensions used in Figure B.1.
88
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
==PAGE:97==
Satellite Electronic Support Measures
89
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 101
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.security.dtu.dk
