==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declara-
tive DCR Choreographies using Jolie
Tobias Bonnesen (s164420),
Faizan Yousaf (s202793)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies us-
ing Jolie
Master Thesis
July 1, 2023
By
Tobias Bonnesen (s164420)
Faizan Yousaf (s202793)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must in-
clude the customary bibliographic citation, including author at-
tribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs.
Lyn-
gby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is set to 35 ETCS points, which ofﬁcially gives the students 6 months
to prepare it. However, due to scheduling conﬂicts, the thesis has been prepared
over a period of only 5 months. This has been done at the Section for Software
Systems Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulﬁllment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Tobias Bonnesen (s164420)
Signature
Date
Faizan Yousaf (s202793)
Signature
Date
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
i
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the possibility of using Dynamic-Condition-Response (DCR)
graphs as choreographies to model the microservices-communication within a
business, paired with the service-oriented programming language Jolie, to gen-
erate source code for distributed services, where the communication is ensured
to happen in accordance with the rules of the choreography and where the com-
munication is guaranteed to be deadlock-free. A .NET solution is implemented
in F#, which takes a DCR choreography in the form of a JSON ﬁle, analyses
it for deadlocks and endpoint-projectability, generates endpoint projections for
its roles involved in the choreography, and consequently, generates Jolie source
code for the projections. We furthermore implement ChoreoFlow, a GUI appli-
cation for creating DCR choreographies, which can then be exported in JSON
format. The work also discusses service communication design implications,
including code redundancy and potential optimizations. The study contributes
to the design of distributed systems that are safe-by-design, ensuring properties
like deadlock-freedom in distributed systems.
ii
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the following people for their help in making this thesis
become a reality:
Hugo-Andrés López-Acosta, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Thanks to Hugo-Andrés for supervising us and for helping in creating an en-
thusiasm around the project and its possibilities. Marco Peressotti, Associate
Professor, SDU IMADA
A special thanks to Marco for co-supervising and contributing with his knowl-
edge of Jolie and choreographic languages. DCR Solutions
Thanks to DCR Solutions for providing us with an extended user at their web-
site, to get familiar with the concepts of DCR graphs initially.
Family and
friends
For their love and support.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
iii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Related Work
3
3
Background
5
3.1
DCR graphs, choreographies and endpoint projection . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Buyer-Seller-Shipper example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Jolie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Design
17
4.1
ChoreoFlow - GUI application for making DCR choreographies . .
17
4.2
DCR choreographies represented in JSON-format and validation
of these . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Code-generation Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Design of Generated Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Implementation
29
6
Evaluation
40
6.1
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Benchmarking of code-generation pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Jolie services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Discussion
44
7.1
Implications of Service Communication Design
. . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Conclusion and future work
47
Bibliography
48
A Appendix A: Generated Jolie code for the Buyer-Seller-Shipper exam-
ple
51
iv
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The use of the microservice pattern in the deployment of modern-day distributed
systems is becoming more prevalent, and with it, there is a growing concern for
distributed systems to be secure-by-design and fault-tolerant. This has led to a
growing interest in the research of safe-by-design principles and research into
how to ensure properties of the communication of the distributed systems, such
as deadlock-freedom and liveness. Meanwhile, research has been going into de-
veloping declarative models in place of imperative models for better-describing
business processes, as imperative models are found to be too restrictive to prop-
erly model the complex scenarios that can arise in real-life business scenar-
ios. [1], [2] introduced Dynamic-Condition-Response graphs, as a new declarative,
event-based workﬂow process model, that could be used to capture the work-
ﬂows of different kinds of enterprises and their processes. It differed from other
process languages, in that it was declarative, which allowed it to better capture
the workﬂows of real-life examples, which often required a greater degree of
ﬂexibility, than what imperative process models allowed for. It also had a sim-
ple graphical notation, which made it more intuitive for people not strongly
familiar with logic, to model in. In addition to this, because of its formalization,
properties of deadlock-freedom and liveness could be developed for the DCR
graph model. This has in recent research led to DCR graphs being an attractive
choice for choreographies, because if they can be formalized as choreographies
and their endpoint-projectability conditions identiﬁed, then they can be used to
model communication between distributed systems and microservices, and sub-
sequently code can be generated for them, that is ensured to be deadlock-free
and which communicates in accordance with the choreography. [3] formalized
DCR graphs as choreographies for the ﬁrst time, and [4] expanded it with time,
data and guards and [5] simulated DCR endpoint-projections deployed as dis-
tributed systems, communicating in accordance with a DCR choreography, using
message queues.
Jolie has been developed, to be a Service-ﬁrst programming language. In this
master’s thesis project, we pair DCR choreographies with Jolie services, to create
safe-by-design distributed services. We do this, by developing a .NET solution in
F#, that is able to take a DCR choreography, check it for deadlocks, for endpoint-
projectability and to create boilerplate source code in Jolie, with a Jolie service
created for each role in the choreography.
1.1
Objectives
The objectives of this master’s thesis are to combine the power of declarative
choreographies, and service-oriented languages like Jolie to create an environ-
ment where declarative choreographies can be modeled, checked for correctness,
and corresponding Jolie microservice endpoints can be generated. In this project
we will do it speciﬁcally for the choreographic language of DCR graphs. This
will be achieved by developing a pipeline that takes in a DCR choreography
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
1
==PAGE:9==
represented as a text-ﬁle, parse it into custom data structures, analyze it for
deadlocks and endpoint-projectability and then generate the relevant Jolie boil-
erplate source code.
2
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:10==
2
Related Work
[5] implemented tools for dealing with DCR graphs with data and time, which
were able to execute events and record traces for runs. The supported data types
were boolean, integer, string and void. In addition, they developed a confor-
mance checker, which could take a trace-run and check whether it violated the
declarative rules of the DCR graph - if it did, it could come with suggestions for
alternative runs, that would then make the trace comply. Furthermore they could
check the DCR graphs for deadlocks and endpoint-projectability and endpoint-
project the graph. Lastly, they could simulate communication between these
endpoints in distributed systems, by using message-passing using the MQTT
standard and visualize the communication in GraphStream.
A few things are different between their solution and ours. They supported
data and time, and we do not due to time constraints. In addition, they support
the recording of traces and conformance checks. While we do not implement
traces or conformance check of traces, all the required tools are implemented to
do so: As we have functions to check for the enabled-ness of a graph and to
execute an event on it, then given a list of events to execute, we could simply
try to execute them one by one, until we meet an event that we ﬁnd is not
enabled (thus proving the trace is not conforming with the declarative rules
of the DCR graph). The most important difference is that while their solution
supports endpoint projection and simulation of the use of these in distributed
systems by use of message queues, with a coordinator to decide if events can be
executed or not, our solution generates source code for Jolie services that can be
spun up as microservices, with a Jolie service for each role and a Jolie operation
deﬁned for each input and output action, the output operation belonging to the
initiator and the input operation belonging to the receivers. We implement a
StateManager that can be initialized with a DCR graph, and which exposes the
endpoints canExecute and execute. An instance of the StateManager is spun up
locally to each Jolie service and initialized with the endpoint projection of that
Jolie service. Whenever an input or output operation is being executed, it will
ﬁrst check with its local instance of the StateManager whether the graph is in
a state, where that action can be executed. If it is, the operation continues by
either contacting an input operation on another Jolie service, if it was an output
operation, or executing an embedded Java method, if it was an input operation.
Another work [6] related to DCR choreographies was done in the realm of
blockchain-enabled business processes, overcoming the limitations of modiﬁca-
tions on existing Smart Contracts (SC). The authors propose a change propaga-
tion mechanism to bring adaptiveness to the trustworthy execution of declarative
choreography instances. Their approach comprises three main steps: change in-
troduction, negotiation, and propagation. They declare rules that specify the
allowed and prohibited changes, ensuring a correct-by-construction DCR chore-
ography after the change and ensuring that no deadlocks or livelocks occur. All
changes are applied at the process instance level. Local changes are managed
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
3
==PAGE:11==
off-chain, while changes impacting an interaction start an on-chain negotiation
phase. If the negotiation succeeds, the change effect is propagated to the partners
affected directly by the change. The authors leverage the use of Smart Contracts
(SC) to record partners involvement in a tamper-proof fashion during the change
negotiation and propagation stages. If misbehavior occurs, the blockchain logs
can be used as a shared source of truth. This use of SCs for ensuring trust and
transparency in the change propagation process is a unique aspect of their work.
The difference between this work and our thesis is the focus on change propa-
gation in a decentralized manner on the blockchain. While our work also uses
DCR graphs to model choreographies, we do not speciﬁcally address the issue of
change propagation in a blockchain-decentralized setting. Instead, our focus is
on generating Jolie microservices from DCR choreographies, where each service
is responsible for managing the state of their choreography projection through a
local StateManager.
Several other works have also focused on choreographies and their application
in distributed systems. The AIOCJ framework [7][8], Choral [9][10], and the
Chor programming language [11] all start with choreography and end up with
distributed applications.
AIOCJ and Chor generate Jolie code, while Choral
generates pure Java code. They ensure deadlock-freedom and conformance of
the endpoint projections with the state of the choreographies in one way or
another.
AIOCJ offers a domain-speciﬁc language, called Adaptive Interaction Oriented
Choreographies (AIOC) which is used to program choreographies from a global
point of view. It allows user to specify scopes and their adaptation rules which
are later compiled to Jolie. These adaptation rules are then given to an adapta-
tion middleware. Running applications would rely on adaptation middleware
to check if the previous scope should be replaced with a new one. With this,
the difference between AIOCJ and our solution is apparent as applications are
designed to rely on their local instance of the StateManager for an event’s afﬁr-
mation but an event’s availability doesn’t insert new scopes.
Choral is a language for programming choreographies that treat choreographies
as ﬁrst-citizen objects. Based on choreographies, it outputs Java libraries that
users can further compose. This is different than our approach as we output
Java service for each role where users can write their business logic.
A key distinction of our work is that we allow for the speciﬁcation of chore-
ographies using DCR graphs, whereas AIOCJ, Choral, and Chor provide their
own domain-speciﬁc languages (DSLs) for describing choreographies. This dif-
ference in approach means that in AIOCJ, Choral, and Chor, the choreography
would need to be programmed using their respective DSLs. Although our so-
lution allows for visual declarations of choreographies using Choreoﬂow, it is
not yet mature enough to support many features that AIOCJ, Choral, and Chor
offer, such as multiparty sessions or data transfer.
4
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:12==
3
Background
3.1
DCR graphs, choreographies and endpoint
projection
[3] deﬁnes the ﬁrst declarative choreography for which endpoint projection and
general liveness properties are supported, by deriving DCR choreographies and
DCR endpoint projections from DCR graphs, both of which can be seen as con-
strictions on DCR graphs. As an important criteria of choreographies is that of
being well-formed, of which the concept of local causality plays an integral part,
the paper identiﬁes the local causality criteria for DCR choreographies. Specif-
ically, the paper deﬁnes the notion of direct dependency between events and
shows that a DCR choreography is endpoint projectable for a speciﬁc role, if
and only if, for all events that have direct dependencies to events that the role is
the initiator of, the role is a participant (initiator or receiver).
In our solution we implement the following deﬁnitions from their paper, with
slight modiﬁcations: 5 (DCR graph deﬁnition); 6 (When is an event enabled); 8
(What is the result of executing an event); 15 (When is there a direct dependency
between two events); 17 (When is a DCR choreography endpoint projectable);
19 (How to obtain the delta-projection of a DCR graph); 20 (How to endpoint
project a DCR choreography). These will now be introduced. Implementation
speciﬁc details and any deviations from their deﬁnitions, are discussed in section
4: Design and implementation.
Before proceeding with introducing the deﬁnitions, we refer the reader to 3.3 to
get an intuition for how a simple DCR choreography can look.
Deﬁnition 3.1.1 (DCR graphs c.f. [3, def. 5]). A DCR graph is a tuple (E, M, L, ℓ, →•,
•→, →⋄, →+, →%), where
1. E is a set of events.
2. M ⊆E × E × E is a marking.
3. ℓ: E →L is a labeling function.
4. ϕ ⊆E × E for ϕ ∈{→•, •→, →⋄, →+, →%} are relations between events.1
→•, •→, →⋄, →+, →% are the symbols for the different relation types: Condition,
Response, Milestone, Include, Exclude.
• Condition Relation (→•) speciﬁes that if an event e has a condition relation to
an event e′, then e cannot be executed until e′ has been executed.
1For each relation type, the set of all possible operator-operand pairs is a subset of the Carte-
sian product of the set E with itself. In other words, the operands for the operator ϕ are taken
from the set E.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
5
==PAGE:13==
• Response Relation (•→) indicates that if an event e has a response relation to
an event e′, then once e is executed, e′ must eventually be executed.
• Include Relation (→+) dynamically adds events to the process. If an event e
has an include relation to an event e′, then once e is executed, e′ is included in the
process.
• Exclude Relation (→%) dynamically removes events from the process. If an
event e has an exclude relation to an event e′, then once e is executed, e′ is excluded
from the process.
• Milestone Relation (→⋄) ensures that if an event e has a milestone relation to
an event e′, then e′ cannot be executed if e is pending.
In this paper, we adopt the notation from [3] that for a DCR graph G with events
E and marking M = (Ex, Re, In) and event e ∈E we write (→•e) for the set
{e′ ∈E|e′→•e}, write (e→•) for the set {e′ ∈E|e→•e′} and similarly for (•→)
(→+), (→%) and (→⋄).
We can now deﬁne when the events of a DCR graph are enabled.
Deﬁnition 3.1.2 (Enabled events c.f. [3, def. 6]). Let G = (E, M, L, ℓ, →•, •→, →⋄,
→+, →%) be a DCR graph with marking M = (Ex, Re, In). An event e ∈E is
enabled, written e ∈enabled(G), iff (a) e ∈In and (b) In ∩(→•e) ⊆Ex and (c)
(Re ∩In) ∩(→⋄e) = ∅.
That is, enabled events (a) are included, (b) their included conditions have already been
executed, and (c) have no pending included milestones.
In ﬁgure 3.1 can be seen an example that show cases the rules of enabled events.
GiveTasks is a condition for the HandleTask events of the Workers, and thus
the worker’s HandleTask events would be enabled, ﬁrst when GiveTasks was
executed. In the ﬁgure, that has happened. However, Management can prioritize
the task of WorkerA through a Response relation, making it pending, and because
WorkerA|HandleTask|TeamLeader is a milestone for WorkerB|HandleTask|TeamLeader,
it means that WorkerB|HandleTask|TeamLeader cannot be enabled before WorkerA
ﬁnishes its task and makes its event non-pending. WorkerC can call in sick, ex-
cluding its own HandleTask event. Thus, in the ﬁgure, WorkerB|HandleTask|TeamLeader
and WorkerC|HandleTask|TeamLeader are not enabled.
Deﬁnition 3.1.3 (Execution c.f. [3, def. 8]). Let G = (E, M, L, ℓ, →•, •→, →⋄, →+, →%)
be a DCR graph with marking M = (Ex, Re, In). When e ∈enabled(G), the result of
executing e, written execute(G,e) is a new DCR graph G’ with the same events, la-
bels, labeling function and relations, but a new marking M′ = (Ex’, Re’, In’), where (a)
Ex’ = Ex ∪{e} (b) Re’ = (Re\){e}) ∪(e•→) and (c) In’ = (In \ (e→%)) ∪(e→+).
Referring back to ﬁgure 3.1, in addition to including the events themselves in the
set of executed events Ex, then the effect of executing WorkerC|CallSick|TeamLeader
removes WorkerC|HandleJob|TeamLeader from the included set In, and execut-
ing PrioritizeWorkerA includes WorkerA|HandleTask|TeamLeader in the pend-
ing response set Re.
6
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:14==
Figure
3.1:
"TeamLeader-Workers-Management"
DCR
graph
exam-
ple.
Here,
"PrioritizeWorkerA",
"GiveTasks"
and
"CallSick"
has
been
executed,
"WorkerA|HandleTask|TeamLeader" is pending
and
"WorkerC|HandleJob|TeamLeader" is not included.
Deﬁnition 3.1.4 (DCR choreography c.f. [3], def. 13). Let A and R ⊂f in R be
sets of roles and actions, respectively. A triple (G, A, R) is then a DCR choreography
when G is a deadlock-free DCR graph such that the labels L ⊆IA of G are interactions
with actions in A and participants in R. For a role r ∈R, a tuple (G,A,R,r) is then a
DCR Endpoint when the labels L of G are interactions either of the form (a, r →R′) or
(a, r′ →r) with a ∈A.
Deﬁnition 3.1.5 (Direct dependency c.f. [3, def. 15]). Let G = (E, M, L, ℓ, →•, •→,
→⋄, →+, →%) be a DCR graph and let e, e′ ∈E be events of E. Then there is a direct
dependency e′ ⪯e from e’ to e iff either of the following conditions are true:
1. e′ = e
2. e′(→• ∪•→∪→+ ∪→% ∪→⋄)e
3. ∃e′′ s.t. e′(→+ ∪→%)e′′(→• ∪→⋄)e
4. ∃e′′ s.t. e′•→e′′→⋄e
That is, e′ ⪯e iff either (1) they are the same, (2) there is a relation from e’ to e, (3) e’
includes or excludes an event which is itself a condition or milestone for e, or (4) e’ has
a response to a milestone for e.
These conditions are derived from the fact that the execution of e’ is capable of
changing the marking or enabledness of e. For condition 2, it should be clear that
if there is a direct relation between e’ and e, then executing e’ will change the
marking or enabledness of e according to the relation rules. For condition 3, the
rationale is that if e” has not been executed, in case of the condition relation, or is
pending, in case of the milestone relation, then e will not be enabled. However,
if e’ is executed, then that can exclude e” and then the relations between e” and
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
7
==PAGE:15==
e are not in effect, thus enabling e for execution. For condition 4, the rationale
is that executing e’ would make e” pending, and since e” is a milestone for e, e
would no longer be enabled, until e” has been executed.
Referring back to the TeamLeader-Workers-Management example in ﬁgure 3.1,
it’s trivial to see where condition 1 and 2 applies. For condition 4, we see that
PrioritizeWorkerA has a Response relation to WorkerA|HandleTask|TeamLeader,
which in turn has a Milestone relation to WorkerB|HandleTask|TeamLeader. Re-
ferring back to deﬁnition 3.1.2 about when events are enabled, PrioritizeWorkerA
thus has the ability to affect the enabledness of WorkerB|HandleTask|TeamLeader,
by making WorkerA|HandleTask|TeamLeader pending. There is thus a direct de-
pendency between the two. We will leave condition 3 as an exercise for the
reader, to conﬁrm that there are no three events which fulﬁlls this condition.
Deﬁnition 3.1.6 (Endpoint projectability c.f. [3, def. 17]). Let (G, A, R) be a DCR
choreography, ℓthe labeling function of G, and r ∈R be a role. This choreography is
endpoint projectable for r iff for all e, if Initiator(e)=r and e′ ⪯e, then ℓ(e′)|r ̸= T ,
where T is undeﬁned.
That is to say, if r is the initiator of e, and there is a direct dependency between
e’ and e, then r must be a participator in e’ (either the initiator or among the
receivers).
Referring back to the TeamLeader-Workers-Management example in ﬁgure 3.1,
we see that the choreography is not endpoint-projectable for Management, as it
has a direct dependency to "WorkerB|HandleTask|TeamLeader" as previously
discussed, but does not have WorkerB among its receivers. Even though they do
not have a direct relation between them, Management must inform WorkerB that
they have prioritized the work of WorkerA over theirs, as it has an impact on
them.
In the same way, the choreography is not endpoint-projectable for WorkerA either,
as WorkerA is also required to notify WorkerB, that they have ﬁnished handling
their task, so that WorkerB knows that they can continue with theirs.
We ﬁx it, by including the roles among the receivers where necessary as dis-
cussed. The ﬁxed endpoint-projectable version of the choreography can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.2.
Deﬁnition 3.1.7 (DCR δ-Projection c.f. [3, def. 19]). Given a DCR graph G =
(E, M, L, ℓ, →•, •→, →⋄, →+, →%) and a set of events δ ⊆E, deﬁne the projection of
G to the events δ as the graph G|δ = (E|δ, M|δ, L|δ, ℓ|δ, →•|δ, •→|δ, →⋄|δ, →+|δ, →%|δ)
given by:
1. E|δ = {e ∈E|∃e′ ∈δs.t.e ⪯e′}.
2. M|δ = (Ex|δ, Re|δ, In|δ where:
(a) Ex|δ = Ex ∩E|δ.
(b) Re|δ = Re ∩E|δ.
(c) In|δ = (In((→•δ) ∪(→⋄δ) ∪δ)) ∪(E|δ \ ((→•δ) ∪(→⋄) ∪δ)).
8
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:16==
Figure
3.2:
The
endpoint-projectable
version
of
the
"TeamLeader-Workers-Management" example, where WorkerB has been made
a receiver of PrioritizeWorkerA and of "WorkerA|HandleTask|TeamLeader,
WorkerB"
3. ℓ|δ(e) = ℓ(e).
4. L|δ = img(ℓ).
5. →•|δ = →• ∩((→•δ) × δ)
6. →⋄|δ = →⋄∩((→⋄δ) × δ)
7. •→|δ = •→∩(((•→→⋄δ) × (→⋄δ)) ∪((•→δ) × δ))
8. →+|δ = →+ ∩(((→+→•δ) × (→•δ)) ∪((→+→⋄δ) × (→⋄δ)) ∪((→+δ) × δ)
9. →%|δ = →% ∩(((→%→•δ) × (→%δ)) ∪((→%→⋄δ) × (→⋄δ)) ∪((→%δ) × δ)
Deﬁnition 3.1.8 (DCR Endpoint projection c.f. [3, def. 20]). Let (G, A, R) be a
DCR choreography with events E and labeling function ℓ. For any r ∈R, deﬁne:
δ = {e ∈E|Initiator(e) = r},
and let G|δ = (E|δ, M, L, ℓ|δ, →•, •→, →⋄, →+, →%) be the δ-projection of G for r.
Suppose M=(Ex, Re, In) and deﬁne
E′ = {e ∈E|∃ars.t.ℓ(e)|r = (a, r′, r)}
M′ = (∅, ∅, E′ \ (E \ In))
ℓ′(e) =
{
ℓ(e)|r
if e ∈E|δ ∪E′
undeﬁned
otherwise
}
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
9
==PAGE:17==
The endpoint projection of (G, A, R) for r is then deﬁned as the DCR endpoint (G|r, A|r, R, r)
where
G|r = (E|δ ∪E′, M ∪M′, img(ℓ′), ℓ′, →•, •→, →⋄, →+, →%)
3.2
Buyer-Seller-Shipper example
Throughout this project, we have chosen to work with the DCR choreography
example of the "Buyer, Seller and Shipper", as it is presented in [3]. We chose
to use this example, as its possible states are well-understood by us, leading to
easier validation of our implementation. Also, it will appear familiar to those
who are familiar with [3]. We will be using it as the basis for our evaluation of
our implementation. The choreography can be seen in its entirety in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: DCR choreography of the Buyer-Seller-Shipper example, as intro-
duced in [3]. Here, visually seen as it appears in ChoreoFlow, a GUI that we
implemented for this project, which will be introduced in section 4: Design.
Figure 3.4 shows the event Buyer|Ask|Seller1, Seller2 executed. It has condi-
tion relation and pending response relation to the Quotes nesting. The effects of
the relations to a nesting apply directly to the nesting’s children, Seller1|Quotes|Buyer
and Seller2|Quotes|Buyer in this case. Since Buyer|Ask|Seller1, Seller2 is
a condition for both Seller1|Quotes|Buyer and Seller2|Quotes|Buyer events,
they are now enabled and available for execution and pending response relation
makes both of the Quotes children pending.
10
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:18==
Figure
3.4:
Buyer-Seller-Shipper
running
example:
Executed
event
Buyer|Ask|Seller1, Seller2.
Figure
3.5:
Buyer-Seller-Shipper
running
example:
Executed
event
Seller1|Quotes|Buyer.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
11
==PAGE:19==
When Seller1|Quotes|Buyer is executed 3.5, Buyer|Accept1|Seller1,Seller2
becomes pending. However, it is not enabled as there is a condition relation be-
tween the Quotes nesting and Decide nesting. Furthermore, there is a milestone
relation between Quotes and Decide nesting, implying that there should be no
events pending in the Quotes nesting before any of the events in Decide nesting
can be executed.
Figure
3.6:
Buyer-Seller-Shipper
running
example:
Executed
event
Seller2|Quotes|Buyer.
By executing the event, Seller2|Quotes|Buyer (Figure 3.6), all the events in the
Decide nesting become enabled. The pending reponse relations to the Buyer|Accepts1|Seller1,Sel
and Buyer|Accepts2|Seller1,Seller2 events make them pending.
With the execution of the event Buyer|Accepts1|Seller1,Seller2 (Figure 3.7),
all the events in the nesting Quotes and Decide are excluded. Furthermore, the
execution of Buyer|Accepts1|Seller1,Seller2 makes the event Seller1|Order|Shipper
included and pending.
Then in ﬁgure 3.8, Seller1|Order|Shipper is executed, making Details in-
cluded and also pending.
Lastly in ﬁgure 3.9, Details is executed, excluding itself. And since Accept2 is
not included, it is not keeping the graph from being in an accepting state. The
choreography is thus in an accepting state and concluded.
12
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:20==
Figure
3.7:
Buyer-Seller-Shipper
running
example:
Executed
event
"Buyer|Accepts|Seller1".
In ﬁgure 3.10 we see the trace where, instead of the Buyer accepting Seller1,
the Buyer executes the Reject event instead. Because the event has no relations
going into the Orders and Ship nestings, to enable any events there, the Quotes
and Negotiate nestings are excluded, and thus everything is excluded. This
also means that the pending status of Accept1 and Accept2 no longer keeps the
graph from being in a non-accepting state, and the choreography is thus in an
accepting and concluded state.
3.3
Jolie
Jolie [12] is described on its website as a "service-oriented programming lan-
guage", that seeks to optimize programming for what they call services, instead
of optimizing for local computation, which they say traditional programming
languages optimize for. The rationale is, that there exists many different com-
munication protocols on the internet, such as HyperText Transfer Protocol,
(Simple Object Access Protocol, Remote Procedure Call, and many more;
and that in order to use any of them in a traditional programming language,
you need to add seperate abstractions on top of the program for each of them,
that all requires seperate knowledge to use. This removes focus from what is
important, which is programming the service itself. Jolie seeks to abstract away
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure
3.8:
Buyer-Seller-Shipper
running
example:
Executed
event
Seller1|Orders|Shipper.
those things, so that the programmer does not need to worry as much about how
to program for each protocol and each kind of microservice setup that exists. On
top of this, the true power of Jolie lies in the fact that all services programmed
in Jolie are composable and can easy be chained together to form new services.
14
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:22==
Figure
3.9:
Buyer-Seller-Shipper
running
example:
Executed
event
Shipper|Details|Buyer.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure
3.10:
Buyer-Seller-Shipper
running
example:
Executed
event
"Buyer|Rejects|Sellers".
16
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:24==
4
Design
In designing our pipeline, we want the following aspects to be covered.
1. We want to design a GUI-application, where the user can easily with the
mouse and keyboard, visually create simple DCR choreographies with
events, relations and markings, that can then be exported in a text-ﬁle
format.
2. We want to design a way to represent DCR choreographies in a text-ﬁle
format for easy parsing and validation by applications, including our own
code-generation pipeline.
3. We want to design a pipeline solution, whose frontend can:
(a) Parse and validate DCR choreographies represented by text-ﬁles, into
internal data structure types that represent DCR choreographies to
the code generation solution.
(b) Analyze the DCR choreographies for deadlocks.
(c) Analyze the DCR choreographies for endpoint-projectability.
(d) Endpoint-project the DCR choreographies, generating an endpoint
projection for each role.
4. And whose backend can:
(a) For each role’s endpoint-projection, generate source code for a service
in a Service-oriented programming language, representing that role’s
endpoint-projection. And by virtue of having been through the fron-
tend analysis steps, are ensured to be deadlock-free. Also, sending or
acting on a received action should only be allowed if the declarative
rules of the DCR choreography allow for it.
5. A way to keep track of the state of the DCR choreography, making sure that
all communication happens according to the rules of the choreography. All
services need to be able to know the state.
In the following sections, we will expand on the design decisions regarding these
items.
4.1
ChoreoFlow - GUI application for making DCR
choreographies
We will now present the GUI application that we have made, which we call
ChoreoFlow. A screenshot of its GUI can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1. ChoreoFlow is a
Node.js and Angular application, which allows the user to create a simple DCR
choreography, that has events and relations between them, using a browser, their
mouse, and a keyboard. The user can export their creation in a JSON text ﬁle,
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.1: Screenshot of our GUI application ChoreoFlow, showing the Buyer-
Seller-Shipper example being created. To the left, a sidebar menu is seen where
the user can create a new event or nesting, import a JSON ﬁle or export the
created DCR choreography as a JSON ﬁle. To the right, a sidebar menu is seen
where the user can remove an event, create relations between two events, or
group an event under a nesting.
18
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:26==
that is downloaded to the user’s computer. It can either be run locally, or it can
be deployed as part of a website. At the time of writing, we have it deployed
to https://choreoﬂow.azurewebsites.net/, and invite the reader to try it out. It cur-
rently supports creating Events, where each event can have one Initiator, an
Action and one or more Receivers. The user can create named nestings and
add events, as well as sub-nestings to them. By selecting two events, the user
can create one or more relations between them, of type Response, Condition,
Milestone, Inclusion or Exclusion. Relations can also be made between nest-
ing and an event, as well as between two nestings. It supports setting the fol-
lowing markings for each event: Included, Executed or Pending. Events are
included by default. If an event is marked as executed, it will get a green tick in
its top-right corner. If it is marked as pending, it will get an exclamation mark
in its top-left corner. If it is not included, the event will be greyed out. The
user then has the ability to export the created DCR choreography as a JSON text
ﬁle. Alternatively, the user can also import a JSON text ﬁle, following the same
format, and modify that one. The format of the JSON text ﬁle is covered in the
following section.
4.2
DCR choreographies represented in
JSON-format and validation of these
As mentioned earlier, we want a way to represent DCR choreographies in text-
ﬁle format, for easy digital distribution and consumption by applications. There
are several ways to do this. A custom Domain-Speciﬁc Language could be de-
veloped for it, whose domain would be that of DCR Graphs, and which would
be made speciﬁcally for capturing the concepts of DCR graphs. This could then
be formalized in an Extended BackusNaur Form (EBNF) notation. This would
clearly state the rules of the syntax for anyone to follow, which could help in
standardizing it. This EBNF syntax could then serve as the basis for a parser to
be written. However, we feel that this would take time away from our goal of
code-generation. For this reason, we instead choose to go with the JavaScript Ob-
ject Notation (JSON) [13][14], which is a lightweight and language-independent
data-interchange format adapted across the whole internet, for its human read-
ability, widespread language support, and its inherent hierarchical structure.
The hierarchical nature of JSON aligns well with the nested structure of DCR
choreographies, where events can be nested within other events, forming com-
plex choreographies.
To ensure the correctness and consistency of the DCR
choreographies, a JSON schema is utilized. This schema serves as a contract for
the JSON data, deﬁning the required structure, properties, and types of values.
4.2.1
Overview of DCR Choreography Schema
The JSON schema for DCR choreographies comprises four main components,
each represented as a list: events, nestings, relationships, and markings.
• events: A list of individual events in the choreography, each characterized
by an id, an initiator, an action, and a list of receivers.
• nestings: A list depicting the nested structure of events in the choreog-
raphy, each nesting deﬁned by an id, a list of events, and childNestings
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
19
==PAGE:27==
encapsulating other nestings.
• relationships: A list that deﬁnes the relationships between events in the
choreography, each relationship specifying a from event, a to event, and a
list of relations that outline the type of relationship.
• markings: A list that captures the state of each event in the choreogra-
phy, each marking indicating an eventId and a marking object that denotes
whether the event has been executed, is included, or is pending.
4.2.2
Schema validation and rules
The validation of a DCR choreography JSON against the schema ensures adher-
ence to the expected structure and prevents errors due to malformed or missing
data. The schema enforces each property within all the single components (event,
nesting, relationship and marking) mentioned above as requirement and must be
provided in the JSON data. Additionally, the schema restricts the presence of
any properties not deﬁned within it, ensuring strict compliance with the ex-
pected structure. This combination of enforced requirements and restrictions
guarantees the structural integrity of the DCR choreography JSON.
4.3
Code-generation Pipeline
This section provides an overview of the code generation pipeline, a key process
in the system that transforms a DCR choreography, represented as a JSON, into
executable Jolie microservices. Furthermore, various projects and modules are
explored as part of the system architecture, that play an integral role in the
code generation pipeline or provide functionalities related to the overall DCR
solution.
As shown in Figure 4.2, a user starts by executing the Codegen command using
the CLI project, passing the path to the DCR choreography JSON and specifying
the output directory. In DCRGraph, the DCR chreography is read and validated
using the DCR Chreography Schema. A valid choreography is then converted
into a type G that conforms closely with the representation discussed in the
background 3.1.1, bridging the gap between theory and practice allowing to run
analysis closer to the academic papers. The program then checks for deadlocks
in the choreography to ensure that the generated code will not result in a state
where no progress can be made. It then checks for endpoint projectability, which
ensures that the choreography can be correctly projected onto the individual
endpoints. With these checks passed, projection graphs for each unique role
in the choreography are generated. If the graph is not endpoint projectable,
the reason for why it is not endpoint projectable, should be relayed back to the
user. Most likely, the reason is because there are two events that have direct
dependencies between each other, but where the initiator of one of the events,
are not a participant in the other. The user can then ﬁx it, either directly in the
JSON ﬁle or ChoreoFlow and try again.
Finally, in the DCR2Jolie, code is generated for each role’s projection and out-
putted to the path provided by the user.
The user can then, implement the
business logic in the generated code and run the services. Next, let us delve into
20
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: Process diagram over use of application suite, including the GUI
application, the Code-generation pipeline and what happens after.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Overview of the DCR solution
the details of the system architecture, highlighting the relations and dependen-
cies between projects and how they contribute to different aspects of the pipeline
and the solution as a whole.
4.3.1
System Architecture
The DCR in Figure 4.3 is a .NET solution composed of several interconnected
projects, each serving a speciﬁc role in the system. The solution is designed with
a clear separation of concerns, with each project handling a distinct aspect of the
system’s functionality.
The entire solution is written in F#, a functional-ﬁrst
language that provides several advantages, such as strong type safety, simple
syntax, and advanced features like pattern matching and immutability, which
contribute to the robustness and reliability of the system.
The CLI project is a command-line program that serves as the entry point to the
DCR solution. It exposes commands to generate Jolie microservices code from
a DCR choreography in JSON format. In addition, it provides commands to
generate DOT code for visualizing the DCR choreography in Graphviz.
The StateManager project is a ASP.NET Core API that manages the state of a
DCR choreography. It utilizes the DCRGraph project to provide this service,
abstracting away the logic of managing the choreography’s state.
Users can
load a choreography, check if an event is executable, and update the state after
executing an event. This service is designed to be used in conjunction with the
Jolie services generated by the DCR2Jolie project.
The Shared project is a library that provides utility functions for working with
JSON ﬁles. It is responsible for loading JSON ﬁles and validating whether a
JSON ﬁle adheres to a speciﬁc JSON schema. The Shared project serves as a
22
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4: Overview of the DCRGraph module
common resource that can be used by multiple different projects within the so-
lution.
The Tests project contains a variety of tests, including unit tests, integration
tests, functional tests, and microservices code generation tests. These tests cover
various aspects of the solution, such as deadlock detection, projectability, and
the state management functionality of the DCRGraph project.
The Benchmark project provides functionality for benchmarking the solution.
At the heart of the DCR solution are the DCR2Jolie and DCRGraph projects.
These two projects form the core of the system and will be explored in more
detail next.
DCRGraph
The DCRGraph project, as illustrated in the module diagram 4.4, is a vital com-
ponent of the solution. It provides the necessary functionalities to manage state
and transform DCR choreographies into a form suitable for microservices code
generation. While one of its primary uses is in the code generation pipeline, it
also serves as a fundamental part of the StateManager Asp.net core API.
The DCRGraph project comprises several modules, each with its unique respon-
sibilities and functionalities. The DCRGraphDTO module deﬁnes the types used
to represent DCR graphs in a format that closely matches the JSON DSL used for
specifying DCR choreographies. The DCRMapping module offers functions to
convert from the DCRGraphDTO type to the G type of DcrGraph, which serves
as an implementation of DCR graphs as they appear in the research paper [3].
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
23
==PAGE:31==
The State module is another signiﬁcant part of the DCRGraph project. It deﬁnes
the functions used to manipulate the state of a DCR graph. This module pro-
vides the necessary operations to execute events, check if an event is enabled,
and determine the acceptability of a state. One of the key features of the State
module is its ability to check the deadlock freedom of a DCR graph, which
is a crucial aspect in the context of DCR graphs. By ensuring that a graph is
deadlock-free, the State module guarantees that the choreography can continue
to progress, thereby maintaining the liveness property of the system. The live-
ness property is a fundamental aspect of DCR graphs, ensuring that the system
can always make progress and that there is always at least one event that can be
executed.
The EndpointProjection module plays a signiﬁcant role in the DCRGraph project.
It is used to project a DCR graph onto its endpoints (roles that interact with the
graph). This projection is a crucial step in the transformation of DCR choreogra-
phies into a form suitable for microservices code generation.
The Utils module provides utility functions, such as a GLoader type for load-
ing DCR graphs from a speciﬁed path. The GraphvizTypes and GraphvizUtils
modules are used for generating Graphviz ﬁgures from DCR graphs. These ﬁg-
ures provide a visual representation of the DCR graphs and can be useful for
debugging and understanding the structure of the choreographies.
In the primary use case, a user interacts with the CLI and runs the Codegen
command with a given path to a DCR choreography JSON ﬁle. The JSON is
converted to DCRGraphDTO, which is then converted to G. The G is endpoint
projected, and the endpoint projections are given to DCR2Jolie for microservices
code generation. The user then receives the generated code for the given chore-
ography.
Future plans for the DCRGraph project include support for data and time in
choreographies, which would allow for specifying data to transfer between ini-
tiators and receivers, adding conditional guards and deadlines for pending events.
This enhancement, along with the project’s robust design and ﬂexibility, will
continue to make DCRGraph a powerful tool for endpoint projecting DCR chore-
ographies for microservices code generation and a vital part of the DCR solution.
In addition, support for reporting what traces would lead to a deadlock if any
are present in the state-space of the choreography.
DCR2Jolie
JavaConstructs and JolieConstructs modules in 4.5 provide types that represent
java and Jolie concepts, for example, a method in java or an operation in Jolie.
Each of these types includes logic to generate the code for the programming
language constructs they represent.
The DCRJavaMapping and DCRJolieMapping modules provide mappings for DCR
type to the Java and Jolie type constructs from JavaConstructs and JolieConstructs.
The MicroserviceGeneration module provides a function that takes a map of roles
and projections.
The function then for each role’s projection generates code
24
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.5: Overview of DCR2Jolie module
using the mapping modules for ﬁles necessary for a role’s service.
4.4
Design of Generated Microservices
This section discusses the architecture and ﬁle structure of the generated code.
We explore the chosen architectural pattern for microservices and its beneﬁts
and delve into the structure and build process of the code ﬁles, highlighting
their role in facilitating development.
4.4.1
Design of the Jolie services
In a DCR microservices choreography, an event consists of an initiator, an action,
and receivers. The initiator and receivers are roles that communicate with each
other, and each unique role maps to a speciﬁc service. This means that a separate
Jolie program will be generated for each role.
Upon projecting the choreography, two Jolie operations are generated per event:
one for the sending service and one for the receiving service. The sending op-
eration is part of the initiator service and its invocation sends a request to each
of the event’s receiver services via their receiving operation. The receiving op-
eration, on the other hand, is where the event’s action is fulﬁlled through the
implementation of the business logic. The receiving operations will all be tied to
the same Jolie Input Port, and the sending operations to the same Jolie Output
Port.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.6: High-level architecture of the generated code
However, embedding business logic directly within the receiving operations can
pose challenges when generating code for an updated choreography.
Users
would need to sift through the communication logic to migrate their existing
business logic to the newly generated code. To address this, we propose sepa-
rating the business logic into a distinct service and leveraging Jolie’s embedding
concept [15] to launch this service within the main Jolie service associated with
the role. This separation is further enhanced by utilizing Java to Jolie interop-
erability. The business logic is isolated into a Java service [16] instead of a Jolie
service. This approach is advantageous because the Java service implements an
interface that contains the receiving operations. Therefore, upon code regen-
eration, we simply update the interface. Since the Java service is required to
implement this interface, it will ﬂag any unimplemented methods, providing
users with a clear indication of where new changes need to be written.
The relationships between the events in a choreography determine how the state
of the choreography changes upon the execution of events.
To maintain the
choreography’s ﬂow, it is crucial for a service to know whether it is permit-
ted to execute an event. Given that the logic for managing the state of a DCR
choreography is common to all services, we decided to isolate this logic into a
shared service (State service). An instance of the State service is deployed at
each role’s service location, enabling local interaction and minimizing potential
communication delay overhead. Figure 4.6 shows how two services would be
linked together.
26
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:34==
Code
|-- <role>
|
|-- java
|
|
|-- <Role>Service.java
|
|
|-- I<Role>Service.java
|
|-- jolie
|
|
|-- lib
|
|
|
|-- <role>.jar
|
|
|-- <role>_service.ol
|
|
|-- <role>_types.ol
|
|
|-- <reciever_role>_types.ol
|
|
|-- projection.json
|
|-- pom.xml
// same for futher roles
Figure 4.7: File structure of the generated code
When generating code for a projection, we also create a JSON ﬁle containing
only the projection’s portion of the choreography. Inside the role’s service init
method, the loadG operation is called on the state service, supplying it with the
path to the projection’s initial state. Consequently, the role’s service can verify
an event’s availability and manage the choreography’s ﬂow through the state
service.
4.4.2
File Structure
The ﬁle structure of the generated code is designed to facilitate the deployment
of each service on different premises, as well as to streamline the build process.
The structure, as shown in Figure 4.7, is organized by roles, with each role hav-
ing its own directory. This separation allows each service to be independently
deployed and scaled, providing ﬂexibility in terms of resource allocation and
geographical distribution.
Within each role’s directory, there are two main subdirectories: ‘java‘ and ‘jolie‘.
The ‘java‘ directory contains the Java service that implements the business logic
for the role, as well as a ‘pom.xml‘ ﬁle. This ﬁle is a Project Object Model (POM)
ﬁle used by Maven, a build automation tool for Java projects. The ‘pom.xml‘
ﬁle deﬁnes the project structure, dependencies, build plugins, and other conﬁg-
urations. By leveraging Maven, we can automate the build process, ensuring
consistent builds and simplifying the process of generating the Java Archive
(JAR) ﬁle needed for the Java service.
The ‘jolie‘ directory contains the Jolie service ﬁles, as well as a ‘lib‘ directory
where the JAR ﬁle generated by Maven is placed. The placement of the JAR
ﬁle in the ‘lib‘ directory is crucial as it allows the Jolie service to access the Java
service at runtime. The Jolie service ﬁles include the service implementation
ﬁle and the types ﬁle deﬁning the service interface and the interfaces for all the
other role’s services that the current role’s shall communicate with according to
a DCR choreography.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
27
==PAGE:35==
This ﬁle structure and build process support the microservices principle of build-
ing services that are loosely coupled but highly cohesive. Each service is self-
contained, with its own code, build process, and dependencies, yet they are able
to communicate and collaborate through well-deﬁned interfaces. This design al-
lows for ﬂexibility in deployment and scalability, as well as ease of development
and maintenance.
As an example, we have provided the code for some of the roles for the Buyer-
Seller-Shipper choreography in Appendix A. A more comprehensive example
can be found in the buyer-seller-shipper directory under the source code’s
root directory.
28
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:36==
5
Implementation
Our solution is built on a series of core functions that ensure the safety and
correctness of the generated code. One of the most crucial parts of our solution
is the deadlock detection mechanism. This mechanism is implemented through
two functions: isDeadlockFree and isStronglyDeadlockFree. These functions
are used to check for safety in the code generation pipeline.
The isDeadlockFree and isStronglyDeadlockFree functions (Listings 1, 2) use
the dfsGatherStateSpace function to perform a depth-ﬁrst search (DFS) from
the initial state and then check if all reachable states are not deadlocked or
strongly deadlocked, respectively.
Our implementation of these functions is closely related to the deﬁnitions pro-
vided in the paper [17]. In this paper, the authors deﬁne a process as deadlock-
free if all reachable states are not deadlocked, and as strongly deadlock-free if
all reachable states are not strongly deadlocked.
However, our implementation differs in a key aspect. In the paper, the authors
treat the markings of the graph as the state. In contrast, in our implementation,
we treat the entire graph G, including its events and relations, as the state. This
distinction is crucial because the events and relations in G are necessary for
determining which events are enabled when exploring the state space.
The dfsGatherStateSpace function (Listing 3) performs a DFS to gather all
reachable leaf states from a given state. If a state has already been visited, it
is ignored. If a state has no next states, it is considered a leaf state and gathered
together in a set Set<G> to be returned as the result set. The function recursively
performs DFS for all the next states. The leaf states are important as these states
being in a non-accepting state would mean that graph is either deadlocked or
strongly deadlocked. Recall that a non-accepting state is when there are events
pending.
The allPossibleNextStates function generates all possible next states from a
given state by ﬁltering and executing all enabled events. It disregards loops to
prevent inﬁnite recursion.
These functions are critical for ensuring the safety of the generated code. They
are used in the code generation pipeline to check if the generated code will result
in a deadlock under any possible execution. If a potential deadlock is detected,
the code generation is halted, and an error is returned.
The isEnabled function (Listing 4) is another crucial part of our solution. This
function is used to determine whether a speciﬁc event in a DCR graph is avail-
able for execution. Our implementation of this function is closely related to the
deﬁnitions provided in the paper [3].
The isEnabled function checks if an event is enabled based on three conditions:
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
29
==PAGE:37==
1 // T. T. Hildebrandt, R. R. Mukkamala, T. Slaats, and F. Zanitti,
Contracts for cross-organizational workflows
,→
2 // as timed dynamic condition response graphs, Journal of Logic and
Algebraic Programming, vol. 82, no. 5-7,
,→
3 // pp. 164-185, 2013. Definition 4.2
4 let isDeadlocked (g: G) : bool =
5
let (_, _, inn) = g.M
6
let ree = getAllPendingEvents g
7
let eventsBothPendingAndIncluded = Set.intersect inn ree
8
Set.forall (fun e -> not (isEnabled e.Id g).value) g.E &&
9
not (Set.isEmpty eventsBothPendingAndIncluded)
10
11 let isDeadlockFree (g: G): bool =
12
// Start a depth-first search from the initial state
13
let _, leafs = dfsGatherStateSpace (Set.empty, Set.empty) g
14
// Check if all reachable states are not deadlocked
15
Set.forall (fun g -> not (isDeadlocked g)) leafs
Listing 1: Implementation of deadlock-free
1 let isStronglyDeadlocked (g: G) : bool =
2
let (_, _, inn) = g.M
3
let ree = getAllPendingEvents g
4
let eventsBothPendingAndIncluded = Set.intersect inn ree
5
not (Set.exists (fun e -> (isEnabled e g).value) ree) &&
6
not (Set.isEmpty eventsBothPendingAndIncluded)
7
8 let isStronglyDeadlockFree (g: G): bool =
9
// Start a depth-first search from the initial state
10
let _, leafs = dfsGatherStateSpace (Set.empty, Set.empty) g
11
// Check if all reachable states are not deadlocked
12
Set.forall (fun g -> not (isStronglyDeadlocked g)) leafs
Listing 2: Implementation of strongly deadlock-free
30
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:38==
1 let allPossibleNextStates (g: G) : Set<G> =
2
g.E
3
> Set.filter (fun e -> (canExecuteEvent e.Id g))
4
> Set.map (fun e -> execute e.Id g)
5
|> Set.filter (fun gP -> gP <> g) // disregard loops
6
7 let rec dfsGatherStateSpace ((visitedStates, leafStates): Set<G> * Set<G>)
(currentState: G) : Set<G> * Set<G> =
,→
8
if Set.contains currentState visitedStates then
9
(visitedStates, leafStates)
10
else
11
// get all possible next states, not including loops.
12
let nextStates = allPossibleNextStates currentState
13
14
let newVisitedStates = visitedStates.Add(currentState)
15
16
if nextStates.IsEmpty then
17
// Nothing more to do, we are in a leaf state.
18
(newVisitedStates, leafStates.Add(currentState))
19
else
20
// recursively perform DFS for all next states
21
nextStates
22
|> Set.fold (fun acc nextState -> dfsGatherStateSpace acc
nextState) (newVisitedStates, leafStates)
,→
Listing 3: Gathering State space using Depth First Search (DFS)
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
31
==PAGE:39==
1 // Definition 4 (Event and time step enabling), modified.
2 // Hildebrandt et al. 2019: Declarative Choreographies and Liveness, new
version
,→
3 let isEnabled (e: string) (g: G) : Answer<bool, bool * bool * bool> =
4
if not (Set.exists (fun (ev: Event) -> ev.Id = e) g.E) then
5
failwith "Called isEnabled on event that does not exist in
supplied graph."
,→
6
7
// e is enabled if all of the following are true.
8
let exx, ree, inn = g.M
9
10
// 1. e must be included.
11
let one = inn.Contains e
12
13
// 2. Events that are conditions for e, must have been executed
14
let two =
15
g.Conditions
16
|> Set.filter (fun (_, sink) -> sink.Id = e) // find all events
that have condition relation to e
,→
17
|> Set.forall (fun elm -> Option.defaultValue false (Map.tryFind
((fst elm).Id) exx))
,→
18
19
// 3. Events that are milestones for e, must not be pending.
20
let three =
21
g.Milestones
22
> Set.filter (fun (,sink)−> sink.Id = e)
23
> Set.forall (fun (source, _) -> not (Option.defaultValue false
(Map.tryFind source.Id ree)))
,→
24
25
{ value = (one && two && three)
26
msg = (one, two, three) }
27
28 let canExecuteEvent (id: string) (g: G): bool =
29
(isEnabled id g).value
Listing 4: IsEnabled and CanExecute functions
32
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:40==
1. The event must be included in the graph.
2. All events that are conditions for the event must have been executed.
3. All events that are milestones for the event must not be pending.
If all these conditions are met, the event is considered enabled. The function
returns a boolean value indicating whether the event is enabled, along with a
tuple containing the results of the three conditions. This detailed return value
allows for more precise error handling and debugging.
The canExecuteEvent function is a simple wrapper around the isEnabled func-
tion. It takes an event ID and a DCR graph as input and returns a boolean value
indicating whether the event with the given ID can be executed in the given
graph. This function is used throughout our solution to check if an event can be
executed before attempting to execute it.
These functions are essential for ensuring the correctness of the DCR graph state
management. They are used in various parts of our solution, such as deadlock
freedom checks, projectability checks, and by the StateManager to check if an
event is available and can be executed for a speciﬁc role.
The execute function (Listing 5) is a key component of our solution. This func-
tion is used to execute an event in a DCR graph and update the state of the
graph accordingly. The function takes an event ID and a DCR graph as input
and returns a new DCR graph that reﬂects the state of the graph after the exe-
cution of the event. Our implementation of this function is closely related to the
deﬁnitions provided in the paper [3].
The execute function ﬁrst checks if the event exists in the graph and if it is
enabled. If the event does not exist or is not enabled, the function returns the
original graph without making any changes. If the event exists and is enabled,
the function proceeds to update the state of the graph.
The state update involves three steps:
1. The event is marked as executed.
2. If the event has a response relation to another event, that event is marked
as pending. Also, the executed event is no longer pending.
3. If the event has an exclusion or inclusion relation to some other event, that
event is removed or added to the included events, respectively.
These updates are reﬂected in the returned DCR graph. The execute function
ensures that the state of the DCR graph is correctly updated after the execution
of an event, maintaining the integrity of the graph and ensuring the correctness
of the subsequent operations.
The endpointProjectGraph and endpointProjectR functions (Listings 6 and 7)
are crucial for the generation of endpoint projections in our solution. Endpoint
projection is a process that transforms a global DCR graph into a set of local DCR
graphs, each representing the perspective of a speciﬁc role in the choreography.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
33
==PAGE:41==
1 // Definition 8 (Execution).
2 // Hildebrandt et al. 2019: Declarative Choreographies and Liveness, older
version.
,→
3 let execute (e: string) (g: G) : G =
4
match Set.exists (fun (event: Event) -> event.Id = e) g.E with
5
| false -> failwith (sprintf "Trying to execute an event \"%s\" which
does not exist." e)
,→
6
true ->
7
match (isEnabled e g).value with
8
false ->
9
Console.WriteLine(sprintf "(%s) is not enabled, not
executing." e)
,→
10
g
11
| true ->
12
let exx, ree, inn = g.M
13
14
// Update e to be executed.
15
let newEx = exx.Add(e, true)
16
17
// If e has a response relation to another event, make that
event pending.
,→
18
// Also, e should not be pending anymore.
19
let newRe =
20
g.Responses
21
> Set.filter (fun (so, )−> so.Id = e)
22
> Set.fold (fun (acc: Re) (so, si) -> acc.Add(si.Id,
true)) ree
,→
23
|> fun (map: Re) -> map.Add(e, false)
24
25
// If e has an exclusion/inclusion relation to some other
event,
,→
26
// remove/add that event from/to the included events
27
let newIn =
28
g.Exclusions
29
> Set.filter (fun (so, )−> so.Id = e)
30
> Set.fold (fun (acc: In) (so, si) -> acc.Remove si.Id)
inn
,→
31
> Set.union (
32
g.Inclusions
33
> Set.filter (fun (so, _) -> so.Id = e)
34
|> Set.fold (fun (acc: In) (so, si) -> acc.Add si.Id)
Set.empty
,→
35
)
36
37
{ g with M = (newEx, newRe, newIn) }
Listing 5: Execute function
34
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:42==
1 let endpointProjectGraph (g: G) (force: bool) : EndpointProjections =
2
let roles: Set<Role> = g.R
3
4
let mutable errors = ""
5
let mutable ePP = Map.empty
6
7
roles
8
> Set.iter (fun (r: Role) ->
9
try
10
ePP <- ePP.Add(r, (endpointProjectR g r force))
11
with (NotEndpointProjectable innerErrors) ->
12
errors <- errors + innerErrors
13
)
14
15
match errors.Length = 0 with
16
true -> ePP
17
| false -> raise (NotEndpointProjectable(errors))
Listing 6: endpointProjectGraph function
This transformation is essential for the distributed execution of the choreogra-
phy, as each participant only needs to know and manage its local graph.
The endpointProjectGraph function takes a DCR graph and a boolean ﬂag as
input and returns a map of endpoint projections for each role in the graph.
The function iterates over each role in the graph and calls the endpointProjectR
function to generate the endpoint projection for that role. If the endpointProjectR
function raises a NotEndpointProjectable exception, the function adds the error
message to a string and continues with the next role. If any errors were encoun-
tered during the endpoint projection process, the function raises a NotEndpointProjectable
exception with the accumulated error messages.
The endpointProjectR function takes a DCR graph, a role, and a boolean ﬂag
as input and returns the endpoint projection for the given role. The function
ﬁrst checks if the graph is endpoint projectable for the given role using the
isEndpointProjectable function. If the graph is not endpoint projectable and
the force ﬂag is not set, the function raises a NotEndpointProjectable excep-
tion. If the force ﬂag is set, the function prints a warning message and continues
with the endpoint projection process.
The endpoint projection process involves the calculation of several sets of events
and relations that are relevant to the given role. These sets are then used to
construct the endpoint projection, which is a DCR graph that only includes the
events and relations relevant to the given role.
The isEndpointProjectable and isDirectDependency functions (Listings 8 and
9) are key components of our solution’s endpoint projection process. They are
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
35
==PAGE:43==
1 let endpointProjectR (g: G) (r: Role) (force: bool): G =
2
match isEndpointProjectable r g with
3
Ok b -> () > ignore
4
Error e ->
5
match force with
6
false -> raise (NotEndpointProjectable(e))
7
| true -> Console.WriteLine(sprintf "Warning: Graph not endpoint
projectable, but force is true. Errors: %s" e)
,→
8
9
let delta = getEventsWhereInitiator r g.E
10
11
let EDelta = getAllEventsWithDirectDependencyToEventSet g.E delta g
12
13
let EPrime = getEventsWhereReceiver r g.E
14
15
let conditionsDelta = getConditionsDelta g delta
16
17
let milestonesDelta = getMilestonesDelta g delta
18
19
let responseDelta = getResponseDelta g delta milestonesDelta
20
21
let inclusionDelta = getInclusionDelta g delta milestonesDelta
conditionsDelta
,→
22
23
let exclusionDelta = getExclusionDelta g delta milestonesDelta
conditionsDelta
,→
24
25
let MDelta = getMDelta g delta EDelta conditionsDelta milestonesDelta
26
27
let InnMPrime = getInnMPrime g EDelta
28
29
let (exxMDelta, reeMDelta, innMDelta) = MDelta
30
{
31
E = Set.union EDelta EPrime
32
M = (exxMDelta, reeMDelta, Set.union InnMPrime innMDelta)
33
Conditions = conditionsDelta
34
Milestones = milestonesDelta
35
Responses = responseDelta
36
Inclusions = inclusionDelta
37
Exclusions = exclusionDelta
38
Cancels = Set.empty
39
R = Set.empty.Add(r)
40
}
Listing 7: endpointProjectR function
36
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:44==
1 let isEndpointProjectable (r: string) (g: G) : Result<bool, string> =
2
let eventsWithDirectDependencyToE (e: Event) =
3
g.E
4
|> Set.filter (fun (eP: Event) -> (isDirectDependency eP.Id
e.Id g).value)
,→
5
6
let eventsRInitiate = getEventsWhereInitiator r g.E
7
8
let mutable errors = ""
9
let mutable result = true
10
11
eventsRInitiate
12
> Set.iter (fun (e: Event) ->
13
eventsWithDirectDependencyToE e
14
> Set.iter (fun (eP: Event) -> (
15
if not (isRParticipantOfE eP r) then
16
errors <- errors + (sprintf "\n%s has a direct
dependency to %s, but %s is NOT a participant in it!" eP.Id e.Id r)
,→
17
result <- false
18
)))
19
20
match result with
21
true -> Ok true
22
false -> Error errors
Listing 8: isEndpointProjectable function
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
37
==PAGE:45==
used to determine whether a DCR graph can be projected onto a speciﬁc role
and to identify direct dependencies between events, respectively.
The isEndpointProjectable function checks whether a DCR graph can be pro-
jected onto a speciﬁc role. It does this by iterating over all events initiated by the
role and checking whether there are any events that have a direct dependency to
the initiated event but do not include the role as a participant. If such an event
is found, the function returns an error indicating that the graph is not endpoint
projectable for the given role. This function is crucial for ensuring the correct-
ness of the endpoint projection process, as it prevents the generation of endpoint
projections that would result in incorrect behavior during the execution of the
choreography.
The isDirectDependency (Listing 9) function identiﬁes whether there is a direct
dependency between two events in a DCR graph. A direct dependency exists if
any of the following conditions are true:
• The events are the same.
• There is a relation between the events.
• An event e’ includes or excludes an event e” that is a condition or milestone
for the event e.
• An event e’ has a response relation to an event e” that is a milestone for
the event e.
This function is used by the isEndpointProjectable function to identify events
that have a direct dependency to an event initiated by the role being projected.
In this chapter, we have provided a detailed exploration of the core components
of our solution, focusing on the safety and correctness of the endpoint projec-
tions. We have examined the intricacies of the deadlock detection mechanism,
the endpoint projection process, and the functions that determine event enabling
and execution. Each function is closely based on the deﬁnitions provided in the
academic literature, ensuring our solution accurately implements the theoretical
concepts of DCR graphs and choreographies. The result is a robust solution
that ensures the generation of safe and correct code for executing declarative
choreographies in a distributed system. The next chapter will focus on the eval-
uation of our solution, discussing its performance and effectiveness in various
scenarios.
38
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:46==
1 let isDirectDependency (e': string) (e: string) (g: G) : Answer<bool, bool
* bool * bool * bool> =
,→
2
// There is a direct dependency between e' and e, if any of the
following are true:
,→
3
// 1. If the events are the same
4
let one = e' = e
5
// 2. If there is any relation between them
6
let two = g.allRelations |> Set.exists (fun (e1, e2) -> e1.Id = e' &&
e2.Id = e)
,→
7
// 3. If e' includes or excludes an event e'', which is a condition or
milestone for e
,→
8
let three =
9
Set.exists
10
(fun (source, sink) ->
11
source.Id = e'
12
&& (Set.union g.Conditions g.Milestones) |> Set.exists
(fun (so, si) -> so.Id = sink.Id && si.Id = e))
,→
13
(Set.union g.Inclusions g.Exclusions)
14
// If e' has a response relation to e'', and e'' is a milestone for e
15
let four =
16
g.Responses
17
> Set.exists
18
(fun (source, sink) -> source.Id = e' && g.Milestones >
Set.exists (fun (so, si) -> so.Id = sink.Id && si.Id = e))
,→
19
20
21
{ value = (one
two
three
four)
22
msg = (one, two, three, four) }
Listing 9: isDirectDependency function
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
39
==PAGE:47==
6
Evaluation
6.1
Testing
To ensure the correctness of our solution, we developed a testing project using
the .NET testing framework NUnit. The tests are categorized into the following
test ﬁles:
ChoreographyTests.fs
Tests that execute the Buyer-Seller-Shipper example and
do various assertions, from the perspective that this example is well understood
and we know what to expect.
DcrGraphDtoUtilsTests.fs
Tests that our ﬂattening of the DCR Graph nestings
into normal event-to-event relations works correctly.
DeadlockTests.fs
Tests that our implementations of the deadlock-algorithms
work as expected, using various deadlocked, strongly-deadlocked, non-deadlocked
and non-strongly deadlocked example graphs.
DependencyTests.fs
Tests that our implementations of the direct dependency
algorithms work as expected, using example graphs with different kind of rela-
tions between them, to simulate all four dependency rules from
refalgorithm.
EndpointProjectionTests.fs
Tests that our implementations of the endpoint
projection algorithms work as expected, by testing with various graphs that are
both endpoint projectable and non-endpoint projectable. Also tests that the end-
points obtained are as expected for the endpoint projectable graphs.
IntegrationTests.fs
Tests that run the whole code-generation pipeline and spins
up the resulting Jolie services using process spawning, and then executes a se-
ries of HTTP requests against them, verifying that the communication happens
as expected and that the state manager updates its state accordingly. This will
be expanded upon in 6.3.
StateTests.fs
Tests that our implementation of the algorithms about enabled-
ness and execution works as intended, by executing events in example graphs
and asserting that the state of the graph has changed accordingly and that the
enabledness of events change accordingly.
40
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:48==
6.2
Benchmarking of code-generation pipeline
A benchmarking project called DCR.Benchmark is implemented, using the well-
known .NET benchmarking library called Benchmarkdotent. A dedicated bench-
marking library was chosen over simple command-execution timing, to auto-
matically take care of aspects such as: warm-up phases to prevent execution
from cold-state; automatic calculation of statistical values such as mean, stan-
dard deviation, error, etc.; automatic export of results into different formats;
automatic handling of outlier data; automatic warnings about measured oddi-
ties; and much more. In addition, the library allows for us to easily parameterize
benchmark runs in such a way, that a range of values can be speciﬁed for each
parameter and then a benchmark will be run for each possible combination of
these parameter ranges. In addition, it allows us to deﬁne different setup phases
that run before each benchmark iteration, in order to setup some initial data
for that benchmark iteration, without that setup counting towards the measure-
ments.
The following benchmarking setup is implemented in the project:
6.2.1
Benchmark setup
Maven downloads dependencies and plugins and stores them in a local reposi-
tory on the machine. Once a dependency or plugin is downloaded, Maven will
use the local copy for subsequent builds, unless explicitly speciﬁed to check for
updates on each build or a day is passed as the default value for updatePolicy [18]
in Maven’s settings is set to daily. Since we only ran the benchmarks during the
day and a before each benchmark a warm-up happened, Maven only used the
local copies of the dependencies, removing any delay that would have occurred
because of dependency downloads.
6.2.2
Benchmark results
Unfortunately we were not able to implement a proper benchmark in time.
While the Benchmark project is ready and allows for high-quality benchmark-
ing using the Benchmarkdotnet library, the complexity of generating random
graphs with increasing complexity, that were also assured to be deadlock-free
and endpoint-projectable, proved to be not realizable within the time-frame. We
leave the project code as an inspiration for how to use the benchmarking library
to carry out the benchmarks, and invites anyone to improve on this code.
6.3
Jolie services
For testing the generated Jolie services that our pipeline produces, we implement
several Nunit tests in IntegrationTests.fs, which all works in the following
fashion: First, a <SetUp> method is run before each test, which spins up a fresh
StateManager and saves its process ID to a global list of process IDs.
Then,
the actual test will run.
Common for most of them, is that they will run a
JSON DCR graph through the code-generation pipeline to produce Jolie/Java
source code and then spawn a process to spin up each Jolie service, adding the
process IDs to the global list of process IDs. We wait for both the state manager
and all Jolie services to be ready, by listening in on their standard out/error
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
41
==PAGE:49==
pipelines and asserting from their output that they are ready.
The test will
then execute a series of speciﬁed HTTP calls to the Jolie services, to attempt
to execute actions on them.
Again, we listen in on the standard out/error
pipelines, and assert that they output what we expect them to output. Lastly, we
have a <OneTimeTearDown> step, that kills all the processes, so that we are ready
for the next test.
In ﬁgure 6.1, we show the output of running the command dotnet test -l:"console;verbosity=n
–filter TestBuyerShipperSeller from the DCR/ folder, which will run a test
that takes the BuyerSellerShipper as a JSON ﬁle as input, checks it for deadlock
freedom, endpoint projectability, generates the code for all the Jolie services and
spins up the Jolie services and the State Manager. It then proceeds to carry out
all the events of the choreography in the correct order and the output of the
services can be seen.
42
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:50==
Figure
6.1:
The
output
of
the
TestBuyerSellerShipper
test
in
IntegrationTests.fs showing standard out of all the Jolie services and
the state manager communicating with each other.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
43
==PAGE:51==
7
Discussion
7.1
Implications of Service Communication Design
In this section, we explore the complexities of the service communication design
in the context of DCR choreography execution. We critically assess the potential
challenges and implications that stem from our current design, with a speciﬁc
focus on the potential for latency and the risk of unsynchronized states among
services. We also explore potential solutions to these challenges, providing in-
sights that could guide future research to enhance the robustness and efﬁciency
of the system.
7.1.1
StateManager as Point of Failure and Potential Latency
The current design of the generated services has signiﬁcant implications for the
execution of events. This process, which is central to the functioning of our
system, involves a series of interconnected steps:
1. Initially, a client sends a request to <role A> service. This request contains
an id of the event to be executed.
2. <role A> service then communicates with its local instance of StateService,
querying whether the event with the provided id can be executed.
3. If StateService afﬁrms the executability of the event, <role A> service sends
requests in parallel to <role B> service and <role C> service.
4. Both <role B> service and <role C> service interact with their local instances
of the StateService to conﬁrm if they are permitted to execute the event.
5. Upon conﬁrmation, <role B> service and <role C> service forward the request
to their embedded Java services that handle the business logic of the event.
6. Once the event is successfully handled, <role B> service and <role C> ser-
vice send a request to their respective StateService instances containing the
event id. This prompts StateService to mark the event as executed. Upon
completion, <role A> service receives successful responses back from <role
B> service and <role C> service.
7. Since there were no problems encountered, <role A> service also sends a
request to its local StateService to mark the event as executed, thereby up-
dating its local projection state.
From the sequence of steps above, we can realize that there is obvious potential
latency if <role>services are located on independent premises, where more dis-
tance between them could mean more time before the event is considered fully
executed by the client. If the business needs require to deploy multiple services
at the same premises, that latency will be mitigated but all the services will use
the same local instance of the StateManager service by design. This will make the
StateManager service a point of failure for multiple services at once as they all
44
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:52==
rely on a single instance to manage their choreographic state. Furthermore, one
service might have to wait for the other to ﬁnish its interaction with StateService,
thereby introducing latency.
To mitigate this, a potential solution would be to convert StateManager service
to either Jolie or Java and embed it directly into each role service. This has not
been possible due to time constraints as conversion would also mean that we
would have to convert the main DCR solution modules, containing the DCR
state management logic, into the target language and properly test their logic.
7.1.2
Unsynchronized State
In the event execution process, there is a potential for the system to end up in
an unsynchronized state. This can occur when <role A> service sends parallel
requests to <role B> service and <role C> service. If <role B> service successfully
executes the event and updates its state, but <role C> service fails to do so, the
choreography ends up in an unsynchronized state. This is because <role A>
service, upon knowing that <role C> service was unsuccessful, will not update its
state, while <role B> service has already done so.
This unsynchronized state poses a signiﬁcant challenge as it can lead to incon-
sistencies in the execution of the choreography and can potentially disrupt the
entire process. Therefore, it is crucial to address this issue and ensure that all
services maintain a synchronized state.
One potential solution to this problem could be to implement a rollback mech-
anism. In this approach, if any service fails to execute an event, all other ser-
vices that have already executed the event and updated their state would roll
back their changes, reverting to the state before the execution of the event. This
would ensure that all services maintain a synchronized state, even in the event
of a failure.
Another possible solution could be to implement a two-phase commit protocol.
In the ﬁrst phase, all services would be asked to prepare to execute the event,
but would not actually execute it. Only if all services conﬁrm that they are ready
and able to execute the event would the second phase, the actual execution of
the event, take place. This would ensure that either all services execute the event
and update their state, or none do, thereby maintaining a synchronized state.
Further research and development in this area could explore these solutions
to address these challenges and improve the reliability and consistency of the
system.
7.1.3
Optimization Opportunities in Service Communication
Design
In the current implementation of our pipeline, there is a noticeable redundancy
in the generated Jolie code. For each operation, the code ﬁrst checks with the
StateManager if the event in question is executable. Once the event is done, the
StateManager is informed that the event in question has been executed, so it
should update its state. To ensure any faults are handled properly, the behavior
of the operation is put into a scoped container[19]. This pattern of state man-
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
45
==PAGE:53==
agement and fault handling repeats for every operation, leading to a signiﬁcant
amount of redundant code.
This redundancy not only makes the code harder to read and maintain but also
has a potential impact on the code generation speed and the code size. However,
there is a potential solution to this problem: The decorator pattern [20] [21]. In
the context of Jolie, the decorator pattern can be implemented using a native
feature called aggregation [22]. By using the decorator pattern in our pipeline,
we can encapsulate the repetitive code into decorators, thereby reducing redun-
dancy. This approach could potentially optimize the code generation speed and
use less space. However, it’s important to note that while decorators can make
the code more efﬁcient and easier to maintain, they also add a layer of indirec-
tion. Therefore, careful consideration should be given to the efﬁciency of the
extra layer, especially in a microservices context where communication is often
remote via sockets.
46
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:54==
8
Conclusion and future work
The increasing use of distributed services and microservices, requires us to think
of ways to create solutions that are safe-by-design, while still being ﬂexible
enough to properly model the business needs.
Our primary contribution is Choreoﬂow and a .NET DCR solution developed in
F#. Choreoﬂow provides a user-friendly GUI for the creation and visualization
of DCR graphs. Users can deﬁne events with initiators, actions, and receivers,
and establish relations between them. These DCR graphs can then be exported as
JSON ﬁles for use in different systems or imported for visualization and further
manipulation.
In the DCR solution, the DCRGraph project allows for the deserialization of a
DCR graph from a JSON format into F# types, the generation of DOT code for
visualization in Graphviz, and DCR graph’s state management. It also provides
functionality for checking deadlock- and strong deadlock-freedom, endpoint-
projectability, and creating endpoint-projections for the roles in the graph. The
DCR2Jolie project takes these endpoint-projections and generates corresponding
Jolie service source code, with one service generated for each role.
Due to time constraints, we were unable to perform comprehensive benchmark-
ing. However, we anticipate that the execution time of our solution would in-
crease with graph complexity. Despite this, we believe that our solution would
perform well for inputs that realistically reﬂect real-life use-cases, demonstrating
its practical applicability.
Looking ahead, there are several potential avenues for further research and de-
velopment. One such area is the optimization of the generated Jolie code. Cur-
rently, our solution generates redundant code, particularly in terms of exception
handling and the checking of event executability with the StateManager. Future
work could explore the application of the Decorator pattern to reduce this re-
dundancy, potentially optimizing the code generation speed and reducing the
space required.
Another potential area of future work is the extension of our solution to handle
more complex DCR graphs, including those with time, data, and guards. This
would further enhance the ﬂexibility and applicability of our solution, allowing
it to handle a wider range of real-world scenarios.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated the potential of combining DCR chore-
ographies with Jolie services to create safe-by-design distributed services. We
believe that our work contributes to the ongoing effort to ensure safe-by-design
principles in distributed systems, providing a practical approach to generating
secure and efﬁcient distributed services.
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
47
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Thomas T. Hildebrandt and Raghava Rao Mukkamala. “Declarative Event-
Based Workﬂow as Distributed Dynamic Condition Response Graphs”.
In: Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science 69 (Oct. 18, 2011),
pp. 59–73. issn: 2075-2180. doi: 10.4204/EPTCS.69.5. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1110.4161v1 (visited on 02/21/2023).
[2]
Raghava Rao Mukkamala. A formal model for declarative workﬂows: dynamic
condition response graphs. OCLC: 907997869. Copenhagen: IT University of
Copenhagen, Theoretical Computer Science, 2012. isbn: 978-87-7949-268-4.
[3]
Thomas T. Hildebrandt et al. “Declarative Choreographies and Liveness”.
In: Formal Techniques for Distributed Objects, Components, and Systems. Ed. by
Jorge A. Pérez and Nobuko Yoshida. Vol. 11535. Cham: Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2019, pp. 129–147. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-21759-4_8.
[4]
Thomas T. Hildebrandt et al. “Timed Declarative Choreographies with
Data”. In: Formal Techniques for Distributed Objects, Components, and Sys-
tems. Ed. by Jorge A. Pérez and Nobuko Yoshida. Vol. 11535. Series Title:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2019, pp. 129–147. isbn: 978-3-030-21758-7 978-3-030-21759-4. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-21759-4_8. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-
030-21759-4_8 (visited on 02/12/2023).
[5]
Hu Guo. “Extension of Declarative Choreographies and Its Application in
Distributed Systems”. In: (May 30, 2022).
[6]
Amina Brahem et al. “A Trustworthy decentralized Change Propagation
Mechanism for Declarative Choreographies”. In: Sept. 2022, pp. 418–435.
isbn: 978-3-031-16102-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-16103-2_27.
[7]
AIOCJ. url: https://www.cs.unibo.it/projects/jolie/aiocj.html#aiocj (visited
on 07/01/2023).
[8]
Mila Dalla Preda et al. AIOCJ: A Choreographic Framework for Safe Adaptive
Distributed Applications. July 10, 2014. arXiv: 1407.0975[cs]. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1407.0975 (visited on 02/23/2023).
[9]
Saverio Giallorenzo, Fabrizio Montesi, and Marco Peressotti. Object-Oriented
Choreographic Programming. July 3, 2022. arXiv: 2005.09520[cs]. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2005.09520 (visited on 06/15/2023).
[10]
Choral Language Website. url: https : / / www . choral - lang . org/ (visited on
07/01/2023).
[11]
Marco Carbone and Fabrizio Montesi. “Deadlock-freedom-by-design: mul-
tiparty asynchronous global programming”. In: ().
[12]
MultiMedia LLC. MS Windows NT Kernel Description. 1999. url: http://
web.archive.org/web/20080207010024/http://www.808multimedia.com/winnt/
kernel.htm (visited on 09/30/2010).
[13]
JSON. url: https://www.json.org/json-en.html (visited on 06/28/2023).
[14]
ECMA-404. Ecma International. url: https://www.ecma-international.org/
publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-404/ (visited on 06/28/2023).
48
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:56==
[15]
Embedding - Jolie Documentation. url: https://docs.jolie- lang.org/v1.11.
x/language-tools-and-standard-library/architectural-composition/embedding/
index.html (visited on 06/30/2023).
[16]
Java Services - Jolie Documentation. url: https://docs.jolie-lang.org/v1.11.x/
language-tools-and-standard-library/technology-integration/java/javaservices/
index.html (visited on 06/30/2023).
[17]
Thomas Hildebrandt et al. “Contracts for cross-organizational workﬂows
as timed Dynamic Condition Response Graphs”. In: The Journal of Logic
and Algebraic Programming 82.5 (July 2013), pp. 164–185. issn: 15678326.
doi: 10.1016/j.jlap.2013.05.005. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S1567832613000283 (visited on 06/15/2023).
[18]
Maven Settings Reference. url: https://maven.apache.org/settings.html (vis-
ited on 06/30/2023).
[19]
Scopes and faults - Jolie Documentation. url: https://docs.jolie-lang.org/v1.
11.x/language-tools-and-standard-library/basics/fault-handling/scopes-and-
faults/index.html (visited on 07/01/2023).
[20]
Decorator pattern. In: Wikipedia. Page Version ID: 1151028118. Apr. 21, 2023.
url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decorator_pattern&oldid=
1151028118 (visited on 07/01/2023).
[21]
Service Decorators. url: https://fmontesi.github.io/2016/11/12/service-
decorators.html?ref=hackernoon.com (visited on 07/01/2023).
[22]
Aggregation - Jolie Documentation. url: https://docs.jolie- lang.org/v1.11.
x/language-tools-and-standard-library/architectural-composition/aggregation/
index.html (visited on 07/01/2023).
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
49
==PAGE:57==
50
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix A: Generated Jolie
code for the
Buyer-Seller-Shipper example
[H]
1 from console import Console
2 from file import File
3 from .buyer_types import IBuyer, ILocal, IStateManager
4 from .seller1_types import ISeller1
5 from .seller2_types import ISeller2
6
7 service Local {
8 inputPort Input {
9 location: "local"
10 interfaces: ILocal
11 }
foreign java {
12 class: "buyer.BuyerService"
13 }
14 }
15
16 service BuyerService {
17 embed Console as console
18 embed Local as local
19 embed File as file
20
21 execution: sequential
22
23 inputPort Buyer {
24 location: "socket://localhost:9001"
25 protocol: http { format = "json" .statusCode -> statusCode }
26 interfaces: IBuyer
27 }
28
29 outputPort Seller1 {
30 location: "socket://localhost:9002"
31 protocol: http { format = "json" .statusCode -> statusCode }
32 interfaces: ISeller1
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
51
==PAGE:59==
33 }
34
35 outputPort Seller2 {
36 location: "socket://localhost:9003"
37 protocol: http { format = "json" .statusCode -> statusCode }
38 interfaces: ISeller2
39 }
40
41 outputPort StateManager {
42 location: "socket://localhost:5105/State/"
43 protocol: http { format = "json" .statusCode -> statusCode }
44 interfaces: IStateManager
45 }
46
47 init {
48 println@console( "BuyerService started..." )(
)
49 getServiceDirectory@file(
)( directory )
50 loadGRequest.path = directory + "/projection.json"
51 loadGRequest.role = "Buyer"
52 scope( LoadingProjection ) {
53
install(
54
IOException =>
55
println@console( "Failed to load projection json
with StateManager service. Reason: " +
LoadingProjection.IOException )(
)
,→
,→
56
);
57
LoadG@StateManager( loadGRequest )( loadGResponse )
58 }
59 }
60
61 main {
62 [BuyerAcceptsSeller1( request )( buyerResponse ) {
63
println@console( "[Buyer] Sending endpoint BuyerAcceptsSeller1 was hit"
)( )
,→
64
scope( BuyerAcceptsSeller1 ) {
65
install(
66
IOException =>
67
println@console( "Something went wrong while
executing BuyerAcceptsSeller1" )(
)
,→
68
statusCode = 503
69
);
70
canExecuteRequest.id = "BuyerAcceptsSeller1"
52
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:60==
71
canExecuteRequest.role = "Buyer"
72
CanExecute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
73
if (canExecute == true) {
74
{
75
BuyerAcceptsSeller1@Seller1( request )(
seller1Response )
,→
76
|
77
BuyerAcceptsSeller1@Seller2( request )(
seller2Response )
,→
78
}
79
Execute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
80
println@console( "Executed BuyerAcceptsSeller1" )(
)
81
}
82
else {
83
println@console( "Tried to execute BuyerAcceptsSeller1, but
not allowed" )(
)
,→
84
statusCode = 503
85
}
86
}
87 }]
88
89 [BuyerAcceptsSeller2( request )( buyerResponse ) {
90
println@console( "[Buyer] Sending endpoint BuyerAcceptsSeller2 was hit"
)( )
,→
91
scope( BuyerAcceptsSeller2 ) {
92
install(
93
IOException =>
94
println@console( "Something went wrong while
executing BuyerAcceptsSeller2" )(
)
,→
95
statusCode = 503
96
);
97
canExecuteRequest.id = "BuyerAcceptsSeller2"
98
canExecuteRequest.role = "Buyer"
99
CanExecute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
100
if (canExecute == true) {
101
{
102
BuyerAcceptsSeller2@Seller1( request )(
seller1Response )
,→
103
|
104
BuyerAcceptsSeller2@Seller2( request )(
seller2Response )
,→
105
}
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
53
==PAGE:61==
106
Execute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
107
println@console( "Executed BuyerAcceptsSeller2" )(
)
108
}
109
else {
110
println@console( "Tried to execute BuyerAcceptsSeller2, but
not allowed" )(
)
,→
111
statusCode = 503
112
}
113
}
114 }]
115
116 [BuyerAsksSellers( request )( buyerResponse ) {
117
println@console( "[Buyer] Sending endpoint BuyerAsksSellers was hit" )(
)
,→
118
scope( BuyerAsksSellers ) {
119
install(
120
IOException =>
121
println@console( "Something went wrong while
executing BuyerAsksSellers" )(
)
,→
122
statusCode = 503
123
);
124
canExecuteRequest.id = "BuyerAsksSellers"
125
canExecuteRequest.role = "Buyer"
126
CanExecute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
127
if (canExecute == true) {
128
{
129
BuyerAsksSellers@Seller1( request )(
seller1Response )
,→
130
|
131
BuyerAsksSellers@Seller2( request )(
seller2Response )
,→
132
}
133
Execute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
134
println@console( "Executed BuyerAsksSellers" )(
)
135
}
136
else {
137
println@console( "Tried to execute BuyerAsksSellers, but not
allowed" )(
)
,→
138
statusCode = 503
139
}
140
}
141 }]
54
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:62==
142
143 [BuyerRejectsSellers( request )( buyerResponse ) {
144
println@console( "[Buyer] Sending endpoint BuyerRejectsSellers was hit"
)( )
,→
145
scope( BuyerRejectsSellers ) {
146
install(
147
IOException =>
148
println@console( "Something went wrong while
executing BuyerRejectsSellers" )(
)
,→
149
statusCode = 503
150
);
151
canExecuteRequest.id = "BuyerRejectsSellers"
152
canExecuteRequest.role = "Buyer"
153
CanExecute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
154
if (canExecute == true) {
155
{
156
BuyerRejectsSellers@Seller1( request )(
seller1Response )
,→
157
|
158
BuyerRejectsSellers@Seller2( request )(
seller2Response )
,→
159
}
160
Execute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
161
println@console( "Executed BuyerRejectsSellers" )(
)
162
}
163
else {
164
println@console( "Tried to execute BuyerRejectsSellers, but
not allowed" )(
)
,→
165
statusCode = 503
166
}
167
}
168 }]
169
170 [Seller1QuotesBuyer( request )( BuyerResponse ) {
171
println@console( "[Buyer] Receiving endpoint Seller1QuotesBuyer was hit"
)( )
,→
172
scope( Seller1QuotesBuyer ) {
173
install(
174
IOException =>
175
println@console( "Something went wrong while
executing Seller1QuotesBuyer" )(
)
,→
176
statusCode = 503
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
55
==PAGE:63==
177
);
178
canExecuteRequest.id = "Seller1QuotesBuyer"
179
canExecuteRequest.role = "Buyer"
180
CanExecute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
181
if (canExecute == true) {
182
Seller1QuotesBuyer@local( request )( localResponse )
183
Execute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
184
println@console( "Executed Seller1QuotesBuyer" )(
)
185
}
186
else {
187
println@console( "Tried to execute Seller1QuotesBuyer, but
not allowed" )(
)
,→
188
}
189
}
190 }]
191
192 [Seller2QuotesBuyer( request )( BuyerResponse ) {
193
println@console( "[Buyer] Receiving endpoint Seller2QuotesBuyer was hit"
)( )
,→
194
scope( Seller2QuotesBuyer ) {
195
install(
196
IOException =>
197
println@console( "Something went wrong while
executing Seller2QuotesBuyer" )(
)
,→
198
statusCode = 503
199
);
200
canExecuteRequest.id = "Seller2QuotesBuyer"
201
canExecuteRequest.role = "Buyer"
202
CanExecute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
203
if (canExecute == true) {
204
Seller2QuotesBuyer@local( request )( localResponse )
205
Execute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
206
println@console( "Executed Seller2QuotesBuyer" )(
)
207
}
208
else {
209
println@console( "Tried to execute Seller2QuotesBuyer, but
not allowed" )(
)
,→
210
}
211
}
212 }]
213
214 [ShipperDetailsBuyer( request )( BuyerResponse ) {
56
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
==PAGE:64==
215
println@console( "[Buyer] Receiving endpoint ShipperDetailsBuyer was
hit" )( )
,→
216
scope( ShipperDetailsBuyer ) {
217
install(
218
IOException =>
219
println@console( "Something went wrong while
executing ShipperDetailsBuyer" )(
)
,→
220
statusCode = 503
221
);
222
canExecuteRequest.id = "ShipperDetailsBuyer"
223
canExecuteRequest.role = "Buyer"
224
CanExecute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
225
if (canExecute == true) {
226
ShipperDetailsBuyer@local( request )( localResponse )
227
Execute@StateManager( canExecuteRequest )( canExecute )
228
println@console( "Executed ShipperDetailsBuyer" )(
)
229
}
230
else {
231
println@console( "Tried to execute ShipperDetailsBuyer, but
not allowed" )(
)
,→
232
}
233
}
234 }]
235 }
236 }
Safe-by-design distributed systems from Declarative DCR Choreographies using Jolie
57
