==PAGE:1==
Interpretation of gene expression in breast
cancer through AI-guided analysis of
multi-omics data
Department of Health Technology
Section of Bioinformatics
Technical University of Denmark
Author: Yi Huang (s210304)
Supervisor: Elena Papaleo∗
Co-supervisors: Matteo Tiberti∗and Jes Frellsen†
Date: June 20, 2023
∗Danish Cancer Society Research Center
†Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU
==PAGE:2==
DTU Master Thesis
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Elena Papaleo, for
giving me the opportunity to work on this exciting topic and for all her guidance, support,
and valuable insights throughout this project. I am also thankful to my co-supervisor Matteo
Tiberti for his help, encouragement, and constructive feedback on the technical parts during the
course of this study. I wish also to thank my co-supervisor Jes Frellsen for the insightful advice
regarding the implementation of the machine learning techniques. I would like to acknowledge
Marco Salvatore and Meera Machado for their help in better understanding the QLattice and
suggestions for applying the tool. I wish to thank Mona Nourbakhsh and Astrid Brix Saksager
for their previous work on the Moonlight project and helpful discussions to get this project into
shape. Finally, I extend my heartfelt gratitude to the members of the Computational Biology
group at DCRC and the rest of the great team at Abzu for their valuable scientific discussions
and continuous support. Their warm welcome and involvement in the daily work have made
my experience of doing this project truly enjoyable.
1
==PAGE:3==
DTU Master Thesis
Abstract
Breast cancer is a prevalent disease characterized by genetic alterations and uncontrolled cell
growth. Identifying differentially expressed genes (DEGs) is crucial for finding potential driver
genes and therapeutic targets, and understanding the factors that cause aberrant gene ex-
pressions is also fundamental and essential.
However, the integrated effects of multi-omics
factors on gene expression are still not well understood. This study utilized the integrated
multi-omics data to comprehend gene expression variations and predict potential driver genes
in breast cancer. Various machine learning models (Symbolic Regression, LASSO, Random
Forest, Multilayer Perceptron) were applied and interpreted using mathematical expressions,
feature importance, and saliency maps. Performance evaluation for binary classification re-
vealed similar results for RF, SR, and MLP, with LASSO performing the worst. Notably, CpG
island methylation had a substantial impact, while mutations had limited influence. ALX4
and KLF2 genes were identified as potential driver genes mostly affected by mutations. The
MLP model on an extra multi-classification task exhibited improved performance, uncovering
distinct factors driving down-regulated DEGs and Up-regulated DEGs. We did further biolog-
ical investigations by consensus partitioning and functional enrichment analysis which revealed
two clusters characterized by oncogenic traits. This study contributes to our understanding of
breast cancer gene expression and provides the potential to unveil novel druggable targets and
optimize treatment strategies for breast cancer.
2
==PAGE:4==
DTU Master Thesis
Resume
Brystkræft er en udbredt sygdom karakteriseret ved genetiske ændringer og ukontrolleret cellevækst.
Identifikation af differentielt udtrykte gener (DEG’er) er afgørende for at finde potentielle driv-
gener og terapeutiske m˚al, og forst˚aelsen af de faktorer, der for˚arsager afvigende genekspres-
sioner, er ogs˚a fundamental og væsentlig. Imidlertid er de integrerede virkninger af multi-omics-
faktorer p˚a genekspression stadig ikke godt forst˚aet. Denne undersøgelse brugte de integrerede
multi-omics-data til at forst˚a genekspressionsvariationer og forudsige potentielle drivgener i
brystkræft. Forskellige maskinlæringsmodeller (Symbolic Regression, LASSO, Random Forest,
Multilayer Perceptron) blev anvendt og fortolket ved hjælp af matematiske udtryk, karakteris-
tika og fremtrædende kort. Ydeevneevaluering for binær klassificering afslørede lignende resul-
tater for RF, SR og MLP, hvor LASSO klarede sig d˚arligst. Navnlig havde CpG-ø-methylering
en væsentlig indflydelse, mens mutationer havde begrænset indflydelse. ALX4- og KLF2-gener
blev identificeret som potentielle drivergener, der for det meste var p˚avirket af mutationer.
MLP-modellen p˚a en ekstra multi-klassifikationsopgave udviste forbedret ydeevne, idet den
afslørede forskellige faktorer, der driver nedregulerede DEG’er og opregulerede DEG’er. Vi
foretog yderligere biologiske undersøgelser ved konsensusopdeling og funktionel berigelsesanal-
yse, som afslørede to klynger karakteriseret ved onkogene egenskaber.
Denne undersøgelse
bidrager til vores forst˚aelse af genekspression af brystkræft og giver potentialet til at afsløre
nye lægelige m˚al og optimere behandlingsstrategier for brystkræft.
3
==PAGE:5==
DTU Master Thesis
Abbreviations
ACC, Accuracy
AI, Artificial intelligence
AUC-ROC, Area Under the ROC Curve
BC, Breast Cancer
BCS, Breast-conserving Surgery
BIC, Bayesian Information Criterion
BN, Bayesian network
BP, Biological Process
CDG, Cancer Driver Gene
CGI, CpG Island
CNN, Convolutional Neural Network
CNV, Copy Number Variation
CRC, Colorectal Cancer
CV, Cross-validation
DEA, Differential Expression Analysis
DEG, Differentially Expressed Gene
DL, Deep Learning
DNAm, DNA Methylation
DR-DEG, Down-regulated Differentially Expressed Gene
FEA, Functional Enrichment Analysis
GP, Genetic Programming
HM450, Illumina Human Methylation 450
LASSO, Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator
MAF, Mutation Annotation Format
ML, Machine Learning
MLP, Multilayer Perceptron
Non-DEG, Non-significantly differentially Expressed Gene
OCG, Oncogene
The Cancer Genome Atlas, TCGA
TPs, True Positives
TNs, True Negatives
4
==PAGE:6==
DTU Master Thesis
RF, Random Forest
ROC, Receiver Operating Characteristic
SNP, Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
SR, Symbolic Regression
SVM, Support Vector Machines
TSG, Tumor Suppressor Gene
UR-DEG, Up-regulated Differentially Expressed Gene
XAI, Explainable Artificial Intelligence
5
==PAGE:7==
DTU Master Thesis
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Cancer Driver Genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Multi-omics Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Differential Gene Expression in Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.1
Genomic Alterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4.2
Epigenomic Alterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.5
The Cancer Genome Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.6
AI-guided Modeling: Predictivity and Explainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.6.1
Machine Learning in Multi-omics Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.6.2
Explainable AI (XAI)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2
Aim of Research
18
3
Methods
19
3.1
Omics Modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Data Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Transcriptome Profiling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
Copy Number Variation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
DNA Methylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.4
DNA Mutation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Multi-omics Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
Download and Preparation of the Omics Modalities . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Generation of The Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.3
Generation of The Target
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Data Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.1
Symbolic Regression: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.2
The QLattice: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.3
Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.4
LASSO Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.5
Multilayer Perceptron
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
==PAGE:8==
DTU Master Thesis
3.6
Biological Investigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.6.1
Consensus Partitioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.6.2
Functional Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Results
35
4.1
The Integrated Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
Data Aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Data Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Binary Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.1
QLattice Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.2
Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.3
MLP Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.4
Interpretation of the MLP Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.5
Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Multiclass Classification Using MLP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Biological Investigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4.1
Discovery of Potential Driver Genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4.2
Clusters in Truly Predicted DEGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4.3
Biological Processes Enriched in Truly Predicted DEGs . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Discussion
52
5.1
Multi-omics Effects on Gene Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Strengths and Weaknesses of the Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Investigation of the Potential Driver Genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Interpretation by Saliency Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5
Data Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.6
Future Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Conclusion
57
7
==PAGE:9==
DTU Master Thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Cancer
Cancer is a highly complex and diverse disease characterized by the uncontrolled growth and
division of abnormal cells throughout the body. It occurs when the normal regulatory processes
governing cell growth, cell cycle control, and apoptosis malfunction, resulting in the formation
of tumors or the infiltration of malignant cells into adjacent tissues. In advanced stages, it
spreads to distant sites by metastasis. Cancer cell growth and spread can pose a direct threat
to the health and life of patients, and the treatment is often a time-consuming, and burdensome
process that involves multiple approaches such as surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy,
causing side effects and discomfort to patients physically and psychologically. Therefore, exten-
sive research efforts are required to unravel the underlying causes, develop precise diagnostic
techniques, and devise targeted therapies that can improve patient outcomes.
The causes of cancer are a complex interplay of multiple factors, involving a combination
of genetic and environmental influences. Inheritance of certain mutations or genetic predis-
positions can increase the risk of developing certain cancers [1]. The environment can also
contribute to cancer development, including exposure to carcinogens such as tobacco smoke,
radiation, viruses, and certain chemicals.
Cancer develops in a multistep process related to mutations and cell selection according
to the ability of survival, proliferation, invasion, and metastasis [2]. Firstly, tumor initiation
occurs when a single cell proliferates abnormally due to genetic alterations, leading to a popu-
lation development of tumor cells. Tumor progression continues as additional mutations occur.
Additional mutations providing a selective advantage for the cells occur to continue tumor
progression, resulting in the dominance of those descendants in the population. As a result of
enhanced growth rate or other characteristics, such as invasion or metastasis, tumors become
more and more malignant over time.
Among different cancer types, breast cancer has become the top malignant tumor threat-
ening women’s health worldwide. In 2020, more than 2.2 million cases were newly diagnosed,
accounting for 11.7% of all cancer cases, and approximately 685,000 died [3]. As the incidence of
cancer increases year by year, breast cancer has surpassed lung cancer to be the most commonly
diagnosed cancer and the fifth leading cause of cancer death worldwide [4].
Due to its heterogeneous property, breast cancer shows diversity at both histological and
molecular levels. Table. 1 presents the gene expression level and molecular subtypes of breast
8
==PAGE:10==
DTU Master Thesis
cancer and their prognosis comparison [5]. Molecular subclassification is not only beneficial to
diagnostics but also in the case of surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy for patients. It was
found that patients with Luminal A are more suitable for breast-conserving surgery (BCS),
while the nodal surgery rate is much higher in Luminal B and Her2-enriched [6]. Patients with
two Luminal subtypes showed a low risk of local-regional recurrence (LRR) while the LRR
of patients with Her2-enriched and Basal-like subtypes is high after breast-conserving ther-
apy (BCT) [7]. Her2+ patients are suggested to take anti-Her2 treatments and chemotherapy.
Compared to other subtypes, Triple-negative or Basal-like breast cancer (TNBC) is extremely
heterogeneous and has seven subtypes, which causes obstacles and ineffectiveness in the treat-
ment [8].
Subtypes
Frequency
Gene expression
Histologic grade level
Prognosis
Luminal
60% BC
Luminal A
ER+, PR+, HER-
Low
Good
Luminal B
Low p53 mutation
ER+. PR+, HER2+/-
High
Less favorable
Basal-like (TN)
15-20%
ER-, PR-, HER-
Often grade III
Poor (chemosensitive)
HER2+
25%
HER2++
High
More aggressive (anti-HER2 sensitive)
Table 1: Rate and specificities of the breast cancer molecular subtypes (Bettaieb et al. [5]). ER:
estrogen receptor; PR: progesterone receptor; HER2: human epidermal receptor 2; HER2++: over-
expression of HER2; TN: triple negative
Common treatments for BC patients include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, hormone
therapy, and targeted therapy. Precision medicine is a new approach to treatment that takes
into account the individual variability in the genomic layer for each patient. For example,
Trastuzumab is the most commonly used drug in clinical treatment which combines with the
HER2 receptor, prevents constitutive activation of HER2, and inhibits the PI3K pathway [9].
Drugs blocking estrogen production and direct estrogen receptor inhibitors are recommended
for patients with ER+ subtypes [10]. Despite these anticancer capabilities of the therapies,
drug resistance that occurs after long-term exposure becomes also a challenge, and because
TNBC has treatment limitations due to a lack of target, new biomarker discovery is highly
important and necessary.
1.2
Cancer Driver Genes
In cancers, the tumor-inducing mutations, called “drivers”, provide cells in somatic tissues with
a selective advantage over adjacent cells. Cancer driver genes (CDGs) are genes that contain
driver mutations (Mut-driver genes) or are aberrantly expressed (Epi-driver genes), which then
affect the steady state of certain important cellular processes [11].
The cellular processes
9
==PAGE:11==
DTU Master Thesis
changed by dysregulated driver genes are organized to form 10 acquired biological capabilities
called cancer hallmarks which enable the cancer cell to fit more for surviving, competing,
and reproducing within the human. Significantly, we can develop therapeutic approaches to
identify crucial CDGs by understanding and annotating the role of driver genes in the context
of hallmark phenotypes.
Two main types of CDGs are oncogenes (OCGs) and tumor suppressors (TSGs). Activa-
tion causing OCGs to be expressed at an incorrect time, incorrect level, or with a new function
will promote tumorigenesis, while inactivation causing TSGs to reduce their functions is tu-
morigenic.
There is an emerging concept of dual role driver genes (DRDG) that own the
characteristics of both OCG and TSG, depending on tumor context. They are OCGs in one
cancer type or subtype, and TSGs in another [12]. The discovery of cancer driver genes is
important because it will pave the way for the establishment of targeted anticancer therapies
as well as the research of genomic biomarkers linked to prognosis and treatment response [13].
Even though high-throughput sequencing has discovered millions of somatic mutations in var-
ious cancers, the identification of CDGs and the discovery of their roles and functions remain
a difficult task.
Several computational and statistical methods were used to predict CDGs, which were
confirmed by real gene expression levels in cancer. For example, AKT1, GATA3, PIK3CA,
MAP3K1, and TP53 are the most frequently mutated reported driver genes [14]. Nik-Zainal
et al. discovered 93 protein-coding cancer genes carrying possible drive mutations by analysis
of 560 whole-genome sequences of breast cancer [15]. However, every research study reveals a
different list of genes with limited overlap, and there is no standard for identifying and validating
breast cancer driver genes so far [16].
A tool called Moonlight [17] has been developed recently to classify CDGs based on a
stratification of functions including functional enrichment analysis, gene regulatory network,
upstream regulator analysis, and pattern recognition analysis by scoring the genes in well-known
biological processes concerning cancer under study. By using this approach, it is possible to
identify context-dependent candidate driver genes. Within the framework, the stratified down-
stream analyses rely on genes being abnormally expressed at the RNA level, which pinpoints
the significance of the differential expression of genes as typical and direct phenotypes in cancer
patients. Those differentially expressed genes (DEGs) help us narrow down the screen for driver
genes, and pave the way for the discovery of biomarkers or drug targets in the development
of precision medicine. However, instead of screening for potential genes, in this study, we are
10
==PAGE:12==
DTU Master Thesis
more interested in understanding the factors that determine a gene to express aberrantly at the
lower level in the central dogma, such as genomic and epigenomic levels, further giving insights
into deeper mechanisms of tumor progression.
1.3
Multi-omics Analysis
Multi-omics research has emerged lately in cancer studies since it is a heterogeneous and mul-
tifactorial disease influenced by a wide range of factors.
Multiple omics analysis involves
integrating and analyzing data from various omics layers, including genomics, epigenomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics, and so on. As each omics layer provides a unique perspective on
biological processes, researchers can gain a deeper understanding of complex biological systems
by combining and analyzing data from different omics layers.
Cancer molecular biology studies have benefited from multi-omics data analysis and have
produced ground-breaking results [18]. Multi-omics allows researchers to gain a deeper un-
derstanding of cancer by not only providing a holistic view of the disease but also captur-
ing the interactions between different molecular components and pathways, which enables the
understanding of causal relationships between various levels of the cellular organization [19].
Additionally, key driving events contributing to cancer initiation, progression, and treatment
response can be identified by combining different omics layers. Cancer subtyping, biomarker
discovery, and system-level understanding of molecular networks and pathways can also be
achieved through multi-omics analysis.
In previous studies, Wolf-Yadlin et al. [20] combined mutations and proteomics to assess
the effect of genomic alterations that may uncover driver genes not typically found in tumor
samples with low-frequency mutations. Through the integration of mutation, copy number,
methylation, microRNA, mRNA, and proteomics data in CRC, Guinney et al. [21] identified
four consensus subtypes of colorectal cancer (CRC), allowing new therapeutic approaches to be
explored. For patients with human papillomavirus(HPV)-related head and neck cancer, Chip-
seq and RNA-seq data were combined to find H3K4me3 and H3K27ac histones are associated
with tumor-specific changes in genes, such as FOXA1, EGFR, and FGFR1 [22].
Due to the signals from noise in a data set that incorporates multi-omics, sophisticated com-
putational algorithms are required. There are mainly three common approaches to integrating
multi-omics data, namely early, middle, and late integration [23]. As presented in Fig. 1, In
early integration, different omics layers are directly concatenated to form a single data set, and
the following analysis is implemented on the whole data set. Late integration, on the contrary,
11
==PAGE:13==
DTU Master Thesis
takes each omics layer for analysis and combines the results eventually. Unlike these two ap-
proaches, middle integration employs machine learning (ML) models to consolidate the omics
layers to both reduce dimensionality and extract information, arranging them into a stacked
matrix as input for subsequent analysis. Standard methods used for middle integration are joint
non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), and joint and individual variation explained (JIVE)
method. Both are unsupervised ML methods and the former projects diverse data types to
a common coordinate system where different variables projecting toward the same direction
form a cluster. As a result of the latter method, the joint variation between data types can be
quantified, data dimensionality is reduced, and joint structure, as well as individual structure,
will be explored [19].
Figure 1: Demonstration of early, middle, and late integration approaches for multi-omics data (Cai
et al. [18]).
1.4
Differential Gene Expression in Cancer
To understand the regulation of gene expression in breast cancer, we need to first measure gene
expressions at the transcription level. With the development of high-throughput technologies in
recent years, transcriptomic analysis or gene expression analysis on various cancer types can be
implemented to quantify the abundance of the mRNA transcripts of each gene. Cancer research
is increasingly relying on transcriptomic analysis because it allows researchers to examine how
genes are expressed in cancer cells compared to normal cells or other cancer subtypes.
It
paves the way for the subsequent differential expression analysis (DEA) that identifies the up-
12
==PAGE:14==
DTU Master Thesis
regulated or down-regulated genes in cancer, shedding light on the molecular mechanisms that
underlie cancer-related biological processes.
Identified DEGs can be prioritized as candidate driver genes according to their degree of
differential expression. Genes with significant differential expression across tumor samples are a
functional consequence that provides a clue for driver genes and are more likely to be function-
ally critical to driving cancer development. However, what causes the genes in cancer patients
to express irregularly? Several factors affect gene expression, including genomic factors like
copy number variation (CNV), DNA mutations, and epigenomic factors like DNA methylation
(DNAm) or histone modification [24].
1.4.1
Genomic Alterations
Basic genomic alterations include DNA mutations and CNV, which lead to somatic structural
variants in the tumor genome and trigger tumor development by modulating gene expression
levels.
It has been demonstrated that in common solid tumors derived from the breast, colon, or
brain, 33-66 genes present slight somatic mutations on average, among which 95% are point
mutations, namely single-base substitutions. The rests are insertions and deletions of one or
a few bases [1]. A single nucleotide variant (SNV) is a typical type of DNA point mutation
that can disrupt the assembly of the transcriptional machinery, thus altering expression at the
transcription level. SNVs are variants of only one single nucleotide substitution that occurs at a
specific genomic position. Furthermore, insertions and deletions (indels) occur when nucleotides
are inserted or removed from the DNA sequence, which can then cause frameshift mutations,
where the reading frame is shifted.
Based on the consequence of the mutation, there are three main categories, namely missense,
nonsense, and nonstop mutations. A missense mutation occurs when the replacement of the
nucleotide results in codon variation that encodes a different amino acid. This happens in
the coding region and can potentially affect protein structure and function, but will not affect
transcription or translation. A nonsense mutation creates a premature stop codon that changes
the original coding sequence resulting in truncated or nonfunctional proteins and will break
down the mRNA if the nonsense-mediated decay is activated. Nonstop mutations happen on
stop codons to extend the transcript, which affects protein production instead of transcription.
DNA mutations can also be classified according to their positions on the genome, for example,
mutations on the 5’UTR region may change the secondary structure of the mRNA, which
13
==PAGE:15==
DTU Master Thesis
then affects mRNA stability and degradation [25].
Mutations within an intron, especially
in the enhancer of the intron, will affect the interaction with the promoter, leading to the
poor binding ability of transcription factors [26]. Nevertheless, not all mutations will have a
significant effect on gene expression and tumorigenesis, and those weak mutations are called
passenger mutations, while mutations having a strong effect and providing a selective advantage
to cancer cells are called driver mutations.
Apart from the small mutations mentioned above, CNV is another important genomic al-
teration which is a particular form of structural variation consisting of insertions or deletions of
DNA stretches in the genome. It has critical roles in altering gene expression to activate OCGs
and inactivate TSGs, thus driving cancer development and progression [27]. Specifically, CNV
refers to the deletion or amplification of DNA segments larger than 1kb in the genome [28].
Somatic CNV plays a significant role in the progression of various cancers by affecting gene
expression levels with a positive linear correlation [29]. Amplification of OCGs ensuing from
CNVs serves as a driving force behind unbridled cell proliferation, enhanced cell survival, and
evasion of regulatory mechanisms. Conversely, the deletion of TSGs through CNVs undermines
their functional integrity, resulting in the abrogation of growth-inhibitory pathways and pro-
moting tumorigenesis. Furthermore, CNVs can perturb gene expression profiles by impinging
on regulatory elements, including enhancers, and disrupt vital signaling cascades implicated in
cancer pathogenesis.
1.4.2
Epigenomic Alterations
Gene expression can also be regulated by epigenomic alterations, which refer to indirect chemical
modifications of nucleotides or proteins, and the invariance of the DNA sequence itself. Those
alterations include DNAm, histone modifications, chromatin remodeling, and non-coding RNA
molecules. In this study, we only focus on the effect of DNAm, because aberrant DNAm was
the first epigenetic mark associated with cancer that affects gene regulation [30].
Figure 2: Methylation-related regions on the genome. CpG shores are regions up to 2kb from the
island, and shelves are from 2kb to 4kb. The open sea describes isolated, remote areas without a
specific designation.
14
==PAGE:16==
DTU Master Thesis
DNAm involves the attachment of a methyl group to DNA molecules, commonly taking
place at the C5 position of the cytosine to form 5-methylcytosine. Increased DNAm, known
as hypermethylation, is linked to gene silencing and repression of transcription. By contrast,
decreased DNAm, referred to as hypomethylation, can result in gene activation or altered ex-
pression. In cancer, abnormal DNAm patterns can contribute to the development of tumors
due to hypermethylation of TSGs and hypomethylation of OCGs. CpG island (CGI) methyla-
tion is important for gene expression by regulating transcription factor binding and chromatin
structure, where the stretches of DNA are greater than 500 base pairs with high density of
CpG than the rest of the genome [31]. It has been demonstrated that a crucial characteristic
of many cancer cells is CGI hypermethylation in the promoters of particular genes [32], while
in normal cells, CGIs are rarely methylated. There are also other regions on the genome that
may have methylation (Fig. 2), and comparable to CGI, CpG shores are also connected with
decreased gene expression [33].
The genetic and epigenetic changes associated with cancer have historically been treated
separately, however, it has been shown that they are interrelated during the progression of
cancer in recent studies [34], and the integrative effects of these factors on cancer gene expression
need to be further elucidated.
1.5
The Cancer Genome Atlas
An increasing number of bioinformatics tools are devised by taking use of data sets in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), a program launched in 2006 that integrates cancer-related data
at a large scale to do a comprehensive analysis of cancer genome profiles [35]. TCGA analyzes
molecular data from 20,000 primary cancers and matched normal samples from 33 cancer types,
and contains various types of omics data from high-throughput microarrays and next-generation
sequencing methods, including genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data. In
this study, we mainly focus on the project of Breast Invasive Carcinoma (TCGA-BRCA). Data
categories including Transcriptome Profiling, Copy Number Variation, DNA Methylation, and
the Mutation Annotation Format (MAF) file can be accessed in the project.
1.6
AI-guided Modeling: Predictivity and Explainability
In recent years, the availability of high-throughput technologies has enabled the comprehensive
analysis of multiple molecular layers simultaneously, providing a more comprehensive view of
15
==PAGE:17==
DTU Master Thesis
cancer biology. However, the integration and interpretation of multi-omics data are challeng-
ing, and traditional statistical methods are often inadequate to identify subtle yet biologically
relevant patterns. AI-based approaches, especially machine learning has recently emerged as
one of the most promising approaches in multi-omics data modeling, because of their predictive
accuracy and capacity of capturing complex and hierarchical characteristics [36]. In finding
new druggable targets, we are able to maximize treatment efficiency by AI-guided multi-omics
analysis.
1.6.1
Machine Learning in Multi-omics Analysis
As a subset of AI, ML approaches have become widely favored to deal with big data in the bio-
logical field due to their exceptional predictive capabilities. Various ML models, including deep
learning (DL), random forests (RF), support vector machines (SVM), and Bayesian networks
(BN), have demonstrated notable success in tasks like cancer subtype classification, patient
stratification, and the identification of molecular signatures [37]. According to the availability
of data labeling, ML can be roughly classified into supervised and unsupervised learning. Super-
vised learning uses the label or the target from the input data for training, while unsupervised
learning methods seek intrinsic patterns directly from the unlabeled data. It is anticipated
that the prevalence of ML approaches in multi-omics data analysis will increase as researchers
continue to exploit intricate omics datasets to understand disease origins, identify therapeutic
targets, and enhance personalized healthcare.
Emaminejad et al. [38] used a na¨ıve BN approach to predict non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) recurrence after surgery by integrating genomics and radiomics data. They combined
computed tomography (CT) imaging as radiomics data, two biomarkers (ERCC1 and RRM1
genes) as the genomics data, and tumor classification using computer-aided detection (CAD).
As a result, The integration of both omics branches improved the predictive performance, with
an AUC value of 0.84. To implement survival analysis in BC, Malik et al. [39] integrated six
omics data types from TCGA, used Neighborhood component analysis (NCA) to select relevant
features and applied a two-layer neural network for survival prediction with an accuracy of
94%. In addition to recurrence and survival prediction in cancer, ML can also be employed to
impute missing data of certain omics types. Zhou et al. [40] developed a tool called TDimpute
to impute missing gene expression data from DNAm data by using a transfer learning-based
neural network with limited training samples.
One limitation of ML algorithms is the “black box” nature of their decision-making pro-
16
==PAGE:18==
DTU Master Thesis
cesses. It is often difficult to understand the reasoning behind ML predictions due to their lack
of transparency and interpretability. Explainability is crucial in the biomedical and bioinfor-
matics field, where decisions can have critical consequences for patient health and treatment. A
clear understanding of ML predictions is necessary for healthcare professionals and researchers
to ensure their trustworthiness, validity, and accountability, which is highly required.
1.6.2
Explainable AI (XAI)
Since accuracy is not the only target, there is an increasing demand to make ML models
or results more understandable to humans. Based on that, explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) emerges in recent years to help not only the bioinformatics field but also other scientific
discoveries. A machine learning model that can be interpreted is one that can extract relevant
knowledge or insights concerning relationships contained within the data or learned by the
model. As appropriate to the context and audience, insights can be presented in the form of
visualizations, natural language, or mathematical equations [41].
Interpretation methods can be categorized through different standards. For instance, based
on the simplification of the model, interpretation can be intrinsic or post hoc [42]. The intrin-
sic method reaches interpretability by limiting the model complexity, such as short decision
trees, while the post hoc method analyzes the model after training, regardless of complexity.
According to the type of model, interpretation methods are classified into model-specific and
model-agnostic. The former is restricted to specific model classes, such as the regression weights
in the linear model that can be transparently inspected to understand model predictions. The
latter can be applied to any ML model after training. Additionally, local interpretation meth-
ods are specific to individual prediction, while global methods focus on the entire behavior of
the model [43].
To what extent can we say a model has been interpreted? Firstly, we can estimate the
transparency of the algorithm about how the algorithm itself works, but not understand the
resulting model. Secondly, we can explore how the entire or partially trained model makes
predictions by having a holistic view of its features and the learned components. Thirdly, we
can explain the model locally by looking at the prediction of each instance, and then summarize
the explanations for an entire group or cluster.
17
==PAGE:19==
DTU Master Thesis
2
Aim of Research
Further research on breast cancer is crucial due to its high prevalence, mortality, and hetero-
geneity. Identifying driver genes, often through analyzing gene expression profiles, is essential
for deepening our understanding of the disease, based on the rationale that upregulation of
OCGs and downregulation of TSGs drives carcinogenesis. In addition to producing driver gene
lists with limited overlap, it is also important to study gene expression regulation from the
outset to facilitate precise therapeutic development and gain a comprehensive understanding
of breast cancer in biology.
In this project, we aim to explore and understand the factors that determine the genes to
express aberrantly at the transcription level in breast cancer by focusing on multi-omics layers,
due to the fact that single omics can only depict parts of the biological complexity. Addition-
ally, we also target finding some patterns within the multiple omics layers themselves that can
give some insights into the tumorigenesis of breast cancer. We analyze the transcriptomic data
from TCGA-BRCA to identify the DEGs between tumor and normal samples and explore the
potential factors from both genomic and epigenomic levels to provide a more comprehensive
view. Nowadays, the development of AI-guided algorithms and tools makes them promising for
multi-omics analysis due to their predictive accuracy and ability to capture complex character-
istics. In this work, we utilize different supervised ML approaches and interpretation methods
to understand gene expression patterns in breast cancer using multi-omics data.
The ML approaches employed here are from commonly used algorithms such as linear re-
gression and random forest to algorithms that are easily overlooked but useful in ML research,
such as symbolic regression, followed by a more complex neural network. Apart from prediction,
understanding and interpreting the ML model is also important in our research, so we apply
both intrinsic and post hoc interpretation methods for the different models, such as feature
importance and saliency maps, and generalize the obtained information together to answer our
research problem. Furthermore, we aim to do a benchmarking of these ML methods to further
compare their predictivity and explainability. Bioinformatics approaches such as clustering and
functional enrichment analysis are used to further explore the patterns inside the DEG group,
serving as an insight for CDGs.
18
==PAGE:20==
DTU Master Thesis
3
Methods
3.1
Omics Modalities
3.2
Data Source
Breast cancer multi-omics data were obtained from the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) Data
Portal through TCGA program. The gene expression quantification data are from the transcrip-
tome profiling data in TCGA-BRCA used to generate our target. The other omics modalities
we included to explain gene expression as the input are CNV data from Affymetrix SNP 6.0
(SNP6), DNAm data from Illumina Human Methylation 450 (HM450), and the mutation data
in the format of a MAF file containing somatic mutations of BC patients. Using standardized
bioinformatic pipelines, the raw data were harmonized using the reference genome hg38. The
data used in this project were downloaded in 2020 from TCGA, and the source and format of
the data are explained below.
3.2.1
Transcriptome Profiling
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) is employed to quantify gene expression data by measuring mRNA
transcript counts. RNA-seq is a high-throughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology
to analyze the transcriptome by sequencing RNA molecules [44].
The process of RNA-seq
involves several steps. Biological samples are first processed for total RNA extraction. Next,
the RNA is reverse-transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA), which is then fragmented
into smaller pieces. Adapters are ligated to the fragment ends and these fragments are then
sequenced, generating millions of short reads. Quantifying the number of reads after mapping
them to the reference genome allows the estimation of RNA molecule expression levels.
GDC used the HTSeq-Count [45] workflow that takes the aligned SAM or BAM file as
input, and outputs the counts of the aligned reads overlapping the exons for each gene. Reads
aligned to multiple positions or overlapping with more than one gene are not counted, since the
script is designed specifically for differential expression analysis. Instead of HTSeq Count, the
GDC updates the alignment and quantification workflow to include STAR Count that generates
stranded counts as raw read counts, and augments with several transformations.
19
==PAGE:21==
DTU Master Thesis
3.2.2
Copy Number Variation
The CNV data in this project is from the SNP6 array data produced by hybridizing the ex-
tracted DNA that has been amplified, labeled, and fragmented onto the SNP6 array. The array
contains thousands of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) probes across the genome. After
hybridization, the array is washed to remove unbound DNA fragments and scanned to mea-
sure the fluorescence intensities of the labeled DNA on each probe. GDC utilizes DNACopy
R-package to perform the Copy Number Liftover Workflow, from which the Circular Binary
Segmentation (CBS) analysis is conducted to translate noisy intensity measurements into chro-
mosomal regions of equal copy number. The final output files are segmented into genomic
regions with the estimated copy number for each region, and the masked copy number segment
file with segment mean values is further obtained using the transformation Eq.1, where CN is
the copy number of a certain region. Therefore, the segment mean of normal diploid regions is
zero. The segment mean of the amplified regions is positive, while that of the deleted regions
is negative.
Segment mean = log2
CN
2
(1)
3.2.3
DNA Methylation
The DNAm data is from the Infinium Methylation Assay [46] that utilizes the function of
bisulfite, a chemical treatment that converts unmethylated cytosines to uracils while keeping
methylated cytosines unchanged. The whole process starts with DNA preparation and bisulfite
conversion.
The converted DNA is then amplified and labeled with fluorescent dyes.
The
labeled DNA fragments are hybridized with probes designed to target CpG sites throughout the
genome on the HM450 array. A microarray scanner is used for measurements of the fluorescence
intensity. The HM450 BeadChip (450K) contains over 480,000 probes targeting 99% of genes
and 96% of CpG island regions [46].
The raw array data from HM450 were measured by the harmonization workflow of the GDC
as beta values at the CpG sites. An array beta value is calculated as the ratio between methy-
lated and total array intensity shown in Eq.2, which ranges from 0 (lower levels of methylation)
to 1 (higher levels of methylation).
β =
M
M + U
(2)
20
==PAGE:22==
DTU Master Thesis
3.2.4
DNA Mutation
The mutation data of TCGA-BRCA are formatted in a MAF file capturing somatic mutations
from DNA sequencing. MAF file is aggregated from multiple VCF files that are annotated in
the variant calling. Mutect2 [47] was used by GDC as a somatic variant caller, a method using
a Bayesian classifier to detect somatic mutations with low allele fractions with high specificity.
Mutations are only reported on the transcript that is the most critically affected one in MAF
files. To produce a somatic MAF file, variants with lower quality and germline information are
further removed.
Since we care more about the small portion of mutations that are potentially driving the
gene to dysregulate its expression than all the mutations, we introduced an extra tool named
CScape-somatic [48] to predict driver mutations by scoring each point mutation with a number
for either coding or non-coding regions. Probability estimates are given as p-scores within the
range between 0 and 1. When the mutations are above 0.5, they are more likely to be drivers,
while when they are below 0.5, they are more likely to be passenger mutations. High-confidence
predictions yield the best accuracy when they are close to the extremes (0 or 1).
3.3
Multi-omics Integration
The early integration method of directly concatenating different data types is utilized here for
multi-omics integration. For each omics modality in this project, we extracted only the data of
the patient samples that were commonly measured in all four data types, namely the mutation,
CNV, DNAm, and gene expression data. For the former three data types, we preprocessed
and transformed each one of them to a gene-level base where genes are the observations in
rows, and the samples are the features in columns. Afterward, we merged them together to
form the multi-omics input (Fig. 3) data set. For generating the output or the target variable,
we used the results of the DEA that measured the gene expression data between normal and
tumor samples.
The specific process and methods for downloading and manipulating each
omics modality are described below.
21
==PAGE:23==
DTU Master Thesis
Figure 3: Integration process of the multi-omics TCGA-BRCA data. The blue part is the data
used for generating the gene-level mutation data. The green part is for gene-level CNV data, and the
orange part is for gene-level methylation data.
3.3.1
Download and Preparation of the Omics Modalities
We used the R package TCGAbiolinks [49] (version 2.12.5) for downloading and preprocess-
ing the data. By using the functions GDCquery(), GDCdownload(), and GDCprepare() from
TCGAbiolinks, we queried, downloaded, and prepared the CNV, DNAm, and gene expression
data from TCGA-BRCA. To download the somatic MAF file of breast cancer, we applied the
function GDCquery Maf() in TCGAbiolinks. The male samples in all data types were excluded
due to their difference from the female samples, and the gender information is from the clinical
data of TCGA-BRCA by using the function GDCquery clinic().
In order to obtain high-quality gene expression data and achieve the most accurate down-
stream results, three steps were taken to process the gene expression data: preprocessing,
normalization, and filtering. Firstly, we used TCGAanalyze Preprocessing() to remove outliers
of the samples by calculating the Spearman correlation between all pairs of samples. Secondly,
TCGAanalyze Normalization was applied to normalize and convert the raw read counts into
informative gene expression measures, where the within-sample effect of GC content and the
between-sample effect of sequencing depth were taken into consideration. Lastly, TCGAana-
22
==PAGE:24==
DTU Master Thesis
lyze Filtering() was used to remove the genes with low expression that may be artifacts or noise.
A matrix with 17376 genes and 1201 samples was returned as a result of three processing steps.
The CNV and DNAm data had 1083 and 878 samples, respectively. The MAF file included
120105 somatic mutations in 18823 genes across 975 breast tumor samples.
3.3.2
Generation of The Input
The three omics modalities included in the final input data set were individually transformed
into gene-level data.
Initially, the data of the common samples were extracted from each
omics modality. To better correspond to the sample codes of the data, we only took the first
four elements of the original TCGA barcode, including the project code, the tissue source site
number, the participant number, and the sample type (NCI, GDC Documentation). For each
data type, we calculated the mean value of the samples if there were replicates.
Figure 4: Tranformation process of the mutation data. CSS denotes the CScape-somatic approach.
The process of mutation data transformation is shown in Fig. 4. Firstly, each mutation in
the MAF file was annotated with the CScape-somatic coding scores or non-coding scores, which
were downloaded here. Within the step, genomic positions in the MAF file were lifted to NCBI
build GRCh37 because CScape-somatic uses the old reference genome different from the MAF
file. Once lifted, the mutations were scored, and we set the threshold of the score to 0.5 to
tell driver mutations from passenger mutations, as suggested in the work of Rogers et al. [48].
After annotating the MAF file, we retrieved all mutations for each sample. The sample-specific
mutations were then combined with the consequence table proposed by Saksager et al. [50] that
23
==PAGE:25==
DTU Master Thesis
contained the mutation types and positions affecting the transcription level (see Appendix 7.1).
Since the MAF file only included SNPs and did not include mutations in intergenic regions
(IGRs), the final mutation types and positions selected in our data were 5’Flank, 5’UTR,
Nonsense, Splice Site, Splice Region, Intron, 3’UTR, 3’Flank, and RNA mutations. After that,
the mutation modality was extended to 9 features for each individual sample and we assigned
binary values to each feature by inspecting whether or not the certain gene in the certain
sample had any driver mutations within this feature. The data for each sample were then
merged together into one large tabular data set, and the final gene-level binary mutation data
was formed by aggregation of the same samples for each mutation feature, in order to reduce
dimensionality and eliminate the effect of different sample individuals so that only the omics
effects are noticed to make better interpretations. For example, if there is at least one sample
that has driver mutations for this feature in the gene, we keep the value as 1, otherwise, it
becomes 0.
The manipulation of CNV and methylation data is quite similar. We applied GISTIC2.0 [51]
from the GenePattern [52] online to map the DNA segments into genes for the production of the
gene-level segment mean for each sample. Apart from the original CNV data from TCGA, the
probe annotation file was also needed to produce the marker file required as input to the tool.
Since one gene is often likely to be mapped to several segments, we set the mapping approach to
the extreme approach which was the default in GISTIC2.0, meaning that either the maximal
or minimal value was taken from all the segments located in the gene region. In terms of
the DNAm data, we sub-categorized the methylation-related regions, namely the CpG island,
island shore of both directions (N-shore and S-shore), and island shelf of both directions (N-
shelf and S-shelf) for each gene, which has been included in the methylation probe file together
with the possible related genes to the probes.
The mean of the beta value was calculated
for each gene-sample pair within the 5 regions. After obtaining both the gene-level CNV and
DNAm data containing all the samples, we checked the distribution of the data from different
samples for each omics feature and aggregated the samples of the CNV data based on both the
mean and extreme values. In terms of the methylation features, we took only the mean value
of the samples to compress the input data. After concatenation of the three gene-level omics
modalities by merging the common gene symbols, we aggregated the samples of each data type,
which presents an overall situation of the tumor samples within each modality.
24
==PAGE:26==
DTU Master Thesis
3.3.3
Generation of The Target
To label the genes as the observations, we performed a differential expression analysis (DEA)
using the statistical analysis pipeline: limma-voom from the R/Bioconductor package limma
[53] (version 3.40.6) on preprocessed gene expression data. A design matrix was created to
categorize samples into tumor and normal groups. The voom transformation was applied to
model the mean-variance relationship for all genes and compute the proper weight for each
gene. The resulting transformed data and design matrix were used to fit a linear model and
calculate regression coefficients for the log2 fold change (log2FC) of gene expression between
tumor and normal samples. Empirical Bayes was used to assess the significance of differences
in gene expression between tumor and normal samples, with a log2FC threshold of 1 and
a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 for significant DEGs. Genes were eventually classified
as up-regulated DEGs (UR-DEGs), down-regulated DEGs (DR-DEGs), or non-significantly
differentially expressed genes (Non-DEGs).
3.4
Data Modeling
Figure 5: Modeling scheme of benchmarking for different ML methods.
25
==PAGE:27==
DTU Master Thesis
The generated multi-omics data of the genes were treated as the input for ML modeling and the
target variable with gene classes was used as the ground truth. In the training phase, the model
was fitted with the labeled training data and it learned from the data by adjusting parameters or
structures through an optimization process to minimize the difference (loss) between predicted
and actual outcomes. The goal was to select out the best model with certain parameters that
minimized the loss. After training, the model was evaluated using the testing data to assess
the performance, such as accuracy, precision or mean squared error, suggesting how well the
model generalized to unseen data.
Here, various supervised ML algorithms and tools were used to perform the classification
tasks. We started with a simple binary classification that labeled the genes as DEGs and Non-
DEGs. We compared the performance of prediction among the algorithms and used different
interpretation methods to understand the models. To better do the benchmarking with less
bias, we preprocessed the input data before modeling for each method by MinMaxScaler() from
Scikit-learn [54], an open-source ML library for Python, to scale the features between 0 and 1
through Eq.3, where x is the original feature, and x′ is the normalized value.
x′ =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(3)
While doing the benchmarking, we designed and applied the modeling scheme in Fig. 5,
where 20% of the data were randomly isolated as the fixed testing set, 60% of them formed
the training set and the remaining 20% were the validation set. A 5-fold cross-validation (CV)
was applied for the first three ML methods to explore the appropriate parameters that produce
the best performance on the certain validation set. For the neural network model MLP, since
the number of hyperparameters to be adjusted was comparatively large, CV was not used here.
Instead, we fixed the randomly separated training and validation sets to do the parameter
tuning. After the models were selected for each method, we evaluated them on the testing set
and compared the resulting performance metrics. Additionally, a multiclassification was also
conducted as a complementary study, where genes were classified into UR-DEGs, DR-DEGs,
and Non-DEGs for further investigation of the biological mechanisms.
The details of each
method used in this project are explained below.
26
==PAGE:28==
DTU Master Thesis
3.4.1
Symbolic Regression:
Symbolic regression (SR) is a machine learning technique that employs genetic programming
(GP) and symbolic computation to uncover mathematical equations that best fit a given data
set. By iteratively evolving equations, it minimizes the difference between observed and pre-
dicted values. It is possible to identify the most appropriate expression by applying a wide
range of mathematical operations such as addition, multiplication, and square root, and ele-
mentary functions such as logarithm, sine, and exponential functions, which makes it different
from standard regression analyses in which the model structure is assumed in advance. The
process of finding suitable SR models is computationally intensive despite the fact they can be
both accurate and human-interpretable [55] by nature. We can restrict or apply methods that
limit the number of operations that the models can contain to achieve interpretation, because
intuitively when the formulas or expressions have fewer variables, it is easier to interpret the
model.
Figure 6: The flowchart of the evolutionary process of symbolic regression based on genetic program-
ming (Angelis et al. [56]).
GP is one of the evolutionary algorithms which provides the framework to investigate the
available mathematical space in an evolutionary process [56]. The process shown in Fig. 6 starts
with generating an initial population consisting of randomly created symbolic expressions, with
dimensions determined by user settings. After evaluation of the performance, termination of
the program is determined if some requirements are met, for example, the error equals zero or
a given point, or the maximum populations set by the user are met. If it does not terminate,
different mutations on the current expression are introduced randomly to prevent the algorithm
27
==PAGE:29==
DTU Master Thesis
from stuck in a local minimum. New expressions are subsequently formed and evaluated during
evolution. When the requirements are met, the program stops, and candidates with low errors
are selected for further analysis. It should be noted that GP can export a range of suggestions
with varying degrees of complexity, instead of producing only one equation.
3.4.2
The QLattice:
The QLattice (abbreviated for Quantum Lattice), from a python module feyn (version 3.0.2)
developed by the company Abzu, is a supervised ML approach using SR. It samples a set of
possible relations between the response y and the input X to form a set of different spatial paths,
which are interpreted as mathematical equations through their interactions with one another.
A binary mathematical operation is added to the equation when two paths interact, and a unary
operation is added to the equation when the path self-interacts [57]. QLattice represents these
mathematical models as graphs, which are generated from a time-tuned probability distribution.
In QLattice, a few thousand graphs will be fitted at a time instead of an infinite number in an
ideal situation [58].
The way the QLattice works is similar to population-based genetic programming. During
the training process, the QLattice is first initialized with a random set of graphs that will
be fitted to the training data. After computing their fitness, the stochastic gradient descent
is implemented for each graph to tune the weights, and the graphs are sorted by either the
training loss or other model evaluation standards. The best graphs or models are then selected
and these models define the structure of the next population or generation. This process is
repeated during iterations, and finally, the top graphs are decided as the resulting models used
for making predictions.
QLattice is able to deal with both the regression and binary classification tasks.
The
semantic types of the data that can be handled by QLattice are either numerical (floating
points or integers), categorical (strings), or boolean (discrete number 0/1 or True/False). In our
integrated multi-omics data, the values of the methylation-related features and CNV features
are numerical, while the mutation features data are boolean. After assigning the type to each
feature, QLattice will automatically encode the categorical data and do the preprocessing. For
the training process, the QLattice was first instantiated using feyn.QLattice(), and the models
were sampled and fitted to the data by using the auto run() function. Inside the function,
we assigned n epochs to 100 (the training process will run for 100 iterations), max complexity
to 10 (the number of extracted features is maximally 5), and criterion to “bic” (the models
28
==PAGE:30==
DTU Master Thesis
are sorted by Bayesian information criterion), since BIC not only measures the model fit but
penalizes complex models. While doing a 5-fold CV, we applied those parameters above to run
the whole 5 folds, extracted the structure of the top1 model in each fold, and trained the top
models on the corresponding data set from the previous CV with the structure constraints to
further confirm the weights of the equations. The graphs of selected models were visualized
by using feyn.show model(), and other functions such as plot roc curve(), plot response 1d, and
plot confusion matrix were used for more visualization and interpretation of the model.
3.4.3
Random Forest
The random forest algorithm is an ensemble learning technique that combines multiple decision
trees to make predictions. It starts with a random selection of the training data for each decision
tree (bagging). A random subset of features is then selected at each node of the decision tree,
and each tree is trained individually on a distinct subset of the data. After the prediction of the
trees, the class label with the highest number of votes is chosen as the predicted class. With
respect to one decision tree, the Gini index is measured to reflect the impurity of a node. The
node is impure if all classes on this node have the same frequency, and maximally pure if only
one class is present. A recursive search-and-split is carried out in both new nodes until a stop
criterion is reached [43]. The interpretation of RF can be achieved through feature importance.
First of all, all the splits where the feature was utilized are examined. We then assess the extent
to which it has decreased the impurity compared to the parent node, and the total impurity
reduction by the feature is calculated over all trees in the forest to represent its importance.
A 100-percent scale is used so that each importance is interpreted as a share of the overall
importance.
We applied RandomForestClassifier() from Scikit-learn (version 1.0.2) for implementation
of RF, and GridSearchCV() for conducting cross-validation. After obtaining a trained model,
the feature importance was retrieved by using the feature importances attribute of the model,
which contained an array of importance scores where each score corresponds to a feature.
3.4.4
LASSO Regression
LASSO, also known as L1 regularization, is a simple linear regression technique in ML that
performs both regularization by adding a penalty term to the loss function (Eq.4), and feature
selection for interpretation. Sparsity is encouraged by constraining the coefficients’ absolute
values, causing some coefficients to become zero, effectively selecting the most important fea-
29
==PAGE:31==
DTU Master Thesis
tures, and eliminating the less relevant ones.
The amount of sparsity is controlled by the
regularization parameter λ, forcing the parameter to become small to minimize the loss. The
LogisticRegressionCV() from Scikit-learn package was used in which we assigned penalty=“l1”
to implement L1 regularization, and the final coefficients of the features were accessed through
coef attribute of the estimator.
Loss =
n
X
i=1
 
yi −
X
j
xijβj
!2
+ λ
p
X
j=1
|βj|
(4)
3.4.5
Multilayer Perceptron
MLP is one of the fundamental neural networks in DL that consists of multiple layers of inter-
connected nodes called neurons. The training process contains two main parts: the feedforward
and the backpropagation. The feedforward neural network makes the information flow from the
input layer to the output layer in one direction. Neurons receive input from the previous layer
and apply an activation function to transform the output to the next layer, which introduces
non-linearity into the network. During backpropagation, an optimization algorithm, typically
gradient descent is used to minimize the loss, the difference between the predicted and the
actual output for each individual sample, and the weights are adjusted [59].
In this project, we applied PyTorch [60] (version 1.13.1+cu117), an open-source DL frame-
work for the implementation of MLP. The network architecture for a binary classification task
in our project is shown in Fig. 7. For each gene i, the input layer contains 14 omics features, and
the output layer includes 2 neurons whose predicted scores were transformed to the probability
of the corresponding two classes (Non-DEG and DEG) after applying the Softmax() function
in Eq.5, where K is the number of classes, and x is the predicted score. There are 2 hidden
layers with 32 neurons in the middle, and such parameters are the best-performing ones that
have been through several tests. ReLU() function was used as the activation function.
f(x) =
exi
PK
j=1 exj
(5)
During training, the loss was calculated by CrossEntropyLoss() (see in Eq.6 where yi is the
actual class value, while ˆyi is the predicted value of class i ) with class weights because the
number of the two classes was imbalanced. L2 regularization or weight decay was also added
with regularization parameter λ = 0.001 to penalize large weights and prevent overfitting. We
used optim.Adam optimizer that adapts the learning rate for each individual parameter, en-
30
==PAGE:32==
DTU Master Thesis
abling parameters to have different learning rates, and enhancing convergence and optimization
efficiency. We set the scale and starting point of the learning rate to 0.001, and applied the
learning rate decay with a lower scale after the 50th epoch to improve the convergence of the
optimization process. The model was trained for 100 epochs to learn the data more thoroughly
and refine the performance. For multi-classification using MLP, the number of output neurons
was changed to 3 to represent the probability of gene i being either UR-DEG, DR-DEG, or
Non-DEG.
H(y, ˆy) = −
X
i
yi log ˆyi
(6)
Figure 7: The network architecture of MLP for gene binary classification.
In MLPs, explainability is a problem because the complex relationships and transformations
learned by the network are difficult to comprehend. However, researchers continue to develop
techniques for improving the explainability of neural networks, such as the gradient-based
method Vanilla Gradient or Saliency Maps which is widely used in image processing [61]. This
method calculates the gradient of the loss function for the class of interest with respect to
the input features. Specifically, after the model has been trained, the parameters are fixed,
and a forward pass is performed for a gene of interest. After that, the gradient of a specific
class is computed with respect to each feature of the gene, which reflects how this specific
31
==PAGE:33==
DTU Master Thesis
class varies with the different features of this gene. The saliency score of each feature is finally
normalized between 0 and 1 from the gradients, and visualized for both individual genes and
certain groups of genes. Based on that, we are able to obtain the gene-specific importance
degree of each feature that determines a certain class.
3.5
Performance Metrics
To evaluate and compare the classification performance of each method on the test set, we in-
troduced three commonly used metrics: Accuracy (ACC), Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC-
ROC), and F1 Score. We used functions from sklearn.metrics to calculate each metric.
ACC: ACC is the most straightforward metric and measures the general correctness of the
predictions. It is calculated as the ratio of correctly classified genes to the total number of
genes in our case, and the accuracy score() function was applied.
AUC-ROC: AUC-ROC summarizes the overall performance of the model across various clas-
sification thresholds for binary classification. It results from the ROC curve which presents
the relation between the true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR). It measures
the area under the ROC curve and provides a single value between 0 and 1 that represents
the model’s ability to distinguish positive classes from negative classes. The value of 0.5 cor-
responds to random guessing, while the higher the value, the better the classifier performed.
The function roc auc score() was used for AUC-ROC calculation. For multi-classification, the
one-vs-rest strategy was applied in the function, which treated each class as positive respec-
tively, calculated the AUC-ROC of each class against the rest, and averaged them to compute
the overall score by class weights for the multiclass task.
F1 Score: The F1 score provides a balanced measure between precision and recall (Eq.7), tak-
ing both false positives and false negatives into account. While ACC alone is not informative
for imbalanced classes, the F1 score provides a more comprehensive evaluation of the model per-
formance. Here, f1 score() was utilized for F1 calculation, and likewise, the weighted-average
F1 score was calculated for multi-classification.
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall
(7)
32
==PAGE:34==
DTU Master Thesis
3.6
Biological Investigations
To further explore the internal structure and connection of the multi-omics data among the
DEGs, and to discover the potential of omics features to distinguish OCG cluster from TSG
cluster, we conducted an extra consensus partitioning approach. Compared to a single clus-
tering, consensus partitioning combined multiple clusterings or partitions of a data set into a
consensus partition. After getting the clusters, we employed the functional enrichment analysis
(FEA) from Moonlight to distinguish the gene clusters with respect to the significantly enriched
biological processes (BPs) and identify the patterns of CDGs from the clusters.
3.6.1
Consensus Partitioning
The data used for partitioning here were those truly predicted DEGs from binary classification.
Another R/Bioconductor package called cola [62] (version 2.4.0) was used for doing the con-
sensus partitioning, which integrated various methods for partitioning and feature extraction.
Within the cola workflow, the input matrix with omics features being rows and genes being
columns, was first adjusted using the adjust matrix which removed outliers and rows with low
variance and imputed missing values for each row. The top n features were selected using one
of the top-value methods in the package. Here, we used the standard deviation (SD) method to
sort the features. A random sampling of the matrix was then conducted to fit the partitioning
method chosen by the user. Here, we applied the commonly used KMeans algorithm. After
that, the former step was repeated several times to get multiple partitions, and a global consen-
sus ensemble was obtained by calculating the consensus matrix, indicating the consistency for
two samples to be assigned to the same subgroup. As suggested in Eq. 8, c i, j is the probability
of sample i and j being in the same subgroup in all N p partitions. s i, a and s j, a are the
adjusted subgroup labels of sample i and j in partition a. I() is the indicator function where
I(x = y) = 1 and I(x ̸= y) = 0.
ci,j = 1
Np
Np
X
a
I (si,a, sj,a)
(8)
The number of clusters k was assigned a range from 1 to 6, and cola suggested the best k by
the following rules [62]:
1. Any k value with a Jaccard index greater than 0.95 is eliminated.
2. For k values with a 1-PAC score higher than 0.9, the largest k is the optimal choice.
33
==PAGE:35==
DTU Master Thesis
3. If the second rule is not satisfied, the k value with the highest majority vote among the
top 1-PAC score, mean silhouette, and concordance values is selected as the best k.
Several metrics mentioned above were used for partitioning evaluation.
The jaccard index
evaluates the similarity of two partitions having k-1 and k subgroups.
If the similarity is
high, a smaller k is preferred. The proportion of ambiguous clustering (PAC) score measures
the proportion of the ambiguous subgroups.
The Silhouette score measures how close one
sample is to other samples in its own subgroup compared to the closest neighboring subgroup.
Concordance measures the consistence of an individual partition with the consensus partition.
3.6.2
Functional Enrichment Analysis
The FEA() function from the Moonlight package was employed to find the significantly enriched
BPs in the gene clusters partitioned by cola. It referred to those 101 BPs stored in the package
and scored each BP. According to literature findings, genes that either has a positive, negative
or uncertain effect on each BP were annotated in DiseaseList in Moonlight. Lkj = 1 means
gene k has an increasing effect on BPj, Lkj = −1 means gene k has a decreasing effect on BPj,
and Lkj = 0 means gene k only affects BPj. FEA took the DEGs as the input to calculate
a score for each BP. The Moonlight Z-score for BPj is formulated as Eq. 9, where N is the
number of annotated DEGs, k is the kth annotated DEG in BPj, and ykj is defined based on
Lkj and log2 FCk values shown in Eq. 10. Based on the overlap between the identified genes in
each BP and the whole list of DEGs, a Fisher exact test is employed to evaluate the likelihood
of whether a BP is enriched. The condition for a significantly enriched BP is |Zscorej| >= 1
and FDR <= 0.01.
Zscorej =
N
X
k=1
ykj
√
N
(9)
ykj =





1
(Lkj = 1& log2 FCk > 0)|(Lkj = −1& log2 FCk < 0)
−1
(Lkj = 1& log2 FCk < 0)|(Lkj = −1& log2 FCk > 0)
(10)
34
==PAGE:36==
DTU Master Thesis
4
Results
4.1
The Integrated Data
The total number of the final common samples found in the four data types is 677. After
multi-omics integration, there are 8983 genes located in the rows and 10157 features in the
columns, including the omics features of each sample for the genes, the chromosome that the
gene belongs to, and the gene class as the target. As shown in Fig. 8, the CNV data of all
the samples varies little in the mean and median value, while it varies a lot in terms of the
minimal and maximal value. Therefore, we aggregated the samples of the CNV data based
on two individual methods: taking the mean and extreme values of the samples. As for the
methylation features, the beta values of the samples are all quite close for each feature, thus
we took the mean value of the samples for individual features to compress the input data.
Figure 8: Basic statistics and distributions of the CNV and Methylation features. The statistic
values are from different samples of the same feature.
4.1.1
Data Aggregation
The aggregated data after omics integration is shown in Table. 2. For every single gene, there
are values reflecting 3 modalities. Within each modality, there are 2, 5, and 7 subgroups for
35
==PAGE:37==
DTU Master Thesis
CNV, DNAm, and Mutation, respectively. For the CNV modality, both the extreme and the
mean values of the segment mean among the samples are included as CNV-related features.
Negative values indicate the deletion degree of the genes, while positive values indicate the
duplication degree. For DNAm data, the values are the mean beta value among the samples
for each methylation region. As mentioned in 3.2.3, the values of the genes are between 0 and
1 with 0 being totally unmethylated and 1 being fully methylated. For the binary mutation
data, a gene is assigned to 1 if there are driver mutations on a certain position in at least one
sample. By contrast, the value is 0 if no driver mutations are found for this mutation type
in any of the samples. Splice Site and Splice Region are excluded from the mutation features
because none of the driver mutations are found within these two regions for any genes in any
samples. In general, the number of genes in this data set is 8983, and the number of features
is 14 in total. Of all the genes, 6989 of them are Non-DEGs, 1155 of them are DR-DEGs and
839 of them are UR-DEGs.
Copy number Variation
DNA methylation
Mutation
Extreme
Mean
Island
Nshore
Sshore
Nshelf
Sshelf
5’Flank
5’UTR
Nonsense
Intron
3’UTR
3’Flank
RNA
G1
-1.159
-0.144
0.691
0.746
0.700
0.000
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
G2
-1.159
-0.144
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.899
0.568
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
G3
-1.159
-0.144
0.639
0.560
0.316
0.640
0.716
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
Gn
1.488
-0.167
0.000
0.890
0.000
0.000
0.000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table 2: The aggregated data after multi-omics integration.
4.1.2
Data Observation
Compared to CNV and DNAm data, the binary mutation data is a bit sparse so we checked the
distribution of the mutation data shown in Fig. 9. The number of genes with driver mutations
on their 3’Flank regions is the most, approximately 1200, while RNA mutation holds the least
genes having driver mutations. Nevertheless, the numbers are quite small compared to the total
number of genes, meaning that genes driving breast cancer progression are in the minority. It is
also found that the number of DEGs with driver mutations is more than Non-DEGs in merely
the 5’Flank and RNA regions, while for the other 5 mutation types, Non-DEGs surpass DEGs
to have a higher number of driver mutations. If the technical errors and the false positives from
DEA are not considered here, it indicates that even if a gene has a driver mutation in specific
regions that can affect transcription level, it is likely not to be aberrantly expressed.
36
==PAGE:38==
DTU Master Thesis
Figure 9: The distribution of the mutation features. The left plot denotes the number of genes with
driver mutations in each feature, and the right plot is the ratio of genes containing driver mutations
among all DEGs and among all Non-DEGs, respectively in each feature. For example, in a specific
mutation feature, if the total number of DEG is 200, and 50 of them are containing driver mutations,
the ratio is 50/200 = 0.25. Similarly, if the total number of Non-DEG is 800, and 80 of them contain
driver mutations, the ratio is 80/800 = 0.1.
4.2
Binary Classification
4.2.1
QLattice Modeling
To begin with, we split the data set into simple train and test partitions (80%-20%). After
running the QLattice for binary classification of DEGs and Non-DEGs, there are 10 models
resulting from the BIC sorting. The model expressions, feature numbers, BIC values, and the
AUC-ROC performance on both train and test sets are shown in Table. 3. The average train
AUC of the 10 models is 0.683, while the average testing AUC is 0.681. Me Island is selected
and contained in every expression from the best 10 models, while Me Nshore is only included
once. It is noticed that even though we set the maximum number of features for a model
to 5, none of the 10 models contain more than 3 features, indicating that making the model
more complicated will not make the performance better, but a simple model can both achieve
comparable results and achieve the interpretability more easily.
37
==PAGE:39==
DTU Master Thesis
Functional form (logreg())
Feature Number
BIC
AUC Train
AUC Test
Me Island + exp(-Cn meanˆ2 - Me Islandˆ2)
2
4141.13
0.68
0.68
Me Island + Me Nshelfˆ4 + exp(-tanh(Me Island)ˆ2)
2
4141.57
0.69
0.69
Me Island + tanh(Cn mean*Me Island)ˆ2
2
4143.97
0.68
0.68
exp(-Me Nshelfˆ2 - (Me Nshore + 1/Me Island)ˆ2)
3
4144.10
0.67
0.66
Me Sshelf*(Me Island + exp(-Me Islandˆ2))
2
4144.96
0.69
0.68
Me Island + tanh(Me Islandˆ2)
1
4145.28
0.68
0.68
Me Island + Me Sshelf + exp(-Me Islandˆ2)
2
4146.81
0.68
0.68
(Me Island + Me Sshelf)ˆ2 + exp(-Cn meanˆ2 - Me Islandˆ2)
3
4149.12
0.69
0.69
Me Sshelf + exp(Me Island + exp(-Cn meanˆ2 - Me Islandˆ2))
3
4149.61
0.69
0.69
Me Island + exp(-4*Me Islandˆ2)
1
4149.89
0.68
0.68
Table 3: The top 10 models with the lowest BIC scoring from QLattice for binary classification
(DEG vs.Non-DEG). The output from each mathematical expression has been wrapped into a logistic
function logreg() to obtain the probability score between 0 and 1. Me denotes the methylation-related
features, and Cn denotes the CNV-related features.
Figure 10: Performance metrics of the top1 model from QLattice for binary classification (DEG
vs.Non-DEG). The left plot is the ROC curve and the calculated AUC for both train and test sets.
The right plot is the variation of F1 and ACC as a function of the threshold probability that determines
a gene to be a DEG. For example, if the threshold is 0.7, the gene is classified as a DEG if its output
probability score is above 0.7, otherwise, it is classified as a Non-DEG.
When looking at the top1 model, the Me Island and Cn mean interact to have a Gaus-
sian relation together to affect gene expression (see Appendix 7.2 for the graph mathematical
expression of the top 1 model from simple train/test split). The performance metrics of this
model are shown in Fig. 10, where the train and test AUC are both 0.68, suggesting that the
model is quite robust and performing consistently. Since the output from the QLattice for a
gene is a single score representing the probability of this gene as a DEG, different thresholds
can be set to make the final decision. Normally this threshold is set to 0.5, but the performance
metrics may change while increasing or decreasing the threshold if the classes are imbalanced.
For example, the highest F1 score 0.53 is obtained when setting the threshold to 0.46. The
highest ACC 0.71 is obtained while the threshold is 0.78, but the F1 score is close to 0 at this
38
==PAGE:40==
DTU Master Thesis
point, which means there are no truly predicted DEGs and the model is not performing well in
terms of precision.
By using 5-fold cross-validation, 50 models resulted from the QLattice since each fold con-
tained 10 models. The top 1 models with the lowest BIC values from each fold produced an
average performance of training AUC = 0.685 with a standard deviation of 0.004, and the
average validation AUC = 0.679 with a standard deviation of 0.01. Additionally, the average
performance of the top 10 models in every fold is similar, indicating that there’s no big bias
within the data we have if we use different training data. The model structures and perfor-
mance metrics of the top 1 models from the five folds are shown in Table. 4. Since the third
model gains the highest validation AUC score, we ran the QLattice again to fit the structure of
the third model to the entire train val data set to determine the final model and evaluated its
performance on the test set (see Appendix 7.2 for the graph mathematical expressions of the
five models from the 5-fold CV)). The finally trained model uses only Me Island and Me Nshelf
features whose collective effects act on the final gene classification. The Test AUC is 0.68, the
Test ACC is 0.78, and the Test F1 score is 0.03 with the threshold being 0.5.
Fold
Model Structure (logreg())
BIC
AUC Train
AUC Val
ACC Train
ACC Val
1
Me Island + tanh(Me Island)**2
3315.62
0.68
0.68
0.66
0.65
2
Me Island + exp(-Cn mean**2 - Me Island**2)
3304.42
0.69
0.67
0.64
0.61
3
Me Island + Me Nshelf**2 + exp(-Me Island**2)
3312.40
0.69
0.69
0.67
0.67
4
Me Island + tanh(Me Island)**2
3304.66
0.68
0.68
0.67
0.67
5
Me Island + sqrt(Me Nshelf) + exp(-Me Island**2)
3306.15
0.69
0.68
0.67
0.68
Table 4: Structures and performances of the top1 models from each fold in 5-fold cross-validation.
Both the train and test ACCc are obtained when the threshold is 0.5 here.
Since the selected model from CV has a lower BIC than the best model from the simple
train-test split, we determined to use this model for further interpretations. We visualized the
model with the selected features Me Island and Me Nshelf as 1-dimensional response plots. As
can be seen in the left plot of Fig. 11, with Me Nshelf fixed to 25%, 50%, and 75% respectively,
regardless of the changes, the relationship between the response and Me Island stays the same.
As for the right plot, when Me Island changes from approximately 0 to 0.2, the variation of the
response becomes different and the general trend is closer to DEGs even though no methylations
are found in Me Nshelf. Therefore, the primary factor of the two features that influence the
target most in the model is Me Island. When looking closely at the curve of island methylation,
it is found that a small amount of CGI methylation will lead to an increase in the probability
of differential expression, and when the amount of CGI methylation continues to increase, the
gene tends to be Non-DEG.
39
==PAGE:41==
DTU Master Thesis
Figure 11: The 1D response plots resulting from the selected model after CV on the test set. Left:
The variation of the response with Me Island by fixing Me Nshelf to the 25% (the first line in the
legend), 50% (the second line in the legend), and 75% (the third line in the legend) quartile respectively.
Right: The variation of the response with Me Nshelf by fixing Me Island to the three quartiles.
Figure 12: The distribution and the pair plot of Me Island and Me Nshelf features from the selected
model after CV on the test set. The blue dots are Non-DEGs represented by 0, and the purple dots
are DEGs represented by 1
Additionally, as presented in Fig. 12, the distribution of the two features in nonDEGs
(gene type = 0) is different from that in DEGs (gene type = 1), suggesting the high possibility
of these features to affect the classification results. However, the scatter plots of the features
40
==PAGE:42==
DTU Master Thesis
are not thoroughly separate the gene classes with clear decision boundaries, which means that
the two features indeed affect gene expression but are not sufficient to fully distinguish between
the two classes and that gene transcription levels in breast cancer are regulated by multiple
factors.
4.2.2
Feature Importance
Apart from SR, we then applied RF and LASSO under the 5-fold CV framework to obtain
the best-performing classifiers used for further interpretations. The feature importance score
was calculated for the RF model by measuring the mean of the impurity decrease within each
tree. For the LASSO classifier, the feature importance was represented by the magnitude of
the feature coefficients.
The selected models for both the RF and LASSO classifiers result from the 5-fold CV by
measuring the validation AUC scores of the models with different parameters from each fold.
The final RF classifier has 75 decision trees with a maximum depth of 5, and the selected
LASSO classifier has an inverse of regularization strength (C) of 0.01 for L1 regularization.
Likewise, the F1 score and ACC under different thresholds for RF and LASSO are shown in
Fig. 13. The maximum ACC scores of both models are 0.78 with a threshold over 0.5, meaning
that more genes are classified as Non-DEGs and the accuracy is increasing because Non-DEGs
are inherently more numerous than DEGs. As for the maximum F1 score, RF outperforms
LASSO to get 0.46.
Figure 13: The variation of F1 score and ACC as a function of the threshold for random forest
and LASSO regression. The vertical dotted lines indicate the points where each metric reaches its
maximum value with a different threshold.
41
==PAGE:43==
DTU Master Thesis
Figure 14: Frequency of the feature occurrence from the top 10 models of QLattice using SR.
Figure 15: Feature importance of the LASSO and RF models.
For the interpretation of the model and its predictions, the selected features have been
statistically calculated and their importance degree has been estimated based on the charac-
teristics of each method. For the SR method using the QLattice, the number of times that a
feature appears in the resulting top 10 models from a simple train/test split is counted so that
the importance of the features can be judged by the frequency of occurrence. For instance,
as presented in Fig. 14, The Me Island feature is selected in every model, both Cn mean and
Me Sshelf have been selected four times, and Me Nshelf and Me Nshore are picked only 1-2
times, from which we can infer that methylations on CGIs are quite important and surpassing
the effect of other omics features to influence gene expression. To further investigate and inter-
42
==PAGE:44==
DTU Master Thesis
pret the models from the other two commonly used ML algorithms LASSO and RF, the feature
coefficients and the feature importance are calculated and visualized respectively in Fig. 15.
As a result, there is an overall consistency among the methods in terms of feature importance,
demonstrating that methylation-related factors always contribute more to the predictive power
of the model and play a significant role in modulating gene expression, from which the CGI
methylations are the most important effect that obtains the highest score in all the three meth-
ods. However, the mutation factors are eliminated from the SR and LASSO models or are
having very little effect in the RF model compared to features from other omics modalities.
Figure 16: Variations of the loss and AUC-ROC of training and validation sets with the increase of
training epoch for MLP binary classification.
4.2.3
MLP Model Evaluation
The MLP model was fitted to the fixed training data shown in the modeling scheme in Fig. 5.
The hyperparameters were determined according to the performance of the model on the vali-
dation data set, and the selected model was then evaluated on the testing data for performance
comparisons with other approaches. During each epoch, the trained model is evaluated on
the same validation data set, and we saved the model as the final selection with the highest
validation AUC-ROC.
Among the 100 epochs, the best validation AUC turns out to be 0.68. Since the F1 score and
ACC will change with different probability thresholds to classify the gene as a DEG, we set the
threshold to the one that produces the maximum F1 score. During the training process, values
of different performance metrics of the MLP model are changing with the epochs (Fig. 16). As
epoch increases, loss and AUC change drastically, fluctuate to some extent, and finally tend to
converge. There is a decrease in overall loss and the decrease in validation loss is slower than
that in training loss. Similarly, the overall AUC is on the rise, and the training AUC is rising
43
==PAGE:45==
DTU Master Thesis
faster than the validation AUC, which also proves that the model does have the ability to learn.
Due to the complexity of the deep learning model, there is a high possibility of overfitting in the
later stage of training, so it is necessary to find a balance point to improve the generalization
ability of the model. The vibrations before convergence for both training and validation sets
may be due to the high learning rate after a certain number of epochs. The learning rate refers
to the step size at which the model parameters are updated during training. Vibrations in the
loss curves can result from a model that has a high learning rate and overshoots the optimal
solution. We introduced learning rate decay in the 50th epoch so a clear drop in the loss and
rise of the AUC-ROC can be found at that point, and the curves become flattened.
4.2.4
Interpretation of the MLP Model
Figure 17: Saliency maps for the truly predicted DEGs and NonDEGs from MLP binary classification
modeling. The value of the color bar is the normalized saliency score for each feature of the genes.
We fitted the whole data set with all the 8983 genes to the saved model, extracted those truly
predicted DEGs / True Positives (TPs) and NonDEGs / True Negatives (TNs) respectively,
and calculated the saliency scores of the features for each individual gene to gain insights into
both local and global feature importance. The saliency maps are presented as two heatmaps
for the TPs and TNs in Fig. 17. For all 4936 truly predicted Non-DEGs on the left, the global
feature importance of all genes has a similar trend that the Me Island still plays the most
important role from a macro perspective and that mutation effects such as Mu Intron and
Mu 5’Flank stand out as well even though the effects are quite small compared to the most
dominant CGI methylation. However, as for those 1150 truly predicted DEGs on the right,
although the feature importance trend for each individual gene is not as similar as that in Non-
44
==PAGE:46==
DTU Master Thesis
DEGs, Me Island is still the most significant factor for most of the genes. Furthermore, other
omics features besides CGI methylation also have a non-negligible impact on the determination
of the DEG class, thus, it is the collective effects of multiple omics features that make a gene
to be a DEG.
We also did an extra experiment to exclude the Me Island feature and retrain the MLP
model for the prediction of the gene classes again, in order to see if we can find some patterns
among the features with relatively small influence. It turns out that after deletion, the model
performance becomes lower with AUC-ROC decreasing by 0.04, ACC decreasing by 0.05 and F1
score decreasing by 0.03. The next dominant effect in the remaining features is Me Nshore and
the combined effects of other omics features become more evident, however, the overall saliency
scores are decreasing compared to the results before deletion of Me Island (see Appendix 7.3 for
performance comparison and the saliency maps after deletion of the CGI methylation feature).
4.2.5
Benchmarking
Test AUC-ROC
Test ACC
Test F1
LASSO
0.62
0.55
0.42
RF
0.70
0.62
0.46
SR
0.68
0.65
0.45
MLP
0.67
0.66
0.44
Table 5:
Benchmarking of the four ML approaches for a binary gene classification on the same
test set. The probability threshold of a gene to be a DEG is taken at the point where the F1 score
obtains the highest value. Test F1 Score is the maximum F1 score, and the Test ACC is the accuracy
corresponding to the same threshold.
After benchmarking the four ML approaches on the same fixed test set, the performance metrics
AUC-ROC, ACC, and F1 score are estimated for each model to make a comparison for the
predictivity. As presented in Table. 5, the Test F1 score of each model is the maximum score
as a function of the threshold, and the Test ACC is taken from the same threshold as F1. It
is suggested that except for LASSO, the other three models perform similarly in predictivity,
which is reasonable because LASSO is the only linear model having a simpler structure, and the
other three models can handle non-linear relationships between features and the target. The
SR model from the QLattice uses only two features to depict the relation as a mathematical
expression, while the RF and MLP models take all the features into account. To this extent, the
SR model is comparatively simple but achieves similar performance as the more complex models,
45
==PAGE:47==
DTU Master Thesis
embodying the great potential of QLattice to provide both predictivity and interpretability in
ML for bioinformatics research.
Nevertheless, the interpretation of the MLP model using
saliency maps is gene-specific compared to the intervention methods of other models that can
only depict the general influence of the omics features on the classification of the entire gene sets.
In addition, the Test ACC scores are much higher than the Test F1 scores in all the models,
suggesting that the models are performing well in terms of overall correct predictions but
struggle in correctly distinguishing the positive class. In this project, we have assigned a larger
class weight to the minority class (DEG) to give it more importance and contribution so that
the models focus more on learning the DEG class to ensure a more balanced representation of
different classes. However, class weighting may not always improve the F1 score if the minority
class is heavily underrepresented, which is inevitable in this project due to the DEA and the
strict threshold of identifying a gene as DEG.
4.3
Multiclass Classification Using MLP
To further explore the difference between UR-DEGs and DR-DEGs in terms of the omics
effects, we applied MLP again for the multi-classification task. Since no threshold is necessary
to determine the probability score of a gene to be the positive class in binary classification,
the class with the maximum probability after Softmax() function is assigned to the input gene.
After evaluation of the test set, the AUC-ROC is 0.66, ACC is 0.64, and the F1 score improves
a lot from 0.44 to 0.66 for the multi-classification task. Likewise, the loss and AUC-ROC as
a function of the epoch for both training and validation sets are shown in Fig. 18, presenting
the same trend as the binary classification task. However, the gap between the training and
validation after convergence of the values is larger than binary classification, and the variation
degree of the validation metrics with the increase of the epoch is much smaller than that of the
training loss. When that task becomes more complicated, the model is more likely to overfit
the training data, thus losing the generalization ability for the validation and testing data.
Similarly, the saliency scores of the features are calculated for each of the genes that are truly
predicted for each class. The result of the Non-DEGs is the same as the result of the binary
classification mentioned in section 4.2.4, suggesting almost the same trend for each individual
Non-DEG, and CGI methylation is the most dominant factor that determines a gene to be a
Non-DEG. It is worth mentioning the different patterns observed between the DR-DEGs and
UR-DEGs presented in Fig. 19 in order to dig deeper into the function of different groups of
genes on breast cancer progression. 5194 genes are correctly predicted as Non-DEGs, 546 genes
46
==PAGE:48==
DTU Master Thesis
are correct DR-DEGs, and 134 are correct UR-DEGs. Both the DR-DEG and the UR-DEG
classes are driven by multiple omics factors. For DR-DEGs, the most dominant factor is CGI
methylation. Apart from that, CNV, S shore methylation, and the 3’Flank mutation also play
an important role together with CGI methylation to determine the down-regulation of the
genes. Possible enhancers or isolators can be found in the 3’Flank region of the genes, thus
mutations in this region may cause the gene to be down-regulated at the transcription level.
However, the most significant factor for UR-DEG identification is the average CNV among
the samples, which directly impact the gene dosage and on the contrary suggests that an up-
regulated gene as a potential OCG candidate to drive oncogenesis, is more likely to have copy
number amplification than the loss of methylation.
Figure 18: Variations of the loss and AUC-ROC of training and validation sets with the increase of
training epoch for MLP multiclass classification.
Figure 19:
Saliency maps for the truly predicted DR-DEGs and UR-DEGs from MLP multi-
classification modeling. The value of the color bar is the normalized saliency score for each feature of
the genes.
47
==PAGE:49==
DTU Master Thesis
4.4
Biological Investigations
4.4.1
Discovery of Potential Driver Genes
Identification of DEGs enhances the possibility to discover the real driver genes in breast cancer.
However, DEA turns out to discover a large list of DEGs even with the strict thresholds.
By combining the results of DEA that label the genes into different groups and the MLP
algorithm for prediction and interpretation, we are able to further select the potential driver
genes based on both the model performance and human understanding. Therefore, after the
binary classification, we extracted the genes that were mostly affected by either of the mutation
factors from the truly predicted DEGs to gain some insights into whether these picked genes
can be CDGs that promote breast cancer development.
There are merely two genes that are mostly affected by the mutation factor rather than
the methylation or CNV factors from the DEG group, namely ALX4 and KLF2. The feature
importance represented by the saliency scores of these two genes is shown in Fig. 20. The
dominant factor for ALX4 is the intron mutation, while that for KLF2 is the 3’Flank mutation.
Furthermore, none of the genes mostly affected by mutation factors were found from the truly
predicted Non-DEGs, adding confidence to the MLP interpretation and the result of finding
the possible two CDGs from the DEGs.
Figure 20: Saliency scores of the omics features for ALX4 (left) and KLF2 (right) from MLP binary
classification modeling. The saliency scores are normalized between 0 and 1.
48
==PAGE:50==
DTU Master Thesis
4.4.2
Clusters in Truly Predicted DEGs
Figure 21: Consensus partitioning of the truly predicted DEGs form MLP by using KMeans. The
annotation of pi denotes the probability of being in class i across all partitions. The Silhouette score
measures how close one sample is to other samples in its own subgroup compared to the closest
neighboring subgroup. The consensus value is the probability of sample i and j being in the same
subgroup in all partitions.
Based on the truly predicted DEGs from the MLP model, it is of great interest to use clustering
algorithms for partitioning these DEGs to see if we can separate them into different groups with
the patterns or characteristics of CGDs. After adjustment of the input matrix, 9 features are
kept in total. By using the standard deviation (SD) as the top-value method for calculating
and sorting the scores of the features, feature selection was implemented to extract certain
top-scored ones for subsequent clustering. The suggested best k from cola is 2 by calculating
different evaluation parameters mentioned in section 3.6.1, such as the PAC score and the
Jaccard index. The result and visualization of the partitioning by using k = 2 are presented in
Fig. 21, where two main clusters in the diagonal can be discovered. However, the plot exhibits
49
==PAGE:51==
DTU Master Thesis
low stability of the subgrouping because the consensus values of the two blocks in the reverse
diagonal are not exactly 0. The heatmap is the calculated consensus matrix that measures how
consistent two samples are in the same subgroup. If sample i and j are always in the same
subgroup among all partitions, the value is close to 1, otherwise it is close to 0. Hence, a totally
stable consensus partitioning will present a consensus matrix with pure 1 values and 0 values.
4.4.3
Biological Processes Enriched in Truly Predicted DEGs
Based on the clustering results, we applied the functional enrichment analysis (FEA) in Moon-
light to further distinguish the genes in the two clusters to discover potential patterns for the
TSGs and OCGs with respect to the BPs associated with breast cancer progression. While
comparing the results of the first and the second cluster shown in Fig. 22 and Fig. 23, it is
found that 15 BPs and 8 BPs are enriched in cluster1 and cluster2, respectively. The positive
Z-score of the BP proliferation of cells in cluster2 indicates that the activity of cell proliferation
is increased, which drives cancer progression, while this BP is not enriched in cluster1. However,
the reduction of apoptosis that contributes to cancer development as well can be discovered in
cluster1, together with an increase in organism death. Therefore, both two clusters present an
overall effect on driving cancer, which belongs to the characteristics of OCGs. Genes in clus-
ter1 drive cancer progression through enhancing cell proliferation, and genes in cluster2 develop
cancer through suppressing apoptosis. Clustering of the truly predicted DEGs from MLP and
the subsequent FEA allowed us to understand that two groups of DEGs with different omics
characteristics act on different BPs, but both play a role in promoting cancer.
50
==PAGE:52==
DTU Master Thesis
Figure 22: Barplot showing FEA results of genes in the first cluster. The horizontal axis contains
the significantly enriched BPs. For each BP, the number in parenthesis indicates the number of genes
participating in this BP. Green bars are −log2 FDR/10 scores from the Fisher exact tests. Yellow
bars denote positive Moonlight Z-scores, indicating an increase in this BP. Purple bars denote negative
Moonlight Z-scores, indicating a decrease in this BP. A BP is significantly enriched among the gens if
|Z −score| >= 1 and FDR <= 0.01..
Figure 23: Barplot showing FEA results of genes in the second cluster. The horizontal axis contains
the significantly enriched BPs. For each BP, the number in parenthesis indicates the number of genes
participating in this BP. Green bars are −log2 FDR/10 scores from the Fisher exact tests. Yellow
bars denote positive Moonlight Z-scores, indicating an increase in this BP. Purple bars denote negative
Moonlight Z-scores, indicating a decrease in this BP. A BP is significantly enriched among the gens if
|Z −score| >= 1 and FDR <= 0.01..
51
==PAGE:53==
DTU Master Thesis
5
Discussion
5.1
Multi-omics Effects on Gene Expression
It is found that CGI methylation is always the main factor influencing gene expression, resulting
from the interpretation of the four ML algorithms. By using symbolic regression, gene expres-
sion as a function of CGI methylation is depicted as a curve with N shelf methylation fixed to
certain values presented in Fig. 11. It is reported that the CGIs are evolutionarily conserved to
regulate chromatin structure and transcription factor binding in order to promote gene expres-
sion [31], thus methylations in CGI regions are associated with gene silencing or declined gene
expression. In our result, when the degree of methylation is from 0 to about 0.2, the degree of
change in gene expression rises sharply, and the gene is closer to differential expression. Such
differential expression can be speculated to be down-regulation based on existing knowledge.
When the amount of methylation exceeds a certain threshold and continues to increase, gene
expression no longer changes sharply and gradually approaches normal expression. It is sug-
gested that in cancer cells, TSGs are often silenced due to hypermethylation, an increase in
methylation levels compared to normal cells [63]. If the methylation degree in certain regions,
such as CGIs continues increasing, it is more likely that the related gene will be down-regulated,
or close to differentially expressed. This seems to be inconsistent with the resulting curve, but
it is worth noting that our study only considered the degree of gene methylation in tumor sam-
ples. When the amount of methylation continues to increase, we are comparing the previous
methylation degree with the current degree of the same tumor sample, without knowing the
difference between the tumor and the normal sample. Therefore, it is incomplete to discuss
how the methylation degree of tumor samples affects gene expression regardless of the difference
between tumor and normal samples, and the mathematical expression generated by QLattice
cannot well explain the causal relationship between methylation and gene expression from a
biological point of view.
In addition, the effects of mutations have been determined to have minimal influence on
differential expression according to the feature importance results of the first three algorithms
SR, RF, and LASSO. This may be due to the fact that the frequency of mutations is intrinsically
low, while most of the accumulated mutations in the genome belong to neutral mutations not
having an effect on fitness [64]. Cells have also developed diverse mechanisms to counteract
the impact of mutations. One such mechanism involves cells activating alternative pathways
or regulatory processes to reestablish typical levels of gene expression, even in the presence of
52
==PAGE:54==
DTU Master Thesis
mutations [65]. Since the mutation effects are seen by the MLP models, the least and even null
effects of mutations may be due to the algorithm limitations to deal with the binary mutation
data.
5.2
Strengths and Weaknesses of the Approaches
In this project, we compared four ML techniques in terms of the predictivity and interpretation
of different models to study the relationship between multi-omics factors and the gene expres-
sion level. A notable strength of LASSO is its ability to deal with high-dimensional datasets
through feature selection and regularization, which is effective at handling multicollinearity and
preventing overfitting. However, LASSO may lead to a loss of predictive accuracy if important
variables are incorrectly excluded, which has been reflected in the results of this study. In
symbolic regression, input variables are directly related to output variables using mathematical
equations, providing intrinsic interpretability and insights into the hidden patterns in the data.
The weakness of SR is that it can be computationally challenging and may struggle with noisy
or complex datasets, resulting in less accurate predictions. As for limitations of the QLattice,
the model can only deal with maximally 16 features which restricts the model’s complexity,
and only binary classification tasks can be implemented so far due to the lack of development.
Data with high dimensionality and relationships that are non-linear can be handled effectively
by random forests. The RF algorithm displays good predictive power and offers feature im-
portance estimates as interpretations. In addition, since individual data points do not heavily
influence it, RF tends to be relatively robust to outliers and missing values. Averaging mul-
tiple decision trees minimizes the impact of outliers and enhances the overall accuracy of the
prediction. Despite this, interpreting the individual decision trees within the ensemble can be
challenging, which makes it a typical black-box technique in ML. Neural networks based on
MLPs can capture complex patterns and nonlinear relationships within data. However, train-
ing MLPs requires careful tuning of hyperparameters, and they can be prone to overfitting,
especially with limited data. The lack of data points may be an explanation for MLP to obtain
similar performance to RF and SR. In spite of its strong predictive ability, it can be challenging
to interpret. However, by using appropriate techniques such as saliency maps for the calcula-
tion of the class gradient with respect to the input data, feature importance can be measured
at a gene-base level for each individual class, indicating more detailed mechanisms or relations
between the features and the target.
53
==PAGE:55==
DTU Master Thesis
5.3
Investigation of the Potential Driver Genes
The two genes mostly affected by the mutation factor from the truly predicted DEG group
are ALX4 and KLF2 as mentioned above, which have the potential to be the driver genes in
breast cancer. Known also as ALX homeobox 4, the ALX4 gene is normally expressed in the
mesenchyme of embryonic limb buds during development[66]. In terms of its functions in breast
cancer, Yang et al. [67] demonstrated for the first time that ALX4 acts as a novel functional
TSG that is inactivated by DNA methylation and is an independent prognostic factor in breast
cancer. Additionally, a loss of ALX4 was found in stromal and epithelial cells in breast tumors
by Change et al. [68]. As for KLF2, it is a transcription factor important for various BPs
such as the cardiovascular and immune systems. It has been proven to be a clinical diagnostic
and treatment biomarker of breast cancer which is significantly down-regulated in cancerous
tissues during advanced cancer stages and grades by Li et al. [69]. KLF2 works as a TSG in
breast cancer and the upstream regulator miR-92a-3p can bind to the 3’UTR region of KLF2
to prevent it from interacting with BIRC5 so as to promote breast cancer proliferation[70][71].
The expression direction of two genes has been checked and both of them are significantly
down-regulated. By using the saliency map technique to identify the most important factor
for these two genes that affect their own gene expression, we further confirm the role of ALX4
and KLF2 as TSGs in breast cancer whose down-regulation is mainly due to the mutations.
These mutations, as a result, make the genes lose their functions and eventually promote tumor
progression.
5.4
Interpretation by Saliency Maps
For the interpretation of the neural networks, the saliency map is one of the gradient-only
methods that measure the change of the prediction by changing a feature. For example, if
the value of the feature is increased, the predicted class probability will either go up (for
positive gradient) or down (for negative gradient). The larger the gradient, the stronger the
feature effect will be on the predicted class. However, using saliency maps to interpret neural
networks also has some disadvantages. First, the sensitivity of saliency maps to small input
variations can cause unstable and inconsistent explanations. Relying solely on saliency maps
for robust interpretations becomes challenging due to the potential for different patterns when
the input undergoes slight perturbations. Second, saliency maps typically offer a superficial
explanation as they primarily emphasize the most influential features without capturing the
54
==PAGE:56==
DTU Master Thesis
intricate reasoning or intermediate processes that take place within the neural network. This
limitation can restrict the comprehension of the model’s internal operations.
Lastly, while
neural networks excel at learning non-linear relationships among input features, saliency maps
often utilize linear approximations of the network’s behavior. This linear approximation might
not fully encompass the intricate complexity of the model’s decision boundaries, resulting in
potentially incomplete interpretations.
5.5
Data Limitations
Even though we obtained several ML models with acceptable performance and interpretability
of the omics effects on gene expression, there are still some limitations within the integrated
data used as the input for ML modeling.
First of all, we treated the results of the DEA by a statistical limma-voom approach as
the ground truth of our data without any biological validations. Although this algorithm has
been widely used in many studies and is considered a standard method for DEA in RNA-
seq analysis, high false positive and false negative rates still occur in DEG predicting due
to the biases introduced during dispersion computations [72].
Hence, biological validations
from previous experiments or literature are required to make the results more convincing.
Secondly, aggregation of the samples by taking the average or extreme values to form individual
features may lose too much information valuable for predictions.
Since the omic signature
of genes is documented in every tumor sample, differences between samples should not be
completely ignored. Thirdly, since biological systems are quite complex that contain a large
number of interactions between genes, it is not enough to only focus on the influence of the
omics characteristics of the gene itself on its expression level. For example, mutations occurring
in a transcription factor may not influence its own expression but affect the expression of its
binding genes. Therefore, such interactions happening in the gene regulatory networks also
need to be considered to depict a full explanation of gene expression. Lastly, as mentioned in
section 5.1, we did not include the information on the differences between tumor and normal
samples in terms of the methylation features, but only the data of the tumor samples. This
may lead to an incomplete understanding of the result that CGI methylation mostly drives the
gene to be differentially expressed because there is lacking information about the difference in
methylation between the two conditions. For example, if the overall methylation of a gene is
high among the tumor samples, it is not necessarily a DEG because the methylation of this
gene in normal samples may be high as well. Therefore, methylations in tumor samples alone
55
==PAGE:57==
DTU Master Thesis
can not depict a positive correlation with differential expression.
5.6
Future Studies
To make the target variable more convincing, a solid validation of the detected DEGs is needed.
What may deserve trying is the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) [73], a bioinformatics tool
used to help gain insights into the underlying biological mechanisms and regulatory networks
associated with their experimental data. By using IPA, we can combine the predicted DEGs
with disease-related knowledge reported in the literature to further extract those biologically
validated data as the ground truth for the subsequent ML modeling. For example, if the DEG
is related to breast cancer, we categorize it as the validated DEG.
According to the second limitation of the data, instead of forcefully taking the mean of the
samples, we can properly compress the integrated data into a latent space by learning-based
approaches that produce new representations of the data. Accordingly, a complementary ex-
periment can be conducted before integration to model each modality separately. For example,
the concatenation autoencoder (ConcatAE) [74] can be employed to transform the features into
a hidden space. The separated hidden features will then go through a decoder where the self-
consistency loss is calculated for evaluation of the valid feature information. In the meantime,
the hidden features will be concatenated as the input to an MLP network for the classification
task.
In addition, mentioned as the third limitation of our data, although DNAm is found a key
factor to influence gene expression, it only contains the pure situations of the tumor samples,
and the clear relationship between differential methylation and differential gene expression
needs to be further demonstrated. Specifically, several tools such as DSS [75], methyIKit [76],
and ChAMP [77] can be used to implement gene-level differential methylation analysis that
measures the difference of DNAm between the tumor and normal samples as we did in DEA.
Lastly, considering that the DEGs in different BC subtypes of breast cancer may be different,
it is informative to further analyze the subtype-specific omics factors affecting variations of
gene expression between the tumor and normal samples, so that more detailed and precise
mechanisms underlying each individual subtype progression and development can be revealed,
which is beneficial for future identification of subtype-specific diagnostic markers, targeted
therapies, and personalized treatment strategies.
56
==PAGE:58==
DTU Master Thesis
6
Conclusion
In this study, we integrated multi-omics data (CNV, DNAm, and mutation) to predict and un-
derstand the differential expression of genes in breast cancer from TCGA-BRCA. We applied
the early integration method to preprocess and concatenate the omics modalities at the gene
level and aggregated the common samples for dimension reduction and feasible interpretations.
We analyzed gene expression data by using the limma-voom pipeline to identify Non-DEGs,
DR-DEGs, and UR-DEGs as the target variable for the multi-omics input. Afterward, we ap-
plied several ML techniques, including SR, LASSO, RF, and MLP for binary class prediction
and interpretation through mathematical expressions, feature importance, and saliency maps.
We then evaluated the selected models on the same test set and compared these algorithms in
terms of both predictivity and interpretability. We applied MLP to the multi-classification task
further and used saliency maps to distinguish the factors of the truly predicted DR-DEGs and
UR-DEGs. Lastly, we utilized cola to do the clustering for the TPs from the MLP model and
employed FEA from Moonlight on the resulting clusters for deeper biological investigations. As
a result, 8983 genes were analyzed, from which 6989 are Non-DEGs, 1155 are DR-DEGs and 839
are UR-DEGs, and there were 14 omics-related features in the input data. Performance evalua-
tion revealed similar results among RF, SR, and MLP, with LASSO performing the worst. CGI
methylation emerged as the primary factor influencing differential expression, while mutations
had a minimal impact. However, the saliency map of the MLP model indicated the collective
effects of multiple omics features rather than CGI methylation alone. ALX4 and KLF2 were
identified as potential driver genes affected mainly by mutations. For the multi-classification
task, the MLP model demonstrated improved performance and revealed differences in the main
factors driving DR-DEGs and UR-DEGs. Biological investigations using cola clustering iden-
tified two clusters representing oncogene characteristics with increased cell proliferation and
decreased apoptosis. This study represents a pioneering investigation into the underlying fac-
tors contributing to differential expression in BC patients, employing a multi-omics approach
and leveraging AI-driven big data analysis and modeling. The utilization of appropriate in-
terpretation techniques facilitates a comprehensive understanding of the predictive outcomes,
shedding light on the molecular mechanisms underlying breast cancer and providing insights
for biomarker discovery and precision treatment strategies.
57
==PAGE:59==
DTU Master Thesis
References
(1)
Vogelstein, B.; Papadopoulos, N.; Velculescu, V. E.; Zhou, S.; Diaz Jr, L. A.; Kinzler,
K. W. Cancer genome landscapes. science 2013, 339, 1546–1558.
(2)
Cooper, G.; Adams, K., The cell: a molecular approach; Oxford University Press: 2022.
(3)
Sung, H.; Ferlay, J.; Siegel, R. L.; Laversanne, M.; Soerjomataram, I.; Jemal, A.; Bray, F.
Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality world-
wide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians 2021, 71, 209–
249.
(4)
Lei, S.; Zheng, R.; Zhang, S.; Wang, S.; Chen, R.; Sun, K.; Zeng, H.; Zhou, J.; Wei,
W. Global patterns of breast cancer incidence and mortality: A population-based cancer
registry data analysis from 2000 to 2020. Cancer Communications 2021, 41, 1183–1194.
(5)
Bettaieb, A.; Paul, C.; Plenchette, S.; Shan, J.; Chouchane, L.; Ghiringhelli, F. Precision
medicine in breast cancer: reality or utopia? Journal of translational medicine 2017, 15,
1–13.
(6)
Mazouni, C.; Rimareix, F.; Mathieu, M.-C.; Uzan, C.; Bourgier, C.; Andr´e, F.; Delaloge,
S.; Garbay, J.-R. Outcome in breast molecular subtypes according to nodal status and
surgical procedures. The American Journal of Surgery 2013, 205, 662–667.
(7)
Nguyen, P. L.; Taghian, A. G.; Katz, M. S.; Niemierko, A.; Abi Raad, R. F.; Boon,
W. L.; Bellon, J. R.; Wong, J. S.; Smith, B. L.; Harris, J. R. Breast cancer subtype
approximated by estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER-2 is associated with
local and distant recurrence after breast-conserving therapy. Journal of clinical oncology
2008, 26, 2373–2378.
(8)
Bauer, K. R.; Brown, M.; Cress, R. D.; Parise, C. A.; Caggiano, V. Descriptive analysis
of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative, progesterone receptor (PR)-negative, and HER2-
negative invasive breast cancer, the so-called triple-negative phenotype: a population-
based study from the California cancer Registry. cancer 2007, 109, 1721–1728.
(9)
Jones, K. L.; Buzdar, A. U. Evolving novel anti-HER2 strategies. The lancet oncology
2009, 10, 1179–1187.
58
==PAGE:60==
DTU Master Thesis
(10)
Pritchard, K. I.; Burris III, H. A.; Ito, Y.; Rugo, H. S.; Dakhil, S.; Hortobagyi, G. N.;
Campone, M.; Cs¨oszi, T.; Baselga, J.; Puttawibul, P., et al. Safety and efficacy of
Everolimus with Exemestane vs. Exemestane alone in elderly patients with HER2-negative,
hormone receptor–positive breast Cancer in BOLERO-2. Clinical breast cancer 2013, 13,
421–432.
(11)
Consortium, I. C. G. et al. International network of cancer genome projects. Nature
2010, 464, 993.
(12)
Shen, L.; Shi, Q.; Wang, W. Double agents: genes with both oncogenic and tumor-
suppressor functions. Oncogenesis 2018, 7, 1–14.
(13)
Tamborero, D.; Rubio-Perez, C.; Deu-Pons, J.; Schroeder, M. P.; Vivancos, A.; Rovira,
A.; Tusquets, I.; Albanell, J.; Rodon, J.; Tabernero, J., et al. Cancer Genome Interpreter
annotates the biological and clinical relevance of tumor alterations. Genome medicine
2018, 10, 1–8.
(14)
Rajendran, B. K.; Deng, C.-X. Characterization of potential driver mutations involved
in human breast cancer by computational approaches. Oncotarget 2017, 8, 50252.
(15)
Nik-Zainal, S.; Davies, H.; Staaf, J.; Ramakrishna, M.; Glodzik, D.; Zou, X.; Martin-
corena, I.; Alexandrov, L. B.; Martin, S.; Wedge, D. C., et al. Landscape of somatic
mutations in 560 breast cancer whole-genome sequences. Nature 2016, 534, 47–54.
(16)
Tokheim, C. J.; Papadopoulos, N.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Karchin, R. Evaluating
the evaluation of cancer driver genes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
2016, 113, 14330–14335.
(17)
Colaprico, A.; Olsen, C.; Bailey, M. H.; Odom, G. J.; Terkelsen, T.; Silva, T. C.; Olsen,
A. V.; Cantini, L.; Zinovyev, A.; Barillot, E., et al. Interpreting pathways to discover
cancer driver genes with Moonlight. Nature communications 2020, 11, 1–17.
(18)
Cai, Z.; Poulos, R. C.; Liu, J.; Zhong, Q. Machine learning for multi-omics data integra-
tion in cancer. Iscience 2022, 103798.
(19)
Menyh´art, O.; Gy˝orffy, B. Multi-omics approaches in cancer research with applications in
tumor subtyping, prognosis, and diagnosis. Computational and structural biotechnology
journal 2021, 19, 949–960.
59
==PAGE:61==
DTU Master Thesis
(20)
Wolf-Yadlin, A.; Hautaniemi, S.; Lauffenburger, D. A.; White, F. M. Multiple reaction
monitoring for robust quantitative proteomic analysis of cellular signaling networks. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2007, 104, 5860–5865.
(21)
Guinney, J.; Dienstmann, R.; Wang, X.; De Reynies, A.; Schlicker, A.; Soneson, C.;
Marisa, L.; Roepman, P.; Nyamundanda, G.; Angelino, P., et al. The consensus molecular
subtypes of colorectal cancer. Nature medicine 2015, 21, 1350–1356.
(22)
Kelley, D. Z.; Flam, E. L.; Izumchenko, E.; Danilova, L. V.; Wulf, H. A.; Guo, T.;
Singman, D. A.; Afsari, B.; Skaist, A. M.; Considine, M., et al. Integrated Analysis of
Whole-Genome ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq Data of Primary Head and Neck Tumor Samples
Associates HPV Integration Sites with Open Chromatin MarksChIP-Seq/RNA-Seq Links
HPV Integration with Open Chromatin. Cancer Research 2017, 77, 6538–6550.
(23)
Rappoport, N.; Shamir, R. Multi-omic and multi-view clustering algorithms: review and
cancer benchmark. Nucleic acids research 2018, 46, 10546–10562.
(24)
Seal, D. B.; Das, V.; Goswami, S.; De, R. K. Estimating gene expression from DNA
methylation and copy number variation: a deep learning regression model for multi-omics
integration. Genomics 2020, 112, 2833–2841.
(25)
Jia, L.; Mao, Y.; Ji, Q.; Dersh, D.; Yewdell, J. W.; Qian, S.-B. Decoding mRNA trans-
latability and stability from the 5’UTR. Nature structural & molecular biology 2020, 27,
814–821.
(26)
Vaz-Drago, R.; Cust´odio, N.; Carmo-Fonseca, M. Deep intronic mutations and human
disease. Human genetics 2017, 136, 1093–1111.
(27)
Zack, T. I.; Schumacher, S. E.; Carter, S. L.; Cherniack, A. D.; Saksena, G.; Tabak, B.;
Lawrence, M. S.; Zhang, C.-Z.; Wala, J.; Mermel, C. H., et al. Pan-cancer patterns of
somatic copy number alteration. Nature genetics 2013, 45, 1134–1140.
(28)
Iafrate, A. J.; Feuk, L.; Rivera, M. N.; Listewnik, M. L.; Donahoe, P. K.; Qi, Y.; Scherer,
S. W.; Lee, C. Detection of large-scale variation in the human genome. Nature genetics
2004, 36, 949–951.
(29)
Shao, X.; Lv, N.; Liao, J.; Long, J.; Xue, R.; Ai, N.; Xu, D.; Fan, X. Copy number
variation is highly correlated with differential gene expression: a pan-cancer study. BMC
medical genetics 2019, 20, 1–14.
60
==PAGE:62==
DTU Master Thesis
(30)
Feinberg, A. P.; Vogelstein, B. Hypomethylation distinguishes genes of some human can-
cers from their normal counterparts. Nature 1983, 301, 89–92.
(31)
Moore, L. D.; Le, T.; Fan, G. DNA methylation and its basic function. Neuropsychophar-
macology 2013, 38, 23–38.
(32)
Paz, M. F.; Fraga, M. F.; Avila, S.; Guo, M.; Pollan, M.; Herman, J. G.; Esteller, M. A
systematic profile of DNA methylation in human cancer cell lines. Cancer research 2003,
63, 1114–1121.
(33)
Irizarry, R. A.; Ladd-Acosta, C.; Wen, B.; Wu, Z.; Montano, C.; Onyango, P.; Cui, H.;
Gabo, K.; Rongione, M.; Webster, M., et al. The human colon cancer methylome shows
similar hypo-and hypermethylation at conserved tissue-specific CpG island shores. Nature
genetics 2009, 41, 178–186.
(34)
You, J. S.; Jones, P. A. Cancer genetics and epigenetics: two sides of the same coin?
Cancer cell 2012, 22, 9–20.
(35)
Tomczak, K.; Czerwi´nska, P.; Wiznerowicz, M. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA): an
immeasurable source of knowledge. Contemporary oncology 2015, 19, A68.
(36)
Biswas, N.; Chakrabarti, S. Artificial intelligence (AI)-based systems biology approaches
in multi-omics data analysis of cancer. Frontiers in Oncology 2020, 10, 588221.
(37)
He, X.; Liu, X.; Zuo, F.; Shi, H.; Jing, J. In Seminars in Cancer Biology, 2022.
(38)
Emaminejad, N.; Qian, W.; Guan, Y.; Tan, M.; Qiu, Y.; Liu, H.; Zheng, B. Fusion of
quantitative image and genomic biomarkers to improve prognosis assessment of early
stage lung cancer patients. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 2015, 63,
1034–1043.
(39)
Malik, V.; Kalakoti, Y.; Sundar, D. Deep learning assisted multi-omics integration for
survival and drug-response prediction in breast cancer. Bmc Genomics 2021, 22, 1–11.
(40)
Zhou, X.; Chai, H.; Zhao, H.; Luo, C.-H.; Yang, Y. Imputing missing RNA-sequencing
data from DNA methylation by using a transfer learning–based neural network. Giga-
Science 2020, 9, giaa076.
(41)
Murdoch, W. J.; Singh, C.; Kumbier, K.; Abbasi-Asl, R.; Yu, B. Definitions, methods,
and applications in interpretable machine learning. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 2019, 116, 22071–22080.
61
==PAGE:63==
DTU Master Thesis
(42)
ˇCyras, K.; Rago, A.; Albini, E.; Baroni, P.; Toni, F. Argumentative XAI: a survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.11266 2021.
(43)
Molnar, C. A guide for making black box models explainable. URL: https://christophm.
github. io/interpretable-ml-book 2018, 3.
(44)
Wang, Z.; Gerstein, M.; Snyder, M. RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for transcriptomics.
Nature reviews genetics 2009, 10, 57–63.
(45)
Anders, S.; Pyl, P. T.; Huber, W. HTSeq—a Python framework to work with high-
throughput sequencing data. bioinformatics 2015, 31, 166–169.
(46)
Bibikova, M.; Le, J.; Barnes, B.; Saedinia-Melnyk, S.; Zhou, L.; Shen, R.; Gunderson,
K. L. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling using Infinium® assay. Epigenomics
2009, 1, 177–200.
(47)
Cibulskis, K.; Lawrence, M. S.; Carter, S. L.; Sivachenko, A.; Jaffe, D.; Sougnez, C.;
Gabriel, S.; Meyerson, M.; Lander, E. S.; Getz, G. Sensitive detection of somatic point
mutations in impure and heterogeneous cancer samples. Nature biotechnology 2013, 31,
213–219.
(48)
Rogers, M. F.; Gaunt, T. R.; Campbell, C. CScape-somatic: distinguishing driver and
passenger point mutations in the cancer genome. Bioinformatics 2020, 36, 3637–3644.
(49)
Colaprico, A.; Silva, T. C.; Olsen, C.; Garofano, L.; Cava, C.; Garolini, D.; Sabedot, T. S.;
Malta, T. M.; Pagnotta, S. M.; Castiglioni, I., et al. TCGAbiolinks: an R/Bioconductor
package for integrative analysis of TCGA data. Nucleic acids research 2016, 44, e71–e71.
(50)
Saksager, A.; Nourbakhsh, M.; Tom, N.; Chen, X. S.; Colaprico, A.; Olsen, C.; Tiberti,
M.; Papaleo, E. An Automatized Workflow to Study Mechanistic Indicators for Driver
Gene Prediction with Moonlight. bioRxiv 2022, 2022–11.
(51)
Mermel, C. H.; Schumacher, S. E.; Hill, B.; Meyerson, M. L.; Beroukhim, R.; Getz, G.
GISTIC2. 0 facilitates sensitive and confident localization of the targets of focal somatic
copy-number alteration in human cancers. Genome biology 2011, 12, 1–14.
(52)
Reich, M.; Liefeld, T.; Gould, J.; Lerner, J.; Tamayo, P.; Mesirov, J. P. GenePattern 2.0.
Nature genetics 2006, 38, 500–501.
(53)
Ritchie, M. E.; Phipson, B.; Wu, D.; Hu, Y.; Law, C. W.; Shi, W.; Smyth, G. K. limma
powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nu-
cleic acids research 2015, 43, e47–e47.
62
==PAGE:64==
DTU Master Thesis
(54)
Pedregosa, F.; Varoquaux, G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V.; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel,
M.; Prettenhofer, P.; Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V., et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python. the Journal of machine Learning research 2011, 12, 2825–2830.
(55)
Virgolin, M.; Pissis, S. P. Symbolic Regression is NP-hard. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01018
2022.
(56)
Angelis, D.; Sofos, F.; Karakasidis, T. E. Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences:
Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives. Archives of Computational Methods in
Engineering 2023, 1–21.
(57)
Wilstrup, C.; Kasak, J. Symbolic regression outperforms other models for small data
sets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15147 2021.
(58)
Broløs, K. R.; Machado, M. V.; Cave, C.; Kasak, J.; Stentoft-Hansen, V.; Batanero, V. G.;
Jelen, T.; Wilstrup, C. An approach to symbolic regression using feyn. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.05417 2021.
(59)
Gardner, M. W.; Dorling, S. Artificial neural networks (the multilayer perceptron)—a
review of applications in the atmospheric sciences. Atmospheric environment 1998, 32,
2627–2636.
(60)
Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Massa, F.; Lerer, A.; Bradbury, J.; Chanan, G.; Killeen, T.; Lin, Z.;
Gimelshein, N.; Antiga, L., et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems 2019, 32.
(61)
Simonyan, K.; Vedaldi, A.; Zisserman, A. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising
image classification models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034 2013.
(62)
Gu, Z.; Schlesner, M.; H¨ubschmann, D. cola: an R/Bioconductor package for consensus
partitioning through a general framework. Nucleic acids research 2021, 49, e15–e15.
(63)
Phillips, T. et al. The role of methylation in gene expression. Nature Education 2008, 1,
116.
(64)
Tenaillon, O.; Matic, I. The impact of neutral mutations on genome evolvability. Current
Biology 2020, 30, R527–R534.
(65)
Pavlicev, M.; Wagner, G. P. A model of developmental evolution: selection, pleiotropy
and compensation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 2012, 27, 316–322.
63
==PAGE:65==
DTU Master Thesis
(66)
Takahashi, M.; Tamura, K.; B¨uscher, D.; Masuya, H.; Yonei-Tamura, S.; Matsumoto,
K.; Naitoh-Matsuo, M.; Takeuchi, J.; Ogura, K.; Shiroishi, T., et al. The role of Alx-
4 in the establishment of anteroposterior polarity during vertebrate limb development.
Development 1998, 125, 4417–4425.
(67)
Yang, J.; Han, F.; Liu, W.; Chen, H.; Hao, X.; Jiang, X.; Yin, L.; Huang, Y.; Cao,
J.; Zhang, H., et al. ALX4, an epigenetically down regulated tumor suppressor, inhibits
breast cancer progression by interfering Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Journal of Experimental
& Clinical Cancer Research 2017, 36, 1–15.
(68)
Chang, H.; Mohabir, N.; Done, S.; Hamel, P. Loss of ALX4 expression in epithelial cells
and adjacent stromal cells in breast cancer. Journal of clinical pathology 2009, 62, 908–
914.
(69)
Li, Y.-Z.; Xie, J.; Wang, R.-Q.; Gao, X.-Q.; Liu, P.-J.; Liu, J. KLF2 is a clinical diagnostic
and treatment biomarker of breast cancer. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology
2023, 11.
(70)
Yu, Z.-H.; Chen, Z.-H.; Zhou, G.-L.; Zhou, X.-J.; Ma, H.-Y.; Yu, Y.; Wang, X.; Cao,
X.-C. miR-92a-3p promotes breast cancer proliferation by regulating the KLF2/BIRC5
axis. Thoracic Cancer 2022, 13, 2992–3000.
(71)
Zhu, K.-Y.; Tian, Y.; Li, Y.-X.; Meng, Q.-X.; Ge, J.; Cao, X.-C.; Zhang, T.; Yu, Y.
The functions and prognostic value of Kr¨uppel-like factors in breast cancer. Cancer Cell
International 2022, 22, 23.
(72)
Kakati, T.; Bhattacharyya, D. K.; Kalita, J. K.; Norden-Krichmar, T. M. DEGnext:
classification of differentially expressed genes from RNA-seq data using a convolutional
neural network with transfer learning. BMC bioinformatics 2022, 23, 17.
(73)
Kr¨amer, A.; Green, J.; Pollard Jr, J.; Tugendreich, S. Causal analysis approaches in
ingenuity pathway analysis. Bioinformatics 2014, 30, 523–530.
(74)
Tong, L.; Mitchel, J.; Chatlin, K.; Wang, M. D. Deep learning based feature-level inte-
gration of multi-omics data for breast cancer patients survival analysis. BMC medical
informatics and decision making 2020, 20, 1–12.
(75)
Park, Y.; Wu, H. Differential methylation analysis for BS-seq data under general exper-
imental design. Bioinformatics 2016, 32, 1446–1453.
64
==PAGE:66==
DTU Master Thesis
(76)
Akalin, A.; Kormaksson, M.; Li, S.; Garrett-Bakelman, F. E.; Figueroa, M. E.; Melnick,
A.; Mason, C. E. methylKit: a comprehensive R package for the analysis of genome-wide
DNA methylation profiles. Genome biology 2012, 13, 1–9.
(77)
Tian, Y.; Morris, T. J.; Webster, A. P.; Yang, Z.; Beck, S.; Feber, A.; Teschendorff, A. E.
ChAMP: updated methylation analysis pipeline for Illumina BeadChips. Bioinformatics
2017, 33, 3982–3984.
7
Appendix
7.1
Level of consequence
Type/Classification
SNP
INS
DEL
DNP
TNP
ONP
5’Flank
1
1
1
1
1
1
5’UTR
1
1
1
1
1
1
TSS
0
0
0
0
0
0
Missense
0
NA
NA
0
0
0
Nonsense
1
1
1
1
1
1
Nonstop
0
0
0
0
0
0
Splice Site
1
1
1
1
1
1
Splice Region
1
1
1
1
1
1
Silent
0
NA
NA
0
0
0
In Frame Deletion
NA
0
0
NA
NA
NA
In Frame Insertion
NA
0
0
NA
NA
NA
Frameshift Deletion
NA
0
0
NA
NA
NA
Frameshift Insertion
NA
0
0
NA
NA
NA
Intron
1
1
1
1
1
1
3’UTR
1
1
1
1
1
1
3’Flank
1
1
1
1
1
1
RNA
1
1
1
1
1
1
IGR
1
1
1
1
1
1
Table 6: Mutation consequence on the level of transcription (Saksager et al. [50]). Number 1 denotes
there can be an effect, while number 0 denotes no effect is possible. NA means certain mutation type
combination does not exist.
65
==PAGE:67==
DTU Master Thesis
7.2
Expression graphs from QLattice
Figure 24: Mathematical expressions of the binary classification (DEGvs. Non-DEG) from both
simple train/test split and 5-fold cross-validation represented by graphs from QLattice.
66
==PAGE:68==
DTU Master Thesis
7.3
MLP results after deletion of the CGI methylation feature
Test AUC-ROC
Test ACC
Test F1 Score
MLP before deletion
0.67
0.67
0.44
MLP after deletion
0.63
0.62
0.41
Table 7: Performance comparison between the MLP model before and after deletion of the CGI
methylation feature. Hyper-parameters used: hidden layers=2, hidden size=32, n epochs=100, learn-
ing rate=0.001, L2 reg=0.001.
Figure 25: Saliency heatmaps of the truly predicted Non-DEGs (left) and DEGs (right) by using
the retrained MLP model on the data without CGI methylation feature.
67
