==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Nanopore sequencing of phylogenetic 
and functional amplicons 
Date: 21st July 2023 
 
 
Author: László Bence Kraskó, s212913 
Master student, Biotechnology, DTU 
Master Thesis 30 ETCS 
 
Supervisors: 
Ass. Prof. Mikael Lenz Strube, 
PhD-student Adele Kaltenyte, 
Prof. Lars Jelsbak 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
Preface & Acknowledgement 
 
This master's thesis was carried out at the Technical University of Denmark in the 
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine in the Bacterial Ecophysiology and 
Biotechnology group. Mikeal Lenz Strube served as the primary supervisor on this project. 
The experimental work was conducted in the Microbial Interactions and Engineering 
group under the supervision of PhD-student Adele Kaltenyte and Professor Lars Jelsbak. 
This master’s project corresponds to 30 ECTS points and was conducted from the 30th of 
January to the 21st of July, 2023. 
 
First and foremost, I would like to thank all my supervisors, Adele, Mikael and Lars, for 
letting me join this project and guiding me through it. They helped me whenever I was in 
doubt and provided plenty of help for me both from practical and theoretical aspects, 
which helped me understand this project better. 
 
I also want to thank all the help from the Bacterial Ecophysiology and Biotechnology group 
members and the Microbial Interactions and Engineering group members. They provided 
plenty of ideas and constructive feedback, which helped complete this project. 
 
Finally, special thanks to my friends who supported me throughout the project. 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
Abstract 
 
Agriculture currently faces several challenges which require modern, sustainable solutions. These 
include molecular biology-based methods, such as amplicon sequencing, which can be utilised to 
identify community members from environmental sources and delineate their biosynthetic 
potential. Previous works in this field suffered from nonoverlapping reads and low species-level 
resolution due to the nature of the applied short-read length sequencing methods. Therefore, this 
thesis aimed to test long-read length sequencing nanopore technology for amplicon sequencing, 
focusing on phylogenetic (16S rRNA gene and rpoD gene for species-level identification) and 
functional (adenylation domain of the nonribosomal peptide biosynthesis, keto-synthase domain 
of the polyketide synthesis) amplicons. First, to achieve this, soil samples were collected from 
previously investigated sites, and different DNA extraction methods were tested to find the best 
setting to maximise DNA yield while maintaining sufficient purity for downstream applications. 
Then, several degenerated primers were tested in silico and in vitro to find the most suitable 
candidates for PCR amplification. The PCR reactions for the chosen primers were also optimised 
to overcome inhibition problems due to the DNA samples' environmental nature. Although 
several issues emerged during the project, the 16S rRNA gene amplicons were successfully 
sequenced, proving that this method can be utilised. 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
Introduction & Project Aim 
 
 
Background & Problem: Due to climate change, plant diseases and pests are more 
frequent, and crops become more vulnerable, resulting in lower crop production. In addition, 
plant pathogens are developing resistance to chemical pesticides that previously worked well 
against them [1]. These, and the steady increase in the human population, might lead to the 
threat of a global food shortage in the foreseeable future. Solving these challenges requires novel, 
sustainable solutions. Therefore, attention to biotechnological methods in agriculture recently 
increased [2]. It is commonly known that soil can harbour many microorganisms with high 
species diversity [3]. These microorganisms can be utilised to solve the problems mentioned 
earlier. Unfortunately, only a tiny portion of the microbiological population can be cultivated 
with traditional, cultivation-based methods, and it is without a doubt that the “uncultivable” 
majority represents an enormous unexplored pool of biological and chemical novelty [4]. 
Alternative sequencing-based methods were previously applied successfully to monitor these 
untapped pools' taxonomic diversity and biosynthetic potential. For the latter, several studies 
focused on two major secondary metabolite classes, the nonribosomal peptides (NRPs) and 
polyketides (PKs), consisting of multiple compounds currently used as antibiotic agents. These 
studies relied on the amplification and sequencing of PCR amplicons of the conserved 
adenylation (AD) domains of nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) and ketosynthase (KS) 
domains of polyketide synthases (PKSs) [5], [6]. Regarding species-level identification, the 
traditional sequencing of the V3-V4 regions of the 16S subunit of the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
gene is less suitable since the amount of difference in the 16S genes needs to be higher to 
differentiate between the members of a particular genus [7], [8]. Common in the previously used 
methods, they faced several problems regarding the short read length of the used sequencing 
method. 
 
Hypothesis: The previous experiments regarding phylogenetic and biosynthetic potential 
investigations using amplicon sequencing as a tool suffered from limitations regarding short-read 
length; the hypothesis was that a long-read sequencing method such as nanopore sequencing 
could help to provide a better resolution regarding both 
 
Aim: In light of the above, this master thesis aimed to test if amplicon sequencing, based on 
long-read nanopore sequencing technology, is a suitable tool for phylogenetic identification and 
analysing the biosynthetic potential of soil community members. To test this, samples from 
previously investigated sites were collected, and extraction methods were tested to obtain high 
concentrations of purified environmental DNA from these samples. Several primer pairs were 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
tested in silico and in vitro, and the PCR reactions were optimised for the chosen primer pairs. 
Finally, the PCR products were purified and prepared for nanopore sequencing. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
Contents 
Preface & Acknowledgement ............................................................................... 1 
Abstract .............................................................................................................. 2 
Introduction & Project Aim ................................................................................ 3 
1 Theory ............................................................................................................ 6 
1.1 
Current state of biotechnological applications in agriculture ........................................ 6 
1.2 Nonribosomal peptides and polyketides ........................................................................ 6 
1.3 Previous work regarding amplicon sequencing of phylogenetic and functional 
amplicons ........................................................................................................................ 7 
1.4 Nanopore sequencing ...................................................................................................... 8 
2 Project background ....................................................................................... 10 
3 Materials & Methods ...................................................................................... 11 
4 Results ......................................................................................................... 18 
4.1 Extraction of eDNA from soil: ....................................................................................... 18 
4.2 Computational evaluation of primers: ............................................................................ 29 
4.3 Optimisation of PCR settings: ........................................................................................ 30 
4.4 Analysis of the 16S region sequencing data: ................................................................... 32 
5 Discussion .................................................................................................... 33 
5.1 
Extraction methods, DNA yields and purity ................................................................. 33 
5.2 Primer evaluation and PCR performance ..................................................................... 36 
5.3 Amplicon sequencing .................................................................................................... 37 
6 Future prospects ........................................................................................... 38 
7 Conclusion.................................................................................................... 39 
8 References .................................................................................................... 41 
 
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
1 
Theory 
 
1.1 
Current state of biotechnological applications in 
agriculture 
 
The world's population is projected to surpass nine billion by 2050, leading to an 
unprecedented demand for food [2]. The steadily increasing human population and the 
frequent appearance of pests and diseases due to climate change threaten global food 
security. In response to these challenges, attention to microbial applications in 
agriculture recently increased. As a result, the global biocontrol market was estimated 
to be valued at 6.6 billion USD in 2022 and is projected to double by 2027 [1]. 
Biotechnology offers promising novel applications such from genetic engineering to 
new biocontrol agents to address these problems and enhance agricultural productivity 
sustainably [9].  
Finally, another improving field in agriculture is precision agriculture. This includes 
including the use of field sensors, satellite imagery, drones and robotics, and decision 
support tools to translate “big data” into real-time farm management advice [10]. 
Integration biotechnological methods with these might further enhance the 
effectiveness of this type of management. 
 
1.2 
Nonribosomal peptides and polyketides 
 
Nonribosomal peptides (NRPs) and polyketides (PKs) are secondary metabolites which 
can be produced by several microorganisms, including bacteria and fungi. These 
molecules can play crucial roles in several biological processes, and due to their diverse 
chemical structures, they can be utilised in agriculture, particularly in biocontrol. 
 
NRPs and PKs are both assembled by large multifunctional enzyme complexes called 
nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) and polyketide synthases (PKSs), 
respectively. NRPSs consist of several modules responsible for incorporating a specific 
amino acid into the growing peptide chain. Similarly, PKSs have modules containing 
specific acyl-CoA monomers in the polyketide backbone [11]. 
 
The genes involved in NRPs and polyketide synthesis are organised in gene clusters, 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
usually found on bacterial and fungal chromosomes or plasmids. These gene clusters 
consist of core genes, responsible for synthesising the basic scaffold and tailoring 
genes, responsible for modifying the final product. Environmental factors and cellular 
signals tightly regulate the genes which are responsible of the expression of these 
molecules. Scientists can modify these clusters through genetic manipulation to 
produce novel compounds or enhance their production [12]. 
 
NRPs and polyketides have shown significant potential in agriculture for biocontrol 
purposes, as they can inhibit the growth of pathogenic organisms and provide 
environmentally friendly alternatives to chemical pesticides. Some examples of their 
application in biocontrol include: 
 
Bacillus thuringiensis is bacterium predominantly found in soil which produces NRPs 
called insecticidal crystal proteins. These proteins are highly toxic to specific insect 
pests, such as caterpillars and mosquitoes, making Bt-based biopesticides an effective 
biocontrol solution in integrated pest management (IPM) strategies [13]. 
 
Streptomyces species are well-known producers of polyketide compounds with 
antifungal and antibacterial properties. One example is Streptomyces avermitilis, 
which produces avermectins, effective in controlling nematodes and mites [14]. 
 
Certain Trichoderma fungi produce NRPs and polyketides that have antagonistic 
effects against plant pathogens. Trichoderma-based bio fungicides protect crops from 
diseases caused by fungi like Fusarium and Botrytis [15]. 
 
 
1.3 
Previous work regarding amplicon sequencing of 
phylogenetic and functional amplicons 
 
In his work, Lauritsen et al. developed a high-throughput amplicon sequencing 
protocol compatible with the Illumina MiSeq 300PE platform with a new informed 
bioinformatic pipeline. The driving force behind that was that standard 16S rRNA gene 
amplicon profiling does not allow for accurate species differentiation due to the low 
nucleotide dissimilarity between species of the same genus, particularly the 
Pseudomonas genus. For this, they used the rpoD gene, a housekeeping gene, which 
encodes the sigma 70 factor of RNA polymerase. While he tested his method on a 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
known mixture of Pseudomonas, it gave better resolution than the amplicon 
sequencing of the 16S V3V4 regions. However, certain species were underestimated 
due to their phylogenetic closeness and poor amplification. One of the challenges 
during this study was the nonoverlapping reads. Therefore the sequencing data could 
not be analysed by standard OTU-based methods [8]. 
In Bech et al.’s research, as a novel solution for antimicrobial product discovery, they 
focused on amplicon sequencing of conserved ketosynthase (KS) and adenylation (AD) 
domains within polyketide synthase and nonribosomal peptide genes from marine 
sediments, since antimicrobial compounds discoveries were previously more focused 
on soil sources [5].  
Geers et al. used the same approach in searching for novel antimicrobial compounds 
from both soil and marine sources, focusing on spatial differences. They found that 
while the NRPs diversity was higher in marine sediments, PKs diversity was higher in 
soil, and the latter correlated with pH and salinity, meaning that grassland soils are 
promising for novel polyketides, especially the actinobacterial taxa [6]. 
Common in these researches that they all used short read sequencing methods, 
however given the size of the genes, long read sequencing methods would be 
supposedly suitable. 
Kerkhof et al was one of the earliest who utilised nanopore sequencing for microbial 
fingerprinting in soil using the 16s rRNA subunit. He amplified the whole rRNA 
operon, using the intergenic spacer regions as potential strain specific identification. 
Using this method they get robust species node resolutin, which could not be achieved 
by shorter amplicons. Unfortunately, this method has a higher error rate compared to 
other methods leading tot he overestimation of the OTUS [16]. 
 
 
1.4 
Nanopore sequencing 
 
The previous chapter mentioned that short-read sequencing was limited, and its use 
led to unique bioinformatic solutions. These problems can be overcome using another 
sequencing method, such as nanopore sequencing. 
Just like Illumina, Nanopore sequencing is a next-generation sequencing method that 
can sequence biopolymers, such as DNA, RNA or other biopolymers [17]. Its 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
advantages include the lack of chemical labelling, relatively low cost, and rapid, real-
time method. Previously this method was used successfully for several areas, such as 
for quick identification of pathogens [18] or antibiotic resistance monitoring [19]. 
The main principle of nanopore sequencing is based on the following. A MinION flow 
cell contains multiple channels with nanopores in each channel. These wells are 
inserted into an electrically resistant polymer membrane supported by an array of 
microscaffolds connected to a sensor chip. Each channel associates with a separate 
electrode in the sensor chip and is controlled and measured individually by the 
application-specific integration circuit (ASIC). Ionic current passes through the 
nanopore because a constant voltage is applied across the membrane, where the trans 
side is positively charged. Under the control of a motor protein, a double-stranded 
DNA (dsDNA) molecule (or an RNA–DNA hybrid duplex) is first unwound, then 
single-stranded DNA or RNA with negative charge is ratcheted through the nanopore, 
driven by the voltage. As nucleotides pass through the nanopore, a characteristic 
current change is measured and is used to determine the corresponding nucleotide 
type at [20]. 
 
Throughout the years Oxford Nanopore Technologies continuously developed their 
flow cells and chemistries iteratively. As of now their newest development the 
R10.4/Kit12 system, which include: a new motor protein for more controlled passage of 
the nucleic acid template through the sequencing pore, thereby avoiding slippage; 
‘duplex’ read sequencing – where the forward and reverse strand of a single nucleic 
acid molecule are sequenced in succession to improve accuracy; and lastly an 
optimized pore with a longer pore head to better resolve homopolymers [21]. 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
 
 
2 Project background 
 
The workload behind this project can be divided into four parts: 
1. Environmental DNA extraction from soil samples from the previously examined 
sites considering the downstream application 
2. Production of suitable PCR amplicons for the characterisation of phylogenetic 
attributes and biosynthetic potential of the soil community members 
3. Nanopore sequencing of the produced amplicons 
4. Computational analysis of the amplicon sequencing data 
In the first part of the project, a phenol-chloroform extraction-based method was 
tested against a commercial kit and the latter’s several modifications in its protocol. 
These methods were compared regarding yield and purity. After careful consideration, 
the best-performing method was chosen for DNA extraction, which served as a 
template for part 2. 
 
In the second part, degenerate primers were tested by in vitro PCR on a Pseudomonas 
genome library. They have been compared regarding species-level resolution and their 
hits in biosynthetic gene clusters. Based on that information, the primers were tested in 
real-life PCR settings, and the best-performing ones were picked for barcoding, the 
PCR conditions were optimised and used in amplicon production. 
 
In parts 3 and 4, the PCR products from part 2 were purified, and after library 
preparation, they were supposed to be sequenced on a Nanopore flow cell. Following 
sequencing, the gathered sequencing data was analysed. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
 
3 Materials & Methods 
 
Soil samples: 
Soil samples were collected from 3 sites in late January and in the middle of May in 
Dyrehavn, Denmark, from the following previously examined locations [22]. Using a 
sterilised shovel, the soil was collected into sterile plastic bags from approximately 10 
centimetres below the surface. Then, the soil was homogenised and sieved in a 
biosafety cabinet to remove rocks and root residues, and 1 g of soil samples were 
portioned into Eppendorf tubes. The tubes were stored at -80°C before extraction. 
 
DNA extraction methods from soil samples: 
Each soil sample was thawed on ice before extraction. Extractions were performed with 
either duplicates or triplicates. The list of different methods and their summarising 
chart (Figure 1) can be found below. 
 
Figure 1: Summary of extraction methods. Each extraction method's unique one latter 
code is indicated in parentheses. The green colour suggests the ones which possessed 
suitable attributes for downstream applications, while red colour indicates the 
opposite 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
 
Method O: DNA was extracted from the soil samples using the DNeasy® PowerSoil® 
Pro Kit (QIAGEN) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 
 
Method P: This method was taken from Griffith et al. [23] with the following 
modifications. First, 100 mg of thawed soil was placed into a PowerBead Pro Tube 
from the DNeasy® PowerSoil® Pro Kit (QIAGEN). Afterwards, 0.4 mL extraction 
buffer (mixture of equal amounts of 10 % (wt/vol) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 0.7 
M sodium chloride with 240 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 8.0) and the same 
amount of phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) (pH 8.0) was added to the 
tube. Then, the tubes were secured horizontally on a Vortex Adapter for 1.5–2 ml tubes 
and were vortexed at maximum speed for 10 minutes. After vortexing, the tubes were 
centrifuged at 16 000 g for 5 minutes at 4°C. After that, the aqueous phase was 
collected under a fumehood and mixed with an equal volume of chloroform-isoamyl 
alcohol (24:1), followed by repeated centrifugation with the same settings. After 
removing the aqueous layer again, a double volume of 30% (wt/vol) polyethylene glycol 
(PEG) 6000 - 1.6 M sodium chloride was added for precipitation, and the mixture was 
incubated for 2 hours at room temperature (RT), followed by centrifugation at 17 000 g 
at 4°C for 10 minutes. After removing the supernatant, the pellets were washed with 70 
% (vol/vol) ice-cold ethanol. Then, the ethanol was removed, and the pellets were 
carefully airdried for approximately 1 hour to avoid overdrying. The pellets were 
resuspended in 50 µL RNase-free Tris-EDTA buffer (pH 7.4). 
 
Method N: Method N was the same as Method O except for using freshly collected soil 
samples during sample preparation. 
 
Method L: Method L was based on Method O, but 450 mg of thawed soil sample was 
used for sample preparation, and the duration of vortexing was increased to 20 
minutes. 
 
Method D: Method D is the same as Method O with the following modification. After 
the lysis step, following the centrifugation and the collection of supernatants, 800 µL of 
solution CD1 was added to the residual soil and the lysis steps were repeated with the 
residuals. 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
 
Method S: Method DL is based on Method O, but the lysis was carried out according to 
the manufacturer’s handbook “Reduction of shearing of DNA” suggestions. 
 
Method DL: Method DL is based on Method O, but the lysis was carried out according 
to the manufacturer’s handbook “Cells are difficult to lyse” suggestions. 
 
Method F: For Method F, instead of the vortex adapter, a FastPrep FP120 Cell 
disruption system was used at 4 m/s speed for 30 seconds. The samples were then 
placed in a cooling rack and repeated the previous step. Everything else was according 
to Method O. 
 
Method M: Method M was carried out the same way as Method O except for using 500 
mg thawed soil sample for sample preparation and, in the end, eluting the DNA with an 
elution buffer warmed up to 70°C. 
 
Method B: An additional 32 µL of 20 mg/mL bovine serum albumin (BSA) was added 
before lysis during sample preparation. Everything else was carried out according to 
Method O. 
 
For the final extractions from each site, 1 g of thawed soil samples were used, and 
triplicates of 250 mg soil were extracted using the D method. 
 
After extractions, the sample’s DNA concentration was checked using a Qubit 4 
Fluorometer and DeNovix DS-11 Spectrophotometer was used to determine their 
purity. Additional validation of the presence of gDNA in the samples was performed by 
gel electrophoresis, on 100 V for 30 minutes on 0.7 % agarose gel. 
 
Primer testing, PCR amplification and sequencing: 
In silico testing of the suitable primers was performed by RibDif2. Before using 
barcoded primers on the final samples, each primer was tested using a dilution series 
of the DNA template with or without added bovine serum albumin (20 mg/mL). To 
determine the taxonomic composition, we amplified the 16S rRNA gene region using 
the Oxford Nanopore Technologies 16S Barcoding Kit 1-24 according to the 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
manufacturer’s instructions (protocol SQK-16S024) with the exception of using 40 
cycles instead of 25. The rpoD, KS and AD primers reaction conditions were 11.55 µL 
nuclease-free water, 2 µL 10X DreamTaq™ Buffer (Thermo Scientific™), 2-2 µL 5 µmol 
forward and reverse primer (in the case of the AD primers, it was 5 pmol), 0.25 µL 
DreamTaq DNA Polymerase (5 U/µL, Thermo Scientific™), 0.8 µL bovine serum 
albumin (20 mg/mL), 0.4 µL dNTP Mix (10 mM each, Thermo Scientific™) and finally 
1 µL template DNA. Cycling conditions were the following: 
 
rpoD gene: 1 cycle of 95°C for 15 minutes, 40 cycles of 95°C for 30 seconds, 51°C for 30 
seconds, and 72°C for 30 seconds, and 1 cycle of 72°C for 5 minutes.  
 
AD amplicons: 1 cycle of 95°C for 15 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 94°C for 30 
seconds, 56°C for 40 seconds, 72°C for 1 minute, and finally 1 cycle of 72°C for 10 
minutes 
 
KS amplicons: These amplicons were produced using touch-down PCR according to 
the following: 1 cycle of 95°C for 5 minutes, followed by 11 cycles of 95°C for 1 minute, 
60°C-40°C for 1 minute (ΔT = -2°C/cycle), 72°C for 1 minute, than 39 cycles of 95°C for 
1 minute, 40°C for 1 minute, 72°C for 1 minute and 1 cycle of 72°C for 10 minutes 
The list of used primers can be found below (Table 1 and 2). 
 
Presence of the amplicons in the reaction mixes validated by gel electrophoresis, on 
100 V for 30 minutes on 1 % agarose gel. 
 
Purification of the reaction mixtures and library preparation were performed according 
to the previously mentioned protocol SQK-16S024 (Oxford Nanopore Technologies). 
After purification of the mixtures, the presence of the amplicons were checked by gel 
electrophoresis the same way as after PCR amplification. 
 
The prepared libraries were sequenced according to the SQK-16S024 protocol using a 
FLO-MIN106D flow cell and MIN-101B MinION Sequencing Device, and the 
MinKNOW software. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
Bioinformatic analysis: 
Overview statistics of the sequence runs and basecalling were prepared by the 
MinKNOW software. SeqKit v2.5.0 were used for FASTA/Q file manipulation [24]. 
Read filtering by length (1000-1600 bp) and quality (keeping only 90% of the best 
reads) was performed by filtlong 0.2.1 (https://github.com/rrwick/Filtlong). 
VSEARCH 2.23.0 were used for sorting reads [25]. Finally, species-level microbial 
community profiling was done by Emu v3.4.5 [26]. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
Table 1: List of used KS and rpoD primers throughout the experiments 
List of primers (5' → 3') 
KS primers 
rpoD primers 
MDPQQRf: 
RTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
PsEG30F: 
ATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
HGTGTr: 
VGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
PsEG790R: 
CGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
Barcoded KS primers 
Barcoded rpoD primers 
1_MDPQQRf: 
AGAATCTARTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
1_F 
ATAATTAGATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
1_HGTGTr 
AGAATCTAVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
1_R 
ATAATTAGCGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
2_MDPQQRf: 
TAGAAAACRTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
2_F 
ACCAAATTATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
2_HGTGTr 
TAGAAAACVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
2_R 
ACCAAATTCGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
3_MDPQQRf: 
GACGCCTARTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
3_F 
AGAATCTAATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
3_HGTGTr 
GACGCCTAVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
3_R 
AGAATCTACGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
4_MDPQQRf: 
CCCAGGCCRTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
4_F 
AATAGGGTATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
4_HGTGTr 
CCCAGGCCVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
4_R 
AATAGGGTCGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
5_MDPQQRf: 
TTCGCGCCRTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
5_F 
ATTGCTGAATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
5_HGTGTr 
TTCGCGCCVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
5_R 
ATTGCTGACGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
6_MDPQQRf: 
TCGACGGARTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
6_F 
TGAGTTCTATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
6_HGTGTr 
TCGACGGAVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
6_R 
TGAGTTCTCGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
7_MDPQQRf: 
TCCCTGACRTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
7_F 
TTGAGTGAATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
7_HGTGTr 
TCCCTGACVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
7_R 
TTGAGTGACGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
8_MDPQQRf: 
TGACGCTTRTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
8_F 
GCTTCTGAATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
8_HGTGTr 
TGACGCTTVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
8_R 
GCTTCTGACGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
9_MDPQQRf: 
CTTAGTCCRTRGAYCCNCAGCANCG 
9_F 
ACACACTGATYGAAATCGCCAARCG 
9_HGTGTr 
CTTAGTCCVGTNCCNGTGCCRTG 
9_R 
ACACACTGCGGTTGATKTCCTTGA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
Table 2: List of used AD primers throughout the experiments 
List of primers (5' → 3') 
AD primers 
degNRPS-1F 
AARDSNGGNGSNGSNTAYBNCC 
degNRPS-4R 
CKRWANCCNCKNANYTTNAYYTG 
A3F 
GCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
A7R 
SASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
Barcoded AD primers 
19_A3F 
ACAAAACGGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
19_A7R 
ACAAAACGSASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
21_A3F 
TTGAGTGAGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
21_A7R 
TTGAGTGASASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
22_A3F 
GCTTCTGAGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
22_A7R 
GCTTCTGASASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
23_A3F 
GGCAAGATGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
23_A7R 
GGCAAGATSASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
24_A3F 
GTGCTTTCGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
24_A7R 
GTGCTTTCSASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
25_A3F 
ACACACTGGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
25_A7R 
ACACACTGSASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
26_A3F 
CGATTCTGGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
26_A7R 
CGATTCTGSASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
27_A3F 
GCAGAGTTGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
27_A7R 
GCAGAGTTSASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
28_A3F 
CGTCCTATGCSTACSYSATSTACACSTCSGG 
28_A7R 
CGTCCTATSASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
4.1 
Extraction of eDNA from soil: 
 
Initial extractions using the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit: 
The first step of this project required the extraction of eDNA from soil samples 
collected from previously examined sites in Dyrehavn. The initial choice for facilitating 
this was the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit (QIAGEN) due to its efficient lysis of bacteria in 
different soil types, high yields of high-quality DNA and higher alpha diversity in 
sequencing compared to other commercial kits [27]. 
 
To test this kit, a duplicate of extractions was performed according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol (Method O) using 250 mg of soil samples and 50 µL elution 
buffer from site P9 stored at 4°C (sample IDs: O.1 and O.2). Then the concentrations of 
the extracts were measured on a Qubit 4 Fluorometer while the purity of the samples 
was measured by Nanodrop. Since the initial tryouts seemed sufficient regarding DNA 
yield and purity, duplicates of extractions were performed on 250 mg of soil samples 
from each site (P5, P8 and P9) stored at -80°C after thawing them on ice (sample IDs: 
O.P5.1., O.P5.2., O.P8.1., O.P8.2., O.P9.1., O.P9.2.). Unfortunately, compared to the 
initial ones, these extractions resulted in approximately 5.5-fold lower yields in the case 
of samples from the P9 site and, in some cases, lower purity (acceptable purity is 
determined as a value between 2.0 and 2.2 for the A260/230 ratio and a value between 
1.8 and 2.0 for the A260/280 ratio). These results are summarised in Table 3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
Table 3: Comparison of DNA concentration, purity and yield of the initial extractions 
Sample ID Site DNA concentration [ng/µL] A260/230 A260/280 
O.1 
P9 
309.92 
2.087 
1.854 
O.2 
P9 
343.573 
2.105 
1.83 
O.P5.1 
P5 
36.8 
2.086 
1.839 
O.P5.2 
P5 
35.2 
1.398 
1.826 
O.P8.1 
P8 
23.6 
1.963 
1.818 
O.P8.2 
P8 
0.412 
1.929 
1.818 
O.P9.1 
P9 
59.2 
2.113 
1.839 
O.P9.2 
P9 
57.8 
2.025 
1.841 
 
To eliminate the probability that the concentration differences would mean the lack of 
genomic DNA in the samples and to validate the effectiveness of the extraction method, 
the extracted samples were also prepared for gel electrophoresis on a 0.7 % agarose gel 
for 30 minutes (Figure 2.). The taken gel image proved that the extractions worked. 
However, the genomic DNA fragmented during the process, possibly due to shearing 
from the beads during lysis. While for whole genome sequencing, this would be a 
concern since the project’s goal is amplicon sequencing, in this scenario, the 
fragmentation has a smaller impact, except if it involves the regions required to be 
amplified. According to the image, all samples contained high molecular weight DNA, 
which can be utilised in further PCR amplification. It is also worth mentioning that 
improper gel electrophoresis (overloaded wells, dirty equipment, excess or old buffers, 
voltage conditions) can also contribute to smearing. 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
 
Figure 2: Agarose gel electrophoresis result of the initial samples 
Since the only difference between samples from the same sites were the storage 
conditions, the first reason behind the difference in the measured concentrations was 
that freezing might degrade the DNA in the soil samples. This was, however, denied by 
studies about DNA storage stability [28]. Another more credible explanation is that 
since the soil samples were collected during the winter, the slightly warmer conditions 
in the fridge made it available for certain community members to grow over the storage 
period. 
 
Optimalisation of the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit: 
While the lower concentrations are similar to those achieved by the manufacturer from 
topsoil, this occurrence raised a question about whether it is possible to get a higher 
concentration of high-purity DNA by applying modifications in the recommended 
extraction procedure. To identify which factors can influence the kit’s performance, I 
constructed an Ishikawa diagram commonly used in quality control (Figure 3.). 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
 
Figure 3: Ishikawa (or fishbone) diagram of the kit-based extraction method. The 
head of the fish on the right represents the problem to be solved, with the possible 
impacting factors serving as ribs, with sub-causes as fish bones. 
 
While multiple factors influence the effectiveness of the extraction method using the 
kit, some of them (contaminant carry-over, tube preparation) can be avoided using 
good practice. And since the characteristics of consumables (buffer concentration) can 
not be modified, I identified the following modifications which could enhance the kit’s 
effectiveness: increasing the amount of used soil samples, using heated-up elution 
buffer to improve the releasing of DNA from the membrane, alternative bead beating 
system and lysis conditions, performing the lysis twice on the same sample, longer lysis 
time, adding BSA during lysis, and as a final modification using freshly collected soil 
samples from the same sites. These factors will be further discussed below. 
 
Increasing the amount of soil samples seemed a reasonable modification since more 
soil samples should contain more eDNA. As shown in the initial two extractions, the 
membrane should be able to retain more fold higher DNA amount as well, while 
considering the volume of the bead beating tube, this one has its limitations. Heating 
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
the elution buffer (Method M) to release more bound DNA from a silica column is also 
commonly used by other commercial kits. 
 
Another possible explanation for the lower yield can be insufficient bead beating. Since 
the protocol suggested a Vortex Adapter, typically used for mixing, equipment 
specifically designed for cell and tissue lysis could improve the lysis and lead to higher 
DNA yield (Method F). 
 
Regarding insufficient lysis, even the kits handbook has suggestions for alternative lysis 
methods (handbook). In the case of cells which are difficult to lyse (Method DL), it 
suggests incubating the mixture of sample and lysis buffer at a higher temperature for a 
shorter period before following the rest of the instructions. The guide also has an 
alternative method for reducing the shearing of DNA, which would be useful for further 
steps, but it also states that this method results in lower DNA yields (Method S). 
 
Performing the lysis twice on the same sample (Method D) and a longer lysis time 
(Method L) both rely on the suggestion that the sample lysis is insufficient. Increasing 
the lysis time enables the lysis buffer to exert its effect longer while performing the lysis 
twice on the same sample might help extract the remaining DNA in the retentate, 
which otherwise would have been discarded. 
 
Looking back at Table 3, it is visible that some of the extraction’s end product also 
resulted in lower purity than was required for further steps. This can be explained by 
the presence of humic substances in the samples. These substances can bind to both 
the DNA and the silica column due to their structural similarities (humic sources); 
moreover, they can inhibit future PCR reactions. It is a commonly used method for 
PCR reactions involving environmental samples to add bovine serum albumin (BSA) to 
the reaction mixture since it can bind to the inhibiting substances. Therefore it was 
proposed that adding BSA during lysis (Method B) might help to eliminate excess 
humic substances and, by doing that, possibly increase purity. 
 
Lastly, It was considered that due to harsher weather conditions, the samples collected 
during winter might have a lower abundance of microbes, which led to lower DNA 
concentration results. To test this hypothesis during spring, new, freshly collected 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
samples were also extracted (Method N). 
 
A summary of all the tried-out methods can be seen in Figure 1, while the results 
regarding DNA quantity and quality can be found in Table 4. 
==PAGE:25==
 
Table 4: Summary of DNA extractions 
Sample 
ID 
Site 
Elution 
volume 
[µL] 
Used soil 
[mg] 
DNA concentration 
[ng/µL] 
A260/230 
A260/280 
Average DNA concentration 
[ng/µL] 
Average DNA yield 
[ng/mg soil] 
Method 
O.P9.3 
P9 
50 
100 
25.8 
1.921 
1.834 
24.60 
12.30 
O 
O.P9.4 
P9 
50 
100 
23.4 
2.019 
1.841 
O.P9.5 
P9 
50 
100 
24.6 
2.038 
1.838 
D.P9.1 
P9 
50 
100 
26.2 
1.666 
1.825 
31.53 
15.77 
D 
D.P9.2 
P9 
50 
100 
36.2 
2.051 
1.849 
D.P9.3 
P9 
50 
100 
32.2 
1.963 
1.83 
P.P9.1 
P9 
50 
100 
29.6 
1.577 
1.727 
26.47 
13.23 
P 
P.P9.2 
P9 
50 
100 
23.2 
1.581 
1.717 
P.P9.3 
P9 
50 
100 
26.6 
1.605 
1.706 
DL.P5.1 
P5 
100 
100 
5.42 
0.544 
1.914 
5.02 
5.02 
DL 
DL.P5.2 
P5 
100 
100 
4.62 
0.412 
1.876 
S.P5.1 
P5 
100 
100 
0.596 
0.456 
3.148 
0.79 
0.79 
S 
S.P5.2 
P5 
100 
100 
0.986 
0.19 
4.638 
B.P5.1 
P5 
100 
100 
4.86 
0.326 
1.895 
4.43 
4.43 
B 
B.P5.2 
P5 
200 
100 
2 
0.106 
2.013 
L.P8.1 
P8 
50 
450 
26.6 
1.696 
1.832 
31.00 
3.44 
L 
L.P8.2 
P8 
50 
450 
35.4 
2.056 
1.837 
M.P5.1 
P5 
100 
500 
38.8 
1.701 
1.824 
36.90 
7.38 
M 
M.P5.2 
P5 
100 
500 
35 
0.898 
1.838 
M.P8.1 
P8 
100 
500 
27.8 
1.315 
1.816 
31.00 
6.20 
M.P8.2 
P8 
100 
500 
34.2 
0.928 
1.834 
M.P9.1 
P9 
100 
500 
46.6 
0.849 
1.837 
43.40 
8.68 
M.P9.2 
P9 
100 
500 
40.2 
1.77 
1.833 
N.P9.1 
P9 
50 
100 
5.14 
0.243 
1.867 
4.99 
2.49 
N 
==PAGE:26==
 
Sample 
ID 
Site 
Elution 
volume 
[µL] 
Used soil 
[mg] 
DNA concentration 
[ng/µL] 
A260/230 
A260/280 
Average DNA concentration 
[ng/µL] 
Average DNA yield 
[ng/mg soil] 
Method 
N.P9.2 
P9 
50 
100 
4.86 
0.784 
1.833 
N.P9.3 
P9 
50 
100 
4.96 
0.548 
1.847 
F.N.P9.1 
P9 
50 
100 
10 
1.908 
1.806 
9.79 
4.90 
F 
F.N.P9.2 
P9 
50 
100 
9.58 
2.007 
1.827 
F.O.P9.1 
P9 
50 
100 
16.2 
0.356 
1.86 
16.05 
8.03 
F 
F.O.P9.2 
P9 
50 
100 
15.9 
0.787 
1.829 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
 
Suppose we put these modifications in order regarding the measured average DNA 
concentrations. In that case, the following order can be set up in decreasing order: M, D, L, O, F, 
DL, N, B, S. Meaning that the highest concentration of DNA was achieved by adding twice the 
initial amount of soil sample to the tubes, and warming the elution buffer up to 70°C before 
elution, followed by the double lysis of the sample, and adding more soil (450 mg) to the 
preparation tube and elongating the lysis time to 20 minutes. Two of these methods rely on the 
increased amount of soil samples. However, due to this, ranking the effectiveness of these 
methods solely based on the measured concentrations cannot hold its place since more soil 
samples result in higher DNA concentrations. In addition, due to the lack of sample resources, 
not all methods were tried using soil from the same sites. As shown in the initial measurements, 
there is a significant difference in the DNA extractable DNA concentration between sites. 
Therefore, to get a more nuanced picture of the effectiveness of each method, I used the average 
DNA yield as an indicator. The comparison of these results can be seen in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4: Comparison of average DNA yields of the modifications of the kit 
According to Figure 3, the following order can be set up between the modifications regarding 
their average DNA yield in descending order: D, O, M, F, M, DL, L, N, S. This means that out of 
the tried modifications the double lysis of the sample seems to get to most DNA out of the soil 
samples. However, to the lack of soil samples, not all modifications were tried out on the same 
samples, and DNA yields varied between the initial samples regarding sites as well. This leads to 
that first, the optimization should be considered regarding to the nature of sites, and that this 
comparison is biased. 
15.77
12.30
8.68
8.03
7.38
5.02
4.43
3.44
2.49
0.79
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
D
O
M
F
M
DL
B
L
N
S
Average DNA yield [ng/mg soil]
Method
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
 
Alternative extraction method: 
Besides these modifications, another alternative extraction protocol (Method P) tailored to the 
available resources was tried out, which in a previous experiment, performed better than an 
earlier version of the kit [23], [29]. 
After performing the extraction, the DNA concentration was relatively high, and its yield was the 
second best compared to the modifications of the kit, only surpassed by the double lysis of the 
samples. Also, after checking the extraction sample with gel electrophoresis, the DNA seemed to 
stay mostly intact, which could not be said about the modifications of the kit-based method 
(Figure 5.) 
 
Unfortunately, on the other hand, the precipitated DNA had a brownish colour, possibly because 
the humic substances were not eliminated during extraction and stuck to the DNA, which was 
shown in the purity of these extractions. Since the purity values were slightly lower, the samples 
were tested in real-life PCR settings using the rpoD primers to see if producing amplicons using 
this extraction method was possible compared to the best-performing kit modification. A half-
dilution series were made from both extraction methods using the samples with the highest 
measured DNA concentration. In addition, the same PCR setting was tried with the addition of 
BSA to eliminate the possibly occurring inhibition. While modification D could perform in each 
setting, the phenol-chloroform method underperformed. 
 
To purify these samples, the phenol-chloroform extraction samples were put through the 
purification steps of the kit. Unfortunately, this process comes with losing almost all the DNA 
from the sample as the DNA concentration measurements and gel electrophoresis (Figure 6.) 
validates it. A possible explanation can be that it was removed during the removal of humic 
substances since they stuck to the DNA. Therefore as a final choice, method D was chosen for the 
final extractions. 
 
During the final extractions, three replicates were made from each soil sample. Still, one sample 
from both site P5 and site P8 did not fulfil the previously set up purity criteria, so using up the 
remaining soil samples from these sites, more extractions were performed. While extractions 
from site P5 produced one additional sample with appropriate characteristics, from location P8, 
almost all of the extractions failed during the purity check due to improper absorption curves. 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
Only one sample had a right curve, and while its purity values do not entirely fulfil the set 
requirements, it was chosen for further processes. 
 
Figure 5: Gel electrophoresis image of extractions using the unmodified protocol of the DNeasy 
PowerSoil Pro Kit, method D, and the phenol-chloroform method. 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
 
Figure 6: Gel electrophoresis image of phenol-chloroform extractions after purification with the 
DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit 
 
4.2 Computational evaluation of primers: 
 
Before PCR amplification on the final extractions, several primers were tested using in silico PCR 
with RibDif2. Since the rpoD primers will be used in further experiments, a Pseudomonas library 
consisting of 1336 genomes was used for testing. Primers were chosen from previous review 
article regarding the topic [30].  
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
For phylogenic testing, the primers that can amplify the whole 16S gene (V1V9) resulted in a 58% 
overlap between species, whereas PsEG primers only 20.55 %, which is lower compared to results 
from a previous paper (rpoD). Primers amplifying only the V3V4 regions were not tested since 
they supposedly give worse resolution between species than the primers amplifying the whole 
gene. 
 
Regarding the functional amplicons, for the adenylation domain, the to best performing were 
chosen by Strube et al. The longest primers (degNRPS) could amplify 1286 genomes out of 1336, 
of which 99.22 % had multiple hits. The second longest one, the A3-A7 primer pair, could amplify 
slightly less, 1280 genomes with slightly fewer multiple hits (98.52%). In the case of several 
amplicons, the degNRPS primers resulted in 25758 amplicons, while the A3A7 primer pair could 
only produce 21580. 
 
For the KS regions, the primers from Tae et al. hit 12603 genomes with a total of 6678 amplicons, 
while the degKS primers did not work. 
 
These results suggest that the primers amplifying longer DNA regions generally produced more 
amplicons and could amplify more genomes with multiple hits. 
 
4.3 Optimisation of PCR settings: 
 
After the production of the initial extractions, at the same time as the optimisation of the 
extraction methods, the optimisation of PCR settings was also started. 
For the initial settings, the rpoD primers were used with the addition of a one-microliter 
template. While the purity of the samples was between the previously determined ranges, the 
sample from site P9 did not produce amplicons (Figure 7). 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
 
Figure 7: PCR amplification of the rpoD gene using one microliter of extracted DNA from the 
initial extractions 
To test if this resulted from the presence of inhibitors in the DNA sample, the samples were 
diluted into half of their concentration and added with the same volume for the same reaction 
settings. As Figure 8 shows, the dilution of the sample led to better results. 
 
 
Figure 8: PCR amplification of the rpoD gene using one microliter of extracted DNA from the 
diluted initial extractions 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
In the presence of inhibitors in DNA samples from the environment, additives are commonly 
used. One of the most widely used of these is bovine serum albumin (BSA), which can stick to 
these inhibitors to prevent the inhibition of DNA polymerase [31]. This was further proved by 
addition of BSA solution to the PCR mixtures as seen below. 
 
 
4.4 Analysis of the 16S region sequencing data: 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
 
5 Discussion 
 
Agriculture is facing several challenges currently, which require novel solutions, especially in 
biocontrol. Discovering new biocontrol agents, such as polyketides and non-ribosomal peptides, 
can successfully solve this problem. To utilise these compounds, finding which microbes can 
produce these is necessary. Therefore a new amplicon-based sequencing method was tested to 
identify community members from the soil. To successfully implement this method in the future 
several improvements are required. 
 
5.1 
Extraction methods, DNA yields and purity 
 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
Throughout the years, several research focused on the biodiversity and community composition 
of soil microbiomes based on molecular techniques. The biggest advantage of these methods is 
that they do not rely on traditional culturing methods. Therefore they are less time-consuming 
and less biased. Moreover, these methods can be characterised by their high sensitivity and 
reproducibility. One of the key initial steps of these methods is the extraction of DNA from soil, 
focusing on its quantity and purity. These methods can be divided into two categories: indirect 
and direct techniques. Indirect techniques focus on isolating cells from the sample and their 
further lysis, while direct methods focus on obtaining genetic material from the samples. Indirect 
methods are useful when one would like to separate certain cell types and analyse them 
separately, but they’re more biased regarding certain cell types. In direct extraction, the 
concentration of obtained DNA is higher, and it can test various groups of microorganisms. 
Moreover, due to fewer steps in the process, there is a lower risk of contamination of the samples. 
Therefore in this project, the latter was used. 
In both cases, the key importance of the extraction methods is the lysis efficiency and purification 
of the samples, especially from humic acid. 
 
Lysis methods can be based on physical lysis (beads, freeze-thaw, ultrasound, grinding), chemical 
lysis (phenol-chloroform), enzymatic lysis (lysozyme, proteinase K) or a mixture of these. Studies 
showed that extraction methods based on ultrasound or mills lead to higher fragmentation of the 
genetic material, but beads or enzymatic, chemical lysis leads to larger fragments. The results 
proved the latter. While the extraction methods highly depend on the cell structure, analysing 
biodiversity requires an effective method for the entire spectrum of soil microorganisms. 
In this project, several modifications of a commercial kit and a phenol-chloroform-based method 
were used to obtain the high quantity and quality DNA from soil samples. Since the amount of 
used soil samples was uneven during the methods due to the lack of samples, the obtained DNA 
yield was used for comparison. 
 
The phenol-chloroform method used had higher DNA concentrations and yield than the kit’s 
original protocol, and it came with the smallest amount of shearing. Still, the colour of the 
precipitated DNA was brown, meaning that a high amount of humic substances were coextracted 
during the process. This was further reinforced by using the extracted DNA as a template in PCR 
reactions. Regardless of dilution or additives, the PCR reactions did not work with these extracts, 
and after purification, the DNA was precipitated with the inhibiting substances as well. The 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
carryover of the inhibitors could be due to the switch of the CTAB to SDS in the lysis buffer. CTAB 
can bind to the humic substances, therefore eliminating them. While this method looked 
favourable, it still needs several adjustments in future experiments. Removing inhibitors before 
lysis can overcome the coextraction of the inhibitors enhancing modifications. This can be 
achieved by adding excessive Al ions and for flocculation and removing it by pH adjustment. 
Other alternative purification methods, such as gel purification, are also considerable. 
 
The collection of fresh soil in better environmental conditions did not influence the extractions 
positively since the amount of DNA extracted from these samples was not higher than the 
original samples, and the purity of these samples was worse. The latter can be explained that 
before the collection, it was raining, and it helped to mobilise more humic substances in the soil. 
Using more soil during sample preparation and longer lysis time led to higher DNA 
concentrations with acceptable purity, looking at the DNA yield obtained from a fixed amount of 
soil was lower than the original method, and using more soil might lead to higher carryover of the 
contaminants. When this method was compared with better wetting conditions using heated-up 
elution buffer, this thought was further reinforced with decreased purity. 
 
Alternative lysis methods suggested by the manufacturer did not perform well either. Method S, 
which was carried out to reduce DNA shearing, resulted in the lowest amount of DNA out of all 
the settings, and the presence of DNA was not reinforced during DNA electrophoresis. The 
application of the alternative lyses method recommended for cells which are difficult to lyse did 
not have higher concentration values than the original protocol, and the purity of the sample was 
also worse, probably due to the more efficient extraction of inhibitors. 
 
Switching the Vortex adaptor to another device designed for cell lysis also did not influence the 
extraction method positively since the obtained values were not higher than the original one. 
The addition of BSA during the lysis process was insufficient to remove the inhibitors from the 
sample since the purity values of these extractions were below the acceptence level. 
 
Out of all the Methods, the double lysis of the soil samples resulted in the best DNA yield values 
with proper purity. 
 
Ultimately, as other papers suggest, sequencing depth has a greater influence in these types of 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
experiments than the way of extraction [29]. Therefore more focus on this topic should have been 
applied. 
 
5.2 Primer evaluation and PCR performance 
 
Before PCR amplifications, several primers were evaluated using RibDif2. The results clearly 
show that longer amplicons resulted in more hits and more PCR products, therefore, more OBU 
in a possible future sequencing run in theory. While computational tools can be useful regarding 
experiment design, they still need to predict real life due to their practical limitations partially. 
This was proved by the fact that while the AD primers producing the longest amplicons 
performed the best during in vitro PCR, they did not work in real-life settings. Since these 
primers were initially designed for microorganisms from marine sources, not soil, it could be an 
explanation for that. Therefore new primers designed on a bacterial genome library consisting 
predominantly of soil community members are suggested. In the case of the AD primers, new 
primers with the addition of PCP and C module encoding genes would be beneficial since these 
modules are required during the synthesis of non-ribosomal peptides. 
 
Regarding the 16S primers, the computational results showed around a 50 % overlap between 
species of the Pseudomonas genus, meaning that it still gives better resolution regarding species 
level than smaller gene amplicons. However, more is needed for species identification. A solution 
to this problem is using primers that amplify the entire rRNA encoding operon, previously 
utilised in other research. 
 
The rpoD amplicons resulted in around 20 % overlap, and while it performed better than the 16S, 
it still can be optimised. As data shown by Jonas Greve, the primers designed by him focused only 
on the D region, but according to the Shannon diversity analysis, there is less diversity on the two 
ends of the gene, meaning that longer primers, amplifying the whole gene can be utilised in 
future applications. 
 
During the initial testing of the PCR conditions, the PCR reactions did not work. This is possibly 
due to the coextraction of inhibitors, such as humic substances, from soil samples. To overcome 
these problems, there are several suggestions in the literature. Pre-PCR treatments contain the 
purification of DNA extracts or dilution of the samples. Since the inhibitors coextracted with the 
DNA during the purification, and humic substances can bind to the columns during purification, 
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
the latter was used. During dilution, the concentration of the inhibitors is lowered, thus 
improving the PCR amplification. However, this method itself could have resulted in significantly 
better results itself. On the other hand, excess dilution of the sample can lead to the 
overestimation of certain species in the sample. To overcome this burden, the solution can be in 
the future by a method from Wang et al., where they spiked their extraction samples with an 
artificial target gene and evaluated the inhibitory effect with the amplification of this gene. 
Modifications of PCR reactions include adding performance-enhancing additives (such as bovine 
serum albumin) and high-fidelity thermostable DNA polymerases. While the latter resulted in 
unspecific bands, adding BSA helped overcome the presence of inhibitors even in undiluted 
samples. This beneficial effect is due to BSA’s ability to bind to these inhibitors and prevent their 
interaction with the DNA polymerase. The main reason behind the inhibition is that the DNA and 
humic substances have similar molecular structures. Both of them are long-chain molecules and 
negatively charged. The carboxyl and hydroxyl groups in humic substances are also highly similar 
to the phosphate groups in the DNA. Another advantage is that the enhancing effect of adding 
BSA does not depend on the amplification size. 
 
Despite these improvements, the PCR reactions still required several amplification cycles for 
sufficient amplicons. Therefore in future applications, it is highly suggested to use nested PCR to 
improve the number of PCR products. In other settings similar to these, the PCR products were 
purified with AMPure beads using unbarcoded primers, and the purified products were added to 
the PCR mixture but this time with the barcoded primers. This purification process could have 
been used initially after the extraction as well. 
 
5.3 Amplicon sequencing 
 
During the library preparation, the recovery of AMpure beads was tested. While gel 
electrophoresis validated its performance, the recovery monitored during the purification of the 
AD amplicons seemed only to capture around 30% of the total DNA. The cause of this can be 
traced back to the amount of elution buffer used during recovery. According to the beads 
specification, the used buffer can recover less than 30 % of the total DNA. Although the initial 
DNA concentrations of the PCR mixtures after the PCR reactions were also low, a higher amount 
of elution buffer might result in lower DNA concentrations during library prep. Therefore an 
optimisation of the purification process is suggested. Moreover, bigger PCR volumes can also 
enhance this process. 
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
 
The 16S amplicons were first sequenced using the new FLO-MIN1104 flow cell, but all the reads 
failed. This is probably because the new flow cell is based on the 10. kit chemistry, while the 
amplicon sequencing kit is only compatible with previous kit chemistry. Although the new kit 
chemistry has better accuracy than previous ones due to the double reading, they have modified 
nanopores and motor proteins. This also requires a modified adapter, which may lead to slippage 
and insufficient reading. According to ONT, a read is declared failed if only one strand was read 
during sequencing or with a low Phred score. In this scenario, it is possibly due to the former 
reason since most of the failed reads are far below the target length, even though the samples 
added to the library were verified by gel electrophoresis regarding the size. 
 
Using a flow cell with the required chemistry resulted in evaluable reads regarding the 16S 
amplicons. Still, the AD amplicons were not evaluable because they gave 16S reads, probably due 
to the software settings during sequencing. 
 
6 Future prospects 
 
Several additional modifications were mentioned during the discussion, which may lead to a 
more efficient framework for this project. Regarding the eDNA extraction, the phenol-chloroform 
method seemed a promising way to extract DNA from the soil due to the high yield and the ability 
to obtain unfragmented high molecular weight DNA even from such a low amount of starting 
sample. However, removing inhibitors is a crucial step to utilise this method fully. This possibly 
could be achieved by following the original protocol [23], treating the samples with aluminium 
sulfate [32], or by adding additional purification steps, such as gel purification of the DNA [33]. 
Adding each step, or a combination of them, might help to overcome the inhibition during PCR 
amplification. 
Regarding the PCR amplification of the products, while dilution of the samples and addition of 
BSA to the reaction mixture seemed to resolve most of the problems, the high number of cycles 
which needed to get a sufficient amount of amplicons still raises some questions regarding the 
effectiveness. Another question that might arise is the community members' overestimation due 
to the samples' dilution. A solution can be to test the level of inhibition in environmental samples 
to spike them with a known concentration of an artificial target gene, and quantify this gene as 
described by Wang et al [34]. 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
Due to the low DNA concentration achieved by the PCR amplification, it is considerable to purify 
these products and use them as a template in a second PCR run, as was done by previously [6]. It 
is also considerable to use a PCR Barcoding Expansion 1-96 kit from Oxford Nanopore 
Technologies, since the addition of tails and barcodes would possibly increase the DNA 
concentration for library preparation, and it also enables to pool together multiple first-round 
PCR products, so each amplicon sample would receive the same barcode during the follow-up 
PCR, therefore all the amplicons can be sequenced in one run. Moreover, this method is 
compatible with the newest chemistry of Oxford Nanopore Technology, therefore the 
experimental results would lead to higher accuracy. Unfortunately, similar to previous 
experiments the rpoD gene amplification resulted in inconsistent products from the samples 
[35], possibly due to their low presence since the sequencing results did not identify them as 
major community members. To utilise this method, the lower detection limit should be 
investigated. 
Regarding primer design, in future applications, it might be beneficial to use primers designed to 
amplify the whole rRNA operon rather than just the 16S subunit, therefore possibly achieving 
better resolution between species [36]. It is also considerable to design longer primers for the 
amplification of the complete rpoD gene to utilise the long-read capabilities of the nanopore 
sequencing to achieve better species-level resolution between Pseudomonas species. For the 
functional amplicons, the AD and KS primers can also be changed to ones specific to soil 
microorganisms, that can amplify additional obligatory domains, producing longer amplicons. 
To increase DNA yield, the optimisation of AMPure XP purification is required during library 
preparations. Alternative library preparation methods mentioned in the discussion are highly 
recommended for sequencing the rest of the amplicons. 
Identifying possibly novel compounds with biocontrol potential is sufficient for the future, but to 
completely utilise them, the producing strains should be identified and characterised, which is 
another difficult challenge. 
Last but not least, to validate the recent findings, the method should be tested on synthetic 
communities, including closely related species, to uncover the effectiveness of the resolution of 
this method. 
 
7 Conclusion 
==PAGE:41==
40 
 
 
In this thesis, a new amplicon sequencing method was tested for phylogenetic and biosynthetic 
potential characterisation of soil samples from previously investigated sites. As a first step to 
optimise the eDNA extraction regarding quantity, a commercial kit-based method and its 
modifications were tested against a combination of chemical and enzymatic lysis methods. While 
the latter had some favourable characteristics, ultimately, one of the modifications of the kit-
based techniques, the double lysis of the same sample, was chosen to ensure sufficient purity of 
the DNA extraction samples for downstream applications. Primers were tested computationally 
by in silico PCR, but computational results were not entirely aligned with real-life testing. Despite 
sufficient purity, PCR conditions must also be optimised to amplify the necessary genes. Still, 
diluting the samples and the addition of bovine serum albumin helped to overcome the PCR 
inhibition caused by the environmental source of the sample. Out of the four amplicons, only the 
16S rRNA gene amplicons were sequenced successfully, proving the concept that this method can 
be utilised for future experiments. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
41 
 
 
8 References 
 
[1] 
MarketsandMarkets, ‘Biocontrol Market by Type (Biopesticides and Semiochemicals), Source 
(Microbials, Biochemicals, and Macrobials), Mode of Application, Crop Type, and Region (North 
America, Europe, APAC, South America, Rest of the World) - Global Forecast to 2027’, Aug. 
2022. https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/biocontrol-market-
216657040.html (accessed Feb. 22, 2023). 
[2] 
J. J. Parnell et al., ‘From the lab to the farm: An industrial perspective of plant beneficial 
microorganisms’, Frontiers in Plant Science, vol. 7, no. AUG2016. Frontiers Media S.A., Aug. 04, 
2016. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01110. 
[3] 
X. Raynaud and N. Nunan, ‘Spatial ecology of bacteria at the microscale in soil’, PLoS One, vol. 9, 
no. 1, Jan. 2014, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087217. 
[4] 
D. Nichols et al., ‘Use of ichip for high-throughput in situ cultivation of "uncultivable microbial 
species▽’, Appl Environ Microbiol, vol. 76, no. 8, pp. 2445–2450, Apr. 2010, doi: 
10.1128/AEM.01754-09. 
[5] 
Pernille Kjersgaard Bech, Klaus Lars Lysdal, Lone Gram, Mikkel Bentzon-Tilia, and Mikael Lenz 
Strube, ‘Marine Sediments Hold an Untapped Potential for NovelTaxonomic and Bioactive 
Bacterial Diversity’, mSystems, vol. 5, no. 5, Dec. 2020, doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00782-20. 
[6] 
A. U. Geers, M. L. Strube, and M. Bentzon-Tilia, ‘Small Spatial Scale Drivers of Secondary 
Metabolite Biosynthetic Diversity in Environmental Microbiomes’, mSystems, Feb. 2023, doi: 
10.1128/msystems.00724-22. 
[7] 
M. L. Strube, ‘RibDif: can individual species be differentiated by 16S sequencing?’, Bioinformatics 
Advances, vol. 1, no. 1, Jun. 2021, doi: 10.1093/bioadv/vbab020. 
[8] 
J. G. Lauritsen, M. L. Hansen, P. K. Bech, L. Jelsbak, L. Gram, and M. L. Strube, ‘Identification 
and Differentiation of Pseudomonas Species in Field Samples Using an rpoD Amplicon 
Sequencing Methodology’, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://journals.asm.org/journal/msystems 
[9] 
A. E. Ricroch and M. C. Hénard-Damave, ‘Next biotech plants: new traits, crops, developers and 
technologies for addressing global challenges’, Critical Reviews in Biotechnology, vol. 36, no. 4. 
Taylor and Francis Ltd, pp. 675–690, Jul. 03, 2016. doi: 10.3109/07388551.2015.1004521. 
[10] 
K. Fuglie, ‘The growing role of the private sector in agricultural research and development world-
wide’, Global Food Security, vol. 10. Elsevier, pp. 29–38, Sep. 01, 2016. doi: 
10.1016/j.gfs.2016.07.005. 
[11] 
C. T. Walsh and M. A. Fischbach, ‘Natural products version 2.0: Connecting genes to molecules’, 
Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 132, no. 8. pp. 2469–2493, Feb. 24, 2010. doi: 
10.1021/ja909118a. 
[12] 
N. P. Keller and T. M. Hohn, ‘Metabolic pathway gene clusters in filamentous fungi’, Academic 
Press, 1997. 
[13] 
A. Bravo, S. Likitvivatanavong, S. S. Gill, and M. Soberón, ‘Bacillus thuringiensis: A story of a 
successful bioinsecticide’, Insect Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, vol. 41, no. 7. pp. 423–
431, Jul. 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2011.02.006. 
[14] 
L. Dong and J. Zhang, ‘Research progress of avermectin: A minireview based on the structural 
derivatization of avermectin’, Advanced Agrochem, vol. 1, no. 2. KeAi Communications Co., pp. 
100–112, Dec. 01, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.aac.2022.11.001. 
[15] 
F. Vinale, K. Sivasithamparam, E. L. Ghisalberti, R. Marra, S. L. Woo, and M. Lorito, 
‘Trichoderma-plant-pathogen interactions’, Soil Biol Biochem, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–10, Jan. 2008, 
doi: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2007.07.002. 
[16] 
L. J. Kerkhof, K. P. Dillon, M. M. Häggblom, and L. R. McGuinness, ‘Profiling bacterial 
communities by MinION sequencing of ribosomal operons’, Microbiome, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 116, Sep. 
2017, doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0336-9. 
[17] 
T. P. Niedringhaus, D. Milanova, M. B. Kerby, M. P. Snyder, and A. E. Barron, ‘Landscape of next-
generation sequencing technologies’, Analytical Chemistry, vol. 83, no. 12. pp. 4327–4341, Jun. 
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
15, 2011. doi: 10.1021/ac2010857. 
[18] 
A. L. Greninger et al., ‘Rapid metagenomic identification of viral pathogens in clinical samples by 
real-time nanopore sequencing analysis’, Genome Med, vol. 7, no. 1, Sep. 2015, doi: 
10.1186/s13073-015-0220-9. 
[19] 
M. D. Cao, D. Ganesamoorthy, A. G. Elliott, H. Zhang, M. A. Cooper, and L. J. M. Coin, 
‘Streaming algorithms for identification of pathogens and antibiotic resistance potential from 
real-time MinIONTM sequencing’, Gigascience, vol. 5, no. 1, 2016, doi: 10.1186/s13742-016-0137-
2. 
[20] Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, A. Bollas, Y. Wang, and K. F. Au, ‘Nanopore sequencing technology, 
bioinformatics and applications’, Nature Biotechnology, vol. 39, no. 11. Nature Research, pp. 
1348–1365, Nov. 01, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41587-021-01108-x. 
[21] 
N. D. Sanderson et al., ‘Comparison of R9.4.1/Kit10 and R10/Kit12 Oxford Nanopore flowcells 
and chemistries in bacterial genome reconstruction’, Microb Genom, vol. 9, no. 1, 2023, doi: 
10.1099/mgen.0.000910. 
[22] 
M. L. Hansen, Z. He, M. Wibowo, and L. Jelsbak, ‘A Whole-Cell Biosensor for Detection of 2,4-
Diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG)-Producing Bacteria from Grassland Soil MICROBIAL ECOLOGY’, 
2021. [Online]. Available: https://journals.asm.org/journal/aem 
[23] 
R. I. Griffiths, A. S. Whiteley, A. G. O’donnell, and M. J. Bailey, ‘Rapid Method for Coextraction of 
DNA and RNA from Natural Environments for Analysis of Ribosomal DNA-and rRNA-Based 
Microbial Community Composition’, 2000. 
[24] W. Shen, S. Le, Y. Li, and F. Hu, ‘SeqKit: A cross-platform and ultrafast toolkit for FASTA/Q file 
manipulation’, PLoS One, vol. 11, no. 10, Oct. 2016, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163962. 
[25] 
T. Rognes, T. Flouri, B. Nichols, C. Quince, and F. Mahé, ‘VSEARCH: A versatile open source tool 
for metagenomics’, PeerJ, vol. 2016, no. 10, 2016, doi: 10.7717/peerj.2584. 
[26] K. D. Curry et al., ‘Emu: species-level microbial community profiling of full-length 16S rRNA 
Oxford Nanopore sequencing data’, Nat Methods, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 845–853, Jul. 2022, doi: 
10.1038/s41592-022-01520-4. 
[27] 
T. Sperling et al., ‘Sample to Insight Application Note Novel procedure for improved results in 
soil microbiome analysis using the DNeasy ® PowerSoil ® Pro Kit’. 
[28] K. Matange, J. M. Tuck, and A. J. Keung, ‘DNA stability: a central design consideration for DNA 
data storage systems’, Nature Communications, vol. 12, no. 1. Nature Research, Dec. 01, 2021. 
doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-21587-5. 
[29] C. Sanchez-Cid, R. Tignat-Perrier, L. Franqueville, L. Delaurière, T. Schagat, and T. M. Vogel, 
‘Sequencing Depth Has a Stronger Effect than DNA Extraction on Soil Bacterial Richness 
Discovery’, Biomolecules, vol. 12, no. 3, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.3390/biom12030364. 
[30] A. U. Geers, Y. Buijs, M. L. Strube, L. Gram, and M. Bentzon-Tilia, ‘The natural product 
biosynthesis potential of the microbiomes of Earth – Bioprospecting for novel anti-microbial 
agents in the meta-omics era’, Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, vol. 20. 
Elsevier B.V., pp. 343–352, Jan. 01, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.12.024. 
[31] 
E. M. Farell and G. Alexandre, ‘Bovine serum albumin further enhances the effects of organic 
solvents on increased yield of polymerase chain reaction of GC-rich templates’, BMC Res Notes, 
vol. 5, 2012, doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-257. 
[32] 
D. Dong, A. Yan, H. Liu, X. Zhang, and Y. Xu, ‘Removal of humic substances from soil DNA using 
aluminium sulfate’, J Microbiol Methods, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 217–222, Aug. 2006, doi: 
10.1016/j.mimet.2005.11.010. 
[33] 
S. S. Mantri et al., ‘Metagenomic Sequencing of Multiple Soil Horizons and Sites in Close Vicinity 
Revealed Novel Secondary Metabolite Diversity’, 2021, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.5195507. 
[34] 
H. Wang, J. Qi, D. Xiao, Z. Wang, and K. Tian, ‘A re-evaluation of dilution for eliminating PCR 
inhibition in soil DNA samples’, Soil Biol Biochem, vol. 106, pp. 109–118, Mar. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.soilbio.2016.12.011. 
[35] 
J. G. Lauritsen, ‘Increasing phylogenetic resolution of microbiomes by genus-specific primers’, 
2019. 
[36] 
L. J. Kerkhof, K. P. Dillon, M. M. Häggblom, and L. R. McGuinness, ‘Profiling bacterial 
communities by MinION sequencing of ribosomal operons’, Microbiome, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 116, Sep. 
==PAGE:44==
43 
 
2017, doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0336-9. 
  
 
