==PAGE:1==
Drivers of adoption of bidets in Denmark
Author
Giuliano Zazzetta Cioffi - s220335
Tutor
Euiju Jeon
Thesis presented for the degree of MSc. in Industrial Engineering and Management
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This research has the objective of exploring and identifying the drivers that would lead
to adoption of bidets in Denmark. For this, two main theories were used as a theoretical
background, the Theory of Adoption Life Cycle and the framework SaniFOAM. The target
group of this research is the Danish population between within the age range of 18 up to
30 years old. The first method used to collect data were interviews, which were followed
by surveys built upon the results of the interviews. With the data collected in the surveys,
a factor analysis was made, together with a regression analysis consisting of an Ordinary
Logit Model and an Ordinary Least Squares regression, with the objective of explaining
and predicting the willingness to pay for bidets in Denmark. Finally, it was concluded that
according to the data collected, the social norms, societal values and product attributes are
the main drivers to the adoption of bidets in the Danish population, and explanations for
that were attempted, together with a brief discussion of the limitations of this study and
possible areas for future research.
i
==PAGE:3==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
2
2.1
Technology Adoption Life Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
SaniFOAM framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Methodology
6
3.1
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.1
Interview questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Surveys
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.1
Survey Sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.2
Factor Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Regression Analysis Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Findings
14
4.1
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Surveys
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.1
Factor Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.2
Ordinary Logit Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
Ordinary Least Squared Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Conclusions and Discussion
29
List of Figures
I
Sources
II
ii
==PAGE:4==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
1
Introduction
A bidet is a personal hygiene device which was originally designed in France in the
1700s, and although there is written evidence of their popular request and use as early as
the 19th century, it became widespread after the second World War, mostly due to plumbing
improvements, which allowed the bidets to be moved from the bedrooms, where they were
originally established, to bathrooms and toilets (Inami et al., 2018).
Nowadays, there are many types of bidets. These include bidet showers, which is a
simple hand triggered nozzle, with a hose attached to it that provides with the water, and
provides with a water spray in order to assist the personal cleaning process. This type of
bidet is commonly seen in some countries, such as Brazil and Finland. Another type of
bidet, is the standalone, or conventional bidet, which is the most used in the world, and it is
installed in the toilets and bathrooms as a separate device, that has a nozzle that throws a
water jet to assist with the cleaning. The last type available of bidets, are the add-on bidets.
These are installed on the toilet, and are a good option for saving space. They can either
be controlled mechanically or electronically, depending on the model, and might have some
extra features, such as heating, deodorizers and lights.
(a) Bidet shower
(b) Standalone bidet
(c) Add-on bidet
Figure 1: Types of bidets
Bidets have nowadays been adopted in many countries in the world such as many South-
ern Eastern European countries, most of the Arab countries, South American countries and
in some Asian countries. In Italy and Portugal, the installation of bidets has been estab-
lished as mandatory as from 1975 (Inami et al., 2018). Nonetheless, even though Denmark
has been ranked amongst the top ten countries in the World Index of Healthcare Innovation
(Roy, 2023), bidets are not commonly found in Danish bathrooms. This makes allows room
to wonder why bidets are not popular in the Danish society, considering the fact that Den-
mark is a developed country, whose population is most likely aware of the benefits of good
hygiene habits as reflected in world rankings. Hence, the main objective of this research will
be to answer the following question:
Page 1 of 31
==PAGE:5==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
What are the drivers that could lead to adoption of bidets in Denmark?
Considering the nature of the research question to be exploratory, no particular hypoth-
esis will be tested, but the focus will be to understand and explain the determinants that
could eventually lead to the adoption of such devices, contributing mostly to the theory of
hygiene products adoption in the Danish society.
2
Theoretical Background
In order to better conclude which are the drivers that will possibly lead to adoption of
bidets in Denmark, it is of great importance first having a deep understanding of the existing
theoretical background to use as a starting point and frame of reference to carry out this
research. Thus, two main models will be discussed, the Technology Adoption Life Cycle and
the SaniFOAM framework.
2.1
Technology Adoption Life Cycle
According to the existent adoption theory, one of the most important features to con-
sider is the Technology Adoption Life Cycle. This is a model that helps to understand the
acceptance of new products, since it describes the market penetration of any new product
in terms of a progression in the types of consumers that are attracted to the product during
its lifetime. According to the model, there are five different types. The first one, innovators,
are the ones who search and are always willing to adopt new products and technologies,
since technology is one of their main interests in life (Moore, 2014). There are not many
innovators within each market, but they are of extreme importance since they are the ones
who will reassure and encourage other consumers to adopt the product. After the innova-
tors, the second group is labeled as early adopters, who are also willing to adopt products
in the early stage of its lifecycle, but they are not technology enthusiasts, so they mostly
rely on their intuition regarding the potential benefits brought by the new product (Moore,
2014). Followed up are the early majority, who like the early adopters rely on their sense of
practicality, but in addition to this, they research and are interested in previous references
supplied by other users. This group is of great importance since it accounts usually for
approximately one third of the market (Moore, 2014). The late majority is the fourth group
who also represents about a third of the market and share the same thoughts as the early
majority, plus the fact that they decide to purchase the product only once it has already
been settled and standardized in the market by big companies (Moore, 2014). Lastly are the
laggards, who by different reasons are the ones that show the strongest resistance to change
and are only likely to purchase one product when it is a part of another product (Moore,
2014). The following graph shows the Technology Adoption Life Cycle together with the
adoption groups:
Page 2 of 31
==PAGE:6==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
2.1
Technology Adoption Life Cycle
Figure 2: Theory of Adoption Life Cycle Graph
This model suggests that in order to achieve interesting outcomes for companies, the
curve should be developed from left to right, focusing first in the innovators, and only after
that segment is developed, moving forward to the early adopters and so on, since this would
allow for the previous segment to generate a positive influence in the following one, mak-
ing it more likely to be adopted. Nonetheless, the model also states that the hardest gap
to surpass, also known as the chasm, is between the early adopters and the early majority
(Moore, 2014). This is because the early adopters expect something that is in advance of
the competition, such as lower product cost or better customer experience, whereas the early
majority searches for an improvement in productivity, meaning that they want an evolved
product if comparing against its previous version, not a revolutionary change that would
make the previous product obsolete.
The previous model is of great importance in order to identify the current market
situation, together with how to make a greater share of the market adopt one product.
However, this model on its own does not provide a solid background to the drivers leading
to product adoption, and it is normally used to explain and predict the behavior of the
insertion of new technological products and not hygiene products. Hence, for the purpose of
this research, another model is needed to complement this one.
Page 3 of 31
==PAGE:7==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
2.2
SaniFOAM framework
2.2
SaniFOAM framework
The conceptual framework SaniFOAM, is based on the adoption theory presented in
Crossing the chasm, but it was specially designed to gain a deeper insight associated to
determinants affecting the adoption of hygiene products, such as the drivers leading to cease
defecating in the open and switching to latrines.
The starting point of this framework is to define the focus of the research, which in-
cludes the desired sanitation behavior, in this case being the adoption of bidets instead of
just using toilet paper, and the target population which in this research is defined to be the
Danish population. Once the focus is established, the next step is to define the determinants
that might have any influence, either positive or negative, in the behavior, called behavioral
determinants. There are three main subdivisions within the behavioral determinants: oppor-
tunity, ability and motivation (Devine, 2009). The opportunity determinants are associated
with the individual having the chance to perform the desired behavior (Devine, 2009). Here,
the main determinants for this category can be defined as follows:
• Access and availability: represents an external factor, and refers to the availability of
the product in the market and readily accessible.
• Product attributes: the product must have the level of quality and other characteristics
sought by the target population. Includes everything related to the attributes of the
product such as dimensions, smell, comfort, durability, amongst others.
• Social Norms: refer to the implicit rules that govern how individuals within a society
behave in different situations. Any behavior outside these norms is considered to be
abnormal and not accepted. Might be influenced by old age habits.
• Sanctions and Enforcement: are the measures and explicit consequences of not behav-
ing as expected by the group or society.
On the other hand, the ability determinants refer to whether or not an individual has the
capacity to engage in the desired behavior (Devine, 2009). The determinants are listed as
follows:
• Knowledge: it is acquired through learning and refers to every possible information
about the product and how to use it, together with the potential outcomes derived
from its usage. Inaccurate or incomplete knowledge might avoid individuals to engage
in the desired behavior. An important feature to mention is that knowledge on its own
is not sufficient to cause behavioral change.
• Skills: refers to being physically and mentally able to perform a specific action.
• Social support: it is the physical and emotional support given to individuals by their
family, friends and community.
Page 4 of 31
==PAGE:8==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
2.2
SaniFOAM framework
• Roles and Decisions: the individuals within a household take different roles and deci-
sions, and each one of them has a potential influence that will vary depending on the
culture and region.
• Affordability: refers to the ability to pay for a hygiene product or service or to engage
into the sanitation behavior. Nonetheless, even if the individual is able to afford it, it
does not necessarily lead to the purchase, since affordability should not be confused
with willingness to pay.
The last group of determinants are the ones associated with motivation, meaning that the
individual should also be motivated in order to engage into the sanitation behavior (Devine,
2009).
• Attitude and beliefs: they are related to the individual’s perception of the sanitation
product or service, and even the sanitation behavior. The beliefs might be inaccurate,
leading to false perceptions on the adoption of new sanitation products. An important
feature to be considered within this determinant is the locus of control, since individuals
who have an internal locus of control are more likely to believe that the outcome of
a behavior will depend on the individual’s actions, so the likelihood of adoption of
sanitation products will be higher than individuals whose locus of control is external
believe that an extrinsic force will control the circumstance and behavior.
• Values: are related to beliefs, but the main difference is that beliefs refer to an individual
level, whereas values operate on a collective level. They represent the thoughts of a
community about what is desirable or not.
• Emotional and Social drivers: they relate to strong internal thoughts and feelings to
motivate behavior.
• Competing priorities: with a lower income, the budget should be allocated in the best
way according to the individual in order to satisfy the existing demands according to
the priorities. This might lead to placing sanitation products at a lower priority when
considering households with financial struggles.
• Intention: it refers to the individual’s plan to either engage or not in a certain behavior.
It is believed to be one of the strongest motivators for behavioral change.
Another important feature to be mentioned for this research is the willingness to pay,
meaning that in order for the product to be adopted, both affordability and willingness to
pay have to be met. Also, willingness to pay should not be interpreted as binary (yes or no),
since what can also be measured is how much individuals are willing to pay for a particular
sanitation product.
Page 5 of 31
==PAGE:9==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3
Methodology
For the purpose of this research, the SaniFOAM framework will be used in order to
collect empirical data in different ways, whereas the Theory of Adoption Life Cycle will be
useful to withdraw conclusions and evaluations of this research. To start with, the main
focus is defined to be the Danish population between the age of 18 and 30, who are not
frequent users of bidets, since they will be the potential adopters. During this research,
two methods will be used to collect data: interviews and surveys. The interviews will be
used to have a better first understanding of the target population so that the surveys can
be better structured. On the other hand, the surveys will be used with the objective of
gathering enough data to carry out statistical analysis, which will be firstly a factor analysis
to identify and group elements of the survey which might provide the same information.
Followed by this, a Logit Model with the different factors obtained in the factor analysis
together with control variables will be established, and finally an Ordinary Least Squares
Regression will be done as a robustness check of the Logit Model.
3.1
Interviews
The first method used in this research are interviews. This is because a first link between
the theoretical background and data collection is attempted and through open questions,
more information is likely to be achieved, so other methods for data collection and processing
can be established in the future with a higher understanding of the correspondence between
theory and target population. Since the interviews are mostly to gather an initial approach,
a sample size of 15 individuals was selected. The structure of the interview can be seen as
follows.
3.1.1
Interview questions
To begin with, the first relevant information to be gathered in the interviews are data
associated with the demographics of the respondents. The reason behind this is that later
on, when the mathematical models are attempted, these variables will be used as control
variables and provide the model with more information of the potential behavior of the pop-
ulation. Hence the first questions can be seen next:
1. What is your gender?
2. What is your age?
3. Are you a student, a student who is working or just working?
4. Do you have any university degree?
With the first two questions, general demographics will be gathered, whereas the third
and fourth question attempt to collect information regarding the income of the individual to
potentially relate with the willingness to pay and their education level so as to record their
Page 6 of 31
==PAGE:10==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3.1
Interviews
potential understanding of the hygienic benefits obtained when using a bidet.
The next questions are meant to collect information of the hygiene habits of the indi-
viduals:
5. How many times a week do you take a shower?
6. How many times a day do you wash your hands?
7. Which method do you use to clean yourself after using the toilet?
8. Would you feel ’cleaner’ if using water instead of toilet paper?
9. Do you know that cleaning yourself with water removes more bacteria than using toilet
paper?
Throughout these questions, some parallelism is attempted particularly between question
five, six and seven regarding use of bidet and other hygiene habits, whereas questions eight
and nine address mostly the knowledge of the user of the potential benefits of the usage of
bidets, which is a determinant to the adoption of the product according to the theoretical
background discussed.
On the other hand, the following questions aim to discover the
individual’s knowledge regarding bidets, and if they are frequent users:
10. Do you know what a bidet is?
11. Have you ever used a bidet?
12. Are you aware of the different types of bidets?
13. Do you have a bidet in your house?
14. If you had one installed at your house, would you use it?
Then, there are two possible outcomes for question 14, which will then split the interview
and hence the questions into individuals who replied ’No’ and ’Yes’. For the respondents
who answered positively, the following questions are settled:
15. Why do you not have one installed?
16. Do you think it is difficult to use?
17. Would you be more willing to use it if people in your surroundings used it as well?
Whereas for the respondents who replied to question 14 negatively the next questions are
addressed:
18. Why would you not use it?
Page 7 of 31
==PAGE:11==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3.2
Surveys
19. Do you think it is hard to use?
As it can be seen, from questions 15 onwards, what is intended is to be provided through
open questions, a deeper insight regarding potential factors and drivers that could lead
either to adoption of bidets or eventually, negative features that act as barriers of adoption.
The main objective of this is to then merge the findings with the theoretical background
analyzed before, and settle a survey that could allow a more solid data collection so as to
achieve relevant conclusions.
3.2
Surveys
Based on the results of the interviews, which will be further discussed in section 4.1
Interviews, a survey was carried out. Here, the focus is to still collect basic demographics
which will be later used as control variables in the mathematical models, but at the same
time gather empirical information about the possible determinants of bidet adoption within
the target population.
Before formulating the survey there are important aspects to be considered. First, the
target population will still be the same as from the interviews and throughout all of the
research. Also, the sample size is of great importance, since withdrawing conclusions about
the population is the main objective of this project. For the purpose of this research, a sample
size of 48 is desired, since that is an amount that will allow to withdraw some conclusions
from the targeted population. Having a greater sample size would of course provide with
more information and consequently provide with more solid results, but due to limitations
associated with the time length of this project, unfortunately a bigger sample cannot be
achieved. Nonetheless, the impact of the sample size will be further discussed in the findings
and results section.
3.2.1
Survey Sample
After having considered the sample size, the next step is to design the demographic
characteristics that will be relevant for this research. Once again, commonly used variables
are included, starting with "Gender", followed up by "Age" which is split into five possible
ranges: 18 to 20, 21 to 23, 24 to 26, 27 to 29 and ages over 30 years old. This is because
the behavior of individuals within the same range is assumed to be almost the same, if just
considering age and keeping all other variables constant, since the maximum age difference
within each range is considerably small. The next important question to be asked, is if the
respondent is from Denmark or not, so as to focus the answers on the target population.
Followed up, the last question associated with the demographics is, like in the interviews, if
the individual either has or is enrolled in a university degree or not. The aim of this question
is once again to later on verify the possibility that people who have a higher education level
are more aware of the hygienic benefits brought by using a bidet other than just using toilet
paper. After the basic demographic collection, questions 5 and 6 from the interview decided
to be repeated based both on the theoretical background, since they could be associated with
Page 8 of 31
==PAGE:12==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3.2
Surveys
indicators of personal hygiene level, and similarly to age, the answers are grouped, where
the groups for the questions associated with showers are 1 to 2, 3 to 4, 5 to 6, 7 to 8 or
more than 9, and the groups for the question associated with washing hands are from 0 to
5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15, 16 to 20 or more than 21. Also, questions 10 and 11 from the interview
are repeated, so as to have a better understanding about the respondent’s awareness of bidets.
Having set all the previous questions, now it is important to make a differentiation
between individuals who use bidets regularly and the ones who do not. Depending on the
answer provided, the follow up questions will differ. An important issue to mention is that
all of the following questions will be based on a seven point Likert scale, where the respon-
dent will be asked to select a number based on the degree of agreement with the statement
brought in each question, where 1 means that the individual highly disagrees, while 7 means
the highest degree of agreement with the statement proposed. A seven point scale was chosen
so that there is a higher sensitivity than with only five points, thus more precise and rep-
resentative outcomes can be achieved, whereas having a scale with more points would most
likely confuse the interviewees and consequently worse results could be obtained (Fleetwood,
2023). Another feature to mention, is that for every factor previously discussed from the
SaniFOAM framework, there will be an attempt to include least two questions, because by
doing so, more accurate information can be achieved, and since there is no previous research
done in this topic, this will be the best way to provide the survey with validity.
After having the previous points settled, the questionnaire can be formulated. Starting
with the respondents who replied that do not use a bidet, the following questions with the
same initial structure are established:
"I do not have a bidet because..."
• I do not have money to spend in it, I have other priorities (Competing priorities)
• It is hard to use (Product attributes)
• I do not know how to buy/install it (Skills)
• I find it unhygienic (Product attributes)
• I do not need it, toilet paper is enough (Attitudes and beliefs)
• It is not common in Denmark (Social Norms)
• I was not taught to use it as a child (Social Norms)
• It takes longer than using toilet paper (Product attributes)
• I do not want to have one (Intention)
• I do not have space to install it (Product attributes)
Page 9 of 31
==PAGE:13==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3.2
Surveys
• I do not know how to use it (Knowledge)
• I do not know the advantages of using it (Knowledge)
• I will not decide if I am having it or not (Roles and decisions)
It is worth noting that the determinants associated with the theoretical background are
outlined next to each question.
In addition to this, the next five questions were added, where the same Likert scale was
used, with 1 meaning strongly disagree and 7 meaning strongly agree, and once again the
factor for each question is outlined:
• If my family/friends used a bidet, I would be more likely to use it (Emotional drivers)
• If the government made campaigns about the benefits of using a bidet, I will be more
likely to use it (Values)
• If companies would make ads selling bidets, I will be more likely to use it (Access and
availability)
• If I was taught as a child to use a bidet, I will be more likely to use it (Social Norms)
• If bidets were in public toilets, I will be more likely to use it (Values)
On the other hand, the questions addressed to individuals whose response to regularly
using a bidet is affirmative are also measured with the same scale and are:
"I use a bidet because..."
• I feel cleaner than just using toilet paper (Attitudes and beliefs)
• It is faster than toilet paper (Product attribute)
• It is more eco-friendly than toilet paper (Product attribute)
• It is easier than using toilet paper (Product attribute)
• My family/friends use it (Social norms)
• I was taught as a child to use it (Social norms)
• It was easy to buy and install it (Knowledge)
• It is cleaner than using just toilet paper (Product attribute)
• I would feel ashamed if anyone knew I did not use it (Emotional drivers)
• I decided to install it at home (Skills)
Page 10 of 31
==PAGE:14==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3.2
Surveys
• It was already available to be used (Roles and decisions)
It is worth noting that the questionnaire for this case is less extensive than for the pre-
vious case, and there is an important reason for that. In this case, individuals have already
adopted bidets, and the purpose of the research is to focus on what would make the target
population adopt bidets, which implies a difference since after having adopted the product,
the view and perception on its usage is probably different compared to before adopting it.
Finally, the last question asked to the respondents is about the willingness to pay. Even
though in the SaniFOAM framework this is considered as one potential factor of adoption
of hygiene products, in this research it will not be treated exactly like that, but what will
actually be done is that through mathematical models that will be further discussed, the
willingness to pay will be estimated based on the characteristics of the respondent and on the
factors of adoption, so that a deeper understanding of how much the target population would
be willing to spend on this new product. The question asked is then how much they would
be willing to pay for a bidet, and the values are grouped in 7 answers based on a market
research of the existing selling prices of bidets in Denmark. The first two alternatives are
either that the individual already has a bidet, or that the respondent is willing to spend
nothing on it because the desire for adoption is non-existent. Otherwise, the group’s ranges
are less than 200 DKK, between 200 DKK and 500 DKK, between 500 DKK and 1000 DKK,
between 1000 DKK and 5000 DKK or more than 5000 DKK.
3.2.2
Factor Analysis
The Factor Analysis Technique is used in order to reduce a large number of elements or
variables into a smaller quantity of factors. This is because this technique describes variabil-
ity amongst observed variables which can be potentially correlated, and so the variability
effects can very likely be reflected with a lower amount of "unobserved" variables, the fac-
tors (Frost, 2023). For this research, it can be clearly seen that due to the great amount
of questions asked in the survey sample, doing a factor analysis is important to reduce the
amount of total factors, and also because the respondents might interpret some questions dif-
ferently when they have the same meaning, so the objective is to group similar determinants.
Before running the factor analysis, it is important to verify the reliability of the sample
collected, which basically refers to the consistency of a measurement, or if the results can
be reproduced under the same measures (Tourangeau, 2020). For this, the method chosen
is to calculate the Cronbach’s Alpha coefficient. By calculating this coefficient, reliability is
assessed by comparing the amount of shared variance amongst all the elements. The main
concept behind it is that there should be a great deal of covariance amongst the items com-
pared to the actual variance. In order for the sample to be reliable, the commonly accepted
value of the Cronbach Alpha coefficient has to be greater or equal than 0.8 which will be the
target value in this research as well (Collins, 2007).
Once verified the value of the Cronbach Alpha coefficient, the factor analysis can be
made. Here, the first step is to determine the amount of factors, which was decided to be
Page 11 of 31
==PAGE:15==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3.2
Surveys
calculated with the eigenvalue method with the aid of a software. The eigenvalue is the
measure of how much of the variance is explained by one factor. The amount of factors is
settled equal to the amount of eigenvalues whose values are greater than one, since factors
with eigenvalues greater than one explain the variance better than only one independent
variable.
Having defined the amount of factors, the last step is then with the assistance of a
software run the factor analysis.
By doing so, the elements of the survey will then be
grouped into factors, and based on the variables grouped within each factor, conclusions
might be withdrawn so as to better understand which determinants from the theoretical
framework might be the most influential to bidets adoption in Denmark, together with a
possible reason for it. Finally, what will be carried out is a statistical analysis with different
models so as to try to verify the significance of each factor when explaining the willingness
to pay, which will be further developed in the following section.
3.2.3
Regression Analysis Methods
As stated in the previous section, the last part of this research consists in creating a
mathematical model to try to partially explain the willingness to pay for bidets in Denmark.
Before running any mathematical model, it is of great importance to evaluate possible
multicollinearity. This is because these models are valid only under the assumption that
there is no multicollinearity between the observed variables. A first approach to check for
multicollinearity is to generate a correlation matrix including all of the elements from the
survey. This will provide with a view of potential correlation between variables, and the ones
that could make the assumption not valid. Nonetheless, the most effective way to test for
multicollinearity is with the Variance Inflation Factor (VIF), which measures how much the
variance of an independent variable is explained by the correlation with the other indepen-
dent variables (Team, 2023). The VIF for each variable can be calculated with the following
expression:
V IF =
1
1 −R2
n
Where R2
n is the correlation coefficient of running the nth variableagainst all the other vari-
ables. It is worth noting that the smaller the value of R2
n, meaning that there is no correlation
of the nth variable with the others, the closest the denominator is to one, so consequently,
closer values of VIF to the unity will indicate lack of multicollinearity (Team, 2023). For the
purpose of this research, values of VIF lower than 4 will be accepted as an indicator that
there is no multicollinearity, whereas for values greater than that, corrections will have to
be made so as to make the effects of multicollinearity negligible.
Once verified the assumption of absence of multicollinearity, the next important step
Page 12 of 31
==PAGE:16==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
3.2
Surveys
is to define all of the variables that will be measured. As a starting point, the dependent
variable will be the willingness to pay, that will be a discrete variable with values equal to
the mean of each range. In addition to this, all factors provided by the factor analysis will
be included in the model as independent variables, and the value for each factor will be
determined as the average between all of the elements within each factor, per observation.
Next, the control variables should be defined. These will include the basic demographics,
starting with "Gender" which will be a binary variable, followed by "Age" which will be
a discrete variable with values settled equal to the mean of each range of values. Another
binary control variable used will be "University degree", which represents whether the re-
spondent has or is enrolled at a university degree, since that would eventually show if users
who have a higher education level would be more likely to know the potential benefits of
using the bidet, which is also associated with the theoretical background of the knowledge
of individuals towards the use of products. The last two control variables to be considered
are "Amount of showers" which makes reference to the amount of weekly showers taken by
the individual and "Amount of hand-washes" which refers to the daily frequency with which
the respondent washes hands. These two variables will also be discrete, and their values
will be equal to the average of each range so as to achieve a better fit. What will have to
be considered with these two variables is if both of them will be included together in the
model or just one of them. This is because both could be theoretically seen as a relative
measure of hygiene standards of the respondents, which might eventually lead to high po-
tential correlation between them and consequently to a model that is not valid. So, the first
step is to determine if there is correlation between these two variables, and if there is, test
them in separate models, whereas if there is not, test them both in the same model and in
separate models so as to evaluate which one provides the best results. Finally, a comparison
between a model including just the control variables against a model including the control
variables and the independent variables should be carried out, since that will demonstrate
the relevance of the independent variables considering the fact that the latter model should
provide better results than the first one.
Another aspect of relevance is the sample size, which will be slightly smaller than the
survey size, since the survey question where the respondent is asked to reply about having
a nationality or not will be used in order to just consider the Danish population, as well as
the fact that respondents who regularly use bidets (who are an extreme minority) will also
be set apart, since it would not be relevant analyzing their willingness to pay for a product
they have already adopted. Due to already having a relatively small sample size, and hav-
ing to disconsider some more answers, the significance level of this statistical analysis will
be broadened to 10% instead of the traditional 5% used in most cases, since by increasing
it, the power of the statistical test will be increased due to the fact that with a higher sig-
nificance level, the test becomes less conservative and more sensitive to detecting true effects.
The last decision to be made is what type of model to use. Considering this research,
two potential types would be likely to be chosen: the Ordinary Least Squared model and
the Ordinary Logit model. The most important difference between these two, is that the
linear regression is used to predict a continuous dependent variable, whereas the Ordinary
Page 13 of 31
==PAGE:17==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
Logit model allows to predict the values of categorical variables. Due to the nature of this
research, the data collected in the surveys, having many discrete independent variables and
a discrete dependent variable, an Ordinary Logit Model is the one that suits the best for
predicting the willingness to pay. Nonetheless, an Ordinary Least Squared model will be
also generated, but the objective of this model is purely to verify the robustness of the Logit
model, by comparing the significance of the different variables, as well as comparing models
with different variables.
4
Findings
After having established the theoretical background, the methodology and collecting
relevant information for this research, what is left is to finally show and discuss the results
obtained, achieving then an answer to the research question provided.
4.1
Interviews
Out of the 15 individuals interviewed, 8 were males and 7 were females. The average
age of all respondents was of 23,5 years, whereas if separating between men and women, the
average age of the first group is of 25 while the one of the latter is slightly less of 22, as it
can be seen in the following graph:
Figure 3: Graph showing ages of respondents
What can also be noticed, is that the age range for men is older than the one for women,
Page 14 of 31
==PAGE:18==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.1
Interviews
nonetheless, when considering both genders together, the interquartile range is between the
ages of 22 and 26.
If considering now question 3 of the interview, all of the interviewees were either work-
ing or studying and working, except for 3 female respondents. This might be an initial
indicator that the affordability factor might not be a potential problem in the adoption of
bidets, considering the actual cost of the product and the actual market prices compared to
standard salaries in Denmark. For this reason, it was decided that this question and factor
will probably not affect the outcome of this research and hence doing a further investigation
about this is not relevant.
Regarding question 4 of the interviews, 3 out of the 8 males do not possess a university
degree neither are enrolled in one, and 3 female respondents were in the same situation.
This represents a 40% of the interview sample, so based on this, this question was decided
to be further studied since there is a significant amount of the sample size that do not have
higher education level, and so exploring the potential knowledge and awareness of using
bidets might be of relevance.
By analyzing the amount of times respondents take showers on a weekly basis, no initial
insight might be outlined. Here, it seems that there is no significant difference between gen-
ders amongst the whole sample size except for one outlier value. Nonetheless, this question
was decided to be further analyzed with a greater sample size from the surveys because there
is still a theoretical reasoning behind the fact that the amount of showers might reflect a
hygiene standard of the respondent, and also there might be a relevant relationship with
another characteristic or factor that will then be shown in the mathematical model.
On the other hand, when analyzing the daily amount of times respondents wash their
hands, there seems to exist a more clear trend between genders as seen below:
Page 15 of 31
==PAGE:19==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.1
Interviews
Figure 4: Graph showing daily hand washes of respondents
As seen in the graph above, there seems to be a significant difference between genders
since the interquartile ranges of both genders do not overlap, leading to an initial belief that
females would be more likely to have higher hygiene standards and consequently be more
likely to adopt bidets. Unfortunately, as stated previously, the sample size of the interviews
is not extensive enough so as to obtain conclusive results, thus, this question was decided to
be further studied in the surveys to attempt withdrawing relevant conclusions and evaluate
the potential significance of this question regarding the bidet adoption.
For question 7, all respondents use toilet paper as the hygienic method to clean them-
selves, so due to homogeneity of the sample, this question is not relevant for further research.
Also, questions 8 and 9 showed that at about 80% of the interviewees are aware of the po-
tential benefits of using bidets as well as the fact that they would feel cleaner when using
it, so these questions were included in the survey to explore the effects in a deeper way and
try to better understand the reason of why even though feeling cleaner after using it, there
is still a barrier to adopting the product. Regarding question 10, all respondents are aware
of what a bidet is, what might give an initial approach that the awareness of the product is
not a driver that would lead to adoption, since even knowing what bidets are and of their
existence together with its potential benefits, they did not decide to adopt them yet. On
the other hand, considering question 11, not all of them know about the different types of
bidets, and when asked about them, most respondents did not seem to find the types of
bidets as something important since according to most of them the most important feature
is either using water or not in the hygiene process.
Page 16 of 31
==PAGE:20==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.1
Interviews
Also, only 3 respondents have not used a bidet before, what might give an initial hint
that the previous experience was either negative in the sense that something in the trial did
not provide with a good experience, or maybe what could also happen is that even with
a positive experience, there is a factor that has a considerably higher importance that is
preventing the adoption, like in the case of questions 8, 9 and 10 which should definitely be
studied in more depth. In addition to this, none of the respondents had a bidet installed at
home, what reinforces the idea that even knowing the product and its benefits, something is
stopping individuals from adopting it.
Moving forward into the interview questions, 10 respondents said that they would use
bidets if they had them at home. Related to this, two main reasons for why they do not
have them installed at home were identified during the interviews. The first one is that
most of them consider that buying it and installing it is a challenging problem, and they
are not willing to spend their time nor effort into it. To this, they replied that they would
be willing to pay for somebody to install it as long as the price is "reasonable" according
to their standards. The other main reply for why the interviewees do not have one bidet
at home is simply that either "It is not common in Denmark" and that "It is not there
ready to be used". Out of these replies, what might be stated is that social norms and the
values of the society seem to have a relevant role when it comes to the adoption of bidets
in Denmark, as well as the access and availability of installing the product seems to be a
major problem for individuals. Another aspect that was also referred in many occasions
by the interviewees were the product attributes, such as the space it might occupy. When
considering the attitude of the respondents towards the difficulty of using it, all of them
replied that it was either easy or that there were no major problems associated with usage
that would prevent them from buying the product. Lastly, most of the individuals who are
willing to use a bidet said that they would probably be more likely to use it if people in their
surroundings used it as well, reinforcing the idea that the social norms and culture could be a
factor of great importance in this research. The ones who replied negatively to this last ques-
tion, said that they were already willing to adopt it independently of other people’s behavior.
The other 5 respondents who would not use bidets even if installed at home, reported
that the main reasons for not doing so are mostly that "It is a cultural issue", "It is un-
hygienic" and that since it is not already installed in the place they live at, and they are
renting, they would not be willing to pay to install the product at a place that they will
eventually have to leave in the future and lose the invested capital. Finally, all of them also
reported that they see the bidet as a hard product to use, particularly if compared to toilet
paper.
Overall, as a final conclusion from the interviews, it can be said that even having
individuals who are aware of the existence of bidets, about the potential benefits of using it,
feel cleaner if using it compared to just using toilet paper, and say they are willing to use it,
still have not adopted the product. One potential reason for this seems to be that there is a
strong influence of the social norms and values regarding the adoption of bidets in Denmark,
as well as potential users see the installation process as a difficulty they are not willing to
Page 17 of 31
==PAGE:21==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
face in order to adopt bidets. On the other hand, it also seems that social norms play an
important role for individuals who are not willing to adopt the product, together with some
of its attributes. Nonetheless, as previously mentioned, due to the limited sample size, no
strong conclusion can be withdrawn yet, but some initial insights could be observed which
might eventually be confirmed with the deeper research from the surveys.
4.2
Surveys
After having an initial glance at what might be potential drivers to bidets adoption
in Denmark through the interviews, a more analytical approach is intended now with the
survey sample, which will lead to more conclusive results. As stated in the methodology
section, the first step is to run a factor analysis whose results are to be discussed in the next
section.
4.2.1
Factor Analysis
After collecting the data from the survey sample, the first important test to be carried
out is the Cronbach Alpha, so as to measure the reliability of the collected sample. The
coefficient was calculated with the help of an online software and the result can be seen in
the following table:
Figure 5: Cronbach Alpha Statistic
As it can be seen above, the Cronbach Alpha coefficient has a value which is above the
threshold of 0.8 leading then to positive results regarding the reliability of the sample, which
means that the factor analysis will provide good results as well. An important mention is
that only one of the respondents of the survey actually has a bidet installed at home and
uses it on a regular basis, so the factor analysis will be purely carried out focusing on the
questions associated with respondents who do not use bidets regularly.
The next step is then to calculate the amount of factors. To calculate the amount of
factors, as stated in the methodology section, the Eigenvalue method was used, meaning that
the amount of factors will be equal to the amount of eigenvalues whose values are greater
than one in the following graph:
Page 18 of 31
==PAGE:22==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
Figure 6: Eigenvalues graph
As it can be seen, the amount of eigenvalues greater than one, and consequently the
quantity of factors chosen for the factor analysis is equal to 6.
Then, the factor analysis was carried out, providing the following table of results:
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
I do not use a bidet because I do not have money, I have other priorities
-0,053
0,010
0,228
-0,004
0,073
0,538
I do not use a bidet because it is hard to use
0,139
0,281
0,841
0,118
0,101
0,280
I do not use a bidet because I do not know how to buy/install it
-0,169
0,524
0,175
-0,212
0,278
0,198
I do not use a bidet because I find it unhygienic
0,119
0,008
0,918
-0,241
-0,239
0,168
I do not use a bidet because I do not need it, toilet paper is enough
0,676
-0,132
0,116
0,171
-0,075
-0,097
I do not use a bidet because it is not common in Denmark
0,343
0,318
-0,180
0,556
-0,137
-0,094
I do not use a bidet because I was not taught to use it as a child
0,825
0,315
0,167
0,162
-0,047
0,125
I do not use a bidet because it takes longer than using toilet paper
0,295
-0,020
0,765
0,040
0,165
0,009
I do not use a bidet because I do not want to have one
0,709
-0,027
0,275
0,134
-0,092
-0,422
I do not use a bidet because I do not have space to install it
0,037
0,104
-0,038
-0,617
-0,004
-0,047
I do not use a bidet because I do not know how to use it
0,288
0,248
0,415
0,324
0,000
0,455
I do not use a bidet because I do not know the advantages of using it
0,682
0,019
0,119
-0,168
0,042
0,132
I do not use a bidet because I am not deciding if I will have it at home or not
-0,045
0,070
0,010
-0,056
0,820
0,075
If my family/friends used a bidet, I will be more likely to use it
0,070
0,701
0,044
0,243
-0,042
0,208
If the government made campaigns about the benefits of using a bidet, I will be more likely to use it
0,369
0,763
-0,142
-0,026
-0,097
0,215
If companies would make ads selling bidets, I will be more likely to use it
-0,050
0,819
0,059
0,057
0,087
-0,094
If I was taught as a child to use a bidet, I will be more likely to use it
0,303
0,493
-0,015
0,423
-0,234
0,004
If bidets were in public toilets, I will be more likely to use it
-0,105
0,812
0,257
-0,242
0,124
-0,215
Table 1: Factor analysis
To determine to which factor each element of the survey belongs to, it is necessary
to search for each row the column that has the highest absolute value, which can be seen
in bold in the previous table.
Another important feature to mention, is that the order
in which the factors are shown represents the relative importance of each factor compared
to the others, meaning that factor 1 has more relevance than all the other factors for example.
Hence, it is useful now to identify the elements within each factor, together with the
determinant associated to each element in accordance to what was established with the San-
iFOAM framework. This can be seen below:
Page 19 of 31
==PAGE:23==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
Factor 1:
• I do not use a bidet because I do not need it, toilet paper is enough (Attitudes and
beliefs)
• I do not use a bidet because I was not taught to use it as a child (Social Norms)
• I do not use a bidet because I do not want to have one (Intention)
• I do not use a bidet because I do not know the advantages of using it (Knowledge)
Factor 2:
• I do not use a bidet because I do not know how to buy/install it (Skills)
• If my family/friends used bidets, I would be more likely to use it (Emotional drivers)
• If the government made campaigns about the benefits of using a bidet, I would be
more likely to use it (Values)
• If companies would make ads selling bidets, I will be more likely to use it (Access and
availability)
• If I was taught as a child, I will be more likely to use it (Social Norms)
• If bidets were in public toilets, I will be more likely to use it (Values)
Factor 3:
• I do not use a bidet because it is hard to use (Product attributes)
• I do not use a bidet because I find it unhygienic (Product attributes)
• I do not use a bidet because it takes longer than toilet paper (Product attributes)
Factor 4:
• I do not use a bidet because it is not common in Denmark (Social Norms)
• I do not use a bidet because I do not have space to install it (Product attributes)
Factor 5:
• I do not use a bidet because I am not the one deciding if I have it at home or not
(Roles and decisions)
Factor 6:
• I do not use a bidet because I do not have money, I have other priorities (Competing
priorities)
Page 20 of 31
==PAGE:24==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
• I do not use a bidet because I do not know how to use it (Knowledge)
Now, after having clearly defined how each factor is composed, it is of interest evalu-
ating the reason behind the grouping in each factor. Starting with Factor 1 which is the
most relevant factor since it was first ordered by the software, what can be seen is that all
of the elements have different determinants associated with them. Nonetheless, a possible
explanation can be achieved for the theoretical reason behind this grouping. What could
probably happen, is that not being taught as a child on how to use a bidet never raised
any curiosity nor room to think that there could be other hygiene methods that actually are
more efficient than toilet paper. This shows the strength of the social norms, since when
becoming older, the individual already has built attitudes and beliefs towards the sanitation
methods, leading them not to either research or intend to adopt other techniques, since that
is what they have been doing all of their life and there is no need to change it.
Regarding Factor 2, a great amount of elements and determinants can be observed.
Here, the first thing to notice is that most of the questions associated with this factor were
written in a very similar way in the survey, since 5 out of the 6 elements are questions re-
garding potential scenarios, and not situations that actually happened. So, the respondents
answer is mostly based on his/her perception about this hypothetical situations, and here an-
other potential conclusion can be drawn, which is that even though the determinants are not
the same, they are somehow related (for example social norms with values and emotional
drivers), and together with the fact that Denmark is known to be a society where group
thinking is primordial, the individual perception about hypothetical scenarios is probably
thought from a group perspective, leading to very similar answers.
On the other hand, Factor 3 only includes elements whose determinants are product
attributes, so the grouping behind this factor seems to be logically associated with the
product’s features and characteristics. If considering Factor 4, while the determinants are
not the same, a possible reason for this grouping is that since bidets are not common in
Denmark, the toilets and bathrooms are not originally designed with enough space so as to
include a bidet. Factor 5 only has one question, whose determinant is related to the roles
played by individuals in their homes, which is understandable to be separated from the other
questions. Lastly, Factor 6, which happens to be the least relevant factor as it is the last one
ordered by the software, shows two things that were previously discussed, which are that
Denmark is a country where budget issues are not seen as a major problem, since overall
the great majority of the society is able to satisfy their basic needs, so competing priorities
are not relevant for this research, and that using a bidet does not require expertise, meaning
that it is considerably intuitive how to use it, so both determinants are probably grouped
together due to their lack of relevance for this research.
4.2.2
Ordinary Logit Model
After having settled the different factors through the factor analysis in the last section,
what is left to be done is establishing a mathematical model to predict the willingness to pay
Page 21 of 31
==PAGE:25==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
for bidets, and evaluating the statistical significance of the factors, so as to better conclude
which determinants might lead to adoption of bidets in Denmark.
As mentioned in section 3.2.3 Regression Analysis Methods, the initial step is to verify
that no multicollinearity is present amongst the variables. A first approach to evaluate the
presence of multicollinearity is through the correlation matrix, which can be seen below:
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
Gender
Age
University degree
Showers
Hand-washs
F1
1,0000
F2
0,1500
1,0000
F3
0,3732
0,2109
1,0000
F4
0,3071
0,3458
-0,0985
1,0000
F5
-0,0858
0,1039
0,0243
-0,1066
1,0000
F6
0,1785
0,2342
0,5085
-0,0863
0,0965
1,0000
Gender
-0,0537
-0,1330
0,2149
-0,1761
0,3306
0,2468
1,0000
Age
-0,1543
0,2215
-0,2857
0,2087
-0,0173
-0,4294
-0,1703
1,0000
University degree
0,0718
0,3110
-0,1225
0,4859
0,1525
0,0890
0,0024
0,2973
1,0000
Showers
-0,1580
0,3259
-0,0471
0,5256
0,0575
-0,0676
0,1313
0,1533
0,4658
1,0000
Hand-washs
0,2291
-0,0261
-0,1189
0,1666
-0,1890
-0,0235
-0,3195
0,1667
0,1231
-0,0601
1,0000
Table 2: Pearson’s correlation matrix
Here, all of the correlation values between variables are relatively low, since no value
exceeds 0.55, which is already a positive indication regarding absence of multicollinearity.
Nonetheless, the VIF test was also carried out in order to guarantee that the effects of mul-
ticollinearity are negligible, where the following results were provided:
Variable
VIF
F1
1,7435
F2
1,6488
F3
1,7906
F4
2,2836
F5
1,2367
F6
1,9399
Gender
1,4320
Age
1,6141
University degree
1,7747
Amount of showers
2,1699
Amount of hand-wash
2,0695
Table 3: VIF values
Here, with no values exceeding the threshold of 4, it can be concluded that the effects
of multicollinearity can be discarded for this sample, and so it is possible to proceed with
the regression models.
Page 22 of 31
==PAGE:26==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
As it was previously mentioned, due to the nature of the data collected in the survey
and of the type of variables, the model that would better fit according to this circumstances
is an Ordinary Logit model. The first model attempted includes all of the variables from
table 3. The main parameters of the model are shown in the following table:
Observations
47
Log Likelihood
118,552
Degrees of freedom
11,000
AIC
150,552
Pr > Chi2
0,001
Table 4: Parameters for first model
The most important value to consider are the degrees of freedom together with Pr >
Chi2, since for the whole model to be valid and statistically significant, the probability has
to be lower than the previously established significance level of 10%, which can be seen that
it is fulfilled for this model, making it a valid model. Also, the model has a Log-Likelihood
of 118,552 and AIC of 150,552 which will be used later on in order to make comparisons
between models. Next, it is important to verify the statistical significance of the control
and independent variables when predicting the willingness to pay. This can be seen in the
following table:
Parameter
Probability
Intercept 1
0,791
Intercept 2
0,928
Intercept 3
0,506
Intercept 4
0,102
Intercept 5
0,012
F1
<0,0001
F2
0,120
F3
0,000
F4
0,021
F5
0,703
F6
0,203
University degree
0,484
Gender
0,614
Amount of hand-wash
0,685
Amount of showers
0,063
Age
0,635
Table 5: Significance of parameters from the first model
For the parameters to be significant, the probability has to be lower than 0,1. Hence,
it can be seen that the only statistical significant variables are Factor 1, Factor 3, Factor 4
Page 23 of 31
==PAGE:27==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
and the "Amount of showers". A note to be done is that the probability of the intercepts is
not relevant for this and the next models, since the intercepts are only parameters used to
provide a better fit for the model but have no theoretical meaning.
Next, another model was tested, with the same variables as before except for the
"Amount of showers". The same tables provided for the previous model are given for this
model as follows:
Observations
47
Degrees of freedom
10
Log Likelihood
122,250
AIC
152,250
Pr > Chi2
0,002
Table 6: Parameters for second model
Parameter
Probability
Intercept 1
0,977
Intercept 2
0,886
Intercept 3
0,394
Intercept 4
0,082
Intercept 5
0,012
F1
<0,0001
F2
0,267
F3
0,001
F4
0,117
F5
0,931
F6
0,410
University degree
0,838
Gender
0,879
Amount of hand-wash
0,730
Age
0,852
Table 7: Significance of parameters from the second model
It can be seen that the model is statistically significant since the value of Pr > Chi2
is less than 0,1 and what can also be appreciated is that the significant variables here are
only Factor 1 and Factor 3. This already provides the initial idea that the original model is
a better choice, but there are other ways to confirm it. The first one is the Log-Likelihood
Ratio test, which can be carried out since the second model is a nested model of the first one.
Here the test statistic LR is calculated as twice the difference between the Log-Likelihoods
of each model. Then LR is compared against the Chi-Squared statistic associated with the
significance level chosen of 10% and the degrees of freedom equal to the difference in the
Page 24 of 31
==PAGE:28==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
amount of parameters between models, which is equal to 1. If LR has a greater value than
the Chi-Squared statistic, then the null hypothesis of the test that the simpler model is
equally good at explaining the data is rejected, meaning that the model with the greatest
amount of parameters is to be chosen. In this case, the LR value is of 7,46 and the Chi-
Squared statistic is of 2,71 which means that the model with more parameters is preferred.
This already states that the original model is better at explaining the data, but in addition
to this, if using the criteria of lowest AIC to choose a model (Stephanie, 2023), the first one
has a lower value, which again leads to the choice of the original model against the second one.
The third model to be tested is the model including all of the variables from table 5,
but this time excluding the "Amount of hand-wash". The tables with the relevant statistics
for this model can be seen below:
Observations
47
Degrees of freedom
10
Log Likelihood
118,715
AIC
148,715
Pr > Chi2
0,000
Table 8: Parameters for third model
Probability
Coefficient
Parameter
Intercept 1
0,702
-0,741
α1
Intercept 2
0,838
-0,394
α2
Intercept 3
0,563
1,088
α3
Intercept 4
0,114
3,063
α4
Intercept 5
0,013
5,392
α5
F1
<0,0001
1,183
β1
F2
0,128
-0,406
β2
F3
0,000
-0,936
β3
F4
0,022
-0,935
β4
F5
0,722
0,075
β5
F6
0,215
0,295
β6
University degree
0,444
0,120
β7
Gender
0,667
-0,333
β8
Amount of showers
0,064
-0,641
β9
Age
0,684
0,420
β10
Table 9: Significance of parameters from the third model
From the statistics, it can be seen that the model is significant, and that the statistical
significant variables are Factor 1, Factor 3, Factor 4 and "Amount of showers". Now, it is of
Page 25 of 31
==PAGE:29==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
interest carrying out the Log-Likelihood Ratio test since this model is a nest of the original
one, for which the value of LR is of 0,326 which is smaller than the Chi-Squared statistic is
of 2,71 meaning that the simpler model can be chosen. Also, this model has a lower AIC
value than the original one, which makes it even more clear that this model has to be chosen.
Hence, the third model is the one chosen to predict the willingness to pay for bidets in
Denmark, and has the following predictive equations:
P(WTP = 0) =
1
1 + e−(α1+γ)
(1)
P(WTP ≤200) =
1
1 + e−(α2+γ)
(2)
P(WTP ≤350) =
1
1 + e−(α3+γ)
(3)
P(WTP ≤750) =
1
1 + e−(α4+γ)
(4)
P(WTP ≤3000) =
1
1 + e−(α5+γ)
(5)
P(WTP > 3000) = 1 −
1
1 + e−(α5+γ)
(6)
Where αn is the coefficient associated to the nth intercept as shown in table 9, and γ
is equal to the linear combination of each variable multiplied by its associated coefficient, as
seen below:
γ = β1 × F1 + β2 × F2 + β3 × F3 + β4 × F4 + β5 × F5 + β6 × F6 + β7 × Uni + β8 × Gender + β9 × Shower + β10 × Age
(7)
Page 26 of 31
==PAGE:30==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
And βn refers to the coefficient associated to each variable which can be seen in table 9.
Before discussing the significance of the variables and their relation with the theoretical
background and factor analysis, there is one last interesting comparison to be made, which
is the chosen model against a model containing only the control variables, so as to evaluate
the improvements generated by adding the independent variables. Next, the statistics for
the model containing only the control variables can be seen:
Observations
47
Degrees of freedom
4
Log Likelihood
128,750
AIC
170,281
Pr > Chi2
0,241
Table 10: Parameters for model with only control variables
Here, it can be seen first of all that the model with only the control variables is not sig-
nificant, since Pr > Chi2 is more than 0,1. Also the AIC value is greater than the model that
includes both control variables and independent variables. This shows that by adding the
independent variables, more relevant information is considered, and so the model is improved.
It is worth making one last comment about the variables in the model before analyzing
the significance of the variables. As it can be noticed, most of the control variables are not
significant, and probably, by excluding those variables, a better model could be achieved.
Nonetheless, these variables were decided to be kept due to the fact that the model results
to be more representative of the reality, since more information is being provided as an input.
Now, analyzing the results of the model is of relevance to this research, since it will
provide statistical evidence about the drivers of adoption of bidets in Denmark. The first
feature to notice is that, with the collected data, Factor 1, Factor 3, Factor 4 and "Amount
of showers" are the significant variables of the model. It is worth noting that since the
factors are a unitless scale, no physical interpretation of the coefficients can be made, the
only possible statement that can be done is that the odds to be more willing to pay will
increase by an amount of times equal to ecoefficient. So, regarding Factor 1, what can be
stated is that probably, as mentioned in section 4.2.1 Factor Analysis, social norms is the
main determinant behind the factor, and this factor is the one that has the greatest impact
in explaining the willingness to pay since it has the highest coefficient, where an increase in
one unit of the factor would cause an increase of 225% in the odds of willing to pay extra for
bidets. If now considering Factor 3 and Factor 4, what can be seen is that their coefficients
are almost the same, meaning that their impact level on the willingness to pay is very similar.
One thing to mention though, is that both coefficients are negative, meaning that an increase
Page 27 of 31
==PAGE:31==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
4.2
Surveys
in the value of these factors would lead into a decrease of about 60% in the odds of willing
to pay for a bidet. This is probably due to the fact of how the questions were written in the
survey, since for example in Factor 3, a higher score in the reply for example of the question
"I do not use a bidet because it is hard to use" would mean it is progressively more difficult
to use the bidet, hence the willingness to pay for it would be increasingly lower as difficulty
increases. Finally, the variable "Amount of showers" does have a physical interpretation,
which is that for every extra shower taken per week, there is a 37% increase in the odds
that the individual will be more willing to pay for the bidet, if all other variables are kept
constant. One last comment about this variable is that it seems to be a better representation
of the hygiene habits of the respondents compared to the "Amount of hand-wash" since the
model containing only "Amount of showers" resulted to be a better choice, as well as the
fact that the variable resulted being statistically significant most of the times.
4.2.3
Ordinary Least Squared Regression
The last statistical approach to be carried out in this research is an Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) regression. It has been stated previously that due to the nature of the data
the Ordinary Logit Model would be a better fit, but the objective of carrying out an OLS
regression is to provide a robustness approach, by verifying the validity of the model, the
explanatory level and the significance of the variables. Hence, an OLS regression was carried
out, and the relevant statistics associated to it are displayed as follows:
Adjusted R2
0,3307
F-value
0,0042
Table 11: OLS statistics
What can be seen from these values is first, that the model is valid considering the
Fisher test, with an F-value lower than 10%, and what can also be said is that a 33% of the
variability of the variance is explained by this model. This value might not seem particularly
high, but considering the field of study that is associated with behavioral theory, and the
sample size, it can be said that the results obtained are relevant.
If considering now the significance of the variables, the following results are shown:
Page 28 of 31
==PAGE:32==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
P-value
Coefficient
Intercept
0,502
-722,160
F1
0,000
-485,500
F2
0,820
31,114
F3
0,001
457,693
F4
0,004
676,511
F5
0,391
88,967
F6
0,079
-238,702
Amount of showers
0,045
-258,210
University degree
0,495
358,158
Age
0,306
175,167
Gender
0,509
278,709
Table 12: OLS parameters
As it can be seen, all of the variables that were significant in the Logit model are
significant here as well, together with Factor 6 that also resulted as a significant variable in
this model. These results strengthen the results of the Logit model and of the research as a
whole, since through two different approaches, the significant variables were almost the same,
leading to the conclusion that these are relevant factors when predicting the willingness to
pay for bidets in Denmark. Regarding Factor 6 that resulted to be significant here, one
comment can be made about it, being on the significance level since if a traditional level of
5% was used, then this variable would not be significant and hence making its explanatory
power more doubtful and partially dependent on the significance level.
5
Conclusions and Discussion
Throughout this research, many points have been covered about the adoption of bidets
in Denmark, which will allow to withdraw final conclusions about the research question.
The first issue to discuss is the market for bidets in Denmark. As previously stated, there
is a supply of different types of bidets, but the installation process is not easy to be fixed.
Regarding the amount of people who frequently use bidets in Denmark, based on the amount
of respondents who replied positively to that question either in the interviews or surveys, it
can be definitely said that it is a small minority, and they could be considered as the either
innovators together with a small portion of the early adopters according to the Technology
Adoption Life Cycle. Hence, as also mentioned in this model, once the early adopter portion
of the market is fully developed, the most challenging part of the whole life cycle is to be
faced, the gap to reach the early majority. This is definitely something hard to overcome,
since it involves changing the Mental Model of how the actual sanitation process with only
toilet paper works, and that is known to be one of the most long-lasting and difficult parts of
change management in society. Nonetheless, since Denmark is known to be a country whose
society thoughts are based more on the collective level than individual level, achieving those
changes can be easier than in other places, particularly if there is influence from the gov-
Page 29 of 31
==PAGE:33==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
ernment with for example campaigns increasing awareness of the product and the benefits
provided by its use, as well as installing them in strategic places such as schools, hospitals
or public toilets.
The next feature that is important to discuss now are the determinants that would lead
to the adoption of bidets in Denmark, and hence provide an answer to the research question.
As it was explained in previous sections, the ordering of the outcome of the factors from the
factor analysis provides information about which factors are the most influential.
Starting with Factor 1, even though there are 4 different determinants, it can be said
that the most important one is probably the one related with the social norms, since it is
very likely that due to the social norms, many of the attitudes and beliefs were ingrown in
the individuals as a child, leading then to either lack of intention of use because they are
accepting the current sanitation method as a valid one that does not need to be replaced so
they do not have intention of adopting a new product neither in gaining knowledge about it.
Regarding Factor 2, even if it was highly ordered in the factor analysis, in no mathemat-
ical model it was a significant variable. This is probably due to the way the majority of the
questions associated with that factor were formulated, since they mostly refer to hypothetical
scenarios that do not represent the actual behavior of the individuals. Also, considering that
those questions are about future possibilities, there is no actual guarantee that the respon-
dents would execute what they think they would do. Nonetheless, the mathematical models
are trying to predict the willingness to pay for bidets, which is not exactly the same as the
willingness to adopt the product, so it is reasonable to say that the questions and hence the
determinants associated to them are relevant when considering drivers of bidets adoption but
maybe not to estimate their willingness to pay. Also, if analyzing the determinants within
this factor, most of them are related with social norms, values of the society and emotional
drivers, which as stated before, have a great influence in the individual’s behavior due to
society’s behavior in Denmark.
Considering now Factor 3, it consists only in questions whose determinants are the
product’s attributes, and it has always been significant in the regression analysis. So, it can
be said that according to the data collected in this research, the attributes of the bidets
are a relevant driver to its adoption as well. Regarding Factor 4, it has also been signifi-
cant in most of the models, and if inspecting again its determinants, they are social norms
and product attributes, confirming again their importance. Also, Factor 5 and Factor 6 did
not show particular relevance neither in the factor analysis ordering nor in the regression
analysis, hence they can be considered as irrelevant when explaining the drivers of bidet
adoption in Denmark. Lastly, out of all the control variables, the only one that resulted
to be significant was the "Amount of showers", which can be considered as a measure of
personal hygiene and resulted being more relevant than the daily hand-wash frequency for
this research, which is reasonable since showers are most likely to be associated with per-
sonal hygiene than hand washes, and could be considered as an eventual substitute of bidets.
Page 30 of 31
==PAGE:34==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
So, what can be concluded from this research regarding the drivers of bidets adoption
in Denmark is that according to the SaniFOAM framework, the most relevant determinants
are the social norms together with the values of the community, followed by the product
attributes. This probably confirms the idea that first, the product must be accepted in the
society, and then, individuals will start considering the attributes of the product for each
particular circumstance. Also, as mentioned before, achieving the adoption of this product
might require a considerable amount of time, but this could probably be shortened with the
government’s assistance.
Lastly, it is interesting to discuss the limitations of this research, together with oppor-
tunities to be further investigated. The first important aspect to mention, is the limited
sample size both for the interviews and surveys. Though they might provide an approxima-
tion of what the population’s behavior is, there are many issues that cannot be granted to
be the same, such as the fact that all of the data was gathered in Copenhagen, and within
a specific age group. This might have some influence in the results, since Copenhagen is the
capital of the country, and it has more international influence than most cities in Denmark,
so the sample might not be exactly representative of the whole Danish society. Also, it
would be relevant studying how elderly citizens would reply to the given questions, since it
is knownt that normally older age groups are more resistant to changes. In addition, what
would be of great interest is having a greater sample of bidet users, since throughout all of
this research, only one respondent belonged to that group, what did not lead to any possible
valid conclusions, but it would be important understanding why actual users adopted bidets,
so as to eventually design policies and strategies that would make potential adopters more
likely to adopt the product. Finally, what is also proposed for next studies, is making a
similar research to this, with targets populations being foreigners living in Denmark, as well
as in countries whose culture is similar to the Danish one, like Sweden or Norway, and try to
understand the cultural differences (if any) and drivers that would make these other groups
more or less likely to adopt bidets compared to the Danish society.
Page 31 of 31
==PAGE:35==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Types of bidets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory of Adoption Life Cycle Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Graph showing ages of respondents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Graph showing daily hand washes of respondents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Cronbach Alpha Statistic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Eigenvalues graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Page I of III
==PAGE:36==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
References
References
• Collins, L.M. (2007) ’Research design and methods’, Encyclopedia of Gerontology, pp.
433—442. doi:10.1016/b0-12-370870-2/00162-1.
• Curtis, V.A., Danquah, L.O. and Aunger, R.V. (2009) ’Planned, motivated and habit-
ual hygiene behaviour: An eleven country review’, Health Education Research, 24(4),
pp. 655—673. doi:10.1093/her/cyp002.
• Devine, J. (2009) ’Introducing SaniFOAM: A Framework to Analyze Sanitation Be-
haviors to Design Effective Sanitation Programs’, World Bank, Water and Sanitation
Program (WSP), USA.
• Dreibelbis, R. et al. (2013) ’The integrated behavioural model for water, sanitation,
and hygiene: A systematic review of behavioural models and a framework for designing
and evaluating behaviour change interventions in infrastructure-restricted settings’,
BMC Public Health, 13(1). doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-1015.
• Ferreira, J. dos et al. (2022) ’Factors interfering with the adoption of good hygiene
practices in public school food services in Bahia, Brazil’, Frontiers in Public Health,
10. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2022.975140.
• Fleetwood, D. (2023) Likert scale: Definition, examples & how to use it, QuestionPro.
Available at: https://www.questionpro.com/blog/what-is-likert-scale/ (Accessed: 23
June 2023).
• Frost, J. (2023) Factor analysis guide with an example, Statistics By Jim. Available
at: https://statisticsbyjim.com/basics/factor-analysis/ (Accessed: 23 June 2023).
• Graf, J. et al. (2008) ’Water disinfection and hygiene behaviour in an urban slum in
Kenya: Impact on childhood diarrhoea and influence of beliefs’, International Journal
of Environmental Health Research, 18(5), pp. 335—355.
doi:10.1080/09603120801966050.
• Inami, B., Benthin, P. and Scheer, S. (2018) Who invented the bidet?, Brondell Inc.
Available at: https://www.brondell.com/healthy-living-blog/who-invented-the-bidet/
(Accessed: 23 June 2023).
• Jacob, I., Khanna, M. and Yadav, N. (2014) ’Beyond poverty: A study of diffusion &
adoption of feminine hygiene products among low Income Group Women in Mumbai’,
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 148, pp. 291—298.
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.045.
• Mahmood, M.S. (2022) Logistic regression models comparison, Medium. Available at:
https://towardsdatascience.com/logistic-regression-models-comparison-2a88a9da4eb6
(Accessed: 23 June 2023).
Page II of III
==PAGE:37==
Drivers of bidet adoption in Denmark
References
• Moore, G.A. (2014) Crossing the chasm: Marketing and selling high-tech products to
mainstream customers. New York, NY: HarperBusiness Essentials.
• Mosler, H.-J. (2012) ’A systematic approach to behavior change interventions for the
water and sanitation sector in developing countries: A conceptual model, a review,
and a guideline’, International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 22(5), pp.
431—449. doi:10.1080/09603123.2011.650156.
• Nakata, C. and Weidner, K. (2011) ’Enhancing new product adoption at the base of
the Pyramid: A contextualized model’, Journal of Product Innovation Management,
29(1), pp. 21—32. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5885.2011.00876.x.
• Roy, A. (2023) Denmark: #7 in the 2022 world index of healthcare innovation, Medium.
Available at:
https://freopp.org/denmark-7-in-the-2022-world-index-of-healthcare-innovation-3715f
c493a1d (Accessed: 23 June 2023).
• Stephanie (2023) Akaike’s information criterion: Definition, formulas, Statistics How
To. Available at: https://www.statisticshowto.com/akaikes-information-criterion/ (Ac-
cessed: 23 June 2023).
• Tamene, A. and Afework, A. (2021) ’Exploring barriers to the adoption and utilization
of improved latrine facilities in rural Ethiopia: An integrated behavioral model for
water, sanitation and hygiene (IBM-wash) approach’, PLOS ONE, 16(1).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0245289.
• Team, T.I. (2023) Variance inflation factor (VIF), Investopedia. Available at:
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/v/variance-inflation-factor.asp
(Accessed: 23 June 2023).
• Tourangeau, R. (2020) Survey reliability: Models, methods, and findings, OUP Aca-
demic.
Available at: https://academic.oup.com/jssam/article-abstract/9/5/961/5934005 (Ac-
cessed: 23 June 2023).
Page III of III
