==PAGE:1==
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chro­
mophore to a solvent
Molecular dynamics modelling and simulation of
the X­ray scattering signal of solvent heating
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
Molecular dynamics modelling and simulation of the X­ray scattering signal of solvent
heating
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Magnus Andreas Hilduberg Christiansen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Physics, Fysikvej, building 311, 2800 Kgs.
Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.fysik.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Magnus Andreas Hilduberg Christiansen ­ s220536
Signature
Date
ii
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis employs molecular mechanics molecular dynamics (MM­MD) simulations to
explore the non­equilibrium dynamics of excess energy transfer from a vibrationally ex­
cited hemithioindigo (HTI) chromophore to the polar solvent acetonitrile solution and its
corresponding time­resolved X­ray difference scattering signal. A crucial component for
the future analysis and interpretation of a first­of­its­kind experiment carried out at the
Swiss X­ray free electron laser The primary objectives are to estimate the timescales in­
volved in solute­to­solvent heat transfer and to pave the way to the development of a
model for the analysis of experimental time­resolved X­ray difference scattering data.
As such ultrafast experiments on organic chromophores becomes possible, thanks to
advancements at large scale X­ray facilities, it becomes crucial to assess the changes
in the X­ray scattering due to solvent heating on short time scales (hundreds of fs to ps)
using computational modelling.
The simulations utilize the generalized AMBER force field (GAFF) to describe nonbonded
and bonded atomic interactions. Preliminary MD test simulations on neat liquid acetonitrile
in the canonical (NVT) ensemble were used to find the optimal parameters for subsequent
non­equilibrium MD simulations and calculations of the X­ray difference scattering signals.
Conventional damping methods, such as Lorch and Zederkof damping in conjunction with
van der Vegt correction of the RDFs at large r, were found ineffective at removing low Q
difference scattering artifacts without affecting the high Q region. As a solution, a novel
”hybrid” damping scheme was devised, successfully removing artifacts at low Q without
introducing significant errors at high Q.
During the NVT ensemble simulations for the solute­solvent system, it was observed that
the chair conformations of the julolidine ring of the HTI solute exhibits lifetimes of sev­
eral nanoseconds. These conformations lead to distinct solute­solvent difference scat­
tering signals, emphasizing the importance of selecting initial conformations for the non­
equilibrium simulations based on the equilibrium distribution of julolidine chair conforma­
tions, to ensure the solute­solvent difference scattering signals.
With the novel damping method and parameters chosen from the preliminary tests, it was
possible to acquire a statistically robust non­equilibrium time­resolved difference scat­
tering signal. The non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering signal shows an
increase that is proportional to the increase in bulk solvent temperature at its maximum
and minimum. However, discrepancies from linearity are seen in several rangs of Q, most
notably below Å̃−1. The solute­solvent difference scattering signal show similar behaviour
as the low Q solvent­solvent signal. These results can provide crucial assistance to the
analysis of ultrafast X­ray scattering experiments of organic chromophores in solution. In
particular, they show that modelling the component in the X­ray scattering data due to
solvent heating at short time scales with the signal corresponding to bulk solvent heating,
as commonly done, can lead to inaccuracies in the analysis of the experimental data.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Martin Meedom Nielsen, Professor, DTU Department of Physics
Main supervisor
Asmus Ougaard Dohn, Postdoc, DTU Department of Physics
Co supervisor
Gianluca Levi, Postdoc, HI Faculty of Physical Sciences
Co supervisor
Kristoffer Haldrup, Senior Researcher, DTU Department of Physics
Co supervisor
Klaus Braagaard Møller, Professor, DTU Department of Chemistry
Co supervisor
iv
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Chromophore of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical & Computational Methods
4
2.1
Interatomic Interactions and Force Fields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Molecular Dynamics Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Modelling X­ray Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Computational Details
12
4
Preliminary Tests
14
4.1
Box­size Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Damping Parameters Tests & Novel Damping Method . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Introducing & Testing a Novel Damping Scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
Timestep Tests & Energy Conservation in NVE Ensemble . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Dye Conformation Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Results of Simulations
26
5.1
Equilibrium Dynamics & Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2
Non­equilibrium Dynamics & Scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6
Conclusion & Outlook
37
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
43
A.1 Test of the Generalized AMBER Force Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
When a chromophore is exposed to photons of specific energies they go through pho­
toexcitation, absorbing the light, instantaneously injecting large amounts of excess en­
ergy into the molecule. Through this process chromophores can reach vibrational tem­
peratures as high as a few thousand Kelvin upon excitation with a single photon [1, 2].
If the chromophore is in the presence of a solution, a significant portion of this excess
energy is transferred to the solvent through vibrational energy transfer [3]. The Energy
transfer process competes with other processes such as chemical transformations (like
bond breaking) and radiative phenomena like fluorescence, occurring on extremely short
timescales ranging from femtoseconds to nanoseconds [3]. Understanding the intrica­
cies of chromophore­solvent heat transfer is essential for comprehending the reactivity of
molecules in solution, as the rates of various reactions can be highly dependent on the in­
ternal energy of the reactants and the energy flow between solute and solvent molecules
[3, 4]. Notably, the excess energy transfer as heat to a solvent after photoexcitation can
affect photochemical transformations and the photofunctionality of a molecule, influenced
by transient atomic rearrangements in the solute and its solvation shell [5].
Detection of solvent heating following photoexcitation of a solute becomes feasible through
time­resolved X­ray scattering within pump­probe experiments at large­scale synchrotron
and X­ray free electron laser facilities (XFELs) [6, 7]. However, it is important to note that
solvent scattering alone does not constitute the entire photoinduced scattering signal.
This signal encompasses various components, including changes in the solute’s struc­
ture and solute­solvent rearrangements [8]. To discern the solute­specific changes in the
scattering signal accurately, it becomes imperative to identify and analyze the contribu­
tion of the solvent signal. This consideration holds particular significance in ultrafast X­ray
scattering experiments involving organic chromophores in solution, where the scattering
cross­section is relatively small [9]. In ultrafast X­ray scattering experiments, it is com­
mon that the contribution of the solvent is assumed to be static in shape, only changing
amplitude as a response to changes in temperature of the bulk solvent [10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17]. Under this assumption the solvent signal at short time delays are estimated
from the long time delay signals, when the solute has relaxed.
Although prior ultrafast X­ray scattering experiments have predominantly focused on mole­
cules containing heavy atoms, the continuous improvement in signal­to­noise resolution at
large­scale X­ray sources is enabling the exploration of experiments on organic molecules
as well [18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. Nevertheless, a clear understanding of the temporal evolution
of the X­ray scattering signal of a solvent as heat is transferred from the solute still eludes
us. To address this critical issue, this thesis employs computational modeling.
More specifically, this thesis studies a hemithioindigo chromophore in a liquid acetonitrile.
This system has been the object of time­resolved X­ray scattering experiments performed
by the group where the present project has been conducted. The objective of this thesis is
to estimate the changes in the X­ray scattering signal resulting from the transfer of excess
energy from solute to solvent. To achieve this, molecular mechanics molecular dynamics
(MM­MD) simulations are employed to model the solute­solvent system. Equilibrium MD
simulations of the pure solvent at different temperatures are conducted to determine the
relation between solvent scattering signal and temperature of the bulk solvent. Addition­
ally, nonequilibrium MD simulations of the vibrationally excited solute are be performed to
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
1
==PAGE:10==
estimate the timescale of solvent heating following photoexcitation, investigate the prop­
agation of heat through the solvent, and observe how the X­ray scattering signal changes
over time due to solvent heating. From these investigations it is determined whether the
assumption that the long­time delay solvent signal provides an accurate estimate for the
solvent signal at short time delays.
1.1
Chromophore of Interest
Molecular photoswitches are molecules that undergo reversible structural changes upon
absorption of electromagnetic radiation. Their changes in molecular structure have long
been known to play an important role in various processes such as drug delivery and catal­
ysis of chemical reactions [23, 24, 25]. One class of photoswitches which has garnered
great interest in recent times are hemithioindigos (HTI), hybrid chromophores belonging
to the emerging class of indigo photoswitches [26, 27]. The HTI photoswitches show
a series of advantageous properties, such as reversible photochromism to visible light,
thermal stability and simple synthesis. This has led to its wide use in applications such as
photoswitching of lipids [28], gramicidin channels [29], enzyme inhibition [30], and pho­
tomodulation of peptide folding [31]. It has known for some time that photoisomerization
of HTI is highly dependent on the polarity of the solvent with the yields being 50% for
cyclohexane and <2% acetonitrile respectively [32]. To explain the low yield of photoiso­
merization in polar solvents, it has been suggested that the HTI undergoes intramolecular
electron transfer and internal molecular rotation (twisted intramolecular charge transfer) in
polar solvents [33]. The involvement of this charge­transfer state has not yet been directly
proven experimentally, but has been suggested based on the observations of shortened
excited­state lifetimes, reduced fluorescence emission, and strong red shift of the emis­
sion spectrum in polar solvents [32].
Figure 1.1: The HTI­J molecule.
Femtosecond X­ray scattering can directly probe the photoinduced structural changes of
the solute coupled to the intramolecular charge transfer. It can also be used to detect
changes in the arrangement of solvent molecules around the solute, which are a result of
the redistribution of the electron density of the solute, thereby providing evidence of the
intramolecular charge transfer. For these types of results to be interpreted one needs to
2
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:11==
be able to disentangle the different contributions in the total X­ray scattering signal. To
achieve this one needs a highly accurate model of the structural changes in the solvent
due to the transfer of excess energy as heat from the solute.
The system being studied in this thesis is a hemithioindigo, where part of the molecule is
a julolidine group, hereafter hemithioindigo­julolidine (HTI­J), in the polar solvent acetoni­
trile. This molecule was experimentally studied using time resolved X­ray scattering at
X­ray free­electron lasers (XFELs) in a pump­probe setup by the group where the project
has been carried out. The during the experiment the HTI­J was excited with an energy
2.64 eV. The structure of the HTI­J is shown in figure 1.1. The HTI­J molecules consists
of a thioindigo fragment connected by a double and single carbon­carbon bonds to the
julolidine fragment, which has two methyl groups.
1.2
Outline of Thesis
Chapter 2 introduces the background of the theory of molecular mechanics, the molec­
ular dynamics (MD) simulation method, and the modeling of X­ray scattering from the
trajectories of MD simulations.
Chapter 3 describes in detail the system that was simulated and the procedures used to
generate the results of this thesis.
Chapter 4 presents the results of a series of preliminary tests leading to the non­equilibrium
MD simulations. Among these results are tests of the finite size corrections, a tests of var­
ious damping functions, test of energy fluctuations in the microcanonical ensemble, and
a test of the difference scattering between long lived solute conformations. The chapter
also introduces a novel damping scheme
Chapter 5 presents the results of both the equilibrium and non­equilibrium simulations.
The equilibrium section investigates the assumption of linear scaling of the difference
scattering from neat liquid acetonitrile. The non­equilibrium section analyses the time
evolution of the X­ray scattering signal of solvent heating, comparing the shpae and mag­
nitude of the signal at short and long time delays
Chapter 6 presents the conclusions and outlook of the work of this thesis.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical & Computational Methods
This chapter presents the theoretical background that the work of this thesis is based
on. Section 2.1 introduces the theoretical models that are used in the molecular mechan­
ics to describe the different types of interactions between atoms and molecules, and the
information presented is largely based on the notes Introduction to Molecular Dynamics
Simulation written by Michael P. Allen [34]. Section 2.2 presents the Molecular Mechanics
Molecular Dynamics (MM­MD) method. This section describes how the atomic forces pro­
vided by molecular mechanics force fields are used to simulate the dynamics of atomic
and molecular systems under various conditions and ensembles. The information pre­
sented in this section is based on the book Computer Simulation of Liquids by Allen and
Tildesley [35]. Section 2.3 gives an introduction to how X­ray scattering can be modelled
from the atomic positions using radial distribution functions (RDFs) and various correction
methods that are employed in the modelling. This information presented in this section is
largely based on the book Elements of Mordern X­ray Physics written by Als­Nielsen and
McMorrow [36].
2.1
Interatomic Interactions and Force Fields
To produce physically relevant and predictive molecular simulations, one need to have
an accurate description of the relevant atomic interactions and corresponding forces. In
molecular mechanics this is done by the use of potential functions, which are simple func­
tions used to approximate the interactions between the atoms. The force acting upon an
atoms can be determined through the negative derivative
F = −∂
∂rU
(2.1)
of the potential energy U with respect to the position vector of the atom r. In molecular me­
chanics the interactions and potentials between atoms can generally be decomposed into
two categories, the bonded and non­bonded interactions. Non­bonded interactions are
the interactions between all of the atoms such as the Lennard­Jones and Coulomb poten­
tial. The bonded interactions are the interactions happening between atoms in molecules,
such as bond stretching, angle bending, and rotation of torsional angles. [34]
2.1.1
Non­bonded Interactions
Between any pair of atoms there are the van der Waals and the electrostatic interactions.
The van der Waals forces are commonly modelled by the Lennard­Jones potential
ULJ(r) = 4ε
σ
r
12
−
σ
r
6
,
(2.2)
where σ is the diameter of the potential well, ε is the depth of the potential well, and r is
the distance between the atom­pairs. The electrostatic interactions are modelled by the
Coulomb potential
UCoulomb(r) =
1
4πϵ0
q1q1
r ,
(2.3)
where q1 and q2 are the charges of the interacting atoms, and ϵ0 is the vacuum permittivity.
This gives the total non­bonded interaction
Unon−bonded(rij) =
"
4ε
 σij
rij
12
−
σij
rij
6!
+
1
4πϵ0
qiqj
rij
#
(2.4)
between the two atoms i and j. [34]
4
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:13==
2.1.2
Bonded Interactions
Bonded interactions are the interactions that arise between atoms being linked together.
They include interactions through direct bonds, such as bond stretching or two neighbor­
ing bonds such as angle bending. The potentials of these two types of interactions are
usually approximated through harmonic functions. The potential energy for bond stretch­
ing is approximated as
Ubonds = 1
2kr
ij(rij −req)2,
(2.5)
where rij is the distance between atom i and j i.e. the length of the bond, req is their
equilibrium distance, and kr
ij is the force constant of the bond. The potential energy for
angle bending is approximated as
Uangles = 1
2kθ
ijk(θijk −θeq)2,
(2.6)
where kθ
ijk is the force constant of the angle, θijk is the bend angle between neighboring
bonds of atoms i, j, and k
cos θijk = ˆrij · ˆrjk = rij · rjk
|rij| |rjk|,
(2.7)
with and θeq is their structural equilibrium angle. There are also bonded interactions be­
tween atoms through four bonds by the rotations around dihedral angles. These rotations
play an important role in the conformations of molecules and have much lower frequen­
cies than compared to the interactions through bond stretching and angle bending. For
these reasons it is important to test for the distributions of conformations in the solute.
The potentials of dihedral angles is approximated by the sum of cosine functions
Edihedrals =
X
n
kϕ
ijkl [1 + cos(nϕijkl −γ)]
(2.8)
where kϕ
ijkl is the force constant of the dihedral angle ϕijkl, which is the angle between
three neighboring bonds defined by the dot product (or scalar product) between the normal
to the planes of the bond vectors
cos ϕijkl = −ˆnijk · ˆnjkl = −(ˆrij × ˆrjk) · (ˆrjk × ˆrkl),
(2.9)
and γ is a phase angle[34].
2.1.3
Force fields and the general AMBER force field
In computational simulations of atomic systems a force field is a set of set of potential
functions and corresponding parameters used to describe the potential energy of the in­
teractions between atoms and molecules. The potential energy functions and their pa­
rameters used for the force field are optimized to describe certain properties of systems
of interest (like large protein complexes or liquid systems) by using results from experi­
ments, and from more advanced quantum mechanical calculations. The force field used
for the work of this thesis is the general AMBER force field (GAFF), a force field with pa­
rameters optimized for the study of small organics and drug design [37, 35]. GAFF is part
of what is called a class I force field and its energy functions include all of the non­bonded
interactions mentioned in section 2.1.1 and uses a non­rigid model for molecules taking
into account all the bonded interactions mentioned in section 2.1.2, with its total potential
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
5
==PAGE:14==
energy function being
Utotal =
X
bonds
kr(r −req)2 +
X
angles
kθ(θ −θeq)2
+
X
dihedrals
Vn
2 [1 + cos(nϕ −γ)] +
X
i<j
"
4ε
 σij
rij
12
−
σij
rij
6!
+
1
4πϵ0
qiqj
rij
#
(2.10)
each term representing the bond stretching, angle bends, torsion, van der Waals, and
electrostatic interactions between two atoms, respectively. As mentioned GAFF, is de­
signed for the study of small organic molecules, and its parameters have been optimized
for the interactions between organic molecules made of C, N, O, H, S atoms and more,
all the atom types relevant for the work of this thesis.
2.2
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were the primary tool for the work of this thesis.
MD simulations use a classical description of the dynamics atomic system to predict its
dynamical properties. MD simulations are a great tool to study the properties of materials
allowing one to see how molecules move at atomistic level.
MD simulations are in essence, a numerical, step­by­step, implementation of the equation
of motion using Newton’s second law to update the atomic positions in time according to
the force derived from the potential energy, U, of the force field as in equation 2.1
F i = mi¨ri = −∂U
∂ri
(2.11)
where F i is the force acting upon atom i at position ri with mass mi. So in a system of N
atoms, with coordinates rN = (r1, r2, ...rN) and momenta pN = (p1, p2, ...pN), then the
evolution of the system over time can be determined by integrating the classical equations
of motion
˙ri = pi/mi
and
˙pi = Fi
(2.12)
However, this is tedious to evaluate analytically ’by hand’ for large systems. Therefore,
since the advent of high speed computing in the 60’s the integration has been done by
numerical computational techniques.
2.2.1
Equations of motion and Verlet Algorithm
An algorithmic description of equation 2.12 given by Verlet in 1967 (aptly named the Verlet
algorithm)[38] is commonly used for numerical integration of the classical equations of
motion as described above. The Verlet algorithm is the combination of two third order
Taylor expansions of the positions ri(t) going a time step δt forward and backward
ri(t + δt) = ri(t) + δtvi(t) + 1
2δt2ai(t) + 1
6δt3bi(t) + O(δt4)
ri(t −δt) = ri(t) −δtvi(t) + 1
2δt2ai(t) −1
6δt3bi(t) + O(δt4)
(2.13)
The two equations can be combined to shows that the positions of the atoms change by
ri(t + δt) = 2ri(t) −ri(t −δt) + δt2a(t) + O(δt4)
(2.14)
and the velocities change by
vi(t) = ri(t + δt) −ri(t −δt)
2δt
+ O(δt2)
(2.15)
6
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:15==
In a 1982 paper Swope et al. [39] introduced the velocity Verlet algorithm
r(t + δt) = r(t) + δtv(t) + 1
2δt2a(t)
v(v + δt) = v(t) + 1
2δt [a(t) + a(t + δt)]
(2.16)
which is now more commonly written as the three equations
pi(t + 1
2δt) = pi(t) + 1
2δtFi(t)
ri(t + δt) = ri(t) + δtpi(t + 1
2δt)/mi
pi(t + δt) = pi(t + 1
2δt) + 1
2δtFi(t + δt)
(2.17)
eliminating the need to store the accelerations between time steps. The first equation of
the algorithm can be thought of as advancing the momenta, pi(t), to some intermediate
time t + 1
2δt, using the values of the forces on the atoms at time t. These mid timestep
momenta pi(t+ 1
2δt) are then used to propagate the positions of the atoms by a time step
of δt from ri(t) to ri(t+δt) in the second equation of the algorithm. The third equation of the
algorithm then evaluates the forces at the new atom positions and adjusts the momenta
accordingly. The step­by­step nature of the velocity Verlet algorithm makes it easy to
implement it as a code, and the fact that it only needs to store the positions and momenta
of the system makes it efficient at extracting information about the kinetic and the potential
energies. Furthermore, the velocity Verlet algorithm has been shown to conserve the
energy such that the root mean square of the energy fluctuations is closely proportional
to δt2 [35]. This shows that with a short enough timestep δt, the velocity Verlet algrorithm
closely mimics a system in the microcanonical (NVE) ensemble with constant number of
particles (N), volume (V), and close to constant total energy (E), So before running the
non­equilibrium simulations in the NVE ensemble in the work of the present project this
dependence is investigated to find the optimal timestep. [35, 40]
However, if one is interested in simulating a system in the canonical (NVT) ensemble,
where the system is held at a constant number of particles (N), volume (V), and tempera­
ture (T) one can make the use of what is called a thermostat. There exist several schemes
for the implementation of thermostats, and the one used during the work of this thesis is
the Langevin thermostat. The Langevin thermostat mimics the viscous aspect and ran­
dom collisions a solvent and maintains the temperature of the system by supplementing
the forces of equation 2.12 with a component describing Brownian dynamics,
˙pi = Fi −γipi + fi,
(2.18)
where γi is a friction coefficient damping the momenta, and fi is a random force simulating
the collision in a thermal bath with temperature T. The random components are randomly
selected from a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of
σ2
i = 2miγikBT/δt
(2.19)
In the work of this thesis the NVT ensemble is used during the equilibration runs, to heat
the system towards a specific temperature, and during sampling for the system in a state
of equilibrium [40, 41].
During the work of this thesis the equilibrium volume of the system was found by running
part of the equilibration in the isothermal­isobaric (NPT) ensemble, where the number of
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
7
==PAGE:16==
particles (N), pressure (P), and temperature (T) is kept constant, using what is called a
barostat in combination with a thermostat. The specific barostat that was used was the
Monte Carlo barostat, which works by doing random rescalings of the system volume
weighted by the barostat parameters [40].
2.2.2
Periodic boundary conditions and cutoffs
As already explained, the propagation of the system is achieved through numerical inte­
gration of the equations of motion using the forces arising from interactions between the
atoms. As the number of atoms increases, the number of such interactions that need to be
considered when using pairwise potentials grows approximately by N(N −1)/2 ≈N2/2,
increasing the computational time of each time step. Consequently, this limits the size of
the simulated systems. Therefore, it is often advantageous to simulate smaller systems
with lower computational costs. However, working with smaller systems introduces chal­
lenges related to surface effects. The number of atoms or molecules at the surface of
a box­shaped system scales roughly as N −(N1/3 −2)3, meaning that for a system of
N = 1000 molecules, 488 molecules will exist at the surface of the system. These surface
effects become more significant in smaller systems [34, 35, 40].
To mitigate the limitations imposed by finite system sizes, periodic boundary conditions
are introduced. These conditions impose a repeating pattern of the system, effectively
limiting the influence of its finite size. In the context of this thesis, this is particularly ben­
eficial since we are interested in using the smallest possible system that still provides an
accurate representation. We are specifically studying the heating of the solvent resulting
from energy transfer from an excited solute. for a given excess energy deposited in the
solute, as the size of the simulation box is increased more solvent molecules are included,
the simulated increase in temperature will be smaller. Therefore the effect of the box size
has been tested extensively with the results of these tests shown in section 4.1.
The use of periodic boundary conditions then leads to the ’minimum image convention’,
where each atom only interacts with the nearest atoms or images of those atoms in the
neighbouring arrays. This imposes a cutoff in the short range non­bonded between the
atoms, while the long­range electrostatic interactions that extend beyond the length of the
periodic box are dealt with by Ewald summation [40]. The minimum image convention
limits the cutoff range of the interactions to half length of the box, and for larger systems
the cutoff might be shorter.
2.3
Modelling X­ray Scattering
X­ray photons are scattered on an electron, and the elastic coherent scattering, known as
Thomson scattering, is the momentum transfer between the electromagnetic wave and
the electron. The scattering of a photon on a isolated atom can then be described by the
Fourier transform of electron density, ρe, of the atom, which defines the scattering length
or atomic form factor
fatom = −r0
Z
ρe(re)eiQ·rdr,
(2.20)
where r0 is the Thomson scattering length, Q is the scattering vector defined as the mo­
mentum transfer k−k′ of the incoming and outgoing wave vector [36]. In X­ray scattering
calculations, the atomic form factors are taken from parameters tabulated by D. T. Crom­
mer and J. B. Mann[42]. In the ’independent atom model’ the electron distribution around
the atom is assumed to be isotropic. This allows one to treat each atom i, in a molecule
consisting of N atoms, as an independent scatterer. The form factor of a single molecule
can then be assumed to simply be the sum of the atomic form factors, and the coherent
8
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:17==
scattering of the molecule to be the absolute square of its form factor
S(Q) =

N
X
i
fi(Q)eiQ·ri

2
,
(2.21)
where ri is the position of atom i [36]. For an isotropic liquid the scattering can then be
assumed to be the orientational average of the scattering in equation 2.21,
S(Q) =
X
i
fi(Q)2 +
X
i
X
j̸=i
fi(Q)fj(Q)sin(Qrij)
Qrij
,
(2.22)
where rij is the distance between atom i and j.
In the case of computational simulations of molecular systems it is more convenient to ex­
press equation 2.22 in terms of radial distribution functions (RDFs) g(r) [43], since it easily
allows for separating the scattering into the components of the interferences between the
solvents (called solvent­solvent scattering), solute (called solute­solute scattering), and
the cross term between the solute and solvent (called solute­solvent scattering). The
RDFs can be expressed as the likelihood of finding an atom j of type (e.g. elements, or
elements belonging to a specific group of molecules like the solvent) m at a distance r
from the reference atom i of type n
gnm(r) = 1
ρm
*Nm
X
j̸=i
δ(|ri −rj| −r)
+
i
= lim
dr→0
Nnm(r)
ρm4πr2dr = ρnm(r)
ρm
,
(2.23)
where Nm is the number of atoms m, ρm is the average density of atoms m in the system,
and Nnm(r) is the number of atoms m at a distance r from atoms n. The X­ray scattering
can then be rewritten in terms of the RDFs as [36, 43]
S(Q) =
X
n
Nnfn(Q)2 +
X
n,m
fn(Q)fm(Q)Nn(Nm −δnm)
V
4π
Z ∞
0
(gnm(r) −g0)sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr,
(2.24)
where g0 is 0 for the solute­solute scattering and 1 otherwise. However, because of the
finite size of the system, the RDFs calculated from the interatomic distances in the tra­
jectories will have to be truncated at a length, rtrunc, equal to half the side length of the
simulation box. The upper limit of the integral will have to be limited to the truncation
length.
2.3.1
Finite size & artefact corrections
The density of atoms m used to normalize the RDFs in equation 2.23 is ρm = Nm/Vcell.
However, for systems of finite size this approximation begins to break down as the size of
the system becomes smaller. This is because, when calculating the RDFs, the excluded
volume of the reference atom becomes significant compared to the total volume of the
system, Vcell, reducing the actual volume that the the atoms m occupy. The wrong nor­
malization of the RDFs means that g(r) does not converge towards 1, but some value
different from 1. This means that when taking the Fourier transform of g(r)−1 in equation
2.24, there are finite size artefacts that become worse at low Q, as it creates an artificial
edge at the ends of the RDFs [43]. Since we are both interested in scattering at low­Q
beginning from Q = 0.5 Å−1, and in using as small a system as possible that still produces
accurate results, to maximize the effect of the added energy from the excitation, the den­
sity ρm used to normalize gnm(r) needs to be corrected. This can either be by correcting
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
9
==PAGE:18==
the volume or the number of particles, but the correction method used throughout the
work of this thesis is by correcting for the latter. One such approach is presented by P.
Ganguly and N. F. van der Vegt [44], refered to as the van der Vegt (vdv) correction. Their
method corrects normalization by ρm for the number of atoms Nm in being overestimated
at shorter distances of r close to the excluded volume of reference atom n, while being
underestimated far from the reference atom. In this way their correction method turns the
RDFs for systems of finite number of molecules, gN
nm(r), into RDFs as if sampled from
infinite systems, g∞
nm(r)
g∞
nm(r) = gN
nm(r)
Nm
Nm −

(∆Nnm(r) + δnm)

1 −(4/3)πr3
Vcell
−1
(2.25)
∆Nnm is defined as the excess number of atoms of type m within a sphere of radius r
around reference atoms n, and is usually estimated by the integral
∆Nlm(r) = 4πρm
Z r
0
(gN
lm(r′) −1)r′ 2dr′
(2.26)
However, as is shown in section 4.2, even after the vdv correction has been applied the
RDFs might still not be exactly g(r) = 1 at the end r = rtrunc. The truncation of the
RDFs will then create an artificial structure of a sharp edge at the end of the RDFs and
will translate into oscillations with increasing amplitude for Q →0. These artefacts can be
minized by applying a window function to the RDFs forcing g(r) to converge towards 1 at
their truncation r = rtrunct, removing the structure of a sharp edge. There exists several
functions for this purpose, and the ones that are employed in the work of this thesis are
the Lorch damping and the Zederkof damping. The Lorch damping works by multiplying
(g(r) −1) with the following sinc function [43, 45]
ωLorch(r) = sin(πr/rmax)
πr/rmax
,
(2.27)
where rmax is the length, r, at which the g(r) is forced to converge to 1, and will typically
be the largest r­value of the sampled RDF rtrunc. The Lorch damping works very well
in the sense that the shape of the damping function being a sinc function translates well
into a constant after the Fourier transformation. The Lorch damping will however remove
structural a lot of structural information from the end of the RDFs with the the contributions
after rmax/2 being reduced by ωLorch(rmax/2) = 2/π. This might not be an issue for larger
systems where the end tail of the RDFs contribute with very little structural information,
however for smaller systems where this range still provides important information this will
become and issue.
For these reasons the Zederkof damping was employed and tested in the work of this
thesis. The Zederkof damping is a step function which is applied to the RDFs begining
at some length rcut, converging the g(r) towards 1 at rmax with the following function [43,
46]
ωZederkof(r) =











1,
if r < rcut
1 −3(
r−rcut
rmax−rcut )2,
if rcut < r ≤2rcut+rmax
3
3
2(1 −2
r−rcut
rmax−rcut +
r−rcut
rmax−rcut )2,
if rmax > r > 2rcut+rmax
3
0,
if r > rmax
(2.28)
10
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:19==
The Zederkof damping turns the sharp edge at rtrunc into smoother edge beginning at
rcut and rmax. This smooth step will cause oscillating artefacts, however with the right
parameters the amplitude of the artefacts should be reduced without removing too much
structural information.
The exact shape of the Lorch and Zederkof damping functions can be seen in figure 2.1a
and how the cut into the RDFs can be seen in figure 2.1b. As can be seen from the figures
the Lorch damping cuts the RDFs along its whole length while Zederkof damping starts
cutting the RDFs after r = rcut
During the preliminary testing of the damping functions neither the Lorch damping or the
Zederkof damping were found to produce satisfactory results for the difference scattering
signal of the entire Q­range, for the smallest system that still provided good results for the
RDFs. It was found that the Lorch damping was very effective at removing the truncation
artefacts, while it removed too much structural information at high­Q. On the other hand
the Zederkof damping was found to be decent minimizing the artefacts at high­Q while
still preserving the structural information, however the truncation artefacts were still very
much present at low­Q. This led to the implementation of a novel damping scheme, where
the two scattered signals SL(Q) and SZ(Q) with the Lorch damping and Zederkof damping
applied to their RDFs respectively, are interpolated at some range Q1 < Q < Q2,
Shybrid(Q) =





SL(Q),
if Q < Q1
Q−Q1
Q2−Q1 SZ(Q) + Q2−Q
Q2−Q1 SL(Q),
if Q1 < Q < Q2
SZ(Q),
if Q > Q2
(2.29)
so that the signal at low­Q has the Lorch damping applied, while the signal at high­Q has
the Zederkof damping applied. This damping scheme was found to produce the difference
scattering signal with the least amount of artefacts, while keeping the largest amount of
structural information in the RDFs. The exact implementation and comparison between
the three damping methods and their difference scattering are shown in section 4.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: The Lorch and Zederkof damping functions with rmax = 1 and rcut = 0.5 as
applied to an RDF
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Computational Details
This chapter describes the procedure used to generate the trajectories and radial distri­
bution functions (RDFs) in the molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The software used
to conduct the MD simulations is the OpenMM software package [47], which contains a
large library of algorithms for MD simulations.
3.0.1
Equilibrium trajectories
After setting up the simulation box, the workflow for the equilibrium MD simulations was the
following. First a run in the NPT ensemble equilibrating the system towards its equilibrium
volume is performed. The simulations in the NPT ensemble uses a Monte Carlo barostat
and the Langevin thermostat (for more details regarding how these work see section 2.2.1)
with their parameters set to a pressure of p = 1.01325 bar, a temperature of T = 298.15
K, and a collision rate of 1.0 ps−1 (atmospheric conditions). The NPT run was carried
out for t = 5 ns using a timestep δt = 1 fs, recording the volume of the system every 1
ps. For the following runs the volume of the system is set to the average of the recorded
volumes during the last 4 ns. At the end of the NPT run the atom positions and velocities
are recorded in a restarter file, to initialize the system in the next ensemble. Following
the NPT ensemble run, the system is simulated in the NVT ensemble using the Langevin
thermostat. This was to removes any effect of the barostat and equilibrate the system
towards a target temperature of the production run. The NVT equilibration is run for 20 ps
and has a timestep of δt = 1 fs, and the thermostat would have a collision rate of 1.0 ps−1.
Again a restarter file are saved at the end of the run. Following the NVT equilibration run
the system is either propagated in the in the NVT ensemble or the NVE ensemble, for the
equilibrium and nonequilibrium simulations respectively.
3.0.2
Non­equilibrium trajectories
The equilibrium volume of the system used for the non­equilibrium simulations was ob­
tained using the same method as for the equilibrium simulations described in the previous
section. Following the run in the NPT ensemble the symstem was simulated in the NVT
ensemble using the Langevin thermostat at a temperature of T = 298.15 K and a collision
rate of 1 ps−1. This NVT run was used to generate a large number of restarter files which
were selected according to the equilibrium distribution of the chair conformations of the
julolidine ring (this is discussed further in section 4.5). The simulation in the NVT ensem­
ble ran for 400 ns at a timestep of δt = 1 fs, and the atomic positions and velocities were
recorded every 1 ps. The restarter files were categorized according to conformation of
the julolidine ring.
From the restarter files, the NVT trajectories were followed by a short run in the NVE
ensemble to remove any effect from the thermostat. The runs in the NVE ensemble were
carried out using a timestep of δt = 0.5 fs, and lasted for 20 ps. During the run the
temperature and energies of the system was recorded. At the end of the trajectory the
atom position and velocities were recorded in a restarter file used to initialize the non­
equilibrium simulations.
Following the NVE equilibration run the velocities of the atoms in the HTI were increased
randomly weighted by a Maxwell­Boltzmann distribution according to the total energy of
the HTI after the vibrational excitation of 2.64 eV. Following this adjustment in velocity the
vibrationally excited solute solvent system was run in the NVE ensemble with a timestep
12
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:21==
of δt = 0.5 ps. During the run, atomic positions, velocities, forces, and energies were
recorded.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
13
==PAGE:22==
4
Preliminary Tests
This chapter presents the results of a series of preliminary studies aimed at finding the
best parameters to use in the non­equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations, and for the
calculation of the X­ray scattering from RDFs. The parameters that are investigated are
the size of the simulation box and time step. Strategies to dampen artificial contributions
to the low­Q scattering signal are also evaluated, as well as the differences in the X­
scattering signal of different conformations of the dye. These results play an important
role in this work, since the difference scattering signal that is being investigated arises
from small changes in the RDFs, and since both the solute and solvent scatters weakly,
robust and accurate modelling is needed. If interested the generalized AMBER force
field has also been tested during course­work leading up to this thesis, and it was shown
produce accurate results for the RDFs. These results can be found in appendix A.1
4.1
Box­size Test
For a given excess energy deposited in the solute, as the size of the simulation box is de­
creased and fewer solvent molecules are included, the simulated increase in temperature
of the solvent will be bigger. This represents an advantage in using a smaller system,
because it gives rise to a bigger scattering signal due to solvent heating, requiring shorter
simulation times to achieve significant statistics. However, as explained in section 2.3,
smaller simulation boxes introduces more artefacts in the low­Q part of the signal stem­
ming from the wrong density normalization of the RDFs, because of the excluded volume
of the reference atom in the RDF making up a non­trivial part the cell volume. This leads
g(r) to converge toward some value different from 1, creating an artificial sharp edge at
the end of the RDFs. The artificial structure of an sharp edge will translate into artefacts
in the signal with the shape of sinc function after the Fourier translation in equation 2.24.
With the magnitude of the sinc function being the largest at Q →0, an efficient way to
test the effect of the finite size of the simulation box is by calculating the scattering signal,
S(Q = 0; R) at Q=0, as a function of the length of the RDFs, R. A ”large” box of pure
liquid acetonitrile with a side length d = 90 Å, producing RDFs with a maximum truncation
length of rtrunc = 45 Å was used to find the length at which the S(Q = 0; R) scattering
has converged.
The ”large” box consists of N = 8176 acetonitrile molecules, and has a side length con­
verged to d = 90 Å after the NPT run, giving a concentration of ρ = 0.765 g/cm3, similar
to both experimental values other simulations of acetonitrile [48, 49]. A production run in
NVT ensemble at a temperature of T = 298.15K for t = 9 ns was used to produce a tra­
jectory of the Cartesian positions of the atoms, recorded every 1 ps (9,000 frames). The
RDFs among all solvent pairs are calculated from the atom positions and used to compute
the S(Q = 0; R) scattering from the large box, which is shown in figure 4.1a. The black
and orange curves show the uncorrected and vdv corrected (see section 2.3.1) scattering
respectively. The both the vdv corrected and uncorrected scattering follows each other
quite well with large oscillations up until around R ≈15 Å. As R increases above 15 Å the
uncorrected scattering increases diverging from the vdv corrected scattering. The large
oscillations seen before R ≈15 Å shows that in this range the RDFs of the solvent atom
pairs contains a large amount of structural information as they haven’t converged close
to g(r) = 1 yet, and the offset caused by the inaccurate normalization is comparatively
small to this contribution. The divergence in the uncorrected scattering shows that after
14
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:23==
R = 15 Å the offset in g(r)−1 from the normalization becomes significant compared to the
structural information at this range, while the vdv corrected scattering is almost constant
with only very small oscillation after R = 20 Å. Figure 4.1a shows that the error in the
density normalization for a box of this size can be corrected for with the vdv correction,
and further indicates that there is very little contribution to the scattering after R = 20 Å.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1: (a) S(Q = 0; R) for the large box of neat acetonitrile with a side length of 90 Å,
with and without the vdv­correction applied. (b) S(Q = 0; R) for the small box with a side
length of 40 Å, with and without the van der Vegt (vdv) correction applied. (c) S(Q = 0; R)
for the small and the large box, and their difference, without any corrections applied. (d)
S(Q = 0; R) for the small, the large box, and their difference, both with the vdv­corrections
applied.
For this reason a ”small” box with a side length converged to d = 40 Å after the NPT
run was compared to the large box to test if reducing the box to this size caused any
further artefacts. The small box consists of N = 718 acetonitrile molecules, with the same
concentration as the large box. A production run in the NVT ensemble at a temperature
of T = 298.15K for t = 100 ns was used to produce a trajectory of the Cartesian positions
of the atoms, recorded every 1 ps for a total of 100,000 frames (a trajectory with the
same statistical significance as the trajectory with the large box). Figure 4.1b shows both
the uncorrected and the vdv corrected S(Q = 0; R) scattering of the small box system.
Similar behaviour as was seen with the large box system is observed for the small box
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
15
==PAGE:24==
system. The amplitude of the scattering oscillates rapidly as more structural information is
included. At R = 10 Å the uncorrected and vdv corrected scattering begins to diverge. As
can be better seen in figure 4.1c, the small box signal diverges earlier than the large box
signal. This is because the excluded volume of the reference atom for the RDFs makes up
a larger fraction of the cell volume, which leads to a larger error in the ρ­normalization of
the RDFs for the small box than for the large box. However, in figure 4.1d comparing the
vdv­corrected S(Q = 0; R) scattering of the small and the large box, it can be seen that the
effect of the finite box size has been removed after the vdv­correction has been applied.
It can be seen from the two figures that the S(Q = 0; R) scattering of the two boxes are
identical after the vdv correction has been applied, and any difference between the two
signals stemming from the error in the ρ­normalization has been removed. This means
that it is possible to use the box with a d = 20 Å side length, without loosing accuracy (or
structural information), since there is no observable difference in the S(Q = 0; R) between
the small and the large box after the vdv correction has been applied, and there are no
significant changes to the corrected S(Q = 0; R), when increasing the truncation length
of the RDFs beyond R = 20 Å.
NVT simulations at a higher temperature of T = 398.15 K has also been performed for
the small and large boxes of pure acetonitrile. The trajectories have the same statistical
significance as the previous two trajectories at T = 298.15 K used for the testing the vdv
correction. Figure 4.2 shows the vdv corrected difference scattering signals (∆S(Q, ∆T =
100 K) = S(Q, 398.15 K) −S(Q, 298.15 K)) temperature change in both the small and the
large box. Figure 4.2a shows the the difference scattering, in the scattering vector range
of 0.5 Å−1 < Q < 5 Å−1, which is the range of Q most relevant for a comparison with the
experimental signal, as the latter is recorded at Q > 0.5 Å−1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: The vdv­corrected ∆T = 100 K difference scattering signals of both the small
(rtrunc = 20 Å) and the large (rtrunc = 45 Å) box RDFs and their difference in (a) the Q
range 0.5 ­ 5 Å−1, and (b) in a close­up in the low­Q range 0.5 ­ 1 Å−1 highlighting the
truncation artefacts.
It can be seen that there are no major differences between the small and large box dif­
ference scattering signal, at this range. There are however some artificial oscillations at
low Q as can better be seen in figure 4.2b, which shows a close up of the two difference
scatterings and the difference between them at the range 0.5 Å−1 < Q < 1.0 Å−1. The
16
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:25==
oscillation artefacts stem from the truncation of the upper limit in the integral in equation
2.24 used to calculate the scattering, effectively creating sharp edge at the end of the
RDFs when g(rtrunc) ̸= 1.
4.2
Damping Parameters Tests & Novel Damping Method
The oscillations seen in figure 4.2b are artefacts that originate from the fact that the inte­
gral in equation 2.24 used to calculate the scattering signal has a finite upper limit corre­
sponding to the truncation length, rtrunc, of the RDFs and therefore the Fourier Transform
involved in the integral produces artificial oscillations. This means that these oscillations
don’t relate to any structural information in the system and if not removed can limit the
structural resolution at low­Q, where they are larger. The truncation artefacts can be min­
imized by damping the RDFs with a ”softer” step function which makes the RDFs go slowly
towards 1 at long r removing the sharp edge. The two types of step functions are used,
Zederkof­damping and Lorch­damping, described in section 2.3.1.
The same two vdv­corrected difference scattering signals shown in figure 4.2 are used
assess the effect of the Lorch and Zederkof damping schemes and test different damp­
ing parameters. The difference scattering signal corresponding to a large temperature
difference of ∆T = 100 K is used to better separate the effects of the damping on the
truncation artefacts and on the contributions to the signal related to structural information.
Figure 4.3 shows the vdv corrected difference scattering signals, ∆S(Q) for a ∆T = 100 K
for the 40 Å and the 90 Å boxes with the Lorch damping applied together with the dif­
ference scattering signals with no damping applied, and the difference between them
(∆Sdamped −∆Sundamped).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) The difference scattering signals normalized by the number of molecules
computed from vdv­corrected RDFs obtained from both the 90Å­box and the 40Å­box
system with either Lorch­damping or no damping applied to the RDFs and their residuals
(a) 0.5Å−1 < Q < 5.0Å−1 (b) A close­up of the signals shapes and truncation artefacts at
low­Q.
For both of these Lorch damped signals, the damping parameters have been chosen
such that the RDFs go to 1 at their truncation lengths rtrunc of 20 Å and 45 Å for the 40
Å box and the 90 Å box, respectively. As can best be seen from the difference at low­
Q region in figure 4.3b, the Lorch damping removes the artificial oscillations at low Q in
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
17
==PAGE:26==
both the difference scattering signal of small and the large box. However, in figure 4.3a,
it can be seen that the Lorch damping also modifies the difference scattering in the range
0.5 Å−1 < Q < 5.0 Å−1. It can be seen that the maxima decreases, while the minima
increases. This is especially bad for the simulations of the 40 Å box, where the peak
in the difference scattering signal at Q = 1.4 Å−1 drops from 3.5 e.u. to 3.0 e.u, and at
Q = 1.8 Å−1 where the difference scattering signal increases from ­5.4 e.u. to ­4.4 e.u.
Since the artefacts only contribute to the low­Q part of the signal, indicates that the Lorch
damping introduces too large structural modifications to the RDFs, and hence to signal.
The Lorch damping creates significantly more impactful modifications to the structural
information to the 40 Å box signal than to the 90 Å box signal, where the changes at high
Q are rather small. From the difference between the damped and undamped signals it
can be seen that modifications to the structural information contained in the RDFs are
only significant for the difference scattering when going above Q = 1 Å−1, while the loss
in structural information is rahter small for Q < 1 Å−1 (there is a small shift between the
Lorch damped signals of the 90 Å and 40 Å boxes). This means that the 40 Å box signal
gives a good model for the difference scattering at Q < 1 Å−1 with the Lorch damping,
however Q > 1 Å−1 the damping modifies the signal too much.
Figure 4.4 shows the 40 Å box difference scattering signal after the Zederkof damping is
applied such that the RDFs go towards 1 at r = rtrunc the with the damping beginning
at cut­offs, rcut, ranging from 14 Å −18 Å. Figure 4.4a compares the 40 Å box differ­
ence scattering signal using the Zederkof damping with various parameters of rcut to the
undamped signal.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: (a) The difference scattering normalized by the number of molecules cal­
culated from vdv­corrected RDFs obtained the 40 Å box simulations with either Lorch­
damping or Zederkof­damping at rmax = 20 Å and various values of rcut applied to the
RDFs and the difference between the Lorch and Zederkof damped signals in the Q­range
0.5Å−1 < Q < 5.0Å−1. (b) Close­up of the difference between the Lorch and Zederkof
damped signals in the Q­range 0.5Å−1 < Q < 1.0Å−1 showing the magnitude of the
truncation artefacts at low­Q.
The undamped and Zederkof damped difference scattering signals follow each other
closely for the entire range of 0.5 Å−1 < Q < 5.0 Å−1. From the differences it can be
18
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:27==
seen that there has been little to no excess modifications to the structural information
from the Zederkof damped signal at Q > 0.9 Å−1, and the damping has no noticeable
impact on either the maxima or the minima like the Lorch damping had. A close­up in the
low­Q range of Q < 0.9 Å−1 in figure 4.4b, shows artificial oscillations stemming from the
Fourier transform of the truncated RDFs. From the figure it can be seen that the Zederkof
damping with a cut­off at rcut = 18 Å performs about as poorly as if no damping had been
applied, Zederkof dampig with a cut­off at rcut = 17 Å and rcut = 16 Å performs better
than if no damping was applied with rcut = 17 Å performing the best, and Zederkof damp­
ing with a cut­off at rcut = 15 Å and rcut = 14 Å performs worse than if no damping was
applied.
Out of all the cut­offs used for the Zederkof damping the 40 Å box signal with a cut­off at
rcut = 17Å and converging at rmax = 20Å performed the best with the amplitude of the
oscillations from the truncation artefacts in the low Q range being the smallest when the
Zederkof damping was applied with these parameters.
4.3
Introducing & Testing a Novel Damping Scheme
The Zederkof damping preserves to a large extent the structural information in the range
1.2 Å−1 < Q < 2.5 Å−1, while the Lorch damping significant modifications to the struc­
tural information from the 40 Å box RDFs, affecting the scattering signal in this Q range.
However, residual artificial oscillations can still be seen in the Zederkof damped signal
at Q < 1.3 Å−1. The Lorch damping outperforms the Zederkof damping in the range
Q < 0.85 Å−1 in that it removes all the truncation artefacts. In order to model the dif­
ference scattering signal without any truncation artefacts at low Q, which still keeps the
structural information at high Q, a novel hybrid scheme combining the two damping meth­
ods is introduced where the Lorch damping is used in the low Q (Q < 0.85 Å−1) part of
the difference scattering signal, and the Zederkof damping is used in the high Q range
(Q > 1.2 Å−1). This is done by calculating the difference scattering signal twice with either
the Lorch damping or the Zederkof damping applied to the RDFs. These two signals are
then interpolated between low and high Q, as shown in figure 4.5a.
∆Shybrid(Q) =





∆SL(Q),
if Q < Q1
Q−Q1
Q2−Q1 ∆SZ(Q) + Q2−Q
Q2−Q1 ∆SL(Q),
if Q1 < Q < Q2
∆SZ(Q),
if Q > Q2
(4.1)
Figure 4.5b compares the difference scattering signal using the Lorch­Zederkof hybrid­
damped RDFs obtained from the 40 Å box simulations to the difference scattering signal
using Lorch damped RDFs obtained from the 90 Å box simulations, which was considered
to be the most accurate model for the difference scattering signal due to solvent heating
in that it produces no significant truncation artefacts while preserving to a large extent
of structural information. Figure 4.5b shows that there are only some slight differences
between the two signals indicating the absence of truncation artefacts at low Q (see also
close­up at low Q of the difference between the signal using the hybrid damping for the
40 Å­box simulations and the Lorch damped signal forthe 90 Å box simulations in figure
4.5d). There is also a slight difference in slope between the two models as can be seen
in both figure 4.5c and 4.5d. It is, however, quite small and seems to be a feature of the
different box sizes rather than the damping model since it shows up in both the Lorch and
Zederkof damped signals. The hybrid model outperforms the 90 Å box Lorch damped
model in preserving the structural information, as shown in figure 4.5b, where it can be
seen from both the signals of the two models and the differences between them, that there
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
19
==PAGE:28==
is no modifications to the structural information contributing to the peaks at Q = 1.4Å−1
and at Q = 1.8Å−1 by the hybrid model.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.5: (a) Illustration of the Lorch­Zederkof hybrid damping showing the interpolation
of the difference scattering signal calculated using the Lorch damping and the Zederkof
damping with the best parameters identified above. The interpolation begins at Q =
0.85Å−1 and ends at Q = 1.2Å−1, which was found to give the smallest artefacts in the
signal. (b) Comparison of the difference scattering from the Lorch­damped RDFs of the
90 Å box simulations and the hybrid­damped RDFs of the 40 Å box simulations, and their
difference. (c) Close­up of the Lorch­damped 90 Å box signal and the hybrid­damped 40
Å box signal in the low­Q range 0.5Å−1 < Q < 1.3Å−1. (d) Close­up of the difference in the
low­Q range, showing the magnitude of the truncation artefacts and the loss of structural
information.
Figure 4.5 shows that this novel Lorch­Zederkof hybrid damping model is capable of mini­
mizing truncation artefacts effectively while preserving structural information, allowing one
to use a smaller simulation box and still get an accurate model of the difference scatter­
ing signal, much better than would be possible with either Lorch­damping or Zederkof
damping alone.
20
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:29==
4.4
Timestep Tests & Energy Conservation in NVE Ensemble
As discussed in section 2.2.1, when conducting MD simulations in the NVE ensemble with
the velocity Verlet integrator, there will be fluctuations and a drift in the total energy of the
system that is dependent on the square of the timestep, δt2 [35]. It is paramount to check
the magnitude of the energy drift and fluctuations, when doing simulations in the NVE
ensemble, to find the the smallest time step to keep the computational cost low without
compromising stability and accuracy of the simulations.
The drift in total energy in the NVE ensemble was obtained for a system of one HTI­J
solute molecule and 717 acetonitrile molecules. The system box had an average side
length of d = 20 Å during the last 4 ns of a 5 ns long NPT run at temperature T = 298.15
K and pressure p = 1.01325 bar. The system was further equilibrated to a temperature
of T = 298.15 K by a 20 ps long run in the NVT ensemble. 50 different trajectories
were propagated in the NVE ensemble at time steps of 1 fs, 0.8 fs, 0.5 fs, and 0.3 fs,
sampling the energy of the system every 1 ps for 100 ps. The computational time of the
simluations was respectively had a production rate of 480ns/day, 400ns/day, 260ns/day,
and 160ns/day, decreasing linearly with the time step.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.6: Time evolution of the total energy, Etot averaged over 50 trajectories, for
the small box system containing the hemithioindigo­julidine solute and 717 acetonitrile
molecules, propagated at time­steps of (a) 1 fs, (b) 0.8 fs, (c) 0.5 fs, and (d) 0.3 fs.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6 the total energy averaged over the 50 runs running for 100 ps, with time­steps
of 1 fs, 0.8 fs, 0.5 fs, and 0.3 fs. At a time step of δt = 1 fs the NVE­ensemble had a drift in
total energy of dEtot/dt = 13.0 meV/ps, at δt = 0.8 fs a drift of dEtot/dt = 7.03 meV/ps, at
δt = 0.5 fs a drift of dEtot/dt = 1.68 meV/ps, at δt = 0.3 fs a drift of dEtot/dt = 0.54 meV/ps.
This shows that over 60 ps (the total length of the non­equilibrium simulations performed
in this project and presented in section 5.2) the total energies will have drifted by 0.78eV,
0.42eV, 0.10eV, and 0.033eV, for time steps of 1 fs, 0.8 fs, 0.5 fs, and 0.3 fs respectively.
Compared to the excitation energy of 2.64 eV the change in total energies corresponds
to a change of 30%, 15%, 4%, and 1% respectively. Most of the energy transfer from the
solute to the solvent is expected to happen within the first 20 ps, in which time period the
drift in total energy would be 0.26eV (9.8%), 0.14eV (5.3%), 0.034eV (1.3%), and 0.011eV
(0.4%), for time steps of 1 fs, 0.8 fs, 0.5 fs, and 0.3 fs respectively.
The magnitude of the energy fluctuations can be seen in figure 4.7 showing the root mean
square of fluctuations in total energy, RMS(Etot), as a function of time step δt, averaged
over 50 100 ps trajectories. The RMS(Etot) are 0.38 ± 0.08eV (15% compared to the
excitation energy of 2.64eV), 0.21 ± 0.06eV (8.0%), 0.058 ± 0.024eV (2.2%), and 0.026 ±
0.009eV (1.0%) at time steps of 1 fs, 0.8 fs, 0.5 fs, 0.3 fs respectively.
Figure 4.7: Root mean square of the fluctuations in total energy, Etot, averaged over 50
100 ps trajectories, at time­steps, δt, of 1 fs, 0.8 fs, 0.5 fs, 0.3 fs
With energy fluctuations in the total energy of only 2.2% compared to the excitation en­
ergy, and a drift in total energy of 1.3% in the time range that is most relevant for the
present study the δt = 0.5fs time step has been chosen for the following non­equilibrium
simulations because it ensures enough stability while keeping the computational cost
small enough to achieve sufficient statistics.
4.5
Dye Conformation Tests
To makes sure that the non­equilibrium simulations accurately describes the dynamics
of an ensemble, one should make sure that the initial configurations chosen for the non­
equilibrium simulations are representative of the distribution of conformations in the sys­
tem at equilibrium. in fact if the models produced for the scattering is to be used to be
compared to experimental results, then one has to make sure that the distribution of con­
formation of the initial frames in the non­equilibrium simulations are representative of the
22
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:31==
equilibrium ensemble.
It was observed during the equilibrium simulations that the julolidine ring of the HTI­J
solute had some rather long lived chair conformations, characterized by the ring flips
shown in figure 4.8a. The dihedral angles between the atoms indicated by the red and
blue lines in 4.8a were calculated to track in which conformations the julolidine ring was
over time. The left side angles are shown in figure 4.8b and the right side angles are
shown in figure 4.8c and is the dihedral angle indicated by red.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.8: (a) The HTI­J solute, showing the ring flip of the chair conformations of the
julolidine. (b) Time evolution of the angle between the hydrogen bonds indicated by the
red marks to the right of (or below) of the nitrogen atom, over an 800 ns long run of the
solute solvent system in the NVT­ensemble. (c) Time evolution of the angle between the
hydrogen bonds indicated by the red marks to the right of (or above) of the nitrogen atom
These angles were then assigned to three categories corresponding to different confor­
mations of the julolidine group, down, up, or mixed, as shown in figure 4.9a depending on
the value of the angles. Up is when both angles are around 170 deg, down is when they
are around 70 deg and mixed is where one is around 170 deg and the other is around
70 deg. In figure 4.8a the left configuration shows the down configuration, while the right
hand side shows the up configuration. Figure 4.9a shows the sum of the right and left
dihedral angles divided by two are plotted. The conformations are quite long lived with
the julolidine molecule staying in either conformation for a few nanoseconds up to around
40 ns as can be seen from figure 4.9a.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
23
==PAGE:32==
To exhaustively sample the distribution of these conformations at the temperature T =
298.15K, an 800 ns long simulation of the solute­solvent system was run in the NVT en­
semble. The normalized distributions of the conformations as a function of propagation
time are shown in figure 4.9b. The figure shows that the mixed conformation is favoured
over both the down and up conformations.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: (a) The time evolution of the conformations of the solute julolidine ring over
an 800 ns NVT run at T = 298.15K. (b) The normalized distributions of the conformations
over time.
Whether these conformations produced significantly different difference scattering signal
was tested by running another simulation at T = 398.15K in the NVT ensemble. The
configurations (or frames) in both the 298.15 K and 398.15 K trajectories were sorted
according to the conformations of the julolidine ring. Then, the different scattering signal
associated with a given conformation (up, down, mixed) was calculated using the RDFs
obtained from frames of the 298 and 398 trajectories where the julolidine ring is only in
that conformation
24
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: (a) Solvent­solvent ∆T = 100 K difference scattering signal for each confor­
mation of the julolidine ring, showing that the julolidine ring conformations have no effect
on the solvent­solvent difference scattering. (b) Solute­solvent ∆T = 100 K difference
scattering signal for each conformation of the julolidine ring showing, showing that the
conformations of the julolidine ring affect on the solute­solvent difference scattering.
Figure 4.10a shows the solvent­solvent difference scattering signal, where no notice­
able difference can be seen between the difference scattering at ∆T = 100K for the
three conformations of the julolidine ring as expected. Figure 4.10b shows the solute­
solvent difference scattering signal at ∆T = 100K for the three conformations. There are
clear differences between the signals of the different conformations. At the valley around
Q = 1.7 Å−1 the down conformations difference scattering has lower intensity, and at
the peak around Q = 1.4 Å−1 the down conformation difference scattering signal has
higher intensity compared to the two other conformations. There is also a dip in the range
1.0 Å−1 < Q < 1.4 Å−1 in both the down and mixed solute­solvent difference scattering
signals, which is not present in the difference scattering of the up conformation.
This shows that one should be careful when picking the initial frames for the non­equilibrium
simulations, since the conformation of the julolidine ring has an effect on the solute­solvent
difference scattering signal. Given the long lifetimes of each of the conformations, a distri­
bution reflecting an equilibrium ensemble at 300 K is obtained for trajectories with a length
of a least 500 ps, as shown in figure 4.9. In the present work, the initial conditions for the
non­equilibrium simulations were selected from the equilibrium distribution of such a long
trajectory.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
25
==PAGE:34==
5
Results of Simulations
5.1
Equilibrium Dynamics & Scattering
As has been discussed earlier during the introduction, it is typical to use the long time delay
solvent­solvent difference scattering signal to estimate the difference scattering signals at
shorter time delays by adjusting the signal proportional to the difference in temperature
between the time delays [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17] This method assumes that the
signal scales linearly as a function of temperature. The linearity of the difference scattering
signal from a neat acetonitrile solution is estimated by the scattering from the RDFs of
trajectories of the neat acetonitrile solution at temperature changes, ∆T, ranging from 0
K to 100 K, starting from an initial temperature of T = 298.15 K. The trajectories used for
these estimates were produced from simulations of the neat acetonitrile at equilibrium in
the NVT ensemble, and had a length of 100 ns recording the atom coordinates every 1
ps.
The degree to which the solvent shows a linear response in X­ray difference scattering to
bulk temperature changes can be estimated in the view of the difference scattering, and
the first­ and second­order change in the difference scattering [50]. If the scattering is
linear, one should see that the difference scattering, ∆S = S(T + ∆T) −S(T), changes
proportionally to an increase in temperature, ∆T. In the same way one should see that
the first­order change in difference scattering, ∆S/∆T should be constant between tem­
perature changes if the scattering is linear. If the first­order scattering is not to be linear
then the degree to which the signal is nonlinear can be estimated by the second­order
change. The second­order change in difference scattering is estimated by the difference
between difference scattering signals normalized by the difference in temperature change
between the signals, e.g. ∆2S/∆T 2 = (∆S/∆T −∆S/∆T0)/(∆T −∆T0).
Figure 5.1 compares the X­ray scattering intensity of neat acetonitrile solution under dif­
ferent temperature changes (∆T) ranging from 10 K to 100 K. Figure 5.1a shows the
difference scattering signal ∆S(Q, ∆T). It is evident from the figure that the difference
scattering intensity increases monotonically with temperature, and there are no observ­
able changes to the signal’s shape, with regards to peak positions and so on, within this
temperature range. However, it is difficult to tell whether the increase is linear from this
figure alone.
Figure 5.1b presents the first­order change in difference scattering signal ∆S(Q, ∆T)/∆T.
Although the shapes of all the difference scattering signals are quite similar, there is a
small but noticeable drop in the intensities of the normalized signals as the temperature
increases, especially around the maximum (Q = 1.4 Å−1) and minimum (Q = 1.8 Å−1).
This indicates that there is a nonlinear increase in the solvent’s difference scattering heat­
ing signal in this ∆T range. Looking specifically at the minimum it can be seen that the
first­order change of the difference scattering signal scales ranges between ­45 to ­38
e.u./K.
26
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.1: Calculated difference scattering signal from the heating of the neat ace­
tonitrile solvent the (a) non­normalized difference scattering, (b) first­order change
(∆S(Q, ∆T)/∆T) signal, and (c) second­order change (∆S(Q, ∆T)).
Figure 5.1c shows the second­order change to the difference scattering signal, ∆2S/∆T 2.
The ∆T0 = 100 K difference scattering signal was used as for the second­order calcula­
tions. The oscillations observed in the signal are finite­size artifacts resulting from the trun­
cation of the solvent atom pair RDFs used to calculate the difference scattering signals. It
can be seen that the contribution from these artifacts is more significant for smaller tem­
perature changes. This is because as ∆T decreases, the structural differences between
systems at different temperatures become smaller, in turn increasing the comparative
contribution of the truncation artifacts compared to the structural information of the RDFs.
The second­order changes in the solvent­solvent difference scattering signals remains
consistent in intensity and shape (when ignoring the contributions from the artifacts). This
can be seen from the second­order changes at Q = 1.8Å−1 where it ranges between 0.055
to 0.0080 e.u./K2, with no systematicity between them in the 10 K < ∆T < 100 K range.
Since the second­order change in difference scattering remains consistent it this range it
should be fair to assume that it should remain the same in the range 0 K < ∆T < 10 K.
Since the first­order changes to the difference scattering signal at Q = 1.8 Å−1 scales with
a factor ranging between ­45 e.u./K to ­38.u./K and the second­order changes scales with
roughly 0.07 e.u./K2 it is an fair assumption that the solvent­solvent difference scattering
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
27
==PAGE:36==
scales linear with respect to ∆T at small temperature changes.
Figure 5.2 shows the difference scattering intensity at its maximum (Q = 1.4 Å−1) and
minimum (Q = 1.8 Å−1) for the same signals shown in figure 5.1a. Analyzing the nonlin­
earity of the difference scattering due to heating becomes more straightforward at these
two Q­values, as they exhibit the largest magnitude. In figure 5.2a, the upper half displays
the intensity of the difference scattering signal at Q = 1.4 Å−1 as a function of temperature
change (∆T), together with a linear fit. The lower half of the figure shows the residuals of
the fit. Upon examination, one finds that over a temperature change of ∆T = 100 K, the
magnitude of the difference scattering signal (∆S(Q, ∆K)) increases by 2500 e.u., and
with the fit giving a slope of 26 e.u./K. The lower figure shows that the residuals are within
the range of −110 e.u. to 100 e.u. and have a standard deviation of σ = 64e.u., which is
negligible compared to the increase in the difference scattering.
Moving on to figure 5.2b, the upper half presents the intensity of the difference scattering
signal at Q = 1.8 Å−1 as a function of ∆T, together with a linear fit. The figure indicates
that the difference scattering decreases by 3800 e.u. over the ∆T = 100 K temperature
change. Looking at the lower half of the figure, one finds the residuals between the dif­
ference scattering and the fit shown in the upper half. The residuals are within the range
of −120 e.u. to 140 e.u. and has a standard deviation of σ = 77 e.u.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: Difference scattering signal intensities at temperature changes up to ∆T =
100K starting from a temperature of T = 298.15K and residuals of a linear fit at (a) the
maximum of Q = 1.4Å−1 and (b) minimum of Q = 1.8Å−1.
The results presented in figures 5.1 and 5.2 suggest that while there is some nonlinear
behavior in the solvent­solvent difference scattering signal with increasing temperature
up to ∆T = 100 K, it can be approximated as linear. This conclusion is drawn from two
observations: 1. the contributions to the nonlinear increase are found to be negligible, as
evidenced by the second­order change in the difference scattering shown in figure 5.1c
and 2. that the standard deviation from the linear fit in figure 5.2 is small compared to the
overall signal change.
Based on these findings, it can be inferred that as the energy is transferred from the solute
to the solvent, and the bulk temperature of the acetonitrile solution increases, the solvent­
solvent difference scattering should increase proportionally. This linear relationship be­
tween the difference scattering and temperature implies a consistent and predictable re­
28
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:37==
sponse of the system to temperature changes, as long as the energy transferred from
the solute to the surrounding solvent disperses among the solution at a similar or shorter
time scale. However, if the energy is transferred to solvent faster then it disperses among
the solvent molecules, this assumption becomes more tenuous. It can be further inferred
that any large deviations from the proportional increase in the solvent­solvent difference
scattering signals in the non­equilibrium systems must stem from some behaviour specific
to the system.
5.2
Non­equilibrium Dynamics & Scattering
5.2.1
Energies & Temperatures of Solute & Solvent System
Figure 5.3 shows the temperature, total energy, kinetic energy and potential energy of the
system during NVE runs before and after vibrational excitation of the HTI­J chromophore
averaged over 3987 trajectories. The energies and temperature were recorded every 1
ps during the 20 ps equilibrium runs in the NVE ensemble.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3: (a) Total energy, (b) temperature, (c) kinetic energy, and (d) potential energy
of the solute­solvent system averaged over 3987 trajectories propagated at equilibrium in
the NVE ensemble before the excitation energy was added to the system, and after the
excitation energy was added to the system.
For the 60 ps long non­equilibrium runs, the frequency of recording energy and temper­
ature was the following: every 1 fs during t < 200 fs, every 10 during 200 fs < t < 20 ps,
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
29
==PAGE:38==
and every 1 ps during t > 20 ps. Looking at Figure 5.3a confirms that the increase in
total energy at time t = 0 ps perfectly matches the target excitation energy of 2.64 eV. It
can also be seen that there is a 0.11 eV drift in the average energy (a small change of
4.3% compared to the excitation energy) during the entire 60 ps non­equilibrium run in
the NVE ensemble and a 0.044 eV drift in the average energy (a small change of 1.7%
compared to the excitation energy) during the first 20 ps. Figure 5.3b shows that there
is a temperature increase of ∆T = 5 K to from 297 K to 302 K after the excitation at time
t = 0 ps, thereafter, the temperature rapidly reaches 300 K within the first picoseconds.
This behaviour is best explained by looking at the both the kinetic and potential energy
of the entire system shown in figure 5.3c and 5.3d respectively. From these two figures
it can be seen that there is a sharp drop in the kinetic energy of ∆Ekin ≈−1.2 eV during
the first 200 fs, which corresponds exactly to the increase in the potential energy in the
same time frame. This means that from the 2.64 eV added to the system as kinetic en­
ergy initially, kinetic energy increased by 1.44 eV and the potential energy increased by
1.2 eV. In totality Figure 5.3 shows that the solute­solvent system is in accordance with
the conservation of energy, apart from the small numerical drift, during the non­equilibrium
simulations.
Figure 5.4a shows the kinetic energy of the solute and solvent during the non­equilibrium
simulations, averaged over 3987 trajectories. The drift in kinetic energy The drift scaled
by Ekin,n
Ekin
has been subtracted from the solute and solvent kinetic energy. The kinetic
energy calculated from the velocities of the atoms, Ekin(t) = P
i
1
2mi|vi(t)|2, where mi is
the mass of atom i of either in the solvent (HTI) or solute (ACN) and vi(t) is its velocity in
Cartesian coordinates at time t. The figure shows that over 60 ps the kinetic energy of the
solute Ekin,HTI decreases from 4.53 eV at t = 0 ps down to 1.93 eV at t = 60 ps, a change
of ∆Ekin,HTI = −2.61 eV, while the kinetic energy of the solvent Ekin,ACN increases from
166.16 eV at t = 0 ps up to 167.59 eV at t = 60 ps, an change of ∆Ekin,ACN = 1.43 eV.
Here it can again be seen the that total kinetic energy of the system changes by ∆Ekin =
∆Ekin,HTI +∆Ekin,ACN = −1.18 eV, corresponding exactly to the drop of the total kinetic
energy and increase in the potential energy seen in figure 5.3. This change can best be
seen in the sharp initial drop of the kinetic energy of the solute, Ekin,HTI, happening within
the first few femtoseconds.
Figure 5.4b shows a close­up of the kinetic energies of the solute and solvent within the
first picosecond. From the close­up it can be seen that there is a noticeable change in
the evolution of the solvent kinetic energy around t = 200 fs, namly a rapid heating of the
solvent at t < 200 fs and a slower heating at t > 200fs, indicating some change in the
exchange of energy between solute and solvent.
Both the solute and solvent kinetic energies have been fitted using a two­exponential
function of the form
f(t) = A · e−t/τa + B · e−t/τb + C
(5.1)
in the 200 fs < t < 60 ps range to get a better understanding of the time component of the
heating in this region. For the fit C was set to the mean of the kinetic energy in the time
interval 55 ps < t < 60 ps. For the best fit of the solute kinetic energy the parameters A
and b were 0.18 eV and 1.0 eV respectively, and the time constants were τa = 1.7 ps and
τb = 8.8 × 10−2 ps. For the best fit of the solvent kinetic energy the parameters A and b
were −0.29 eV and −0.89 eV respectively, and the time constants were τa = 2.5 ps and
τb = 7.5 × 10−2 ps. This indicates that the heating of the bulk solvent happens at a slower
rate than the heat transfer from the solute to the neighbouring solvent molecules.
Figure 5.4c shows the change in the temperature of the solvent calculated from the kinetic
30
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:39==
energy together with the normalized change in the temperature of the solvent extracted
from X­ray scattering experiments performed by the group where the present project has
been conducted. The figure shows that the simulated solvent heating corresponds very
well with the estimated solvent temperature change that was measured during the experi­
ment experimentally after exciting the solute by 2.64eV. This indicates that the simulations
give an accurate description of the solvent heating and should therefore give a good es­
timate of the corresponding of the solvent­solvent heating difference scattering signal.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.4: (a) The time evolution of the kinetic energy of the solute, Ekin,HTI, and the
solvent, Ekin,ACN, calculated from the atomic velocities and averaged over 3987 non­
equilibrium trajectories. (b) Close­up of the solvent heating and solute cooling happening
on the short timescale, showing a change in the evolution of the kinetic energy of the
solvent at around t = 200 fs. (c) Simulated time­evolution of the solvent temperature (es­
timated from the drift corrected kinetic energy) and experimentally measured normalized
temperature change of the solvent in a system similar to the simulation.
5.2.2
Non­equilibrium X­ray scattering signal
Figure 5.5a shows the evolution of the non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scatter­
ing, ∆S(Q; t) in the Q­range of 0.5 Å−1 < Q < 3.0 Å−1 over the first 20 ps. The scattering
has been calculated from the time­dependent RDFs of trajectories from of 8972 non­
equilibrium simulations of the solute­solvent system. The equilibrium scattering signal
subtracted from the non­equilibrium scattering was calculated from the RDFs of a 400 ns
long trajectory at T = 297 K, where the atom positions were recorded every 1 ps. The
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
31
==PAGE:40==
same trajectory that was used to generate the restarter files for the NVE equilibrium runs.
To improve the statistics at the cost of time resolution a running average of RDFs was
taken over a 50 fs windows every 10 fs timestep. It can be seen from figure 5.5a that
the difference scattering has a maximum at Q = 1.4 Å−1 and a minimum at Q = 1.8 Å−1
that starts growing in at t = 5 ps, as the excess solute energy dissipates and the solvent
temperature increases. This can also be seen from figure 5.6.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Time­resolved non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering signal.
Figure 5.6 shows the relationship between the solvent kinetic energy and non­equilibrium
difference scattering signals at Q = 1.4 Å−1 and Q = 1.8 Å−1. The figure shows that
the difference scattering at the maximum and minimum follows the solvent kinetic energy
(which is proportional to the solvent temperature) very well as expected from the results
in section 5.1. It can also be seen from the figures that the signals are quite ”noisy” even
after averaging the RDFs along t and Q. The oscillations of the signal stem from the fact
that the structural difference being investigated are quite small.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: (a) Non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering signal averaged over
the range 1.3 Å−1 < Q < 1.5 Å−1 plotted together with solvent kinetic energy. (b) Non­
equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering signal averaged over the range 1.6 Å−1 <
Q < 2.0 Å−1 together with the solvent kinetic energy.
32
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5b shows a close­up of the non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering
signal in the t < 1.0 ps time range. The close­up shows that the solvent difference scat­
tering signal at Q = 1.4 Å−1 and Q = 1.8 Å−1 has not started growing in this time range,
however there is a clear peak in the low­Q range at Q < 0.7 Å−1 that grows in at t = 0.1 ps
and then quickly disappears after t = 0.3 ps. This is better shown in figure 5.7 which plots
the difference scattering ∆S(Q, t) averaged in the range 0.5 Å−1 < Q < 0.7 Å−1. The
large intensity of the signal strongly indicates not just some artefact from the RDFs, but
a feature from the structural changes in the solvent. This feature is likely related to the
change in the evolutions of the solvent kinetic energy at around t = 0.2 ps that was ob­
served in figure 5.4b. Since the feature is observed at low­Q it might also be related to the
isothermal compressibility, as the increase and later decrease in the potential energy ob­
served within the first 200 fs in figure 5.3d could indicate a local increase in solvent density
or build up of pressure between the solute and the surrounding solvent molecules.
Figure 5.7: Non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering averaged over 0.5 Å−1 <
Q < 0.7 Å−1 as a function of time.
Figure 5.8 shows the solvent­solvent difference scattering, ∆S(Q, t) averaged over var­
ious time ranges. As can be seen from the figure the intensity of the low­Q signal de­
creases monotonically with increasing time, before disappearing at 20 ps < t < 60 ps. It
can also be seen that within the first few picoseconds the heating signal of the acetonitrile
starts growing with the maximum at Q = 1.4 Å−1 and minimum at Q = 1.8 Å−1.
The figure shows that during the early energy transfer process between the solute and
solvent, the solvent will produce a scattering signal that is entirely different from the sig­
nal produced between two bulk solvents at different temperatures. It can be further seen
that at later timesteps as the energy transfer process continues and as the excess energy
starts dissipating among the solvent, that a signal similar to the difference scattering of a
heated bulk solvent starts growing in, while the low­Q difference scattering starts decreas­
ing. At long time delays, no low­Q signal is observed and the difference scattering signal
looks much like that of a heated bulk solvent shown in figure 5.1a. These results strongly
indicate that the early non­equilibrium difference scattering arises from the locally heated
solvent molecules, and the signal must either stem from changes in structure between the
heated solvent, between the heated solvent and ”cold” solvent molecules, or from both of
these.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.8: Non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering averaged over various
ranges of time.
Figure 5.9 shows the non­equilibrium solute­solvent difference scattering, ∆S(Q; t) in the
Q­range of 0.5 Å−1 < Q < 3.0 Å−1 over the first 20 ps. The solute­solvent difference
scattering has been calculated from the same trajectories as the solvent­solvent difference
scattering. The figure shows that there is a strong increase in the solute­solvent difference
scattering signal intensity in the range of 0.7 Å−1 < Q < 1.5 Å−1, within the first few
hundred fs. A small decrease in the signal can also be seen around Q = 1.8 Å−1. The
difference scattering at longer time scales shows that after this early increase the the
signal before the excitation is recovered. This can better be seen in figure 5.10.
Figure 5.9: Non­equilibrium solute­solvent difference scattering
34
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.10 shows the time evolution of the solute­solvent difference scattering signal at
Q = 1.0 Å−1 and Q = 1.8 Å−1, which are its maximum and minimum respectively. The
figure shows that there is a rapid increase in the signal at the maximum and decrease
in the signal at the minimum, within the first 200 fs of the excitation. This indicates that
there is a rapid dissociation between the solute and the surrounding solvent molecules.
It can be further seen that as the solute cools down, giving transferring its excess energy
to the solvent, the solute­solvent difference scattering signal begins converging towards
a signal close similar to the signal at t = 0, within the first 40 ps. This indicates that
the structure between solute and surrounding solvent molecules have returned to their
equilibrium structure within the 40 ps after the excitation of the solute.
Figure 5.10: Non­equilibrium solute­solvent difference scattering signals at Q = 1.0 Å−1
and Q = 1.8 Å−1.
Figure 5.11 shows the solute­solvent difference scattering averaged over various time
intervals. The figure shows that within the first 100 fs there is only a small increase in
the difference scattering, however after around 200 fs there has been a large increase in
the solute­solvent signal, again indicating a rapid disassociation between the solute with
the surrounding solvent molecules. Finally, within the time interval 0.3 ps < t < 1 ps the
difference scattering at Q = 1 Å−1 begins to broaden while the valley at Q = 1.8 Å−1
decreases further. Then within the following time intervals the solute­solvent difference
scattering begins to decrease monotonically, until it decays back to the signal before the
excitation.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.11: Non­equilibrium solute­solvent difference scattering averaged over various
ranges of time
36
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion & Outlook
In this work molecular mechanics molecular dynamics (MM­MD) simulations have been
used to investigate the dynamics following vibrational excitation of an hemithioindigo (HTI)
chromophore in liquid acetonitrile, under similar conditions as those used in recent ultra­
fast X­ray scattering experiments, by the group where this project was carried out. By
vibrationally exciting the chromophore using the experimental value of excitation energy,
the non­equilibrium dynamics of excess energy transfer between solute and solvent was
simulated. An extensive number (8972) of non­equilibrium MD simulations amounting
to several TBs of data was collected, which made it possible to obtaine time­dependent
radial distribution functions (RDFs) for the non­equilibrium dynamics with high enough
statistics to model the time­resolved X­ray difference scattering signal.
In the non­equilibrium simulations of the vibrationally excited HTI in acetonitrile two rates
of energy exchange were observed, one happening within the first 200 fs after the exci­
tation, and the second happening after 200 fs. From the time­resolved X­ray scattering
calculations it was observed that the difference scattering signal of the bulk heating grows
in within the first picoseconds. It was also observed that within the first few hundred fem­
toseconds the non­equilibrium solvent­solvent difference scattering shows a strong signal
at low­Q that fades out over the next several picoseconds, which cannot be explained by
the temperature change of the bulk solvent. It must originate from the rapid local heating
of the solvents surrounding the solute. These results tell us something quite important,
namely that using the solvent scattering signal measured at long time delays for fitting
data at short time delays, as is commonly done [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], can lead
to errors, especially when measuring weakly scattering organic molecules. It further gives
very useful input for modelling experimental data, changes in the scattering at short time
delays can arise from the local heating of the solvent and not only from photoinduced
changes in solute structure.
From equilibrium MD simulations of neat acetonitrile at various temperatures ranging be­
tween 298.15 K ­ 398.15 K, it was found that the solvent­solvent difference scattering sig­
nal arising from heating of bulk acetonitrile scales linearly with temperature. More specif­
ically from the equilibrium simulations it was found that the second­order contributions to
the solvent­solvent difference scattering at the minimum has a magnitude of 0.07, while
the first­order contributions has a magnitude of around 40, indicating that at small temper­
ature changes the first­order changes should dominate over the second­order changes.
In the preliminary tests leading up to the non­equilibrium MD simulations, a novel damping
scheme to correct the RDFs at long r and remove artefacts from the scattering signal at
low­Q was devised, since it was found that conventional methods like Lorch and Zederkof
damping did not provide satisfactory results. The Zederkof damping reduced the low­Q
difference scattering artefacts, but not to the extent that was wanted. The Lorch damping
was effective at removing the low­Q difference scattering artefacts, but this came at the
cost of either modifying the high­Q signal too much, or having to increase the system
size. The damping scheme was devised based on the fact that the damping methods
provide good results at either Q­range, leading to the idea of interpolating two signal
obtained using the two damping methods. This Lorch­Zederkof hybrid damping proved to
outperform both the Zederkof damping in removing the truncation artefacts at low­Q, and
the Lorch damping in avoiding modifying the difference scattering too much for small box
size giving similar results to the Lorch damped RDFs from larger boxes.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
37
==PAGE:46==
The immediate and obvious next steps following this project is to improve the statistics
of the non­equilibrium trajectories even further to produce a robust and accurate model
for the solvent­solvent difference scattering, which can be implemented in the analysis of
data from ultrafast X­ray scattering experiments. Further analysis involves identifying the
rotational and vibrational motions of solvent molecules that are activated by the energy
transfer from solute, which will shed light into the mechanism of the solvent heating.
Further next steps would be to also study the scattering from the electronically excited
HTI­J structure. This would help the analysis of the experimental results, allowing one to
separate the contributions from vibrational excitation of the HTI from the specific structural
changes of the solute induced by photoexcitation.
It would also be interesting to further develop the Lorch­Zederkof hybrid damping scheme
testing it for systems different from the one investigated here.
38
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Anatolio Pigliucci and Eric Vauthey. “Vibrational Relaxation Dynamics of Polyatomic
Molecules in Solution”. In: Chimia 57 (Apr. 2003), pp. 200–203. DOI: 10 . 2533 /
000942903777679406.
[2]
D. Schwarzer et al. “Vibrational Energy Transfer in Highly Excited Bridged Azulene­
Aryl Compounds:  Direct Observation of Energy Flow through Aliphatic Chains and
into the Solvent”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 106.35 (2002), pp. 8019–
8028. DOI: 10.1021/jp0210576. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0210576. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0210576.
[3]
Elizete Ventura et al. “Modeling the heating and cooling of a chromophore after
photoexcitation”. In: Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 24.16 (2022), pp. 9403–
9410. DOI: 10.1039/d2cp00686c. URL: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp00686c.
[4]
Michael P. Grubb et al. “Unravelling the mechanisms of vibrational relaxation in
solution”. In: Chem. Sci. 8 (4 2017), pp. 3062–3069. DOI: 10.1039/C6SC05234G.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C6SC05234G.
[5]
Tatu Kumpulainen et al. “Ultrafast Elementary Photochemical Processes of Or­
ganic Molecules in Liquid Solution”. In: Chemical Reviews 117.16 (2017). PMID:
27957848, pp. 10826–10939. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00491. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00491. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.
6b00491.
[6]
Christian Rischel et al. “Femtosecond time­resolved X­ray diffraction from laser­
heated organic films”. In: Nature 390.6659 (Dec. 1997), pp. 490–492. DOI: 10.1038/
37317.
[7]
Matteo Levantino et al. “Structural dynamics probed by X­ray pulses from syn­
chrotrons and XFELs”. en. In: Comptes Rendus. Physique 22.S2 (2021), pp. 75–
94. DOI: 10.5802/crphys.85.
[8]
M. Cammarata et al. “Impulsive solvent heating probed by picosecond x­ray diffrac­
tion”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 124.12 (Mar. 2006), p. 124504. DOI:
10.1063/1.2176617. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2176617.
[9]
W H McMaster et al. “COMPILATION OF X­RAY CROSS SECTIONS.” In: (Jan.
1969). URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/4794153.
[10]
Sophie E. Canton et al. “Visualizing the non­equilibrium dynamics of photoinduced
intramolecular electron transfer with femtosecond X­ray pulses”. In: Nature Com­
munications 6.1 (Mar. 2015). DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7359. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1038/ncomms7359.
[11]
Kasper S. Kjær et al. “Finding intersections between electronic excited state poten­
tial energy surfaces with simultaneous ultrafast X­ray scattering and spectroscopy”.
In: Chemical Science 10.22 (2019), pp. 5749–5760. DOI: 10.1039/c8sc04023k. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1039/c8sc04023k.
[12]
Denis Leshchev et al. “Tracking the picosecond deactivation dynamics of a pho­
toexcited iron carbene complex by time­resolved X­ray scattering”. In: Chemical
Science 9.2 (2018), pp. 405–414. DOI: 10.1039/c7sc02815f. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1039/c7sc02815f.
[13]
Tetsuo Katayama et al. “Atomic­scale observation of solvent reorganization influ­
encing photoinduced structural dynamics in a copper complex photosensitizer”. In:
Chemical Science 14.10 (2023), pp. 2572–2584. DOI: 10.1039/d2sc06600a. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1039/d2sc06600a.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
39
==PAGE:48==
[14]
Q. Y. Kong et al. “Initial metal–metal bond breakage detected by fs X­ray scattering
in the photolysis of Ru3(CO)12 in cyclohexane at 400 nm”. In: Photochemical &
Photobiological Sciences 18.2 (Feb. 2019), pp. 319–327. DOI: 10.1039/c8pp00420j.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1039/c8pp00420j.
[15]
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof et al. “Resolving Femtosecond Solvent Reorganization
Dynamics in an Iron Complex by Nonadiabatic Dynamics Simulations”. In: Journal
of the American Chemical Society 144.28 (July 2022), pp. 12861–12873. DOI: 10.
1021/jacs.2c04505. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.2c04505.
[16]
Tim B. van Driel et al. “Atomistic characterization of the active­site solvation dynam­
ics of a model photocatalyst”. In: Nature Communications 7.1 (Nov. 2016). DOI:
10.1038/ncomms13678. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13678.
[17]
Elisa Biasin et al. “Direct observation of coherent femtosecond solvent reorganiza­
tion coupled to intramolecular electron transfer”. In: Nature Chemistry 13.4 (Feb.
2021), pp. 343–349. DOI: 10.1038/s41557-020-00629-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41557-020-00629-3.
[18]
Lingyu Ma et al. “Ultrafast x­ray and electron scattering of free molecules: A compar­
ative evaluation”. In: Structural Dynamics 7.3 (May 2020). DOI: 10.1063/4.0000010.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/4.0000010.
[19]
M. P. Minitti et al. “Imaging Molecular Motion: Femtosecond X­Ray Scattering of an
Electrocyclic Chemical Reaction”. In: Physical Review Letters 114.25 (June 2015).
DOI: 10.1103/physrevlett.114.255501. URL: https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.114.
255501.
[20]
T. J. A. Wolf et al. “The photochemical ring­opening of 1, 3­cyclohexadiene imaged
by ultrafast electron diffraction”. In: Nature Chemistry 11.6 (Apr. 2019), pp. 504–509.
DOI: 10.1038/s41557-019-0252-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-019-0252-7.
[21]
Brian Stankus et al. “Femtosecond photodissociation dynamics of 1, 4­diiodobenzene
by gas­phase X­ray scattering and photoelectron spectroscopy”. In: Faraday Dis­
cussions 194 (2016), pp. 525–536. DOI: 10.1039/c6fd00135a. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1039/c6fd00135a.
[22]
J M Budarz et al. “Observation of femtosecond molecular dynamics via pump–probe
gas phase x­ray scattering”. In: Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical
Physics 49.3 (Jan. 2016), p. 034001. DOI: 10.1088/0953-4075/49/3/034001. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-4075/49/3/034001.
[23]
Katharina Hüll, Johannes Morstein, and Dirk Trauner. “In Vivo Photopharmacology”.
In: Chemical Reviews 118.21 (2018). PMID: 29985590, pp. 10710–10747. DOI:
10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00037. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00037.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00037.
[24]
Jan Boelke and Stefan Hecht. “Designing Molecular Photoswitches for Soft Mate­
rials Applications”. In: Advanced Optical Materials 7.16 (2019), p. 1900404. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1002/adom.201900404. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/adom.201900404. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/adom.201900404.
[25]
Robert Göstl, Antti Senf, and Stefan Hecht. “Remote­controlling chemical reactions
by light: Towards chemistry with high spatio­temporal resolution”. In: Chem. Soc.
Rev. 43 (6 2014), pp. 1982–1996. DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60383K. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1039/C3CS60383K.
[26]
Sandra Wiedbrauk and Henry Dube. “Hemithioindigo—an emerging photoswitch”.
In: Tetrahedron Letters 56.29 (2015), pp. 4266–4274. ISSN: 0040­4039. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tetlet.2015.05.022. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S004040391500831X.
40
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:49==
[27]
Christian Petermayer and Henry Dube. “Indigoid Photoswitches: Visible Light Re­
sponsive Molecular Tools”. In: Accounts of Chemical Research 51.5 (2018). PMID:
29694014, pp. 1153–1163. DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00638. eprint: https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00638. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.
7b00638.
[28]
Keetah Eggers, Thomas M Fyles, and Pedro J Montoya­Pelaez. “Synthesis and
characterization of photoswitchable lipids containing hemithioindigo chromophores”.
In: The Journal of organic chemistry 66.9 (2001), pp. 2966–2977.
[29]
Tyler Lougheed et al. “Photomodulation of ionic current through hemithioindigo­
modified gramicidin channels”. In: Organic & biomolecular chemistry 2.19 (2004),
pp. 2798–2801.
[30]
Stephan Herre et al. “Photoactivation of an Inhibitor of the 12/15­Lipoxygenase
Pathway”. In: ChemBioChem 7.7 (2006), pp. 1089–1095. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1002/cbic.200600082. eprint: https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
pdf/10.1002/cbic.200600082. URL: https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/cbic.200600082.
[31]
S Kitzig et al. “Light­Switchable Peptides with a Hemithioindigo Unit: Peptide De­
sign, Photochromism, and Optical Spectroscopy”. In: ChemPhysChem 17.9 (2016),
pp. 1252–1263.
[32]
Sandra Wiedbrauk et al. “Twisted Hemithioindigo Photoswitches: Solvent Polarity
Determines the Type of Light­Induced Rotations”. In: Journal of the American Chem­
ical Society 138.37 (2016). PMID: 27571212, pp. 12219–12227. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.
6b05981. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6b05981. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1021/jacs.6b05981.
[33]
Klara Stallhofer et al. “Electronic and Geometric Characterization of TICT Formation
in Hemithioindigo Photoswitches by Picosecond Infrared Spectroscopy”. In: The
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 125.20 (2021). PMID: 33989005, pp. 4390–4400.
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpca.1c02646. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.1c02646.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.1c02646.
[34]
Michael P. Allen, Norbert Attig, and Kurt Binder. “Introduction to Molecular Dynamics
Simulation”. In: 2004.
[35]
M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley. Computer Simulation of Liquids. Ed. by Oxford
Clarendon Press. 1987.
[36]
“Kinematical scattering I: non­crystalline materials”. In: Elements of Modern X­ray
Physics. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2011. Chap. 4, pp. 113–146. ISBN: 9781119998365.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119998365.ch4. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781119998365.ch4. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/9781119998365.ch4.
[37]
Junmei Wang et al. “Development and testing of a general amber force field”. In:
Journal of Computational Chemistry 25.9 (2004), pp. 1157–1174. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcc.20035. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/jcc.
20035. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jcc.20035.
[38]
Loup Verlet. “Computer ”Experiments” on Classical Fluids. I. Thermodynamical Prop­
erties of Lennard­Jones Molecules”. In: Phys. Rev. 159 (1 July 1967), pp. 98–103.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.159.98. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.159.
98.
[39]
William C. Swope et al. “A computer simulation method for the calculation of equi­
librium constants for the formation of physical clusters of molecules: Application
to small water clusters”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 76.1 (Jan. 1982),
pp. 637–649. ISSN: 0021­9606. DOI: 10.1063/1.442716. eprint: https://pubs.aip.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
41
==PAGE:50==
org/aip/jcp/article- pdf/76/1/637/11237336/637\_1\_online.pdf. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1063/1.442716.
[40]
Efrem Braun et al. “Best Practices for Foundations in Molecular Simulations [Article
v1.0].” In: Living journal of computational molecular science 1 1 (2019).
[41]
T. Schneider and E. Stoll. “Molecular­dynamics study of a three­dimensional one­
component model for distortive phase transitions”. In: Phys. Rev. B 17 (3 Feb. 1978),
pp. 1302–1322. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.17.1302. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevB.17.1302.
[42]
D. T. Cromer and J. B. Mann. “X­ray scattering factors computed from numerical
Hartree–Fock wave functions”. In: Acta Crystallographica Section A 24.2 (1968),
pp. 321–324. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1107 / S0567739468000550. eprint: https :
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1107/S0567739468000550. URL: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1107/S0567739468000550.
[43]
Ougaard Dohn A et al. “Finite­size Effects on the Calculation of X­ray Scattering
from Molecular Dynamics Simulations”. In: ChemRxiv 125.20 (2023), pp. 4390–
4400. DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2023-69m82-v2. eprint: https://chemrxiv.org/engage/
api-gateway/chemrxiv/assets/orp/resource/item/6494035f24989702c2c4307d/original/
finite-size-effects-on-the-calculation-of-x-ray-scattering-from-molecular-dynamics-
simulations.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2023-69m82-v2.
[44]
Pritam Ganguly and Nico F. A. van der Vegt. “Convergence of Sampling Kirkwood–
Buff Integrals of Aqueous Solutions with Molecular Dynamics Simulations”. In: Jour­
nal of Chemical Theory and Computation 9.3 (2013). PMID: 26587597, pp. 1347–
1355. DOI: 10.1021/ct301017q. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/ct301017q. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/ct301017q.
[45]
E Lorch. “Neutron diffraction by germania, silica and radiation­damaged silica glasses”.
In: Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 2.2 (Feb. 1969), p. 229. DOI: 10.1088/
0022-3719/2/2/305. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0022-3719/2/2/305.
[46]
Diana Bregenholt Zederkof et al. “Resolving Femtosecond Solvent Reorganization
Dynamics in an Iron Complex by Nonadiabatic Dynamics Simulations”. In: Journal
of the American Chemical Society 144.28 (2022). PMID: 35776920, pp. 12861–
12873. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.2c04505. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.2c04505.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.2c04505.
[47]
“OpenMM 7: Rapid development of high performance algorithms for molecular dy­
namics”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 13.7 (2017), e1005659. DOI: 10.1371/
journal . pcbi . 1005659. URL: https : / / app . dimensions . ai / details / publication / pub .
1090894993.
[48]
PubChem Compound Summary for CID 6342, Acetonitrile. https://pubchem.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/compound/Acetonitrile. Accessed: July 24, 2023.
[49]
Elvira Guardia et al. “Comparison of Different Three­site Interaction Potentials for
Liquid Acetonitrile”. In: Molecular Simulation ­ MOL SIMULAT 26 (Apr. 2001), pp. 287–
306. DOI: 10.1080/08927020108024509.
[50]
Kristoffer Haldrup et al. “Observing Solvation Dynamics with Simultaneous Fem­
tosecond X­ray Emission Spectroscopy and X­ray Scattering”. In: The Journal of
Physical Chemistry B 120.6 (Feb. 2016), pp. 1158–1168. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.
5b12471. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b12471.
42
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
A.1
Test of the Generalized AMBER Force Field
The neat acetonitrile solution was simulated using a system consisting of 718 molecules
in a box with side­lengths of d ≈40 Å and periodic boundary condition. The volume of
the box was reached taking the average volume of the last 4 ns of a 5 ns long simulation
(in simulated time, not real time) with a timestep of δt = 1 fs in the NPT ensemble using
a Monte Carlo barostat, recording the volume of the system every 1 ps. The temperature
and pressure of the barostat were set to T = 298.15 K and 1.01325 bar respectively. Fol­
lowing this volume­equilibration run in the NPT ensemble, the system was equilibrated
to the temperature of interest. This was done by a short t = 20 ps run at a timestep of
δt = 1fs in the NVT ensemble using a Langevin thermostat. The thermostat was set to
the temperature of interest ranging between 298.15 K and 398.15 K. The NVT equilibration
run was followed by a production run also in the NVT ensemble with similar parameters.
These production runs are then conducted for various lengths of time depending on de­
sired level of statistics and with a report interval of 1 ps, recording the atom positions and
various other quantities of interest like the velocities, temperatures, kinetic and potential
energy. From these simulations the RDFs are calculated from the atom positions. The
scattering, S(Q), calculated from the RDFs, and the difference scattering, ∆S(Q) by sub­
tracting two scattering signals produced at different temperatures from each other. To
ensure that the simulations produce RDFs that accurately model an acetonitrile solution,
the radial distribution functions are compared to the results presented by Guàrdia et al.
[49]. Figure A.1 shows the RDFs produced by a 10 ns long NVT production run plotted
against RDFs reported by Guàrdia et al. [49]. Here it can be seen that the simulation
produces similar results with only slight differences in the structure, which are likely due
to the acetonitrile in the Guàrdias model being being rigid, allowing no internal movement
in the molecule like in GAFF, and the methyl group of the acetonitrile being simulated as
one large atom, and not four distinct atoms.
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.1: The RDFs of the various atom pairs produced using GAFF, and the results
presented by Guàrdia et al. [49]
44
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
==PAGE:53==
Energy transfer from a vibrationally hot chromophore to a solvent
45
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, building 311
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fysik.dtu.dk
