==PAGE:1==
NTNU
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Faculty of Natural Sciences
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Master’s thesis
Vilma Helena Erika Kristiansson
Temperature-dependent carrier
lifetime measurements on silicon
wafers and bricks
Master’s thesis in Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering
(Nordic Master's Programme)
Supervisor: Marisa Di Sabatino (NTNU), Eugen Stamate (DTU), Sune
Thorsteinsson (DTU)
Co-supervisor: Alfredo Sanchez Garcia (SINTEF)
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Vilma Helena Erika Kristiansson
Temperature-dependent carrier
lifetime measurements on silicon
wafers and bricks
Master’s thesis in Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering (Nordic
Master's Programme)
Supervisor: Marisa Di Sabatino (NTNU), Eugen Stamate (DTU), Sune
Thorsteinsson (DTU)
Co-supervisor: Alfredo Sanchez Garcia (SINTEF)
June 2023
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Faculty of Natural Sciences
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ABSTRACT
This work presents a novel method to measure the temperature-dependent car-
rier lifetime of crystalline silicon wafers, bricks and ingots. The method uses a
BCT-300 from Sinton Instruments paired with a Peltier element connected to
a temperature controller. To ensure electrical insulation between the measured
sample and the Peltier element a 5 mm thick quartz plate is mounted on the
Peltier element.
The BCT-300 instrument allows measurements with the Quasi-Steady-State
Photoconductance (QSSPC) technique and transient photoconductance decay tech-
nique. The method has been tested in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C repres-
enting the Nordic climate. The silicon samples measured consist of 4 monocrys-
talline bricks, 2 multi-crystalline (mc-Si) bricks, 2 mc-Si wafers, and 8 mono-
crystalline wafers. All samples are p-typed boron doped, except 2 of the mono-
crystalline wafers that are n-typed phosphorus doped. The results show that the
proposed method eﬀectively measures temperature-dependent minority carrier life-
times higher than 1 µs within the studied temperature range. The temperature
dependence found for most samples aligns with the Shockley-Read-Hall equation
under low-level injection conditions. The limitations of the method are related to
the physical setup of the BCT-300 instrument and the Peltier element.
The thesis also investigates the temporal stability of stack passivation using
a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H on two p-type boron-doped monocrystalline wafers through a
10-week study. The ﬁrst sample, a Czochralski-grown wafer, shows stabilization
of the passivation layer after 600 hours with degradation of 50% from the initial
carrier lifetime measurement. The second sample, a ﬂoat zone-produced wafer,
shows a continuous decrease in the carrier lifetime through the 10-week period. It
is concluded that light-induced degradation, a nonuniform passivation layer and
a damaged passivation layer is responsible for the degradation. Lastly, the thesis
investigates the possibility of performing temperature-dependent lifetime spectro-
scopy (TDLS) analysis on the obtained data. Simpliﬁcations and assumptions are
taken into account while performing this analysis which oﬀers limitations in the
accuracy of the obtained results. However, by using the developed method TDLS
analysis can be performed.
i
==PAGE:6==
SAMMENDRAG
Dette arbeidet presenterer en ny metode for å måle temperaturavhengig ladnins-
bærer levetid i krystallinske silisium wafere, bricks og ingots. Det eksperimentelle
oppsettet består av en BCT-300 ladningsbærer levetidsmåler fra Sinton Instru-
ments sammenkoblet med et Peltier-element og en temperatur kontroll. For å
sikre elektrisk isolasjon mellom silisum prøven og Peltier-elementet, er en 5 mm
tykk kvartsplate montert på Peltier-elementet.
BCT-300-instrumentet mulligjør to måleteknikker, kvasi-likevektstilstand fo-
tokonduktans (QSSPC) og transient fotokondutans decay. Metoden er testet i
et temperaturintervall på 10-75 ◦C, som representerer det nordiske klimaet. De
målte silisiumprøvene inkluderer 4 monokrystallinske bricks, 2 multikrystallinske
(mc-Si) bricks, 2 mc-Si-wafere og 8 monokrystallinske wafere.
Alle prøvene er
p-type, bor-dopet, med unntak av 2 av monokrystallinske wafere som er n-type,
forfor-dopet. Resultatene viser at den utviklede metoden eﬀektivt måler temper-
aturavhengigheten til ladningsbærer levetiden høyere enn 1 µs innenfor det un-
dersøkte temperaturområdet. Temperaturavhengigheten som ble observert for de
ﬂeste prøvene er i samsvar med Shockley-Read-Hall-ligningen under betingelser
med lavt injeksjonsnivå.
Begrensningene til metoden er knyttet til det fysiske
oppsettet til BCT-300-instrumentet og Peltier-elementet.
I tillegg er den tidsmessige stabiliteten til en passivering bestående av a-
Si:H/a-SixNy:H på to p-typede bor-doped monokrystallinske wafere gjennom en
10-ukers studie undersøkt. Den første prøven, en czochralski silisium wafer viser
stabilisering av passiveringslaget etter 600 timer med en degradering på 50% fra
den initielle målingen av ladningsbærer levetiden. Den andre prøven, en ﬂoat-zone
silisium wafer, viser en kontinuerlig negang i ladningsbører levetiden gjennom de
10-ukene. Degraderingen som er observert konkluderes å være et resultat av lysin-
dusert nedbrytning, et ikke-uniformt passiveringslag og et skadd passiveringslag.
Avlustende ser arbeitet på muligheten til å utføre en temperaturavhengig
levetidsspektroskopi (TDLS) analyse ut fra den oppnådde dataen. Forenklinger
og antagelser ble tatt i betraktning under utførelsen av denne analysen. Dette
begrenser nøyaktigheten til de oppnådde resultatene. Den utviklede metoden kan
brukes til å utføre en TDLS-analyse.
ii
==PAGE:7==
PREFACE
This master thesis completes my Master of Science degree in the joint Nordic ﬁve
tech program Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering, Solar Cell Systems and
Materials as a collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
and the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU). The thesis is
performed in cooperation with SINTEF in Trondheim and is a continuation of the
specialization project Lifetime and resistivity measurements on silicon wafers and
bricks performed in the course TMT4520 during the fall of 2022. The specialization
project focused on the eﬀect the sample thickness and passivation had on the
carrier lifetime of Czochralski boron-doped monocrystalline silicon samples, and
learning the process of resistivity measurements which was crucial to measure
accurate carrier lifetime.
The master thesis investigates a method for measuring the carrier lifetime
at various temperatures to gain knowledge about the temperature eﬀect on the
carrier lifetime. The thesis includes basic knowledge about semiconductor physics
chapter 2, charge carrier transport Section 2.2, and experimental details chapter 4.
These chapters are partly or entirely based on the work performed through the
specialization project. In addition, the master thesis includes a poster presented
at The Norwegian Solar Cell Conference (NSCC) 2023, attached in Appendix 6.2.
iii
==PAGE:8==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was performed within the Norwegian Research Center for Sustainable
Solar Cell Technology (FME SUSOLTECH, project number 275639/E20). The
centre is co-sponsored by the Research Council of Norway and its research and
industry partners.
First and foremost I would like to express my gratitude to my main supervisor
Prof Marisa Di Sabatino (NTNU) for your excellent guidance, insightful comments,
for proofreading, and for being a great mentor.
Secondly, I would like to express my gratitude to my day-to-day co-supervisor
Dr. Alfredo Sanchez Garcia (SINTEF). From the very start, you created a safe
learning environment and taught me everything about the lab including setting it
up. Despite your busy schedule, you were always available with an open door and
made time for my endless questions, and series of discussions, helping me with my
Python script, and your ﬁne detailed feedback and countless coﬀee breaks. For
this, I am forever grateful.
To my DTU supervisors Eugen Stamate and Sune Thorsteinsson. For always
being available online, answering my countless questions and proofreading.
I would also like to thank the N5T for a great experience being both at DTU
and NTNU during the 2-year master’s degree. These 2 years have been challenging,
and full of new experiences and great people.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family for their love, support, patience, and
guidance.
iv
==PAGE:9==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
vii
List of Figures
vii
List of Figures
viii
List of Tables
xii
List of Tables
1
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
7
2.1
Basic semiconductor physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Generation and Recombination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Intrinsic recombination mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
The extrinsic recombination mechanism Shockley-Read-Hall
13
2.2.3
Surface recombination through defects
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2.2.4
Impurity Sources During Crystallisation And Silicon Pro-
duction Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Temperature dependence on carrier lifetime
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Lifetime characterization techniques
23
3.1
Quasi-steady-state photoconductance technique
. . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Transient photoconductive decay technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
The SRH equation and its linearizaiton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.1
The Shockley-Read-Hall equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.2
Temperature-dependent lifetime spectroscopy
. . . . . . . .
28
3.3.3
Injection-dependent lifetime spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.4
Lifetime spectroscopy analysis based on the SRH equation .
30
4
Experimental work
31
4.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.1
BCT-300 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.2
Peltier Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Results and Discussion
49
5.1
Lifetime measurements using the BCT-300 coupled with Peltier ele-
ment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.1.1
From the block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.1.2
Not from the block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Temporal stability of FZ and 2T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
TDLS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Conclusions
67
6.1
Concluding summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
References
69
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vii
Appendices:
73
A - TDLS analysis
74
B - poster
76
C - Specialization project
78
D - Risk analysis
117
==PAGE:12==
LIST OF FIGURES
1.1
Normalized eﬃciency as a function of operating temperature for
various PV-cell technologies. The ﬁgure illustrates a decrease in
eﬃciency with an increase in temperature [13]. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1
The ﬁgure illustrates the silicon energy band diagram where EC
and EV are energy levels of the conduction band and valence band
respectively The energy bands are separated by the forbidden band
gap Eg. The band gap energy or the width of the forbidden band
is Eg = 1.12 [eV] for silicon [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
In the ﬁgure, the CB is represented by the colour green, the VB by
the colour blue, electrons by red circles, and holes by white circles.
The main recombination mechanisms are illustrated as follows: (1)
radiative btb, (2) Auger, and (3) SRH recombination. The illus-
tration of the SRH recombination (3) also includes the process of
electron and hole trapping and de-trapping near the CB and the
VB, respectively, and will be further elaborated in Section 2.2.2. . .
12
2.3
SRH recombination shown as (3) from Figure 2.2. The ﬁgure illus-
trates occupied and unoccupied defect levels as part of the step-wise
transition that takes place when carriers recombine. An occupied
defect level can excite an electron to the CB (1) or capture a hole
from the VB (4). An unoccupied defect level can capture an elec-
tron from the CB (2) or emit a hole into the VB (3) [14]. . . . . . .
14
4.1
A p-type boron-doped monocrystalline block extracted from an in-
got made in the SINTEF Heliosi lab utilizing the Czochralski fur-
nace. The total length of the block is 18 cm. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Three 8x8 cm p-type boron-doped Cz bricks cut from the block in
Figure 4.1. The notation B and T represents samples cut from the
bottom and top respectively. The thickness of the samples is 1 cm.
33
viii
==PAGE:13==
LIST OF FIGURES
ix
4.3
Four 8⇥8 cm p-type boron-doped monocrystalline Cz samples cut
from the top (T) or the bottom (B) of the block (seen in Figure 4.1.
The samples have been passivated with the stack passivation of a-
Si:H/a-SixNy:H through the procedure explained in Section 2.2.3.
.
34
4.4
The sample C-196060 is a p-type boron-doped Cz monocrystalline
sample with a diameter of 10 cm and a thickness of 2.5 cm. . . . . .
35
4.5
The FZ sample is a p-type boron-doped monocrystalline wafer pro-
duced through the ﬂoat zone process with a diameter of 10 cm. The
sample has been passivated with the stack passivation of a-Si:H/a-
SixNy:H through the procedure explained in Section 2.2.3.
. . . . .
36
4.6
The samples Figure 4.6a and Figure 4.6b are p-type boron-doped
monocrystalline silicon samples produced by the Cz process. The
size of the samples is 5⇥5 cm. The Figure 4.6a are unpassivated
and the Figure 4.6b are passivated with the stack passivation of
a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H through the procedure explained in Section 2.2.3.
During the passivation process, the IC-x2 experienced some breakage. 37
4.7
The samples displayed in Figure 4.7a and Figure 4.7b are n-type
phosphorous-doped monocrystalline silicon samples produced by
the Cz process. The size of the samples is 12x12 cm.
. . . . . . . .
38
4.8
The samples Figure 4.8a and Figure 4.8b are p-type boron-doped
mc-Si samples produced through directional solidiﬁcation. The size
of the samples is 15⇥15. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.9
The samples QSSPC-1 (seen in Figure 4.9a) and QSSPC-2 (seen
in Figure 4.9b) are p-type boron-doped mc-Si bricks produced by
directional solidiﬁcation with a thickness of 1.5 cm. The size of the
bricks is 5⇥5 cm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.10 Part of the experimental setup which consists of the BCT-300 in-
strument (1) and temperature regulator (2). . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.11 The ﬁgure displays the BCT-300, with the 1000 nm ﬁlter inser-
ted, measuring a wafer. The BCT-300 shows a green LED light
indicating that a stable internal Temperature has been reached.
. .
41
4.12 Schematic working principle of a Peltier element connected to a
power source. The Peltier element consists of n-type and p-type
semiconductor materials [41].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.13 Experimental setup showing the Peltier element (3) with a connec-
ted water bath functioning as a temperature stabilizer (4). . . . . .
47
==PAGE:14==
x
LIST OF FIGURES
5.1
The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injec-
tion level of the three bricks from the block (Figure 4.2) measured
in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C. The bricks are p-type boron-
doped monocrystalline Cz samples. The sample 7T is observed to
have the highest measured carrier lifetime and 15B is observed to
have the lower measured carrier lifetime in the temperature range. .
51
5.2
The sample 15B (seen in Figure 4.2) is a p-type boron doped Cz
brick from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), measured from 10-75 ◦C.
The graph illustrates the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as
a function of injection level, and it is observed that the temperature
dependence of the carrier lifetime is in accordance with the SRH-
equation in the LLI region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
The sample 14B (seen in Figure 4.2) is a p-type boron doped Cz
brick from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), measured from 10-75 ◦C.
The graph illustrates the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as
a function of injection level, and it is observed that the temperature
dependence of the carrier lifetime is in accordance with the SRH-
equation in the LLI region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
The sample 7T (seen in Figure 4.2) is a p-type boron doped Cz
brick from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), measured from 10-75 ◦C.
The graph illustrates the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as
a function of injection level, and it is observed that the temperature
dependence of the carrier lifetime is in accordance with the SRH-
equation in the LLI region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
The samples 5T, 9B, 12B, and 2T (seen in Figure 4.3) are p-type
boron doped Cz wafers from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), meas-
ured from 10-75 ◦C. The samples are passivated with a-Si:H/a-
SixNy:H. The graphs illustrate the temperature-dependent carrier
lifetime as a function of the injection level. It is observed that the
temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime is in accordance with
the SRH-equation in the LLI region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.6
The C-196060 is a p-type boron doped monocrystalline brick, seen
in Figure 4.4). The graph illustrates the measured carrier lifetime
as a function of injection level. The carrier lifetime was measured
in a temperature range from 15-75 ◦C. The graph does not display
a clear temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime.
. . . . . . .
54
5.7
The QSSPC-1 and QSSPC-2 samples (seen in Figure 4.9) are P-type
boron doped mc-Si samples produced through directional solidiﬁc-
ation and have a thickness of 1.5 cm. The temperature-dependent
carrier lifetime is measured in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C. The
carrier lifetime is seen to decrease with increasing temperature. . . .
55
==PAGE:15==
LIST OF FIGURES
xi
5.8
The FZ wafer (seen in Figure 4.5) has a diameter of 5 cm and
is a p-type boron doped monocrystalline silicon sample produced
through the ﬂoat zone process described in Section 2.2.4. The graph
displays the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of
the injection level for the FZ wafer. The carrier lifetime is seen
to increase with increasing temperature aligning with the SRH-
equation in the LLI region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.9
The measured carrier lifetime as a function of injection level in a
temperature range of 10-75 ◦C, on the IC samples.
The IC-1T
and IC-1B are unpassivated p-type boron-doped monocrystalline
Cz wafers. The trend observed for the two unpassivated wafers in
Figure 5.9a and 5.9b are not in accordance with the SRH-equation
in the LLI region. The two wafers IC-x1 and IC-x2 are stack with a-
Si:H/a-SixNy in accordance to the process described in Section 2.2.3.
Figure 5.9c and 5.9d. The carrier lifetime for the passivated samples
is observed to increase with increasing temperature in aligning with
the SRH equation in the LLI region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.10 The graphs display the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a
function of injection level for the sample n-type 1 (5.10a) and n-type
2 (5.10b). These samples are n-type phosphorus-doped monocrys-
talline Cz wafers, displayed in Figure 4.7. The graph displays the
temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injection
level for the sample n-type 2. The samples are phosphorus-doped
n-type Cz wafers, as displayed in Figure 4.7b. The overall temper-
ature dependence on the carrier lifetime is in accordance with the
SRH-equation in the LLI region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.11 The graphs display the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as
a function of injection level for the multi-grains (Figure 5.11a) and
m-cryst (Figure 5.11b) samples in a temperature range of 10-75
◦C. The measured carrier lifetime of the multi-grains sample show
instability and no clear temperature dependence in accordance with
the SRH-equation in the LLI region. The measured carrier lifetime
of the m-cryst sample show instability in measurements however
the carrier lifetime increases with increasing temperature aligning
with the SRH-equation in the LLI region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.12 Temporal stability measurements of the Si:H/a-SixNy stack passiv-
ated 2T (Figure 5.12a) and FZ (Figure 5.12b) samples are displayed
in Figure 5.12a and Figure 5.12b, respectively. The measurements
include measuring the carrier lifetime at a ﬁxed injection level in a
given temperature range of 10-75 ◦Cand have been performed once
a week for a period of ten weeks. The colour coding represents the
temperatures where dark blue is 10 ◦C, and red is 75 ◦C. . . . . . .
61
5.13 Scratches and marks that formed on the FZ sample surface around
week 6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:16==
xii
LIST OF FIGURES
5.14 The ﬁgures illustrate the TDLS analysis performed on the brick
samples 15B (Figure 5.14a) and 14B (Figure 5.14b). The trap level
found through the analysis is given in the title of both samples. For
the sample 15B, the trap level corresponds to 1.103 eV and for the
sample 14B, the trap level is found to be 1.101 eV. . . . . . . . . . .
65
.1
TDLS analysis on the brick sample 7T. The trap level found in the
sample 7T corresponds to 1.103 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
.2
TDLS analysis on the wafer sample FZ. The trap level found in the
FZ sample corresponds to 1.098 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
.3
TDLS analysis on the wafer sample 2T. The trap level found in the
2T sample corresponds to 1.099 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
.4
TDLS analysis on the wafer sample 5T. The trap level found in the
5T sample corresponds to 1.105 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
.5
TDLS analysis on the wafer sample 9B. The trap level found in the
9B sample corresponds to 1.096 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
.6
TDLS analysis on the wafer sample 12B. The trap level found in
the 12B sample corresponds to 1.104 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
.7
TDLS analysis on the wafer sample IC-x1. The trap level found in
the IC-x1 sample corresponds to 1.097 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
.8
TDLS analysis on the wafer sample m-cryst. The trap level found
in the m-cryst sample corresponds to 1.107 eV. . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
==PAGE:17==
LIST OF TABLES
3.1
Limiting case of Low-level injection conditions (∆n ⌧p0 + n0) [14].
27
4.1
Information about all measured samples in the thesis, where DS
represents directional solidiﬁcation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Measurement technique, Speciﬁed MCD based, lifetime range and
ﬁlter used depending on analysis mode for the BCT-300 instrument
[14, 16].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
1
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER
ONE
INTRODUCTION
The consequences the world is facing if the global temperature exceeds the tem-
perature limit of 1.5 ◦C set by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) can be detrimental [1].
In light of ongoing challenges such as the en-
ergy crisis and population growth, the demand for energy continues to escalate.
The Energy Information Administration (EIA) projects a nearly 50% increase in
world energy consumption by 2050 due to population growth and an increase in
standards of living in non-Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment (OECD) countries [2]. The situation today where most of the world’s energy
needs are met by fossil fuels, whose energy conversion results in greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions contributes to global warming [3]. For these reasons, the need
for renewable sources of energy and utilization technologies is essential.
Through the European Economic Area (EEA) Norway is committed to be
Determined to preserve, protect and improve the quality of the environment and
to ensure prudent and rational utilization of natural resources on the basis, in
particular, of the principle of sustainable development, as well as the principle that
precautionary and preventive action should be taken [4]. Consequently, Norway,
along with other nations worldwide, is actively transitioning away from fossil fuel-
based energy systems. By doing so, the energy mix that today consists of 81%
(2021) fossil fuels (when 5% nuclear is counted as sustainable energy) will become
greener [5]. This however requires reducing the costs of renewable energy sources
and simultaneously increasing their eﬃciencies.
A renewable energy source that is expected to be one of the most important
contributors is solar energy. Solar energy is seen as one of the fastest-growing
energy sources between 2018-2050 together with wind and hydroelectric power [5].
Solar energy is abundant, free and available everywhere. Through the photovoltaic
(PV) eﬀect it is possible to convert sunlight directly to electricity to power devices
[6]. The PV energy sector is rapidly growing by more than 40% per year since
the beginning of 2000 with a current (2022) global capacity of 940 GWp [7, 8].
Photovoltaic energy has a great number of advantages, however, the limitations
2
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
are mainly related to eﬃciency as this property is a compromise between cost,
material, and eﬃciency [9]. Other challenges are mainly related to maintenance,
energy storage, and weather dependencies [9].
The trend observed in the PV
market is a continuation of a price reduction of the price of PV modules [8].
Silicon solar cells are today a mature technology with the highest reaching
eﬃciency being 26.8% for the single crystal (non-concentrator) silicon solar cells
[10]. The maximum eﬃciency a single homojunction silicon solar cell can reach
is approximately 32% [11]. The most important photovoltaic material today is
silicon which makes up 95% of all solar cell material used. One of the reasons
for this extensive use of silicon can be explained through its abundance in silicon
oxide (SiO2) which makes up 27.7% of the earth’s crust [3, 12].
1.1
Motivation
Solar cell eﬃciency is essentially the most important factor for assessing quantit-
atively the quality of solar cells. The quality of the solar cell is directly dependent
on the quality of the material [9]. To increase the eﬃciency of a solar cell it is
important to understand the parameters inﬂuencing the eﬃciency of the mater-
ial. Solar cells are sensitive to temperature and suﬀer from recombination losses,
ohmic resistance losses, shadowing losses etc [9]. The eﬀect of an increase in tem-
perature is observed to have a direct negative eﬀect on both the eﬃciency and
power output of the solar cell [13]. This can be observed in Figure 1.1 where
increased temperature results in a linear decrease in the eﬃciency for several PV
technologies. This phenomenon can be attributed to the accelerated rate of re-
combination processes that occur at elevated temperatures [13]. A decrease in
solar cell eﬃciency corresponds to a decrease in the power output of the solar cell.
To assess the quality and eﬃciency of a solar cell, or a solar cell material, the
carrier lifetime can be measured. A high carrier lifetime is associated with high
eﬃciency and vice versa [14]. The carrier lifetime represents the time it takes for
a charge carrier, a hole or an electron, to recombine [9]. This parameter depends
on various factors such as impurity concentration and defects in the material.
Impurities and defects have a detrimental inﬂuence on the carrier lifetime. The
decay of charge carriers through defect states in the material is commonly known
as the Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination mechanism and is dominant in
silicon [14].
In monocrystalline silicon samples defects are most likely to occur at the
surface of the sample due to abrupt discontinuities in the crystal structure seen by
the edges of the surface or grain boundaries. These abrupt discontinuities represent
unbonded or partially bonded atoms also referred to as dangling bonds [14]. The
unbonded atoms introduce vacant positions in the lattice where unwanted vacancy
atoms or extrinsic impurities from the environment can connect to the material
[9]. Consequently, these impurities introduce energy levels within the band gap,
acting as trap states or recombination centres that have a detrimental impact on
both eﬃciency and carrier lifetime [14].
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1: Normalized eﬃciency as a function of operating temperature for
various PV-cell technologies. The ﬁgure illustrates a decrease in eﬃciency with an
increase in temperature [13].
The carrier lifetime can be measured through various techniques, two of these
are the quasi-steady-state photoconductance (QSSPC) technique and the transient
photoconductance decay (PCD) method, ﬁrst described by Sinton et. al in 1996
[14, 15]. The QSSPC regime is used for materials with low carrier lifetimes, while
the PCD method is used for materials with high carrier lifetimes.
To better understand the temperature eﬀects on the carrier lifetime, this
thesis develops a method for measuring the carrier lifetime at various temperat-
ures. Samples of diﬀerent ingots, doping and crystal structures will be measured.
To ensure that the method developed in this thesis can be utilized at a later time,
there will be multiple measurements on chosen samples to ensure that results are
reproducible. Through these measurements and focus areas, the thesis will answer
the following research question:
• Is the carrier lifetime in mono and multi-crystalline silicon samples inﬂuenced
diﬀerently by temperature and is the temperature eﬀect more signiﬁcant in
one sample than the other?
• What is the temporal stability of the stack passivation of a-Si:H and a-
SiNx:H and how does the passivation performance diﬀer ten weeks after
initial testing?
• Through temperature-dependent lifetime spectroscopy, can we from the de-
veloped model gain information about the defect level in the materials?
The thesis is a continuation of a 15 ECTS specialization project report, part
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
of the course TMT4520.
The focus area of the specialisation project Lifetime
and resistivity measurements on silicon wafers and bricks was to learn the work-
ing principles of the Sinton Instrument BCT-300 and how to perform four-point
probe measurements on diﬀerent samples. In addition, the inﬂuence of the sample
thickness of wafers and bricks (164 µm - 1 cm), passivated and unpassivated wafers,
on the carrier lifetime was investigated [16].
==PAGE:22==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER
TWO
THEORY
2.1
Basic semiconductor physics
This chapter aims at providing the reader with the necessary theoretical back-
ground to understand the measurements, results, and discussion in the later
chapters. The most important concepts on basic semiconductor physics are provided
in the following chapters, however, more thorough information is given as part of
the specialization project report, attached in Appendix 6.2.
A semiconductor is suitable for use in solar cells due to its properties. These
include the ability to absorb visible light, and the band gap between initial, occu-
pied, and unoccupied states which are involved in the absorption of photons, seen
in Figure 2.1 [9]. Insulators and metals also have bandgaps however the distance
between the lowest energy level that can accept an electron (Lowest Unoccupied
Molecular Orbital - LUMO) and the highest energy level containing valence elec-
trons (highest occupied molecular orbital - HOMO) is too long or overlapping [18].
The distance between the HOMO and LUMO plays a fundamental role in determ-
ining the wavelength and intensity of light absorption [18]. The eﬃciency of the
solar cell is directly related to the bandgap and the maximum eﬃciency is seen
at a band gap width of 1.4 eV. The eﬃciency is also dependent on the incident
photon energy as shown in Equation 2.1 [9].
Eph = hc
λ ,
(2.1)
where Eph [eV] is the photon energy, h is the Planck constant [eVs], c [m/s] is the
speed of light, and λ [nm] is the wavelength of the incident light [9].
The lowest unoccupied band is the conduction band (CB) and the highest
occupied band is commonly known as the valence band (VB). The VB edge (EV)
and the CB edge (EC) are separated by a band gap: Eg = EC −EV, in which
electrons are not able to populate [9]. The reason is that there are no energy
7
==PAGE:24==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.1: The ﬁgure illustrates the silicon energy band diagram where EC and
EV are energy levels of the conduction band and valence band respectively The
energy bands are separated by the forbidden band gap Eg. The band gap energy
or the width of the forbidden band is Eg = 1.12 [eV] for silicon [17].
levels within the band gap of an intrinsic semiconductor, meaning that there are
no electrons present. To promote an electron from the VB to the CB energy equal
to or larger than the band gap is required. The excess energy generated from the
promotion of the electron is converted into electrical energy, commonly known as
the photovoltaic eﬀect (PE) [9]. Materials that require momentum together with
a photon in order to promote an electron from the VB to the CB are commonly
known as indirect band gap materials. In these materials, the CB minimum and
the VB maximum occur at diﬀerent wave number values (k). In direct band gap
materials, the VB maximum and the CB minimum occur at the same wave number
value and only a photon is needed to promote the electron from the VB to the CB
[9].
The properties of a semiconductor can be tailored by means of their electrical
and conductive properties and for more eﬃcient transport of charges. This can
be achieved through the addition of an atom with a higher valence number by
adding, for instance, phosphorus which has ﬁve valence electrons. This is com-
monly referred to as donor doping as electrons are the majority carrier in the
material and donate away the excess electron. Another possible way to dope the
semiconductor material is by adding a material with a lower valence number. This
can be achieved by adding for instance boron which has three valence electrons.
The addition of a lower valence atom is commonly referred to as acceptor doping
as electrons are accepted to the empty positively charged position in the outer
shell of silicon. The absence of an electron is treated as a particle known as a hole.
More information on semiconductor doping is elaborated in Appendix 6.2 section
2.2.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
9
In thermal equilibrium (T=0K) the VB states are occupied and the CB states
are unoccupied, as all electrons are involved in bonding. For this reason, they do
not conduct heat or electricity easily [9].
The probability of allowed electron
states at a given energy level E in thermal equilibrium can be described through
the Fermi-Dirac (F-D) distribution presented in Equation 2.2.
f(E) =

1 + exp
✓E −EF
kBT
◆$−1
,
(2.2)
where EF [eV] is the Fermi energy, kB [eV/K] is Boltzmann’s constant and T
[K] is the absolute temperature. To calculate the densities of electrons and holes
in the CB and the VB, respectively, at thermal equilibrium Equation 2.3 and
Equation 2.4 can be used for electrons and holes respectively [9].
n0 = NC exp
✓EF −EC
kBT
◆
,
(2.3)
p0 = NV exp
✓EV −EF
kBT
◆
.
(2.4)
Equation 2.3 and Equation 2.4 show that n0 [cm−3] and p0 [cm−3] strongly
depend on both the Fermi level and the temperature [9]. NC [cm−3] in Equation 2.3
and NV [cm−3] in Equation 2.4 denote the eﬀective density of state in the CB and
VB, respectively. These values can be calculated through Equation 2.5 [9].
NC/V = 2
✓m⇤
e/hkBT
2⇡~2
◆3
2
,
(2.5)
where m⇤
e/h [-] are the eﬀective masses of electrons (e) and holes (h) respectively,
and ~ [Js] is the reduced Planck constant. The equations above, 2.2-2.5, indicate
that the product of the n0 and p0 is constant for any given material at a given
temperature and is independent of EF [9]. This is the intrinsic carrier density,
ni and equals the equilibrium concentrations of electrons and holes, expressed in
Equation 2.6, commonly known as the law of mass action [9].
n0p0 = NCNVexp
✓
−Egap
kbT
◆
= n2
i .
(2.6)
2.2
Generation and Recombination
When light is incident on a semiconductor material, the electrons absorb light as
photons and are excited from the VB to the CB. Simultaneously a hole in the CB
is promoted to the VB and an electron hole (e-h) pair is generated. Generation is
seen as a process that increases the number of charge carriers in the semiconductors
[14].
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
The opposite process of generation is recombination. The recombination pro-
cess takes place as a spontaneous transition of an excited electron from the CB
to an unoccupied state, a hole, in the VB. Therefore this process is referred to as
recombination. Here an e-h pair is annihilated. This process decreases the num-
ber of charge carriers in the semiconductor. Recombination is one of the major
limiting factors on solar cell eﬃciency and is therefore important to investigate.
The recombination rate (R, [cm−3s−1]) and the generation rate (G, [cm−3s−1])
are proportional to each other. This proportionality is based on the probability
of an electron moving from the CB to the VB, through the F-D distribution. In
thermal equilibrium, the thermal generation rate (G0, [cm−3s−1]) and the recom-
bination rate (R0, [cm−3s−1]) are balanced [14]. When a system is exposed to
constant light, it reaches a new stationary state where the generation rate ex-
ceeds the equilibrium generation rate and the total recombination rate exceeds
the equilibrium recombination rate. When the light is turned oﬀ, the system tries
to return to equilibrium. The excess electron and hole densities (∆n and ∆p)
therefore decay at a net recombination rate (U [cm−3s−1]) which is equal to the
recombination rate minus the equilibrium recombination rate or the generation
rate minus the recombination rate (∆U = R −R0 = G −R [cm−3s−1]) [14]. As-
suming the material remains in charge neutrality and free of trapping centres (∆n
= ∆p), the time dependence of ∆n can be expressed through Equation 2.7 [14].
d∆n(t)
dt
= −U (∆n(t), n0, p0) .
(2.7)
In thermal equilibrium, the net recombination rate can be represented as
a polynomial in (∆n, [cm−3]), with the zero-order coeﬃcient equal to zero, as U
must equal zero at (∆n=0). Hence, the time-dependent decay of the excess carrier
density (∆n) follows an exponential decay, which can be shown through a Taylor
function. By setting the recombination rate U(∆n) as a function where ∆n is a
function of the excess carrier density, the Taylor expansion will take the following
form.
U(∆n) ⇡U(∆n = 0) + @U
@∆n
%%%%
∆n=0
∆n + O(∆n2),
(2.8)
where U(∆n = 0) = O, therefore
U(∆n) ⇡@U
@∆n
%%%%
∆n=0
∆n = ↵⇥∆n,
(2.9)
where ↵=
@U
@∆n|∆n=0 is a constant. Then, using equation Equation 2.9 the time
decay of ∆n can be expressed as follows.
d
dt∆n = −U(∆n, n0, p0) = −↵∆n.
(2.10)
By inserting Equation 2.9 as d∆n
∆n = −↵dt in Equation 2.10, with the expo-
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
11
nential decay of ∆n can be derived by integration between 0&t:
Z ∆n(t)
∆n(t=0)
d∆n
∆n = −↵
Z t
0
dt,
(2.11)
By integrating Equation 2.11 the following expression is obtained.
log ∆n(t)
∆n(0) = −↵t,
(2.12)
and therefore
∆n(t) = ∆n(0)e−↵t.
(2.13)
The ↵[1/s] in Equation 2.11-2.13 represents the time constant of exponential
decay. The recombination lifetime (⌧[s]), commonly referred to as the lifetime or
carrier lifetime, is dependent on the excess carrier density and can be expressed
through Equation 2.14 [14].
⌧(∆n, n0, p0) =
∆n
U(∆n, n0, p0).
(2.14)
The recombination processes are categorized into intrinsic and extrinsic mech-
anisms.
Intrinsic mechanisms are inherent to all crystal types and are caused
by band-to-band (btb) transitions. They include radiative recombination (URad
[cm−3s−1]), where excess energy is released as a photon seen as (1) in Figure 2.2,
and Auger btb recombination (UAuger), where excess energy is transferred to a
third carrier, seen as (2) in Figure 2.2. The extrinsic mechanism depends on the
concentration of impurities and dislocations present in the material. The decay of
electrons from the CB to the VB takes place as a step-wise transition via a defect
centre with an intermediate energy level in the band gap. This recombination
mechanism is commonly known as Shockley-Read-Hall, and the recombination
rate is denoted as USRH, seen as (3) in Figure 2.2. The intrinsic and extrinsic re-
combination mechanisms are often used to express the bulk lifetime ⌧bulk [s] shown
in the following equation [9].
1
⌧bulk
=
1
⌧Auger
+
1
⌧Rad
+
1
⌧SRH
,
(2.15)
where ⌧Auger, ⌧Rad, and ⌧SRH [s] are the lifetimes associated with the Auger, radi-
ative, and SRH recombination mechanisms, respectively, given in Equation 2.14.
The SRH mechanism dominates in silicon; however, with increasing temperature
or in heavily doped silicon, the Auger mechanism becomes dominant. As silicon
is an indirect bandgap material, the radiative mechanism is not relevant in silicon
[17].
The eﬀective carrier lifetime, ⌧e↵[s], combines the bulk and surface recom-
bination, ⌧surf [s], through Equation 2.16. Surface recombination can be viewed as
a two-dimensional case of SRH taking place on the surface of the material, this is
further covered in Section 2.2.3.
1
⌧e↵
=
1
⌧bulk
+
1
⌧surf
.
(2.16)
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
In the limiting cases of high or low recombination rates the bulk lifetime seen
in Equation 2.16 can be simpliﬁed to Equation 2.17 [14].
The surface recom-
bination velocity can be derived through the time-dependent equation for excess
carrier density given in Equation 2.14. The surface recombination velocity is ex-
pressed as S = U/∆n, and the distance the carrier has to pass to recombine is
the diﬀusion length, Lj (where j=p, n for holes and electrons, respectively). The
length the carriers have to pass before they recombine depends on the thickness of
the sample. The diﬀusion length can be expressed as L =
p
Dj⌧j. The eﬀective
lifetime can be expressed as follows.
1
⌧e↵
=
1
⌧bulk
+ 2Se↵
W .
(2.17)
where W [cm] is the wafer thickness and Se↵[cm/s] is the eﬀective surface re-
combination. Equation 2.17 shows that with a low bulk recombination lifetime,
surface recombination will be dominant and vice versa [14]. The derivation of
Equation 2.17 can be found in [19].
Figure 2.2: In the ﬁgure, the CB is represented by the colour green, the VB
by the colour blue, electrons by red circles, and holes by white circles. The main
recombination mechanisms are illustrated as follows: (1) radiative btb, (2) Auger,
and (3) SRH recombination. The illustration of the SRH recombination (3) also
includes the process of electron and hole trapping and de-trapping near the CB
and the VB, respectively, and will be further elaborated in Section 2.2.2.
2.2.1
Intrinsic recombination mechanisms
The two intrinsic recombination mechanisms are radiative btb recombination and
Auger btb recombination. Radiative btb recombination refers to the release of
a photon due to excess energy, as illustrated in Figure 2.2 (1). It is dominant
in direct-band-gap materials as it occurs directly from band to band. For this
reason, the radiative btb is not the primary recombination mechanism in silicon-
based semiconductors.
The rate Urad at which radiative recombination occurs
depends on the concentration of free electrons and holes [14]. This is described by
Equation 2.18.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
13
Urad = Brad(np −n2
i ),
(2.18)
where Brad [cm−3s−1] represents the radiative recombination coeﬃcient, which
denotes the probability of a radiative transition occurring. This coeﬃcient is a
material property that depends on the band structure of the semiconductor [9].
Auger recombination refers to the case when excess energy from a decay-
ing carrier is transferred to a third carrier, illustrated in Figure 2.2 (2).
The
Auger recombination is dominant in materials with high carrier densities or at
high temperatures as a result of increasing thermal excitation [9]. The rate of this
mechanism depends on the densities of all involved carriers and the net rate for
the two-electron and one-hole (eeh-process) and two holes and an electron (ehh-
process) process. The net recombination rate, UAuger, of these processes is given
in Equation 2.19 and is given as the product of the concentrations of the carriers
involved [9]. Auger recombination can take place in indirect band gap materi-
als and is considered the most dominant loss mechanism in very pure silicon and
germanium [9].
UAuger = Cn(n2p −n2
0p0) + Cp(np2 −n0p2
0),
(2.19)
where Cn and Cp [cm6s−1] are Auger coeﬃcients of the eeh- and ehh-processes,
respectively.
2.2.2
The extrinsic recombination mechanism Shockley-Read-
Hall
The extrinsic recombination mechanism takes place as the decay of an e-h pair
occurs as a step-wise transition involving a defect centre with an intermediate
energy level within the band gap [14]. This recombination mechanism is known
as SRH recombination and is illustrated as (3) in Figure 2.2 [20].
In silicon semiconductors, SRH is the dominant recombination mechanism
due to the presence of impurities in the crystal structure. These impurities create
energy levels in the bandgap that act as trap states or recombination centres when
located in the forbidden [9, 14]. The defect energy level and its location within
the band gap have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the recombination rate of the charge
carrier.
When the defect level is close to the CB edge, the probability of the
electron being re-emitted to the CB is higher than the probability of combining
with a hole coming from the VB into the same energy level. This can be attributed
to the fact that the trap level is closer to the CB than the VB, which facilitates
the re-emission of the electron from the trap level to the CB while increasing the
energy barrier for hole capture from the VB. Consequently, defect energy states
that are deeply situated within the band gap have more inﬂuence on the carrier
lifetime than the shallow defects [14].
Defect levels, as displayed in Figure 2.3, can be either occupied or unoccupied.
An occupied defect level can either excite an electron to the CB (1) or capture a
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.3: SRH recombination shown as (3) from Figure 2.2. The ﬁgure illus-
trates occupied and unoccupied defect levels as part of the step-wise transition
that takes place when carriers recombine. An occupied defect level can excite an
electron to the CB (1) or capture a hole from the VB (4). An unoccupied defect
level can capture an electron from the CB (2) or emit a hole into the VB (3) [14].
hole from the VB (4), as illustrated in Figure 2.3. An unoccupied defect level can
either capture an electron from the CB (2) or emit a hole into the VB (3) seen
in Figure 2.3 [14]. The interactions between the defects and the CB and VB can
result in three distinct processes: recombination centre, generation centre, and
trap centre [14].
SRH is the most important recombination mechanism in silicon and will for
this reason be derived in the following. The net generation and recombination rate
of holes and electrons are dependent on the emission and capture rates (c⇤
p and c⇤
n)
of holes and electrons. The capture rates for holes and electrons are expressed in
Equation 2.20 [14].
c⇤
p = cpp = σp⌫thp,
c⇤
n = cnn = σn⌫vtn.
(2.20)
The probability of an electron occupying a defect state is given by the product
Nt ⇥ft, where Nt is the density of defect centres, and ft is the probability of
occupation by an electron, which is determined by the Fermi-Dirac distribution
function (Equation 2.2). The total electron emission (or total hole capture) is
directly proportional to the density of occupied defect centres, as only occupied
states can emit an electron or capture a hole. Conversely, for total electron capture
(or hole emission), only one electron can be captured and occupy a single defect
state, and the state must be unoccupied. Therefore, the probability of an electron
not occupying the defect state is given by 1−ft. The changes in hole and electron
concentrations over time as a result of generation and recombination processes,
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
15
can be expressed by the following equations, respectively.
✓dp
dt
◆
GR
= ep ⇥Ntft −cnn ⇥Nt(1 −ft),
(2.21)
✓dn
dt
◆
GR
= en ⇥Nt(1 −ft) −cpn ⇥Ntft.
(2.22)
By isolating the emission rates from Equations 2.22 and 2.21, they can be
expressed as functions of the defect energy Et and the capture coeﬃcients cn
for electrons and cp for holes, as expressed in Equation 2.23 and Equation 2.24,
respectively. Under equilibrium conditions, where the rate of generation and re-
combination are equal, the net recombination and generation are zero. By using
USRH =
( dn
dt
)
GR =
( dp
dt
)
GR, it is possible to derive expressions for the emission
rates of electrons and holes, denoted as en and ep respectively, are expressed in
the following equations.
en = cnn1 −ft
ft
= cnNC exp(−EC −Et
kBT
) = cnn1,
(2.23)
ep = cpp
ft
1 −ft
= cpNC exp(−Et −EV
kBT
) = cpp1,
(2.24)
where n1 and p1 are the SRH densities for electrons.
Under steady-state conditions, the time rates of change of electrons dn/dt = 0
and the time rates of change of holes dp/dt = 0, therefore they are equal. By
inserting Equation 2.23 and Equation 2.24 into Equation 2.21 and Equation 2.22,
respectively, The probability of occupation, ft, of the defect centres as a function
of time can be determined through dn/dt = dp/dt. If this expression is inserted in
either Equation 2.21 or Equation 2.22 the net recombination rate USRH [cm−3s−1]
for SRH recombination through defects can be expressed through the following
equation.
USRH =
(np −n2
i )
[Ntσn⌫th]−1(p + p1) + [Ntσp⌫th]−1(n + n1).
(2.25)
By inserting Equation 2.25 into Equation 2.14, it is possible to derive an
expression for the SRH lifetime. The derivation of this equation assumes that
carrier trapping can be neglected meaning that ∆n = ∆p. The non-equilibrium
densities of electrons and holes are equal to n = n0+∆n and p = p0+∆p. Through
this, the expression for the SRH lifetime, ⌧SRH [s], in Equation 2.26 is derived.
⌧SRH = ⌧n0(p0 + p1 + ∆n) + ⌧p0(n0 + n1 + ∆n)
p0 + n0 + ∆n
,
(2.26)
where ⌧n0 [s] and ⌧p0 [s] are the capture time constants of electrons and holes,
respectively [9].
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.2.3
Surface recombination through defects
In mono- and multi-crystalline silicon (mc-Si), defects are most frequently found
on the surface edges and at grain boundaries respectively. The reason for this is
the presence of partially bonded Si-atoms at the silicon surface edge and in the
grain boundaries present in the material. This creates an abrupt discontinuity
in the crystal structure with unbonded atoms [9, 14]. The presence of unbonded
atoms is higher in mc-Si compared to monocrystalline silicon.
The density of
recombination-active defect levels near the semiconductor surface is increased as
a result of the unbonded atoms. These unbonded atoms represent areas in which
environmental impurities can connect to the material. These impurities act as
trapping centres or recombination centres [14].
The recombination rate at the surface is often described by the surface re-
combination velocity (SRV). The SRV can be calculated for both electrons, Sn,
and holes, Sp, [cm/s], as expressed in Equation 2.27 [9].
Sj = BjNs,
(2.27)
where j = n, p for electrons and holes respectively, Bj is a coeﬃcient given by
Bj = ⌫jσj where ⌫j ia th thermal velocity of the carrier and σj is the capture
cross-section of the carrier, and Ns [cm−3] is the density of traps per unit area.
The SRV is limited by the thermal energy, and at higher temperatures, the SRV
increases. The reason for this is attributed to the increased diﬀusion of carriers
to the surface at higher temperatures [14]. The SRV is expressed as the surface
recombination rate, Us [cm−2s−1], divided by the carrier density, ∆n, shown in
Equation 2.28 [14].
S ⌘Us
∆n.
(2.28)
Surface recombination can be seen as a two-dimensional case of SRH. One
way to reduce surface recombination is through passivation which is a process that
saturates the unbonded Si-atoms and reduces the number of energy states in the
bandgap, resulting in longer carrier lifetimes [9]. This will be further explained in
Section 2.2.3.
Reduction of surface recombination
The primary limiting factor in the performance of today’s crystalline silicon solar
cells is recombination at the cell surfaces and contacts [9]. In the case of high sur-
face recombination velocity at the silicon surface, a dead layer is created where the
photogenerated carriers are not collected [9]. To avoid carriers recombining at the
surface, and reducing the recombination velocity, a thin layer of a wide bandgap
insulator material can be applied on the surface. This applied layer saturates the
unbonded atoms and other recombination active bonds at the surface which pre-
vents the carriers from reaching the surface and recombining. This is referred to
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
17
as surface passivation. Through surface passivation, the SRV is reduced, resulting
in higher measured lifetimes compared to unpassivated (untreated) surfaces [9].
This means that the quality of passivation can be investigated through the SRV. If
the surface passivation is of high quality, the eﬀective lifetime ⌧eﬀcan be described
by the bulk lifetime alone, as expressed in Equation 2.29 [14].
1
⌧e↵
=
1
⌧bulk
.
(2.29)
To perform passivation, oxygen, nitrogen, or hydrogen atoms are often used
[14]. One method used for surface passivation is chemical passivation, such as
the stack passivation of hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) and hydrogen-
ated amorphous silicon nitride (a-SixNy:H) [21]. This passivation procedure is a
two-step process that includes sample etching followed by passivation using the
Oxford Instruments PlasmaLab 133 PECVD chamber (Plasma-enhanced chem-
ical vapour deposition) [22]. Information about the electromagnetic ﬁeld needed
to generate the plasma and the pressure in the deposition chamber is conﬁdential
to the instrument and process at IFE [22].
The etching process involves immersing the samples in an HNA solution (Hy-
droﬂuoric (HF) acid, nitric acid, and acetic acid with a 2:10:5 ratio) for 20 minutes
using the CP5-ets etching method to remove any unwanted substances from the
surface [22]. This is followed by eliminating any organic residue on the substrate
using Piranha cleaning, which is a mixture of sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) on the wafers [23]. The ﬁrst step includes a 2-minute HF dip
and cleaning with de-ionized (DI) water. The second step involves an 8-minute
immersion in the Piranha solution, followed by cleaning with DI water. The third
step is a repetition of the ﬁrst step, followed by drying in an N2-well [22].
The passivation process begins by removing possible oxide layers on the wafer
surface through a 2-minute HF dip in a 5% HF solution, followed by drying in
an N2-well. Once the samples are dry, they can be placed in a load-lock chamber
with a vacuum environment to prevent surface oxidation. The passivation is then
performed using Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD). The
passivation starts by depositing a 40 nm layer of hydrogenated amorphous silicon
(a-Si:H) on one side of the wafer. The sample is then removed from the vacuum,
quickly ﬂipped, and another 40 nm layer of a-Si:H is deposited on the other side
of the wafer. After the passivation layer has been deposited, a 70 nm layer of
silicon nitride (a-SixNy:H) is also deposited on both sides of the sample. This can
be observed in the samples as the (a-SixNy:H) layer yields a blue colour. The
SiNx:H layer serves two purposes: improving the passivation of a-Si:H through
a 10-minute annealing process at 230°C and enhancing the sample’s resistance
against scratches and other handling-related issues during measurements such as
lifetime measurements [22].
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Temporal stability of passivated silicon samples
The article Temporal stability of a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H on crystalline silicon wafers,
investigates the temporal stability of a-Si:H,a-SixNy:H, and stack passivation a-
Si:H/a-SixNy:H on silicon wafers [21]. In the article, the measurements were per-
formed over 18 months. During the ﬁrst 500 hours, the FZ sample undergoes a
degradation of about 85% of the initial value. However, after 1500 hours, the
sample recovers to about 100% of the initial value. The degradation observed in
the samples can be related to weak bonds of Si-H within the a-Si:H ﬁlms, which
can be inﬂuenced by light and temperature. However, the samples’ recovery and
stability over time may be related to the buﬀer layer of a-Si:H on the sample which
then becomes less sensitive to environmental eﬀects [21]. The bonds between sil-
icon and hydrogen can break as a result of light exposure [24].
The quality of the a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H stack passivation is relatively stable with
respect to time. This passivation provides a more stable passivation compared
to a single layer of a-Si:H or a-SixNy:H. At high temperatures, it is found that
hydrogen is released from the a-Si:H ﬁlm by eﬀusion. The temporal stability of
the deposition layer depends on the temperature at which it was deposited. In
literature, one ﬁnding includes a deposition temperature of 400 ◦C, which results
in a more stable stack passivation compared to a layer deposited at 300 ◦C [25].
By reducing the temperature the risk of impurity diﬀusion into the bulk is also
reduced [25].
Degradation of the a-Si:H/c-Si structure/layer can result in the creation of
dangling bonds. Defects assembling and connecting to the material can suﬀer from
light-induced degradation (LID) commonly referred to as the Staebler-Wronski ef-
fect (SWE) [26]. This is typical for electronically active defects such as iron that
connect to the material [26]. The dangling bond density will result in shorter
measured carrier lifetimes due to the impurities in the material. The most prom-
inent example of LID is degradation caused by the activation of the boron-oxygen
(BO) defect in Cz-grown silicon [27]. Other contaminants, such as copper, iron-
boron, or other iron acceptors, also cause a decrease in lifetime under illumina-
tion. The article [27] discusses materials that are susceptible to Light- and elevated
Temperature-Induced Degradation (LeTID), such as boron and gallium-doped ma-
terials. The detrimental aspect of LeTID is the degradation of the charge carrier
lifetime under illumination at elevated temperatures. This degradation is caused
by both illumination and current injection [27].
2.2.4
Impurity Sources During Crystallisation And Silicon
Production Technology
Impurities in silicon can be detrimental to the eﬃciency, power output, and carrier
lifetime of the material. The impurities that assemble in the material are intro-
duced in the production chain incorporated in the material. The silicon feedstock,
quartzite, used for silicon ingot growth can contain impurities. The feedstock des-
ignated for silicon ingot production undergoes a reduction process utilizing coal,
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
19
coke, charcoal or wood chips as reducing agents. During this process, impurities
from the electrodes might be introduced into the material. The feedstock is then
melted and dopants are subsequently introduced into the molten silicon. The mol-
ten silicon is then poured into a furnace, and the furnace elements are introduced
into the molten silicon. This increases the impurity concentration in the material
[28].
There are multiple methods to produce monocrystalline and multi-crystalline
silicon. One method that is frequently used to produce monocrystalline silicon is
the Czochralski (Cz) process. This process involves submerging a monocrystalline
seed in molten material and subsequently drawing it upwards with a ﬁxed speed,
thus maintaining proximity between the growth interface and the melt-atmosphere
interface [6]. The crucible and the seed are rotated in opposite directions, which
ensures uniform doping distribution in the monocrystalline ingot. This process
requires careful control of the process parameters, including temperature, pulling
speed, and the rate of rotation. Small deviations can result in defect formation,
such as dislocations or grain boundaries, which will impact the electrical properties
of the material. Impurities also have an impact on the electronic properties of the
material, and these can be introduced from the crucible, feedstock, seed, and
the atmosphere in the growth chamber. To minimize contamination, high-purity
materials are used for both the crucible and the seed, and the growth chamber is
typically ﬁlled with an inert gas, such as argon, to prevent oxygen contamination
[6]. The crucible is made from quartz, which partly dissolves in the melt, resulting
in a relatively high oxygen level in the monocrystalline ingot [6].
Another method to produce monocrystalline silicon is through the ﬂoat zone
pulling method. This method involves the use of a polycrystalline rod that is
placed within an enclosure purged with an inert gas to avoid any oxygen contam-
ination. A single crystal seed is then melted onto the polycrystalline rod through
induction heating.
Subsequently, a section of liquid silicon is moved upwards
while being rotated via the vertical movement of the induction coil. Once the
silicon cools, it solidiﬁes into a single-crystal form. The desired doping is attained
through the introduction of an appropriate dopant in gaseous form to the inert
gas. A notable advantage of this process is its ability to further clean the crystal.
Thus, these substances are primarily carried with the ﬂuid zone and transported
to the upper end of the crystal. With repeated pulling, this process facilitates the
production of exceptionally perfect, high-purity crystals with high resistivity for
the intended application [6].
Multicrystalline, compared to monocrystalline, is less expensive to produce
due to being easier to manufacture. However, they usually exhibit lower eﬃciency
due to the grain boundaries in the material. A common method to produce multi-
crystalline silicon is through directional solidiﬁcation (DS). This process involves
ﬁlling a crucible with high-purity silicon feedstock, which is then heated above
its melting point. The heat is then removed from the bottom, and solidiﬁcation
proceeds upwards, creating a temperature gradient. The quality of the polycrys-
talline silicon produced through DS depends on the purity of the feedstock, the
solidiﬁcation rate, and the temperature gradient along the length of the crucible.
By controlling these parameters, high-quality polycrystalline silicon with desired
==PAGE:36==
20
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
electrical properties can be achieved. The impurity atoms that are introduced
into the material during crystallization originate from the crucible and coating,
resulting in a higher impurity concentration at the edges of the ingot [28].
During the solidiﬁcation process, most of the metallic impurities in silicon
prefer to remain in the liquid phase rather than the solid phase. As a result, a
higher concentration of impurities is expected in the last solidiﬁed region. Con-
sequently, samples taken from the bottom of CZ-silicon ingots and the top of
DS-silicon will have a higher impurity concentration compared to other locations
in the ingot. This phenomenon is commonly referred to as segregation. The extent
of segregation depends on the ratio of impurity concentration in the melt to that
in the ingot [28].
2.3
Temperature dependence on carrier lifetime
When investigating the temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime, various
parameters are considered. This includes extrinsic losses such as SRH and surface
recombination, doping concentration, and recombination mechanisms [29, 30]. In
the case of a material like silicon, where SRH is the dominant recombination
mechanism, an increase in temperature will result in an increase in carrier lifetime
[14, 29]. The temperature dependence of PV-device performance is related to the
temperature inﬂuence on the intrinsic and extrinsic energy losses in the device.
The intrinsic losses are unavoidable in the single-junction cell, and the intrinsic
losses are related to the conversion loss (Carnot loss, the thermal energy lost from
the sun when converting into electricity), emission loss, entropy generation loss,
thermalization, and sub-band-gap loss [31]. The Auger recombination mechanism
is included as an intrinsic loss as it is a consequence of fundamental material
properties [30, 9]. In the literature, the Auger recombination lifetime is found to
increase with an increase in temperature for both n- and p-type silicon [32]. It was
found that with increasing doping levels the dominant recombination mechanism
changes from SRH to Auger recombination [32]. For high doping concentrations,
the Auger lifetime was however found to be reduced [32].
The band gap in a semiconductor is inﬂuenced by changes in temperature. As
the temperature increases, the band gap decreases [9]. This is conﬁrmed through
the empirical equation published in [33].
Egap(T) = Egap(0) −↵T 2
T + β ,
(2.30)
where Egap(0)=1.170 eV, ↵= 4.73 ⇤10−4 eV/K is a temperature coeﬃcient, and
β = 636 K, which is a temperature oﬀset. In n-type semiconductors, increasing
the temperature results in an increased concentration of electrons, while in p-type
semiconductors, it leads to an increased concentration of holes. This eﬀect occurs
due to the increased thermal energy that promotes electrons from the valence band
and relaxes holes in the conduction band [9].
Single-crystal solar cells measured at lower temperatures are in agreement
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
21
with the SRH theory [29]. For mc-Si solar cells, the lifetime is relatively smal-
ler and is found to increase exponentially with temperature due to the presence
of recombination centres within the potential barrier associated with the inter-
crystalline grain boundaries. Within these boundaries, the presence of trapped
charges and photogenerated minority carriers leads to the neutralization of the
charge, resulting in a reduction in the potential barrier height.
Consequently,
minority carriers are able to traverse the potential barrier region. However, when
the minority carriers encounter recombination centres at the grain boundary, their
eﬀective lifetimes are reduced. As the temperature increases, the thermal energy
of the carriers also increases, thereby lowering the probability of barrier recom-
bination. Consequently, the lifetime of minority carriers exhibits an exponential
increase with rising temperatures [29]. The experimental work in [29] shows that
the lifetime in both monocrystalline and mc-Si cells increases with increasing tem-
perature measured in a temperature range of -196.15-226.85 K. When carriers
become trapped by defect or impurity levels, their lifetimes at temperatures equal
to or below the exhaustion temperature (the temperature at which the Fermi level
aligns with the acceptor impurity level) are independent of temperature.
According to [13], the radiative emission in photovoltaic devices increases
with temperature due to an increase in the recombination rate, which is caused
by an increase in the equilibrium carrier concentration. This phenomenon cre-
ates an imbalance between the absorption and emission rates, leading to negative
temperature sensitivity. This imbalance characteristic is responsible for decreased
eﬃciency in all photovoltaic devices at higher temperatures [13]. The negative
temperature sensitivity, a decrease in lifetime with increasing temperature, is also
observed in cases where the btb recombination process is predominant [29].
The Auger lifetime is observed to increase with increasing temperature for
both n-type and p-type silicon, while the temperature dependence weakens at
high doping concentrations [30]. The temperature sensitivity of SRH recombina-
tion can be assessed by examining the equations that make up the SRH lifetime
(Equation 2.26), and the parameters are given in Equation 2.20 - 2.25. The in-
ﬂuence of temperature is captured by the thermal velocity of electrons and holes,
the capture cross-section of electrons and holes, and the intrinsic carrier concen-
tration. Additionally, the SRH densities n1 and p1 depend on temperature itself
and through the eﬀective density of states in the conduction and valence bands
[30].
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER
THREE
LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
This chapter will discuss two techniques used to measure carrier lifetime. The car-
rier lifetime is determined by the recombination dynamics of excess carriers. One
of these techniques is the quasi-steady-state photoconductance (QSSPC) method,
ﬁrst introduced by Sinton and Cuevas in 1996 [15]. This method measures the
change in photoconductance through a gradual decay of light intensity over several
milliseconds. This ensures steady-state conditions in the sample with respect to
recombination processes [14]. Another technique utilizes a sharp pulse of illumin-
ation that is rapidly terminated and measures the excess carrier density without
illumination. This method is referred to as the transient photoconductance decay
(PCD) technique and is typically used for measuring high carrier lifetimes [14].
Both the QSSPC and the PCD methods can be described by a generalized
analysis procedure proposed by Nagel et al. [34]. The generalized analysis assumes
that the recombination rate ⌧bulk = ⌧e↵and is valid to any carrier lifetime and
ﬂash lamp dependence [34]. The expression for the eﬀective lifetime ⌧e↵in the
generalized analysis is given in Equation 3.1 [34].
⌧e↵=
∆nav
Gav −d∆nav(t)
dt
,
(3.1)
where ∆nav [cm−3] and Gav [cm−3s−1] are the average excess carrier density and
the average generation rate, respectively. To determine the eﬀective lifetime, the
photoconductance decay with respect to time has to be measured.
3.1
Quasi-steady-state photoconductance technique
The QSSPC technique is used to measure lifetimes below 200 µs, which employs
a large signal method that can be used to directly determine the carrier lifetime.
The QSSPC technique enables direct measurements of the carrier injection level,
23
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 3. LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
without the need for device simulation [14].
The instrument uses a ﬂash lamp to optically generate carriers in the meas-
ured sample. The excess carrier density (∆n) is measured by observing the changes
in the excess photoconductance, denoted as ∆σ(t), of the sample. The change in
photoconductance within the sample is detected through the change in permeab-
ility caused by the radio-frequency bridge, that is inductively coupled to a coil.
The time dependence of the excess photoconductance of the test sample and illu-
mination is determined using the instrument’s reference solar cell and an oscillo-
scope. Through this, the instrument calculates the average excess carrier density
(∆nav = ∆pav) using the following expression.
∆nav =
∆σ(t)
q(µn + µp)W ,
(3.2)
where µn and µp [cm2V−1s−1] are the carrier mobility and q [C] is the element-
ary charge. Under steady-state conditions, the generation and recombination of
electron-hole pairs are in balance. This means that the number of generation and
recombination events are equal. The generalized case given in Equation 3.1 in the
case of steady-state (d∆n/dt ⌘0) can be simpliﬁed and expressed in terms of the
total recombination in the wafer which is expressed as the eﬀective carrier lifetime,
⌧eﬀ. The expression for the eﬀective carrier lifetime is given in Equation 3.3 [15].
⌧e↵= ∆nav
Gav
.
(3.3)
The average generation rate (Gav [cm−3s−1]) depends on the illumination intensity
Iav which is measured from the calibrated reference solar cell typically expressed
in suns (1sun= 1000 W/m2). The illumination intensity represents the number
of photons incident on the surface of the measured sample. The sample absorbs
only a fraction, fabs, of the incident light where the rest of the available photons
are lost to the environment. The average generation rate within the sample can
be expressed through Equation 3.4 [14].
Gav(t) = Iav(t)fabsN 1sun
ph
W
,
(3.4)
where N 1sun
ph
[cm−2s−1sun−1] represents the ﬂux of photons in solar light with an
irradiance of 1 sun, which generates electron-hole pairs in the sample [14].
The QSSPC method has several advantages in terms of its measurement cap-
abilities. Firstly, it enables the determination of lifetime values across a wide in-
jection range. Additionally, this method allows for similar measurements to those
of an operating solar cell under constant illumination, due to the steady-state con-
dition in the sample. Lastly, this method provides data with fewer ﬂuctuations
and less instability, as the lifetime is calculated directly from the absolute values
of the measured quantities [35].
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
25
3.2
Transient photoconductive decay technique
The transient photoconductive decay (PCD) technique is a well-established and
widely utilized technique for characterizing semiconductor materials and devices
[36]. This technique is used to measure carrier lifetimes higher than 100 µs[36].
The technique uses a pulsed light source to generate e-h pairs in a sample biased
under constant current conditions. This includes a sharp illumination peak which
ensures photoconductance decay and changes can be observed in the samples’
conductivity and voltage [36].
The PCD technique allows for a simpliﬁcation of the general equation in
Equation 3.1 as G = 0. The reason is that the excess carrier density is measured
after the light source has been turned oﬀand after the photogeneration has de-
creased to small levels [34]. The lifetime at each carrier density can be determined
using the derived Equation 3.5.
⌧e↵= −∆nav
d∆nav(t)
dt
.
(3.5)
This is only valid when the carrier lifetime is signiﬁcantly higher than the
decay of the illumination source. The reason is that the illumination source has
to generate enough carriers to measure the lifetime for the given sample which is
achieved through the sharp ﬂash, generating a peak in illumination [36]. To achieve
accurate results, it is necessary to ensure that the sample maintains suﬃcient
excess carrier density well after the ﬂash has terminated. This requires the ﬂash
turn-oﬀtime (50 µs for the Sinton BCT-300 instrument) to be shorter than the
carrier lifetime. This means that this technique is only valid for carrier lifetimes
longer than 100 µs [35].
The PCD method has a few limitations. These include the dependence on
semiconductor material, excess carrier density, light source inhomogeneities, ﬁlter
thickness, and temperature [36]. Firstly, the excess carrier density, which is meas-
ured to calculate the lifetime, depends on the semiconductor material. In silicon,
recombination centres with energy states primarily occur in the forbidden gap,
which negatively inﬂuences the lifetime [36]. Secondly, the light source generates
excess carriers in the incident sample, and depending on the intensity or type of
light, the carrier distribution at the very beginning of the decay might not be
optimal as both generation and recombination take place [36]. For this reason,
the carrier lifetime of the sample is measured after the ﬂash has terminated [35].
Thirdly, semiconductor materials often exhibit non-uniform distributions of res-
istivity and lifetime (⌧PCD) due to the presence of dopants and impurities. In the
analysis of PCD measurements, it is crucial to recognize that the derived ⌧PCD
value represents an average over the illuminated region. Consequently, variations
in ⌧PCD may be observed across diﬀerent segments of the sample [36]. fourthly,
the use of a ﬁlter for PCD measurements allows approximation of uniformity. In
the case of specimens with inhomogeneities, the presence of a ﬁlter can introduce
variations in the measured decay time. The material’s lifetime and the location
of excess carrier generation within the specimen contribute to determining the
==PAGE:42==
26
CHAPTER 3. LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
eﬀect of ﬁlter thickness on measurements [36]. Lastly, The data obtained from
this method depends on the derivative which can lead to noisy data in some cases
[35].
This method also has some advantages as it is a “stand-alone” method – in
other words, it does not require an independent and simultaneous measurement of
the generation rate, as the QSSPC method. This means that amount of incident
light that is absorbed in the sample, the optical factor, is irrelevant in the PCD
analysis. The only purpose of the light sensor is to indicate when the ﬂash has
ﬁnished and trigger the measurement so the data analysis can begin [35].
An instrument that allows career lifetime measurements with the QSSPC and
the PCD technique is the BCT-300 Photoconductance Lifetime Tester (BCT-300)
from Sinton Consulting [35].
3.3
The SRH equation and its linearizaiton
Lifetime spectroscopy (LS) is a method that allows the analysis of defect and
impurity energy levels in a material. This can be performed by other conven-
tional methods as well, however, concentrations of defects outside the detection
limit show a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the carrier lifetime. By measuring the carrier
lifetime the temperature and injection-dependent carrier lifetime can be assessed.
through this information, one can perform an LS analysis and obtain information
about the material quality that can be used to directly identify impurities if the
injection and temperature dependence of carrier lifetime is analyzed by measur-
ing recombination lifetime. There are diﬀerent approaches to investigating this,
and all of these methods are based on the SRH Theory.
S. Rein through his
book Lifetime Spectroscopy: A Method of Defect Characterization states that the
sensitivity of lifetime spectroscopy allows for analyzing defect centres through the
recombination process, which can be used to identify defects relevant to semicon-
ductors. One of the main advantages of LS is that only the relevant defects to the
semiconductor device are identiﬁed the defects that are relevant to semiconductor
devices. LS is the current most sensitive diagnostic method for the identiﬁcation
and analysis of impurities in semiconductor materials [14, 37]. Some of the LS tech-
niques reported in the literature are Temperature-dependent lifetime spectroscopy
(TDLS), Injection-dependent lifetime spectroscopy (IDLS), and Temperature- and
injection-dependent lifetime spectroscopy (TIDLS) [14].
3.3.1
The Shockley-Read-Hall equation
The SRH equation, seen in Equation 2.26 forms the basis of diﬀerent lifetime
spectroscopy techniques. One parameter of the SRH-equation is the fundamental
time constant ⌧n0 and ⌧p0 for electrons and holes, respectively. They are propor-
tional to the inverse product of the defect concentration Nt [cm−3] and the capture
cross-sections σn and σp [cm−2] for electrons and holes, respectively [14].
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
27
Doping
Majority carrier
Magnitude of the relevant densities
p-type
p0 = Na
p0 ≫n2
i /Na = n0
n-type
n0 = Nd
n0 ≫n2
i /Nd = p0
Table 3.1: Limiting case of Low-level injection conditions (∆n ⌧p0 + n0) [14].
⌧j0 =
1
(Ntσj⌫th,j),
(3.6)
where j=n,p, ⌫th,j [cm/s] is the thermal velocity.
The thermal velocity (⌫th =
q
(2kT)/m⇤
e/h, where m⇤
e/h are the eﬀective masses of electrons(e) and holes(h) re-
spectively) of electrons and holes varies due to diﬀerences in their eﬀective masses,
electrons being a heavier element than holes [9]. To include the capture asymmetry
which is characteristic of a defect state, a symmetry factor k is introduced [14].
k ⌘σn/σp ⇡⌧p0/⌧n0.
(3.7)
This symmetry factor is only dependent on the structure of the defect. By
applying Equation 3.7 to the SRH lifetime equation from Equation 2.26, the SRH
lifetime can be written as the following [14].
⌧SRH = ⌧n0
p0 + p1 + ∆n
p0 + n0 + ∆n + kn0 + n1 + ∆n
p0 + n0 + ∆n
$
.
(3.8)
Equation 3.8 represents the SRH-lifetime equation with the dependencies on
injection level, doping concentration, defect parameters and temperature.
De-
pending on the injection level, two levels are described. The low-level injection is
the case when the excess carrier concentration is much smaller than the equilib-
rium concentrations of electrons and holes (i.e., ∆n ⌧n0 + p0) and the high-level
injection is the case when the excess carrier concentration is much greater than
the equilibrium concentrations of electrons and holes (i.e., ∆n ≫n0 + p0). The
limiting case of low-level injection conditions for a p-type and an n-type semicon-
ductor is shown in Table 3.1. In the limiting case of LLI conditions Equation 3.8
with relevant properties presented in Table 3.1, the SRH-LLI for a p-type and
an n-type semiconductor can be expressed in Equation 3.9 and Equation 3.10,
respectively [14].
⌧LLI,p
SRH = ⌧n0
✓
1 + p1
Na
◆
+ k
✓n1
Na
◆$
,
(3.9)
⌧LLI,n
SRH = k⌧n0
✓
1 + n1
Nd
◆
+ 1
k
✓p1
Nd
◆$
.
(3.10)
In the limit of high-level injection condition (∆n ≫n0 + p0, n1, p1) the sim-
pliﬁcation of Equation 3.8 can be expressed through the following equation [14].
⌧HLI
SRH = ⌧n0 + ⌧p0 = ⌧n0(1 + k).
(3.11)
==PAGE:44==
28
CHAPTER 3. LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
Equation 3.11 shows that the SRH recombination under high-level injection is
limited by the slower of the two capture processes and is independent of the defect
level.
For a p-type (n-type) semiconductor under low-level injection conditions,
three types of defects have to be considered. A deep defect level close to or in the
mid-gap, a shallow defect level that is close to the CB edge (VB edge for n-type
material), and lastly, a defect level in the transition region which is between the
deep and shallow defect levels [14]. These will be further explained in Chapter
Section 3.3.2.
3.3.2
Temperature-dependent lifetime spectroscopy
TDLS measures the carrier lifetime as a function of temperature. The samples
are illuminated with a light source that generates excess minority carriers, and
the decay of the excess carrier density is monitored over time using an instru-
ment. The carrier lifetime in semiconductor materials is strongly dependent on
temperature, as temperature changes can aﬀect the mobility and concentration
of carriers. In TDLS, the lifetime is typically measured at a ﬁxed injection level,
while the temperature dependence on the lifetime is analyzed to determine the
recombination mechanism that occurs in the material. The TDLS method allows
for the determination of the defect energy Et from the linear slope of an Arrhenius
plot [14, 37]. The linear slope increases the deeper a defect energy level is. This
is a result of the reduction in the SRH densities for deep defect levels compared
to shallow defect levels [14].
The rate of increase of the slope of the Arrhenius plot depends on the defect.
This section is limited to shallow defect levels close to the CB edge, which can be
derived from Equation 3.9. For a p-type silicon sample, the LLI-SRH lifetime is
expressed through Equation 3.9, at a defect in the upper half of the band gap, the
LLI-SRH lifetime can be reduced to the following equation.
⌧LLI,p
SRH (T) = ⌧n0(T)

1 + kn1(T)
p0
$
.
(3.12)
The n1/p0 term can be neglected at low temperatures. The reason is that the
exponential temperature dependence of the SRH density n1 seen in Equation 2.3,
where EF = Et for the SRH density of electrons is the main contributor to the
overall temperature dependence. The ratio n1/p0 in Equation 3.12 increases with
increasing temperature, reﬂecting the decreasing recombination activity of the
defect as the Fermi level EF approaches mid-gap [14]. n1 is inﬂuenced by the
eﬀective density of states, NC, in the conduction band, which is also temperature
dependent as seen from Equation 2.5. The electron capture time constant given in
Equation 3.6 only depends on temperature via the thermal velocity ⌫th expressed
through Equation 3.13.
⌫th(T) = ⌫300K
th
✓
T
300K
◆1/2
,
(3.13)
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
29
where ⌫300
th
= 107 [cm/s] is the thermal velocity at 300K. This equation assumes
that the capture cross-sections are temperature independent. The temperature
dependence of the time constant ⌧n0(T), can then be expressed by Equation 3.14
[14].
⌧n0(T) = [Ntσn⌫th(T)]−1 = ⌧300K
n0
✓
T
300K
◆−1/2
,
(3.14)
where ⌧300K
n0
is the electron capture time constant at 300K. At suﬃciently low tem-
peratures (T< 300 K) the term n1/p0 can be neglected resulting in the LLI-SRH
lifetime to equal the electron capture time ⌧n0(T). At suﬃciently low temperatures
the ⌧n0(T) in Equation 3.12 is independent of the defect parameters Et and k and
exhibits a slight decrease with increasing temperature which can be observed from
Equation 3.14. At suﬃciently high temperatures the defect-level-dependent term
n1/p0 is dominant and the ⌧n0 can be neglected. To gain information about the
defect from the measured carrier lifetime the following assumptions are considered
for a shallow defect level close to the CB edge; the position of the defect level Et
in the band: Et ! EC, the magnitude of the relevant densities: p1 ⌧p0 ⌧n1,
recombination activity of the defect: ⌧LLI,p
SRH /⌧n0 = k(n1/p0), and position of EF in
relation to Et: Et ≫EC −EF [14]. From this information, it is possible to derive
the Arrhenius slope from the SRH lifetime under LLI conditions, where EC = Eg,
displayed in Equation 3.9.
⌧LLI,p
SRH
⌧n0
= kNC
NA
⇥exp
✓
−Eg −Et
kbT
◆
.
(3.15)
To isolate the temperature, logarithmic transformation is applied.
log
"
⌧LLI,p
SRH
⌧n0
#
= Et −Eg
kb
⇥1
T + NC
NA
.
(3.16)
A linear equation is represented as y = mx + b. In this equation, y represents
the dependent variable, m and b are slope and intercept, respectively and x rep-
resents the independent variable. In Equation 3.16 the dependent variable is the
logarithm of the term log
h
⌧LLI,p
SRH
⌧n0
i
, the slope is represented by the addend Et−Eg
kb
,
the intercept is represented by NC
NA, and the independent variable is represented
by 1/T. The rate of increase of the linear slope equals the defect level close to
the CB edge in the sample. Information about the defect level can be used to
directly characterize the type of impurity, as diﬀerent impurities in the material
have known energy levels [14].
3.3.3
Injection-dependent lifetime spectroscopy
The IDLS characterization technique is used to measure the decay of the excess
carriers to determine the carrier lifetime as a function of the injection level, ex-
pressed as ⌘= ∆n/(n0 + p0) [14]. In IDLS a sample is illuminated with a light
source that generates excess minority carriers, and the decay of the excess car-
rier density is monitored over time using a detector. The injection level can be
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 3. LIFETIME CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
varied by controlling the light intensity of the light source, which determines the
concentration of excess minority carriers injected into the material. In IDLS, an
important consideration is the additional trapping centres that do not contrib-
ute to recombination but instead interact with the minority band, leading to the
external trapping eﬀect. This eﬀect is well-known in multi-crystalline and Czo-
chralski silicon. These trapping centres can have a signiﬁcant impact on lifetime
measurements, particularly when using photoconductance-based techniques [14].
The TDLS analysis method assumes that the electron and hole capture cross-
sections σn and σp are temperature independent, which is not the practical case
[14]. However, utilizing the IDLS method, the values of the capture cross sections
can be determined with high accuracy [37]. By combining these methods (IDLS
and TDLS) the defect energy level and the capture cross sections can be determ-
ined. The combination of these two methods, IDLS + TDLS) is commonly known
as temperature and injection-dependent lifetime spectroscopy (TIDLS).
3.3.4
Lifetime spectroscopy analysis based on the SRH equa-
tion
To enable temperature-dependent lifetime measurements, multiple setups in the
scientiﬁc literature are used. One method to perform TDLS is performed by using
the original QSSPC setup from Sinton Consulting and connected to a temperature-
controlled sample stage positioned on top of the photoconductance sensor coil [37].
To ensure electrical insulation a PyrexTM glass disk is kept at a distance of 1mm
from the coil by means of insulating spacers, The heating power is regulated
via a controller [37].
The coil of the instrument is subject to heating during
measurements, however, the instrument was calibrated at multiple temperatures.
It was concluded that since the calibration curves did not change with temperature,
the heating of the coil would not aﬀect the lifetime measurements and that this
setup was well suited for TIDLS/TDLS applications [37].
Another study used the Sinton instrument WCT-100 combined with a heating
and cooling stage [38]. In this study, the instrument was calibrated and the uncer-
tainty in the calibration curve represents the 95% conﬁdence limit. Other methods
used for TDLS and IDLS using the Sinton instruments WCT-120TS which has a
temperature stage integrated into the instrument, and photoluminescence (PL)
imaging to look at the spatial variations of the eﬀective minority carrier lifetime
in samples measured [39, 22, 40].
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER
FOUR
EXPERIMENTAL WORK
This chapter is divided into 2 parts. The ﬁrst part introduces the samples used
and their preparation. The second part, Section 4.2 is a description of the meas-
urements with the corresponding instrument used in the experimental work.
4.1
Materials
The samples investigated in this report are given in Table 4.1 and are displayed
in ﬁgures 4.2-4.9. Most samples are p-type boron-doped monocrystalline silicon
samples produced by the Czochralski (Cz) method. To accurately measure the
sample lifetime, the bulk recombination properties have to be determined. This
requires a reduction in the impact of the surface recombination so that the only
contribution when measuring the eﬀective lifetime comes from the bulk. For this
reason, the samples were sent to IFE (Institutt for Energiteknikk) for passivation
according to the method described in Section 2.2.3.
31
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
Table 4.1:
Information about all measured samples in the thesis, where DS
represents directional solidiﬁcation.
Sample ID
Sample
Type
Growth
method
Doping
Passivated
Thickness [mm]
Doping [cm−3]
Figure
9B
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
Yes
0.557
9.785E16
Figure 4.2
12B
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
Yes
0.968
9.785E16
Figure 4.2
2T
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
Yes
0.500
9.785E16
Figure 4.2
5T
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
Yes
0.970
9.785E16
Figure 4.3
15B
Brick
Czochralski
Boron
No
10.000
9.785E16
Figure 4.3
14B
Brick
Czochralski
Boron
No
10.000
9.785E16
Figure 4.3
7T
Brick
Czochralski
Boron
No
10.000
9.785E16
Figure 4.3
C-196060
Brick
Czochralski
Boron
No
25.000
7.809E16
Figure 4.4
FZ
Wafer
Float Zone
Boron
Yes
0.260
1.512E16
Figure 4.5
IC - 1T
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
No
0.166
9.785E16
Figure 4.6a
IC - 1B
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
No
0.200
9.785E16
Figure 4.6a
IC - x1
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
Yes
0.160
5.713E16
Figure 4.6b
IC - x2
Wafer
Czochralski
Boron
Yes
0.160
5.713E16
Figure 4.6b
n-type 1
Wafer
Czochralski
Phosphorus
No
0.165
3.227E15
Figure 4.7a
n-type 2
Wafer
Czochralski
Phosphorus
No
0.165
3.227E15
Figure 4.7b
multi-grains
Wafer
DS
Boron
No
0.194
1.695E16
Figure 4.8a
m-cryst
Wafer
DS
Boron
No
0.0260
2.650E16
Figure 4.8b
QSSPC-1
Brick
DS
Boron
No
15.000
1.242E16
Figure 4.9a
QSSPC-2
Brick
DS
Boron
No
15.000
1.242E16
Figure 4.9b
Figure 4.1: A p-type boron-doped monocrystalline block extracted from an ingot
made in the SINTEF Heliosi lab utilizing the Czochralski furnace. The total length
of the block is 18 cm.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
33
Figure 4.2: Three 8x8 cm p-type boron-doped Cz bricks cut from the block in
Figure 4.1. The notation B and T represents samples cut from the bottom and
top respectively. The thickness of the samples is 1 cm.
==PAGE:50==
34
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
Figure 4.3: Four 8⇥8 cm p-type boron-doped monocrystalline Cz samples cut
from the top (T) or the bottom (B) of the block (seen in Figure 4.1. The samples
have been passivated with the stack passivation of a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H through the
procedure explained in Section 2.2.3.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
35
Figure 4.4: The sample C-196060 is a p-type boron-doped Cz monocrystalline
sample with a diameter of 10 cm and a thickness of 2.5 cm.
==PAGE:52==
36
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
Figure 4.5: The FZ sample is a p-type boron-doped monocrystalline wafer pro-
duced through the ﬂoat zone process with a diameter of 10 cm. The sample has
been passivated with the stack passivation of a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H through the pro-
cedure explained in Section 2.2.3.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
37
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: The samples Figure 4.6a and Figure 4.6b are p-type boron-doped
monocrystalline silicon samples produced by the Cz process.
The size of the
samples is 5⇥5 cm. The Figure 4.6a are unpassivated and the Figure 4.6b are
passivated with the stack passivation of a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H through the procedure
explained in Section 2.2.3. During the passivation process, the IC-x2 experienced
some breakage.
==PAGE:54==
38
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: The samples displayed in Figure 4.7a and Figure 4.7b are n-type
phosphorous-doped monocrystalline silicon samples produced by the Cz process.
The size of the samples is 12x12 cm.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: The samples Figure 4.8a and Figure 4.8b are p-type boron-doped
mc-Si samples produced through directional solidiﬁcation. The size of the samples
is 15⇥15.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
39
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: The samples QSSPC-1 (seen in Figure 4.9a) and QSSPC-2 (seen in
Figure 4.9b) are p-type boron-doped mc-Si bricks produced by directional solidi-
ﬁcation with a thickness of 1.5 cm. The size of the bricks is 5⇥5 cm.
4.2
Method
To measure the temperature-dependent carrier lifetimes the BCT-300 setup (Fig-
ure 4.10), a Peltier element, a temperature stabilizer, a temperature regulator,
and a quartz plate for electrical insulation. To secure exactly similar conditions,
the wafers were placed on the heat plate also when mapping lifetimes at room
temperature. The measured temperature range is 10-75 ◦C, as a representation of
the Nordic climate [13].
4.2.1
BCT-300
The Sinton consulting instrument BCT-300 is a non-destructive, optical meas-
urement device used to measure the carrier lifetime in silicon samples [35]. The
primary application of the Sinton Consulting BCT-300 is measuring as grown
boron-doped Cz silicon ingots and bricks. The instrument is not optimized for
measuring wafers as they are prone to breakage, and measurements include an
error 0.1 µs [35]. For this reason, Sinton Consulting recommends using a speciﬁc
wafer measurement tool, the WCT-120 [35]. As this instrument is not available
for the thesis, the BCT-300 is used with great caution.
To ensure accurate measurements when using the BCT-300 instrument, sev-
eral steps must be followed.
First, the instrument must be turned on and all
components properly connected as per the manufacturer’s instructions [35]. After
turning on the instrument, it is recommended to wait for at least 30 minutes
to allow the instrument to reach a stable internal temperature of 25 ◦C, before
measurements are conducted. When the instrument has reached a stable internal
==PAGE:56==
40
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
Figure 4.10:
Part of the experimental setup which consists of the BCT-300
instrument (1) and temperature regulator (2).
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
41
Figure 4.11: The ﬁgure displays the BCT-300, with the 1000 nm ﬁlter inserted,
measuring a wafer. The BCT-300 shows a green LED light indicating that a stable
internal Temperature has been reached.
temperature the green LED on the instrument is lit, as displayed in Figure 4.11.
While using the BCT-300 instrument the red LED will be turned on and oﬀ, this
indicates that the instrument is being maintained at a constant temperature of
25◦C.
Before taking measurements, it is important to insert the appropriate ﬁlter
into the ﬁlter slot, which is determined by the lifetime of the sample being meas-
ured. As shown in Table 4.2, the inserted ﬁlter determines the measurement mode
(QSSPC or Transient analysis). When measuring either wafers or bricks, the ﬂash
setting of the Flash Power Supply (FPS) - 300 must be set to high (HI) for Transi-
ent analysis mode and low (LO) for QSSPC analysis mode. Additionally, the base
resistivity of the sample in ⌦·cm and the type of substrate (n- or p-type) must be
speciﬁed before measurements can be taken. The minority carrier density (MCD)
must also be speciﬁed, as per Table 4.2.
==PAGE:58==
42
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
Table 4.2: Measurement technique, Speciﬁed MCD based, lifetime range and
ﬁlter used depending on analysis mode for the BCT-300 instrument [14, 16].
Illumination mode
Analysis Type
Speciﬁed MCD [cm−3]
Lifetime range [µs]
Filter (nm)
Quasi-Steady-State
QSS1000
1E15 (p-type)
< 200
1000
QSS850
5E14 (n-type)
< 2
850
Transient
Transient
1E15 (p-type)
> 100
850
Transient
5E14 (n-type)
> 100
850
The process of qualifying the tester to ensure accurate measurements and
calibrating the instrument is given in Appendix 6.2 chapter 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 re-
spectively.
After these steps are performed, the instrument can be zeroed by placing it on
top of the plastic measurement platform and pressing the "Zero the instrument"
button in the software. Then by placing a sample on the plastic measurement
platform (or on the quartz plate) and the instrument on top of the sample, en-
suring the sensor region is in complete contact with the sample, the sample can
be measured by pressing "Measure sample". The lifetime is usually reported as a
function of minority carrier density (MCD). The results obtained from the meas-
urements are represented in a table. The conductance sensor voltage and the light
sensor voltage as a function of time are presented in a graph. The data obtained
from each measurement can then be collected and downloaded as a text ﬁle for
later processing.
The carrier lifetime is estimated through the change in conductivity that is
measured by an eddy-current conductance sensor and a ﬁltered xenon ﬂash lamp.
Depending on the lifetime of the sample, the Quasi-Steady-State Photoconduct-
ance (QSSPC) or the Transient Photoconductance Decay (Transient PCD) tech-
niques. The primary purpose of this equipment is to determine the lifetime of car-
riers in monocrystalline or multi-crystalline silicon ingots, bricks or wafers that are
either thinner than 1mm (Wafer lifetime software) or larger than 1cm (Brick life-
time software) [35]. The instrument allows measurement on unpassivated samples
directly after growth as the instrument is able to measure the bulk lifetime. The
main function of the instrument is to qualify high-purity silicon without any sur-
face preparation of the measured sample [35]. This also includes measuring the
trap density in the semiconductor. The instrument is able to provide accurate
results of lifetime measurements from 0.1µs to greater than 10ms [35].
In transient photoconductance decay measurements, the relatively slow de-
trapping of minority carriers can cause a long tail in the photoconductance decay,
which gives the appearance of an extremely long lifetime. However, this apparent
lifetime does not represent the actual recombination lifetime but is instead an
output result caused by the presence of traps. Traps may inﬂuence the steady-
state photoconductance of a sample. At carrier densities equal to or lower than
the trap density, the presence of minority carrier traps causes a relative increase in
the concentration of majority carriers to maintain charge neutrality. This results
in an increase in the steady-state photoconductance above its value when traps
are absent, which in turn leads to a longer apparent lifetime [35].
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
43
To obtain the conductivity of semiconductor material, the voltage output from
the eddy current sensor of the BCT-300 instrument is converted to conductivity
using Equation 4.1, where A, B, and C are obtained from the calibration curves in
the software used. The resulting conductivity value is expressed in Siemens [⌦−1]
[35]. The value of C in Equation 4.1 corresponds to the voltage output from an
undoped wafer, and it serves as a reference point on the calibration curves. To
ensure accurate measurements, it is necessary to "zero the instrument" before each
measurement. Changes in the instrument’s operating temperature may aﬀect the
accuracy of the measurements, therefore the calibration curve must be normal-
ized to the undoped sample for the current operating conditions. The BCT-300
instrument subtracts the air voltage from the measured sample conductivity to
minimize errors in the measurements [35].
σ = A(V −C)2 + B(V −C),
(4.1)
The carrier recombination lifetime measurements of PV silicon at brick or
ingot level is an accurate method to verify quality, purity, and growth conditions
and to ensure that the material will yield high-eﬃciency solar cells [35].
The
Sinton Instruments eddy-current lifetime measurement instruments oﬀer the best
available measurement of the carrier lifetime of these samples in the as-grown and
as-cut stages without the need for surface preparation.
The two modes of measurement (QSSPC and Transient PCD) available with
the Sinton Instrument tools are described below. In both cases, the sample is
illuminated by an IR-Pass ﬁltered xenon ﬂash lamp while the photoconductance
is measured simultaneously by an eddy current conductance sensor [35].
Quasy steady state photoconductive decay
The QSSPC mode employs an illumination ﬂash that decays slower (> 10 times
slower) than the carrier lifetime of the sample. This enables the instrument to
calculate the eﬀective carrier lifetime through the steady state equation: ⌧eff =
∆n/G, where G is the photogeneration within the sample and ∆n is the car-
rier density. G is calculated based on the calibrated illumination sensor, known
illumination spectrum, and material absorption. The illumination intensity also
depends on the ﬁlter used, which is determined by the carrier lifetime of the sample
seen in Table 4.2. ∆n is calculated based on the measured photoconductance and
calculated through Equation 3.2, and known material and instrument parameters
[35].
For a thick sample (> 1 cm) such as an ingot or brick, the measured carrier
lifetime depends on the bulk carrier lifetime and conductance depth sensitivity of
the instrument, the illumination spectrum, and the sample surface recombination
velocity [35]. In QSSPC mode, the measured lifetime is limited by the recombina-
tion of carriers at the as-cut or as-grown surface. Since the surface properties are
predictable for p-type samples, the contribution of the surface to the measured
lifetime can be removed and the bulk lifetime can be estimated [35]. In the QSSPC
==PAGE:60==
44
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
mode, the lifetime measured at speciﬁc MCD will be lower than the bulk lifetime
due to the unpassivated surface [35].
Transient photoconductive decay
The Transient Photoconductance Decay (PCD) method involves generating car-
riers with a pulse of illumination that quickly terminates. The resulting decay in
the photoconductance is then measured with the eddy current sensor. The car-
rier recombination lifetime can then be calculated based on Equation 3.5. Just
as with the QSSPC mode measurement, the transient mode measured lifetime
consists not only of the bulk carrier lifetime but also of the instrument depth sens-
itivity, illumination spectrum, and surface recombination velocity. The secondary
parameters have a small eﬀect in this case; thus, the measured lifetime is taken as
a lower bound on the bulk lifetime without any correction [35].
In the transient PCD mode, the measured lifetime is quite close to the bulk
lifetime. Transient PCD measurement results taken immediately after the ﬂash
terminates (at MCD > 1015 cm−3) will be aﬀected by surface recombination and
yield a measured lifetime signiﬁcantly lower than the bulk lifetime.
Transient
mode measurements do not require careful surface preparation as this method is
relatively insensitive to diﬀerences in the SRV [35]. In the PCD mode, the carrier
lifetime measured at a speciﬁc MCD is equal to the bulk lifetime [35].
4.2.2
Peltier Element
To enable temperature-dependent lifetime measurements, a Peltier element has
been connected to the BCT-300 setup. The setup is capable of achieving temper-
atures from -10 ◦C to 200◦C [42]. The accessible temperature range of the Peltier
element using distilled water in the water bath is 5 to 95 ◦C, and the voltage
needed is 230± 10% [42]. The power supplied in Norwegian power outlets is 230
V.
A Peltier element consists of two dissimilar cojoined thermoelectrical metals.
These metals are normally an alternation of p-type and n-type semiconductor
materials. The n-type and p-type doped semiconductors in a Peltier element are
essential for creating the thermoelectric junctions. As thermal energy is applied to
the junction one end will become hot and the other warm creating a temperature
gradient [41].
When electrical energy is applied a temperature gradient proportional to the
electrical current is created across the junction.
The free electrons and holes
redistribute themselves based on their thermal energy levels. The warmer side of
the junction has more thermal energy, causing electrons to move from the n-type
material to the p-type material, while the holes move in the opposite direction.
This redistribution of charge carriers results in an electrical potential diﬀerence
across the junction which generates an electrical current. The device is capable of
transferring heat and can function as a cooler or heater, depending on the direction
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
45
Figure 4.12: Schematic working principle of a Peltier element connected to a
power source. The Peltier element consists of n-type and p-type semiconductor
materials [41].
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
of the electric current [41].
By applying an electrical current at the junction of the two materials, heating
or cooling is achieved as a temperature gradient is created. When a current ﬂows
through the materials, one of the materials will become cold and the other will
become warm as illustrated in Figure 4.12. The Peltier element is then able to
transfer heat from one side of the device to the other by using electrical energy.
By changing the direction of the current, the Peltier element can function as a
cooler. Peltier elements are however known to have a weak cooling capacity as a
lot of electrical energy is required to achieve low temperatures [41].
Lifetime measurements Using BCT-300 and a Peltier element
To enable lifetime measurements at various temperatures, a Peltier element has
been coupled to the original BCT-300 setup (1 in Figure 4.10) used in Appendix 6.2.
The Peltier element (seen as (3) in Figure 4.13) consists of a Peltron temperature
regulator (2 in Figure 4.10) and a Haake DC 10 temperature stabilizer (seen as
(4) in Figure 4.13). To ensure electrical insulation between the copper plate and
the sample, a 5 mm thick quartz plate has been mounted on top of the Peltier
element, seen as (2) in Figure 4.10. To take a measurement the desired temper-
ature has to be set on the temperature regulator. When the temperature has
stabilized the sample to be measured can be carefully placed on the quartz plate.
The correct ﬁlter for the sample measured, as well as the ﬂash setting, has to be
correctly set in order to achieve the most valid results. When the temperature
has stabilized the BCT-300 instrument can be zeroed by pressing the "Zero In-
strument" button. When the instrument has been zeroed, it can be placed on
the sample and the measurement can take place. The BCT-300 should be left on
the sample during all measurements in the desired temperature range to ensure
accurate measurements.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
47
Figure 4.13: Experimental setup showing the Peltier element (3) with a connec-
ted water bath functioning as a temperature stabilizer (4).
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER
FIVE
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This chapter is divided into four parts. The ﬁrst section (Section 5.1) presents
the results obtained from the carrier lifetime measurements conducted on bricks
and wafers.
The second section (Section 5.2) compares the temporal stability
of the stack passivation of a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H of the two passivated wafers, 2T
and FZ, which were measured once a week over a period of ten weeks. The last
section (Section 5.3) outlines the results obtained from the TDLS analysis method
to assess if the data obtained from the developed method can be used for such
analysis.
To understand the ﬁgures presented in this chapter, a colour coding scheme is
applied. Dark blue represents 10 ◦C, and dark red represent 75 ◦C. While taking
measurements with the BCT-300, the instrument is ﬁrst "zeroed", and placed on
the sample when the temperature is stable, and then a measurement is conducted.
As temperatures below 20 ◦C were only possible to reach once a day, multiple
samples were measured after each other at the same temperature. This means
that the instrument was taken oﬀthe sample so that a new sample could be
measured at the same temperature. It is important to note that this procedure
may introduce a potential source of error.
Given the spatial variations of the
carrier lifetime within the sample, particularly for mc-Si samples, inconsistencies
can be expected if the instrument is not placed in the exact same position [27,
22, 35]. Consequently, variations in carrier lifetimes due to diﬀerent impurities
at the grain boundaries must be considered as potential sources of error during
measurements [35]. Notably, it was observed that this approach yielded erroneous
results.
To mitigate this issue, an alternative approach was explored, wherein the
instrument was left on the sample throughout the entire temperature range. This
modiﬁcation to the methodology yielded more accurate and reliable results and
hence this approach was mainly used throughout all experimental work.
During the measurement process using the BCT-300 instrument, certain pro-
49
==PAGE:66==
50
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
cedural steps have to be followed. Firstly, the instrument has to be calibrated.
This is performed by following chapter 4.2.2 in Appendix 6.2. After the calibration,
the instrument needs to be qualiﬁed to ensure accurate results. This procedure is
performed in accordance with chapter 4.2.1 in Appendix 6.2. After these steps are
performed the instrument has to be zeroed prior to each measurement, and the
measurements can then be performed. Once the temperature of the temperature
regulator is stable, the measurement can be carried out.
5.1
Lifetime measurements using the BCT-300 coupled
with Peltier element
5.1.1
From the block
From the block displayed in Figure 4.1, three bricks and four wafers were measured.
These samples were extracted from an ingot created in SINTEF’s Heliosi lab,
utilizing the Czochralski furnace. A block was cut from the ingot, from which
eight samples were taken, designated B or T for the bottom or top of the block,
respectively.
The samples were numbered in ascending order, with the lowest
number indicating the sample cut deepest into the block and the highest number
representing the ﬁrst cut sample. Samples that had a thickness of under 200 µm
broke during the polishing process. For this reason, the thinnest wafers cut from
the block have a thickness of 500 µm and only seven samples are measured.
Bricks
The three bricks, 15B, 14B, and 7T are displayed in Figure 4.2. The measured
carrier lifetime as a function of injection level in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C,
is depicted in Figure 5.1. The three bricks display diﬀerent carrier lifetimes, and
sample 15B is observed to have the overall lowest lifetimes. The reason for the
diﬀerence in lifetimes measured from the three samples can be related to structural
defects and impurities in the material [28]. The temperature inﬂuence on all the
bricks individually is displayed in ﬁgure 5.2 - 5.4.
Figure 5.2 - 5.4 illustrates the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a
function of injection level on the three bricks denoted 15B, 14B, and 7T, respect-
ively, in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C. All three bricks are monocrystalline
silicon and are dominated by the SRH recombination mechanism [14]. The three
bricks display an increase in carrier lifetime with increasing temperature. This
trend is in accordance with the theory in Section 2.2.2, where it is stated that a
material dominated by the SRH recombination mechanism will see an increase in
the carrier lifetime as the temperature increases at LLI. In addition, the BCT-300
measures the change in conductivity in the sample, and as the temperature in-
creases the conductivity increases. The increase in conductivity results in a higher
excess carrier density seen from Equation 3.2, which again results in a higher
carrier lifetime measured, seen from Equation 2.16.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
51
Figure 5.1: The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injection
level of the three bricks from the block (Figure 4.2) measured in a temperature
range of 10-75 ◦C. The bricks are p-type boron-doped monocrystalline Cz samples.
The sample 7T is observed to have the highest measured carrier lifetime and 15B
is observed to have the lower measured carrier lifetime in the temperature range.
Figure 5.2: The sample 15B (seen in Figure 4.2) is a p-type boron doped Cz
brick from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), measured from 10-75 ◦C. The graph
illustrates the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injection
level, and it is observed that the temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime is
in accordance with the SRH-equation in the LLI region.
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.3: The sample 14B (seen in Figure 4.2) is a p-type boron doped Cz
brick from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), measured from 10-75 ◦C. The graph
illustrates the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injection
level, and it is observed that the temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime is
in accordance with the SRH-equation in the LLI region.
Figure 5.4: The sample 7T (seen in Figure 4.2) is a p-type boron doped Cz brick
from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), measured from 10-75 ◦C. The graph illustrates
the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injection level, and it is
observed that the temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime is in accordance
with the SRH-equation in the LLI region.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
53
Wafers
The four wafers from the block, 5T, 9B, 12B, and 2T displayed in Figure 4.3 are
stack passivated with an a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H using the PECVD passivation method
described in Section 2.2.3.
These samples were also measured as part of the
specialization project (Appendix 6.2) where it was found that the Carrier lifetime
in the samples increased with increasing thickness, meaning that 5T (970 µm) and
12B (968 µm) should exhibit higher lifetimes compared to the 9B (557 µm) and
2T (500µm) of these four wafers [16].
Figure 5.5: The samples 5T, 9B, 12B, and 2T (seen in Figure 4.3) are p-type
boron doped Cz wafers from the block (seen in Figure 4.1), measured from 10-75
◦C. The samples are passivated with a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H. The graphs illustrate the
temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of the injection level. It is
observed that the temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime is in accordance
with the SRH-equation in the LLI region.
The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime measured in a temperature range
of 10-75 ◦C, is illustrated in Figure 5.5.
From Figure 5.5 it is observed that
the samples 5T and 12B present the highest lifetimes among the four measured
wafers. This observation is consistent with the theoretical deduction presented in
Equation 2.17, which indicates that the thickness of the sample aﬀects the carrier
lifetime, with thicker samples resulting in higher measured lifetimes. Speciﬁcally,
the wafers 5T and 12B have approximately twice the thickness of wafers 2T and
9B and will thus exhibit a longer lifetime compared to the thinner samples. As the
wafers are passivated the diﬀerence in lifetime may be attributed to a nonuniform
passivation layer meaning that more carriers recombine at the surface where the
passivation layer is not fully saturating the dangling bonds. The passivation of the
samples was conducted in January (2023) and the measurements taken on these
four samples were completed in June (2023). Through this time the passivation
layers might have degraded. However, in accordance with scientiﬁc literature, the
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
temporal stability of the stack passivation layer of a-Si:H/a-SixNy:H after 1600
hours suggests that the carrier lifetime measured should have recovered about
100% of the initially measured carrier lifetime after passivation [21]. This is further
elaborated in Section 5.2.
The temperature dependence of the carrier lifetimes of the samples exhib-
its the typical SRH-temperature-dependent trend in the LLI region which is also
found to coincide with scientiﬁc literature [22, 14, 37]. The four graphs in Fig-
ure 5.5 display a trend where the carrier lifetime increases with temperature up
to a speciﬁc injection level from where the trend changes.
This change is ob-
served when the injection levels are close to the doping level of each sample (see
Table 4.1). In the LLI region, the excess carrier density is smaller than the doping
concentration and the temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime is represen-
ted by the SRH-equation found in Equation 3.9. In the HLI region, the excess
carrier density is comparably larger than the doping concentration. In this regime,
the SRH lifetime is given by Equation 3.11 and does not necessarily increase with
increasing temperature [14]. Additionally, in the HLI regime, other recombination
mechanisms may also become more prominent [14].
5.1.2
Not from the block
Bricks
Figure 5.6: The C-196060 is a p-type boron doped monocrystalline brick, seen
in Figure 4.4). The graph illustrates the measured carrier lifetime as a function of
injection level. The carrier lifetime was measured in a temperature range from 15-
75 ◦C. The graph does not display a clear temperature dependence of the carrier
lifetime.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
55
The C-196060 brick is displayed in Figure 4.4 and the temperature-dependent
carrier lifetime as a function of injection level is illustrated in Figure 5.6. The
temperature range measured for this sample is 15-75 ◦C. The measurement results
of this sample do not display the expected temperature dependence in accordance
with the SRH-equation in Equation 3.9. From Table 4.2 it is seen that the carrier
lifetime is measured in a region that is much smaller than the doping concentra-
tion, meaning that the measurement is conducted in the LLI region. In the LLI
region, the expected temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime should be in
accordance with the SRH-equation in the LLI region given in Equation 3.9. At
higher temperatures, the concentration of mobile charge carriers increases due to
an increase in thermal energy, leading to an increase in thermalization events that
occur when an electron-hole pair recombines. Moreover, the reduction in band gap
energy at elevated temperatures results in a lower energy requirement for exciting
charge carriers, which can further enhance the rate of Auger recombination. This
deviation from the expected SRH temperature dependence of carrier lifetime in the
LLI region can be attributed to the presence of other recombination mechanisms
such as the impact of Auger recombination on the recombination rate.
Other factors that can inﬂuence the temperature dependence of the carrier
lifetime are related to defects in the material, which can be activated at higher
temperatures resulting in shorter lifetimes [14]. Defects that lie close to the Fermi
level result in a slowing down of the temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime
which might be the reason for the observed carrier lifetime measured from the C-
196060 sample [29].
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: The QSSPC-1 and QSSPC-2 samples (seen in Figure 4.9) are P-type
boron doped mc-Si samples produced through directional solidiﬁcation and have
a thickness of 1.5 cm. The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime is measured
in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C. The carrier lifetime is seen to decrease with
increasing temperature.
The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of the injection level
of the samples QSSPC-1 (Figure 4.9a), and QSSPC-2 (Figure 4.9b) are displayed in
Figure 5.7a and Figure 5.7b, respectively. These samples are p-type, boron-doped,
mc-Si brick samples produced through directional solidiﬁcation.
The QSSPC-
1 and QSSPC-2 exhibit lifetimes of 14-25 µs compared to the bricks from the
block (seen in Figure 5.2 - 5.4) which exhibit a carrier lifetime of 130-400 µs.
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The reason for the lower carrier lifetimes measured for the mc-Si bricks can be
attributed to the grain boundaries and crystal structure of the samples.
The
grain boundaries represent areas of unbonded atoms, which means that mc-Si
has a high concentration of unbonded atoms where charge carriers can recombine
resulting in a lower carrier lifetime [9]. The impurities can connect to the unbonded
atoms in the material and the concentration of impurities is higher compared to
monocrystalline silicon samples. This will generally result in a shorter measured
carrier lifetime for mc-Si samples and more surface recombination will take place
in areas with grain boundaries. From Section 2.2.4 it is known that the grain
boundaries in mc-Si samples result in variations in the minority carrier lifetime.
Both the QSSPC-1 and QSSPC-2 samples display a decreasing carrier lifetime
with increasing temperature as a function of injection level. One reason for this
can be attributed to the grains in the mc-Si sample which act as barriers. As
temperature increases, the carriers’ mobility decreases due to the limited space
imposed by grain boundaries, resulting in a reduced band gap [9]. A study by
Søndegaard et. al explained that mc-Si samples where the lifetime decreased with
increasing temperature could be related to the impurities in the material, and the
ingot position as more impurities will ensemble at the top of the ingot [43]. For
the QSSPC-1 and QSSPC-2 samples, no information about the ingot position was
given. However, as the lifetime decreases with increasing lifetime it is possible
to conclude that the concentration of impurities in the samples inﬂuences the
carrier lifetime in such a way that it decreases with increasing temperature. A
study by Mathur P., et al explains that a decrease in a lifetime with an increase
in temperature can be a result of predominant btb recombination processes [29].
However, the injection level and temperature measurement are too low for Auger
recombination to be dominant, and as silicon is an indirect band gap material,
radiative btb recombination is not present. The doping concentration of these two
samples seen in Table 4.1 suggest that the measured carrier lifetime is in the LLI
region. In the LLI region, it is expected to see an increase in carrier lifetime with
increasing temperature in accordance with the SRH-equation.
The temperature dependence observed in the two samples can be attributed
to the positioning of the BCT-300 instrument on the sample surface. The carrier
lifetime measured at a speciﬁc temperature may vary due to diﬀerent positions on
the sample surface, thus capturing spatial variations within the sample caused by
grain irregularities. Therefore, it is crucial to maintain a consistent positioning
of the BCT-300 instrument throughout all measurements.
The two measured
monocrystalline silicon (mc-Si) bricks had a width of 5 cm, which is smaller than
the width of the instrument, but suﬃcient to be covered by the coil. However, the
instrument’s placement was carried out without certainty that the RF sensor coil
completely covered the entire sample. No part of the coil was observed to extend
beyond the sample surface, indicating that this arrangement was satisfactory. If
the sensor coil extends beyond the sample surface, the software shuts down. To
continue measurements after a shutdown, the instrument must be zeroed.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
57
wafers
Figure 5.8: The FZ wafer (seen in Figure 4.5) has a diameter of 5 cm and is a p-
type boron doped monocrystalline silicon sample produced through the ﬂoat zone
process described in Section 2.2.4. The graph displays the temperature-dependent
carrier lifetime as a function of the injection level for the FZ wafer. The carrier
lifetime is seen to increase with increasing temperature aligning with the SRH-
equation in the LLI region.
The carrier lifetime measurements performed on the FZ-sample (seen in Figure 4.5)
are illustrated in Figure 5.8. The sample is a p-type boron-doped monocrystalline
sample produced through the ﬂoat zone process as described in Section 2.2.4. The
sample exhibits a temperature-dependent carrier lifetime in accordance with the
SRH-equation in the LLI region. From Table 3.1 it is observed that the measured
carrier lifetime is below the doping concentration meaning that the measured
carrier lifetime is in the LLI region. The expected trend is an increase in carrier
lifetime with increasing temperature, also found in the literature [22, 14].
The lifetime measurements on the unpassivated IC wafers (seen in Figure 4.6a)
are displayed in Figure 5.9a and the passivated IC wafers (seen in Figure 4.6b) are
displayed in Figure 5.9b. It is important to note that the passivated and unpassiv-
ated samples are not identical, hence the designation x1 and x2 on the passivated
samples. The passivation process was carried out in January through the process
described in Section 2.2.3. According to scientiﬁc literature, the passivation layer
should not have undergone degradation at this stage [21].
==PAGE:74==
58
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.9: The measured carrier lifetime as a function of injection level in a
temperature range of 10-75 ◦C, on the IC samples. The IC-1T and IC-1B are
unpassivated p-type boron-doped monocrystalline Cz wafers. The trend observed
for the two unpassivated wafers in Figure 5.9a and 5.9b are not in accordance
with the SRH-equation in the LLI region. The two wafers IC-x1 and IC-x2 are
stack with a-Si:H/a-SixNy in accordance to the process described in Section 2.2.3.
Figure 5.9c and 5.9d. The carrier lifetime for the passivated samples is observed
to increase with increasing temperature in aligning with the SRH equation in the
LLI region.
The measured carrier lifetime for the unpassivated IC-samples, namely IC-1T
and IC-1B displayed in Figure 5.9a and Figure 5.9b respectively, are generally very
low. The carrier lifetime as a function of injection level for these two samples is
subject to ﬂuctuations and instability. These ﬂuctuations arise from the saturated
reference cell in the BCT-300 instrument, which means that the instrument is not
able to accurately measure the carrier lifetime for these samples. This can be
attributed to the measuring limits of the instruments which are 1 µs.
The carrier lifetimes measured as a function of temperature do not show a
clear temperature dependence. Since the samples are unpassivated, the concen-
tration of impurities and unbonded atoms is higher compared to the passivated
IC wafers (Figure 5.9c-5.9d), which display a much higher lifetime. The inﬂuence
of passivation on the carrier lifetime is explored in a previous study and an in-
crease in the carrier lifetime was observed after the samples were passivated [16].
This increase is related to the saturation of unbonded atoms in the unpassivated
samples, resulting in reduced or no surface recombination in the sample seen from
Equation 2.29.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
59
The passivated samples, IC-x1 (Figure 4.6a top) and IC-x2 (Figure 4.6a bot-
tom), are displayed in Figure 5.9c and Figure 5.9d, respectively. The samples
display an increase in the carrier lifetime with an increase in temperature. This
means that the temperature dependence of the carrier in these samples is in ac-
cordance with the SRH equation in the LLI region. From Table 4.1 the doping
concentrations for the samples can be found and we can conclude that the meas-
ured carrier lifetimes are in the LLI region. From Figure 5.9c and Figure 5.9d it
is observed that the increase in carrier lifetime with increasing temperature takes
place when the excess carrier density is lower than the doping concentration in the
sample (found in Table 4.1) meaning that the carrier lifetime measured for these
two samples are in the LLI region. These ﬁndings are also reported in literature
[22, 14]
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: The graphs display the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as
a function of injection level for the sample n-type 1 (5.10a) and n-type 2 (5.10b).
These samples are n-type phosphorus-doped monocrystalline Cz wafers, displayed
in Figure 4.7. The graph displays the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a
function of injection level for the sample n-type 2. The samples are phosphorus-
doped n-type Cz wafers, as displayed in Figure 4.7b. The overall temperature
dependence on the carrier lifetime is in accordance with the SRH-equation in the
LLI region.
The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injection level
on the n-type samples is displayed in Figure 5.10. The n-type 1 (Figure 4.7a)
and n-type 2 (Figure 4.7b) are n-type, phosphorus-doped monocrystalline silicon
samples.
From Figure 5.10 it is observed that the measured minority carrier
lifetime is very low, under 2 µs. This short lifetime can be attributed to the fact
that these samples are not passivated meaning that more impurities can connect
to the material through the unbonded atoms at the surface edges of the sample.
The obtained temperature dependence of the n-type 1 sample is in accord-
ance with the SRH-equation in the LLI region, which is also observed in scientiﬁc
literature [44]. The doping concentration is 3.227⇥1015 cm−3 and it is observed
that the injection level in Figure 5.10a is smaller than the doping concentration.
Thus most of the measured lifetimes are in the LLI region. The temperature de-
pendence after exceeding the doping concentration shows a less clear temperature
trend due to other recombination mechanisms becoming more prominent in this
region.
==PAGE:76==
60
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The measured carrier lifetime as a function of injection level at various tem-
peratures for the sample n-type 2 is displayed in Figure 5.10b. The temperature-
dependence of the carrier lifetime is for this sample not as clear compared to the
n-type 1 sample. However, the overall trend observed is that the carrier lifetimes
measured at lower temperatures are lower compared to those at higher temperat-
ures where a higher carrier lifetime is measured. The doping concentration of the
sample n-type 2 is equal to the doping concentration of the n-type 1 sample. For
this reason, it is also observed here that the carrier lifetime is measured in the LLI
region, and according to Equation 3.10 the carrier lifetime should see an increase
with increasing temperature. For this sample the temperature dependence when
the injection level exceeds the doping concentration displays a less clear temper-
ature trend. The ambiguity of the measurement at 75 ◦C can be related to errors
within the BCT-300 instrument such as unconscious moving of the instrument due
to the many cords connected to the instrument (seen in Figure 4.10) or due to
activation of defects in the material [35].
The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime measurements of the mc-Si samples
Multi-grain (Figure 4.8a) and m-cryst wafer (Figure 4.8b) are displayed in Fig-
ure 5.11a and Figure 5.11b, respectively. The multi-grains sample was measured
in the given temperature range from 10-75 ◦C. The m-cryst was measured after
the multi-grains starting from 75 ◦C. However, it is important to note that due to
limitations in the experimental setup, the desired temperature of 10-15 °C is only
achievable once per day. This limitation is attributed to insuﬃcient power sup-
plied to the Peltier element, which could potentially be caused by aged equipment
leading to a slight degradation in performance. As a result, the m-cryst sample is
solely measured within the temperature range of 20-75 ◦C.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: The graphs display the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as
a function of injection level for the multi-grains (Figure 5.11a) and m-cryst (Fig-
ure 5.11b) samples in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C. The measured carrier
lifetime of the multi-grains sample show instability and no clear temperature de-
pendence in accordance with the SRH-equation in the LLI region. The measured
carrier lifetime of the m-cryst sample show instability in measurements however
the carrier lifetime increases with increasing temperature aligning with the SRH-
equation in the LLI region.
The carrier lifetime measured on the multi-grains sample is very low and does
not exhibit a clear temperature-dependent trend on the carrier lifetime as a func-
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
61
tion of injection level (as seen in Figure 5.11a). However, at elevated temperatures,
the lowest lifetimes are observed, while the highest lifetimes are recorded at lower
temperatures. The data obtained shows ﬂuctuations and instability, and this can
be related to the reference cell in the instrument becoming saturated, which is
related to the limit of the instrument. This poses challenges for the instrument
in accurately measuring the signal. The absence of clear temperature dependence
in the carrier lifetime with respect to the injection level can be ascribed to the
presence of defects and impurities within the material, as noted in a prior study
[43].
The m-cryst sample displays an increasing lifetime with increased temperat-
ure as a function of injection level (as seen in Figure 5.11b). This aligns with
the theoretical predictions based on the SRH equation in the LLI regime. This
trend is also found in scientiﬁc literature [45]. The doping concentration for the
m-cryst sample is observed to be higher than the injection level. Consequently,
the measured carrier lifetime corresponds to the LLI region.
5.2
Temporal stability of FZ and 2T
Temporal stability measurements were conducted on two wafers, speciﬁcally the
2T sample and the FZ sample. The temperature-dependent carrier lifetime, as a
function of injection level, was assessed every week over a span of 10 weeks. The
obtained results are displayed in Figure 5.12a and Figure 5.12b, representing the
temporal stability of the FZ and 2T samples, respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12: Temporal stability measurements of the Si:H/a-SixNy stack passiv-
ated 2T (Figure 5.12a) and FZ (Figure 5.12b) samples are displayed in Figure 5.12a
and Figure 5.12b, respectively. The measurements include measuring the carrier
lifetime at a ﬁxed injection level in a given temperature range of 10-75 ◦Cand
have been performed once a week for a period of ten weeks. The colour coding
represents the temperatures where dark blue is 10 ◦C, and red is 75 ◦C.
Both the 2T and FZ samples depict a noticeable decline in a lifetime during
the initial 600-hour period. This decrease is expected, as observed in the scientiﬁc
==PAGE:78==
62
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
literature [21]. The degradation can be attributed to weak Si-H bonds within the a-
Si:H ﬁlms, which are inﬂuenced by light and temperature, allowing environmental
impurities to interact with the material [21]. The 2T wafer shows stabilization
after 600 hours at 50% from the initially measured carrier lifetime. According to
the literature, it is expected that this stack passivation will recover to 85-100% of
its initial value [21]. This is related to the passivation layers as the a-Si:H of 40nm
is less sensitive to environmental eﬀects, and the top layer of a-SixNy functions as
a block for hydrogen eﬀusion out of the passivation stacks [21].
During the initial stages of the experimental work, certain measurements
were performed using a procedure that involved removing the instrument from
the sample after each measurement, to measure both samples at low temper-
atures.
Consequently, the measurements obtained within the ﬁrst three weeks
exhibit signiﬁcant variations and demonstrate a notable decline in quality. This
inconsistency in measurement results can likely be attributed to the measurement
method employed during this early phase as the samples exhibit spatial variations
in the carrier lifetime [39, 46].
Figure 5.13: Scratches and marks that formed on the FZ sample surface around
week 6.
The degradation of the FZ wafer does not exhibit a stabilization as the 2T
sample. Starting from week 6, certain areas on the sample exhibited noticeable
marks and damages to the passivation layer as seen in Figure 5.13. This occurrence
could potentially introduce additional instability and unreliability in the results
obtained as these areas contain unbonded atoms. The reason is that in these areas
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
63
where the passivation layer is no longer present, impurities from the environment
can connect to the material.
This can potentially result in a decrease in the
measured carrier lifetimes.
The temperature dependence of the carrier lifetime of the FZ sample becomes
less apparent after 800 hours. This can be attributed to impurities connecting
to the material or preexisting defects within the material that undergo chemical
transformations under illumination, resulting in a change in the carrier lifetime
[35]. One such defect is the boron-oxygen defect, which remains unchanged under
illumination ﬂash but can be activated when exposed to indoor lighting for ex-
tended periods [35]. In the temperature dependence analysis of the FZ sample, it
is noteworthy that measurements conducted at 10 ◦C deviate from the expected
trends observed at other temperatures. These particular measurements exhibit
anomalous behaviour, distinct from the overall clear trends observed in the tem-
perature dependence of other measured temperatures.
While the FZ and 2T samples were stored in opaque containers on a day-to-
day basis, both samples were exposed to indoor lighting during the days when
measurements were conducted.
This exposure may have caused light-induced
changes in the materials which can result in activation of certain defects [21,
26]. One article observed degradation of a ﬂoat-zone monocrystalline phosphorus-
doped sample by close to 40% after 1-sun light soaking up to 500h [26].
The
light-induced degradation observed is explained through the changes driven by
the dangling-bond density [26]. This is also observed in other scientiﬁc research
where it is found that increased light exposure results in an increase in the dangling
bonds (recombination centre density) which in turn results in the degradation of
the material’s electronic quality [47]. As the passivation degrades, more impurities
are inﬂuenced by previous illuminations which will result in lower measured carrier
lifetimes. Therefore, by applying high temperatures to the sample the passivation
layer might degrade more.
5.3
TDLS
The TDLS analysis was performed on the three bricks, and the four wafers from
the block, the FZ, IC-x1, IC-x2, and m-cryst wafer. The TDLS analysis is per-
formed through a linear ﬁt of the measured carrier lifetime at each temperature
step using Equation 3.16.
Each sample’s calculated defect energy levels (trap
levels) are given in the title of the obtained graphs presented in position from
the VB. The TDLS analysis is only performed on the samples in Section 5.1 that
exhibit increased carrier lifetime with increasing temperature. The reason is that
the TDLS analysis is based on the SRH-equation in the LLI region where the tem-
perature dependence of the carrier lifetimes exhibits an increasing carrier lifetime
with increasing temperature which forms the basis of the Equation 3.16.
The
TDLS analysis is performed by evaluating the LLI lifetime at a ﬁxed injection
level in accordance with Table 4.2. The intercept NC/NA + log(⌧n0) presented in
Equation 3.16 assumed constant.
==PAGE:80==
64
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The purpose of this chapter is to see if the developed method for measuring
temperature-dependent carrier lifetime as a function of injection level, can be used
to perform simple TDLS analysis. To do so, some assumptions have been made.
The temperature dependence of the SRH-equation for p-type materials given
in Equation 3.9 is related to the temperature dependence of the SRH density
n1. This parameter is dependent on the eﬀective density of state in the conduc-
tion band given in Equation 2.5, whose temperature dependence is expressed as
NC(T) = N 300K
C
(T/300K)3/2 [14].
The temperature range in which the TDLS analysis is performed, 10-75 ◦C,
indicates that impurity depletion can be assumed for the whole temperature range.
This means that the majority carrier concentration for a p-type material p0 equals
the doping concentration Na [14]. In addition, no temperature dependence has to
be taken into account for the equilibrium concentration of the majority carrier in
this simpliﬁed model [14].
Equation 3.12 - 3.16 assumes that kn1(T)/Na ≫1. The reason is that the
term n1/p0 = n1/Na reﬂects the decreasing recombination activity of the defect as
the fermi level EF approaches mid-gap with increased temperature. The LLI-SRH
lifetime will then see a steep increase in the temperature range where this term
dominates [14]. When performing a TDLS analysis the temperature dependence
of all parameters should be considered. For the purpose of simpliﬁcation the tem-
perature dependence of the capture time constants represented in Equation 3.14,
is treated as a constant. This is in practice not valid [14, 37]. This means that
using Equation 3.16 and assuming that the capture time constant, is constant will
yield results deviating from the true defect energy level to the measured sample.
From Equation 2.30 it is observed that the bandgap decreases with increasing
temperature. For the TDLS analysis, the band gap energy is kept constant. By
not including the temperature dependence of the band gap in the TDLS analysis,
the obtained defect energy levels can deviate from the actual defect energy level.
It is assumed that there is only one defect in the material [14]. From Sec-
tion 2.2.3 and Section 2.2.4 it is explained that multiple defects and impurities
can connect to the material in various steps of the production of the material. Im-
purities may connect to an unpassivated material through its dangling bonds at
the surface. In the case of a passivated sample, diﬀerent factors such as exposure
to light and high temperatures may result in the degradation of the passivation
layer where impurities can connect to the material. The various defect levels and
impurities that can connect to the material are characterized by diﬀerent energy
levels [48, 49]. The energy state of the defect is also assumed stable. This is how-
ever not always accurate. For structural defects such as dislocations, point defects
etc, this is true, however, this might not be accurate for precipitates or impurities
connecting to the material whose defect energy can be continuously distributed in
certain regions of the band gap [14].
The TDLS analysis performed on the brick samples 15B and 14B is presented
in Figure 5.14a and Figure 5.14b, respectively. From Section 5.1 the carrier lifetime
as a function of injection level measured in a temperature range of 10-75 ◦C,
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
65
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14: The ﬁgures illustrate the TDLS analysis performed on the brick
samples 15B (Figure 5.14a) and 14B (Figure 5.14b). The trap level found through
the analysis is given in the title of both samples. For the sample 15B, the trap
level corresponds to 1.103 eV and for the sample 14B, the trap level is found to
be 1.101 eV.
shows a carrier lifetime increase with increasing temperature in accordance with
the SRH equation in the LLI region. The data obtained from the carrier lifetime
measurements is observed as a decrease in the Arrhenius slope shown in the ﬁgures
below for 15B and 14B.
The TDLS analysis is conducted in accordance with Equation 3.16 together
with the assumptions mentioned above. The defect levels obtained suggest that
the lifetime-limiting defect lies in the upper half of the band gap [14]. Trap levels
close to the CB are usually termed shallow defect and their inﬂuence on the carrier
lifetime is not signiﬁcant. The obtained defect levels suggest that the lifetime
limiting defect lies in the upper half of the band gap [14]. The trap level obtained
for both the 15B and 14B are very high which is a result of the assumptions made.
These trap energy levels do not represent any of the defect levels as presented in
[48, 49]. From Section 2.2.2 it is known that deep defect levels have a much more
signiﬁcant impact on the carrier lifetime. The reason can be attributed to the
fact that the carriers trapped close to the CB are easily activated in comparison
to the carriers trapped in deep defect levels [14]. As the energy level approaches
the majority band gap edge (the VB for p-type materials), the minority carrier
capture is increasingly suppressed under LLI due to the energy position of the
defect level [14]. The trend observed with a decreasing slope, and a high lifetime
limiting defect lying in the upper half of the band gap is also observed for other
samples presented in Appendix 6.2.
The primary objective was to assess the suitability of the developed method
for TDLS analysis, hence simpliﬁcations were made in the calculations. Never-
theless, to enhance the accuracy and validity of the analysis, future improvements
should include the temperature dependence of the capture time constant i.e., cap-
ture cross-section, thermal velocity, and fewer assumptions. These are not included
in the analysis as this is beyond the scope of the thesis.
==PAGE:82==
66
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER
SIX
CONCLUSIONS
6.1
Concluding summary
This thesis has presented a method for performing temperature-dependent lifetime
measurements on silicon wafers and bricks. The method is based on the minority
carrier lifetime tester BCT-300 from Sinton Consulting. To perform temperature-
dependent carrier lifetime measurements, the BCT-300 has been connected to a
Peltier element. The method has been tested with a series of passivated and un-
passivated samples spanning diﬀerent crystal structures and thicknesses. The res-
ults show that the proposed method eﬀectively measures temperature-dependent
minority carrier lifetimes within the studied temperature range for lifetimes higher
than 1.5 s. The investigations performed through this method are used to address
the research questions given in Section 1.1.
The thesis also investigated the temporal stability of stack passivation of a-
Si:H/a-SiNx:H stack passivation. From Section 2.2.3 it is explained that the stack
passivation of a-Si:H/a-SiNx:H is expected to degrade about 15% from the initial
value. However, the samples will regain 85-100% of their initial carrier lifetime
after 1500 hours [21]. The FZ wafer displayed a continuous degradation which can
be related to LID, destruction of the passivation layer or a nonuniform passivation
layer. The 2T sample exhibits stabilization at 50% of the initially measured value,
and it is expected that the lifetime will increase. However, due to time restrictions,
this increase was not observed. The reason for the samples degrading more than
15% of their initial value can be attributed to light-induced degradation caused
by exposure to light during the measurement process. Taking measurements in
the full temperature range of one sample could take from 2 to 4 hours, meaning
that the sample measured was exposed to multiple hours of light. Consequently,
defects such as the boron-oxygen defect may have been activated, aﬀecting the
carrier lifetime measurements of the samples.
The unpassivated mc-Si wafers showed shorter carrier lifetimes compared to
67
==PAGE:84==
68
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
the unpassivated n-type monocrystalline carrier lifetimes. This can be attributed
to the presence of grain boundaries in the mc-Si sample which increases the number
of dangling bonds at the surface, which increases the surface recombination and
reduces the carrier lifetime. The monocrystalline p-type samples, namely IC-1T
and IC-1B showed showed ﬂuctuations and instability in the obtained data. The
reason can be attributed to the BCT-300 instrument range which includes an error
of 0.1 µs. Also, the instrument is not optimized for measuring wafers resulting in
instability in the obtained data. This is observed as the extremely low minority
carrier lifetimes, below 1.5 µs display ﬂuctuations, and not a clear temperature
dependence as expected from the SRH-equation in the LLI region. The mc-Si
brick samples QSSPC-1 and QSSPC-2 showed a temperature dependence of the
carrier lifetime that decreased with increasing temperature.
Compared to the
bricks from the block the mc-Si bricks displayed a much shorter carrier lifetime
which is attributed to the grain boundaries and spatial variations in the sample.
The developed model poses various limitations for TDLS analysis. As mul-
tiple assumptions and simpliﬁcations were made to perform the TDLS analysis, the
results obtained may not be as accurate as they would have been with a more ad-
vanced TDLS analysis. To improve the TDLS analysis the temperature-dependent
capture cross section should be included as well as the temperature dependence
of the capture time constant. Also, the experimental setup posed limitations and
instability for the temperature range meaning that the obtained results from this
analysis may not be accurate.
6.2
Future work
This work has presented a method for performing temperature-dependent lifetime
measurements on silicon wafers and bricks. Further work will include improve-
ments in accuracy for lifetimes lower than 1 µs and verifying the measurement
with other well-established techniques. In addition, a validation method for the
developed method is essential to ensure that the method accurately can measure
the temperature-dependent carrier lifetime.
The BCT-300 shows instability and ﬂuctuations at measured carrier lifetimes
below 1 µs. For unpassivated wafers extremely low lifetimes may be measured and
a more accurate method is essential. To measure the low lifetimes a development
of the BCT-300 setup could be performed.
The Peltier element proved to be
unstable at temperatures below 20 ◦C, and 10-15 ◦C was only possible to reach
once a day. More accurate and reliable results could be achieved by implementing
a more stable heat controller.
The TDLS analysis performed included simpliﬁcations and assumptions which
might have given results deviating from the actual case. For this reason, a more
advanced TDLS analysis can be performed to characterize defect levels within
the samples measured.
The use of the TDLS method together with a single-
temperature IDLS measurement to determine defect parameters will improve the
accuracy [14].
==PAGE:85==
REFERENCES
[1]
V. Masson-Delmotte et al. ‘Global warming of 1.5 C’. In: An IPCC Special
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 C 1.5 (2018), pp. 43–50.
[2]
EIA projects nearly 50% increase in world energy usage by 2050, led by
growth in Asia — eia.gov. https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?
id=42342. [Accessed 07-May-2023]. 2020.
[3]
Energy.gov. Solar Photovoltaic Cell Basics. url: https://www.energy.gov/
eere/solar/solar-photovoltaic-cell-basics. (accessed: 30.11.2022).
[4]
EFTA. AGREEMENT ON THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AREA. https:
//www.efta.int/media/documents/legal- texts/eea/the- eea- agreement/
Main%20Text%20of%20the%20Agreement/EEAagreement.pdf. Accessed:
(17.04.2023). 1994.
[5]
bp Statistical Review of World Energy 2021. https://www.bp.com/content/
dam/bp/business-sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/energy-economics/statistical-
review/bp-stats-review-2022-full-report.pdf. Accessed: (24.05.2023). 2021.
[6]
A. Goetzberger et al. Crystalline silicon solar cells. Vol. 1. Wiley Online
Library, 1998.
[7]
J. John et al. ‘Introduction to surface passivation of industrial crystalline sil-
icon solar cells’. eng. In: Surface Passivation of Industrial Crystalline Silicon
Solar Cells. United Kingdom: Institution of Engineering and Technology,
2019. isbn: 9781785612466.
[8]
photovoltaic Equipment VDMA. International Technology Roadmap for Photo-
voltaic (ITRPV): Publication of Thirteenth Edition. https://www.vdma.org/
documents/34570/16191053/2022-04-05+PR+VDMA+PV+ITRPV+2022+
EN.pdf/132a2e1c- c932- 9643- 7bee- f218076e841f ?t=1649064322356. Ac-
cessed: (25.04.2023). 2022.
[9]
J. Nelson. The physics of solar cells. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company,
2003.
[10]
EFTA. Best Research-Cell Eﬃciency Chart. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/
assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-eﬃciencies.pdf. Accessed: (17.04.2023). 1976.
[11]
W. Shockley and H. Queisser. ‘Detailed Balance Limit of Eﬃciency of p‚Äên
Junction Solar Cells’. In: Journal of applied physics 32.3 (1961), pp. 510–
519. issn: 0021-8979.
69
==PAGE:86==
70
REFERENCES
[12]
rscSiliconElement. Silicon - Element information, properties and uses. https:
//www.rsc.org/periodic-table/element/14/silicon. [Accessed 17.04.2023].
[13]
O. Dupré et al. ‘Thermal behavior of photovoltaic devices’. In: Physics and
engineering 10 (2017), pp. 978–3.
[14]
S. Rein. Lifetime spectroscopy: a method of defect characterization in silicon
for photovoltaic applications. Vol. 85. Springer Science and Business Media,
2006.
[15]
R. Sinton and A. Cuevas. ‘Contactless determination of current–voltage
characteristics and minority-carrier lifetimes in semiconductors from quasi-
steady-state photoconductance data’. In: Applied Physics Letters 69.17 (1996),
pp. 2510–2512.
[16]
V. Kristiansson. ‘Lifetime and resistivity measurements on silicon wafers and
bricks’. In: (2023), p. 31.
[17]
K. Mertens. Photovoltaics: fundamentals, technology, and practice. John
Wiley and Sons, 2018.
[18]
I. Fleming. Molecular Orbitals and Organic Chemical Reactions. Wiley, 2009.
isbn: 9780470746592. url: https://books.google.no/books?id=pAgBngEACAAJ.
[19]
T. S. Horanyi et al. ‘In situ bulk lifetime measurement on silicon with a
chemically passivated surface’. In: Applied Surface Science 63.1-4 (1993),
pp. 306–311.
[20]
W. Shockley and W. Read Jr. ‘Statistics of the recombinations of holes and
electrons’. In: Physical review 87.5 (1952), p. 835.
[21]
X. Cheng et al. ‘Temporal stability of a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H on crystalline
silicon wafers’. In: Energy Procedia 124 (2017). 7th International Conference
on Silicon Photovoltaics, SiliconPV 2017, 3-5 April 2017, Freiburg, Germany,
pp. 275–281. issn: 1876-6102. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . egypro .
2017 . 09 . 299. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1876610217342704.
[22]
H. Haug et al. ‘Temperature dependent photoluminescence imaging calib-
rated by photoconductance measurements’. In: Energy Procedia 124 (2017).
7th International Conference on Silicon Photovoltaics, SiliconPV 2017, 3-
5 April 2017, Freiburg, Germany, pp. 47–52. issn: 1876-6102. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.338. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1876610217343096.
[23]
Unknown. - Division of Research Safety | Illinois — drs.illinois.edu. https:
//www.drs.illinois.edu/Page/SafetyLibrary/PiranhaSolutions. [Accessed 30-
Apr-2023]. 2020.
[24]
M. Tucci and L. Serenelli. ‘Metastability of SiNx/a-Si:H crystalline silicon
surface passivation for PV application’. In: Thin Solid Films 516.20 (2008).
Proceedings on Advanced Materials and Concepts for Photovoltaics EMRS
2007 Conference, Strasbourg, France, pp. 6939–6942. issn: 0040-6090. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsf.2007.12.042. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0040609007020871.
==PAGE:87==
REFERENCES
71
[25]
S. Gatz et al. ‘Thermal stability of amorphous silicon/silicon nitride stacks
for passivating crystalline silicon solar cells’. In: Applied Physics Letters
93.17 (2008), p. 173502.
[26]
S. De Wolf et al. ‘Very fast light-induced degradation of a-Si: H/c-Si (100)
interfaces’. In: Physical Review B 83.23 (2011), p. 233301.
[27]
T. Niewelt et al. ‘Understanding the light-induced degradation at elev-
ated temperatures: Similarities between multicrystalline and ﬂoatzone p-
type silicon’. In: Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 26.8
(), pp. 533–542. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2954. eprint: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/pip.2954. url: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pip.2954.
[28]
G. Coletti et al. ‘Role of impurities in solar silicon’. In: Advanced Silicon
Materials for Photovoltaic Applications (2012), pp. 79–125.
[29]
P. Mathur et al. ‘Temperature dependence of minority carrier lifetime in
single-crystal and polycrystalline Si solar cells’. In: Journal of Applied Phys-
ics 52.5 (1981), pp. 3651–3654.
[30]
S. Kristensen. ‘Temperature coeﬃcients and crystal defects in multi crystal-
line silicon solar cells’. PhD thesis. Thesis Dec, 2020.
[31]
L. Hirst and N. Ekins-Daukes. ‘Fundamental losses in solar cells’. In: Progress
in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 19.3 (2011), pp. 286–293.
[32]
P. Altermatt et al. ‘Assessment and parameterisation of Coulomb-enhanced
Auger recombination coeﬃcients in lowly injected crystalline silicon’. In:
Journal of Applied Physics 82.10 (Nov. 1997), pp. 4938–4944. issn: 0021-
8979. doi: 10.1063/1.366360. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/article-
pdf/82/10/4938/10588108/4938_1_online.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.366360.
[33]
S. Sze. Semiconductor devices: physics and technology. John wiley and sons,
2008.
[34]
H. Nagel et al. ‘Generalized analysis of quasi-steady-state and quasi-transient
measurements of carrier lifetimes in semiconductors’. In: Journal of Applied
Physics 86.11 (1999), pp. 6218–6221.
[35]
R. Sinton Insturments Sinton. BCT-400/BLS-I Photoconductance Lifetime
Tester User Manual. English. Version V5.5. Sinton Instruments. 2016. 67 pp.
Boulder, USA.
[36]
R. Mattis and A. Baroody. Carrier lifetime measurement by the photocon-
ductive decay method. Vol. 13. US Department of Commerce, National Bur-
eau of Standards, 1972.
[37]
J. Schmidt. ‘Temperature- and injection-dependent lifetime spectroscopy for
the characterization of defect centers in semiconductors’. In: Applied Physics
Letters 82 (Mar. 2003), pp. 2178–2180. doi: 10.1063/1.1563830.
[38]
B. Paudyal et al. ‘The Implementation of Temperature Control to an Inductive-
Coil Photoconductance Instrument for the Range of 0-2308C’. In: Progress
in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 16 (2008), pp. 609–613. doi:
10.1002/pip.839.
==PAGE:88==
72
REFERENCES
[39]
A. Berg. ‘Temperature and injection dependent photoluminescence imaging
of charge carrier lifetime in multicrystalline silicon wafers’. MA thesis. 2019.
[40]
M. Wiig et al. ‘Identifying recombination parameters by injection-dependent
lifetime spectroscopy on mc-silicon based on photoluminescence imaging’. In:
vol. 1999. Aug. 2018, p. 130017. doi: 10.1063/1.5049336.
[41]
G. Mahan. ‘Introduction to thermoelectrics’. In: APL Materials 4 (Oct.
2016), p. 104806. doi: 10.1063/1.4954055.
[42]
HAAKE. nstruction Manual Circulator DC10 including all Baths. English.
Gebr. HAAKE GmbH. 1999. 56 pp. Germany.
[43]
S. Søndergaard et al. ‘Minority Carrier Lifetime Variations in Multicrys-
talline Silicon Wafers with Temperature and Ingot Position’. In: (2017),
pp. 2651–2655. doi: 10.1109/PVSC.2017.8366683.
[44]
D. Sandiford. ‘Temperature dependence of carrier lifetime in silicon’. In:
Proceedings of the Physical Society 71.6 (1958), p. 1002.
[45]
H. Haug et al. ‘Lifetime spectroscopy with high spatial resolution based
on temperature- and injection dependent photoluminescence imaging’. In:
Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 200 (2019), p. 109994. issn: 0927-
0248. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109994. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092702481930323X.
[46]
S. Nie et al. ‘Photoluminescence-Based Spatially Resolved Temperature Coef-
ﬁcient Maps of Silicon Wafers and Solar Cells’. In: IEEE Journal of Photo-
voltaics 10.2 (2020), pp. 585–594. doi: 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2019.2956261.
[47]
S. Olibet et al. ‘Eﬀect of light induced degradation on passivating properties
of a-Si:H layers deposited on crystalline Si’. In: (Jan. 2006).
[48]
Rougieux Fiacre E. et al. ‘Determining the charge states and capture mech-
anisms of defects in silicon through accurate recombination analyses: A re-
view’. In: Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 187 (2018), pp. 263–272.
issn: 0927-0248. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.07.029. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927024818304008.
[49]
A. Sanchez Garcia et al. ‘The Recombination Parameter γ: Modeling and
Comments’. In: IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics (2023), pp. 1–8. doi: 10.
1109/JPHOTOV.2023.3268399.
==PAGE:89==
APPENDICES
73
==PAGE:90==
A - TDLS ANALYSIS
Figure .1: TDLS analysis on the brick sample 7T. The trap level found in the
sample 7T corresponds to 1.103 eV.
The TDLS analysis is performed on 7 wafers, all exhibiting a carrier lifetime
dependence in accordance with the SRH-equation given in Equation 3.9 in the LLI
region.
Figure .2: TDLS analysis on the wafer sample FZ. The trap level found in the
FZ sample corresponds to 1.098 eV.
74
==PAGE:91==
Figure .3:
TDLS analysis on the
wafer sample 2T. The trap level
found in the 2T sample corresponds
to 1.099 eV.
Figure .4:
TDLS analysis on the
wafer sample 5T. The trap level
found in the 5T sample corresponds
to 1.105 eV.
Figure .5:
TDLS analysis on the
wafer sample 9B. The trap level
found in the 9B sample corresponds
to 1.096 eV.
Figure .6:
TDLS analysis on the
wafer sample 12B. The trap level
found in the 12B sample corresponds
to 1.104 eV.
Figure .7:
TDLS analysis on the
wafer sample IC-x1. The trap level
found in the IC-x1 sample corres-
ponds to 1.097 eV.
Figure .8:
TDLS analysis on the
wafer sample m-cryst. The trap level
found in the m-cryst sample corres-
ponds to 1.107 eV.
75
==PAGE:92==
B - METHOD DEVELOPMENT FOR TEMPERATURE
DEPENDENT LIFETIME SPECTROSCOPY
76
==PAGE:93==
Method
Development
for
Temperature
Dependent
Lifetime Spectroscopy
Introduction
• This work describes a novel method developed to perform temperature dependent lifetime
measurements on silicon wafers and bricks. Additionally, this work investigates the stability of stack
passivation of a-Si:H/a-SiNx:H on 2 wafers in a period of 6 weeks.
• High efficiency in solar cells is associated with high minority carrier lifetime. The efficiency of solar
cells is known to decrease with increasing the temperature [1].
• During the crystallisation process of silicon, impurities are introduced. The presence of impurities
creates energy levels in the silicon band gap which will act as defect levels. This recombination
mechanism is known as the Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination [2]. This recombination
mechanism is usually dominant in silicon [1].
• Untreated wafers are usually dominated by surface recombination due to the unbonded atoms
present at the edges. To reduce the surface recombination, wafers can be passivated. This saturates
the unbonded atoms, and higher lifetimes can be expected [2].
Theory
• To measure the minority carrier lifetime, the Sinton BCT-300 instrument is used. The instruments
allows lifetime measurements in quasi-steady state photoconductance (QSSPC) and Transient
photoconductance decay (PCD) modes [2].
• QSSPC measures the change in photoconductance. The software of the BCT-300 converts this to the
excess carrier density (∆n). The measured flash intensity is converted into the generation rate, G. The
lifetime (𝜏) is then calculated
• The PCD converts the sheet conductance to excess carrier density. The lifetime at each excess
carrier density, ∆n (equation 2), can be determined using equation 3. Equation 3 takes the derivative
of the photoconductance decay with respect to time
Experimental setup
• The Sinton Instruments BCT-300 (1) instrument is capable of measuring carrier lifetime (0.1 µs - 10
ms) in both the QSSPC and PCD modes. To enable lifetime measurements at various temperatures a
Peltier element has been coupled to the BCT-300 setup. The Peltier element (2) consists of a
temperature regulator (3) and a temperature stabilizer (4). To ensure electrical insulation between the
copper plate and the sample, a 5 mm thick quartz plate has been mounted on top of the Peltier
element (2).
• The Peltier element allows temperature measurements in the range [-10, 200] ˚C, where the range
10-75˚C is investigated here.
• The samples tested consists of 6 bricks: 4 mono-crystalline and 2 multi-crystalline, with thicknesses
between 1 cm and 1.5 cm; and 10 wafers: 2 multi-crystalline with thicknesses > 300 µm and 8
monocrystalline with thicknesses < 300 µm.
Sinton BCT-300 instrument and the temperature controller for
the Peltier element.
Peltier element and temperature controller. The instrument
complemented by a quartz plate to ensure electrical insulation
between the samples and the instrument.
Conclusion
This work has presented a method for performing temperature dependent lifetime measurements
on silicon wafers and bricks. The method has been tested with a series of sample spanning
different crystal structures, thicknesses and passivation. The results show that the proposed
method effectively measures temperature-dependent minority carrier lifetimes within the studied
temperature range for lifetimes higher than 1 µs. Further work will include trying to improve
accuracy for lifetimes lower than 1 µs and verifying the measurement with other well-established
techniques.
References:
[1] Nelson, J. A. (2003). The physics of solar cells. World Scientific Publishing Company.
[2] Rein, S. (2005). Lifetime spectroscopy : a method of defect characterization in silicon for photovoltaic 
applications. Tyskland: Springer.
[3] Sinton, R. A., Cuevas, A., & Stuckings, M. (1996, May). Quasi-steady-state photoconductance, a new method for solar cell
material and device characterization. In Conference Record of the Twenty Fifth IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference-
1996 (pp. 457-460). IEEE.
[4] Cheng, X., Marstein, E. S., You, C. C., Haug, H., & Di Sabatino, M. (2017). Temporal stability of a-Si: H and a-SiNx: H on
crystalline silicon wafers. Energy Procedia, 124, 275-281.
∆𝑛=
∆𝜎
𝑞𝜇𝑛+ 𝜇𝑝
𝜏= ∆𝑛
𝐺
Results
The samples 15B and 14B are boron-doped monocrystalline Czochralski grown bricks of 1
cm thickness. These exhibit a trend excepted: with increasing temperature, the lifetime also
increases. This can be attributed to the temperature dependence of the dominating SRH
recombination.
The sample 2T is boron-doped monocrystalline Czochralski grown wafer with a thickness of
0.05 cm. The sample FZ is a boron-doped monocrystalline float-zone grown wafer with a
thickness of 0.026 cm. Both samples have been stack passivated with a-Si:H/a-SiNx:H. The
lifetime measurements for both wafers exhibit the typical trend observed for samples
dominated by SRH-recombination mechanism.
The sample n-type 1 is a phosphorus doped monocrystalline silicon wafer (with thickness
0.0165 cm) produced by the Czochralski method. The sample Multi-grains is a p-type
boron-doped multi crystalline wafer (with thickness 0.0201 cm), produced by directional
solidification. None of these two samples are passivated, which can be observed through
the extremely low measured lifetimes. Because of this, the reference cell of the instrument
saturates, resulting in instability and fluctuations in the measurements that hinder making
any conclusions of the temperature dependence.
Vilma Kristiansson1, Alfredo Sanchez Garcia2, Marisa Di Sabatino1
1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, NTNU, Trondheim
2 Sustainable Energy Technology, SINTEF Industry, Trondheim
The two graphs display a decrease in lifetime with respect to time, for the FZ and 2T
sample, respectively. This is excepted as observed in the scientific literature [4]. The
degradation can be related to weak bonds of Si-H within the a-Si:H films as a result from
light and temperature influence [4]. The 2T wafer depicts a stabilization after > 600 hours.
From literature it is expected that this passivation will recover to 85-100% of initial value [4].
Due to difficulties measuring the exact same position of the wafer, the lifetime measured will
vary from each measurement taken.
(1)
(2)
𝜏=
∆𝑛
𝑑∆𝑛/𝑑𝑡
(3)
(1)
(3)
(4)
(2)
This work was performed within the Norwegian Research Center for Sustainable Solar Cell Technology (FME SUSOLTECH, project number 275639/E20). The center is co-sponsored by the 
Research Council of Norway and its research and industry partners.
==PAGE:94==
C - SPECIALIZATION PROJECT - TMT 4250:
LIFETIME AND RESISTIVITY MEASUREMENTS ON
SILICON WAFERS AND BRICKS
78
==PAGE:95==
Department of Material science
TMT4520 - Solar cell systems and materials,
specialization project
Lifetime and resistivity measurements on
silicon wafers and bricks
Author:
Vilma Helena Erika Kristiansson
Supervisors:
NTNU: Marisa di Sabatino, SINTEF: Alfredo Sanchez Garcia
31.01.2023
==PAGE:96==
Abstract
The eﬃciency of solar cells is inﬂuenced by multiple material properties. Two important properties
are the carrier lifetime and the resistivity of the material. To better understand the methods used
to determine these properties, this report has investigated lifetime and resistivity measurements
in Czochralski boron-doped, p-type monocrystalline silicon.
This project has investigated carrier lifetime and resistivity measurements on p-type silicon samples
with a variety of thicknesses and the eﬀect of passivation. To measure the lifetime, Sinton instru-
ment BCT-300 were used in two diﬀerent modes. Firstly, the quasi-steady-state photoconductance
decay (QSSPC) mode allows the measurement of carrier lifetime below 200 µs; followed by the
photoconductive decay (PCD) mode, which allows the measurement of carrier lifetime above 100
µs. Lifetime measurements were performed on 13 wafers with diﬀerent thicknesses ranging from
164-980 µm, and 3 brick samples with a thickness of 1cm. To ensure high-quality carrier life-
time measurements the BCT-300 instrument was calibrated both with bricks and wafers. The
calibration samples had known resistivity and sheet resistance values. To ensure accurate lifetime
measurements the wafers used for calibration were obtained from 4-point probe measurements.
The results show that the thickness of the samples greatly inﬂuences the measured carrier life-
time on the unpassivated samples. This can be explained through the surface of the unpassivated
samples which consist of partially bonded atoms where unwanted vacancy atoms or extrinsic im-
purities from the environment can connect to the material. This results ion low measured lifetime
for the unpassivated wafers due to the short distance the carriers have to undergo before reaching
the surface. By increasing the sample thickness, the carrier lifetime increases due to a longer dis-
tance to the surface of the material. To increase the carrier lifetime, the wafers can be passivated.
The eﬀect was observed to increase the lifetime signiﬁcantly. This can be explained by the the
atoms on the surface edges of the passivated samples that are now fully bonded which means that
the surface recombination lifetime is not prominent in the sample.
i
==PAGE:97==
Sammendrag
Eﬀektiviteten til solceller blir p˚avirket av ﬂere ulike material egenskaper. To viktige egenskaper er
resistivitet og levetid til wafere. For ˚a f˚a en dypere og bredere forst˚aelse av metodene som brukes
for ˚a bestemme disse egenskapene, har denne rapporten undersøkt levetid og resistivitetsm˚alinger
p˚a Czochralski bor-dopet, p-type monokrystallinsk silisium.
Detter ble undersøkt ved p m˚ale levetid og resistivitet p˚a silisiumprøver med ulik tykkelse. I tillegg
ble eﬀekten av passivering undersøkt for wafere. For˚a m˚ale levetiden ble Sinton instrumentet BCT-
300 benyttet i to ulike moduser. Først ble ≪quasi-steady-state photoconductance decay≫(QSSPC)
benyttet, som tar kan m˚ale levetid i prøver under 200 µs. Deretter ble modusen ”photoconductive
decay” (PCD) benyttet som gjør det mulig ˚a ta levetidsm˚alinger over 100 µs. Levetidsm˚alingene
ble gjennomført p˚a 13 ulike wafere med ulik tykkelse mellom 164-980 µm, og 3 tykkere prøver p˚a
1cm. For ˚a sikre nøyaktige m˚alinger med BCT-300 instrumentet ble det kalibrert ved ˚a bruke 6
wafere med kjent resistivitet og tykkelse, og tykkere prøver (1cm) med kjent resistivitet. For ˚a
sikre at kalibreringen skulle være av høy kvalitet ble waferenes resistivitet m˚alt ved ˚a benytte en
4-punkts probe metode.
Resultatene viste at tykkelsen p˚a prøvene har stor innﬂytelse p˚a den m˚alte levetiden for de upass-
iverte prøvene. Dette kan bli forklart ved at overﬂaten til de upassiverte prøvene best˚ar av ikke-
fullstendige atombindinger, noe som betyr at uønskede vakans atomer o.l. kan feste seg til ma-
terialet.
Dette gjør at ladningsbærerne f˚ar en kortere distanse for ˚a komme til overﬂaten og
rekombinere. Ved ˚a øke tykkelsen p˚a prøven, økes ogs˚a distansen ladningsbæreren m˚a gjennom for
˚a komme til overﬂate, som øker levetiden. For ˚a øke levetiden til waferene kan de passiveres. Fra
resultatene ble det funnet at levetiden i de tynne prøvene merkbart økte. Dette kan forklares ved
at atomene p˚a overﬂaten av prøven er fullstendig mettet, slik at ladningsbærerne ikke kommer til
overﬂaten. Dette gjør at overﬂaterekombinasjonen ikke lenger er til stede og levetiden øker.
ii
==PAGE:98==
Acknowledgements
This specialisation project has been written for the department of material science as part of the
course TMT4520 - Solar cell systems and materials, specialization project.
I want to express my sincere gratitude to my co-supervisor Alfredo Sanchez Garcia for being patient
with me through this project while teaching me the instruments, sharing knowledge, and answering
numerous emails. Also, I want to thank Alfredo for quick replies and feedback of this report and
support through this project. I also want to give my warmest thanks to my supervisor Marisa di
Sabatino for giving feedback on the report and being patient with me through this process.
I also want to thank Irene Brakstad for polishing the samples and P˚al Tetlie for sawing wafers
with diﬀerent thicknesses. Lastly, I want to thank Rune Sønden˚a at IFE for the great cooperation
and help with the passivation of the samples.
iii
==PAGE:99==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim and scope of the work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
2
2.1
Semiconductor Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Carrier density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
pn-Junction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Generation and recombination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.1
Radiative recombination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.2
Auger recombination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.3
Shockley-Read-Hall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.4
Surface recombination through defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Passivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Resistivity and sheet resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Lifetime characterization techniques
12
3.1
Transient photoconductive decay method - (PCD)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Quasi-steady-state photoconductance technique - QSSPC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Materials and methods
15
4.1
Sample and sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
BCT-300
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.1
Qualifying the tester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.2
Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.3
Measuring lifetime on wafers and silicon ingot/bulk . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
4-Point Probe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.1
Jandel 4PP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Results and Discussion
21
5.1
Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.1
Qualify the tester, BCT-300 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.2
Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Resistivity measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Lifetime measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
iv
==PAGE:100==
6
Conclusion and further work
30
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Bibliography
31
v
==PAGE:101==
1
Introduction
The world is facing a pressing need for sustainable energy due to the current challenging energy
crisis and global warming [1]. The transition from fossil fuel-based energies to renewable energies
requires reducing the costs of renewable energy sources and simultaneously increasing their eﬃ-
ciencies. One of the energy sources showing great potential is the Sun. The challenges seen by
solar energy today are mainly related to cost, maintenance, energy storage, and weather depend-
encies. Solar cell material-related challenges are mainly related to eﬃciency as this property is a
compromise between cost and material used [2]. Silicon is the most important solar cell material
and makes up approximately 95% of all solar cell material used for fabrication [3].
1.1
Background and motivation
The eﬃciency of solar cells are inﬂuenced by multiple material properties. Two important proper-
ties are the carrier lifetime and the resistivity of the material. To gain a better understanding of
the methods used to determine these properties, this report will investigate lifetime and resistivity
measurements in Czochralski boron doped, p-type monocrystalline silicon.
During the solidiﬁcation of Czochralski silicon (Cz-Si), a large number of impurities assemble in the
ingot. This has a negative eﬀect on the minority carrier lifetime. To measure the lifetime diﬀerent
techniques can be used. In the paper written by Sinton et al. [4], the quasi-steady-state photocon-
ductance decay (QSSPC) regime is described. This regime determines the minority carrier lifetime
by using a photoconductance instrument in quasi-steady-state mode. According to the paper, the
QSSPC method allows for the utilization of less complex electronics and illumination sources in
comparison to the transient photoconductive decay method, while still being capable of measuring
lifetimes within the range of nanoseconds to milliseconds [4]. Another method used to measure the
carrier lifetime is the photoconductive transient decay (PCD) technique. This technique allows the
measurement of high carrier lifetimes through a sharp pulse of illumination that is rapidly switched
oﬀand then the excess carrier density without illumination can be determined [5].
In monocrystalline silicon samples, defects are most likely to occur at the surface of the material.
The surface edges are abrupt discontinuities in the crystal structure consisting of partially bonded
atoms (dangling bonds) [6]. This introduces vacant positions in the lattice where unwanted vacancy
atoms or extrinsic impurities from the environment can connect to the material. These impurities
introduce energy levels in the band gap of the material. The recombination mechanism associated
with this phenomenon is known as Shockley-Read-Hall(SRH) recombination [7], [8]. SRH is the
most important recombination mechanism in silicon [2]. Recombination occurring at the surface
due to defects and impurities can be explained as a two-dimensional case of SRH recombination.
According to the study by Nagel et al., [9], one of the mechanisms contributing negatively to the
eﬃciency is the recombination losses in the surface and bulk, hence it is important to investigate
the recombination lifetime. One method used to reduce surface recombination is passivation [6].
Lifetime is an indication of the material quality, and it is desired that this property is high to
have an eﬃcient solar cell.
The lifetime is a measure of the time it takes for an electron to
recombine [2]. The lifetime is negatively aﬀected by recombination, and one method to reduce
surface recombination is through passivation. A result expected after passivation is higher lifetimes
achieved on the samples compared to before passivation.
Another parameter also investigated is the eﬀect the sample thickness has on the lifetime. S. Rein
through his work Lifetime spectroscopy: a method of defect characterization in silicon for photo-
voltaic applications, [6], explains that by increasing the wafer thickness the surface recombination
impact on the eﬀective carrier lifetime will decrease. By measuring the lifetime on diﬀerent thick-
nesses one can obtain information about how the surface recombination velocity changes depending
on sample thickness.
1
==PAGE:102==
1.2
Aim and scope of the work
This specialization project work is conducted together with SINTEF in Trondheim and aims to
investigate carrier lifetime and resistivity measurements on silicon bricks and wafers and a block
before and after passivation on the samples that could be passivated.
The project is limited
to measurements on cz p-type, boron-doped monocrystalline silicon at room temperature. The
lifetime measurements are performed using Sinton Instruments BCT-300, which according to Sinton
Consulting is able to measure accurate lifetimes both on unpassivated and passivated samples [5].
The resistivity will be measured using a Jandel 4-point probe instrument to ensure high-quality
calibration for the BCT-300. The BCT-300 instrument will be used to measure the carrier lifetime
of a block, followed by three bricks and ﬁve wafers cut from the block. Additionally, measurements
will be conducted on nine thin wafers that are not from the block. Four wafers from the block and
six thin wafers will be passivated at IFE (Insitutt for Energiteknikk), and the eﬀect of passivation
on the measurements will be investigated.
The project work is structured as follows: section 2 introduces the relevant theory mainly based on
the work Lifetime Spectroscopy: A Method of Defect Characterization in Silicon for Photovoltaic
Applications by S. Rein ([6]) and The physics of solar cells by J. Nelson ([2]).
Following the
theory chapter, Section 3 explains the theory behind the measurement techniques used in the
experimental work given in section 4. Section 5 explains and illustrates results through tables and
graphs and discusses the results in relation to the theory. Lastly, in section 6 a conclusion of the
most important ﬁndings will be presented, followed by suggestions for further work.
2
Theory
This chapter aims to provide an overview of the fundamental properties and characteristics of
silicon as a semiconductor, including its position in the ﬁeld of solar energy. Silicon is the most
used material for solar cells due to its abundance on earth (27.7% [10]), and the combination of
high eﬃciency, low cost, and long lifetime [11]. This chapter begins by introducing semiconductor
properties followed by an explanation of recombination mechanisms in silicon. Lastly, resistivity
and related electrical parameters will be presented.
2.1
Semiconductor Properties
Figure 1: Silicon bandgap, shown with the Fermi energy level in the middle of the conduction and the
valence band (the forbidden band gap) [2].
Semiconductors have a number of properties that make them suitable for use in solar cells. These
include their ability to absorb visible light, their band gap between initial, occupied states and
unoccupied states that are involved in photon absorption, and their ability to be tailored for
eﬃcient transport of charges. The minimum amount of energy needed to promote an electron
from the valence band to the conduction band is called the fundamental band gap, Eg [2], shown
2
==PAGE:103==
through Eg = EC−EV, where EC and EV denote the conduction band minimum and valence band
maximum shown in Figure 1. The conduction band (CB) is described as the lowest unoccupied
band, and the valence band is described as the highest occupied band containing valence electrons.
Photon energy equal to or larger than the band gap allows the absorption of photons and converts
the resulting excess energy into electrical energy, which can then be used to power devices. When
an electron is excited across a band gap, it quickly decays to reach the lowest available energy state
in the conduction band (minimum).
Semiconductors that contain no impurities, nor defects are commonly referred to as intrinsic semi-
conductors or pure and perfect semiconductors. Extrinsic semiconductors are intrinsic semicon-
ductors where an element have intentionally been added to the material [2]. This is commonly
referred to as doping.
Elements with more valence electrons (n-type doping) or fewer valence
electrons (p-type doping) can be added.
This changes the conductivity of the material.
The
conductivity increases with increasing temperature, and with decreasing band gap [2].
In thermal equilibrium, at T=0k, the VB states are occupied and CB states are empty, as all
electrons are involved in bonding. The electrons in the VB are not easily removed and require
energy equal to the band gap to be removed to the nearest available unoccupied level. Hence
they do not conduct heat or electricity easily [2]. With increasing temperature, the electrons gain
increasingly more kinetic energy and electrons are thermally excited from the VB to the CB. The
higher the temperature the greater the number of electrons and holes which are mobilized, and
the higher the conductivity. The occupation probability of the allowed electron states at a given
energy level E in thermal equilibrium can be described by the Fermi-Dirac distribution function
presented in Equation 1 [6]. It is important to note that each energy state can be occupied of
maximum two electrons of opposite spin according to the Pauli Exclusion principle [6].
f(E) =

1 + exp(E −EF
kBT
)
"−1
(1)
where EF [eV] is the Fermi energy, kB [eV/K] is the Boltzmann’s constant and T [K] is the absolute
temperature. To calculate the electron and hole densities in the CB and the VB, respectively, at
thermal equilibrium the following equations can be used for the electron (Equation 2) and holes
(Equation 3) respectively
n0 = NC exp
✓EF −EC
kBT
◆
(2)
p0 = NV exp
✓EV −EF
kBT
◆
(3)
Equation 2 and Equation 3 shows that n0 [cm−3] and p0 [cm−3] strongly depends on both the
Fermi level and the temperature [2]. NC [cm−3] and NV [cm−3] are the eﬀective density of state
in the CB and VB, respectively. These values can be calculated through the following equation
NC/V = 2
✓m∗
e/hkBT
2π~2
◆3
2
, [2]
(4)
where m∗
e/h [-] are the eﬀective masses of electrons and holes respectively, and ~ [Js] is the reduced
Planck constant. Equations 1-4 shows that the product of the n0 and p0 are constant for any given
material at a given temperature and independent of EF.
The carrier density is an important parameter as impurities or structural defects in the material
introduce bonds of diﬀerent strengths in the crystal. This changes the local distribution of elec-
tronic energy levels. If these impurity energy levels occur within the band gap, they can aﬀect
the electronic properties of the semiconductor. Introducing occupied levels increases the Fermi
level, which increases the density of electrons relative to holes in equilibrium. In the same way,
unoccupied levels reduce the Fermi level and increase the density of holes relative to electrons. The
density and the nature of the carriers in the semiconductor can therefore be controlled by adding
deﬁnite amounts of impurities with energy levels close to the conduction or valence band edge.
This addition of impurities is commonly referred to as doping [2].
3
==PAGE:104==
2.2
Carrier density
Semiconductors can be tailored by adding either donors which are electrons (n) with negative
charges or acceptors which are holes (p) with positive charges, commonly referred to as doping.
The donors or acceptors added will be then incorporated in substitutional sites in the crystal
lattice. By adding donors or acceptors the conductivity and electrical properties in the material
will change [2].
The semiconductor can be doped in order to increase the density of electrons relative to holes,
this is called n-type doping. This is done by adding elements from group 5 such as phosphorus
in the semiconductor, which can be observed in Figure 2 as the allowed level is introduced into
the forbidden gap close to the conduction band. Hence little energy is required to excite electrons
to the conduction band [2]. The additive atom is referred to as the donor atom as it donates one
free electron to the lattice. In n-type materials, electrons are the majority carriers and the holes
are minority carriers, n≫p. The concentration of free electrons in n-doped semiconductors can be
assumed to be approximately equal to the density of the donor atoms (ND): n ⇡ND [2].
Figure 2: n-type doping of semiconductors. The ﬁfth electron from phosphorous is available as a free
electron. This introduces a new energy level in the band diagram close to the conduction band minimum
[2].
Another way the semiconductor properties can be altered is through the introduction of atoms with
a lower valence. The purpose is to increase the density of holes compared to electrons. The hole
functions as an acceptor atom as it accepts an electron from the crystal. This process is referred
to as p-type doping [2]. This is usually performed with atoms from group III in the periodic table
such as boron. The allowed level introduced in the forbidden gap is now close to the valence band
(seen in Figure 3), meaning that less energy is emitted during relaxation from the conduction to
valence band [2].
4
==PAGE:105==
Figure 3: p-type doping of semiconductors. As boron is missing an electron, a neighbouring electron
moves into the bond generating a hole. This introduces a new energy level in the forbidden band gap close
to the valence band maximum [2].
When the material is doped the density of the dopant can be assumed to be approximately equal to
the electron and hole densities in an intrinsic semiconductor shown in Equation 2 and Equation 3,
respectively. This is however only valid when the density of the donors is lower than the eﬀective
density of state of electrons in the case of n-type doping, and in the case of p-type doping when the
density of the acceptor is lower than the eﬀective density of states of holes [6]. The Fermi level and
the equilibrium concentrations of hole and electron density in doped (extrinsic) semiconductors
depend on the type and concentration of dopant used.
The majority carrier concentration can be calculated on the basis of the doping concentration
through Equation 6 and Equation 5 for electrons and holes respectively [6].
p0 = NA
and
n0 = n2
i
NA
⌧p0,
for a p-type semionductor
(5)
n0 = ND
and
p0 = n2
i
ND
⌧n0,
for a n-type semionductor
(6)
where NA and ND are the concentration of the acceptor and donor atoms respectively given in the
units of [cm−3]. The position of the Fermi level in a doped semiconductor is directly determined
by the doping concentration which can be observed in Figure 4.
Figure 4: The Fermi level EF as a function of doping concentration in n- and p-type silicon at 300 K,
with respect to the intrinsic energy Ei.
5
==PAGE:106==
2.3
pn-Junction
For a semiconductor material to eﬃciently transport charges, a p-type and an n-type semiconductor
is joined together creating the pn-junction. When the n- and p-side are connected the n-side has
a surplus of free electrons that diﬀuse due to the concentration gradient as a diﬀusion current to
the p-side where the electrons recombine. The opposite happens for the holes. They diﬀuse from
the p-side to the n-side where they recombine with the electrons. This creates an electrical ﬁeld in
the junction, that drives electrons to the n-side and holes to the p-side. This is the foundation for
the space charge region that exists at the pn-junction, which causes a potential diﬀerence between
the border of the space charge region, referred to as the diﬀusion voltage. The concentration of
minority carriers at the edge of the depletion region increases exponentially with applied voltage.
The process by which this concentration is controlled by the bias across the junction is known as
the minority carrier injection [2].
Figure 5: pn-junction together with band diagram, ﬁxed positive charges on the n-side (left) and ﬁxed
negative charges on the p-side (right). EF is the fermi level, close to the CB on the n-side and close to the
VB on the p-side. q·VD is the built in voltage. EG is the distance between the VB and the CB [12].
2.4
Generation and recombination
When the semiconductor is subjected to light the electron is excited from the valence to the
conduction band and an electron-hole pair is created. Thus this process is called generation. The
energy needed to excite an electron from the valence band to the conduction band can come from
thermal processes or through the absorption of photons [2].
The inverse process of generation is recombination. This process refers to an event where electron-
hole pairs are annihilated due to a spontaneous transition of an excited electron from the conduction
band to an unoccupied state, hole, in the valence band. The energy is released either as photons,
phonons, or transferred to other carriers, which ensures energy and momentum conservation for
the individual processes of electron-hole recombination [2].
The recombination rate (R, [cm−3s−1]) is directly proportional to the densities of the carriers
involved in the transition from VB to CB and to a recombination coeﬃcient. The recombination
coeﬃcient depends on the quantum mechanical probability of an electron transition from the CB to
the VB and thus depends on the individual physical processes underlying recombination [6]. Under
thermal equilibrium, the thermal generation rate G0 [cm−3s−1] and the equilibrium recombination
rate R0 [cm−3s−1] are balanced, meaning that the product of the equilibrium hole and electron
densities p0 and n0 is the intrinsic carrier concentration n2
i [cm−3] [6].
If the material is constantly subjected to light under a constant optical excitation, a new stationary
state is present. In the stationary state, the generation rate G > G0 and the total recombination
rate R > R0 are balanced. In the case when the light is switched oﬀthe system wants to regain
its equilibrium state, this however is not reached instantaneously.
For this reason the excess
electron and hole densities ∆n = n −n0 [cm−3] and ∆p = p −p0 [cm−3], respectively, decay at
a net recombination rate. This net recombination rate is given as ∆U = R −R0 [cm−3s−1] [6].
Assuming charge neutrality and absence of trapping centres, it follows that ∆n = ∆p. From this
one can derive an expression for the recombination time, taking into account the time-dependent
6
==PAGE:107==
decay of excess carrier density ∆n(t) [6].
d∆n(t)
dt
= −U (∆n(t), n0, p0)
(7)
Under thermal equilibrium the net recombination rate U [cm−3s−1] can be written as a polynomial
in ∆n [cm−3], whereby the zero-order coeﬃcient identically equals zero, as U(∆n = 0) has to
vanish. Hence Equation 7 suggests that the time-dependent decay of the excess carrier density
∆n follows an exponential decay. This exponential decay presents the recombination lifetime τ [s],
often referred to as lifetime or carrier lifetime, expressed in Equation 8 [6].
τ(∆n, n0, p0) =
∆n
U(∆n, n0, p0)
(8)
The recombination mechanisms are distinguished by intrinsic or extrinsic mechanisms. The in-
trinsic recombination mechanisms are unavoidable as they are present in all types of crystals. If
the excess energy is released as a photon the process is referred to as band-to-band recombination
and denoted τRad [s]. If the excess energy is transferred to a third carrier it is an Auger band-
to-band recombination mechanism τAuger [s]. The extrinsic recombination mechanisms normally
take place as a step-wise transition via a defect centre with an intermediate energy level in the
band gap. This process is more commonly referred to as Shockley −Read −Hall and this lifetime
is denoted τSRH [s]. These three recombination mechanisms are often used to express the bulk
lifetime τbulk [s] of a wafer shown in Equation 9 [2].
1
τbulk
=
1
τAuger
+
1
τRad
+
1
τSRH
(9)
The eﬀective carrier lifetime, τeﬀ[s], of a silicon wafer combines the bulk and surface recombination
by
1
τeﬀ
=
1
τbulk
+ 2Seﬀ
W
(10)
where τbulk is the bulk lifetime, W is the wafer thickness [cm] and Seﬀ[cm/s] is the eﬀective
surface recombination. Equation 10 shows that with a low bulk recombination lifetime, surface
recombination will be dominant and vice versa [6].
2.4.1
Radiative recombination
In direct semiconductors, radiative recombination is considered the dominant recombination pro-
cess. Radiative band-to-band recombination is the direct annihilation of an electron-hole pair,
involving the emission of a photon with energy equal to that of the band gap, illustrated in Fig-
ure 6. The radiative recombination rate depends both on the concentrations of free electrons n
and free holes p, which can be seen in Equation 11 for the net recombination rate Urad [cm−3s−1]
[6]:
Urad = B(np −n2
i )
(11)
where B [cm−3s−1] reﬂects the probability of a radiative transition and is a material property and
strongly depends on the band structure of the semiconductor. For indirect band gap materials,
both a photon and a phonon are emitted in order to conserve both momentum and energy [6].
Thus this recombination mechanism is not dominant in indirect band gap materials such as silicon.
7
==PAGE:108==
Figure 6: Schematic diagram of intrinsic recombination mechanism, radiative band recombination [6].
2.4.2
Auger recombination
The Auger recombination mechanism is most important when carrier densities are high and in
indirect band gap materials. This includes materials which are doped, have a low band gap or are
at high temperatures [2]. Auger recombination is an intrinsic recombination process commonly
seen as a three-particle interaction. The energy released during the recombination of an electron-
hole pair is transferred to a third charge carrier, which releases its excess energy as a phonon to the
crystal. This is also referred to as thermalization [6]. Auger recombination can also take the form
of a band-to-band process, meaning that an electron and two holes or two electrons and one hole
are involved. The rate of this mechanism depends on the densities of all carriers involved, and the
net rate for two-electron and one hole (eeh-process) and two holes and an electron (ehh-process).
The net recombination rate of these processes UAuger [cm−3s−1] are given in Equation 12 [2].
UAuger = Cn(n2p −n2
0p0) + Cp(np2 −n0p2
0)
(12)
where Cn and Cp [cm6s−1] are Auger coeﬃcients of the eeh- and ehh-processes, respectively.
During an Auger recombination event, momentum and energy are conserved and can occur in indir-
ect band gap materials, unlike radiative recombination which is suppressed. Auger recombination
is also the dominant loss mechanism in very pure silicon and germanium [2].
Figure 7: Schematic diagram of intrinsic recombination mechanism, Auger band-band recombination [6].
8
==PAGE:109==
2.4.3
Shockley-Read-Hall
In the case of an extrinsic recombination mechanism, the decay of an electron-hole pair does
not happen band-band as it does in an intrinsic mechanism. The recombination is a step-wise
transition of an electron transition via a defect centre with an intermediate energy level in the
band gap. This recombination mechanism is commonly known as Shockley −Read −Hall (SRH)
recombination after Shockley, Read, and, Hall who originally modelled this eﬀect [7].
SRH is the most important recombination process in silicon semiconductors due to impurities in
the ideal crystal structure. These impurities introduce energy levels in the forbidden band gap
that induces defect levels that act as recombination centres if located within the band gap. This
mechanism can occur either through defects in the bulk, induced by impurities or lattice defects,
or as a result of surface states [6]. Traps are normally localised states that mainly capture and
release one type of carrier. Those that capture and release both carriers are called recombination
centres [2].
The energy levels representing impurities or crystallographic imperfections may be occupied by
an electron or by a hole. These states make it possible for electrons or holes to interact with the
conduction (CB) and valence band (VB), respectively, through four elementary processes shown
in Figure 8 [6].
Figure 8: Electron band diagram showing the four interaction mechanisms of free carriers with a defect
level in the band gap: electron emission (1), electron capture (2), hole capture (3), and hole emission (4).
The direction of the solid and dashed arrows indicates the direction of the electron and hole transition,
respectively [6].
An occupied defect level shown as 1 and 3 in Figure 8 where an electron is excited to the CB (1) or
captures a hole from the VB (3). An unoccupied defect level shown in 2 and 4 on the other hand
can either capture an electron from the CB (2) or emit its hole into the VB (4) [6]. It is important
to understand the function of these defects in relation to the conduction band (CB) and valence
band (VB). The possible two-step processes that result from the interaction of defects (form a
combination of 1,2,3, and, 4 shown in Figure 8) with the CB and VB can be can be understood as
three diﬀerent processes based on the function assigned to the defect level. These three processes
are when the defect level acts as a recombination centre, a generation centre, or a trap centre,
which will be further explained in the following [6].
The ﬁrst process takes place when the defect level acts as a recombination centre. This can be seen
as a two-step capture process where a free electron from the CB (2) and a free hole from the VB
(3) are captured by the defect level and annihilate each other. Alternatively, it can be understood
as a two-step relaxation event, where a free electron from the conduction band ﬁrst relaxes to the
defect level (2) and then relaxes to the VB (3), where it ﬁnally annihilates a hole [6].
9
==PAGE:110==
When the defect level acts as a generation centre a two-step emission event occurs where the defect
level successively emits an electron into the CB (1) and a hole into the VB (4). Alternatively, it
can also be understood as a two-step excitation process where an electron from the VB is ﬁrst
excited into the defect level (4) and then excited into the CB (4), resulting in the generation of an
electron-hole pair [6].
Lastly, an event where the defect level acts as a trap centre. The trapping process is identiﬁed as
a two-step process where a carrier is captured at the defect centre and subsequently injected back
into the band where it came from. This is indicated by the combinations (2)+(1) or (3)+(4) which
show that the defect centre interacts with only one of the two bands [6].
Shockley, Read, and Hall formulated a theory of recombination through defects from statistical
considerations of the four elementary processes and determined the recombination rate related to
a single defect level as a function of the defect, material and excitation parameters [6],[7].
The SRH lifetime, τSRH can be found by Equation 13, based on the assumptions that the densities
of electrons and holes are n = n0 + ∆n and p = p0 + ∆p, respectively, and that carrier trapping is
negligible (∆n = ∆p) [6].
τSRH = τn0(p0 + p1 + ∆n) + τp0(n0 + n1 + ∆n)
p0 + n0 + ∆n
(13)
where τn0 [s] and τp0 [s] are the capture time constants of electrons and holes, respectively and
n1and p1 are the electron and hole SRH densities respectively. SRH recombination through a single
trap state can be explained by Equation 14 [2].
USRH = n −n0
τn,SRH
(14)
where USRH [cm−3s−1] is the net recombination rate via defects. The minority carrier lifetime
τn,SRH [s] depends upon the density of trap states, as well as their position within the band gap,
as can be seen in Equation 15
τn,SRH =
1
BnNt
(15)
where Bn is a coeﬃcient for SRH recombination [cm−3s−1] and Nt [cm−3] is the density of trap
states [2]. In room temperature SRH processes dominate in doped p-type silicon, giving rise to
a τ value of about 10 µm. In heavily doped silicon or at higher temperatures, Auger dominates.
Radiative lifetimes in silicon are extremely long and never dominate the recombination in a practical
solar cell [12].
2.4.4
Surface recombination through defects
Defects are most likely to occur at the surfaces in monocrystalline materials [2]. The silicon surface
edge presents an abrupt discontinuity in the crystal structure, as it has partially bonded atoms [6].
The partially bonded atoms result in an increase in the density of recombination-active defect levels
located in the band gap, near the semiconductor surface [6]. The localised states at the surface may
also be extrinsic impurities that have been deposited from the external environment [2]. In these
cases the trap states are concentrated in a two-dimensional space rather than a three-dimensional
space as in the case of bulk defects [2].
Surface recombination diﬀers from bulk recombination in the sense that the interface states do not
normally occupy a single energy level, but are continuously distributed throughout the band gap.
The activity of the semiconductor surface can be measured by the surface recombination velocity
(SRV, denoted Sn [cm/s] for electrons and Sp [cm/s] for holes), and is deﬁned in Equation 16, for
electrons and holes respectively [2].
10
==PAGE:111==
Sn = BnNs, [2]
Sp = BpNs, [2]
(16)
where Ns [cm−3] is the density of traps per unit area. The SRV allows the quality of surface
passivation to be assessed. The velocity at which the carriers diﬀuse into the surface to recombine
cannot exceed S = 107 cm/s. The reason for this maximum speed at which carriers can move
is related to the thermal energy [6]. Equation 17 represents the surface recombination rate as
equivalent to the surface recombination rate Us divided by the carrier density [6].
S ⌘Us
∆n
(17)
where Us [cm−2s−1] is the surface recombination rate, and ∆n is the excess electron density.
For electrons in p-type silicon, the surface recombination velocity at untreated surfaces and at
interfaces with metallic contacts is in the range of 103 −105 cms−1. Through surface passivation,
the surface recombination rate reduces Sn to less than 100cm s−1. The surface recombination
rate is reduced due to a reduction in the number of defects and impurities at the surface of the
semiconductor [2].
Electron and hole mobilities are determined by the frequency of scattering events within the con-
duction and valence band. At low doping levels scattering is dominated by the silicon lattice and
at high doping, mobility decreases because the impurity atoms generate scattering centres [2].
2.5
Passivation
The steadily increasing bulk carrier lifetimes of crystalline silicon (c-Si) wafers for application
to commercial c-Si solar cells make recombination at the cell surfaces and contact the major
fundamental limitation in today’s c-Si solar cells [2].
The silicon surface has a high surface recombination velocity which tends to create a layer where
photogenerated carriers are not collected. This can be prevented by passivating the surface. Pas-
sivation is performed by creating a thin layer of a wide band gap insulator that prevents carriers
from reaching the surface and hence reduces the eﬀective surface recombination velocity.
The
passivation reduces the loss of carriers in the emitter through surface recombination and a higher
lifetime can be measured compared to that of an unpassivated surface [2].
If the surface passivation is of good quality the eﬀective lifetime can be described by only the bulk
lifetime Equation 18 [6].
1
τeﬀ
=
1
τbulk
(18)
One mechanism to reduce the surface recombination rate at the surfaces is by optimizing the
interface properties. This mechanism includes reducing the interface trap density. It is common
to passivate dangling silicon bonds with oxygen or nitrogen atoms and hydrogen atoms, which
reduces the interface trap density by several orders of magnitude. Each modiﬁcation of the interface
directly modiﬁes the recombination-active interface states, which generally implies a change in the
characteristic defect properties [6].
2.6
Resistivity and sheet resistance
Resistivity and sheet resistance are important factors for the determination of the electrical prop-
erties of a semiconductor, as well as carrier lifetime.
One parameter related to the resistivity is the resistance (R) which is related to the rate at which
carriers recombine at the surface of the semiconductor device. The resistance of a semiconductor
is a measure of the opposition to the ﬂow of electrical current through the device and is typically
11
==PAGE:112==
measured in ohms (Ω) [13]. The resistance is a geometrical-dependent parameter and is equal
to the voltage (V) [volt] across the material divided by the current (I) [ampere] ﬂowing through
it. The inverse parameter of the resistance is the resistivity (ρ) [Ω· cm] [13]. The resistivity is
independent of the material geometry which is opposite to that of the resistance [2]. These two
parameters are related through Equation 19 [13].
ρ = RA
l
(19)
where l is the distance between the two points at which the voltage is measured, and A is the
cross-sectional area perpendicular to the direction of the current. If the length, l, is 1m and the
cross-sectional area, A, is 1m2 the conductivity (σ) Ω−1] is the reciprocal of the resistivity, as seen
in Equation 20. The resistivity is dependent on the free electron and hole densities n and p and
their mobilities, µn [cm2V−1s−1] and µp [cm2V−1s−1], respectively, shown in Equation 20 [13].
This means that the resistivity of a semiconductor material depends on the level of doping. In
doped material, resistivity will be dominated by the majority carrier density and mobility.
ρ =
1
q(nµn + pµp) = 1
σ
(20)
where q [C] is the elementary charge. The electrical conductivity seen from Equation 20, is heavily
dependent on the mobility of the charge carriers [14].
Another material property to consider when measuring the carrier lifetime is the sheet resistance
Rsheet [Ω/□], as this parameter inﬂuences the carrier lifetime measurements. The sheet resistance
is directly proportional to the resistivity and reciprocal to the thickness of the sample, W, shown
in Equation 21 [13].
Rsheet = ρ[Ω· cm]
W[cm]
=
1
q(nµn + pµp)W =
1
σW
[Ω/□]
(21)
The sheet resistance is related to the carrier lifetime in semiconductor devices because it is directly
related to the recombination rate at the surface of the device. When measuring the lifetime, the
instrument uses the sheet resistance and resistivity, and the value before and after passivation
should stay the same as passivation does not change this property.
To ensure accuracy while measuring the carrier lifetime, the sheet resistance has to be invest-
igated. This parameter is measured using a 4-point probe to measure the voltage output and
its corresponding input current. These values can then be used to calculate the sheet resistance
Section 4.3.
The conductivity and excess carrier density are related through Equation 22 [13].
∆n =
∆σ
q(µn + µp)
(22)
The excess carrier density relates to the lifetime, hence the conductivity and sheet resistance
through the following
τ = ∆n
U
=
∆σ
q(µn + µp)U = ∆σρ
U
= ∆σRsheetW
U
(23)
which shows how the sheet resistance and the conductivity inﬂuence the lifetime, and the interde-
pendencies.
3
Lifetime characterization techniques
There are diﬀerent techniques to measure the carrier lifetime, two of these will be explained in this
section. Carrier lifetime is measured based on the recombination dynamics of excess carriers. The
12
==PAGE:113==
excess carrier density measurements are dependent on the time of illumination and the measure-
ment technique. One technique involves a sharp pulse of illumination that is rapidly switched oﬀ
and then the excess carrier density without illumination can be determined. This method is known
as the transient photoconductive decay (PCD) technique and is usually used to measure high car-
rier lifetimes [6]. Another technique is the quasi-steady-state (QSSPC) method, ﬁrst introduced
by Sinton and Cuevas in 1996 [15]. This method includes slowly decaying light intensity til zero
over several milliseconds. This slow decay ensures that the sample remains in a steady state in
terms of the recombination processes. The QSSPC method has the advantage that a large range
of the operating points easily can be explored [6].
Nagel et. al ([9]) proposes a generalized analysis procedure that covers both the PCD and the
QSSPC technique regardless of the decay time of the illumination source. The expression found in
the article [9] combines the bulk and surface recombination rates into an eﬀective carrier lifetime
τeﬀas seen in Equation 24
τeﬀ=
∆nav
Gav −d∆nav(t)
dt
(24)
where nav and Gav are the average excess carrier density and the average generation rate, re-
spectively. In the case of the quasi-transient method, the generalized case can be simpliﬁed as
G = 0.
τeﬀ=
∆nav
d∆nav(t)
dt
(25)
This is only valid when the carrier lifetime is signiﬁcantly higher than the decay of the illumin-
ation source. Quasi-steady-state presents a case that is under steady-state conditions, meaning
d∆n/dt ⌘0, which gives the following expression for the lifetime.
τeﬀ= ∆nav
Gav
(26)
which is only valid when the decay of the illumination source is signiﬁcantly longer than the carrier
lifetime.
From equation 24-26, one can observe that in order to determine the eﬀective lifetime, the time
dependence of the excess carrier density and the generation rate has to be measured. To measure
the time dependence of the excess carrier density, diﬀerent techniques can be used. For this reason,
the quasi-steady state photoconductance technique (QSSPC) and the Transient photoconductive
decay (PCD) method will be presented in the following.
3.1
Transient photoconductive decay method - (PCD)
The transient photoconductive decay (TPCD) method is a well-established technique that has been
widely used for characterizing semiconductor materials and devices [16].
TPCD assumes a highly eﬀective minority carrier lifetime determined by bulk and surface recom-
bination mechanisms [16].
To determine the lifetime this technique uses a pulsed light source
to generate electron-hole pairs in a sample biased under constant current conditions [16]. This
changes the conductivity in the sample which results in a change in the voltage across the sample.
The lifetime at each carrier density, ∆n, can be determined through the following equation [6]
τ =
∆n
d∆n/dt
(27)
There are some limitations to the TPCD method, as the carrier lifetime is dependent on factors
such as the semiconductor material, light source, ﬁlter thickness, and temperature [16]. To obtain
accurate results, it is necessary to ensure that there is suﬃcient excess carrier density in the sample
well after the ﬂash has terminated. This requires that the ﬂash turn-oﬀtime (50 µs) be shorter
than the carrier lifetime. In other words, this technique is only valid for carrier lifetimes greater
than 100 µs [5].
13
==PAGE:114==
3.2
Quasi-steady-state photoconductance technique - QSSPC
An alternative method to the PCD method is to measure the photoconductance under steady-state
illumination. This method, the quasi-steady-state photoconductance was ﬁrst presented by Sinton
Consulting in 1996 through the paper Quasi-steady-state photoconductance, a new method for solar
cell material and device characterisation [4]. The technique developed is well-suited for measuring
the carrier lifetime over a wide range of carrier injection levels [6].
The QSSPC method allows for direct measurements of the carrier injection level, without requiring
device simulation. This method is a large signal technique that allows direct measurements of
the carrier lifetime at any range of injection levels without integrating diﬀerential quantities. In
addition, this technique provides accurate lifetime measurements over a large injection range in
one ﬂash [6].
The experimental work in the present study is based on the BCT-300 Photoconductance Lifetime
Tester apparatus from Sinton consulting. The instrument includes a ﬂash lamp that optically
generates carriers in the sample being measured. The instrument coil measures the excess carrier
density (∆n) through the excess photoconductance, in other words, changes in the excess pho-
toconductance ∆σ(t) of the sample. The instrument then calculates the average excess carrier
density through the following expression:
∆nav =
∆σ(t)
q(µn + µp)W
(28)
The photogenerated excess carrier density, ∆n = ∆p, results in an increase in wafer conductance
given by:
σL = q(∆nµn + ∆pµp)
(29)
Under a steady state, the generation of electron-hole pairs must be in balance with the recombin-
ation of these same pairs. The total recombination in the wafer can be expressed in terms of an
eﬀective minority carrier lifetime, τeﬀshown in Equation 26 [4].
14
==PAGE:115==
4
Materials and methods
This chapter introduces the material used, sample preparation, and instruments used during the
experimental work. The instruments used for this report are Sinton instruments BCT-300 and
Jandel 4-point probe. The samples used in this report are described in Section 4.1. The lifetime
spectroscopy instrument and its related processes will be explained in Section 4.2, followed by the
Jandel four-point probe in Section 4.3.
4.1
Sample and sample preparation
The samples investigated in this report are p-type boron-doped monocrystalline silicon produced
by Czochralski (Cz) method. The samples are cut out from an ingot produced in SINTEF’s Heliosi
lab with the Czhockralski furnace. From the ingot, a block was cut out. From the block, 8 samples
were cut from the bottom, noted B, and from the top, noted T. The samples are also denoted
by numbers. The lowest number represents the sample cut furthest into the sample, whereas the
largest number represents the ﬁrst cut sample.
The thinnest samples (≤200 µm) were found
from another project, as it was not possible to polish the samples from the block to this desired
thickness. From the block, ﬁve wafers were cut three from the bottom, 9B: 557 µm, 10B: 555 µm,
12B: 968 µm, and two from the top, 2T: 500 µm and 5T: 500 µm. Additionally, three bricks with
a thickness of 1cm were cut from the bottom: 14B and 15B, and from the top: 7T. Lastly, the
thinner wafers not from the block are denoted and have a thickness of the following: 1T: 166 µm,
2T: 164 µm, 3T: 166 µm, 4T: 166 µm, 1B: 200 µm, 2B: 200 µm, 3B:200 µm, 4B: 200 µm
To accurately measure the sample lifetime, the bulk recombination properties have to be determ-
ined. this requires a reduction in the impact of the surface recombination so that the only con-
tribution when measuring the eﬀective lifetime comes from the bulk. For this reason, the samples
were sent to IFE (Institutt for energiteknikk) for passivation after the ﬁrst measurements. Then
the measurements were performed again on the passivated samples. The passivation performed
by IFE included a CP5-ets etching to remove any unwanted substances on the surface [17]. Fol-
lowed, an elimination of any organic residue on the substrate using a Piranha cleaning which is
a mixture of sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) on the wafers [18]. Before the
Plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD), the oxide layer was removed, followed by
passivating the wafers by depositing one layer of a-Si:H on each side.
4.2
BCT-300
The instrument used to measure lifetime is a Sinton Instrument BCT-300. To make sure that the
instrument is properly working the instrument has to be qualiﬁed, calibrated, and then the lifetime
can be measured.
The BCT-400 measurement systems use an eddy-current conductance sensor and a ﬁltered xenon
ﬂash lamp to measure carrier lifetime in silicon samples. Measurements can be taken using either a
Quasi-Steady-State-Photoconductance (QSSPC) method or a Transient Photoconductance Decay
(Transient PCD) method. The instrument is mainly meant for lifetime measurements on mono-
crystalline or multi-crystalline silicon ingots or bricks that are either thinner than 1mm or larger
than 1cm.
15
==PAGE:116==
Figure 9: BCT-300 measuring device with ﬂash lamp and ﬂash device FPS-300.
The instrument allows for silicon quality assessment directly after growth without requiring surface
passivation as the instrument is able to measure the bulk lifetime. The primary application of the
BCT-400 system is the qualiﬁcation of high-purity silicon with lifetimes in the 1-10 milliseconds
range, qualifying as grown p-type-Cz silicon without special surface preparation, and the charac-
terization of lifetime and trap density in multi-crystalline silicon blocks [5]. The instrument gives
best lifetime measurements from 0.1µs to greater than 10ms, and the best resistivity measurement
in the range of 0.5-20 Ω· cm [5].
4.2.1
Qualifying the tester
Qualifying the tester is a crucial step to determine the accuracy of the results obtained by the
instrument. When qualifying the instrument, the total sheet resistance is checked. This should lie
in the range of +/−10% of a measured reference wafer. If that is not the case, the instrument has
to be calibrated.
The ﬁrst step when qualifying the tester is checking that the ﬂash (FPS-300) was set to LO
(LOW) ﬂash mode and that the 1000nm ﬁlter is installed in the ﬁlter slot. The software used
when qualifying the tester is the WaferLifetimeSoftware. In the software, the values of sample
thickness (cm), and base resistivity (Ω· cm) need to be updated for every sample. The instrument
is then ready to be zeroed and pressing ”Zero Instrument”. The process of zeroing the instrument
should be completed when a new sample is being measured. Then the instrument is ready to
measure a sample. This is done by placing the sample on the plastic measurement platform and
then placing the BCT-300 instrument on top. Then by pressing ”Measure Wafer” a graph showing
raw voltage, and a table depicting measurement results are shown as in Figure 10 and Figure 11.
The row voltage plot shows whether the measurement is accurate or must be repeated. This is
shown together with the scaling options, and the autoscale button. By autoscaling, the instrument
takes the desired number of measurements and averages the results.
16
==PAGE:117==
Figure 10: Information output of raw voltage as a function of time from
the BCT-300 instrument during qualifying the tester with the WaferLife-
timeSoftware Software. The graph is an indication of the quality of the
measured sample.
Figure
11:
A
snap-
shot of the results output
in the WaferLifetimeSoft-
ware during qualifying the
tester, when the sheet res-
istance of reference wafer
is determined.
4.2.2
Calibration
During wafer calibration, there was only information about the thickness and resistivity. Using
Equation 21 the total sheet resistance can be calculated. Here ρ is the resistivity, RS is the sheet
resistance, and w is the thickness.
The calibration input values are the number of samples, and the sheet resistance values corres-
ponding to each sample. This measures the output voltage of the instrument, on the sample. Then
the sample is removed and the instrument is placed on the plastic measurement platform in order
to measure the output air voltage [5]. Once all samples have been measured, the software will
perform a ﬁt to ﬁnd the calibration constants. This gives calibration curves that will look similar
to those shown in Figure 12 and Figure 13.
Figure 12: Calibration curve for bulk samples
with conductivity as a function of the voltage,
which is the sample voltage minus the air
voltage.
Figure 13: Calibration curve for wafers with
conductivity as a function of the voltage, which
is the sample voltage minus the air voltage.
17
==PAGE:118==
Using
σ = A(V −C)2 + B(V −C),
(30)
the voltage output of the instruments’ eddy current sensor is converted to (a bulk or wafer) con-
ductivity in Siemens [Ω−1]. Here A, B, and C are obtained from the calibration curves. This
allows for the conversion of the instrument voltage output to a calibrated resistivity value [5]. ”C”
in the calibration curve corresponds to the voltage output from a theoretically perfect undoped
wafer. The instrument’s response to air should also be a theoretically perfect point which is usually
at a voltage just below that of an undoped wafer [5]. The calibration curves shown in Figure 12
and Figure 13 show the diﬀerence between wafer voltage and air voltage on the x-axis, and wafer
conductance in Siemens on the y-axis [5].
When using the BCT-400 instrument from Sinton instruments to measure the conductivity of
semiconductor material, it is important to take into account the potential impact of changes in
the instrument’s operating temperature on the accuracy of the measurements. The calibration
curve used to determine conductivity can be shifted to the right or left by changes in temperature,
and an accurate measurement of conductivity depends on normalizing the calibration curve to the
undoped (”zero”-conductivity) sample for any given operating conditions. To minimize errors in
the measurements, the BCT-400 instrument subtracts the air voltage from the measured sample
conductivity. The value C in Equation 30 represents the undoped conductivity and serves as a
reference point on the calibration curves shown in Figure 12 and Figure 13. It is also important
to ”zero the instrument” between every measurement to ensure accurate results.
4.2.3
Measuring lifetime on wafers and silicon ingot/bulk
Lifetime measurements of the samples can take place after calibration and qualifying the tester.
The instrument is not optimized for measuring wafers as the wafers easily break [5].
For this
reason, the user manual recommends using the Sinton instruments’ speciﬁc wafer measurement
tools (the WCT-120) [5]. For this work Sintons’ instrument, BCT-300 is used with great caution.
The ﬁrst step is to turn on the instrument and ensure that all components are connected [5].
Then the instrument has to be left on for 30 minutes to reach a stable internal temperature. The
instrument is ready to be used when the green LED is glowing. The red LED will turn on and oﬀ
as it is keeping the instrument at a constant temperature, 25◦C. Before starting the measurements
the correct ﬁlter should be inserted in the ﬁlter slot. Then the measurements can be taken.
When measuring either wafers or bricks, the measurement mode is decided by the inserted ﬁlter.
The mode and ﬁlter are decided depending on the lifetime of the sample measured, as shown in
Table 1. When the ﬁlter is inserted the ﬂash setting, Flash Power Supply(FPS) - 300, has to
be on high (HI) during Transient analysis mode and low (LO) in QSSPC analysis mode. Before
measurements could be taken, the base resistivity (in Ω· cm) and the sample type (n- or p-type
substrate) had to be speciﬁed. The minority carrier density (MCD) also had to be speciﬁed, and
according to Table 1:
Table 1: Speciﬁed MCD based on analysis mode.
Illumination mode
Analysis Type
Speciﬁed MCD (cm−3)
Lifetime range µs
Filter
Quasi-Steady-State
QSS1000
1E15 cm−3 (p-type)
< 200
1000nm
QSS850
5E14 cm−3 (n-type)
< 2
850nm
Transient
Transient
1E15 cm−3 (p-type)
> 100
850nm
Transient
5E14 cm−3 (n-type)
> 100
850nm
When these steps are done, the instrument can be zeroed.
This is performed by placing the
instrument on top of the plastic measurement platform and clicking the ”Zero the instrument”
button. Then the samples can be measured, by placing the instrument on top of the sample and
making sure that the sensor region is completely in contact with the sample. The lifetime is usually
reported as a function of MCD. The results obtained from the measurements are represented in a
table, and the conductance sensor voltage and the light sensor voltage as a function of time are
18
==PAGE:119==
visualized in a graph. The data obtained from each individual measurement was then collected
and downloaded as a text ﬁle for later processing.
4.3
4-Point Probe
To perform resistivity measurements on wafers and bricks (W≥5mm), a Jandel 4-point probe
(4PP) instrument is used. The sample should have a clean and plain measurement area for accurate
results.
4.3.1
Jandel 4PP
The instrument consists of a measurement probe holder (with dummy) (Figure 14), and a meas-
urement probe (Figure 15), measurement probe holder (with probe) Figure 16), and steering unit
(Figure 17)
Figure
14:
Measurement probe holder with a
dummy, where ”m˚aleprobeholder” is the measure-
ment probe holder, ”m˚alestang” is the measurement
pole. ”Dummyproben” is the dummy probe used to
protect the pins on the measurement probe as they
can easily be destroyed while adjusting the instru-
ment height. lastly ”høydejustering” is used to adjust
the height of the instrument.
Figure 15: 4-point probe [19].
Figure 16:
Measurement probe holder with the
probe, where ”kontakt for m˚aleprobe” is the cord
from the instrument to the probe that measures the
resistivity. ”M˚aleprobe” is the measurement probe.
Figure 17: Steering Unit that allows changing the
applied current and shows the output voltage meas-
ured on the sample.
Before measuring, the instrument had to be adjusted to the correct height to ensure good contact
between the sample and the probe.
The dummy probe has to be inserted in the instrument
when adjusting it to suﬃcient contact with the sample is achieved. The dummy has to be used
19
==PAGE:120==
to prevent damage to the pins on the probe in the adjusting process. When the correct height
is achieved the dummy probe can be changed with the measurement probe (Figure 15). There
are two measurement probes following this instrument. For wafers and bricks (brick thickness >
10mm) the probe with the largest distance between the sticks (1.591mm) should be used. For
bricks with a thickness between 5-10 mm the probe with the smallest distance between the sticks
should be used. Which probe to use depends on the thickness and the quality of the sample.
When the probe is not measuring or in contact with the sample, the steering unit should be in
standby (STBY) mode. It is recommended to have a current in, on 100 µA together with the
x10 button, this will give a current of 1mA to the measurement probe. If the current is too high,
results may be faulty. This is especially on samples with high lifetime and high resistivity. The
voltage button should be on 200mV, as this decides the number of decimals in the output voltage
window. The ﬁlter button should be turned oﬀas it should only be used when measuring samples
with high resistivity.
When measuring a sample the steering unit has to be in forward (FWD) mode. When the sample
is being measured a click can be heard, which indicates that the probe and sample are in suﬃcient
contact. Then FWD can be pressed. When the measured voltage has stabilised, press STBY and
wait til 0V is shown in the display. Then reverse (REV) can be pressed. When the voltage in the
display has stabilised, note the value. The absolute value of the voltage in REV and FWD mode
should be approximately the same +/−a deviation of 1-2%. Before lifting the probe up, STBY
should be pressed. When measuring a sample, it is normal with 5 measurements per sample.
If during a measurement, compliance volts start to light, it means that the steering unit is not
able to apply the desired current. Then either the applied voltage can be reduced by turning the
compliance button, or decrease the current. If compliance volts are lighting up for a sample with
low resistivity, this may indicate a bad connection between the probe and the sample.
When the voltage has been found, this value can be used to calculate the resistivity in Ω· cm for
wafers using
ρ = 4.532V W
I
(31)
where W [cm] is the thickness of the sample in cm, V [mV] is noted voltage and I [mA] is the
set current on the probe. To use Equation 31 the wafer has to be no thicker than 0.3 times the
pin distance. For samples thicker than 0.3 times the pin distance, a correction factor has to be
multiplied. 4.532 is a correction factor derived from π/ln(2). This factor is included in the equation
for the sheet resistance as the samples satisfy the constraint of W≤s/2, where s is the distance
between the pins on the measurement probe.
One assumption when measuring the resistivity is that the area measured has an inﬁnite area.
This means that the d≫s, where d is the diameter or length of the sample and s is the distance
between the pins on the probe, are shown in Figure 18. For very thin samples and samples with
a thickness greater than 5% of the probe spacing, a correction factor has to be multiplied by the
resistivity. The correction factor can be found in Figure 38 in the appendix. The correction factor
is important as it accounts for an overestimation of the sheet resistance. This has to do with the
current paths between the probes as they are limited by the proximity to the edges of the sample
[14].
Figure 18: Schematic of 4 Point Probe dimensions [14].
20
==PAGE:121==
5
Results and Discussion
This section will illustrate the results obtained during the experimental work and discuss the results
in relation to the theory and relevant papers.
5.1
Preparation
To achieve high-quality lifetime measurements with the BCT-300 instrument, it had to be calib-
rated. Calibration required resistivity measurements of the wafers used for calibration. To ensure
that the calibration was of good quality, the instrument had to be qualiﬁed.
5.1.1
Qualify the tester, BCT-300
Figure 19: three reference wafers used to Qualify the tester.
To qualify the tester three reference wafers (Figure 19) with known sheet resistance and resistivity
were used. Table 2 shows the results obtained when qualifying the tester before calibration and
after the ﬁrst and second calibrations. The second column represents the known sheet resistance for
the three wafers, and the third column represents the measured sheet resistance before calibration.
These values diﬀer more than +/−10% which is the given error interval in which the sheet
resistance is acceptable.
For this reason, the instrument had to be calibrated.
After the ﬁrst
calibration, one can observe that a majority of the sheet resistance values obtained are outside the
uncertainty range of +/−10%. Thus a new calibration had to be performed. The values obtained
during qualifying the tester after 2nd calibration proved to be in the given range, as depicted in
the last column in Table 2. However, the value of the sinton262 reference cell is outside this error
interval but it was decided that this value was acceptable.
Table 2: Total Sheet resistance on reference wafers before and after calibration.
Total sheet resistance (Ω· cm)
ID
Reference
Measured
% Abs diﬀ
1st
Calibration
% Abs diﬀ
2nd
Calibration
% Abs diﬀ
Sinton262
26.2
-145.7
-287.7
30.4
14.8
29.9
13.5
Sinton584
58.4
3.1
179.8
62.6
6.9
61.6
5.3
Sinton1000
>1000
4.7
198.1
1886.9
61.4
1013.7
1.4
21
==PAGE:122==
5.1.2
Calibration
Figure 20: 6 wafers used for calibration of BCT-300, values can also be found in Table 4.
Figure 21: Bricks used for calibrating the
BCT-300 instrument, in total 4 bricks.
The
known values of each brick can be found in
Table 4.
Figure 22: Brick used for brick calibration of
BCT-300.
The calibration was performed using the method explained in Section 4.2.2. The wafer calibra-
tion was performed using the six wafers depicted in Figure 20 with properties found in Table 5
were used.
The brick calibration was performed using the same method as for the wafers, on
22
==PAGE:123==
four bricks depicted in Figure 21 and Figure 22 with properties found in Table 5. The obtained
calibration curves for the second calibration for bricks and wafers are illustrated in Figure 23 and
Figure 24, respectively. The calibration performed was depicted as a good ﬁt and used throughout
all experimental work.
Figure 23: Calibration curve for brick samples.
Figure 24: Calibration curve for wafers.
5.2
Resistivity measurements
The resistivity measurements were performed on the three reference wafers (Figure 19), both by
4PP method, following Section 4.3, and by the BCT-300 instrument as depicted in Table 3. In
Section 4.3 it is stated that for very thin samples or for samples where an inﬁnite surface area can
not be assumed, for instance, due to breakage, a correction factor has to be added. The reference
cell Sinton 58.4 is broken, meaning that an inﬁnite surface area cannot be assumed. For this reason,
a correction factor, which can be found in Figure 38 has to be used. The correction factor is found
by dividing the sample thickness (0.0525 cm) by the pin spacing on the measurement probe (0.0635
cm). This gives a correction factor (0.0525cm/0.0635cm = 0.8) corresponding to 0.9662. Through
Table 3 it is observed that the 4PP method gives accurate resistivity values for all wafers. From the
values obtained from the BCT-300, it can be seen that for low resistivity the instrument measures
resistivity values that are acceptable. This is however observed opposite for high resistivity. From
Section 4.2 it is known that the BCT-300 is optimized to measure samples with a resistivity lower
than 20 Ω· cm [5] which causes more error while measuring higher resistivities.
Table 3: Resistivity (ρ) measurements from Jandel 4PP and BCT-300.
ID
Reference ρ [Ω· cm]
4PP ρ [Ω· cm]
BCT-300 ρ [Ω· cm]
Sinton262
1-2
1.40
1.57
Sinton584
1-5
2.95
3.23
Sinton1000
40
42.67
53.22
The assertion is supported by the data obtained from Sinton1000, which demonstrates a higher
resistivity measured by the BCT-300 compared to the 4PP method. This can be attributed to the
fact that as the resistivity increases, the voltage diﬀerences between the air and the sample become
more similar, resulting in a larger margin of error in the measurement of resistivity when utilizing
the BCT-300 [6]. The data obtained for resistivity measurements above 20 Ωcm, utilizing the 4PP
method yields more reliable data compared to the use of the BCT-300 instrument.
23
==PAGE:124==
Table 4: Known values for the six wafers used for calibration, displayed in Figure 20, and the four brick
samples used for brick calibration, displayed in Figure 21.
Reference values of the six wafers
Reference values of the four bricks
ID
ρ [Ω· cm]
W [cm]
Rsheet [Ω/□]
ID
ρ [Ω· cm]
Cal 6 0.5
0.51
0.025
20.33
F-193531
0.69
Cal 6 0.75
0.74
0.026
28.58
H-191083
7.37
Cal 6 1
0.97
0.026
37.03
G-193558
2.24
Cal 6 2
2.12
0.025
82.75
J-191122
17.37
Cal 6 4
4.35
0.025
170.66
Cal 6 10
10.03
0.025
393.64
The 4PP was also performed on the six wafers depicted in Figure 20 with results obtained displayed
in Table 5. Table 4 displays the reference value of these six wafers, where the sheet resistance was
calculated using Equation 21 and the reference values of resistivity and wafer thickness.
Table 5: Values obtained from 4PP with absolute error in relation to the reference sheet resistance value
from Table 4.
Values calculated based on 4PP values
Values obtained from 4PP
Error from
reference value
ID
V
[mV]
I
[mA]
R
[Ohm]
Rsheet
[Ω/□]
ρ
[Ω· cm]
I
[uA]
V #1
[mV]
V #2
[mV]
V #3
[mV]
V #4
[mV]
V #5
[mV]
Abs diﬀ%
Cal 6 0.5
4.48
1
4.48
20.28
0.51
1000
4.49
4.48
4.48
4.46
4.47
0.28
Cal 6 0.75
6.40
1
6.40
28.98
0.75
1000
6.37
6.38
6.40
6.41
6.43
1.41
Cal 6 1
8.40
1
8.40
38.07
0.99
1000
8.41
8.42
8.41
8.39
8.39
2.80
Cal 6 2
18.57
1
18.57
84.11
2.16
1000
18.58
18.56
18.55
18.55
18.6
1.65
Cal 6 4
15.18
0.4
37.95
171.89
4.38
400
15.17
15.15
15.20
15.18
15.19
0.72
Cal 6 10
8.90
0.1
88.96
402.99
10.27
100
8.87
8.92
8.91
8.91
8.87
2.37
Table 5 shows the set current value I, and the measured voltage output, V#1 −#5, measured 5
times, for accurate results. Using ohms law the resistance can be calculated, and using Equation 19
and Equation 21, the resistivity and sheet resistance was calculated.
Looking at the absolute
diﬀerence which compares the measured Table 5 and the known Table 4 the sheet resistance values
obtained through the 4PP were acceptable and used to calibrate the BCT-300.
5.3
Lifetime measurements
Lifetime measurements were performed on the block and bricks using the transient analysis mode
together with an 850nm ﬁlter and FPS-300 setting on high (HI). For all wafers measured the
QSS1000 analysis mode was used together with the 1000nm ﬁlter, and FPS-300 setting on low
(LO).
Block
The block (Figure 25) was measured 4 times, labelled as measurement 1-4 in Figure 26 and Fig-
ure 27.
24
==PAGE:125==
Figure 25: The block from which wafers and bricks are cut.
From Figure 26 and Figure 27 one can observe that both the resistivity and the estimated bulk
lifetime through the block increase towards the bottom. According to Berthod, C. et. al, this
increase observed may be caused by an increase in the boron concentration along the ingot height.
In their paper Experimental investigation of the optimal ingot resistivity for both the cell perform-
ances and the temperature coeﬃcients for diﬀerent cell architectures it is also suggested that the
average resistivity should be around 1.3 Ω· cm [20]. To achieve this, the resistivity at the bottom
of the ingot should be higher than that of the top [20], which is the observed trend for the block.
The estimated bulk lifetime of the block (Figure 26) was plotted with a 5% error interval in order
to understand where the bulk lifetime for the wafers could be excepted. In the case of the bottom
samples, a lifetime between 255-290 µm can be expected from Figure 26 and in the case of the
samples cut from the top a lifetime between 225-259 µm can be expected.
Figure 26: Lifetime measured through the
block from top to bottom with a 5% error
interval. A total of 4 measurements were
performed on the block.
Figure 27: Resistivity through the block, measured
from top to bottom. A total of 4 measurements were
performed on the block.
Bricks
Figure 29 illustrates the measured lifetime vs. carrier density for the three bricks displayed in
Figure 28. The lifetime was measured using the transient mode, as the lifetime is greater than
100 µs. The lifetimes were measured twice for each sample, and can be seen to be identical from
3 ⇤1014 −9 ⇤1015cm−3. For carrier concentrations lower than 3 ⇤1014cm−3 there is more variation
shown in the measurements. The measurements were taken at 2 diﬀerent times. The reason for the
two obtained proﬁles of each sample can be dependent on the surface recombination, and doping
25
==PAGE:126==
level variations in the sample if the measurements were not taken at the exact same position both
times. From the lifetime as a function of carrier density proﬁles obtained it is observed that 7T
which is cut from the top of the block and 15B, cut from the bottom of the block, have similar
lifetime proﬁles compared to 14B, cut from the bottom. It was expected that both of the samples
cut from the bottom would have similar lifetime proﬁles. The reason for this diﬀerence may be
due to boron concentration variations in the samples or defects in the measured area.
The lifetimes are considered high, and the reason why the bricks obtain a high lifetime without
being passivated can be seen in relation to the thickness of the samples together with the purpose of
utilization area of the instrument. The reason is that the instrument is able to measure the lifetime
in the bulk. From Equation 10, it can be seen that the eﬀect that surface recombination has on
the eﬀective lifetime decreases with increasing wafer thickness. In other words, higher lifetimes
will be measured on thicker samples [21].
Figure 28: A total of three bricks were
cut from the block.
Figure 29: Lifetime [µs] as a function of the excess
carrier density [cm−3] for the three bricks displayed
in Figure 28.
Wafers
The measurements of wafers were performed on ﬁve samples cut from the bottom and the top of the
block with a thickness of 500-970 µm shown in Figure 30, and thinner wafers (not from the block)
with a thickness of approximately 200 µm and 164-166 µm Figure 32. During the passivation
the samples were polished, and the thin wafers experienced breakage as observed in Figure 37.
The wafers were measured using the QSSPC measuring method with the 1000nm ﬁlter using the
LifeTimeWaferSoftware. This is because the transient technique passes light of higher intensity
compared to that of the quasi-steady state technique [5]. After the samples were passivated and
new measurements were to be taken, a few challenges arose with the BCT-300 instrument as it
was not possible to use only the transient mode. For this reason, the Generalized (1/1) mode was
used. This mode uses a combination of QSSPC and PCD mode, which may have inﬂuenced the
results on the passivated samples.
26
==PAGE:127==
Figure 30: A total of 5 wafers
were cut from the block.
Figure 31: 4 out of 5 wafers in
Figure 30 were passivated.
Figure 32: Eight samples which were not from
the block was also measured.
Figure 33: From the 8 wafers in Figure 32,
six were passivated.
The lifetimes measured on the unpassivated samples (displayed in Figure 30 and Figure 32), the
results obtained are illustrated in Figure 34 and Figure 36. For these samples, the lifetimes meas-
ured are very low compared to that of the brick samples in Figure 29. The observed short lifetimes
can be explained through the dominant surface recombination in the wafers. This is due to the
increased probability of carriers recombining at the surface, which results in a short carrier life-
time. The surface recombination depends on the wafer thickness, and this assertion is approved
by Horﬁnyi T. S., et. al in [21] where it is stated that a thin wafer dominated by surface recom-
bination will give shorter lifetimes. In the case of the thin wafers, the instrument is not able to
detect the bulk recombination lifetime due to their thickness. However, the wafers from the block
are thicker than the thin wafers, which is also approved by the longer lifetime shown in Figure 34
and Figure 36.
27
==PAGE:128==
The results of the four wafers from the block (Figure 31) and six thin wafers (Figure 33) after
passivation are displayed in Figure 31 and Figure 37. Comparing these to before passivation, the
passivated wafers exhibit longer lifetimes and higher carrier densities. This is because passivation
allows for the reduction of recombination through defects at the surface edges, which are typically
the dominant recombination mechanism in unpassivated wafers. As a result, the instrument can
measure the lifetime in bulk, rather than only measuring the surface recombination lifetime. This
can be supported by S. Rein who previously reported that passivation increases carrier lifetimes as
the lifetime is no longer dependent on the recombination rate at the surface [6]. Also investigating
the eﬃcient carrier lifetime in Equation 10, the surface recombination term can be neglected after
passivation as it becomes equal to zero. This results in the bulk recombination lifetime being
the only recombination lifetime that aﬀects the lifetime shown in Equation 18, resulting in higher
lifetimes measured.
Figure 34: Lifetime [µs] as a function of the
excess carrier density [cm−3] for the ﬁve
wafers displayed in Figure 30.
Figure 35: Lifetime [µs] as a function of the
excess carrier density [cm−3] for the four
passivated wafers from the block displayed in Fig-
ure 31.
Figure 34 display the measures obtained for the ﬁve wafers cut from the block. It is observed
diﬀerent lifetimes for all of the measured wafers where 2T shows the lowest measured lifetime and
12B the highest. From the lifetime measurement through the block in Figure 26, the samples cut
from the top were expected to have a shorter lifetime compared to the bottom-cut samples. In this
case, however, there are also thickness variations in the wafers where 12B (968 µm) and 5T (970
µm) are the thickest samples and 9B (557 µm), 10B (555 µm), and 2T (500 µm) are the thinnest.
The thickness variation is observed in the ﬁgure as the samples with the largest thickness also show
the longest lifetimes and vice versa for the thinnest wafers. For the three thinner wafers from the
block (9B, 10B, and 2T) it is observed that the bottom-cut samples have a higher lifetime than
the sample cut from the top, which was expected.
The results from lifetime measurements on the four passivated wafers from the block are displayed
in Figure 35. 12B and 2T are the wafers that show the longest lifetimes, and 5T and 9B have
the shortest lifetimes. The reason for this change can be attributed to the quality of passivation
or the measurement mode. It demonstrates a positive correlation between the carrier lifetime and
injection level. This trend can be attributed to the reduction of recombination through defects in
the material at higher carrier densities. As the carrier density increases, more defect states are
ﬁlled, thereby reducing the likelihood of recombination [2]. A higher carrier density also means
a higher probability for carriers to recombine, which is why the lifetimes are seen to decrease at
high carrier density. From Equation 17 it can also be seen that with an increase in excess carrier
density, the surface recombination rate will decrease which generally results in longer lifetimes.
28
==PAGE:129==
Figure 36: Lifetime [µs] as a function of the
excess carrier density [cm−3] for the 8
thin wafers displayed in Figure 32.
Figure 37: Lifetime [µs] as a function of the
excess carrier density [cm−3] for the six
passivated thin wafers displayed in Figure 37.
Figure 36 displays the results obtained during lifetime measurements on the unpassivated thin
wafers (Figure 32). The overall trend observed is an increase in the lifetime with increasing carrier
density, which is the same trend observed for the ﬁve wafers from the block. Also, the wafers
noted T are generally seen to have a higher lifetime compared to the wafers noted with a B. The
variations between the samples may have been caused by diﬀerent boron concentrations in the
position of the sample where the lifetime was measured. These wafers were also very brittle so
most of them had broken which may have aﬀected the results. As these samples were thin and not
passivated, a short lifetime was expected.
The lifetime measurements on the passivated thin samples (Figure 33) displayed in Figure 37 show
a general trend where the carrier lifetime decreases as a function of increasing carrier density.
This trend can be attributed to an increase in the concentration of defects and impurities in
the wafer. Additionally, as the carrier density increases, the probability of recombination also
increases, leading to a decrease in carrier lifetime as seen in the ﬁgure. It is noteworthy that the
carrier lifetime after passivation is signiﬁcantly longer compared to the lifetime before passivation
(Figure 36). The reason for this increase in lifetime after passivation is that unpassivated samples
have a layer where photogenerated carriers are not collected due to the high surface recombination,
as stated in Section 2.5.
The high surface recombination results in short lifetimes.
Through
passivation, the carriers are prevented to reach the surface and recombining which reduces the
surface recombination velocity at the surface and increases the carrier lifetime.
29
==PAGE:130==
6
Conclusion and further work
6.1
Conclusion
In this project, the resistivity and lifetime of silicon wafers and bricks were investigated. Through
the experimental work, a comprehensive understanding of the Jandel 4PP instrument and the
BCT-300 was obtained. The results of this study enabled the investigation and discussion of the
thickness dependence on lifetime and the eﬀect of passivation.
The ﬁndings from the lifetime measurements demonstrated that passivated samples displayed a
signiﬁcantly higher lifetime in comparison to unpassivated samples.
This was due to the fact
that the surface recombination rate was reduced through passivation. The results indicated that
passivating silicon wafers are crucial for improving the conversion of solar energy into electrical
energy.
The obtained resistivity and sheet resistance values were crucial for achieving high-quality cal-
ibration, which is fundamental for accurate lifetime measurements. It was determined that the
BCT-300 had limitations in measuring resistivity above 20 Ω· cm and that the 4PP yielded more
precise results for all wafers measured.
The thickness dependence on the measured lifetime was mainly prominent in the unpassivated
samples as the thin wafers showed a low lifetime, whilst the bricks and the block demonstrated a
longer lifetime. The reason for the short lifetimes measured on the unpassivated samples is related
to the thickness inﬂuence on the surface recombination rate. The results obtained indicate that
as the thickness increases the eﬀect of surface recombination becomes less relevant. This can be
attributed to Equation 10, where it is seen that the surface recombination lifetime term decreases
with increasing sample thickness. After passivation, the surface recombination term can be set to
zero, which results in higher measured carrier lifetimes in the samples.
6.2
Further work
Based on the ﬁndings of this study, further investigation into the eﬀects of temperature on carrier
lifetime in both passivated and unpassivated samples with varying thicknesses would be of interest.
This would provide insight into the thermal stability of the material and the temperature coeﬃcient
of resistance. Additionally, examining how bulk lifetime and surface recombination lifetime vary
with wafer thickness would also be valuable. Furthermore, utilizing lifetime spectroscopy to char-
acterize and identify defects in the material through the examination of recombination mechanisms
would be a valuable avenue for future research.
30
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
[1]
World Energy Outlook 2022 – Analysis - IEA — iea.org. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-
energy-outlook-2022. [Accessed 12-Jan-2023].
[2]
J. Nelson. The physics of solar cells. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company, 2003.
[3]
Energy.gov. Solar Photovoltaic Cell Basics. url: https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/solar-
photovoltaic-cell-basics. (accessed: 30.11.2022).
[4]
R. A. Sinton, A. Cuevas and M. Stuckings. ‘Quasi-steady-state photoconductance, a new
method for solar cell material and device characterization’. In: Conference Record of the
Twenty Fifth IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference-1996. IEEE. 1996, pp. 457–460.
[5]
Sinton Insturments Sinton R. A. BCT-400/BLS-I Photoconductance Lifetime Tester User
Manual. English. Version V5.5. Sinton Instruments. 2016. 67 pp. Boulder, USA.
[6]
S. Rein. Lifetime spectroscopy: a method of defect characterization in silicon for photovoltaic
applications. Vol. 85. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[7]
WTRW Shockley and WT Read Jr. ‘Statistics of the recombinations of holes and electrons’.
In: Physical review 87.5 (1952), p. 835.
[8]
R. N. Hall. ‘Electron-hole recombination in germanium’. In: Physical review 87.2 (1952),
p. 387.
[9]
H. Nagel, C. Berge and A. G. Aberle. ‘Generalized analysis of quasi-steady-state and quasi-
transient measurements of carrier lifetimes in semiconductors’. In: Journal of Applied Physics
86.11 (1999), pp. 6218–6221.
[10]
rscSiliconElement. Silicon - Element information, properties and uses. https://www.rsc.org/
periodic-table/element/14/silicon. [Accessed 30-Dec-2022].
[11]
Energy.gov. Solar Photovoltaic Cell Basics. https : / / www . energy. gov / eere / solar / solar -
photovoltaic-cell-basics. [Accessed 30-Dec-2022].
[12]
K. Mertens. Photovoltaics: fundamentals, technology, and practice. John Wiley & Sons, 2018.
[13]
D. K. Schroder. Semiconductor material and device characterization. John Wiley & Sons,
2015.
[14]
F. M Smits. ‘Measurement of sheet resistivities with the four-point probe’. In: Bell System
Technical Journal 37.3 (1958), pp. 711–718.
[15]
R. A. Sinton and A. Cuevas. ‘Contactless determination of current–voltage characteristics
and minority-carrier lifetimes in semiconductors from quasi-steady-state photoconductance
data’. In: Applied Physics Letters 69.17 (1996), pp. 2510–2512.
[16]
R. L. Mattis and A. J. Baroody. Carrier lifetime measurement by the photoconductive decay
method. Vol. 13. US Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, 1972.
[17]
What Is Wafer Etching? — waferworld.com. https://www.waferworld.com/post/what-is-
wafer-etching. [Accessed 31-Jan-2023].
[18]
- Division of Research Safety — Illinois — drs.illinois.edu. https://www.drs.illinois.edu/
Page/SafetyLibrary/PiranhaSolutions. [Accessed 31-Jan-2023].
[19]
MDC Materials Development Corp. SA. Cylindrical Four Point Probe Head. url: https:
//www.mdc- europe.com/mdc- equipments/cylindrical- four- point- probe- head/. (accessed:
15.12.2022).
[20]
C. Berthod, S. T. Søndergaard and J. O. Odden. ‘Experimental investigation of the optimal
ingot resistivity for both the cell performances and the temperature coeﬃcients for diﬀerent
cell architectures’. In: 2018 IEEE 7th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion
(WCPEC)(A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE PVSC, 28th PVSEC & 34th EU PVSEC).
IEEE. 2018, pp. 0293–0297.
[21]
T. S. Horanyi, T. Pavelka and P. T¨utt¨o. ‘In situ bulk lifetime measurement on silicon with a
chemically passivated surface’. In: Applied Surface Science 63.1-4 (1993), pp. 306–311.
31
==PAGE:132==
Appendix
Figure 38: 4PP correction factors based on sample thickness or diameter
32
==PAGE:133==
D - RISK ANALYSIS
117
==PAGE:134==
RISK ASSESSMENT (RiskManager alternative)
Unit/Institute:
Responsible line manager (name):
Responsible for activities being risk assessed 
(name):
Participants in the risk assement (names):
Use of computer
Fire due to DAC misplaced and put on top of 
Use of BCT instrument
Eye injury due to bright light
Use of lab
Fall acident due to little space
Use of Peltier element
Burn injury due to warm heat plate
Marisa Di Sabatino Lundberg, Alfredo Sanche
IMA
Ida Westermann
Vilma Kristiansson
Activity / process
Unwanted incident
Description of the activity, process, area, etc.:
The risk assessment applies to the activities related to the project work at the "MEKA
guidelines for the instrument are given in the manual. As the instrument meets all th
hazard, hot instruments and tools, and cabinets containing chemicals. None of these 
==PAGE:135==
Probability (P)
(1-5)
Health
(1-5)
Material 
values (1-5)
Environment
(1-5)
DAC is put on top of the computer (plast
1
3
3
3
Do not take the instrument apart and lo
1
4
0
0
Be cautious
1
1
3
0
Heat glowes for removing samples 
from the heat plate and tweezers to 
move samples
1
1
0
0
ez Garcia
Consequence (C)
Evaluate the categories individualley. He
always be evaluated.
Existing risk reducing measures
ANISK LAB" (Room nr. E-112). The purpose of the experimental work is to measure the lifetime o
e given guidelines, it is safe to use and does not represent a risk. The work will be conducted on
apply to the planned lab work and, therefore, are not considered as part of the risk assessment
==PAGE:136==
Reputation 
(1-5)
1
3
Do not move the DAC
3
1
4
Do not take the instrument apart and look into the lightbulb w
4
0
1
Be cautious while walking around in the lab
1
0
1
Be cautions and use the extra tools available
1
01.02.2023
alth should 
Risk value 
(P x C)
Date:
Revised:
Risk reducing measures - suggestions
Measures reducing the probability of the unwanted incident 
happening should be prioritized.
Residual risk 
after measures 
being 
implemented
(S x K)
of silicon ingots by using the instrument BCT-400 Photoconductance Lifetime Tester. Safety 
nly at the “Mekanisk lab”. The room card of the lab states different risks such as crushing 
t for this project.
==PAGE:137==
==PAGE:138==
Red
Unacceptable risk. Measures needs to be implemented.
Yellow
Medium risk. Measures needs to be considered.
Green
Acceptable risk. Measures can be considered.
==PAGE:139==
==PAGE:140==
