==PAGE:1==
Towards 
CIRCULAR 
MINDSETS
in a distributed design context
Master Thesis
Therese Balslev · s161699
2023
==PAGE:2==
Title page
Student name: 
Student ID:
Education: 
Supervisor: 
Institution: 
Department: 
Content : 
ECTS: 
Project duration: 
Therese Balslev
s161699
MSc Design & Innovation
Associate Professor,
Michael Deininger
Technical University of Denmark 
DTU Management
Master thesis project
30 
09 Jan 2023 - 30 June 2023
Therese Balslev
30 June 2023 · Vienna, Austria
==PAGE:3==
Content 
01 
02
03
04
07
44
45
Introduction  
Acknowledgement
Learning Objectives
Master Thesis - a draft for an academic paper 
Table of contents for academic paper
Appendices
Appendices overview
==PAGE:4==
Personal introduction
Design is everywhere around us. The furniture we use, the 
clothes we wear  - even the food we eat and the systems we inter-
act with on a daily basis. Visible to the eye or or not, everything 
humans have created has been designed. Design was caused 
societal progessions and achievements but has inevitably also 
caused tremendous harm on the planet contributing to overcon-
sumption and overexploitation of natural resources.  
As engineers, we play a vital role in shaping and crafting the fu-
ture, actively devoting to positive societal transformation.
I have as a soon-to-graduate design engineer from DTU acquired 
knowledge and obtained competencies that can contribute to 
this transition. 
This master thesis project is rooted in my deep motivation and 
desire to apply design compentecies in the field of research and 
contribute to the circular and sustainable transition necessary to 
create a better future for all. 
Having successfully integrated my master’s program at DTU 
with my experiences gained at the Danish Design Center, my 
belief in the transformative potential and power of design-driven 
approaches to address the increasingly intricate challenges of 
our time has only grown stronger.
So dear reader, I hope you will find my thesis interesting and 
insightful. 
Best,
Therese Balslev
Page 01 
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
An infinite amount of gratitude goes to to my supervisor, Asso-
ciate Professor, Mr Michael Deininger, for supporting me from 
beginning to end and for believing in the project and me as a 
designer throughout my entire education at DTU. 
Thank you to the DDC - Danish Design Center for letting me 
combine my work experience with my engineering degree at 
DTU and letting me manage the Distributed Design Platform 
project and combine this with my research. 
Thanks to the kind people from Happylab for hosting me for 
three months in Vienna, providing me with a workspace and for 
using your network to help me recruit participants for the study. 
A final thank you to all family members, friends and colleagues 
who have helped and supported me on an ongoing basis on my 
journey to finalize my master degree. 
Page 02
==PAGE:6==
Learning objectives
A student who has met the objectives of the course will be able 
to: 
1.	 Gain and apply knowledge within the cross-section of Distrib-
uted Design and Circular Economy. 
2.	 Synthesise design ideas and concepts in a research context
3.	 Plan, facilitate and host design-driven workshops
4.	 Be able to include and receive inputs and feedback on relevant 
topics and framework(s)
5.	 Be able to carry out a relevant study by planning, testinf, ana-
lysing and evaluating an experiment
6.	 Manage the planning and communication necessary for a 
study to be carried out
7.	 Collect relevant data for a chosen research direction 
8.	 Carry out relevant statistical tests and based on this, be able to 
draw overall conclusions
9.	 Write an academic article for potential submission to a rele-
vant journal  
10.	
Be able to identify and suggest further work and recom-
mendations based on the research carried out 
11.	Identify limitations of the research and highlight critical as-
pects to be taken into account 
Original course title: 
Towards circular mindsets in a distributed design context
Page 03 
==PAGE:7==
A draft for an
ACADEMIC
PAPER
Master Thesis
Therese Balslev · s161699
2023
to be submitted for a journal
==PAGE:8==
 
Page 5 
Towards Circular Mindsets in a 
Distributed Design Context:  
Exploring the scalability and distribution 
potential of a design-driven method 
applied in a makerspace and fab lab 
practice.  
 
Therese Balslev 1 
1 DTU – Technical University of Denmark  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
Page 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Circularity, mindsets, design methods, distributed design, fab labs, makerspaces, strategic 
design, design thinking, design methods, circular strategies, circular economy, circular product development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper investigates how two different approaches to disseminate a design-driven method that 
provides an overview of 18 circular strategies was carried out in a makerspace context. The study gives 
an insight in the development, test, analysis and interpretation of the two approaches to distribute a 
method as intervention formats – in this case as a workshop format and a personal design journal format 
respectively. In doing so, the study team hopes to identify whether one of the intervention formats has 
the potential to outperform the other one and thereby find a preferred way to distribute a design method 
that aims to contribute to an increased circular mindset among makers in makerspaces and fab labs.  
The purpose is to look at ways for which a successful design-driven tool potentially can be scaled and 
applied in other ways than a typical workshop format – in this case held up against a self-guided journal 
that does not require a facilitator. A secondary purpose of the paper is oriented towards the investigation 
of one or more ways for makerspaces to best support makers to work towards more circular practices by 
potentially applying these interventions and thereby influencing the makers and their creations.  
The research consists of data collected based on self-assessment performed by testing each of the 
interventions in three and two iterations in total. In the analysis, statistical tests were applied on the data 
to look for statistical significance in the differences within and between the two intervention groups. A 
crucial limitation linked to the study is the small sample size of the journal intervention (N=14) versus 
the sample size for the workshop (N=58) as well as the bias and uncertainty linked to the chosen method 
of subjective self-assessment.  
The statistical tests carried out revealed that no statistical evidence could be found that there should be a 
significant difference between the interventions and thereby it is, based on this study, not possible to 
reject that the intervention formats should not have a similar potential to change mindset for future work 
in makerspaces according to the participants’ assessments. Though, statistical significances were 
identified linked to how the workshop seemed to have contributed to an increase in the participants’ 
confidence towards being able to apply circular strategies in their practices as well as a detected increase 
in the self-assessed knowledge about circular economy.  
==PAGE:10==
 
Page 7 
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction and background section  
8 
 
1.1 Distributed Design, Maker Movement and Makerspaces 
8 
1.2 Circular economy and strategies 
8 
1.3 Distributed Design as a Contribution to the circular economy 
9 
1.4 Change of mindset via application of design-driven tools 
10 
1.5 Reflecsive practice and journaling as a discipline 
10 
1.6 The circular framework as a design-driven tool 
11 
2. Research objective 
15 
3. Methods 
16 
3.1 The Circular Strategies Wheel as two different intervention formats 
16 
3.2 Test of the interventions 
17 
3.3 Evaluation and comparison of the two interventions 
19 
4. Results 
22 
4.1 Intervention A – the workshop 
22 
4.2 Intervention B – the journal  
23 
4.3 Potential knowledge increases due to interventions 
25 
4.4 The interventions as enablers for a circular mindset 
27 
4.5 The interventions assessed on different aid parameters 
29 
4.6 Potential change in level of motivationo and confidence 
32 
5. Discussion 
33 
5.1 Perceived effects of the interventions 
33 
6. Conclusion 
36 
7. Limitations and future research 
37 
7.1 Limitations 
37 
7.2 Future research 
38 
References 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
Page 8 
 
1. Introduction and Background Section  
 
1.1. Distributed Design, Maker Movement and Makerspaces 
 
A “maker” describes each one of us. No matter how we live our lives or what our goals might be, we are all 
makers; as cooks preparing food, as gardeners, as knitters. The so-called ’maker movement’ has emerged due 
to people’s need to engage passionately with objects in ways that make them more than just consumers and is 
contributing to a democratization of design and innovation. Today’s makers enjoy a level of interconnected-
ness that has helped to build a movement out of what in the past would have been micro-communities defined 
by a particular hobby or activity (Dougherty, 2012).  
Fab labs and makerspaces are small-scale workshop areas offering the possibility of e.g. digital fabrication 
and (rapid) prototyping to anyone interested. The difference between fab labs and makerspaces is, that fab labs 
must support and subscribe to the Fab Charter, which is a set of rules describing what a fab lab is, as well as 
the duties and responsibilities that come along with being a fab lab (Fonda & Canessa, 2016).  
In continuation, Wu & Ma (2022) points out how the heterogeneous culture generated by these makerspaces 
has been playing an essential role in stimulating innovation and expanding the impact of the maker movement. 
Distributed Design has as a framework emerged at the intersection of the Maker Movement and design 
sensibility. The framework is targeting designers, creatives as well as makers. It aims to enable them to 
innovate the field of design towards a more sustainable, open, democratic, inclusive, and community-based 
way of approaching production, making, and designing physical as well as non-physical products. Distributed 
Design is focusing on global connectivity and local productivity; “bits travel globally, while atoms stay local” 
(Distributed Design Platform, 2023). This also refers to the open-source approach to product development and 
data sharing amongst peers where makerspaces and fab labs play an important role in making it happen. 
Distributed Design, the maker movement and empowering people as makers can be regarded as an active 
response to the call to action to start working towards increased resilience of e.g. supply chains and a more 
sustainable manner of designing, making, and producing since we, as a society, inevitably will keep facing 
huge challenges like pandemics, wars, lack of biodiversity, climate crisis etc.  
 
1.2. Circular economy and strategies 
 
Circular Economy (CE) is a concept based on the principle of decoupling value creation from resource 
consumption. The idea is to move away from the so-called linear mindset, where value creation is based on 
the ‘take-make-use-dispose’ dogma and is instead focusing on how to continually extract value from resources 
for as long as possible by extending the useful lifetime of products and materials (Pieroni et al., 2020).  
According to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF, 2023), CE is based on three principles, driven by design, 
and underpinned by a transition to renewable energy i.e.:  
 
(1) Eliminate waste and pollution 
(2) Circulate products and materials (at their highest value)  
(3) Regenerate nature  
 
Based on the Circularity Gap Report (Circle Economy, 2023), we know that the global economy per 2023 is 
only 7.2% circular. It has gone down from 9.1 pct. in 2018, is getting worse every year and it is driven by the 
rising material extraction and usage.  
Furthermore, the efforts to tackle the climate crisis to date have heavily been focused on a transition to 
renewable energy and energy efficiency. These measures can only address 55% of emissions. The remaining 
45% are coming from production of everyday goods and materials like cars, clothes, food etc. The CE holds 
the potential to contribute to completing the picture of emission reduction by transforming the way we make 
and use products (EMF, 2019).  
To address the structural waste created by the linear approach to consumption we have had for years, the CE 
concept proposes a range of activities that aims to enhance efficiency and productivity, which is known as 
==PAGE:12==
 
Page 9 
circular strategies. To mention some, we have reuse, repair, maintain, repurpose, recycle, cascade etc. 
(Blomsma et al., 2019; EMF, 2013). These circular strategies are meant to be inspirational rather than 
exhaustive. In general, a framework containing circular strategies needs to create a comprehensive 
understanding of the different circular strategies (Blomsma et al., 2019). By applying circular strategies, more 
value can potentially be created (EMF, 2013) and value loss and destruction can be reduced (Murray et al., 
2017).  
 
1.3. Distributed Design as a contribution to the circular economy  
 
Both obstacles and potentials can be identified when it comes to how the democratization of design and 
manufacturing potentially can contribute to a CE agenda in society. In the Autumn of 2022, a literature study 
was carried out to investigate the cross-section of Distributed Design and CE (see Appendix A1.1 for how the 
following points were identified and A1.2 to read the article submitted for the Distributed Design Platform’s 
annual publication).  
The main points from the study are summed up as in total three obstacles and eight potentials i.e.:  
 
1.3.1. Obstacles related to… 
1. Communication. Makerspaces tend to lack communication concerning circularity and is rarely being 
promoted nor presented as a present core value (Kohtala, 2017; Kohtala, 2016)  
2. Prioritization. Makerspaces tend to lack focus and priority oriented towards circularity. There is a 
gap between claimed possibilities and realities on the ground and they mostly focus on day-to-day 
work and concerns and thereby risk reproducing unsustainable practices (Fleischmann et al., 2016; 
Prendeville et al., 2017; Smith & Light, 2017) 
3. Knowledge. Makerspaces lack knowledge and tend to be divided in their capacity and knowledge on 
circularity and sustainability. Additionally, makers seem to lack information on relevant raw materials, 
processes etc. (Kohtala, 2017; Unterfrauner et al., 2019).  
 
1.3.2. Potentials related to…  
• 
The Maker. Makers should find their own way to be motivated and confident when working with 
circularity. Their mindsets could be influenced, though, they need to have the right tools, resources, 
and activities provided (Prendeville et al., 2017; Smith & Light, 2017; Fleischmann, 2020).  
• 
The Makerspace. What makerspaces consciously promote usually pays off and they can help 
fostering highly demanded skills of the 21st century. Managers should drive the approaches from 
within and have it further up the agenda (Rayna & Striukova, 2020; Fleischmann et al., 2016; Kohtala, 
2016).  
• 
The Maker Skillset. It is key to facilitate activities around awareness and implementation of 
circularity where makers can work with products’ full lifecycles. The makerspaces can function as 
educational spaces (for all age groups) and here, upcoming designers can come to understand their 
future profession (Kohtala 2016; Bakırlıoğlu et al. 2021; Fleischmann et al. 2016).  
• 
The Maker products. There are great opportunities to repair and maintain products due to the open-
source approach as well as the value and attachment occurring to creations. Activities like product 
teardowns and development of dynamic and flexible products to prepare for future repair and 
upgrading are recommended (Van Nes & Cramer, 2005; Kohtala, 2017; Smith & Light, 2017; 
Fleischmann, 2020). 
• 
Makers in the Market. Local production (in cities) can be strengthened aiming to decrease mass 
production and increase the focus on customization and on-demand production. In makerspaces, risk-
free platforms are offered to explore open and distributed design. Increased resilience of supply chains 
can be aided by more effectively integrated production by smaller entities and more individualized 
solutions (Unterfrauner et al., 2019; Kohtala, 2016).  
• 
Maker movement. Knowledge-sharing among community networks allows for improvement 
suggestions and so-called “master makers” should keep transferring their knowledge to less 
==PAGE:13==
 
Page 10 
experienced makers. The movement has an active position when it comes to producing tangible 
artefacts and perform experiments with new processes, materials, and technologies (Maravilhas & 
Martins, 2019; Kohtala, 2016).  
• 
Makers in society. Acknowledging and appreciating the social value and democratizing capacity 
produced by the activist communities in makerspaces is vital. So is keeping an eye on potential 
collaboration with stakeholders outside the spaces e.g. by enhancing collaborations between makers 
and industries to extend the lifespan of products (Smith, 2017; Unterfrauner et al., 2019).  
• 
Makers for policy. Policy and economic obstacles tend to block ways of doing circular business but 
designers as change agents can help remove these obstacles. Businesses have concerns about warranty 
and safety issues when letting end-users perform repair activities themselves (Unterfrauner et al., 2019; 
Fleischmann, 2020).  
 
This study has taken its starting point in the conducted literature study in the cross-section of circularity and 
makerspaces and is focusing on some of the research’s recommendations and findings. Makerspaces and 
makers need the correct information, tools and methods to have a positive impact on the environment and 
increase the circularity of the spaces (Prendeville et al., 2017). Based in this, we see a certain need to address 
the potential to change, shift and heavily start influencing people’s mindsets in a circular direction.   
 
1.4. Change of mindsets via application of design-driven tools 
 
Fleischmann (2020) is touching upon the key role of designers as change agents for the circular economy. 
Here, it is mentioned how designers have a key role to play by facilitating the necessary transformations in 
human interactions, mindsets, and relationships. Mindsets help us understand how people make meaning of 
their experiences and by studying mindsets, we get to understand how individuals arrive at certain beliefs or 
judgements, why they make the decisions and take the actions they do. Mindset shifts can lead to changes in 
behavior, policy, and even social institutions and structures – changing mindsets is ultimately part of changing 
society (Frameworks Institute, 2020).  
A design method (alternatively referred to as a tool) can be broadly defined as ‘a formalized representation of 
a design activity, which functions as a mental tool to support designer in achieving a goal, in relation to the 
circumstance and resources available’ (Daalhuizen, 2019). A common way of applying design tools is in a 
workshop format, most commonly lead by a facilitator.  
There are a whole lot of methods and design-driven tools that already exist and have been published. Like 
Gericke et al. (2020) mentions, we might have enough methods and should instead focus on improving and 
adapting these.  
Development of methods is at the heart of design research. Methods are ways of expressing (and transferring) 
knowledge about how aspects of design could and should be done. To understand the challenges involved in 
adopting a method, the method needs to be seen in context. A method depends on the knowledge and skills of 
the practitioners using it: while a description of a method is an artefact that is a formalization of engineering 
knowledge, a method in use constitutes a socio-technical system depending on the interactions on the of human 
participants with each other as well as with the description of the method, representations of design information 
and often tools for carrying out the method’s tasks (Gericke et al., 2022).  
 
1.5. Reflective practice and journaling as a discipline 
 
Schön (1983) is stresssing the role of reflection within learning processes. As Sicora (2019) describes it, Schön 
describes the profile of a reflective practitioner for any type of professional. He affirms that competent 
practitioners are reflective practitioners if they ‘know in action’ and reflect on action and in the course of 
action. This is crucial when practitioners have to deal with complex, uncertain and ambiguous situations as 
well as when having to manage, identify and explore new action paths making extensive use of tacit knowledge 
and skills. This should have deep implications for any program of professional education (Sicora, 2019). In 
==PAGE:14==
 
Page 11 
fact, using a reflective practicum to develop professional skills is one of the core concepts of educating people 
as reflective practitioners (Schön, 1987). 
Schön argues for two types of reflection. Firstly, reflection-in-action, which is where people can reflect on 
unexpected experiences and conduct ‘experiments’, which helps generate new understandings of experiences 
and changes in situations. Secondly, reflection-on-action, which is when people reflect upon experiences and 
situations after they have occurred. Reflection-on-action is often associated with reflective writing where 
participants reflect upon their experiences and how they potentially could improve or change practices 
(McAlpine, 2017; Schön, 1983). One can claim how makerspaces represent an adaptable and experimental 
environment, where makers often end up performing reflection-in-actions but possibly, there is a potential to 
enhance and explore the potential for reflection-on-action in makerspaces.  
Building upon Schön’s work on reflective practitioning, McAlpine et al. (2017) has investigated the role of 
informal information management in engineering work focusing on logbooks and journaling. They are stating 
how the pervasiveness of logbooks (in addition to the physical affordances; paper robustness, ease-of-use, co-
creation etc.), is linked to the following factors: 
1. The use of them is trained at both the undergraduate and professional level. 
2. They contain information indicating design intent and the development of rationale. 
3. The content often retains its significance and allows for re-examination. 
With respect to the first factor, the authors have argued that logbooks are widely used because they are one of 
the only type of informal information management tool in which engineers receive any structured training. As 
Topi et al. (2006) also points out, the informal notes also remain as a ‘largely untapped ressource’.  
 
1.6. The circular framework as a design-driven tool  
The study carried out has taken its starting point in the Circular Strategies Wheel (see Figure 1.1). This 
framework has been developed in the context of the Danish Design Center (DDC) and has in its development 
phase been inspired by the work of Blomsma et al. (2019), Potting et al. (2017) and previous work from the 
DDC (Danish Design Center, 2023).  
The circular strategies framework is divided into the three overall stages of the lifecycle of products and 
materials i.e. 1) The start of life, 2) The product life/use phase and 3) The end-of-life. Each stage contains 
specific circular strategies relevant to each of the three phases that can be considered in e.g. product 
development, business model generation etc. 
The framework has been developed and set up by the DDC in a design-driven format meaning that the 
participants applying the tool are to carry out a mapping exercise with the framework as a starting point. In the 
mapping exercise, participants are encouraged to map out, with different colored post-its, specific thoughts 
and ideas related to the following:  
1) What is already being worked on 
2) Identified potentials 
3) Curiosities 
4) Obstacles and barriers that can be identified for the specific context  
These parameter should all be related to the in total 18 circular strategies presented in the framework.  
==PAGE:15==
 
Page 12 
 
Figure 1.1 – The Circular Strategies wheel by DDC - Danish Design Center (Danish Design Center, 2023)  
For larger size of the framework, see Appendix A2 
 
The framework has been applied several times in workshops hosted and facilitated by the DDC. It has 
previously shown indication to seem to have a certain impact on people’s mindset by providing an overview 
and common reference point and language for those who wish to work in the field of circularity. Whether they 
are new in the field or have already started touching upon the subject, they should via the tool be able to gain 
new insights and ideas for their practice and contexts they operate in.  
Table 1.1 provides with an overview of the circular strategies included in the latest version of the framework 
by DDC. 
 
Table 1.1 – Overview of the circular strategies 
 
Circular strategy 
Life cycle 
stage 
Description for framework 
1. Design  
Start of life 
Design of products is considered the first circular strategy and therefore 
the primary priority as well as it influences the rest of the life cycle of 
products and materials.  
Circular design/eco-design involves the application of guidelines that 
involves a variety of guides of how to e.g. design for/with: disassembly, 
timelessness, emotional attachment, easy recognition of materials, non-
toxic and renewable/recyclable materials, digital elements, as few 
incompatible and dissimilar materials as possible and more. 
2. Raw materials 
and sourcing 
Start of life 
Raw materials cover the selection of resources and materials that go into 
the products that is to become a part of your product system. 
When choosing materials, consider durability, renewability, recyclability 
& secondary recyclability.  
You can also consider aspects such as where the materials originate from 
and how the working conditions are for the people dealing with the 
materials (i.e. social sustainability aspects). 
3. Manufacturing 
Start of life 
Manufacturing concerns improvement of circularity, efficiency and 
effectiveness in the product manufacturing and you can consider the 
following: favour cleaner production, efficiency, processes, equipment 
==PAGE:16==
 
Page 13 
toxicity and other environmental aspects of handling waste originating 
from production of materials and products.  
Finally, you can also consider social sustainbility aspects (e.g. working 
conditions), design for reduced energy consumption and prioritising 
renewable energy. 
4. Distribution  
Start of life 
Considerations about distribution are e.g.; design for effective loading 
and transport, which concerns transport of larger quantities at a time and 
stackable products. It also concerns return logistics, reduction of 
emissions linked to transport, choosing local suppliers, minimisation of 
the weight of components and selection of strong, robust and durable 
packaging with long lifespan that do not degrade during multiple 
transportation. 
5. Care  
Product life 
(extend 
existing use 
cycle) 
Caring is about how to extend the lifetime of products as much as 
possible by (continuously) taking care of them during their use phase. 
This is done by e.g. considering effective use along with procedures for 
caring to facilitate the extension of the lifetime of products. 
Examples of this could be facilitation of emotional/personal attachment 
to products, educational videos, provision of care kits, guides, manuals 
etc. 
6. Upgrade  
Product life 
(extend 
existing use 
cycle) 
When upgrading, the product is still functional, but new changes, 
evolution and/or new features are added to extend the lifetime of 
products. Upgrades can extend the product value by enhancing the 
function of an existing product to even beyond its original design 
condition. Potentially, upgrading can also reduce value loss from 
continued use of parts and products.  
Rebound effects are important to take into consideration when 
considering whether it pays off to upgrade or not. 
7. Reuse  
Product life 
(extend 
existing use 
cycle) 
(Direct) reuse of (discarded) products involves that the products are still 
in good condition and fulfil original functions that aims to keep the 
product attractive to as many different users as possible for as long as 
possible and prevent that they turn into waste. Reuse may involve 
minimum cleaning and repackaging. The reused product should still be 
functional, efficient, and attractive. People might reuse preowned 
products due to lower prices, patina or if they are better than new ones. 
8. Repair and 
maintenance 
Product life 
(extend to 
new use 
cycles) 
Repair and maintenance involve thinking about how to correct, replace 
and/or fix broken/damaged components of a defective product aiming to 
maintain the original functionality to the same user and thereby extend 
the lifetime of products and reduce the need for new resources, avoiding 
waste and producing fewer emissions. Repair and maintenance can 
happen with different frequencies and be part of a product/service-
system. 
9. Refurbish  
Product life 
(extend to 
new use 
cycles) 
Refurbishing is about repairing a returned product after a certain period 
of use so that it satisfies certain mechanical specifications and operating 
conditions within the limitations of what is considered acceptable by 
rebuilding or repairing major components that are close to failure - even 
if there are no reported failures in the components. The main difference 
from remanufacturing is that refurbishment is usually less rigorous and 
costly and involves less dis/re-assembly. 
10. Remanufacture 
Product life 
(extend to 
new use 
cycles) 
Remanufacturing involves collecting and returning used products, 
disassembling, sorting, cleaning, inspecting, repairing, and 
reconditioning, assembly, testing and finally combining and upgrading 
them with new parts to make products that both look and perform as new 
and can be sold as new. 
==PAGE:17==
 
Page 14 
Designing for remanufacturing involves considering design for 
disassembly aspects such as speed of disassembly, cost, etc. during the 
product development stages. 
11. Repurpose 
Product life  
(extend to 
new use 
cycles) 
Repurposing is about identifying new use phases for products 
(discarded/not in use) or their parts and use them in new/different 
contexts. Repurposing requires to think outside the box and possibly 
outside your industry.  
When working with repurposing aspects consider e.g.: use of durable 
and robust components and materials, easy and non-distructive 
disassembly and provision of manuals and relevant documentation.   
12. Upcycle 
Product life 
(extend to 
new use 
cycles) 
Upcycling is about reusing or redesigning products, which often involves 
working in a creative manner to identify the second use scenarios or 
functions that the products/materials will become a part of in its new use 
phase.  
Upcycling is about transforming bi-products, waste materials and/or 
unwanted products into new materials, components or products of same 
or even higher quality or value. 
13. Resell  
Product life 
(extend to 
new use 
cycles) 
Strategies for reselling can e.g. involve collaborations with partners 
about enabling reverse logistics aiming to achieve e.g. take-back systems 
or establishing sharing economies, which are examples of business 
models that operate within the resell strategy.  
Reselling can be placed earlier in the strategies wheel and be a part of 
several steps in a circular business model. 
14. Collection and 
sorting  
End-of-life 
Consideration about collection and sorting of products after the use 
stage(s). These aspects are (and will be) inevitably influenced by laws 
and regulations on a domestic, European, and international level.  
Societies are moving in a direction towards increased demands within 
collection and sorting of different materials e.g. textiles, plastic, metals 
etc. 
15. Disassembly 
End-of-life 
Design for disassembly makes it easier for products to prolong its useful 
life. It can also help ensure that products are being recycled and enables 
entire components to be reused. In fact, the degree to which your product 
can be disassembled often determines how the product will end its life. 
You can consider as few parts and use of tools as possible, integrated 
instructions and minimal time for disassembly, easy inspection and 
identification of materials, direct reuse of parts etc.    
16. Recycle 
End-of-life 
Recycle concerns recovery of waste material where it is being 
reprocessed into (new) products, materials, or substances - either for 
their original or another purpose.  
Recycling destroys the energy and value that were placed into the 
product originally and adds additional energy and resources for the 
recycling process required.  
Finally, even more additional energy and resources are required to 
transform the recycled materials back into a new product. 
17. Cascade  
End-of-life 
When cascading, new applications of processed materials usually have a 
lower demand for resource quality. It is important to consider the 
cascading process early in the design process.  
A material starts its lifetime at the highest quality possible, and the 
quality of the material naturally declines over time. Every step of the 
cascade has a certain lifetime. The resource should be used in a new 
application before the quality is too low. 
18. Recover 
End-of-life 
Energy recovery happens by incinerating materials since the material 
characteristics no longer satisfy any application whatsoever.  
==PAGE:18==
 
Page 15 
The recovery must happen only after materials have been recycled more 
than once.  
The main problem when recovering materials is toxic smoke emitted by 
certain materials and additives that was added to the product. 
 
In the DDC, the framework has mainly been tested among small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and 
start-ups over the years from 2021 to 2023. In January 2023, the research team ran a pilot and tested the 
framework in a makerspace context. A total of ten makers participated in the workshop and the majority of the 
participants found the framework useful and the overall satisfaction among the makers was considered high. 
One of the makers stated: “I wish I would have had this workshop two years ago while studying. It could have 
changed my way of designing” and some of the participants even changed their designs (and processes) based 
on the ideas and inputs they got from the workshop by integrating selected CE strategies. The workshop was 
therefore considered successful, and it was chosen to keep the framework as the foundation for this research 
and additionally look for less labor-intensive ways than facilitated workshops and more potentially scalable 
and distribution-friendly formats of the tool to change mindsets towards circularity in a makerspace context. 
The outcome of a brainstorm session resulted in sub-dividing the potential framework distribution methods 
into two different intervention formats: a workshop format and a journal format. 
 
2. Research objective  
 
The objective of this study is to investigate an optimal way of potentially being able to distribute and scale the 
circular framework presented in section 1.6 in a distributed design context; specifically focusing on 
makerspaces and fab labs. The two distribution methods (regarded as interventions) that are being tested in 
this study is 1) Intervention A (IA) which is the workshop format that we have already seen indications of 
working well and 2) Intervention B (IB) – a personal and self-guided journal format.  
The study is focusing on investigating whether the interventions have an influence the participants’ assessment 
of their knowledge, if the interventions can help create a circular mindset for future work according to the 
participants, in what ways the interventions helped them and finally if the intervention had an influence on the 
participants’ confidence and motivation to work with CE prior to and post participating in the study.  
The study aims to compare the two intervention formats and ways of distributing the design-driven tool. The 
paper outlines the development, test, analysis, evaluation and interpretation of the tool formats and the two 
distribution methods aiming to assess the preferable format for the tool to find a way for makerspaces and fab 
labs to potentially apply it in their practice aspiring to have makers increase the circularity of the projects they 
are working on.  
 
The study is guided by the following research question: 
Can a self-guided journal format compared to an in-person workshop format, be an equally effective method, 
to disseminate a design-driven method that encourages individuals to adopt circular strategies in their 
practices aiming to foster a mindset change?   
 
The study aims to determine the most effective strategy to distribute and promote the adoption of a design-
driven tool within makerspaces to foster a circular mindset among makers. The research team is therefore 
driven by whether the tool is making a difference for the individuals participating in the study, if they learn 
more about circularity by applying the framework, how the intervention helped them, whether they manage 
to gain a new (circular) mindset and discovering an optimal way to potentially be able to distribute and 
disseminate such a design-driven tool for, in this case, makerspaces, but potentially also other creative 
practice contexts.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
Page 16 
3. Methods  
 
3.1. The Circular Strategies Wheel as two different intervention formats 
 
In this research, the Circular Strategies Wheel (described in section 1.6) was tested, evaluated, and two 
different ways of distributing the tool in a distributed design context has been compared.  
The framework was tested in two different intervention formats i.e. A) A workshop format (Intervention A/IA) 
and B) a journal format (Intervention B/IB) (see pictures of interventions on Figure 3.1). In both formats, the 
circular framework was integrated in different manners.  
 
   
 
Figure 3.1 – The two intervention formats 
Left: Intervention A (the framework printed on an A3 paper), Right: Intervention B (The Circular Design Journal) 
 
Leaning up against what Gericke et al. (2022) state, these two intervention formats intend to be variations of 
the tool which are both artefacts where engineering knowledge have been formalized in different ways. In this 
study, each intervention has been in use in different ways, has interacted with different socio-technical (sub)-
systems and has been represented as different tools to carry out the tasks which the tool contains.  
Intervention A was set up as a two-hour workshop format where participants would receive a short general 
introduction to the topic of CE, the different CE strategies – including some real-case examples linked to the 
application of selected CE strategies. The participants received an introduction to the exercise where the 
facilitator would explain each step and subsequently provide the participants with approximately 50 minutes 
to carry out the mapping exercise individually (using the four mapping categories as previously described in 
section 1.6), yet still allowing for the participants to pose questions and ask for help along the way.  
Intervention B, namely ‘The Circular Design Journal’ (see the journal as it was distributed in Appendix A3), 
attempts to be an intervention format that contains the CE strategies framework as well but in a different way 
than seen in Intervention A. It aims to allow for participants to gain similar insights as if they attended the 
workshop but instead filling out a journal on their own, inspired by elements from reflective practice theory as 
described in the background section of this paper (see 1.5). The journal consists of a total of 26 pages and 
introduces the participant to CE and the three core circular principles (see 1.2) as well as the framework (see 
1.6). Subsequently, it invites the participant to reflect upon their motivation to work in the field of circularity, 
what project they are taking their starting point in and has a page dedicated to each of the CE strategies. On 
these pages, they can read the description of each of the strategies and are encouraged to note down their 
thoughts, ideas and obstacles related to the specific strategy. An example of the encouragement related to e.g. 
the circular strategy, ‘Upgrade’, could be: “How have you considered upgrading in your project? You can note 
what you’ve already implemented, potentials, what to explore further as well as obstacles.” 
Finally, most CE strategy pages in the journal also contained a QR code directing the participant to a webpage 
or relevant research where they could go more in depth with each strategy if desired.  
==PAGE:20==
 
Page 17 
In this research, Intervention A is considered as the most intuitive way of distributing the tool as we know 
from both previously gained experience from DDC as well as the previously mentioned pilot run.  
Intervention B is inspired by the work of Schön and by the informal information management studies as it aims 
to combine informal information engineering management over time with design methodology (McAlpine et 
al., 2017; Schön, 1987). It aims to have makers reflect actively on each of the presented circular strategies in 
the journal and relate it to one or more relevant context of theirs. The journal attempts to educate the makers 
as reflective practitioners and have them think more on-action – allowing and inviting them to make more 
notes, sketches on each page of the journal provided to them individually. For this intervention, the time frame 
given to individuals to keep it in their possession was between one to eight weeks allowing for the makers to 
have an extended learning journey and possibly reach a deeper state of reflection than they would in a workshop 
format.  
 
3.2. Test of the interventions 
 
To test the two intervention formats, IA was initially offered to people who were linked to a makerspace as a 
workshop carried out in a physical space. Due to lack of sign-ups for the physical workshop and a limited time 
frame to carry out the research, IA was expanded to be offered as an online version and thus IA ultimately 
consisted of three different workshops: 1) A physical workshop hosted by Innovation Lab in Wiener Neustadt 
in Austria 2) An online workshop open to everyone interested in the field of design and making and 3) An 
online workshop for a group of students enrolled in the design engineering program at a technical university 
in Scandinavia. All three workshops lasted two hours and both online versions were hosted via Zoom and the 
participants applied the virtual collaboration platform, Miro, to carry out the exercise. Once the participants 
received a link to Miro, they were encouraged to claim a board to themselves. Additionally, for the online 
boards for the mapping exercise, a ‘parking lot’ in the bottom of each of the individual boards was provided 
giving the opportunity to add additional thoughts that would not fit in the circular framework. Prior to 
commencing the mapping exercise in all of the workshops, the participants were encouraged to take a starting 
point in a specific project and/or context as previous experience has shown that by doing it, it tends to make it 
easier to carry out the exercise properly. 
IB was initially tested in a physical paper format mainly recruiting participants connected to the fab lab, 
Happylab, in Vienna, Austria. Due to lack of sign-ups for IB, this intervention was also expanded to be offered 
as an online PDF-version and people could sign up regardless of their location. IB was tested over a time span 
of two months allowing participants to spend the time they needed on the journal.  
To recruit participants for IA, the message to sign up for the physical and online workshop was spread on 
social media, websites, via newsletters, email lists, and by reaching out personally to makerspaces around 
Europe. The workshop for the students was kept internal and only students who were enrolled in the course 
could voluntarily participate in the workshop.  
To attract participants for IB, a sign-up form was also spread mainly via newsletters, email lists and posts on 
social media. All participants that became a part of the study were informed of the purpose of the study and 
agreed to be a part of it, ensuring their anonymity by de-identifying information and making them aware that 
they could withdraw from the study at any time. 
 
To test the interventions and collect data, a survey questionnaire (SQ) containing both close- and open-ended 
questions were provided to the participants both prior to and post being exposed to one of the interventions. A 
similar approach to data collection for each of the interventions were chosen to be able to compare and assess 
these as closely as possible once the data collection would be regarded as finalized.  
In the study, the participants who answered both the first and second SQ are considered as the final participants 
as they managed to go through the four steps of the study i.e. 1) sign up, 2) answer the first SQ, 3) apply the 
tool in either a workshop or journal format and 4) answer the second SQ.  
For IA, reminders were sent to those who were missing the last step i.e. to answer the second SQ after having 
participated in the workshop. For IB, weekly reminders were sent individually to the participants who had 
signed up, reminding them about their progress and what step to finish next in order to proceed.  
==PAGE:21==
 
Page 18 
In the SQs, participants were also asked to provide with basic information concerning gender identification, 
age, occupation, for how long they have been a maker, description of the project they would like to improve 
circularity on and finally for IB, they were asked for how long they spent on using the journal.  
Table 3.1 provides with an overview of the people involved in the different steps linked to the study and Table 
3.2 provides with an overview of the distribution of gender identification and age among the final participants.  
 
Table 3.1. Overview of participants in the study 
 
Time stamp 
Intervention 
Code 
Location 
Sign-ups 
No. of 
people 
who 
showed 
up 
Survey 
questionnaire 
1 
respondents 
Survey 
questionnaire 
2 
respondents 
22.05.2023 
A – workshop 
(physical) 
A1 
Innovation Lab, 
Wiener 
Neustadt 
16 
9 
9 
8 
31.05.2023 
A – workshop 
(online) 
A2 
Online (Zoom 
and Miro) 
250 
80+ 
65 
37 
02.06.2023 
A – workshop 
(online 
for 
students from 
DTU) 
A3 
Online (Zoom 
and Miro) 
No sign-up 
form 
20+ 
21 
13 
Totals 
266+ 
109+ 
95 
58 
12.04.2023 - 
31.05.2023 
B – journal 
(physical) 
B1 
Happylab in 
Vienna, Austria 
18 
- 
18 
9 
15.05.2023-
31.05.2023 
B – journal 
(online) 
B2 
Virtual  
40 
- 
16 
5 
Totals 
53 
- 
34 
14 
 
Table 3.2. Distribution of age and gender identification for Intervention A and B 
 
Intervention 
Survey 
questionnaire no. 
2 respondents [N] 
Distribution 
in gender 
identification 
Age distribution 
A  
(The 
workshop. 
Accumulated 
for A1, A2 
and A3) 
58 
55.2% female 
43.1% Male 
1.7% other 
(four people in 
a group) 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
Page 19 
B  
(The journal. 
Accumulated 
for B1 and 
B2) 
14 
50% female  
41.7% male 
8.3% 
non-
binary 
 
 
In both SQs, the participants were encouraged to describe their knowledge related to CE. These self-
assessments of their knowledge aimed to provide an insight in the participants’ view on the subject before and 
after the intervention aiming to be able to compare the self-assessments and insights looking for potential 
improvements and/or increases in the knowledge around the topic. Furthermore, both SQs prior and post to 
the interventions asked the participants to quantitatively rate on an ordinal scale from 1 to 5 (1 as the lowest 
answer and 5 as the highest answer) their motivation to work with circularity as well as their confidence in 
being able to apply circular economy principles in their practice/project.  
In the second SQ, the participants were asked to similarly rate from 1 to 5 to the close-ended question: ‘Does 
the workshop/journal help create a circular mindset for future work in makerspaces/creative contexts.’ 
Furthermore, they also rated from 1 to 5 based on the following five questions whether the workshop/journal 
helped them to: 
Q1) ‘Gain an overview of the available circular strategies.’ 
Q2) ‘Become more inspired and motivated to work with circular economy.’  
Q3) ‘Better understand how much can be done in your project to improve the circularity.’ 
Q4) ‘Balance the generation of new ideas with the mapping of the existing situation.’ 
Q5) ‘Set priorities for which strategies to implement in your project on both a short and long term’.  
Finally, the participants could also leave additional feedback and reflections in the second SQ encouraging to 
contribute with both positive aspects and improvement points for the interventions.  
 
All close-ended questions where participants quantitatively rated on an ordinal scale from one to five, it is in 
this study considered a high rate when the rate is either ‘4’ or ‘5’. Rating ‘3’ is considered a medium rate and 
‘1’ and ‘2’ are considered as low ratings when described qualitatively.  
 
3.3. Evaluation and comparison of the two interventions 
 
3.3.1. Assessment of knowledge about circular economy  
 
In order to evaluate the choice of framework and investigate whether Intervention A and B contributed to an 
increased level of knowledge about CE for the participants, the study has been focusing on initially assessing 
the tool by coding the open-ended questions of participants’ self-assessed knowledge on CE and compare the 
potential change in knowledge prior and post being exposed to either IA or IB. The responses from the 
participants were read carefully and coded with the different level of knowledge indicators according to Table 
3.3. The participants who did not describe their knowledge but instead explicitly stated that their knowledge 
improved due to the workshop/journal received a category increase.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
Page 20 
Table 3.3. Schedule for assessment of knowledge on circular economy 
 
Category 
Level of 
knowledge 
Description  
Example 
I 
None to very 
limited or no 
answer 
None - no or very little knowledge. 
Participant doesn't mention any keywords 
related to the topic or leaves no comment.  
“None. But have the passion for 
sustainability” 
II 
Low or  
limited 
Low - participant might indicate that they 
know about the overall concept but does 
not mention any concrete keywords related 
to CE. Might indicate/mention that CE is 
about circulating and/or recycling 
materials. There might be a heavy weight 
on a single concept/aspect of CE.  
“Try to reduce the use of materials in a 
design process as much as possible” 
III 
Medium  
Medium - mentions the more fundamental 
aspects of CE by also including the 
mentioning of different circular 
strategies/concepts e.g. "repair", 
"durability", "recycling", "no waste" etc. 
“As the name specifies, is about creating 
a life cycle in our economy, not wasting 
or destroying things that can be reused 
and, in that way, promote sustainability.” 
IV 
High to 
advanced 
High - mentions more fundamental aspects 
and strategies linked to CE - e.g. the 
different design strategies like "reduce", 
"repair", "reuse", and more advanced 
concepts/principles like "design out waste", 
"upstream innovation", "regeneration", etc. 
Might also mention how CE is linked to 
business models and the systemic changes 
that are necessary for a potential circular 
transition as well as policy, supply/value 
chains, consumer behaviour, leadership etc.  
“A circular economy is an economic 
model that aims to minimize waste and 
maximize resource efficiency. It promotes 
strategies such as product redesign, 
recycling, sharing platforms, and 
industrial collaboration. The goal is to 
create a closed-loop system where 
materials are reused, waste is minimized, 
and natural resources are preserved. 
Benefits include reduced resource 
depletion, lower emissions, and increased 
job opportunities. Challenges remain in 
policy, infrastructure, and consumer 
behavior. 
 
Based on the coding of the self-assessed knowledge, the categorial data has been analyzed by carrying out a 
chi-square test (for IA) and a Fisher’s exact test (for both IA and IB) in XLSTAT to look for statistical 
significance for independence between the two categorial variables them being 1) the self-assessed knowledge 
level (none/low, medium, high) and 2) the time of the assessment (before and after the interventions). The 
participants who did not leave an answer in the second SQ were excluded from this test since an equal number 
of participants was wanted concerning the time-related variable.  
A Fisher’s exact test (Connelly, 2016) is a statistical test that be used for contingency tables. It does not rely 
on any specific assumption concerning the sample size and is useful for small sample sizes and then some of 
the observed frequencies are below five like in the case of IB. A Chi-square test is more sensitive towards 
smaller samples sizes and frequencies should not be below five. Though, a Chi-square test is considered more 
powerful (Camilli & Hopkins, 1978), and is therefore carried out for Intervention A to hold up against the 
results from the Fisher’s exact test since its sample size is considered large enough.  
For all tests carried out related to the potential increase in knowledge, it was chosen to gather data allocated to 
Category I and II from Table 3.3 into one category. Firstly since a frequency of zero was detected in one of 
the cells for IB and secondly because by doing so, it provides with additional statistical power and reduction 
of uncertainty when wanting to detect association between the variables. One should keep in mind that the 
statistical tests are based upon qualitative data based on the self-assessed knowledge and have subsequently 
chosen to be qualitatively coded and this subjectivity potentially contributes to an unidentifiable level of 
uncertainty and bias for this study.  
==PAGE:24==
 
Page 21 
3.3.2. The interventions as enablers for a circular mindset for future work in makerspaces  
 
In the second SQ for both interventions, the participants were asked to rate the close-ended question concerning 
whether they think the intervention will help create a circular mindset for future work in makerspaces an orbital 
scale from 1 to 5 where the values have a meaningful order as ‘1’ is considered the lowest and ‘5’ the highest. 
Based on the data collected for intervention A (N=58) and B (N=14), a Welch’s two-sample t-test was carried 
out to look for differences in the means of the assessments between the two interventions. The Welch’s t-test 
is based on the assumptions of 1) independent samples and 2) normality. Unlike the traditional t-test, the 
Welch’s t-test allows for unequal variances and sample sizes. Generally, the t-test is robust to violations of 
normality, especially when dealing with sample sizes larger than 25 (de Winter, J. C. F., 2013).  
Due to concerns regarding whether the samples are violating the assumptions of normality (despite having no 
extreme outliers) mainly due to IB’s small sample size, an additional Mann-Whitney U test was carried out. 
The assumptions linked to this test is 1) independent samples, 2) random sampling, 3) independence of 
observations and 4) continuity. As the non-parametric counterpart to the t-test for independent samples, this 
test is testing for a difference in the rank sums of the data linked to the two interventions (and not the means 
as in the t-test for independent samples) and this test is subject to less stringent assumptions and allows for the 
samples to not be normally distributed as well as having unequal sample sizes (Nachar, 2008). 
The Welch’s t-test was carried out in Excel using the data analysis function ‘t-Test: Two-sample Assuming 
Unequal Variances’ and the Mann-Whitney U test was carried out manually in excel following the equations 
from based on the paper by Nachar (2008) by summing up the ranks, calculating U, the z-statistic and finally 
the p-value.  
In both types of statistical tests, we are looking for statistical significance between the means/summed ranks 
of the assessed ratings based on the participants’ experience post applying either the journal or attending the 
workshop by looking at the p-values computed to look for indications of whether one of the interventions 
outperforms the other based on whether the null hypothesis can be rejected or accepted. 
 
3.3.3. Way in which the interventions supported the participants  
 
Similarly as explained in 3.3.2., the five closed-ended questions posed in the second SQ for both interventions 
were also analyzed by applying a Welch’s t-test and an additional Mann-Whitney U test on the data collected 
aiming to compare the answers for the two different interventions. The statistical tests were used to look for 
statistical significance between the average ratings/and summed ranks for the five questions to determine 
whether statistical evidence could be found regarding whether one of the interventions is outperforming the 
other assessed for each of the five questions.  
 
3.3.4. Motivation and confidence prior and post the interventions 
 
In order to analyze the data collected related to the close-ended questions where the participants self-assessed 
their level of confidence and motivation respectively, a paired two-sample t-test for means (Xu et al., 2017) 
for each of the interventions for both the confidence and motivations was carried out to look for statistical 
significance in differences between the means.  
The paired two-sample t-test for means allows for small samples sizes to be analyzed which makes it suitable 
in this case due to the small sample size of intervention B.  
This approach is carried out to determine whether the confidence and/or motivation was changed (for better or 
worse) due to the interventions.  
 
For all statistical tests carried out in this research, a significance level of =0.05 is chosen and will help 
determine the cutoff point for the p-values given in the tests to determine whether statistical significance have 
been found in each of cases presented.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
Page 22 
4. Results 
 
4.1. Intervention A - The Workshop 
 
Intervention A was carried out in its different versions and with different audiences i.e. A1, A2 and A3 
(introduced in Table 3.1). A1 being the physical workshop and A2 and A3 as virtual workshop versions. Both 
A2 and A3 used the same set-up in Miro – an example is provided on Figure 4.2. On Figure 4.1, an example 
of the exercise carried out in the physical workshop is provided (see Appendix B3.1 for larger formats).  
In all three of the two-hour long workshops, the participants were encouraged to take a starting point in a 
specific project or context and map out on the framework, what they are already doing (blue post-its), potentials 
(green post-its), curiosities (yellow post-its), challenges (red/orange post-its) and were encouraged to relate 
these color-coded aspects to as many of the 18 CE strategies as possible. In all workshops, the mapping exercise 
lasted approximately 50 minutes and the remaining time was spent on the facilitator’s presentation introducing 
the topic, context and exercise as well as on questions, reflections etc. coming from the participants.  
Generally, IA attracted a diverse group of people from industry, university, makerspaces etc. coming from 
more than in total 35 different countries (as can be seen in Appendix B1.1). All participants had in common 
that they had a certain background and/or interest in the field of making and designing. This diverse group of 
people has been accepted for this research due to the previous experience obtained at the DDC where a wide 
group of people seem to have benefitted from the workshop(s).  
 
 
Figure 4.1 Example of the exercise carried out in the physical workshop, A1 (from Appendix B3.1). 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
Page 23 
 
Figure 4.2 Example of exercise carried out in Miro in one of the digital versions of the workshops (A3) (from Appendix B3.1). 
 
In workshop A1, 9 participants showed up and 8 ended up completing all steps.  
In workshop A2, 65 participants answered the first SQ. Out of these, 26% claimed a board without carrying 
out the exercise in Miro, 48% did the exercise in Miro and 57% answered the second SQ. Some of the 
participants stated that the reason why they did not carry out the exercise was because they did not have a 
specific project to take a starting point in.  
In workshop A3, 21 participants answered the first survey questionnaire, out of these, 81% did the exercise in 
Miro, 10% claimed a board but never started the exercise and 62% ended up answering the second SQ.  
Accumulated for the two online workshops, A2 and A3, out of the number of participants who went to Miro 
and commenced the exercise, 75% of these ended up finishing all steps related to the data collection 
activities by finalizing the second SQ.  
 
4.2. Intervention B - The Circular Design Journal 
 
For IB, a total of 14 participants managed to finalize the journal – either as the physical format filled out by 
hand (B1) or as the virtual format filled out as a fillable PDF (B2). The 14 participants correspond to 26% of 
those who did the sign-up to be a part of this intervention. For B1, all participants (N=9) had a maker 
background and were connected to a makerspace and for B2 (N=5), the participants were a mixed group of 
designers, consultants, and students.  
Figure 4.3 shows two selected pages from B1 where a participant has been reflecting upon how they can 
relate the strategies ‘Design’ and ‘Raw Materials & Sourcing’ to their project and on Figure 4.4, another 
participant from B2 reflected upon the strategies ‘Care’ And ‘Upgrade’. 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
Page 24 
 
Figure 4.3. Intervention B1: Selected pages from one of the participants’ journals filled out by hand  
(from Appendix B3.2). 
 
 
Figure 4.4. Intervention B2: Selected pages from one of the final participant’s journal filled out in the virtual format  
(from Appendix B3.2) 
 
Most participants who filled out the journal did as presented on the examples provided on Figure 4.3 and 4.4 
respectively – i.e. in a descriptive format. Only three participants provided with visual elements like pictures 
or sketches.  
Finally, an overview of the time spent on using the journal is provided on Table 4.1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
Page 25 
Table 4.1. Self-assessed time spent using the journal  
 
Time spent using the 
journal 
Number of 
participants [N=14] 
Half a day (1-3 hours) 
4 
A full day (4-8 hours) 
2 
Half a week 
2 
A week 
3 
More than a week 
2 
No answer 
1 
 
4.3. Potential knowledge increases due to interventions  
 
Commencing with IA and by accumulating data from all three workshops carried out in the study, we see that 
60% of those who replied to the first SQ continued and became final participants in the study having in total 
58 participants. Among these, the self-assessed knowledge prior and post the workshop was assessed according 
to Table 3.3. On Figure 4.5, the diagrams illustrate the participants’ level of knowledge prior to and post the 
workshop. From this we see that prior to the workshop, 16% was allocated to Category I (none), 47% to 
Category II (low), 29% to Category III (medium) and 9% to Category IV (high). Post the workshop, 0% was 
allocated to Category I, 3% to Category II, 48% to Category III, 40% to Category IV, and 7% did not leave an 
answer in this section in the second SQ.  
 
 
Figure 4.5. Assessment of level of knowledge on circular economy for IA (for larger version, see Appendix B1.2). 
Left: knowledge before attending the workshop. Right: knowledge after having attended the workshop. 
 
To give an example, a participant stated prior to the workshop to the question, ‘Please describe your knowledge 
of Circular Economy’: “I have just started getting into the topic some months ago. This is my first workshop 
for the purpose of learning more about circular economy” (allocated to Category II according to Table 3.3) 
and answered post the workshop to the question ‘Now that you have attended the two-hour workshop, please 
describe your knowledge of circular economy’: “I know more about the actual framework and the questions 
that should be considered when going the circular economy route, which essentially means that it’s much more 
structured in my head now” (allocated to Category III).  
Another participant stated prior to the workshop, “As the name specifies, is about creating a life cycle in our 
economy, not wasting or destroying things that can be reused and that way promoting sustainability” 
(allocated to Category III) and subsequently post the workshop: “I didn't know about all of these strategies 
and it's something that can really change the approach of creating a new product” (allocated to Category IV). 
Some participants also stated explicitly how the workshop helped them refresh their memories e.g.: “I have 
refreshed my memory on several strategies” (participant in Category IV before and after the workshop) and 
another one stating: “This was a very useful reminder of the importance of being mindful of circularity early 
in the design proces! The Circular Strategies Wheel was a great way to get an overview the many many aspects 
and strategies!” (participant going from Category II to IV).  
==PAGE:29==
 
Page 26 
 
Coded similarly to the results from IA, the knowledge about circular economy prior and post applying the 
journal was assessed related to the people who were a part of IB. On Figure 4.6, the results are presented. 
Derived from the graphs, it is evident that prior to applying the journal, out of 14 participants, 7% were assigned 
to Category I, 29% to Category II, 29% to Category III and finally, 36% were assigned to Category IV. After 
having applied the journal, 7% were assigned to Category I, 0% to Category II, 50% to Category III and 43% 
to Category IV.  
 
 
Figure 4.6. Assessment of level of knowledge on circular economy for IB. (for larger version, see Appendix B2.1). 
Left: knowledge before applying the journal. Right: knowledge after applying the journal 
 
An example of a participant self-assessing their knowledge prior to applying the journal is: “I have studied it 
intensively throughout my studies and participated in several conferences, debates, discussions on the 
subject. I have of course mainly been having a focus on buildings. I did do intensive research on it and even 
came up with a case study about it in the past. Overall, I would say that on a scale of 1-10, I would be 
somewhere at 7. I am missing of course the real life practical application of CE.” (Assigned to Category IV) 
and after they stated: “I am indeed more confident with all strategies and aspects of CE. I even learnt new 
circular strategies concepts, which I am excited to start exploring. Overall, I believe it is a very good tool to 
navigate all the aspects and actually understand each and every one of them, and how it relates to a specific 
product or project” (remaining in Category IV).  
 
To investigate whether statistical evidence of independence could be found between the categorial variables 
(them being the time before and the interventions and the potential change in knowledge respectively), a 
Fisher’s exact test was carried out for both Intervention A and B and an additional Chi-square test was 
carried out for IA. On Table 4.2, the results from these statistical tests are provided.  
 
Table 4.2 Results from Chi-squared test for IA and Fisher’s exact test for IA and IB applying XLSTAT. 
• 
 
Type of  
statistical test 
Intervention 
Null hypothesis (N0) 
Chi-
square  
(Observed 
value) 
Chi-square 
(Critical 
value)  
p-value 
Chi-square 
A 
There is no association between the level 
of knowledge and the time before and 
after attending the workshop 
41.3 
6 
<0.0001 
Fisher’s exact 
test 
A 
There is no association between the level 
of knowledge and the time before and 
after attending the workshop 
- 
- 
<0.0001 
Fisher’s exact 
test 
B 
There is no association between the level 
of knowledge and the time before and 
after applying the journal 
- 
- 
0.535 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
Page 27 
Based on the results, it is evident that both p-values linked to IA are way below the level of significance of 
0.05, and we can therefore reject both null hypotheses (listed in Table 4.2) and claim that statistical evidence 
has been found that dependence among the variables is present – in this case regardless of the choice of test 
carried out. As for IB, with a p-value above 0.05, we are not able to reject null hypothesis and have therefore 
not found statistical evidence to reject the null hypothesis concerning that there should be no association 
between the level of knowledge and the time before and after applying the journal. Therefore, it seems as if 
the workshop worked as intended but that we have no evidence of the journal performing as well as the 
workshop based on the self-assessed knowledge changes among participants.  
 
For an overview of all the self-assessments related to the knowledge about CE for IA, see Appendix B2.1 
and for IB, see Appendix B2.2. For results from the Chi-squared and Fisher’s exact test carried out by the 
application of XLSTAT, see Appendix C9.1 for IA and Appendix C9.2 for IB.  
 
4.4. The interventions as enablers for a circular mindset  
 
The results from the participants’ answers to the closed-ended question posed to the participants in the second 
SQ concerning whether the workshop can help create a circular mindset for future work in makerspaces is 
presented on Figure 4.7. Here, 86% of the participants gave a high answer (rating 4 or 5), 10% provided with 
a medium rating and 3% with a low rating.  
 
Figure 4.7. Distribution of quantitative answers to close-ended question in survey no. 2 for Intervention A 
 
Subsequently, as what counts for the journal, Figure 4.8 illustrates that 79% of the participants gave a high 
answer to that the journal can help create a circular mindset for future work in makerspaces – the remaining 
21% gave a medium rating and no one provided with a low rating.   
==PAGE:31==
 
Page 28 
 
Figure 4.8. Distribution of quantitative answers to close-ended question in survey no. 2 for Intervention B 
 
To analyze and evaluate the results presented above, a Welch’s t-test and a Mann-Whitney U test has been 
carried out to look for statistical significance. Table 4.3 provides with the results from these statistical tests. 
 
Table 4.3 Results from the Welch’s t-test and the Mann-Whitney U test 
• 
 
Type of 
statistical test 
Null hypothesis (H0) 
Average 
rating/sum 
of ranks for 
Intervention 
A  
Average 
rating/sum of 
ranks for 
Intervention 
B 
t-
statistic 
/ z-
statistic 
p-
value 
Welch’s t-test 
The mean ratings of the two 
intervention groups are equal  
4.24 
4.14 
0.43 
0.67 
Mann-Whitney 
U test  
The distribution of ratings for 
both intervention groups are 
identical 
2152 
476 
-0.50 
0.62  
 
The results indicate, that based on the t-test, where the null hypothesis states that the there is no difference in 
means between the two interventions, the p-value of 0.67 represents a 67% probability of obtaining the 
observed data or more extreme differences in means between the interventions assuming the null hypothesis 
is true.  
For the Mann-Whitney U test, with a null hypothesis stating that there is no difference between the distribution 
of rating for the two interventions, the p-value of 0.62 indicates a 62% probability of obtaining the observed 
data or more extreme results under the assumption that the null hypothesis is true and that there is no difference 
between the mean of the participants’ assessment concerning whether the workshop/journal help create a 
circular mindset for future work in makerspaces for Intervention A and B respectively.  
In both tests, with p-values greater than the chosen significance level of 0.05, there is insufficient evidence to 
reject the null hypotheses in both cases and no statistical significance have been found that there should be a 
significant difference in means and this supports the idea of that the observed differences in means are likely 
due to random variation. The results therefore indicate that no evidence has been found that any of the 
interventions is outperforming the other one. 
 
For an overview of the calculations related to the Welch’s t-test, see Appendix C1.1 and for the Mann-
Whitney U test, see Appendix C1.2.  
 
==PAGE:32==
 
Page 29 
4.5. The interventions assessed on different aid parameters 
 
Looking at how the interventions helped the participants related to the five closed-ended questions posed in 
the second SQ, we see that for IA, based on the graph provided on Figure 4.9, high rates were given to: 
• 
Q1 by 86% of the participants 
• 
Q2 by 78% of the participants 
• 
Q3 by 75% of the participants 
• 
Q4 by 63% of the participants 
• 
Q5 by 59% of the participants  
 
 
Figure 4.9. Distribution of ratings to the close-ended questions 1-5 in survey questionnaire no. 2 for IA (see Appendix B4.1). 
 
Figure 4.10 shows similarly the results related to IB. By highlighting the high rates, we see that:  
• 
72% gave a high rate to Q1 
• 
50% gave a high rate to Q2 
• 
65% gave a high rate to Q3 
• 
50% gave a high rate to Q4 
• 
78% gave a high rate to Q5 
==PAGE:33==
 
Page 30 
 
Figure 4.10. Distribution of ratings to the close-ended questions 1-5 in survey questionnaire no. 2 for IB (see Appendix B4.2) 
 
Based on the data collected concerning how the interventions helped the participants in different ways, a 
Welch’s t-test and an additional Mann-Whitney U test was carried out for each of the five questions aiming to 
compare the results and looking for statistical significances between the two interventions. Table 4.4 and Table 
4.5 provide with overviews of the basic information obtained from the Welch’s t-tests and Mann-Whitney U 
tests respectively carried out for each of the questions.  
 
Table 4.4. Results from Welch’s t-tests for the five questions  
 
 
Close-ended questions 
from second survey 
questionnaire 
Null hypothesis, 
H0 
Interven
tion A 
Interven
tion B 
Unpaired two-
sample t-test 
Ques
tion 
no.  
“Did the workshop help 
you too… 
 
Average 
rating, 
µ1 
(N=58) 
Average 
rating, 
µ2 
(N=14) 
t-
statisti
c 
p-value 
1 
… Gain an overview of 
the available circular 
strategies?” 
The average mean 
ratings of the two 
intervention groups 
are equal 
4.41 
3.93 
1.37 
0.19  
2 
… Become more inspired 
and motivated to work 
with circular economy?” 
The average mean 
ratings of the two 
intervention groups 
are equal 
4.19 
3.71 
1.38 
0.19 
3 
…Better understand how 
much can be done in 
your project to improve 
the circularity?” 
The average mean 
ratings of the two 
intervention groups 
are equal 
4.10 
3.64 
1.22 
0.24 
4 
…Balance the generation 
of new ideas with the 
mapping of the existing 
situation?” 
The average mean 
ratings of the two 
intervention groups 
are equal 
3.86 
3.14 
1.70 
0.11 
5 
…Set priorities for which 
strategies to implement in 
your project on both a 
short and long term?” 
The average mean 
ratings of the two 
intervention groups 
are equal 
3.67 
3.71 
-0.13 
0.89 
==PAGE:34==
 
Page 31 
Table 4.5. Results from the Mann-Whitney U tests for the five questions 
 
 
Close-ended questions 
from second survey 
questionnaire 
Null hypothesis, 
H0 
Interven
tion A 
Interven
tion B 
Mann-Whitney 
U test 
Ques
tion 
no.  
“Did the workshop help 
you too… 
 
Sum of 
ranks, 
R1 
(N=58) 
Sum of 
ranks, 
R2 
(N=14) 
z-
statisti
c 
p-value 
1 
… Gain an overview of 
the available circular 
strategies?” 
The distribution of 
ratings for both 
intervention groups 
are identical 
2198.5 
429.5 
-1.16 
0.25 
2 
… Become more inspired 
and motivated to work 
with circular economy?” 
The distribution of 
ratings for both 
intervention groups 
are identical 
2211 
417 
-1.34 
0.18 
3 
…Better understand how 
much can be done in 
your project to improve 
the circularity?” 
The distribution of 
ratings for both 
intervention groups 
are identical 
2192.5 
435.5 
-1.07 
0.28 
4 
…Balance the generation 
of new ideas with the 
mapping of the existing 
situation?” 
The distribution of 
ratings for both 
intervention groups 
are identical 
2221 
407 
-1.48 
0.14 
5 
…Set priorities for which 
strategies to implement in 
your project on both a 
short and long term?” 
The distribution of 
ratings for both 
intervention groups 
are identical 
2085 
543 
-0.46 
0.65 
 
Based on the results from the statistical tests, we see how all p-values are greater than the level of significance 
of 0.05. The quantified differences between the groups tell us that no statistical significance is found in any of 
the questions regardless of the choice of statistical test. Therefore, all null hypotheses related to the tests for 
each of the five questions cannot be rejected and no statistical evidence has been found concerning whether 
the means nor the difference between the distributions differ from one another.  
 
In the following, an overview is provided of the appendices containing the calculations related to the 
statistical tests carried out in this section: 
 
• 
Appendix C2.1: Welch’s t-test for Q1 
• 
Appendix C2.2: Mann-Whitney U test for Q1  
• 
Appendix C3.1: Welch’s t-test for Q2 
• 
Appendix C3.2: Mann-Whitney U test for Q2  
• 
Appendix C4.1: Welch’s t-test for Q3 
• 
Appendix C4.2: Mann-Whitney U test for Q3 
• 
Appendix C5.1: Welch’s t-test for Q4 
• 
Appendix C5.2: Mann-Whitney U test for Q4 
• 
Appendix C6.1: Welch’s t-test for Q5 
• 
Appendix C6.2: Mann-Whitney U test for Q5  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
Page 32 
4.6. Potential change in level of motivation and confidence  
 
On Table 4.6 and Table 4.7, the results from the paired t-tests related to the two factors assessed in the study 
concerning the motivation and the confidence prior and post to being exposed to either Intervention A or B.  
 
Table 4.6. Results from paired t-tests related to Intervention A 
• 
 
Factor 
assessed 
Question posed 
in Survey 
questionnaire 
[participants 
rating from 1-
5] 
Null hypothesis, H0 
Sample 
size, N 
Average 
rating 
before 
workshop, 
µ1 
Average 
rating 
after 
workshop, 
µ2 
t-
statistic 
p-
value 
Motivation 
“How motivated 
are you to work 
with circular 
economy in your 
project?” 
There is no significant 
difference in the level of 
motivation among 
participants before and 
after participating in 
the workshop 
58 
4.45 
4.47 
0.21 
0.84 
Confidence 
“How confident 
are you that you 
can apply 
circular 
economy 
principles to 
your project?”  
There is no significant 
difference in the level of 
confidence among 
participants before and 
after participating in 
the workshop 
58 
3.77 
4.11 
2.95 
0.0046  
 
Table 4.7. Results from paired t-tests related to Intervention B 
 
Factor 
assessed 
Question posed 
in Survey 
questionnaire 
[participants 
rating from 1-5] 
Null hypothesis, H0 
Sample 
size, N 
Average 
rating 
before 
workshop, 
µ1 
Average 
rating 
after 
workshop, 
µ2 
t-
statistic 
p-
value 
Motivation 
“How motivated 
are you to work 
with circular 
economy in your 
project?” 
There is no significant 
difference in the level 
of motivation among 
participants before and 
after applying the 
journal 
14 
4.36 
4.43 
0.43 
0.67  
Confidence 
“How confident 
are you that you 
can apply 
circular economy 
principles to your 
project?”  
There is no significant 
difference in the level 
of confidence among 
participants before and 
after applying the 
journal 
14 
3.71 
3.79 
0.29 
0.78  
 
Based on the results derived from the set of paired t-tests, it is evident that for IB, no statistical significance is 
found for either of the factors, and we cannot reject the null hypotheses concerning that the average rated 
means for both the motivation and confidence should be equal since both p-values are greater than 0.05.  
For IA, nor have statistical significance been found in the case of potential increase (or decrease) in motivation, 
and with a high p-value of 0.84, we also reject the null hypothesis assuming the average means for the 
motivations prior to and post attending the workshop should be equal. Though with a p-value of 0.0046 smaller 
than 0.05, we can reject the null hypothesis and claim that statistical significance has been found in the case of 
the average means of confidence among the participants who participated in the workshop are not equal. The 
==PAGE:36==
 
Page 33 
test has indicated that the workshop seems to have contributed to increase the level of confidence among the 
participants.  
 
For an overview of the calculations for tests, see the following appendices:  
• 
Appendix C7.1: Paired t-test for motivation related to Intervention A 
• 
Appendix C7.2: Paired t-test for confidence related to Intervention A 
• 
Appendix C8.1: Paired t-test for motivation related to Intervention B 
• 
Appendix C8.2: Paired t-test for confidence related to Intervention B 
 
5. Discussion  
 
The objective of this study was to test and compare two different ways of distributing a framework containing 
different circular strategies in a makerspace context. The two distribution methods were 1) a workshop 
(Intervention A, IA) and 2) a personal design journal (Intervention B, IB). In the study, a total of 58 participants 
completed all steps and became final participants of the study related to IA and 14 people managed to finish 
the journal and give their feedback related to IB. In the following, we discuss and interpret the results derived 
from the data collected for this study highlighting the main conclusions and insights gained.  
 
 
5.1 Perceived effects of the interventions 
 
Commencing with a focus on the self-assessed knowledge coded and presented in this paper (see 4.1), we saw 
how knowledge seemed to have been increased among the participants as most of the participants either moved 
up a category or remained in the same category when interpreting the distributions the graphs presented.  
For Intervention A, we managed to find statistical evidence concerning that there should be an association 
between the categorial variables. With the small p-values yielded in both the Fisher’s exact test and the Chi-
squared test, we had evidence to reject the null hypotheses and we identified evidence of dependency to exist 
between the level of self-assessed knowledge and the time before and after attending the workshop 
respectively. Thereby, we claim that the workshop contributed with an increase of knowledge based on the 
self-assessed and subsequently coded replies in the surveys.  
When regarding the results yielded from the Fisher’s Exact test for IB, we saw how no statistical evidence was 
found that there should have been a knowledge increase linked to applying the journal. We therefore cannot 
reject that there could be independence between the variables in this case. An assumption related to the reason 
for the lack of statistical evidence identified could be (apart from the subjective character of the data collected) 
related to the small sample size as well as the large number of participants allocated to a high level of 
knowledge prior to applying the journal (and thereby made it harder to reach a higher assessment based on the 
determined codes). Many participants were stating that they gained something from applying the journal. Thus, 
there are certain qualitative indications of the journal also contributing to an increase of knowledge among the 
participants, despite having found no statistical significance in this regard.  
An important aspect to take into consideration is the fact that the results and insights presented in this paper 
possibly contain a great amount of uncertainty and bias since participants were assessing themselves in a 
complex topic – both with regards to the knowledge but also for the other parameters where they rated and 
assessed subjectively. Nonetheless, the data collected provided us with an insight in how people are assessing 
themselves with great variety as none of the answers were alike. The subsequent coding of the knowledge is 
also linked with potential bias and if this has been carried out in an alternative way, or by somebody else, it 
would most likely have provided with different results.  
 
Based on the results presented in section 4.2, we saw how the majority (>79% in both cases) of the participants 
in the study rated highly concerning whether the workshop or journal potentially can help create a circular 
mindset for future work in makerspaces. Furthermore, the statistical tests (Welch’s t-test and Mann Whitney 
U test) carried out both support the argument of neither of the interventions are outperforming the other one 
==PAGE:37==
 
Page 34 
based on this parameter. There is therefore no statistical significance was found related to whether there should 
be a difference in the average rated means based on the participants’ assessments. Therefore, we claim that 
Intervention A and B yielded somewhat similar results and according to the participants’ ratings, no statistical 
evidence was found that the journal and workshop should not have a somewhat similar potential to help create 
a circular mindset for future work in makerspaces.  
 
When interpreting the results from section 4.3, concerning how the intervention aided the participants on 
different parameters based on the five questions posed in the second survey questionnaire, we see how 
(similarly to the previously described case) no statistical evidence was found in either of the cases for the five 
questions regardless of the choice of statistical test carried out (Welch’s t-test or Mann Whitney U test). Both 
types of statistical tests yielded somewhat similar results and they all provided with p-values greater than the 
chosen significance level of 0.05. We therefore found no statistical evidence that there should be a difference 
in the participants’ mean ratings and no evidence that the interventions should not have a similar potential to 
help the participants based on the different aspects each of the questions represent. Once again, we see a 
tendency that neither intervention A nor B is outperforming the other one.  
 
Based on the results from section 4.4. concerning whether the interventions could contribute to a potential 
change in the participants’ increase (or even decrease) in their motivation and as well as confidence to work 
with/apply CE strategies in their projects, we saw how the paired t-tests demonstrated that in both tests related 
to IB, no statistical significance was found that the means should differ before and after applying the journal 
related to both motivation and confidence. Based on this, we saw a tendency that the journal at least did not 
make the level of confidence nor motivation among the participants decrease as the tests indicate that we 
cannot reject that the levels seemed to have remained stable throughout the intervention. In the data collected, 
we also saw how both the level of motivation and confidence were self-assessed to being relatively high (3.71 
and 4.36 respectively) prior to applying the journal which might indicate most of the people who signed up for 
the study already possessed a high level of motivation as well as confidence prior to signing up for the study.  
Subsequently, for IA, we found no statistical evidence that the average ratings for the motivation before and 
after attending the workshop were not equal. In the same way as for IB, this could indicate that the workshop 
did not seem to demotivate the participants. Though, statistical significance was found concerning that the 
means differed for the level of confidence among the participants and there seem to be statistical evidence that 
the mean confidence levels were not equal since the p-value for the paired t-test was given by 0.0046 i.e. way 
below the level of significance of 0.05. We therefore identified a tendency to that the workshop have the 
potential to contribute to an increased level of confidence concerning participants being able to apply CE 
principles in their projects. Based on this, we see how the workshop might have a greater effect on the 
participants and is outperforming the journal when it comes to the level of confidence.  
 
 
Moving on from the statistical tests carried out, we claim how this study was an attempt to carry out a potential 
finding in the previously conducted literature study (Kohtala, 2016; Bakırlıoğlu et al., 2021); Fleischmann et 
al., 2016); i.e. to facilitate different activities (in this case; the two interventions) around awareness of 
circularity where makers could work with products’ full lifecycles and focus on adding competencies to their 
skillset. This study has indicated that both the journal and the workshop seem to have the potential to help 
change mindsets for future work in makerspaces according to the participants’ assessments and possibly be 
part of the tools, resources and activities that according to Smith & Light (2017) should be laid out 
conveniently for participants. The makerspaces need to consciously promote circularity (Rayna & Striukova, 
2020) and what they could offer to help foster demanded skills of the 21st century could in principle be either 
of the interventions tested in this study.  
On an overall level, the study has given an indication of that the circular framework helped to increase the 
level of knowledge among the participants. The chosen makerspace context indicated to be a space 
characterized by diversity and we saw how the interventions helped a large amount of the makers and designers 
spark creativity, new ideas as well as insights around the complex topic of CE.  
==PAGE:38==
 
Page 35 
The journal turned out to be more time-consuming than initially expected – both for the people distributing it 
as well as for the makers filling it out (see Table 4.1). Though, the potential regarding the journal being more 
scalable, mainly due to the lack of a facilitator, is still to be explored further. A journal format might be suitable 
– even a better fit – for the makerspaces that do not have the in-house competencies nor are able to hire 
externals to facilitate such workshops. It can be discussed how the makerspaces might be able to reach the 
most makers to work with circularity in their projects leveraging the potential to decrease the environmental 
footprint of makers’ creations e.g. by implementing circular strategies.  
 
The journal intervention was an attempt to apply Schön’s (1987) work and have the makers and designers 
reflect more in-depth than they presumably do during workshops – i.e. the attempt to educate the makers as 
reflective practitioners. Despite no hard evidence can be presented related to this, what we do claim is that the 
participants performed different actions in the different intervention scenarios. This could perhaps indicate that 
the journal has a greater degree of having people reflect on-action whereas the workshop is more community-
based and does not contain the same level of encouragement to reflect. The interventions therefore seemed to 
have supported different aspects differently, but we do not have evidence to pin-point whether one set of 
actions have greater effects than the other one. Though, both interventions seem to have its pros and cons 
linked to them and there might therefore be a potential to find ways of combining these two interventions.   
 
As mentioned in the background section of this paper, we need to see a design-driven method in context to 
understand the challenges involved when it comes to adopting it. A method is dependent upon the knowledge 
and the skills of the practitioners applying it (Gericke et al., 2022).  
The study consciously chose a specific context, i.e. makerspaces, to test the interventions in. Though, the 
nature of makerspaces and its heterogeneous culture have on the one hand played an essential role in the 
stimulation of innovation and expand the impact of the maker movement (Wu & Ma, 2022) but has with its 
heterogeneous nature most likely added a certain level of complexity to the research. To mention some of the 
factors that vary among the participants in the study, we have their level of knowledge, general skillsets, type 
of project(s) they are working on, educational and cultural background etc. This naturally contributes with 
different perspectives on the interventions as the method in use constitutes a socio-technical system that 
depends on the interactions with the method and therefore the manners of interpreting and applying the chosen 
design-driven method that approaches a complex topic like circular economy varies greatly.     
Prior to conducting the study, the journal was expected to be the less labor-intensive way of distributing the 
method mainly due to the lack of presence of a facilitator as well as minimum preparation time as soon as the 
journal is produced (if choosing the physical paper format). Though, this study showed how the attempt to 
distribute the journal was relatively time and management consuming due to the time spent recruiting people 
as well as the high level of reminders being sent to the participants encouraging them to proceed with the steps 
to finish the journal. We also saw how 74% of those who signed up for intervention B, never managed to finish 
the journal within the provided time frame of two months. This could indicate that if a makerspace (or another 
type of organization) chooses a journal format to distribute a design-driven method, they should keep in mind 
the additional time that might be necessary to spend having the makers and designers go through the entire 
process if set up like in this research. In continuation, there might be a potential to link an intervention format 
like the journal to dedication-related activities to aim for increased commitment and motivation among 
participants assuming the makers would be more likely to finish this type of format and becoming more 
determined to achieve certain goals – like improvements of their project to aim for a more environmentally-
friendly footprint.  
Additionally, we also saw how the participants carried out the exercise differently due to the variation in the 
format the framework was presented. The workshop had a greater character of brainstorming where 
participants used post-its as a short note format whereas the journal, with its logbook-inspired format, lead to 
participants carrying out the exercise with a greater character of reporting and describing in longer sentences. 
Furthermore, the color-coding encouraging participants to categorize status quo, potentials, curiosities and 
obstacles in the workshop intervention was not projected on to the journal format.  
==PAGE:39==
 
Page 36 
The tool tested in this study is highly oriented towards the ideation phase of a project or for iterations where 
makers have decided to identify potential improvement aspects to increase the circularity and is not 
(intentionally) focused on the more implementation-oriented aspects of circular projects.   
The tool seems to work to gain new ideas and increase the awareness around CE – though, for a transition like 
the circular one to happen, implementation is crucial.  Therefore, when applying the tool, we see the importance 
of keeping in mind the intention of implementation.  
Evidently, a circular economy on a societal level is far more complicated than knowing and implementing 
circular strategies. It is also concerning (just to mention a few) e.g. regeneratively, business modelling, human 
behavior, rebound effects, trade-off management, transparency, finances, technology, collaborations between 
private and public sectors, integration and implementation of initiatives into existing or even new domestic 
and international systems (Circle Economy, 2023). Therefore, there are many other aspects of circular 
economy that is important to consider and which the framework might implicitly include but might require a 
certain knowledge and even experience to identify and actively take into consideration. In continuation, we 
acknowledge that a framework cannot grasp it all and this is not the intention with the tool. In general, it should 
more be regarded as a relatively simplified method around a complex topic aiming to give an overview and 
spark new ideas – not to be a comprehensive understanding of circular economy. Though, some of the blind 
angles and lack of representation of certain elements linked to the framework is worth taking into consideration 
or possibly state as disclaimers to participants.  
Another interesting aspect to discuss is a certain paradox that seem to be present in makerspaces when they 
want to be working actively with circularity. As described in the background section (see 1.3), we see how 
both obstacles as well as potentials were identified when it comes to how makerspaces can contribute to a 
circular transition. And as mentioned previously, the makers and designers also have different starting points 
for their projects and levels of maturity when it comes to circularity. There is a potential that makerspaces 
might be able to determine certain constraints or even prerequisites to work in the makerspace that 
encompasses working with an increased awareness around the environment. Yet, carrying this out could also 
be argued to go against some of the very core values of the maker movement that most often seem to allow for 
unlimited creativity and a free space for experimentation, exploration and prototyping to everyone interested. 
From our point-of-view, the question remains unanswered whether makerspaces who want to promote 
sustainability and circularity also can allow for unlimited types of activities to happen in these labs.  
One of the final questions worth raising, is whether we can measure mindsets and link them to the effect it 
might have on the actual implementation of circular strategies in the relevant application contexts. As 
mentioned previously, Frameworks Institute (2020) suggests how we might measure mindsets and mindset 
shifts but how might we link this to the real effects a circular mindset might have on the potential circular 
transition of our society? Makers and their projects might be small and seem insignificant in the bigger picture, 
but mindset shifts can lead to changes in human behavior, policy, and structures. Ultimately, changing people’s 
mindsets is part of changing society for the better.    
 
6. Conclusion  
 
Makerspaces and makers have the potential to adopt a circular mindset if they decide to do so. A way to 
commence (or continue) their circular journeys could be by applying design-driven tools that provide with 
overviews of circular strategies. This study developed, tested, evaluated and compared two different 
intervention formats based on a framework representing 18 circular strategies that potentially could be two 
different ways of distributing and scaling the framework in a distributed design context. The two intervention 
formats that were tested was a facilitated workshop format (Intervention A) and a personal design journal 
format (Intervention B) aiming to educate makers as reflective practitioners respectively. Both interventions 
aimed to have an influence on makers’ mindsets and identify the least labor-intensive way of distributing a 
design-driven framework and get makers to investigate how different circular strategies could be relevant to 
their projects. The results from the study indicate that no optimal way of distributing the tool was found and 
that we cannot reject that a self-guided journal has a somewhat similar potential to be as effective as an in-
==PAGE:40==
 
Page 37 
person workshop format. The study affirmed how no evidence was found that both ways of distributing the 
tool should not have a similar potential to be an effective tool to have makers work with circularity. The only 
exceptions being that evidence was found that the workshop format did seem to increase self-assessed 
knowledge among participants as well as having a positive influence on the makers’ confidence towards being 
able to apply circular strategies in their contexts and thereby outperformed the journal format.  
Makerspaces can choose to function as moral and ethical actors and provide makers with the right tools and 
activities to influence their mindsets and encourage them to implement e.g. circular strategies to improve the 
circularity of the projects they are working on.  
The research demonstrated the power of getting to know circular strategies presented in the framework on a 
micro scale. The framework helped the participants from the study to spark new ideas, gain new insights and 
according to the large part of the assessment of the participants, both interventions can help create a circular 
mindset for future work in makerspaces.  
Summing up, the main pros and cons about Intervention A and B respectively can be claimed to be that 
Intervention A requires a facilitator as well as the necessary preparation to carry out the workshop but has also 
indicated to be less time-consuming than Intervention B, which seems more time consuming from both a 
management point-of-view as well as for the makers that are to fill out the journal but on the other hand remains 
independent from facilitation resources.  
 
7. Limitations and future research  
 
7.1. Limitations 
 
One of the major limitations in this study has been the time frame provided to carry out the research. In total, 
two months were allocated to collect data, and this resulted in a small sample size of 58 for the workshop 
format but especially with 14 for the journal format. Regardless of the small sample size for the journal, the 
analysis was carried out and yielded the results presented in this paper. Though, this does inevitably add a 
certain lack of robustness and reliability in the results presented that one must keep in mind.  
Another limitation worth pointing out is the chosen context. Firstly, the participants’ backgrounds varied 
greatly both culturally as well as professionally coming from various countries and having different 
(professional) occupations. Despite most of the participants identified themselves as being either a maker, 
designer or consultant, it might be worth taking into consideration that welcoming participants from both 
makerspaces and industry in both of the interventions was a prerequisite to execute the study in order to have 
enough participants to carry out the data collection and perform the analysis within the given time frame. It is 
not possible to tell whether this had a significant influence on the results, though this is also recommended to 
keep in mind.  
Furthermore, heterogeneity was also present in this study with regards to the diversity of the participants’ 
projects they took their starting points in to carry out the exercise provided to them. None of the in total (58+14) 
72 projects were the same and this possibly added further complexity and an increased variety in how the 
participants’ interpreted the interventions. One participant also pointed out explicitly how their rating to one 
of the questions posed in the second SQ could have been different for another project indicating that there 
might be a certain level of project dependency present in the replies received. Subsequently, there was no 
distinguishment between the projects that had taken their starting point in sustainability and/or circularity and 
those who did not. The study therefore contains a mixture of projects taken into consideration where the 
maturity level of circularity and sustainability varies to a certain extent.  
We know how a method in use is dependent upon both the description of the method as well as the interaction 
between the human participants applying the tool (Gericke, 2022). A limitation, and even a potential critique, 
linked to this study is the chosen approach to develop and test the two interventions. By this, we mean that the 
variations of the ways the method was described varied among the interventions, though, there was no 
facilitated interaction between the participants in any of the versions of the intervention (the physical workshop 
==PAGE:41==
 
Page 38 
being the only exception) which might be a parameter to take into consideration since an increased interaction 
between the participants might have influenced the data collection and thereby results.  
When focusing on the methods applied to collect data, another limitation is regarded to be the participants’ 
self-assessing their knowledge. Self-assessment tends to be difficult for most – especially related to a complex 
topic like circular economy. Here, a wide range of responses were welcomed, possibly contributing to an 
increased level of complexity that encompassed educational background, free time spent on the subject, 
experience from industry just to mention some. As a consequence, some uncertainties were revealed related to 
the application of statistical tests applied on small sample sizes for self-assessment for intervention B, not 
being able to find statistical evidence of dependency. As for intervention A, we did find statistical evidence of 
dependency, but these results are still likely to contain a certain degree of uncertainly due to the subjective 
character of the data.   
A final limitation associated with the data collection methods, which might deserve slight attention, apply for 
the timing of the participants’ responses to the second survey questionnaire. In this case, the participants were 
granted significant flexibility in choosing when to complete the survey, and their response times were not 
monitored. For intervention A, most participants answered the second survey questionnaire right after the 
exercise but for Intervention B, it is unknown how much time was spent between finalizing the journal and 
filling out the second survey, which might have influenced the final reflections and feedback – for better or for 
worse. In this case, the question is how to balance the risk of forgetting versus the time to digest and reflect 
upon the new knowledge, ideas and insights obtained.  
 
7.2. Future research 
 
In this study, a design-driven method was tested in two different intervention formats in a makerspace context 
aiming to explore whether one of them could outperform the other one and investigate whether an optimal way 
to potentially distribute and scale a design method exists.   
Although the study has its limitations in terms of the generalizability, time limitation, small sample sizes and 
thereby robustness of the results, we claim that undertaking this research has provided with a unique 
opportunity to gain an insight in how two different design-driven intervention formats can be evaluated and 
compared to one another. People interested in design research and methods can potential use the research 
conducted if they want to obtain inspiration concerning to how to explore potential approaches to how to 
distribute – and even scale – design-driven methods; especially the ones we know are working well in one way 
or another.  
This research was centered around the possibility of a design method that can help foster circular mindsets, 
but in principle, the subject can be replaced by another fruitful societal agenda. The same counts for the chosen 
context – in this case makerspaces. This context could also easily be replaced. In fact, it would be interesting 
to explore what results could be yielded if a similar study was to be carried out in a different context.  
 
Further research in this area is suggested to have a larger time span than this study had, hopefully leading to 
larger sample sizes for each of the interventions and thereby better chances to determine whether one of the 
intervention formats have the potential to outperform the other. If someone is to carry out a similar study, it 
might be preferable to link – especially the journal format – to an element that can help employ a higher level 
of commitment and motivation assuming this will lead to a greater amount of people who will finish all steps 
related to intervention B and hopefully fewer who would be likely to (actively or inactively) reassign 
themselves from the study. This would ideally lead to a larger sample size as well as less time spent on 
providing participants with reminders etc.  
Subsequently, it is recommended to find a way in which data collection could be based on externally assessed 
parameters (possibly by a professional expertise) unlike the self-assessed ones chosen for this study. In this 
way, objectivity and validity could be increased, more accurate measurements would be collected, the research 
findings would be more reliable and bias could potentially be minimized or even eliminated.  
==PAGE:42==
 
Page 39 
Another suggestion for future research could be to provide participants with similar starting points and give 
them a common case to work on to possibly lower the level of complexity the several different starting points 
might have contributed with to this study. By doing so, it could make it easier to identify potential improvement 
aspects for both interventions if a redesign turns out to become relevant.  
Additionally, the future research could focus on providing additional guidance with regards to how to 
systematically identify other important aspects related to a circular transition e.g. synergies, trade-offs, end-
user perspectives, collaboration opportunities etc. as a part of the change in mindset towards a more circular 
one for the participants. Subsequently, an increased interaction among participants taking part in the study is 
also recommended as this is an important aspect of testing a design method and might add useful insights to 
this kind of research. In this way, the participants could share experiences and insights though with the risk of 
biasing each other which should be taken into consideration. If an increased interaction is to be implemented 
in future research, the potential influence the participants could have on each other both have the possibility to 
favor but also disrupt the research, which should be kept in mind.  
Finally, it is also recommended to focus on a harder distinguishment between the profiles, backgrounds and 
professions of the people participating in the study to possibly be able to decrease the level of complexity in 
the data collected.   
This study showcased that both the workshop and the journal seem to have its advantages – the workshop 
possibly benefiting from aspects related to facilitation and inspiration derived from other participants and the 
journal benefitting from reflective elements. For future research, it could also be considered whether it could 
be beneficial to find a way to combine the two design-driven intervention formats and possibly apply the best 
of what a workshop and a personal design journal seem to be able offer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
Page 40 
References  
 
Bakırlıoğlu, Y., Galleguillos, R., Bensason, M.L.E., Yantaç, I., Evren, A., & Aykut, C. (2021). Connecting 
the dots: understanding professional development needs of Istanbul's makers for circular economy. 
Conference: EESD2021: Proceedings of the 10th Engineering Education for Sustainable Development 
Conference, 'Building Flourishing Communities', 1(1), 1-7.     
https://cora.ucc.ie/items/9adc91f3-618d-4f18-88b3-0554d2c672a8  
 
Baybrooke, K. & Smith, A. (2018) Editors' Introduction: Liberatory technologies for whom? Exploring a 
new generation of makerspaces defined by institutional encounters. Journal of Peer Production 1(12). 1-132. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3210701  
 
Blomsma, F., Pieroni, M., Kravchenko, M., Pigosso, D. C. A., Hildenbrand, J., Kristinsdottir, A. R., 
Kristoffersen, E., Shahbazi, S., Nielsen, K. D., Jönbrink, A.K., Li, J., Wiik, C., McAloone, T. C. (2019). 
Developing a circular strategies framework for manufacturing companies to support circular economy-
oriented innovation, Journal of Cleaner Production, 241. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652619331415  
 
Camilli G., Hopkins K. D. (1978) Applicability of chi-square to 2 × 2 contingency tables with small expected 
cell frequencies. Psychological Bulletin, 85(1), 163–167. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.85.1.163  
 
Circle Economy. (2023). The Circularity Gap Report 2023. https://www.circularity-gap.world/2023  
 
Connelly, Lynne M. (2016). Fisher's exact test. MedSurg Nursing, 25(1), 
58+. https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA444912943&sid=googleScholar&v=2.1&it=r&linkaccess=
abs&issn=10920811&p=AONE&sw=w&userGroupName=anon%7Eacde5334&aty=open+web+entry  
 
Daalhuizen, J., Timmer, R., Van Der Welie, M., & Gardien, P. (2019). An architecture of design doing: A 
framework for capturing the ever-evolving practice of design to drive organizational learning. International 
Journal of Design, 13(1), 37e52. http://www.ijdesign.org/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/2814  
 
Danish Design Center. (2023, June 23). Tool 01: Circular Strategies Wheel. https://ddc.dk/tools/tool-01-
circular-strategies-wheel/  
 
Danish Design Center. (2023, June 24).  How To Go Full Circle: The Circular Business Model. 
https://ddc.dk/tools/how-to-go-full-circle-the-circular-business-model/  
 
de Winter, J. C. F. (2013). Using the Student's t-test with extremely small sample sizes. Practical 
Assessment, Research, and Evaluation, 18. https://doi.org/10.7275/e4r6-dj05  
 
Dougherty, D. (2012). The Maker Movement. Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 7(3), 
11–14. https://doi.org/10.1162/INOV_a_00135 
 
Distributed Design Platform. (2023, June 24). About. https://distributeddesign.eu/about/ 
 
EMF (Ellen MacArthur Foundation). (2019). Completing the Picture: How the Circular Economy Tackles 
Climate Change. www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
Page 41 
EMF (Ellen MacArthur Foundation). (2013). Towards the Circular Economy: Economic and business 
rational for an accelerated transition. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 
https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/towards-the-circular-economy-vol-1-an-economic-and-business-
rationale-for-an  
 
EMF (Ellen MacArthur Foundation). (2023, April 05). What is Circular Economy?.  
https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/topics/circular-economy-
introduction/overview#:~:text=It%20is%20based%20on%20three,the%20consumption%20of%20finite%20r
esources.  
 
Fleischmann, K. (2020). Designers as change agents in the Circular Economy. Discern: International 
Journal of Design for Social Change, Sustainable Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 1(1), 99-118.  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348251306_Designers_as_change_agents_in_the_Circular_Econo
my_Designers_as_change_agents_in_the_Circular_Economy   
 
Fleischmann, K., Hielscher, S., & Merritt, T. (2016). Making things in Fab Labs: a case study on 
sustainability and co-creation. Digital Creativity, 27(2), 113-131. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/296561826_Making_things_in_Fab_Labs_a_case_study_on_sustai
nability_and_co-creation  
 
Fonda, C. & Canessa, E. (2016). Making ideas at scientific fabrication laboratories. Physics Education, 
51(065016). 10.1088/0031-9120/51/6/065016 
 
Frameworks Institute. (2020). Measuring Mindset Shifts and Evaluating Mindset Shift Efforts - Supplement 
to Mindset Shifts: What Are They? Why Do They Matter? How Do They Happen?. A FrameWorks Research 
Supplement. https://www.frameworksinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/MindsetShifts-
MethodsSupplement.pdf  
 
Gericke, K., Eckert, C., Campean, F., Clarkson P. J., Flening, E., Isaksson. O., Kipouros, T., Kokkolaras, M., 
Köhler, C., Panarotto, M., & Wilmsen, M. (2020). Supporting designers: moving from method menagerie to 
method ecosystem. Design Science, 6(21). https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/design-
science/article/supporting-designers-moving-from-method-menagerie-to-method-
ecosystem/63DA0F12D7C5AB2D94DDFBE40DD7E8ED  
 
Gericke, K., Eckert, C., & Stacey, M. (2022). Elements of a design method – a basis for describing and 
evaluating design methods. Design Science, 8(29). https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/design-
science/article/elements-of-a-design-method-a-basis-for-describing-and-evaluating-design-
methods/A7387B643DBFDB5DF9075261D7D61408  
 
Kohtala, C. (2016). Making Sustainability: How Fab Labs Address Environmental Sustainability.  Aalto 
University: Aalto University publication series. 
https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/21755/isbn9789526066622.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed
=y  
 
Maravilhas, S. & Martins, J. (2019). Strategic knowledge management in a digital environment: Tacit and 
explicit knowledge in Fab Labs. Journal of Business Research, 94, 353-359. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0148296318300675   
 
McAlpine, H.,  Cash. P., & Hicks, B. (2017). The role of logbooks as mediators of engineering design work. 
Design Studies, 48, 1-29. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142694X16300680  
 
==PAGE:45==
 
Page 42 
Murray, A., Skene, K. & Haynes, K. (2017). The Circular Economy: An Interdisciplinary Exploration of the 
Concept and Application in a Global Context. J. Bus. Ethics 140, 369–380. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-
015-2693-2 
 
Nachar, N., (2008). The Mann‐Whitney U: A Test for Assessing Whether Two Independent Samples Come 
from the Same Distribution. Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for Psychology, 4(1), 13-20. 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/007b/c0936646c34abd369ceda930000c3d142228.pdf  
 
Pieroni, M. P. P., Jensen, T. H., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2020). Circular Economy Business 
Modelling: CIRCit Workbook 2. Technical University of Denmark. 
https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/210455061/WB2_CIRCit_double.pdf  
 
Potting, J., Hekkert, M., Worrell, E. & Hanemaaijer, A. (2017). Circular Economy: Measuring Innovation in 
the Product Chain. PBL publication number: 2544. PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency. 
https://www.pbl.nl/sites/default/files/downloads/pbl-2016-circular-economy-measuring-innovation-in-
product-chains-2544.pdf   
 
Prendeville, S., Hartung, G., Brass, C., Purvis, E. & Hall, A. (2017). Circular Makerspaces: the founder’s 
view. International Journal of Sustainable Engineering, 10(4-5), 272-288. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/19397038.2017.1317876    
 
Rayna, T. & Striukova, L. (2021). Fostering skills for the 21st century: The role of Fab labs and 
makerspaces. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 164(120391), 2-12. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0040162520312178  
 
Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action (1st ed.). Basic Books. 
https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/10.4324/9781315237473/reflective-practitioner-donald-
sch%C3%B6n  
 
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning 
in the professions. Jossey-Bass. 
http://www.daneshnamehicsa.ir/userfiles/file/Manabeh/Educating%20the%20reflective%20practitioner.pdf  
 
Sicora, A. (2019). Reflective practice and learning from mistakes in social work student placement, Social 
Work Education. The international Journal.  38(1), 63-74. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02615479.2018.1508567?journalCode=cswe20  
 
Smith, A. (2017). Social innovation, democracy and makerspaces. SPRU Working Paper Series. 10. 1-15. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2986245  
 
Smith, A. & Light, A. (2017). Cultivating sustainable developments with makerspaces. Liinc em Revista, 
13(1), 162-174. http://steps-centre.org/wp-content/uploads/MC-report_final.pdf  
 
Topi, H., Lucas, W., & Babaian, T. (2006). Using informal notes for sharing corporate technology know-
how. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(5), 486-499. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000637?journalCode=tjis20  
 
Unterfrauner, E., Shao, J., Hofer, M., Fabian, C. M. (2019). The environmental value and impact of the 
Maker movement—Insights from a cross‐case analysis of European maker initiatives. Business Strategy and 
the Environment, 28(2), 1518-1533. 
==PAGE:46==
 
Page 43 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bse.2328?casa_token=uAO5kc8xkbwAAAAA%3AC4lH-
bAsXJAdg7mNHO4nb90daBgbDvSQfbW5_2gryoDmFsWlMiv_CnX7PZ1Z7Zzx7IP7HAefmSA2Jfc  
 
Van Nes, N., & Cramer, J. (2005). Influencing product lifetime through product design. Business Strategy 
and the Environment, Special Issue: Sustainability and Design, 14(5), 286-299.  
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.491     
 
Wu, Y. & Ma., Z. (2022). The Power of Makerspaces: Heterotopia and Innovation. Sustainability, 15(1), 
629. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15010629  
 
Xu, M., Fralick, D., Zheng, J.Z., Wang, B., Tu, X.M. & Feng, C. (2017). The Differences and Similarities 
Between Two-Sample T-Test and Paired T-test. Shanghai Arch Psychiatry, 29(3), 184-188. 
10.11919/j.issn.1002-0829.217070 
 
==PAGE:47==
