==PAGE:1==
Nanofluidics and interferometric scattering
microscopy
Master Thesis
Bolette Sommer Degn
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Nanofluidics and interferometric scattering microscopy
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Bolette Sommer Degn
Supervisors
Rodolphe Marie
Jonas Nyvold Pedersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was carried out in the group ”Nanofluidics and Bioimaging” in the department
of Health Tech of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfillment of
the degree Master of Science in Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology. This thesis
was written under the supervision of Rodolphe Marie (Assoc. Professor, Department of
Health Tech) and Jonas Nyvold Pedersen (Assoc. Professor, Department of Health Tech).
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of microfluidics.
Bolette Sommer Degn - s173961
Signature
Date
ii
23/06/2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Characterization of biological nanoparticles is an important step to understand their phys-
ical properties. Here, lipid vesicles are biological particles that show great potential within
drug delivery and as disease markers. By using nanofluidics, the fluid dynamics can be
analyzed and controlled to characterize nanoparticles. Using a nanofluidic chip, trapping
of nanoparticles has previously been shown in the group. The trapping led to analysis of
the particles where e.g. size and zeta potential was obtained. This was performed using
fluorescence microscopy which requires a fluorescent labelled sample.
In this thesis, single liposomes are characterized by single-particle tracking using both
fluorescence microscopy and the label-free technique interferometric scattering (iSCAT)
microscopy. The measurements are performed on an existing home-built iSCAT micro-
scope. Liposomes with a size of approximately 200 nm are imaged in the nanofluidic chip
under a salt gradient, resulting in trapped liposomes. By analyzing the position of the
liposomes in the chip information about the particle velocity and trapping position is
obtained. Here, the movement in the trapping position is used to obtain the physical
properties size and zeta potential of the liposomes.
Next, three new coatings for surface passivation of the nanochannels are investigated using
fluorescence microscopy. The investigation shows that the two lipid coatings POPC:POPG
9:1 and POPC:POPG 30:1, and the polymer surfactant Pluronic F127 have potential as
new coatings for particle trapping. The zeta potential of the coatings are unknown and
estimations based on the trapping point, particle size and particle zeta potential is used
to estimate the zeta potentials of the coatings using analytical simulations.
Lastly, the behaviour of liposomes under a pH gradient is explored using fluorescence mi-
croscopy. Here, both a strong and moderate pH gradient is established using HCl and
NaOH. This is the first time particle behaviour in a pH gradient is explored on the nanoflu-
idic chip. Therefore, an introduction to the theory behind monovalent diffusioosmotic and
diffusiophoretic velocity is given along with an introduction to diffusiophoretic velocity in
a multicomponent electrolyte.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
In this thesis, I have worked with many people and I would like to express my gratitude
for their support.
To my supervisors Rodolphe Marie and Jonas Nyvold Pedersen, I would like to say thanks
for the guidance throughout the thesis. A special thanks to Rodolphe for giving me the
opportunity to work on this exciting project and for fruitful discussions on new insights
and results.
I want to thank the whole ”Nanofluidics and Bioimaging” group for making me feel as part
of the group from day one. Thanks for suggestions and help on lab questions. In particular,
I would like to say thanks to Pavlina Senikoglou for lab discussions on the nanofluidic chip
system and for trouble shooting chip problems with me. To Philipp Willmer I would like
to show my gratitude for help on the iSCAT setup and for being available to always answer
my questions and come with suggestions to lab problems. To Corentin Cardot I would
like to say thanks for help with the theoretical understanding of the nanofluidic chips and
for help with simulations. I would also like to thank Senior Researcher Jannik Larsen for
the discussion on liposome stability in pH gradients.
Lastly, I would like to say thanks to my boyfriend Henrik, my family and friends for their
support not only throughout this thesis but also throughout my studies. This would not
have been possible without you.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Interferometric scattering microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Motion of particles in a concentration gradient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Nanofluidic device
11
3.1
Chip bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Surface passivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Lipid vesicles
14
4.1
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Microscopy set-ups
16
5.1
Interferometric scattering microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
Fluorescence microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Trapping liposomes in a salt gradient
23
6.1
Imaging single liposomes in nanochannel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4
Sub-Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
How does coating affect trapping?
37
7.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.4
Sub-Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Exploring pH gradient in a nanofluidic chip
45
8.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2
Exploring single particle tracking in a pH gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.4
Sub-Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9
Discussion
63
9.1
iSCAT microscopy vs fluorescence microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
10 Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
v
==PAGE:7==
A Diffusiophoretic motion
71
B Tracking in salt gradient - data
72
B.1
Fluorescence imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
B.2
iSCAT imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B.3
Diffusion coeﬀicients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
For many years, fluorescence microscopy has been the main imaging method for single
molecule imaging. It offers great specificity, sensitivity and is able to suppress the back-
ground [1]. However, single molecule imaging using fluorescence microscopy also has some
limitations. The sample is labelled with a fluorescent dye which can affect the properties
of the molecule and requires prework to attach the fluorophore to the sample. Also, when
the sample is exposed to light for a longer time the fluorophores will reach their finite
fluorescence limit, saturation, after which the particles will begin to photobleach. An al-
ternative to labelled imaging is label-free imaging. By omitting the label, it is possible to
expose the sample to light for a longer time without reaching the finite fluorescence limit
of the fluorophores.
A way to solve some of the limitations of the fluorescence microscopy is to use interferomet-
ric scattering microscopy (iSCAT). iSCAT uses scattering based interferometric imaging
which is the interference between a reference field and a scattered field. This technique
makes iSCAT microscopy a label-free imaging technique. The progress in iSCAT imaging
has made it possible to image biological samples such as lipid vesicles [2, 3], viruses [4],
and proteins [5, 6]. For now, these measurements are conducted in free liquid suspension
where the fluid dynamics of the system is hard to control. In these systems the particle
movement is therefore described by random walk in the solution.
Lipid vesicles are biological containers and carriers that are greatly researched within
drug delivery. These can either be biological (e.g. exosomes) or artificial (e.g. liposomes)
lipid vesicles.
Liposomes are well studied due to their resemblance to biological lipid
vesicles. Important characteristics are their zeta potential and size. One established and
widely used way to measure the zeta potential and size of particles is using dynamic light
scattering (DLS). DLS requires a large sample volume, approx. 20 mL, where the sample
is diluted by a factor 1:1000 [7].
DLS has some limitations when measuring in more
concentrated samples e.g. it measures the hydrodynamic radius and not the actual size
of the particle as it has a low resolution [8]. In a study presented by Rasmussen et al.
[9] a new characterization method is used based on a salt gradient in a nanofluidic chip.
Compared to DLS this method requires a much lower sample volume and can be used
for single particle tracking whereby the size and zeta potential can be estimated. This
method is based on fluorescence detection, meaning it uses a fluorescent dye to label lipid
vesicles. However, when conducting measurements under native conditions, labelling the
sample with a fluorophore is not possible.
Hence, the main goal of this master thesis is to demonstrate tracking of nanoparticles in
a nanofluidic chip using iSCAT microscopy. Also, the fluid dynamics of the nanofluidic
device is investigated by changing coatings of the channels and testing the use of a pH
gradient instead of the established salt gradient. The hope is that this lays the founda-
tion for further research using label-free characterization of extracellular vesicles such as
exosomes to obtain the zeta potential, refractive index, and size of the particles using the
nanofluidic chip.
The reader will first be introduced to the concept and theory of iSCAT microscopy followed
by an introduction to the nanofluidic chip combined with the concepts of the nanofluidics.
Next, the used iSCAT setup and fluorescence microscopy are covered along with their
characteristics. The next part covers the experiments. Here, results based on imaging of
1
==PAGE:9==
single liposomes in the nanofluidic chip obtained using fluorescence microscopy and iSCAT
microscopy are presented. A quantitative analysis of the trajectories of liposomes leads
to further discussion of sizes of the liposomes obtained using both techniques. After a
short introduction to other coatings for surface passivation, results obtained using fluores-
cence microscopy are discussed. The focus is here how the new coatings affect trapping
of liposomes.
The last part investigates the application of a pH gradient in the chip.
Results obtained using fluorescence microscopy are presented and discussed. Finally, the
techniques are discussed and an outlook for future work is laid.
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
In the following, the method behind interferometric scattering microscopy (iSCAT) is
explained to show why iSCAT microscopy is good at enhancing the contrast for isolated
weakly scattering objects.
Next, the functionality of the used nanofluidic chip in this
project is explained followed up by an elaboration of the fluid dynamic phenomenons
diffusiophoresis and diffusioosmosis describing the mobility of particles in a concentration
gradient.
2.1
State of the art
Optical microscopes are used extensively to investigate biological single particles in mi-
crofluidic systems due to their high sensitivity and specificity. This allows for tracking
of their motion, whereby characteristics of the particles such as the size can be obtained.
Here, fluorescence microscopy is a well-known method for measuring particle tracking in
microfluidic systems.
For example, Palacci et al.
[10] showed DNA focusing under a
LiCl concentration gradient where colloidal particles and λ-DNA showed transient diffu-
siophoretic focusing. Rasmussen et al. [9] used a similar method and showed that exo-
somes can be diffusiophoretically sorted by size and surface potentials in funnel-shaped
nanochannels.
Common for these experiments are the need for labelling the objects of interest. Label-free
characterization of single particles complements fluorescence imaging in situations where
labelling compromises data interpretation [11]. Here, an alternative is scattering-based
interferometric imaging which is a powerful method for label-free detection and tracking
of single biomolecules in solution. In these techniques, light scattered by a molecule is
interfered with a reference to obtain a detectable signal. Here, the forward scattered light
in coherent bright field microscopy interferes with the transmitted incident light and to
increase the contrast, the reference light is often attenuated [12]. In dark field microscopy,
only the scattered light is detected while the direct light from the illumination source is
blocked. Here, metal nanoparticles are often used as nanoprobes due to their excellent
light scattering property [13].
For example, dark field microscopy has proven to be a
useful technique to visualize the motion of extracellular vesicles [14]. A third technique
that uses scattering-based interferometric imaging is interferometric scattering microscopy
(iSCAT).
iSCAT microscopy is a very sensitive imaging method based on the detection of light
scattered by nanoparticles. Fast acquisition time and high imaging contrast enables for
applications in single-particle tracking, label-free imaging of nanoscopic objects and quan-
titative single-molecule characterization [15].
One of the first microscopes to make use of interference as a contrast mechanism and intro-
ducing phase shift was the phase contrast microscope by Zernike [16]. Based on this, the
interference reflection microscopy was developed and already in 1964, it was used to mea-
sure cellular adhesion [17]. At first, the phase change based on an optical path difference
between two fields made the microscope interesting, but since it was further developed to
enable quantitative measurements on e.g. colloidal particles and lipid bilayers. This tech-
nique was called reflection interference contrast microscopy which is similar to the iSCAT
setup. Detection of single nanoparticles with a diameter of 50 nm was possible by the
end of the twentieth century, marking a milestone [18]. However, researchers, especially
3
==PAGE:11==
within biology, were interested in much smaller particles e.g. 5 nm in diameter. Further
development in phase contrast microscopy was paused until the interest in fluorescence-
free imaging of nanoparticles regained interest whereby the development of phase contrast
microscopy began again.
Figure 2.1: iSCAT configuration modes.
a) Wide-field illuminates with a larger
FOV. Fast scanning.
b) Confocal: the
beam is focused in a small spot. Scans
over the sample. Adapted from: [18].
iSCAT microscopy was first introduced by
Lindfors et al. [19] in 2004 where it was used to
detect gold nanoparticles smaller than 10 nm.
Since then, the development of iSCAT micro-
scopes has grown. The basis setup is the same
for all of them and can be divided into two
subgroups depending on image modality that
are shown in Figure 2.1: wide-field or confocal
configuration.
In the confocal configuration,
the beam is focused on the sample and scan
across it. This method is time-consuming and
temporal noise from the light source is trans-
lated into spatial noise in the image [18]. How-
ever, unwanted scattering from the depth of
the sample is not detected. The wide-field configuration is used for fast imaging. By using
reflection mode instead of transmission, a higher contrast is detected as the amplitude of
the reference field is lower. This poses an advantage in terms of sensitivity to the axial
position of the nanoparticle. Therefore, wide-field setups operated in reflection mode is
the most used configuration mode for iSCAT setups.
Gold nanoparticles, liposomes, and exosomes have been imaged in free suspension using
iSCAT imaging [2]. Recently, Dahmardeh et al. [5] demonstrated imaging of single proteins
below 10 kDa in free suspension with iSCAT which is a huge achievement. This requires
a great machine learning program for the tracking of the particles.
2.2
Interferometric scattering microscopy
iSCAT microscopy is a technique that is based on the optical phenomena scattering and
interference.
The interference occurs between the incoming light, Ei, the particles of interest, and the
device containing the particles. The sample in this project consist of a chip and a medium
containing the particles. The result of the interference is detection of reflected light, Er,
and scattered light, Es. The reflected light appears from the interference of the light with
the chip. Scattered light occurs when the light interacts with the nanoparticles in the
medium. The scenario is shown in Figure 2.2. Here, the setup uses back-reflection where
a beam splitter (BS) is used to separate the incoming light and the detected field. The
incident field is shown by a blue arrow with a large solid arrowhead. The BS reflects the
reference field (solid blue arrow with small arrowhead) and the scattered field (dashed
blue).
The intensity of the reflected light is much larger than the intensity of the scattered light,
Ir ≫Is. The result is a large contrast which is necessary to observe the scattered light
which is an important factor in iSCAT. The intensity of the reflected light should be very
small to reduce shot noise and increase the contrast. The light hitting the detector is
different from the illumination light due to the scattered and reflected light and is given
by Eq. 2.1
4
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: The iSCAT signal is detected using back-reflection. The incident light Ei
interferes with both the cover glass and the scattering particle in the medium, resulting in
reflected light Er from the cover glass and scattered light Es from the particle. Adapted
from: [18].
Idet ∝|Er + Es|2 = Ir + Is + 2ErEs cos ϕd.
(2.1)
Here, Es = Eseiϕs and Er = Ereiϕr is, respectively, the scattering field from the particle
with the scattering phase ϕs and the reference field with the reference phase ϕr. Hence,
Ir = |Er|2 and Is = |Es|2. As a result, the image is created by the intensity of the detected
reference field, the scattering field, and the cross-term. The cross-term is dependent on
the phase shift since ϕd = ϕr −ϕs. Here, the scattering signal is much smaller than the
reference signal, Ir ≫Is because of the very small particles, whereby the detected signal
Idet is simplified to
Idet ≈Ir + 2ErEs cos ϕd.
(2.2)
Knowing the intensity of the detected signal, the contrast can be established using Eq.
2.2. The reference intensity acts as the background signal and is therefore, subtracted
from the intensity of the detected signal
c = Idet −Ir
Ir
= |Er|2 + 2ErEs cos ϕd −|Er|2
|Er|2
= 2Es cos ϕd
Er
.
(2.3)
The signal obtained in iSCAT is represented as an interferometric point spread function
(iPSF) as illustrated in Figure 2.3.
This occurs due to interference between the scat-
tered field that propagates as a spherical wave (dashed spheres) and the reference field
that propagates as planar waves (straight lines). The interference between the two fields
generates constructive or destructive interference on the detection plane which leads to
the iPSF. The iPSF exhibit characteristic rings that are similar to Airy disks. Here, the
iPSF changes between bright and dark rings, and a bright and dark center. This stem
from the constructive and destructive interference between the light fields. The iPSF is
determined by the phase difference ϕd between the sample field and the reference field
which also influences the shape of the iPSF that changes depending on the axial position
at the interface zr, the particle zp, and the focal plane zf (Figure 2.3) [20].
The advantage of iSCAT is its ability to image single particles. The limit of the sensitivity
of iSCAT imaging and tracking of single molecules is described by the signal-to-noise ratio
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.3: a) A schematic of interference of a scattering particle suspended in solution in
iSCAT imaging. The rings show the sample field (Es) and the straight lines the reference
field (Er). b) Illustration of an interferometric point spread function (iPSF) which appears
due to interference between the reference field and scattering field. Adapted from:[18].
(SNR). SNR is determined by the scattering cross-section of the nanoparticle, illumina-
tion dynamics and detector [21]. When more particles are gathered, the detected signal
becomes more noisy due to the interference of the scattering signal from multiple parti-
cles. On the images, the iPSF of the particles will overlap, making it diﬀicult to track
the individual particles. In the experiments conducted for this thesis, the aim is single
particle imaging to obtain characteristics of the particles.
2.3
Motion of particles in a concentration gradient
The mobility of particles in gradients such as chemical [9], viscous liquids [22], and elec-
trical potentials [23] are an ongoing research field to obtain a deeper understanding of
biological particles. In this project, the focus is the investigation of single particles in
chemical gradients in a nanofluidic device. Here, diffusioosmosis and diffusiophoresis are
surface-flow-driven phenomenons that describe the motion of liquid and colloidal particles
in a concentration gradient. Diffusiophoresis was first discovered by Derjaguin et al. in
1947 (English translation in 1993 [24]) and has since then been broadly studied [9, 25, 26].
In a nanofluidic system, these phenomena are extremely important since they describe
the motion of the particles. In the following, the two phenomenons are described more in
detail.
2.3.1
Nanofluidic trap
In this project, a nanofluidic chip is used which enables trapping of particles in nanochan-
nels [9].
The trapping appears due to a balance between the diffusiophoretic particle
transport and the diffusioosmotic fluid flow which is shown in Figure 2.4a. A salt gradient
is applied across the nanochannels by creating a continuous flow in the microchannels
with a salt concentration in the narrow, CN, and wide end, CW , of the nanochannels. The
channel walls have been coated with a lipid coating which ensures that the particles are
not attracted and attached to the walls, due to a negative zeta potential on the walls. A
fluid flow at the walls known as diffusioosmosis is created, moving from high to low concen-
tration. The colloid particles are introduced in the microchannel at the narrow end of the
nanochannel. These will spontaneously migrate into the nanochannels towards higher salt
concentrations by diffusiophoresis. The trapping point appears at the equilibrium point
where the diffusiophoretic velocity and the diffusioosmotic velocity are vdp + vdo = 0.
The parameters contributing to the trapping point are the particle diameter and the zeta
potential. The particles diffuse around in the trap which is used for characterizing the
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: a) Schematic of the trapping of particles. The trapping appear due to an equi-
librium point between the diffusiophoretic particle velocity, vdp, and the diffusioosmotic
fluid velocity, vdo. b) A schematic of top and side view of the nanochannel. Adapted
from: [9].
particles. A schematic of the trap is shown in Figure 2.4b.
2.3.2
Diffusioosmotic motion
Osmotic transport appears in transport across biological membranes and is also crucial in
other areas such as food processing or energy harvesting under salinity gradients. Under
the presence of a solid surface, an interfacially driven version of osmotic transport can be
achieved under salinity gradients [26]. The diffusioosmotic (DO) motion appears due to a
concentration gradient along a channel where the liquid flows towards low concentration
areas as shown in Figure 2.5a. The DO flow is given by two contributions: chemiosmosis
(Figure 2.5b) and electroosmosis (Figure 2.5c).
a
b
c
Figure 2.5: a) Diffusioosmotic flow generated along two parallel walls with negative zeta
potential in a concentration gradient.
b) Schematic of the chemiosmotic contribution
and c) schematic of the electroosmotic contribution to the diffusioosmotic flow. The dots
represent counterions in the liquid. Adapted from: [25].
For a surface with a zeta potential, ζsurf, in contact with an electrolyte solution, a DO flow
is generated along the surface due to the concentration gradient ∇C. The DO velocity is
vdo(x) = Γos
ln(CL/CH)
CL −CH
∇C(x)
C(x) .
(2.4)
where Γdo is the diffusioosmotic mobility
7
==PAGE:15==
Γdo = −ϵ
η
kBT
Ze
[
βζsurf −2kBT
Ze ln(1 −γ2)
]
.
(2.5)
Here, ϵ, η, kB, T, Z, and e are, respectively, the electrical permittivity, fluid viscosity,
Boltzmann constant, temperature, valence, and electron charge. β is the diffusivity dif-
ference factor, β = D+−D−
D++D−, where D+ and D−are the diffusion constants of the positive
and negative ions, respectively. The first term in Eq. 2.5 describes the electroosmotic
contribution and the second term is the chemiosmotic contribution. The expression in Eq.
2.4 is obtained in the limit of an infinitesimally thin double layer.
2.3.3
Diffusiophoretic motion
A particle suspended in an electrolyte solution will under a concentration gradient migrate
along the gradient by diffusiophoresis, relative to the fluid. The main mechanism behind
diffusiophoresis (DP) is that a liquid flow along the particle surface is induced. The result
is that particles can move in the opposite direction of the surface flow along a stationary
wall. This is due to the structure of the electrical double layer (EDL) around the particle
which is nonuniform.
x
y
D
Increasing concentration
a
b
Figure 2.6: a) A negatively charged particle in a concentration gradient is moving towards
high concentration by diffusiophoresis. This is due to a liquid flow along the particle surface
that appears in such gradient whereby the particle moves in the opposite direction of the
fluid flow. b) The diffusiophoretic flow of the particle appears due to the structure of
the electrical double layer around the particle which is nonuniform. The non-uniformity
appears due to the concentration gradient. Adapted from: [25].
Therefore, the DP velocity takes the same form as the DO velocity but is oppositely
directed
vdp(x) = Γdp
∂ln C(x)
∂x
,
(2.6)
where Γdp is the DP mobility
Γdp = ϵ
η
kBT
Ze
(
βζp −2kBT
Ze ln(1 −γ2)
)
.
(2.7)
Here, the DP velocity of a particle is independent of shape and size. If the features are
comparable in size to the Debye length, the geometry of the particle becomes important
and the convection-diffusion equation must be solved for both inside and outside the double
8
==PAGE:16==
layer [27]. Briefly, the Debye length is a screening distance that describes the interaction
with counterions in the diffuse mobile layer on the surface [28]. The result is a first-order
expansion of the DP mobility where the ratio of the counterion-cloud thickness to the
particle radius λ is considered
Γdp = ϵ
2η
(kBT
Ze
)2
[u0 + λu1].
(2.8)
Here, u0 = 2β Zeζ
kBT −4 ln(1 −γ2) and u1 = F0 + βF1 + Pe[F2 + β(F3 + F5) + β2F4] where
Pe =
ϵ
2η
(
kBT
Ze
)2
and the F-functions are dependent on the zeta potential. These are given
by Preive et al. [29] and are shown in Appendix A.
The nonuniformity appears due to the salt ion concentration gradient.
The particles
considered are negatively charged, whereby the first ion layer is positively charged when
suspended in a liquid. This is known as the Stern layer, and the potential at the boundary
is the Stern potential. The ions in the next layer are attracted to the surface due to the
surface charge. These ions are free and can easily diffuse in the liquid, meaning, they are
not as tightly bound. This layer is the Slip plane which is in contact with the solution.
The edge of this boundary is the slipping plane and the potential is the zeta potential.
For diffusioosmosis and diffusiophoresis, the slipping plane is used as the effective surface
of the object consisting of the particle and the ion cloud that travel with the particle [27].
In this project, the nanochannels are coated with a negatively charged lipid solution and
the nanoparticles are negatively charged. This results in a diffusioosmotic motion created
at the surface of the walls, moving from high salt concentration to low salt concentration.
On the particle surfaces, a diffusioosmotic flow is also generated which results in liquid
being moved around the particles. The diffusiophoretic motion is generated due to the
variation in ion concentration on both sides of the particle and makes the particle flow in
the opposite direction of the diffusioosmotic flow.
2.3.4
Diffusion
When the particles are in the trap, there is no net force acting on them due to the equilib-
rium between the DO and DP velocities. Therefore, the particles move by diffusion which
is the motion of particles in a solvent from high to low concentrations of the particle
population [30]. This random motion is also referred to as Brownian motion. Therefore,
characterization of the particles is possible when they move in the trap by Brownian mo-
tion. The diffusion of particles can be modelled using the root-mean-squared displacement
(RMS) which is related to the statistical standard deviation of the displacement, σdx. RMS
is a measure of the width - or variance - of a Gaussian probability distribution [28]. The
RMS is described in terms of the diffusion constant D
< dx >= σdx =
√
2Dt
(2.9)
Here, the 1D case is considered where the root-mean-squared displacement (RMS) of a
diffusing particle is tracked over some time t to obtain the diffusion constant. In the case
where misplacement occurs, the diffusion constant must be calculated by the covariance-
based estimator (CVE). Both methods are unbiased, however, CVE is the more precise
estimator of the two methods since it weights all displacements equally [31]. It is given as
D = (∆xn)2
2∆t
+ ∆xn∆xn+1
∆t
.
(2.10)
9
==PAGE:17==
The corresponding variance of the estimation of the diffusion constant D is
Var(D) = D2
(6 + 4ε + 2ε2
N
+ 4(1 + ε)2
N2
)
,
(2.11)
where ε = σ2/(D∆t) −2R, R = 1/6, σ2 = R(∆xn)2 + (2R −1)∆xn∆xn+1, and N is the
total number of the image stack.
When knowing the diffusion constant, the size d of the particle is determined by Stokes-
Einstein equation which yields
d = kBT
3πηD.
(2.12)
Here, kB, T, and η are, respectively, Boltzmann’s constant, the temperature and the
viscosity of the medium.
In the experimental part of my thesis I do single particle tracking from which trajectories
of the particles are obtained. Based on the trajectories, information on the particle dis-
placement is obtained which is used to extract information about the size of the particles
by first estimating the diffusion constant D.
10
==PAGE:18==
3
Nanofluidic device
In this project, an established nanofluidic device is used for imaging and tracking the single
nanoparticles. The chip has several nanofluidic arrangements but only the 4 top reservoirs
are used for this project as shown in Figure 3.1a. The reservoirs are in pairs connected by
a microchannel and these two microchannels are interconnected by 16 nanochannels (see
Figure 3.1b). The microchannels have a depth of hM = 5 µm and the nanochannels have
a depth of hN = 240 nm. The microchannels have a width of 30 µm and a length of 2 cm,
connecting the inlets and outlets. The nanochannels are funnel-shaped where the width
changes from wN = 5 µm at its narrowest part to wW = 20 µm at the widest part. The
length of each of them is L = 440 nm. 13 of the 16 nanochannels are shown in a bright
field image in Figure 3.1c. Few of the channels have defects on them, stemming from the
master that is used for the injection molding of the chips. Therefore, these nanochannels
cannot be used during the experiments for imaging as the flow in the channels may be
changed due to the defects.
1
2
3
4
Channel 1
Channel 2
Figure 3.1: a) The nanofluidic chip. The marked area indicates the four wells that are
used in the project. b) An illustration of the nanofluidic system. The wells are connected
through microchannels and the nanochannels connect channel 1 with channel 2. c) Bright
field image of 13 of the 16 nanochannels. The image is taken using a 20x Nikon objective.
The patterns on top of the nanochannels e.g. on channels 5 and 6 from the left are defects
that stem from the master that is used for the injection molding of the chips.
Briefly, the chip is fabricated in a cleanroom by using a silicon substrate which is coated
with a nickel layer [32]. The device is then made by injection molding in cyclic olefin
copolymer (COC) TOPAS 5013 using an Engel polymer injection molder. The refractive
index of TOPAS is n = 1.533 [33]. This is very similar to the refractive index of glass which
is perfect when working with oil immersion microscopy since it appears as a homogeneous
medium for the light rays as they pass through the oil and TOPAS [34]. Here, the negative
nickel master is replicated. The nickel master makes it possible to replicate and cheaply
11
==PAGE:19==
mass-produce the nanofluidic chip. The chip is sealed with a 150 µm thick COC foil by
using a hydraulic pressure machine and a UV-assisted thermal bonding. The UV-assisted
bonding activates the surface and creates a pre-bonding before pressure is applied. COC
is hydrophobic and the surface must be passivated to make it more hydrophilic before
experiments can be conducted.
3.1
Chip bonding
Figure 3.2: a) After UV exposure and light pressure from fingers, the prebonding between
chip and lid is seen. b) The old metal form for the chip here with orange foil and patterned
PDMS on top. c) The materials for the new process where a new metal holder is used for
more stability. d) The chip with orange foil and patterned PDMS on top. e) Metal holder
with chip, white teflon and flat PDMS on top (are pushed down during pressure-step). f)
The new chip metal holder to ensure a more even pressure on the chip.
Sealing low-aspect-ratio channels is a diﬀicult process that was established in a previous
work [35]. In this project, the procedure for the sealing has been adjusted to improve the
sealing.
The chip is sealed with a 150 µm thick COC foil. First, the surfaces of the two parts
are activated by exposing them to UV light for 2 minutes, after which they are pressed
together by hand to obtain a prebonding as shown in Figure 3.2a. In order for the chip to
be sealed, a hydraulic pressure machine is used in the bonding step. Here, the temperature
is very important. COC has a glass transition temperature at 133°C. If the temperature
gets close to the glass transition temperature, the channel walls can deform. Therefore,
the bonding is finished at a temperature of 125°C. The bonding is performed in two steps
with different pressures. This procedure has been changed during the project. For the
first procedure, the used components are shown in Figure 3.2b. First, the chip (with the
lid) was placed in a pre-heated metal chip holder. A pre-heated orange foil and PDMS
with matching channel pattern are placed on top. The chip holder is placed in the press
and 0.5 kN is applied for 2 min. Next, the orange foil and PDMS are removed, and a pre-
12
==PAGE:20==
heated teflon sheet is placed on top of the chip aligned with the nanochannel system. The
orange foil and PDMS is placed on top again after which 1.5 kN is applied for 1 min. Due
to changes in the injection molding of the chips, the process and some of the components
used for the procedure were changed.
A new metal form for the chip was established as shown in Figure 3.2c-f with a new teflon
piece that fits around the four poles. Also, to create an even pressure a flat piece of PDMS
is made and a metal top-holder. The first part of the process use the same components,
pressure and pressure time. For the second part, the teflon piece is placed in the holder
with the flat PDMS piece, and on top the top metal part. The applied pressure 1.5 kN
is kept for 1.5 min. In case of too many bubbles, it must be checked that the pressure is
placed evenly on the chip. Also, the pressure and pressure time can be enhanced to test
if the bubbles can be removed in that way.
3.2
Surface passivation
Before using the chip for experiments it is prepared by a coating step. In the coating step,
the surface of the walls in the channels are passivated using a negatively charged lipid
solution of POPC:POPG 3:1 (1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC)
lipids and 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoglycerol (POPG)). The ratio of these
determine the zeta potential of the channel walls - and thereby, the strength of the diffu-
sioosmotic flow. The coating takes place at a bright field microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti2).
The degassed coating solution contains Vcoat = 60 µL 3:1 POPC:POPG 30 nm liposomes
and Veth = 140 µL 70% ethanol (99.9% ethanol diluted with Milli-Q water). The liposomes
are dissolved in the ethanol solution, creating lipids that are attached to the surface of the
channels as illustrated in Figure 3.3. During coating, pressure is applied over the inlets
which is controlled using a Fluigent MFCS-EX pump with a stated instrumental error of
±0.3 mbar. This ensures a uniform distribution of the lipids and gets rid of air bubbles
in the channels. On the microscope, the Fluigent pump has a pressure up to 1300 mbar
and the applied pressure for inlets 1-4 is set to 1000 mbar, 950 mbar, 50 mbar and 0 mbar,
respectively, for 40 minutes.
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the surface passivation at the channel walls. The phospholipid
hydrophilic heads point towards the solution, making the walls hydrophilic.
After the coating, residuals from the liposomes are removed by introducing and aspirating
35 µL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solutions at the inlets. PBS is an electrolyte solu-
tion that is commonly used for biological research where a salt concentration is needed.
When a particle is suspended in an electrolyte solution, the surface obtains a net charge
and a nonzero surface potential forms in the liquid in contact with the surface [25]. In
inlet 1 and 2, PBS with concentration 10−3x is introduced and in inlet 3 and 4, the concen-
tration is 10x. The PBS solutions are aspirated and finally, 20 µL PBS solutions (10−3x
PBS in inlets 1-2 and 10x PBS in inlets 3-4) are introduced, creating a salinity gradient
in the nanochannels, whereby the chip is ready for use.
13
==PAGE:21==
4
Lipid vesicles
In this project lipid vesicles are used for the experiments. Lipid vesicles appear in cell
biology where they are formed naturally during processes such as secretion and uptake.
Lipid vesicles have attracted much interest due to their function as potential disease mark-
ers and drug delivery systems. An example of such a lipid vesicle is exosomes. They are
released by body cells and found in most body fluids where they are carriers of RNA and
proteins. These can be disease markers. Exosomes are an ongoing research field due to
their position in the cell-to-cell signaling system [36]. A simpler system that can be pre-
pared artificially by lipids and is used widely in drug delivery systems is liposomes. They
are biocompatible and able to encapsulate drugs in either the hydrophilic inside or in the
hydrophobic bilayer [37]. Therefore, it is important to study their characteristics.
Figure 4.1: Left: Illustration of a phospholipid. It has a hydrophilic head and two hy-
drophobic tails. Middle: Phospholipids assemble to a bilayer. Right: The lipid bilayer
can create unilamellar vesicles such as the liposome.
Liposomes are only made by phospholipids that self-assemble into vesicles. A phospholipid
has a hydrophilic head and two hydrophobic tails and during the self-assembly in an
aqueous solution, they can assemble into one or multiple lipid bilayers called lamellae.
As seen in Figure 4.1, the lipids assemble in the bilayer such that the hydrophilic heads
are facing the surrounding medium and the aqueous core. Liposomes can vary in size
from 30 nm to a few micrometers. In the following, the focus lies on smaller unilamellar
vesicles consisting of a single bilayer of sizes ranging from 30 nanometer to a few hundred
nanometers.
A disadvantage of liposomes is their weak scattering signal.
Due to the
aqueous core, scattering only appears from the 5 nm thick bilayer membrane [38]. When
compared to polystyrene particles or gold nanoparticles the detection signal is much lower,
resulting in a lower contrast.
Liposomes and extracellular vesicles like exosomes are being investigated using iSCAT,
however, all these measurements appear to be in free suspension [2]. Combining iSCAT
and tracking of single liposomes in a nanofluidic system enables new characterization
methods of label-free biological samples using iSCAT.
4.1
Sample preparation
The used sample contains liposomes with a diameter of d = 100 nm that are stored in a
PBS solution. The liposomes are made by a 3:1 phospholipid mixture of the uncharged
POPC lipids and POPG lipids with charge −1e (Avanti Polar, Birmingham, US). The
negatively charged POPG lipids create a negative net charge which introduces repelling
forces. The lipids are stable for a wide range of pH.
14
==PAGE:22==
dnom [nm]
100
dDLS [nm]
214.1
σDLS [nm]
13.4
ζDLS [mV]
-21.3
Nstock [·1010]
2.1
Table 4.1:
The size of
the liposomes.
dnom is
based on the pore size
after the extrusion pro-
cess. dDLS is the mean
size of liposomes mea-
sured by DLS. An es-
timation of the num-
ber of liposomes in the
stock solution per 1 µL
is stated.
The sample preparation and dynamic light scattering (DLS)
measurements were carried out by PhD student Pavlina
Senikoglou. The process is briefly described in the following.
First, the phospholipid mixture is dissolved in a solvent. Next,
the solution is poured into a beaker and the solvent is evapo-
rated, creating a lipid film. PBS is added to the lipid film to re-
hydrate it, whereby the lipids form spherical vesicles of different
sizes. The solution is extruded through a pore-filter to ensure
that it is a mono-dispersed solution with uni-laminar vesicles.
In our case, the liposomes are extruded through a membrane of
100 nm. The pore-filter defines the nominal diameter of the lipo-
somes and an average size of the vesicles is obtained using DLS.
Fluorophores (DiO) are added to the sample during mixture of
the lipids if the vesicles should be labelled.
An overview of the sample with the corresponding DLS mea-
surement along with the standard deviation on the size is given
in Table 4.1. For single particle tracking a low sample volume is
needed. Therefore, the number of liposomes in 1 µL of the stock
solution (Vstock) is estimated using Eq. 4.1. The concentration of the stock solution is
cstock = 5 mM. The size of the respective liposome surface Alipid must be considered along
with the size of a single lipid head which accounts for Ahead ≈0.5 nm2 of the liposome
surface [38]. The size measured by the DLS is used for the estimations
Nstock =
cstockNAVstock
Alipid(2Ahead)−1 .
(4.1)
Here, NA is Avogadro’s constant and by multiplying with 2 in the denominator, it is
considered that the liposome has a bilayer.
Table 4.1 contains the estimations of the
number of liposomes in the stock solution per 1 µL. Dilutions of the stock ranging from
10−3 −10−5x are used for the experiments in order to do single liposome tracking.
15
==PAGE:23==
5
Microscopy set-ups
5.1
Interferometric scattering microscopy
In the following, an established home built wide-field iSCAT setup is used for the experi-
ments and therefore, described more in detail below.
5.1.1
Previous work
This work is based on three previous projects. The first project dealt with building the
iSCAT setup, characterizing it, and imaging polystyrene particles of different sizes with it
[39]. Here, the setup used a green laser (λ0 = 561 nm) as light source and a polarization
beam splitter (PBSP) to separate the excitation path from the imaging path. The setup
was a wide-field setup and an overview is shown in Figure 5.1. The scattered and reflected
light was p-polarized and transmitted. The setup was characterized during the project to
obtain the beam shape and magnification.
a
b
Figure 5.1: The iSCAT setups from the previous projects. a) The setup from the first
project contained a PBSP. b) The setup from the second project. The PBSP was replaced
with a normal BS. Obtained from Willmer: [40].
The second project looked into a problem with the first setup, a strong ghosting effect of
the PBSP cube [41]. Therefore, the cube was replaced with a normal BS (30:70, T:R) which
also simplifies the setup since the polarization state is no longer important. Furthermore,
the imaging and excitation arms were switched and the laser was changed to a shorter
wavelength to increase the scattering intensity. The setup is shown in Figure 5.1. The third
project was first carried out using a blue laser with a center wavelength of λ0 = 473 nm
[40]. With this it was possible to image single liposomes in a nanochannel. However,
some limitations on the field of view (FOV), power fluctuations and fast changes of the
iPSF led to an updated setup. The laser source was changed to have a center wavelength
of λ0 = 405 nm which increased the scattering intensity. To increase the FOV, a beam
expander was inserted before the wide-field lens resulting in a beam width of around 36 mm
after the beam expander. With these changes it was shown that it is possible to track
16
==PAGE:24==
single liposomes in a nanochannel. The experiments in this project are conducted using
the actual setup from Willmer [40].
5.1.2
Set-up
Figure 5.2: The actual wide-field iSCAT setup. The blue laser beam is sent through a
fiber coupling after which the beam is expanded to a diameter of 36 mm. This increases
the field of view, whereby a more exact determination of the particles in the nanofluidic
channels is obtained. The beam is directed towards the beamsplitter (BS) whereby the
beam is transmitted onto the sample. Lastly, the scattered beam is reflected at the BS
and focused onto the camera. Adapted from Willmer: [40].
A schematic of the used setup is shown in Figure 5.2. It is a home-built setup which
has already been established by Willmer [40]. It is a wide-field microscope that operates
in reflection mode. This means the light is collimated when illuminated by the beam.
To obtain this, the light is focused in the back-focal plane (BFP) of the objective. The
objective is an oil-immersion microscope objective (Nikon, Apo-60x, NA 1.45) with high
numerical aperture which has a focal length of f = 300 mm. The laser beam is expanded
using a beam expander which results in a beam width of approx 36 mm after the expansion.
The beam expander is used to increase the field of view (FOV) giving a more exact
determination of the trapping position of the particles in the channel. The FOV covers
the inlet of the narrow end of the nanochannel and the expected trapping position. A
mirror directs the beam towards a beam splitter (BS) which is used to transmit the
incident beam and reflect the scattered beam such that it is focused on the camera. The
camera is a scientific CMOS camera (Teledyne, PRIME BSI Express) and specifications
are given in Table 5.1.
The scattering strength depends proportionally on the wavelength of the light source as
1/λ4. This means, the light source influences the detected signal directly and to increase
the scattering signal, a short wavelength is needed. The laser source is a coherent Cobolt
06-01 Series module laser diode (MLD) with a center wavelength of λ0 = 405 nm. The
laser characteristics are shown in Table 5.2.
The maximum output power is 150 mW
which makes it a safety class 3B laser. The beam is spatially filtered with a single-mode
fiber. The output from the laser is filtered before entering the fiber and reduced to approx
Pi = 0.1 mW.
17
==PAGE:25==
Sensor specifications of CMOS
Number of pixels
2048 x 2048
Pixel size
6.5 µm x 6.5 µm
Quantum eﬀiciency (@ 405 nm)
∼68%
Full-Well capacity
45,000 e−
Read noise
< 1 e−(RMS)
Bit depth
16-bit
Table 5.1: Specification of the CMOS camera. Adapted from: [42]
Laser specifications
Characteristics
Value
λ0
405 nm
∆λ
< 1.2 nm
Power
150 mW
Safety class
3B
Laser type
Diode laser
Table 5.2: Specifications of the laser. Adapted from: [43].
5.1.3
Characterization of the iSCAT microscope
Coherence length
A coherent light source increases interferometric scattering which is important for the
signal of iSCAT microscopy. In this, the coherence length is important as the scattering
signal is received within the coherence length. In short, the coherence length is the space
within which the phase of a wave is maintained whereby it can interfere [44]. The scattering
signal depends on a strong interference between the scattered wave and the reflected wave.
Hence, the scattered wave from the particles should be located within the coherence length.
The coherence length is related to the spectral width by ∆vc = τ −1
c
[44], whereby Eq. 5.1
can be simplified and be rewritten to depend on the wavelength of the laser source. Here,
λ0 and ∆λ are, respectively, the center wavelength and the bandwidth of the light source.
lc = cτc =
c
∆vc
=
c
c
λ1 −c
λ2
≈λ2
0
∆λ.
(5.1)
The coherence length for a laser with λ0 = 405 nm and ∆λ = 1.2 nm is used in this project,
resulting in a coherence length of lc = 136.7 µm. This is suﬀicient for the setup as the
reflection happens at the chip/medium interface, whereby particles in the channels are
within the coherence length. If the coherence length is too large interference will occur
with almost any reflections in the chip, resulting in extra image noise [45].
Resolution
The resolution is given as the diffraction limit which describes the ability to differentiate
between two spots. The spots are shown as a point spread function (PSF) surrounded by
rings called Airy disks. The PSF is a diffraction pattern that depends on the numerical
aperture (NA) of the microscope and the wavelength of the laser beam. The PSF and
iPSF are fundamentally different. Where PSF originates from diffraction of light from a
small point source in the specimen which is transmitted to the image plane through a high
18
==PAGE:26==
NA, the iPSF appears due to interference between two waves, the spherical scattered and
the near-planar reference wavefronts [46, 20].
The diffraction limit of a setup is determined by the NA of the objective and the wavelength
of the laser source. NA of the used objective is 1.45 and the wavelength of the laser is
λ = 405 nm. The theoretical diffraction limit is therefore
d =
λ
2NA ≈140 nm,
(5.2)
which is the maximum achievable resolution. In order to resolve two neighboring particles
in the lateral direction, the distance must obey the Rayleigh criterion which is given in
Eq. 5.3. The Rayleigh criterion describes that the center of the PSF must lay in the first
valley of the neighboring PSF [47].
dlat = 0.61λ
NA ≈170 nm.
(5.3)
The axial resolution is given as the depth of field which is a measure of the distance over
which the object stays in focus. It takes the refractive index n into consideration which is
the medium between the objective and the sample; here, the immersion oil (noil = 1.5)
dax =
nλ
NA2 ≈289 nm.
(5.4)
5.1.4
Safety
There are some safety precautions to follow when working in a scientific lab. This is both
related to work with a free-space laser but also hazards related to other labwork.
These hazards can be related to labwork with high voltages (e.g. supply of piezo actuator),
chemicals, or nanoparticles. Hence, one must ensure that all electrical components are
properly connected and that cables do not show any damage. Warning signs must be
obeyed, and nitrile gloves and lab coat should be worn when working with chemicals and
nanoparticle. This way, direct skin contact is avoided.
When working with visible lasers (350 −700 nm) hazards include damage to eye or skin
burning. The visible light is focused by the lens in the human eye to the retina. In the case
of high power densities, this can lead to increased phototoxicity or burning of the cells.
However, this is not limited to high power densities, weak laser power can also introduce
severe damage. Therefore, one must wear laser safety goggles that filter out the specific
wavelength. Reflected and diffuse reflections from surfaces can also be dangerous. Hence,
jewelry and watches must not be worn and hands should be covered by nitrile glows while
working with the laser setup. Lastly, the laser lamp of the lab must be activated to warn
entering people before turning on the laser [48].
The used laser source is classified as a safety Class 3B laser by the international norm
IEC 60825-1:2014 [49] and has a maximum output power of 150 mW. A neutral density
filter attenuates the power to a maximum of 15 mW. Further, an imperfect coupling to
the single-mode fiber attenuates the power to a maximum output power of approximately
6 mW. Furthermore, the fiber coupling arrangement is covered by a box to prevent an
open visible and more powerful laser beam. Also, the optical table has covered sides,
reducing the laser hazard risk for other people in the lab.
19
==PAGE:27==
5.2
Fluorescence microscopy
The principles behind fluorescence are excitation and emission of the objects of inter-
est. Fluorescence is the emission of light occurring nanoseconds after the absorption of
light, typically of shorter wavelength. The difference between the exciting and emitted
wavelengths is known as the Stokes shift. By using spectral filtering, the excited light is
completely filtered out without blocking the emitted fluorescence, making it possible only
to see the objects of interest that are stained with dyes that absorb the light [1]. The
excitation and emission process of the fluorophore is shown in Figure 5.3a in a Jablonski
diagram. Here, a fluorophore absorbs a photon of the appropriate wavelength, whereby
an electron is excited from the ground state s0 to a higher energy state s2. Within the
singlet states, discrete energy levels are found known as vibrational levels. The electrons
can absorb photons with a range of wavelengths, whereby the electron can shift into a
higher energy level. This process happens within few nanoseconds, after which the elec-
tron returns to the initial ground state. During the jump between the excited states and
the ground state, the absorbed energy can be released as a fluorescent photon [47].
a
b
s0
s1
s2
Excitation
Emission
Fluorescence
Wavelength [nm]
DiO
Intensity [a.u]
Energy
Transmittance [%]
Figure 5.3: a) The Jablonski diagram. An electron is excited from the ground state s0 to
another energy level s2 by absorbing the incoming light (blue arrow). The electron will
decay to the ground state by vibrational relaxation (red arrows), whereby fluorescence
is emitted as it returns to the ground state (green arrow). b) The excitation spectrum
(left) and emission spectrum (right) of DiO and the corresponding excitation filter (blue
rectangle) and emission filter (green rectangle, FITC). The filters indicate what specific
wavelengths can pass through them. Adapted from: [50, 51].
5.2.1
Set-up
The sample contains liposomes labelled with the fluorophore DiO (3,3’-Dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine
Perchlorate). Therefore, the correct excitation and emission filters must be used which is
chosen based on the excitation- and emission spectra of DiO. These are shown in Figure
5.3b where it is seen that DiO is excited by blue light with a wavelength of λ ≈484 nm.
The left light blue spectrum is the excitation spectrum and the right green spectrum is
the emission spectrum. The difference between the maxima of the excitation and emission
is the Stokes shift, corresponding to the difference in energy between the excitation and
emitted fluorescent photons. A large Stokes shift is preferred for dyes because it makes the
filtering between the excitation and emission easier. The excitation filter (blue rectangle)
and emission filter FITC (green rectangle) are shown on top of the spectra in Figure 5.3b.
The filters are mounted together with a dichroic mirror in a filter cube which is a FITC
Filter Set [51]. The dichroic mirror reflects all wavelengths between 470 −490 nm. Wave-
lengths between 508 −675 nm can pass through the dichroic mirror. Specifications of the
filters and dichroic mirror are shown in Table [51] and the transmittance of the dichroic
mirror is shown in Figure 5.4. The combination of the dichroic mirror mounted with the
20
==PAGE:28==
FITC Filter Set
Pass Band [nm]
Reflection Band [nm]
475-35 Ex.
457.5 - 492.5
–
530-43 Em.
508.5 - 551.5
–
499 DM
508 - 675
470 - 490
Table 5.3: The specifications of the FITC Filter Set used for the Filter Cube. The exci-
tation filter is 475-35 Ex., the emission filter 530-43 Em., and the dichroic mirror is 499
DM. Obtained from: [51].
excitation and emission filters in a filter cube allows for epi-illumination, resulting in eﬀi-
cient high-contrast imaging. Here, both the illuminator and objective lens are positioned
on the same side of the sample, and the filter cube is positioned along the optical axis.
Wavelength [nm]
DiO
Transmittance [%]
Figure 5.4: The transmission band of the dichroic mirror. Between λ = 470−490 nm there
is no transmission, meaning the specific wavelengths are reflected. The dichroic mirror has
full transmission from λ = 508 nm, meaning the wavelengths can pass the dichroic mirror.
A schematic of the epi-fluorescence microscopy (Nikon Eclipse Ti2) is shown in Figure
5.5. Blue LED light with a wavelength of 450 - 495 nm is sent through an excitation filter
before reaching the filter cube. The excitation filter ensures that only specific wavelengths
are transmitted. At the filter cube, the blue light is reflected by the dichroic mirror and
focused onto the sample. Here, the light interacts with the sample which is dyed with the
DiO fluorophor. A photon excites an electron to another energy level and when decaying to
the ground state, a photon in the green wavelength regime is emitted (as shown in Figure
5.3a). The light is transmitted through the dichroic mirror and passes the emission filter,
whereby the signal is detected by the sCMOS camera (Teledyne, PRIME 95B sCMOS)
[52].
The emission filter is used to discard wavelengths that might have been able to
pass through the dichroic mirror. The objective is a Nikon Apo oil-immersion 100x/1.49
objective.
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.5: The fluorescence microscopy setup. A blue LED is used to excite the fluo-
rophores that the sample is dyed with. The light passes through an excitation filter which
ensures that only a specific range of wavelengths can pass. Next, it enter the filter cube
where the light is reflected at the dichroic mirror into the objective which focuses it onto
the sample. The excited green light is gathered by the objective and passes through the
dichroic mirror. An emission filter ensures that a specific range of green wavelengths pass
through after which the detector, a scientific CMOS camera, detects the light.
5.2.2
Resolution
As were the case for the iSCAT microscope, the resolution in fluorescence microscopy is
diffraction limited, and a point source of light is described by an Airy disk. Therefore, the
distance within which two objects can be separated is found using Eq. 5.5. The emitted
light from the DiO has a wavelength of approx. λem = 530 nm and with a NA = 1.49 of
the 100x oil objective, the theoretical diffraction limit is
d = λem
2NA ≈178 nm,
(5.5)
which is the maximum achievable resolution. Next, the spatial resolution is given by the
Rayleigh Criterion, indicating the distance between two neighboring particles that can be
resolved. This is given by Eq. 5.3 and using the emission wavelength, it is
dlat = 0.61λem
NA
≈217 nm.
(5.6)
The axial resolution is given by the depth of field dax as described in Eq. 5.4. Here, the
excitation wavelength λex = 475 nm is used to describe the depth of the optical plane
within which the objects in the sample are in focus. The refractive index is noil = 1.5.
Thereby, the axial resolution is
dax = nλex
NA2 ≈323 nm.
(5.7)
22
==PAGE:30==
6
Trapping liposomes in a salt gradient
6.1
Imaging single liposomes in nanochannel
In the following experiment, single liposomes are imaged in a salt gradient in the nanochan-
nels. First, the chip is coated on a bright-field microscope after which imaging is performed
using fluorescence microscopy. This is done to ensure that the nanofluidic system of the
chip is working as intended.
Next, the chip is moved to the iSCAT setup for further
imaging.
6.1.1
Experimental setup
Before preparing the chip, it is checked for damages and dirt in the channels using the
bright field microscope. When the chip is prepared, the sample containing d = 100 nm
liposomes labelled with the fluorescing dye DiO is introduced in channel 1 (Figure 3.1b).
Next, the liposomes are introduced in the nanochannels by applying a pressure difference
of 5 mbar across the microchannels.
For the experiment conducted using fluorescence
imaging, the objective is changed to 100x oil objective, the filter cube is changed from
bright field to FITC, and the exposure time is set to a 100 ms. Tracking of the liposomes
is started by creating an image stack of 800–1000 images.
For the iSCAT imaging, the chip is moved to the iSCAT setup where an image series of
approx. 5000 images are obtained using an exposure time of 1–2 ms. The same pressure
difference is applied over the system.
6.2
Results
6.2.1
Fluorescence microscopy
The Fiji plugin TrackMate [53] is used for single particle tracking in the nanochannels.
Here, the ROI is narrowed to each channel after which thresholds, linking distances and
max frame gap-distances are adjusted individually per channel and data set. The particles
are located based on a Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) filter, and the tracking is made using
the ’Simple LAP tracker’.
As the liposomes enter the nanochannel and moves towards the trap, they are affected
by diffusiophoresis which acts as a force on them. Figure 6.1a shows the trajectory of
a single liposome where the first appearance is approx. 8 µm inside the channel. Next,
an increase in events is noticed between 18–20 µm. The exposure time is t = 50 ms with
20 fps.
Imaging over 40 s results in a 800 image stack.
The x-position as a function
of time is shown in Figure 6.1b. The curve has a steep profile which matches with the
particle movement as it moves into the channel. In Figure 6.1c, the x-position is shown
as a histogram where each bar indicates 1 µm. Here, a large increase in counts is seen at
x ≈18 µm. The increase in counts and events indicates that the liposome has reached its
trapping position. Figure 6.1d shows the y-position as a function of time. The curve shows
that the particle is moving a bit from side to side, corresponding to a diffusive motion.
The movement appears to be in the lower middle of the channel, suggesting a generally flat
profile. A flat profile indicates that the depth is constant. If the depth was not constant,
the movement would be biased, meaning the movement would not be driven by diffusion
but a drift. The y-position can also be shown in a histogram. For a simple diffusion,
the histogram should take the form of a Gaussian distribution with a center peak in the
middle of the channel. Here, the tendency shows that the liposome is mostly present in
23
==PAGE:31==
the region around 10–11 µm whereas it would be expected to be around 11–12 µm if it was
centered. The red lines indicate the channel walls.
Figure 6.1: a) Trajectory of a liposome as it enters the nanochannel and reaches the trap
using fluorescence imaging. b) The x-position as a function of time. c) The x-position of
the liposome shown as a histogram. An increase in counts is seen around 18 µm. d) The
y-position of the liposome as a function of time. e) The y-position shown as a histogram.
An increase in counts is seen around 10–11 µm.
When running the experiment for a longer time, more liposomes will reach the trapping
position. The tracking of a total of eight liposomes has been done, where the trajectories
and corresponding histograms of the positions are found in Appendix B.1. The tracking
of single liposomes allows for differentiating between the liposomes. Figure 6.2a shows the
trapping of many liposomes for two nanochannels. Here the total imaging time is 148 s
with the exposure time adjusted to t = 100 ms with 10 fps. The shown image is a median
of an image stack which allows for a better contrast between the background and the
detected signal. Green color has been added to the image to show where the liposomes are
located. The annotated dashed line shows the nanochannels and the connection with the
microchannel. Taking the median of the image makes it possible to extract the intensity
profile of the channel which is shown in Figure 6.2b. An increase in intensity is found
24
==PAGE:32==
120
140
160
180
200
Intensity [a.u]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Distance [µm]
a
b
Figure 6.2: Trapping of fluorescing liposomes in the nanochannels. a) Median of an image
stack with exposure time 100 ms. The dashed lines indicate the channels. b) Intensity
profile of the trap measured from the beginning of the nanochannel.
between 15–20 µm inside of the channel, indicating the trap.
To sum up, fluorescence microscopy allows for tracking of liposomes over several microm-
eters into nanochannels.
The trajectories of multiple liposomes can be differentiated,
whereby quantitative analysis can further be used to estimate the trapping position and,
finally, characteristics of the liposomes.
6.2.2
iSCAT microscopy
A more extensive image processing is necessary for the obtained raw data iSCAT images
compared to the images obtained using fluorescence. The analysis is shown in steps in
Figure 6.3. Here, the color bars represent the number of collected photons.
Figure 6.3a shows the raw image of a nanochannel where the particles enter from the
left side, moving towards the right. Both the connection with the microchannel (white
lines) and the nanochannel are visible. In Figure 6.3b, the median of the background
is removed, whereby particles and iPSFs become more visible.
The contrast between
background and detected signal is enhanced by applying radial variance transform (RVT)
analysis [2] (Figure 6.3c), whereby the iPSF is localized. In this step, the iPSF is converted
into a bright spot, making it easier to detect it. Next, a variance ratio filter (VRF) is
applied which is shown in Figure 6.3d.
This filter increases the intensity of the filter
while the background is smoothed out, meaning the contrast between detected signal and
background is increased. The increase in contrast is also noticed on the color bars where
it increases by a few orders of magnitude. Lastly, the iPSF is localized using a maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) which fits a Gaussian to the center of the iPSF on the RVT
image. The red crosses indicates local maxima of the positions in the RVT image as shown
in Figure 6.3e. Finally, trajectories of the liposomes are made by tracking the liposomes
based on their center coordinates, maximum displacement and tracking memory.
The
trajectories are checked manually using a stitching process because the particles sometimes
are not detected for a while time. Hereby, miss-localizations are discarded and tracks
are created. The stitching process is not optimal, however, increasing e.g. the tracking
25
==PAGE:33==
a
b
c
d
e
Figure 6.3: iSCAT image analysis.
The color bars represent the number of collected
photons. a) The raw image. b) Image where the median of the background is subtracted.
A liposome is seen with a clear yellow center. c) Image after RVT analysis. d) The image
after VRF analysis. The background is smoothed out and the intensity of the liposome is
increased. e) Image after MLE analysis. The red crosses indicate peak detection in the
RVT image yielding several localizations. One of these is the particle being tracked.
memory promotes miss-localizations in a trajectory. It is therefore necessary to obtain
precise tracks of the liposomes.
As seen in Figure 6.3a, the nanochannel is slightly tilted. For the quantitative analysis,
the tilt must be adjusted. This is done using Eq. 6.1 which adjusts for the tilt. Here, α is
the angle of the tilt measured from the middle of the channel, xc and yc are the axes of the
new coordinate system along the micro- and nanochannel, and x and y are the coordinates
from the ’old’ coordinate system. The translation vector is set to T = (0, 0) but could be
used to account for the offset occurring between the actual inlet and the offset due to the
tilt. The offset is instead accounted for by subtraction and addition of pixels based on
Figure 6.3a.
[xc
yc
]
=
[cos(α)
−sin(α)
sin(α)
cos(α)
] [x
y
]
−T
(6.1)
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.4: a) Trajectory of a liposome starting around 5 µm inside the nanochannel. An
increase in occurrences is seen around 20 µm. b) The x-position of the liposome as a
function of time. A gap between 5.8–6.4 s appears because the liposome is not detected
for some time. The steepness of the curve appears as the liposome moves further into the
channel. c) The x-position of the liposome as a histogram. An increase is seen at 20 µm.
d) The y-position as a function of time. The same gap as in b) is present. The profile
of the curve is rather flat as the liposome is mostly in the middle of the channel. e) The
y-position of the liposome between the channel walls (red). An increase in counts is seen
around 8 µm.
The particles are tracked on their way to the trapping area. A trajectory of a liposome
is displayed in Figure 6.4a. The tracking of the particle starts around 5 µm inside the
nanochannel and an increase in events is seen around 20 µm. The x-position of the liposome
as a function of time is shown in Figure 6.4b. As the liposome moves into the nanochannel,
the profile of the curve becomes more steep. A large gap between 5.8–6.4 s appears due
to the stitching process. In this time interval, the liposome is not detected which can be
due to its movement in the z-direction, whereby it can move out of focus. Figure 6.4c
illustrates the x-position of the liposome as a histogram. The bin width corresponds to
1 µm. In Figure 6.4d, the y-position of the liposome as a function of time is shown. The
same gap as in Figure 6.4b is seen. The curve tends to have a more flat profile because the
particle moves in an almost straight line through its way to the trap. Figure 6.4e shows
the y-position between the channel walls (red lines) as a histogram. An increase in counts
is visible around 8 µm, contributing to the flatness of the profile as seen in Figure 6.4d.
The total imaging time of the experiment was 10.2 s with a frame rate of 490 fps where it
was not possible to detect the liposome after ≈8 s.
Tracking of six particles on their way to the trap has been possible, allowing for quanti-
27
==PAGE:35==
tative analysis based on their movement. The trajectories are shown in Appendix B.2.
This demonstrates that it is possible to track single liposomes across the nanochannel
using iSCAT microscopy. Creating trajectories of the liposomes allows distinction between
liposomes that are free to move and those that are stuck. Based on this, it is possible to
make a quantitative analysis to estimate the trapping position, whereby characteristics of
the liposomes can be obtained.
6.3
Discussion
Trapping of single liposomes has been shown with both iSCAT microscopy and fluorescence
microscopy, enabling a direct comparison of the results from the two methods. A few
differences are noticed by looking at their trajectories.
It appears that with a longer
imaging time with fluorescence microscopy, the liposomes diffuse a few micrometers around
in the trap. For iSCAT, the liposomes are also diffusing around, however, within a much
smaller range which might be due to a lower imaging time. In the following, the movement
of the liposomes towards the trap is discussed, after which the liposomes are analysed based
on their behaviour in the trap.
6.3.1
Trapping
When the equilibrium between the DP and DO velocities is reached, the liposomes are
only moving by Brownian motion. The imaging time in iSCAT microscopy is much lower
than fluorescence imaging (10.2 s vs 40 s). The lower imaging time in iSCAT allows for
easier distinction between the liposomes due to their scattering signal. When imaging for
a longer time in iSCAT the scattering signal of multiple liposomes will interfere with each
other, making the distinction of the different liposomes diﬀicult.
The trapping of liposomes is possible using both fluorescence and iSCAT imaging. Figure
6.2a–b displays the median trapping position of many liposomes obtained using fluores-
cence microscopy. The intensity profile of the trap shows that the liposomes are located
between 15–23 µm inside the nanochannels with an average position at x0 = 17 µm. The
wide trap indicates that many liposomes are gathered and that they diffuse around in the
trap with a few micrometers.
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
20.5
21
21.5
x-position [µm]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Counts
a
b
Figure 6.5: The x-position of a single liposome imaged in a) fluorescence microscopy with
average trapping position at x0 ≈18.9 µm, and b) iSCAT microscopy with an average
trapping position at x0 ≈22.1 µm.
To analyse the behaviour of the liposomes, single particle tracking is performed by lowering
the exposure time in fluorescence imaging from 100 ms to 50 ms. The results are shown in
Figure 6.1. Based on the trajectory of the liposome in Figure 6.1a and the corresponding
28
==PAGE:36==
histogram of the movement in the x-direction in Figure 6.1c, the trapping position for the
liposome is estimated to be between 18–19 µm. Figure 6.5a shows the x-position of the
liposome in the trapping area as a histogram. From this, the average position is estimated
to x0 ≈18.9 µm. Compared to iSCAT microscopy, the trajectory of a single liposome is
displayed in Figure 6.4 which is obtained with an exposure time of 1 ms. Based on the
trajectory in Figure 6.4a and the corresponding histogram in Figure 6.4c, showing the
x-position of the liposome, the estimated trapping position is 21 µm. Figure 6.5b shows
the x-position of the liposome in the estimated trapping area. The red curve is a fit by
a normal distribution indicating the average of the center peak at µx = 21.9 µm. Based
on the histogram, the average trapping position of the liposome is x0 = 22.1 µm. This is
3 µm deeper into the nanochannel than the trapping position obtained using fluorescence
microscopy. However, this is within the trapping area found by the intensity profile of the
trap containing many liposomes.
Using fluorescence microscopy, single tracking of 8 liposomes was possible. The corre-
sponding trajectories are found in Appendix B.1. The average trapping position is found
and shown in Figure 6.6a. Here, the error bars are the standard deviation of the position
σ =
√∑(X −µ)2/N where X is the value of the positions, µ is the sample mean, and N
is the number of measurements. The dashed line indicates the total mean of the average
trapping positions which is at x0,tot = 18.6 µm. Liposome 4 has a deeper trapping position
than the others (x0,4 ≈22.5 µm) which increases the mean. Here, only the error bars of
liposomes 4 and 5 do not reach the dashed line.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Particle no
20
25
30
35
Trapping point, x0 [µm]
b
Mean x0: 6 liposomes
Mean x0: first 4 liposomes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Particle no
14
16
18
20
22
24
Trapping position, x0 [µm]
a
Mean <x0>
Mean x0
Figure 6.6: The average trapping position x0 of single liposomes for a) 8 liposomes tracked
using fluorescence microscopy, and b) 6 liposomes tracked using iSCAT microscopy. The
error bars are the standard deviation of the trapping. The dashed lines indicate the mean
of the trapping positions. In b), liposomes 5 and 6 have a much deeper trapping position
around x0 ≈32 µm which appears to be outliers that increase the total mean. Therefore,
the red dashed line is the mean trapping position of the first four liposomes.
Single particle tracking of 6 liposomes was possible using iSCAT microscopy. Their tra-
jectories are found in Appendix B.2. The average trapping positions are shown in Figure
6.6b. The error bars are also the standard deviation of the trapping position. Compared
to the error bars of the liposomes in Figure 6.6a, the iSCAT measurements have much
smaller error bars. The reason is found when looking at their x-position histograms. In
29
==PAGE:37==
fluorescence imaging, the liposomes diffuse more in the trap as a result of a longer imag-
ing time, whereas it is much shorter in iSCAT imaging. Another reason is based on the
interference between the iPSF of the liposomes in iSCAT imaging. The result is that it
becomes more diﬀicult to track a specific liposome when more liposomes gather in the
trap. The liposomes could potentially have diffused more, but the uncertainty of which
liposome tracks are stitched together in the trapping area increases over time as more
liposomes gather, creating some uncertainty in the observed diffusion.
The dashed black line indicates the mean of the trapping positions of all the liposomes
as x0,tot ≈26 µm.
This is relatively high due to the trapping position of liposomes 5
and 6 around 32 µm, whereas the others have a trapping position around 22 µm. The
deeper trapping position can occur if the salt gradient has not stabilized after flushing
the channels, and therefore, liposomes 5 and 6 appear to be outliers.
If they are not
accounted for, the average trapping position is x0,tot ≈22 µm as shown by the red dashed
line. This result appears to be much better as it agrees more with the measurement in
fluorescence microscopy. It is higher than the average shown in Figure 6.6a but within the
area indicated by the median intensity profile of many liposomes (Figure 6.2b).
6.3.2
Single-particle tracking
In the following, analysis of single particles is carried out to extract the size and zeta
potential of liposomes that have been measured using fluorescence microscopy and iSCAT
microscopy in order to compare the two methods. For fluorescence microscopy, the analysis
is carried out for 8 liposomes and for iSCAT microscopy, it is carried out for 6 liposomes.
Based on the trajectories of the liposomes (see Appendix B.1 and B.2), the displacements in
the x- and y-direction of the liposomes can be extracted. This is useful in the quantitative
analysis of the liposomes. The displacement of a single liposome is illustrated in Figure
6.7a–b based on fluorescence microscopy (the liposome from Figure 6.1).
Figure 6.7a
shows the dx-displacement where a Gaussian probability distribution has been fitted to
the histogram.
The mean of the fit is µx = 64 nm with a standard deviation on the
displacement of σx = 402.8 nm, indicating the width of the distribution.
Figure 6.7b
shows the corresponding dy-displacement. The result of the Gaussian fit is a mean value
of µy = −14.9 nm and a standard deviation of σy = 423.8 nm.
Figure 6.7c-d shows
the dx- and dy-displacement of a single liposome obtained using iSCAT microscopy (the
liposome from Figure 6.4).
Hence, the mean of the dx-displacement is µx = 13.5 nm
and the corresponding standard deviation is σx = 105 nm while for dy the results are
µy = 1.1 nm and σy = 122.1 nm. The largest difference between the figures is the different
exposure times and amount of counts, resulting in a more narrow (for iSCAT) or wide (for
fluorescence) distribution.
Figure 6.8a and 6.8c show the mean dx- and dy-displacement of 7 and 8 liposomes measured
using fluorescence microscopy. Figure 6.8a only shows the dx-displacement of 7 liposomes
since the fit for liposome 3 was too poor to use.
The dashed line indicates the mean
of the displacements. For Figure 6.8a, the mean is larger than zero since the movement
includes drift as the liposome moves towards the trap. The mean indicated on Figure
6.8c shows that the dy-displacement is approximately 0 nm. This shows that the liposome
movement is centered around the middle of the nanochannels which would be expected
due to diffusion.
Figure 6.8b and 6.8d display the mean dx- and dy-displacement of 6 liposomes measured
by iSCAT microscopy. The same tendency as for fluorescence microscopy is shown; the
mean of the dx-displacement is larger than 0 nm since drift is included in the movement
of the liposomes in the x-direction. The mean of the dy-displacement is approximately
30
==PAGE:38==
a
b
d
c
Figure 6.7: The dx- and dy-displacement of a single liposome using a–b) fluorescence
microscopy and c–d) iSCAT microscopy.
The fits are made using a Gaussian fit.
a)
The dx-displacement.
The mean is µx = 64 nm and the standard deviation is σy =
402.8 nm. b) The dy-displacement with mean at µy = −14.9 nm and standard deviation
σy = 423.8 nm. c) The dx-displacement. The mean is µx = 13.5 nm with a standard
deviation of σx = 105 nm. d) The dy-displacement with mean µy = 1.1 nm and standard
deviation σy = 122.1 nm.
0 nm indicating that the movement in the y direction is driven by diffusion. Comparing
the magnitude at the y-axis, it is seen that the uncertainty on the displacement in iSCAT
is much smaller than in fluorescence.
The dx-displacement can be used to determine the net velocity of the liposomes as they
move towards the trap. The net velocity is the sum of the DP velocity and the Stokes drag
on the liposome. The mean velocities are shown in Figure 6.9 for 8 liposomes based on
fluorescence detection (blue) and 6 other individual liposomes based on iSCAT detection
(red). Here, the error bars are the standard deviation of the velocities. The black dashed
line represents the mean of the velocities based on fluorescence detection which is µv,tot =
11.5 µm/s. The high mean velocity appears due to liposomes 3 and 8 that have a mean
velocity of 22 µm/s and 25 µm/s. Even though all error bars reach the mean, it is very
31
==PAGE:39==
0
2
4
6
8
Particle no
-1000
0
1000
2000
Displacement, dx [nm]
0
2
4
6
8
Particle no
-1000
-500
0
500
Displacement, dy [nm]
1
2
3
4
5
6
Particle no
-100
-50
0
50
100
Displacement, dx [nm]
1
2
3
4
5
6
Particle no
-200
-100
0
100
200
Displacement, dy [nm]
a
b
d
c
Figure 6.8: The average dx- and dy-displacement of single liposomes for a) and c) 8 lipo-
somes using fluorescence microscopy and b) and d) 6 liposomes using iSCAT microscopy.
The dashed line indicates the mean of the displacements. For a), the dx-displacement of
liposome 3 is not included due to a very poor fit. The error bars are the standard deviation
of the displacements.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Particle no
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Mean DP velocity, vdp [µm/s]
Mean v(x): 8 liposomes
Mean v(x): 6 liposomes
Fluorescence
iSCAT
Mean: iSCAT
Figure 6.9: The net estimated velocity of 8 liposomes using fluorescence microscopy (blue)
and 6 other individual liposomes using iSCAT microscopy (red). The error bars are the
standard deviation of the velocities. The black dashed line indicates the total mean of the
fluorescence velocities, the blue dashed line indicates the mean of 6 liposomes based on
fluorescence detection, and the red dashed line is the mean of the iSCAT velocities.
high compared to the other liposomes. By exclusion of liposomes 3 and 8, the mean is
reduced to 7.4 µm/s (the dashed blue line), which appears to be a better fit with the rest
of the liposomes.
32
==PAGE:40==
The mean of the velocities based on iSCAT microscopy for the 6 liposomes (red spots)
is depicted by the red dashed line, indicating a total mean of µv = 5.6 µm/s. This mean
appears to be a good estimate based on the dashed blue line for the fluorescence detection.
The error bars on each of the liposomes are very small but all appear within the error
bars of the fluorescence measurements. The reason for the small error bars might be that
the iSCAT based trajectories are made using more frames than the fluorescence based
trajectories (490 fps vs. 20 fps). Therefore, the displacement between each frame becomes
very small and combined with a short imaging time, the precision of the velocities increases.
Next, the diffusion constant is estimated based on the displacement.
Here, the dy-
displacement is used since it describes the diffusivity of the liposome.
The diffusion
constant can also be estimated using the dx-displacement but this is more diﬀicult. The
dx-displacement takes the whole movement of the liposome into consideration, from en-
tering the nanochannel till reaching the trap. Therefore, the drift part of the trajectory
must be excluded to only have the diffusivity of the liposome to use it for estimation of
the diffusivity of the liposome. Hence, the dy-displacement is used in the following.
The diffusion constant D is estimated in two ways, using the RMS method (Eq. 2.9)
and the CVE method (Eq. 2.10). For liposome 1 detected using fluorescence microscopy,
the diffusion constant is D = 1.8 µm2/s when calculated for both methods. In iSCAT,
the diffusion constant of liposome 1 is DRMS = σ2
dx/(2t) = 3.7 µm2/s and DCV E =
(∆xn)2/(2∆t)+∆xn∆xn+1/(∆t) = 0.9 µm2/s for RMS and CVE. This is a large difference
that might occur because the CVE method takes misalignment of the liposome during the
MLE process into account. The size is estimated using the Stokes-Einstein equation (Eq.
2.12). For the fluorescence based liposome, the size is estimated to d ≈235 nm, and for
the iSCAT based liposome the sizes are dRMS ≈117 nm and dCV E ≈500 nm. This is a
large difference, but 500 nm is also a very large liposome that cannot fit in the nanochannel
(recall, the nanochannel height is 240 nm). The reason might be found by looking at the
trajectory of the y-position as a function of time (Figure 6.4d). First of all, the tracking of
the liposome only takes place over 4 s. Comparing to Rasmussen et al. [9], their tracking
time was 40 s, whereby an imaging time of 4 s is just a brief image of the movement of the
liposome. When looking at the profile of the y-position over time, the average position
should be centered in the channel. However, the position seems a bit shifted towards the
upper part of the nanochannel. Therefore, it could seem like there is some extra drift
or misalignment that bias the movement of the liposome. This could for example stem
from an offset from a tilted channel that is not accounted for. The corresponding diffusion
constants of all the single liposomes, both from fluorescence and iSCAT imaging, are found
in Figure B.25 (Appendix B.3).
The sizes of the 8 liposomes based on fluorescence imaging are shown in Figure 6.10a
along with their corresponding zeta potentials in Figure 6.10c. For the iSCAT case, the
estimated sizes of the 6 liposomes are shown in Figure 6.10b and their zeta potentials
in Figure 6.10d. The error bars of the CVE estimations are the variance based on Eq.
2.11. The error bars of the RMS estimations are based on the uncertainty of the standard
deviation σ of a Gaussian distribution which is found in Taylor [54]. Here, the fractional
uncertainty in estimate for σ is δσ = 1/
√
(2(N −1), where N is the number of measuring
points.
For the fluorescence case, the sizes vary between approx. 100 −300 nm. The RMS and
CVE calculated sizes are very similar and only vary with a few nanometers. Compared
to the DLS estimated size of the liposomes (dDLS = 214.1 nm), liposomes number 1 and
5 are closest to the estimate.
However, the size of the liposomes can vary with both
33
==PAGE:41==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Particle no
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Liposome size [nm]
a
RMS
CVE
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Particle no
-34
-32
-30
-28
-26
-24
-22
-20
-18
-potential [mV]
c
1
2
3
4
5
6
Particle no
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Liposome size [nm]
b
RMS
CVE
1
2
3
4
5
6
Particle no
-50
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-potential [mV]
d
CVE
RMS
Figure 6.10: Size and zeta potential of a) and c) 8 liposomes based on fluorescence
microscopy and of b) and d) 6 liposomes based on iSCAT microscopy. For a) and b), the
error bars are the variance (Eq. 2.11) for the CVE estimations and the uncertainty of δσ for
the RMS estimations. a) Size of the liposomes estimated using the RMS (blue) and CVE
(red) methods. The standard error of the mean (SEM) of the RMS and CVE estimated
sizes are σd,RMS = 79 nm and σd,CV E = 78 nm. b) Size of the liposomes based on the RMS
(blue) and CVE (yellow) methods. SEM of the estimated sizes are σd,RMS = 52 nm and
σd,CV E = 62 nm. c) Corresponding zeta potential based on the liposome size and trapping
position. The dashed line indicates the mean of the zeta potentials. The error bars are the
variance based on the trapping position and liposome size. The SEM is σζ = −9.5 mV. d)
Corresponding zeta potentials estimated using the RMS (blue) and CVE (yellow) sizes of
the liposomes. The yellow dashed line indicates the mean of liposome 2–4 based on CVE
and the blue dashed line indicates the mean of liposome 1–4 based on the RMS method.
The error bars are the variance based on the trapping position and liposome size. The
SEM is σζ,RMS = −17 mV and σζ,CV E = −15 mV.
smaller or larger liposomes as seen here. Liposomes 2, 6 and 7 have a diameter larger
than the channel height which should not be possible. Comparing with their y-position
34
==PAGE:42==
histograms (Figures B.1, B.9, and B.11 in Appendix B.1) a normal distribution of the
particle position around the center of the channel is expected. However, liposome 2 has
a very evenly distributed histogram, and the distributions of liposome 6 and 7 are a bit
weighted towards the lower side of the channel. This might affect the estimations of the
sizes due to a more biased appearance of the movement. As the estimated sizes for each
data spot are closely placed, the error bars from the RMS estimation overlap the CVE
sizes. The standard error of the mean (SEM) is estimated for the sizes using σd = σ/
√
N
where N is the sample population i.e. the number of liposomes.
The estimated sizes of the liposomes based on the iSCAT imaging in Figure 6.10b varies
more than in the fluorescence case. The blue spots are the RMS estimations and the
yellow spots the CVE method. Only liposome 1 has a large inconsistency between the
two methods. The other liposomes compare well with the estimated DLS size. The error
bars of the RMS estimations are very small since the uncertainty of δσ takes the number
of measurements used to obtain the histogram of the dy-displacement into account. Here,
all the estimated sizes are based on more than 700 measurements, making them very
small. The CVE method is more precise than the RMS estimation when the diffusion is
unbiased, whereby the liposome position is Gaussian distributed in the channels with a
clear centered movement. On the other hand, when the movement appears to be biased,
the RMS estimation gives a more correct result [31].
When estimating the zeta potential, important factors are the particle size and the trap-
ping position. The zeta potential is estimated using the analytical method in Rasmussen
et al. [9]. Figure 6.10c displays the zeta potentials corresponding to the CVE estimations
for the fluorescence case. The dashed line is the mean of the zeta potentials and the error
bars are the variance that is estimated based on the uncertainty of the trapping position
and the liposome size. Only liposome 4 has a significantly lower zeta potential than the
other liposomes. The reason is found when comparing with the trapping position that was
deeper in the nanochannel than for the other liposomes (≈22 µm, Figure 6.6a) but still
within the median of the trapping position for many liposomes (Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.10d shows estimations of the zeta potential based on the RMS size (blue) and
the CVE size (yellow) obtained using iSCAT. Here, the zeta potential based on CVE
for liposome 1 is not included. The zeta potential of liposome 5 and 6 is ζ ≈−40 mV
which is much lower than the DLS estimation. The low zeta potentials appear due to
their trapping positions that were deeper in the nanochannels than the other liposomes
(Figure 6.6b). Therefore, the dashed blue line is the mean of the RMS estimated zeta
potentials without liposome 5 and 6, and the yellow dashed line is the mean of the CVE
estimated zeta potentials without liposome 1, 5 and 6.
The result is an average zeta
potential at ζ ≈−30 mV. In general, all zeta potentials are larger when compared to the
DLS estimated zeta potential (ζDLS = −21 mV), however, when the liposomes are made,
it is also assumed that their zeta potentials are between −20 mV to −30 mV. This means
the zeta potentials fit well with the theory. The error bars are based on the uncertainty of
the trapping and liposome size. All the zeta potentials are within an error bars, suggesting
that there is not a big statistical difference between them.
6.4
Sub-Conclusion
In this experiment, liposomes were tracked in a salt gradient and it is shown that single
liposome tracking in the nanofluidic device is possible using both fluorescence imaging and
iSCAT microscopy. Based on the fluorescence imaging, the trajectory of 8 liposomes is
obtained and by analysing the particles, the DP velocity and size is obtained. The same is
shown for 6 liposomes using iSCAT imaging. To estimate the size, both the RMS and the
35
==PAGE:43==
CVE method has been used, producing interesting results. For fluorescence imaging, the
estimations are very similar. However, the estimations of the sizes are more different for
iSCAT imaging. The CVE estimated size of liposome 1 is discarded since it is an outlier
with its 500 nm size compared to the RMS estimated size of 117 nm. For other liposomes
it varies approximately 100 nm. This might be a result of a much lower imaging time,
whereby the movement of the liposomes can appear more biased than they would if the
imaging time was increased like it is in fluorescence imaging. However, if the imaging time
is increased more liposomes are trapped, whereby it becomes more diﬀicult to track the
individual liposomes. This is mainly due to the iPSF that can interfere with the iPSF
of other particles, creating disturbance in the detected signal.
Based on the trapping
positions and the size of the liposomes, the corresponding zeta potentials are estimated
and compared to the DLS estimations of the zeta potential.
36
==PAGE:44==
7
How does coating affect trapping?
In the following, different coatings for surface passivation are investigated to see what
effect coatings have on the trapping position in the nanochannels. Coatings have an effect
on the diffusioosmotic flow due to their zeta potential but they can also prevent particles
from sticking to the surface.
In the scenario where the DO flow is suppressed, the nanoparticles should enter the
nanochannel and go through it without being trapped.
This would make it possible
to determine the DP particle velocity in a salt gradient which depends on the particle
diameter and zeta potential [55]. Knowing the DP velocity in more detail should enable
information on the zeta potential of the particle.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Nanochannel length [µm]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Velocity, v [µm/s]
v(x)=vos(x)+vph(x)
vos(x)
vph(x)
Figure 7.1: A simulation of the expected effective velocity, v(x), of a liposome with size
d = 150 nm and zeta potential ζp = −30 mV in a channel with zeta potential ζch = −30 mV
(red dashed curve) under a salt gradient. The green curve represents the DP velocity, vph,
and the blue curve the DO velocity, vos. Here, v(x) is the product of vph and vos. The
equilibrium between vph and vos - and thereby, the particle trapping position - is indicated
by the net velocity v(x) = 0 (black dashed line). This suggest an estimated trapping
position around x0 ≈21 µm.
The channels have until now been coated with a POPC:POPG 3:1 solution that has a
negative zeta potential of ζ = −30 mV. The net velocity, v(x), of a liposome with size
d = 150 nm and zeta potential ζp = −30 mV in a salinity gradient in a channel with ζch =
−30 mV is illustrated in Figure 7.1 (red dashed curve). The green curve represents the
DP velocity, vph, and the blue curve the DO velocity, vos. The net velocity is the product
of vph and vos. The trapping point for particles appear when the equilibrium between the
two velocities is reached. The trapping point is dependent on the zeta potential of the
channel walls and takes part in creating the DO flow. Therefore, it is expected that the
trapping point is shifted if the zeta potential of the channel walls is changed. A motion
that is yet to be understood is the DP motion of the particles. If the DO flow can be
suppressed, an insight into the DP flow of the particles would be granted since it would
be possible to measure the DP flow for a longer time. A hypothesis on how to suppress
the DO flow is by using a coating that has close to neutral charge. In the following, three
37
==PAGE:45==
different coatings are used in the attempt to suppress the DO flow: POPC:POPG 9:1,
POPC:POPG 30:1 and Pluronic F127.
Known
Coatings
ζ-potential [mV]
1:1 POPC: POPG
−36.4
3:1 POPC: POPG
−30
New
Coatings
Expected
ζ-potential
9:1 POPC: POPG
−12
30:1 POPC: POPG
−2.4
Table 7.1: The zeta potential of lipid coat-
ings. The POPC:POPG 1:1 and 3:1 coat-
ing have been experimentally measured
[27]. The expected zeta potential of the
9:1 and 30:1 lipid coatings are based on
these.
The lipid coatings are made by diluting the
sample with a larger concentration of the
neutral phospholipid POPC and less of the
negatively charged POPG phospholipid which
should increase the zeta potential.
The
zeta potentials of the three coatings are
not known and approximations are therefore
made.
These are shown in Table 7.1 for
the lipid coatings along with zeta potentials
of known coatings.
Rasmussen et al.
[27]
measured the zeta potential of a 1:1 and 3:1
POPC:POPG coating to ζ1:1 = −36.4 mV
and ζ3:1 = −30 mV.
Based on this, the
POPC:POPG 9:1 lipid coating is estimated
to have a zeta potential of −12 mV. This is
higher than the POPC:POPG 3:1 coating by
20 mV and could potentially suppress the DO flow. The zeta potential of the POPC:POPG
30:1 coating is estimated to −2.4 mV, making it very close to neutral zeta potential.
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-potential of channel [mV]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Trapping point, x0 [µm]
Simulated fit
Exp. x0 for 3:1
Est.  of 9:1
Figure 7.2: A simulation of the particle trapping point as a function of the expected
zeta potential of the channel (blue curve). The simulation is based on a liposome of size
d = 150 nm with a zeta potential of ζp ≈−30 mV in a salt gradient with lipid coating.
The blue dot is the experimentally estimated average trapping point for the POPC:POPG
3:1 coating which has a zeta potential of ζch ≈−30 mV. The green dashed line indicates
the estimated zeta potential of the 9:1 POPC:POPG coating. The cross-section with the
simulated curve indicates a trapping point around 95 µm inside the channel.
To further illustrate this, a simulation is made to show the expected trapping point as
38
==PAGE:46==
a function of the zeta potential of the channel (blue curve) which is displayed in Figure
7.2. The simulation is made for a liposome of size d = 150 nm with zeta potential of
ζp = −30 mV. The simulation is based on the known zeta potential for the 1:1 and 3:1
POPC:POPG coatings. Since the simulation is based on results from lipid coatings it is
only a good approximation for lipid coatings and not for polymer coatings like Pluronic.
The mean value of the experimental trapping point of liposomes in a salt gradient with
the 3:1 coating is represented as the blue dot at ζchannel = −30 mV. The error bars are
the standard error of the mean (SEM). The experimental value appears to be a few mi-
crometers below the simulated curve. By the simulated curve, it would be expected that
the mean trapping point for the 3:1 POPC:POPG liposomes is at x0 ≈21 µm. In the
previous chapter on single particles in a salt gradient it was, however, found that when
many particles are gathered in the trap, the trapping area can be found between 15–23 µm
and the error bars also cover the simulated curve. The green dashed line indicates the esti-
mated zeta potential for the 9:1 lipid coating. The cross-section with the simulated curve
suggests a trapping point around 95 µm in the channel. This strengthens the hypothesis
that the trapping point moves as the zeta potential is made less negative.
Figure 7.3: Pluronic attached to a COC surface.
The PPO segment is connecting to
the surface while the hydrophilic PEO segments are in brush confirmation in the liquid.
Adapted from: [56].
Another kind of coating that could be interesting to use in experiments with small nanopar-
ticles are polymer coatings. Polymer coatings can make particles stick less to the surface,
making them favourable coatings for smaller particles. Here, Pluronic F127 (hereafter
referred to as Pluronic) is a commercial triblock copolymer. It is known as a nonionic
copolymer surfactant [57], meaning it should have a neutral charge. In a channel coated
with Pluronic it is expected that the particles therefore travel through the channel without
being trapped. In Perez et al. [56] they tested different coatings to stabilize the surface of
COC (TOPAS 8007) chips. Here, they showed that Pluronic in PBS resulted in the highest
reduction in electroosmotic flow (EOF) in the microchannels. Electroosmosis is one of the
terms that describe the DO flow and therefore, it could result in a reduction in the DO
flow as well. Pluronic is built up by PEO-PPO-PEO that has two hydrophilic polyethylene
oxide (PEO) side blocks and a central hydrophobic poly(propyleneoxide) (PPO) segment.
The interaction with the COC surface happens via hydrophobic interactions with PPO
whereas the hydrophilic segments will extend into the aqueous solution and create a hy-
drophilic layer of polymers. This is also known as a brush conformation and the proposed
attachment is illustrated in Figure 7.3. In the article, they used Pluronic diluted to a 0.1%
solution in PBS which will be used for the experiments.
7.1
Experimental setup
The POPC:POPG 9:1 and 30:1 coatings with liposomes that have been extruded through
a membrane of d = 30 nm are prepared by PhD student Pavlina Senikoglou. The Pluronic
solution is made by dissolving 0.25 g in 25 mL PBS, resulting in a 1% Pluronic solution
39
==PAGE:47==
which is then further diluted with PBS to a 0.1% Pluronic solution.
The coating takes place on the bright field microscope and the chips are prepared as
mentioned in Chapter 3.2. The lipid solutions are mixed with 70% ethanol to dissolve
the liposomes, whereby they are ready to be used as coating. On the other hand, the
channels are wetted with 70% ethanol after which Pluronic is introduced. The used sample
is d = 100 nm liposomes dyed with DiO. The salt gradient of 10−3x and 10x PBS is
established as mentioned earlier.
Fluorescence imaging is used for the experiment with the 100x oil objective. The liposome
movement is tracked by creating an image stack.
7.2
Results
The particle movement is tracked in a salt gradient for each of the coatings. The hypoth-
esis when investigating the new coatings was that the particles would travel through the
channels due to more neutral coatings and a suppression of the DO flow. However, on
the contrary trapping is seen for all the new coatings. The intensity profiles of the trap-
ping is displayed in Figure 7.4a-d for, respectively, POPC:POPG 3:1, POPC:POPG 9:1,
POPC:POPG 30:1, and Pluronic. Here, the intensity profile for trapping of liposomes in
a chip coated with the lipid coating 3:1 was obtained in the previous experiment and acts
as a reference. The dashed lines indicate the maximum intensity of the traps where most
particles, meaning the average trapping point. Only one experiment was performed with
the 9:1 lipid coating, whereas the other intensity profiles are medians of more experiments.
Interestingly, it seems that the trapping point is shifted for the different coatings.
To give a more clear image of the average trapping positions, these are displayed together
in Figure 7.5.
The colors correspond to the dashed lines in Figure 7.4a-d where the
blue line is for the 3:1 coating, green for the 9:1 coating, black for the 30:1 coating and
red for Pluronic. Even though the particles are not travelling through the channels, the
average trapping position of the particles appears to be shifted a few micrometer with
approximately 8 µm between the nearest (3:1) and deepest trap (Pluronic). Interestingly,
this is also the anticipated order in relation to the zeta potential: 3:1 with a zeta potential
of −30 mV, 9:1 with −12 mV, 30:1 with −2.4 mV and Pluronic being neutral. This suggests
that the coatings have a zeta potential that might be lower than first anticipated.
7.3
Discussion
The appearance of trapping points means the DO flow is not suppressed with either of
the three new coatings as first anticipated. In the following, a closer look is taken on the
DO mobility and simulations are made to estimate what the zeta potentials of the new
coatings are.
The DO mobility, Γos, is described by two terms, the electroosmotic (EO) and chemios-
motic (CO) contribution. The EO term is more investigated than the CO term. Therefore,
it is worth investigating if the CO term dominates the flow for a zeta potential close to
zero.
In a study by Chanda et al.
[58] numerical simulations of a positively charged
channel with a very small zeta potential was investigated to determine when which term
dominates the DO flow. They found that the EO term dominates the DO flow for a long
and narrow channel, however, when the channel is wider and shorter, the CO term is
the dominating contribution to the DO flow. As a result of the CO term dominating the
DO flow, the water molecules in the gradient moves from low concentration towards high
concentration. However, when comparing to our experiment the channels are first of all
long and narrow. Secondly, the molecules in the solution move from high concentration
40
==PAGE:48==
0
20
40
60
80
100
Distance in nanochannel, x [µm]
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
Intensity [a.u.]
Coating: POPC:POPG 3:1
a)
Intensity profile
x0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Distance in nanochannel, x [µm]
760
780
800
820
840
860
880
900
Intensity [a.u.]
Coating: POPC:POPG 9:1
b)
Intensity profile
x0
0
20
40
60
80
Distance in nanochannel, x [µm]
120
122
124
126
128
130
132
Intensity [a.u.]
Coating: POPC:POPG 30:1
c)
Intensity profile
x0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Distance in nanochannel, x [µm]
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
Intensity [a.u.]
Coating: Pluronic
d)
Intensity profile
x0
Figure 7.4: Intensity profiles of the trapping point of liposomes combined with different
coatings. The dashed line for each plot indicate the trapping point where most liposomes
are gathered. a) The POPC:POPG 3:1 coating for reference. b) The POPC:POPG 9:1
coating. c) The POPC:POPG 30:1 coating. d) The Pluronic coating. The peaks before
the main peak appear due to liposomes that are stuck in the channel and exhibit a strong
signal.
toward low concentration, whereby the trapping points are created. Therefore, if the CO
term dominates the DO flow of our system, the simulations by Chanda et al. does not
suggest that trapping should appear. As a result, this theory can be rejected as trapping
is seen.
In my experiment, I observed trapping of liposomes in channels coated with Pluronic.
This indicates that Pluronic must have a small charge. This knowledge can be used for
other experiments where small particles such as exosomes are investigated since Pluronic
is known for making small particles stick less to the surface. If the coatings follow the
simulated curve in Figure 7.2 with the trapping points, estimations of the zeta potentials
can be made.
Here, a correction value of 4.8 µm is used since the trapping point for
41
==PAGE:49==
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
Trapping point x0 inside nanochannels, x [µm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
POPC:POPG 3:1
POPC:POPG 9:1
POPC:POPG 30:1
Pluronic
Figure 7.5: The average trapping position x0 of liposomes in channels passivated with
different coatings. It is clear to see that the trapping position is shifted when comparing
the coatings. Blue: POPC:POPG 3:1, green: POPC:POPG 9:1, black: POPC:POPG
30:1, and red: 0.1% Pluronic F127.
3:1 is 4.8 µm below the normal trapping point. Based on this, the zeta potential of the
lipid coatings are ζch,9:1 ≈−29.0 mV and ζch,30:1 ≈−27.5 mV for the 9:1 coating and
30:1 coating. The new estimations of the zeta potentials are listed in Table 7.2. The
simulation in Figure 7.2 is modified to contain the new estimations of the lipid coatings
which is shown in Figure 7.6. An estimation of the Pluronic coating based on the trapping
point and the simulation is also made, even though the simulation reflects the behaviour
of lipid coatings. The zeta potential is therefore estimated to ζch,plur. ≈−24.5 mV. These
estimations are relatively negative compared to our first assumptions.
Coatings
x0 [µm]
ζ-potential [mV]
3:1 POPC: POPG
17.6
−30.0
9:1 POPC: POPG
18.7
−29.0
30:1 POPC: POPG
22.1
−27.5
Pluronic
25.8
−24.5
Table 7.2: The new estimations of the zeta potential of the coatings based on the simulation
in Figure 7.2a with a correction value of 4.8 µm based on the shift for the known 3:1
POPC:POPG coating. Based on this approximation, all the coatings have a very negative
zeta potential and that would explain why trapping points are seen.
In Figure 7.6, the two lines illustrate the experimental trapping position of liposomes
in channels coated with the 9:1 coating (green) and the 30:1 coating (black). The dots
represent the trapping points of liposomes based on the new zeta potential estimations of
each coating. Here, the yellow dot is the 9:1 coating, purple is the 30:1 coating, and red
is the Pluronic estimation. The trapping points are plotted with experimentally obtained
error bars based on the standard error on the mean method. The 9:1 coating does not
have error bars because the experiment only was done once. With the correction value,
the estimations follow the simulated curve.
42
==PAGE:50==
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-potential of channel [mV]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Trapping point, x0 [µm]
Simulated fit
Line for 9:1
Line for 30:1
Exp. x0 for 3:1
Est. 9:1
Est. 30:1
Est. Pluronic
Figure 7.6: A simulation of the zeta potential of the channel as a function of the trap-
ping position (blue curve). The blue spot indicates the experimentally estimated average
trapping point for liposomes in a channel coated with POPC:POPG 3:1. The green and
black lines illustrate the average trapping position of liposomes in a channel coated with
POPC:POPG 9:1 and POPC:POPG 30:1, respectively. The yellow, purple and red spots
indicate estimated zeta potentials of experimental trapping points for, respectively, 9:1,
30:1 and Pluronic coatings. The error bars are the standard error on the mean based on
experimental data. The 9:1 coating does not have error bars since only one measurement
was made.
7.4
Sub-Conclusion
In the above described experiment, the trapping position of liposomes in channels coated
with three different coatings are investigated. Simulations are made to illustrate how the
trapping point is a function of the zeta potential of the channel walls. The coatings are
expected to have a less negative charge that approaches neutral charge compared to the
known 3:1 POPC:POPG coating. However, this hypothesis is rejected since trapping of
liposomes close to the trapping position of the 3:1 lipid coating is observed. Based on
this, new estimations of the coating zeta potentials are made. These show that the zeta
potentials are relatively negative when compared to our first assumption since ζch,9:1 ≈
−29 mV and ζch,30:1 ≈−27.5 mV. An estimation of the zeta potential of Pluronic is also
made based on the observed trapping position whereby ζch,plur. ≈−24.5 mV.
Having obtained trapping of the liposomes can be used in experiments where e.g. small
particles such as exosomes have a tendency to stick to the channel wall. Here, especially
Pluronic is a good coating in experiments where particles sticking to the surface can be
an issue.
Therefore, for future work it would be necessary to measure the zeta potential of the
coatings. For the lipid coatings, a pre-knowledge of their coatings would be to perform
DLS on them which could be done after preparing them. However, a more secure way
to do it would be to coat the chips and measure the flow in the channels. Rasmussen et
al. [27] measured the flow rates using streptavidin labeled with fluorophore Cy3. Due to
streptavidin’s small size and charge at neutral pH it is possible to ignore DP effects. Hence,
it is only the DO flow that is measured. The salt gradient is under the same conditions as
43
==PAGE:51==
the conditions for particle trapping experiments. The salinity gradient is maintained by
applying a pressure with a 5 mbar pressure difference between the inlets and outlets. This
method could be used for the three new coatings and the zeta potentials are determined
from the image analysis.
44
==PAGE:52==
8
Exploring pH gradient in a nanofluidic
chip
In the following chapter, it is investigated if trapping or suppression of the DO flow can
occur if the salt gradient is changed to a pH gradient. This has not been investigated
before in our nanofluidic device and an introduction to the theory for our system is given
in the following. This can allow for a new way to investigate particles by.
Single particle tracking using pH gradients in microfluidic systems has been studied in
dead end pores [59] and over membranes [60]. Shi et al. [60] were able to measure the DP
mobilities in a microfluidic system by making use of integrated hydrogel microwindows
membranes. This hydrogel membrane enables a wide range of solute gradients without
generating a convective flow. Thereby, they were able to visualize and measure the DP
velocity of polystyrene particles with a diameter of d = 0.52 µm. Due to the hydrogel they
do not have a DO flow in their system. The hydrogel is 100 µm × 100 µm which is a very
short and wide channel system. For a monovalent electrolyte the DP velocity is estimated
using a similar equation to the one we stated in the theory for salt gradients (Eq. 2.6).
Their monovalent system contains one channel with a strong pH solution (either HCl or
NaOH) and another with DI water. In this system, the particles showed to flow from
one side of the channel to the other, up the pH gradient. When using multicomponent
electrolytes, Shi et al. presents another equation that takes the ion contributions into
account from more solvents.
8.1
Theory
Figure 8.1:
Recall the nanochannel
geometry of the nanofluidic chip.
In the following, the theory is described for our
nanofluidic chip (Figure 8.1), whereby osmotic
flow cannot be disregarded as the channels are pas-
sivated using the 3:1 lipid coating that induces the
negative zeta potential of ζch = −30 mV. In the
experiments, the used solvents are 1 mM NaOH
and 1 mM HCl. The diffusivity number of the sol-
vents are given by β = (D+ −D−)/(D+ + D−).
Parameters used for the calculations are shown in
Table 8.1.
8.1.1
Diffusioosmotic motion in a pH gradient
The DO contribution for a monovalent electrolyte is described by Rasmussen et al. [9]
which is used in the following to estimate the DO velocity. The concentration profile is
described by taking the changing width of the funnel-shaped nanochannels into account.
This is described by w(x) = wN + ∆wx/L where ∆w = wW −wN, wW = 20 µm, and
wN = 5 µm. Here, the concentration profile in the nanochannel is
C(x) = CN +
CW −CN
ln (wW /wN) ln (w(x)/wN).
(8.1)
The DO fluid flow in the nanochannel occurs due to the DO slip velocity vslip(x) which is
vslip(x) = −Γos(ζch)∇C(x)
C(x) . Here, Γos(ζch) is the DO mobility which depends on the zeta
45
==PAGE:53==
Variable
Quantity
Description
βHCl
0.642
Diffusivity difference factor of HCl
βNaOH
−0.596
Diffusivity difference factor of NaOH
T
293.15 K
Temperature
kB
1.381 · 10−23 J/K
Boltzmann constant
l
440 µm
Length of the nanochannels
e
1.602 · 10−19 C
Charge of an electron
Z
1
Valence of HCl and NaOH
h
240 nm
Height of nanochannels
µ
10−3 Pa s
Dynamic viscosity of aqueous solutions (HCl, NaOH)
ϵ
7 · 10−10 F m−1
Dielectric permittivity for dilute electrolyte solutions
DH
9.311 · 10−9 m2/s
Diffusion coeﬀicient of H+
DNa
1.334 · 10−9 m2/s
Diffusion coeﬀicient of Na+
DCl
2.032 · 10−9 m2/s
Diffusion coeﬀicient of Cl−
DH
2.032 · 10−9 m2/s
Diffusion coeﬀicient of H+
Table 8.1: Parameters used in the calculations. The parameters below the dashed line,
meaning the viscosity, dielectric permittivity and diffusion coeﬀicients, are obtained from
Shim et al. [59].
potential of the channel wall. It is given as Γos(ζch) = ϵ
µ
kBT
Ze
[
βiζch −2kBT
Ze ln(1 −γ2)
]
. A
constant fluid flow rate Q is generated due to the DO slip velocity, but the fluid velocity
varies as a result of the changing channel width. Here, the DO velocity is
vos(x) =
Q
hw(x),
(8.2)
where h is the channel height. The DO velocity is related to the DO slip velocity vslip(x) by
the flow rate Q which is estimated using the Poiseuille contribution for a straight channel
but modified to fit the changing width of our channels
Q = hw(x)vslip(x) −w(x)h3∂xP(x)
12η
.
(8.3)
Here, ∂xP(x) is the internal pressure gradient in the fluid which is assumed identical at the
two ends of the nanochannel. The flow rate described in our funnel-shaped nanochannel
is found by dividing with w(x) on both sides and integrating over the channel length,
whereby
Q = −Γos ln(CN/CW )h∆w
L ln(1 + ∆w/wN) .
(8.4)
Consequently, the DO velocity is
vos(x) = Γos
ln(CL/CH)
CL −CH
∇C(x)
C(x) .
(8.5)
To estimate the velocities, it is assumed that the concentration of species i decreases
linearly over the channel and is approximately 0 mM when reaching the end of the channel.
46
==PAGE:54==
Hence, a concentration very close to zero is used for the calculations in the following. Since
both NaOH and HCl are strong electrolytes that dissolve completely in aqueous solutions,
the [Na+]=[OH−]= 1 mM and [H+]=[Cl−]= 1 mM
NaOH (s)
−→
Na+(aq) + OH−(aq),
HCl (s)
−→
H+(aq) + Cl−(aq).
Numerical results for the funnel-shaped channel are shown in Table 8.2. These values show
that the velocity is dependent on the geometry of the nanochannels where the velocity is
larger in the narrow part of the channels. This describes the DO flow in a monovalent
solution. The DO velocities are shown in Figure 8.2a for the NaOH solution and in Figure
8.2b for the HCl solution.
The velocity for NaOH is negative and increasing because
of a negative diffusivity difference factor βNaOH whereas βHCl is positive, resulting in a
positively decreasing velocity. In the scenario of a multicomponent solution, this must also
have an effect on the DO flow. This is not commented on in the following, but in order to
fully understand the DO flow in a multicomponent electrolyte, this should be investigated.
Shim et al. [59] looked into the effect of DP and DO in the presence of a pH gradient and
demonstrate an equation for the DO velocity under a concentration gradient of multiple
ions in a dead end pore which could be used for inspiration.
Funnel-shaped channel
Solution
Q [pL/min]
vos,N [µm/s]
vos,W [µm/s]
1 mM NaOH
1.5
−20
−5.1
1 mM HCl
−0.97
13.5
3.4
Table 8.2: The computed DO velocity and flow rate for a funnel-shaped channel of length
L = 440 nm and width w = 5–20 µm in a monovalent pH gradient of NaOH and HCl.
8.1.2
Diffusiophoretic motion in pH gradient
In the following section, the DP motion is first described in a monovalent electrolyte and
afterwards the DP motion in a multicomponent electrolyte will be introduced.
Monovalent electrolyte
The diffusiophoretic motion of a monovalent electrolyte system considers a system where
there is a strong pH (NaOH or HCl) in one channel and the other channel contains DI
water. The theoretical equations by Shi et al. [60] are used to estimate the DP velocities
for the funnel-shaped nanochannels. The DP velocity for monovalent electrolyte gradients
is given by
UDP,mono = 3
2DB
(
¯ζpβ + 4 ln cosh
¯ζp
4
)
∇ln C(x),
(8.6)
where ¯ζp = eζp/(kBT) is the zeta potential scaled by the thermal potential, and DB =
kBT/(6πηλB) is the diffusivity of a sphere with radius of Bjerrum length λB = e2/(4πϵkBT).
In the following, a liposome of size d = 150 nm with a zeta potential of ζp = −30 mV is
considered. The velocities for both NaOH and HCl solutions are computed using Eq. 8.6
and displayed in Figure 8.2c–d. Since the DP velocity is oppositely directed of the DO
velocity, a sign change appears for the velocity compared with the estimated DO veloci-
ties in Figure 8.2a–b. The estimated DP velocities appear to be very small compared to
47
==PAGE:55==
0
100
200
300
400
500
Nanochannel Length [µm]
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Di

usiophoretic velocity [µm/s]
vph in NaOH
0
100
200
300
400
500
Nanochannel Length [µm]
-0.6
-0.55
-0.5
-0.45
-0.4
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
Di

usiophoretic velocity [µm/s]
vph in HCl
0
100
200
300
400
500
Channel length [µm]
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
DO velocity [µm/s]
vos in NaOH
0
100
200
300
400
500
Channel length [µm]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
DO velocity [µm/s]
vos in HCl
a
b
c
d
Figure 8.2: The theoretical estimated DO and DP velocities in a monovalent electrolyte.
The DO velocity estimated using Eq.
8.5 a) in NaOH and b) in HCl.
DP velocity
estimated using Eq. 8.6 in c) NaOH and b) HCl.
the DO velocities. In a monovalent experiment, this will probably result in the particles
moving up the gradient but with a very low velocity.
Multicomponent electrolytes
When more than one electrolyte is involved in the experiment, the contribution from each
species must be taken into consideration when estimating the DP velocity. In the following,
the DP velocity for a multicomponent electrolyte containing 1mM NaOH and 1mM HCl
is estimated in our nanofluidic chip based on equations from Shi et al. [60].
The DP velocity is oppositely directed of the osmotic slip velocity and the particle between
the fluid and the particle surface
Us =
∑
i
(−∇µB
i )Mi = −UDP ,
(8.7)
where the contribution of species i to the DO flow mobility is Mi and ∇µB
i is the chemical
48
==PAGE:56==
potential gradient of species i. Multicomponent electrolytes have the same EDL structure
as monovalent electrolytes which is described by the Gouy-Chapman EDL
MGC
±
= ϵ
eη
kBT
2e
(
∓¯ζp + 4 ln cosh
¯ζp
4
)
= −MDP
±
.
(8.8)
The chemical potential gradient can be written in terms of the flux of species by relation
to Fick’s 1st law J(x) = −D∂xC(x)
ji = −DiCi
RT ∇µi.
(8.9)
Here, Di is the diffusion constant and Ci is the concentration of the species i.
Since
multicomponent electrolytes have the same EDL structure, the DO flow mobility Mi of
the species is defined as
Mi = Ci
CB
0
MGC
± .
(8.10)
Here, CB
0 is the bulk electrolyte concentration and Ci is the concentration from species i.
When isolating for the gradient of the chemical potential ∇µi, an expression is obtained
for the DP velocity by inserting ∇µi and Eq. 8.10 into Eq. 8.7 combined with Eq. 8.8
UDP =
∑kBT
CB
0
ji
Di
MGC
±
(8.11)
UDP =kBT
CB
0
(
MDP
+
∑
+
jiB
DiB + MDP
−
∑
−
jiB
DiB
)
.
(8.12)
Here, UDP is described by the flux ji of the species, their diffusion constant DiB and the dif-
fusiophoretic mobility based on the positive and negative species, MDP
±
. To estimate spe-
cific DP velocities, the species flux must be determined. This is done by first estimating the
chemical potential gradient, ∇µ. The chemical potential is given as µi = µ0 + RT ln (ai),
where ai = γ mi
m0
i is the chemical activity. Here, γ is the chemical activity coeﬀicient and
mi is the molality [61]. For an ionic solution with a low concentration the activity can
be estimated to ai = ci(x)
c(0) . The gradient of the chemical potential is the difference in
chemical potential over the nanochannel
∇µi =
∫L
0
dµi(x)
dx
dx.
(8.13)
The change in chemical potential is dependent on the concentration profile C(x) of the
channels (Eq. 8.1) and is
dµi(x)
dx
= RT
C(x)
dC(x)
dx
.
(8.14)
Solving the integral in Eq. 8.13 shows that the gradient of the chemical potential over a
funnel-shaped channel is described by the changing width of the channels
49
==PAGE:57==
∇µi = RT

ln

CL + CH −CL
ln
(
wW
wN
) ln
(wW
wN
)
−ln(CL)


(8.15)
By calculating ∇µi numerically for the acidic and alkaline concentrations and inserting in
Eq. 8.9, the flux of the species can be estimated. These are listed in Table 8.3 for each
of the species. Finally, the DP velocity for both sides of the channel is given by including
the different ion fluxes for the basic and acidic side [60]
UL
DP = kBT
cL
( jH+
DH+ MDP
+
+ jCl−
DCl−MDP
−
)
,
(8.16)
UR
DP = kBT
cR
( jNa+
DNa+ MDP
+
+ jOH−
DOH−MDP
−
)
.
(8.17)
Specific DP velocities are calculated for 1 mM NaOH and HCl and shown in Table 8.3.
Also, the DP velocities are estimated for the case where the liposomes are diluted in PBS
as they normally are. Here, there is a contribution from NaCl which is the electrolyte with
the largest concentration in PBS
UL
DP = kBT
cL
(( jNa+
DNa+ + jH+
DH+
)
MDP
+
+ jCl−
DCl−MDP
−
)
,
(8.18)
UR
DP = kBT
cR
( jNa+
DNa+ MDP
+
+
( jOH−
DOH−+ jCl−
DCl−
)
MDP
−
)
.
(8.19)
Multicomponent electrolyte DP motion
Cchannel
1 mM
µbase
2.22 · 105 J/mol
µacid
2.22 · 105 J/mol
jNa+
−1.22 · 10−8 mol/(ms)
jH+
−8.50 · 10−7 mol/(ms)
jOH−
−4.81 · 10−7 mol/(ms)
jCl−
−1.85 · 10−8 mol/(ms)
NaOH - HCl
UL
DP
7.1 µm/s
UR
DP
7.1 µm/s
NaOH - HCl - NaCl (PBS)
UL
DP
34.8 µm/s
UR
DP
−13.6 µm/s
Table 8.3: Computed parameters to determine specific DP velocities based on the formula
for the DP in multicomponent electrolyte gradients [60]. It is calculated for a concentration
of c = 1 mM. L = 440 µm, ζch = −30 mV. Here, UL
DP represent the side where HCl and
NaCl is present and UR
DP contains NaOH and NaCl.
It is seen that for the NaOH–HCl experiment, the DP velocity is in the same direction,
suggesting that the particles should travel through the channels. When adding NaCl to
the solution, the velocities are oppositely directed and much larger than when NaCl is
50
==PAGE:58==
not in the solution. Here, UL
DP represent the side containing HCl and NaCl, and UR
DP
contains NaOH and NaCl. This suggests that the particles can be trapped somewhere in
the channels. It must be remembered here that the DO velocity for a multicomponent
electrolyte is not taken into account and the experimental results can appear different
because of this.
8.2
Exploring single particle tracking in a pH gradient
In the following experiments, the chemical gradient is changed from a salt gradient to a
pH gradient in the chip. The goal of the experiments is to image single liposomes in the
nanochannels with fluorescence microscopy in order to investigate their behaviour under a
different chemical gradient. Changing the chemical gradient to a pH gradient is interesting
since pH changes can induce lipid vesicle migration and global deformation. Membrane
lipids are directly affected by pH due to their acido-basic properties [62].
8.2.1
Nanofluidic setup
The pH of the 1 mM NaOH and HCl solutions is checked before the experiments begin.
Hereby, it is ensured that the experiments are conducted under the same conditions. A
new dilution of the pH stock solution is prepared if the pH has changed.
Channel 1
Channel 2
Purpose of experiment
Case 1
1 mM NaOH
1 mM HCl
The investigation of how liposomes behave in
a strong pH gradient. The liposomes are diluted
in PBS and trapping somewhere in the channel
is therefore expected.
Case 2
1 mM NaOH
DI water
The investigation of liposomes in a moderate pH
gradient. Expect trapping due to liposomes
diluted in PBS.
Case 3
1 mM HCl
1 mM NaOH
To investigate if the liposomes travel through
the nanochannels. The liposomes are diluted
with Milli-Q.
Table 8.4: Three experiments are performed with pH gradients. Case 1: 1 mM NaOH
is introduced in channel 1 and 1 mM HCl is introduced in channel 2. The liposomes are
diluted in PBS and added to both channels. Case 2: 1 mM NaOH is introduced in channel
1 and DI water in channel 2. The sample contains liposomes diluted using PBS which is
added to both channels. Case 3: 1 mM HCl is introduced in channel 1 and 1 mM NaOH
is introduced in channel 2. The sample is liposomes diluted in Milli-Q water which is
added to both channels.
The chip is prepared using the POPC:POPG 3:1 liposome coating. Three cases are inves-
tigated using fluorescence microscopy. These are shown in Table 8.4. For case 1, a strong
pH gradient is established by a 1 mM NaOH–HCl gradient (pHNaOH: 11 and pHHCl: 3).
The sample containing liposomes is diluted in PBS and introduced in both channels to
establish the same conditions in the channels for the gradient. In case 2, a NaOH-DI wa-
ter gradient is established which is a more moderate pH gradient (pHNaOH: 11 and pHDI:
6). Here, the sample is also diluted in PBS. In the last experiment, case 3, a strong pH
gradient is established. Compared to case 1, the gradient has been shifted such that HCl
is introduced in channel 1 and NaOH in channel 2. The sample is this time diluted using
Milli-Q water which is ultrapure water where organic particles has been removed. As with
the other cases, the sample is introduced in both channels. For imaging, the time-lapse
function of Micro Manager is used to avoid photobleaching of the liposomes since the sam-
51
==PAGE:59==
ple is exposed with an interval of 1 s. When particles do not move that fast, this imaging
technique makes it possible to track their route into the nanochannels. For case 1 it is
investigated if liposomes can be imaged using iSCAT microscopy with an exposure time
of 2 ms.
The experimental procedure is the same as for the experiment with the salt gradient. A
5 mbar pressure difference is applied when the liposomes are introduced in the channels.
In the following parts, TrackMate is used for tracking the liposomes obtained with fluo-
rescence imaging. The goal is to visualize the liposomes which can lay the foundation for
further investigations of liposomes in a pH gradient.
8.2.2
Case 1: NaOH–HCl gradient
Results
Figure 8.3: Trajectory of a liposome with size d = 100 nm and zeta potential ζ = −30 mV
using fluorescence microscopy. The liposome is tracked for 8 s where it moves approxi-
mately 70 µm. a) The x- and y-position of a liposome. b) The x-position as a function of
time. c) A histogram of the x-position illustrating the movement. d) The y-position as
function of time. c) The y-position between the channel walls.
In this experiment, the behaviour of liposomes in a strong pH gradient based on 1 mM
NaOH–HCl is investigated. With fluorescence microscopy it is observed that the liposomes
52
==PAGE:60==
enter the nanochannel from the narrow end (channel 1).
It is possible to follow the
liposomes around 100 µm into the channel. A trajectory of a liposome is illustrated in
Figure 8.3a. Figure 8.3b–c illustrates the x-position over time. In the case of trapping
positions, there would be a large number of occurrences around the trapping position
in the histogram. In the part of the followed trajectory of the liposomes no trapping is
happening which is showed by multiple occurrences along the x-position. The y- position
in Figure 8.3d–e illustrates how the liposome is moving between the walls which is centered
a little to the right side of the channel (downwards).
Using TrackMate it was not possible to track the liposome further into the nanochannel
due to a weak intensity of the fluorophore.
By eye it was seen that a liposome was
diffusing around x ≈285 µm inside the channel. The chip was moved to the iSCAT setup
to investigate if it was possible to detect particles further inside the nanochannel than
what was possible with fluorescence imaging. Using iSCAT it was possible to see many
liposomes but due to the many liposomes it was diﬀicult to track them. Still it was possible
to do single-particle tracking of one liposome which is shown in Figure 8.4. The position
of the liposome is estimated based on the width of the channel at the detected location,
whereby an approximate channel length is found to be around x ≈320 µm inside the
channel. The position of the liposome suggests a trapping position.
320
330
310
300
290
280
270
5
10
15
20
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
5
10
15
20
150
100
50
0
310
290
270
5
10
15
20
5
4
3
2
6
7
8
5
4
3
2
6
7
8
0
20
40
60
80
100
Counts
Counts
Figure 8.4: Trajectory of a liposome with size d = 100 nm and zeta potential ζ = −30 mV
using iSCAT microscopy. a) The x- and y-position of a liposome located around x ≈
320 mV inside the channel where the width is w ≈16 µm. b) The x-position as a function
of time. The liposome is not detected between 3–6 s. c) A histogram of the x-position
illustrating the location around 320 µm. d) The y-position as function of time. c) The
y-position between the channel walls.
53
==PAGE:61==
Discussion
In the first experiment liposomes were tracked in a strong pH gradient (pH 3–11) where
it was observed that the liposomes entered the nanochannels from the narrow part of
the nanochannel, corresponding to the alkaline side of the gradient. The liposomes were
tracked approximately 100 µm in the nanochannel after which the intensity of the fluo-
rophores became much weaker. After this, it was possible to observe the liposomes by
eye but TrackMate could not detect the signal of the liposomes. Figure 8.3 illustrates
the trajectory of a liposome entering and its movement inside the nanochannel. This was
obtained using fluorescence. The liposome is tracked for 8 s and based on figures of the
x-position it moves quite straight into the channel (Figure 8.3b–c). In the y-direction it
diffuses between the two walls (Figure 8.3d). The histogram shows how it has a tendency
to move close to the right-sided wall. Based on the positions, the mean displacement is
estimated for 10 liposomes which is shown in Figure 8.5. The error bars are the standard
error of the mean and the black dashed line represents the average displacement. Figure
8.5a illustrates that the liposomes on average move 1 µm per frame into the nanochan-
nel. Correspondingly, the dy-displacement in Figure 8.5b shows that the liposomes diffuse
around the center of the channel.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Particle no
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Particle displacement, dy [µm]
b
Particle <dy>
Mean <dy>
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Particle no
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Particle displacement, dx [µm]
a
Particle <dx>
Mean <dx>
Figure 8.5: The a) dx- and b) dy-displacement for 10 liposomes in a NaOH–HCl gradient.
The liposomes enter the nanochannel from the narrow side (channel 1). The dashed black
lines indicate the mean of the displacements. The error bars are the standard error of the
mean (SEM). The result is obtained using fluorescence microscopy.
From the dx-displacement, the net velocity of the liposomes i.e. the sum of the DP velocity
and the Stokes drag on the liposomes as they move into the nanochannel is estimated.
From the imaged trajectory, the velocity of the liposome is estimated to vx ≈8.7 µm/s
(liposome 3). The average velocity of the 10 liposomes is imaged by the black line which
indicates an average net velocity of v(x) ≈10 µm/s. This is a multicomponent electrolyte
system where the theory suggests a DP velocity of UDP ≈15 µm/s in the channel with
NaOH (Table 8.3) and the average velocity is therefore an accepted estimate.
It was also possible to image liposomes using iSCAT microscopy. However, here many
liposomes were found which made it diﬀicult to track the single liposomes. For the future,
this should be done with a sample where the liposome concentration is diluted to 10−6x
or 10−7x after which the liposome concentration can be increased if no liposomes are
observed. A trajectory is displayed in Figure 8.4a. The liposome is tracked for a total of
6 s and for approximately 3 s the liposome cannot be detected as it is out of focus (Figure
54
==PAGE:62==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Particle no
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Particle velocity, vx [µm/s]
Particle <vx>
Mean <vx>
Figure 8.6: The estimated velocity of 10 liposomes obtained using fluorescence microscopy.
The black line indicates an average velocity of v(x) ≈10 µm/s. The error bars are the
SEM.
8.4b and d). The histogram of the x-position illustrates that the liposome could be tracked
since it does not appear to move far away from the estimated location at x ≈320 µm.
8.2.3
Case 2: NaOH–DI gradient
Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
channel width, y [µm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
channel length, x [µm]
129.5
130
130.5
131
131.5
132
channel width, y [µm]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
channel length, x [µm]
Figure 8.7: Left: The trajectory of eight particles in different nanochannels obtained
using fluorescence microscopy. The tracking is done using TrackMate. TrackMate was
able to trace the particles between 60 and 100 µm into the channels. Right: trajectory of
a particle that is moving in and out of the frame which makes the trajectory appear as if
the particle sticks to the channel wall.
55
==PAGE:63==
In the second experiment, the pH gradient is more moderate with pH 6–11 (DI water and
NaOH). The particles are observed to enter the nanochannel from the wide end (channel
2) where only a few enter at the time. This means they move from low pH towards high
pH. The results are obtained using fluorescence microscopy. More time can pass before
particles enter. The particles are observed to go through the nanochannel where they leave
at the narrow end. An example of the trajectories of 8 of the particles is shown in Figure 8.7
(left). This is for three nanochannels where TrackMate has traced the particles between
60 and 100 µm into the nanochannels. For some particles it was not possible to follow
them further in the channel due to a weak signal of the fluorophores. Other liposomes got
stuck on the channel walls which interfered with the tracking signal. For tracking using
TrackMate it was necessary to reduce the ROI to observe the moving liposomes.
Discussion
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Particle no
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Particle displacement, dy [µm]
b
Particle <dy>
Mean <dy>
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Particle no
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Particle displacement, dx [µm]
a
Particle <dx>
Mean <dx>
Figure 8.8: The mean displacement in the x- and y-direction of 10 liposomes obtained
using fluorescence microscopy. The error bars are the standard error on the mean (SEM).
In the second experiment where the liposome behaviour in a pH gradient is explored,
the pH gradient is more moderate (pH 6–11).
The liposomes are diluted with PBS,
whereby it is a multicomponent electrolyte case. Few liposomes were observed to enter
the nanochannels at the time but it was possible to see them go through the nanochannels
where they entered at the wide end. The mean dx- and dy-displacement of 10 liposomes
is shown in Figure 8.8a and 8.8b which was obtained using fluorescence microscopy. The
error bars of the displacements are based on the SEM method. The black line is the mean
of the displacement which should be close to zero in the y-direction due to the diffusion
around the center in the channel which is the case. Liposome 5 has large error bars which
can stem from few measurements. A trajectory of a particle that was moving in and out
of the frame is shown in Figure 8.7 (right). The particle appears to be travelling along the
wall but in reality, the whole width of the nanochannel was not within the frame. This can
result in a larger mean displacement of the particle which could correspond to liposome 5.
The mean of the net velocity in the x-direction is shown in Figure 8.9. The error bars
are the SEM. The black line indicates the mean of the velocities which is v(x) ≈7.5 µm/s
since all velocities are below 15 µm/s. The uncertainty of the liposomes is quite small,
meaning the measurements appear to be a good estimate. This velocity fits well with the
theoretically estimated DP velocity for a two component electrolyte (NaOH and HCl).
Here the DP velocity was estimated to UDP ≈8 µm/s. This does of course not account
for the DO velocity and is for a strong pH gradient. Still the mean velocity is similar.
56
==PAGE:64==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Particle no
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Particle velocity, vx [µm/s]
Particle <vx>
Mean <vx>
Figure 8.9: The mean velocity in the x-direction of 10 liposomes. The error bars are the
SEM. The black line indicates the mean velocity.
8.2.4
Case 3: HCl–NaOH gradient
Results
In the third experiment, the pH gradient is strong with pH 3 (HCl) in channel 1 and
pH 11 (NaOH) in channel 2. The liposomes are diluted in Milli-Q water and based on
the theoretical part it is expected that the liposomes travel through the nanochannels
since there is no extra contribution from PBS to the multicomponent solution. Here, it is
observed that the particles enter the nanochannels from the wide end of the nanochannel,
meaning, they move from high basic pH towards high acidic pH. The particles are travelling
through the channels and exit at the narrow end of the nanochannels. The results are
obtained using fluorescence microscopy.
A trajectory of a particle entering from the wide end is shown in Figure 8.10a. Here, the
liposome is tracked for 8 s (Figure 8.10b) as it moves into the channel. The histogram of
the x-position (Figure 8.10c) shows how it moves approximately 80 µm during the tracking.
The y-position in Figure 8.10d–e shows a distribution of the position between the channel
walls that is close to normal distributed.
As the particles go through the nanochannels, a trajectory of a liposome reaching the
narrow end is displayed in Figure 8.11a–c.
Here, the liposome travels approximately
100 µm after which it reaches the end of the nanochannel.
This is also illustrated by
the y-position over time (Figure 8.11d) as the movement is around 5 µm - corresponding
to the width at the narrow end of the nanochannel.
The histogram of the y-position
also shows that there is a larger occurrence of the liposome between 34–38 µm which is
within the narrow channel width. The movement is tracked for around 5 s. The liposome
movement is only obtained at the wide end and narrow end of the channel corresponding
to approximately 200 µm of the channel. It is therefore not certain that it is the same
liposome that is tracked at the wide end as at the narrow end.
Discussion
In this experiment, the liposomes are tracked from the wide end of the nanochannel as they
move towards the narrow end and exit the channel. This is under a strong pH gradient (pH
3–11) where they move towards low pH. The liposomes are diluted with Milli-Q instead of
PBS as in the previous experiments which makes particles go through. In case 2, liposomes
also went through the nanochannels while undergoing a moderate pH gradient. However,
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure 8.10: The trajectory of a liposome entering the nanochannel from the wide end
under a strong pH gradient obtained using fluorescence microscopy. The liposome moves
toward low pH. a) Trajectory of the liposome as it moves approx. 80 µm into the channel.
b) The x-position of the liposome over time. It is tracked for 8 s. c) A histogram displaying
the x-position. d) The y-position as a function of time. e) The histogram of the y-position
shows the diffusivity of the liposome.
very few liposomes went through at the time and could be tracked. That number increases
in this experiment and the dx- and dy-displacement for 28 liposomes at the wide end and
22 liposomes at the narrow end of the nanochannels is shown in Figure 8.12a–d.
Figure 8.12a shows the mean dx-displacement of the liposomes with their SEM as error
bars. The mean of the displacements is dx ≈2 µm, meaning they in average move 2 µm
per frame. The mean dy-displacement of the particles in the wide end is approximately
zero, meaning the liposomes in average diffuse around the channel center.
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure 8.11: The trajectory of a liposome reaching the narrow end of the nanochannel
under a strong pH gradient obtained using fluorescence microscopy. The liposome moves
toward low pH. a) Trajectory of the liposome as it moves approx. 100 µm into the channel.
b) The x-position of the liposome over time. It is tracked for 8 s. c) A histogram displaying
the x-position. d) The y-position as a function of time. e) The histogram of the y-position
shows the how the channel width becomes more narrow.
Figure 8.12c–d shows the dx- and dy-displacement of 22 liposomes. The mean of the dis-
placements is indicated with a dashed black line and the error bars are based on the SEM.
For the dx-displacement in Figure 8.12c, the mean is approximately 3 µm indicating that
the liposomes move an average of 3 µm per frame. Compared with the dx-displacement at
the wide end, the liposomes move a bit faster at the narrow end. The dy-displacement is
close to zero due to the diffusivity around the center in the channel (Figure 8.12d) which
is the same for the dy-displacement in the wide end. Here, only liposome 4 has a larger
dy-displacement which can be the result of few measurements and that it moves closer to
the channel wall.
The mean velocity of the liposomes is estimated based on the dx-displacements. Figure
59
==PAGE:67==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Particle no
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Particle displacement, dy [µm]
b
Particle <dy>
Mean <dy>
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Particle no
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Particle displacement, dx [µm]
a
Particle <dx>
Mean <dx>
0
5
10
15
20
25
Particle no
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Particle displacement, dy [µm]
d
Particle <dy>
Mean <dy>
0
5
10
15
20
25
Particle no
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Particle displacement, dx [µm]
c
Particle <dx>
Mean <dx>
Figure 8.12: The mean displacement in a) x- and b) y-direction of 28 liposomes entering
the nanochannels from the wide end. c) The dx- and d) dy-displacement of 22 liposomes at
the narrow end of the nanochannel. The black line represents the mean of the displacement
and the error bars are the SEM.
8.13a shows the mean velocity of 28 liposomes at the wide end of the nanochannel where
they enter.
The black line represents the mean velocity of all the liposomes which is
v(x) ≈17 µm/s. Compared to most of the velocities this is a bit high which is due to
6 liposomes having a velocity greater than 30 µm/s. Hence, the mean of the liposomes
having a velocity below 30 µm/s (corresponding to 22 liposomes) is illustrated by the blue
dashed line for comparison. This results in an average velocity of approximately 12 µm/s.
This velocity compares better with the estimated velocity in a NaOH–HCl gradient in the
theory which was UDP ≈8 µm/s (Table 8.3).
The mean of the net velocities at the narrow end of the nanochannel are displayed in
Figure 8.13b. The error bars are the SEM and the black line indicates the mean of the
velocities which is v(x) ≈23 µm/s. Most of the liposomes have an average velocity close to
that except for liposome 9. It has a velocity close to 50 µm which appears like an outlier.
Compared with the displacements of that liposome the dx-displacement is approximately
5 µm which combined with few measurements might be why it appears to move so fast.
When comparing the velocities at the wide end with the velocities at the narrow end it is
clear that the liposomes move faster at the narrow end than at the wide end. A reason
for this can be the geometry since the liposomes will move faster in a narrow space than
in a wider space.
60
==PAGE:68==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Particle no
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Particle velocity, vx [µm/s]
a
Particle <vx>
Mean <vx>
Mean: 22 liposomes
0
5
10
15
20
25
Particle no
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Particle velocity, vx [µm/s]
b
Particle <vx>
Mean <vx>
Figure 8.13: a) The mean velocity of 28 liposomes as they enter the nanochannels from
the wide end. The black line represents the mean of all the velocities and the blue dashed
line represents the mean velocity of the 22 liposomes with mean velocity under 30 µm/s.
b) The average velocity of 22 liposomes at the narrow end of the nanochannel. The error
bars are the SEM.
8.3
Discussion
When performing fluorescence imaging of the liposomes in the pH gradient, the exposure
time is increased compared with the salt gradient experiment. Fewer liposomes enter the
nanochannels and with larger time intervals. Tracking was possible, however, decrease
in the intensity of the emitted light from the liposomes made it diﬀicult and sometimes
impossible to track some liposomes using TrackMate since it uses the intensity of the
particles as part of the tracking. Over time, the liposomes attached to the walls which
also act as interference when creating tracks with TrackMate.
When comparing the fluorescence results with the iSCAT result in case 1, they appear
to be quite different. In fluorescence, the liposomes are observed to travel from NaOH
towards HCl. On the other hand, in iSCAT the liposomes are not observed to move in the
NaOH part but in the HCl part. Even though the liposomes should be stable over a long
pH range, the strong pH gradient is a stress test of the system. Therefore, it is possible
that the liposomes are not stable in the very strong pH environments. Another option is
that the fluorophore is not stable in this system. The fluorophore is attached in between
the phospholipids in the lipid bilayer and it might be, that the fluorophore ’jumps out’ of
the bilayer. Hence, it can travel on its own through the channel or attach to the coating
on the walls. The last option is only possible if the tails of the phospholipids on the walls
points towards the solution. However, it is expected that the head points outwards since
it is the hydrophilic part.
Another alternative is that the liposomes change configuration in the acid environment.
This can be investigated with fluorescence imaging by either 1) encapsulating an extra
fluorophore in the core or 2) by encapsulating calcein in the core. The result of using
option 1 is that if the fluorophore is released from the membrane, then the liposome is still
trackable. If, on the other side, the liposome changes configuration, option 2 is a good
test for this. If the encapsulation of calcein is done using large enough concentrations e.g.
around 100 mM [63], the signal is quenched while it is encapsulated. In the scenario where
the membrane is broken-down, the calcein will emit light. This reaction occurs due to
61
==PAGE:69==
dilution of calcein by the surrounding buffer. The way to test this is by making a titration
series where the liposomes are tested in different pH solutions. Here, an important thing
to check is if calcien is stable in the different pH solutions. According to Biotium the
fluorescence should be almost independent of the pH ranging from 6.5–12 [64]. Hence, it
would be working in the alkaline environment.
In the future it would be interesting to track the liposomes in an environment with a
smaller pH range to make it more similar with the pH environments in the body.
8.4
Sub-Conclusion
In this chapter, the behaviour of liposomes in a pH gradient is explored using fluorescence
microscopy. This has both been estimated theoretically by looking into multicomponent
electrolytes and experimentally by investigating three different cases using fluorescence
microscopy. It has not been investigated how another chemical gradient has an effect on
the nanofluidic system of the nanofluidic chip before. Therefore, it was necessary to first
introduce the theory on multicomponent electrolytes. This was done by estimating the
theoretical DP velocities for liposomes. The DO velocity was estimated for a monovalent
electrolyte and it should in the future be investigated how the DO velocity behaves in a
multicomponent electrolyte.
Both experimentally and theoretically, it was shown that PBS has an effect on a strong
pH gradient (pH 3–11) which was clear when looking at the net velocity. The presence
of PBS appears to introduce trapping in the nanochannels whereas no PBS makes the
liposomes move through the channels. Therefore, a strong pH gradient was established
using HCl and NaOH where the liposomes were diluted in Milli-Q water. The net velocities
are estimated for the liposomes and compared to the theoretical estimations. In case 1,
the experiment was transferred to iSCAT microscopy to investigate if the liposomes can
be observed further inside the nanochannels. This is possible, however, due to a too large
liposome concentration it was diﬀicult to do single-particle tracking over a longer time.
For the future, it should be investigated what the effect of a strong pH gradient is on the
liposomes and the fluorophore as the intensity became very weak when the liposomes were
in the nanochannels. Also, case 3 shows potential for analysis of the DP velocity as the
liposomes travel through the nanochannels.
62
==PAGE:70==
9
Discussion
9.1
iSCAT microscopy vs fluorescence microscopy
In the above described experiments, the results have been discussed. It is clear that the
fluorescence measurements and iSCAT measurements complement each other well and
the suggested strategy is to first test the experiment using fluorescence microscopy and
afterwards, when the experiments and results are established, the experiment can be done
using iSCAT. If it is a new experiment where it is unknown how the particles will behave,
it is crucial to use labelled particles and fluorescence microscopy before testing on the
iSCAT setup because it more easily illustrates how the particles are behaving. This is
the limitation of label-free microscopy; it detects all scattering signals in the FOV. It is
the consequence of going label-free but this makes it diﬀicult to distinguish between the
scattering elements from e.g. the species of interest and impurities in the chip. The result
is that impurities can be misinterpreted as species of interest or that the impurities scatter
more than the species of interest such that it overshadows the signal from the particles of
interest.
Combining iSCAT with fluorescence microscopy would be a great optimization of the
current iSCAT setup.
Here, the setup can easily be extended with a second imaging
channel. This would require a second imaging lens and camera to obtain the fluorescence
signal. Combining the two techniques can make it a powerful characterization tool for both
control measurements but also to obtain additional information on biophysical processes.
This has previously been used to image myosin 5a assay with a 20 nm gold particle with
quantum dots [45] and dynamic events of single nascent adhesions in living cells [65]. A
combination of iSCAT with fluorescence in one setup has previously been demonstrated
by Ortega et al.
[45] who combined an iSCAT setup with a total internal reflection
fluorescence microscopy (TIRF). Here, a single dichroic mirror is used as separator which
must be able to separate the iSCAT wavelength from the fluorescence excitation and
emission wavelengths.
A perk of combining iSCAT with fluorescence is that the chip will not have to be moved
during an ongoing experiment. Currently during new experiments, the chip is first placed
on a fluorescence microscope and then switched to the iSCAT setup, in between which
the pressure on the chip is temporarily stopped. Combining the two techniques into one
setup would provide more stable experimental conditions.
In the trapping experiment, the results compare well when comparing the two imaging
techniques. In relation to the well-known and established method by Rasmussen et al.
[9] the imaging time used in iSCAT is much lower than in fluorescence. This is due to
too much interference in the iSCAT signal when multiple liposomes gather, whereby the
single liposome signal is diﬀicult to distinguish between. The result of this, however, is a
much shorter illustration of the liposome behaviour, whereby e.g. the movement in the
y-direction can appear biased. To increase the imaging time the sample should be diluted
more in order to see less liposomes in the trap.
The current iSCAT setup has demonstrated its capability for tracking single liposomes in
the nanofluidic trap. However, there are still limitations connected with the setup that
are necessary to address. The stability of the sample represents a main system limitation.
Here, the setup is sensitive to mechanical noise e.g. from vibrations. For longer imaging
this can easily be seen in the images, whereby the quality of e.g. the temporal median
63
==PAGE:71==
filter is affected. Since the setup is already installed on an air-damped optical table, an
attempt to account for the vibrations have already been made.
9.2
Future work
The presented work in this thesis has laid the foundation for future work with both analysis
using iSCAT microscopy and investigations with different chemical concentration gradi-
ents.
The characterization of single liposomes using iSCAT imaging can be further evolved by
obtaining the refractive index of the liposomes. This was demonstrated by Kashkanova
et al. [2] where a high sensitivity of the contrast leads to information about the refractive
index and thereby the protein load of lipid vesicles. The contrast is described by a di-
rect proportionality to the polarizability which is described by the refractive index of the
particle and surrounding medium. This would be interesting to combine with the charac-
terization methods of the nanofluidic chip as it would make it a powerful characterization
tool. In order to do this it is necessary to do a reference measurement where the refractive
index of the nanoparticles is known. After the reference measurement, the setup must
not be changed since it would require a re-calibration. The obtained calibration constant
will link the measured contrast directly to the scattering cross-section. This could be per-
formed using a polystyrene particle or gold nanoparticle. The refractive index is obtained
by plotting the third root of the contrast against the measured size of the particles. When
knowing the refractive index, the experiment can be performed on liposomes where a large
number of measurements is required to validate the technique. When liposomes have been
characterized, it can be used for characterization of other extracellular vesicles such as
exosomes. They are more complicated biological systems and the imaging method must
be tested on simpler systems to establish a reliable and well-functioning method that can
be used to analyze the exosomes
Next, the analysis presented in this work on the behaviour of liposomes in a pH gradient
is only preliminary work. It would be interesting to further investigate the movement of
liposomes in the nanochannels. Besides investigating what happens to the liposomes and
fluorophore in the strong pH gradient as mentioned in the discussion (section 8.3), it is
suggested to explore case 3 where the liposomes are in a strong pH gradient and diluted
with Milli-Q. It should be investigated what role the DO flow has in the nanofluidic
chip when a multicomponent electrolyte is present. This could for example be done by
measuring the DO flow using fluorescent dyed streptavidin as proposed by Rasmussen et
al. [27]. Note that streptavidin should be stable over a wide pH range [66]. This will also
give new input to the theoretical part. If the DO flow is suppressed in such a concentration
gradient it will enable analysis of the DP flow. When this has been investigated further
with fluorescence microscopy it would be interesting to perform the experiments using
iSCAT microscopy.
Lastly, it is proposed that the iSCAT sample holder is replaced with a new one. To avoid
misalignments or to have to use the rotation matrix on the obtained iSCAT data, the
chip should be accurately placed in the sample holder. This would be easier if the sample
holder was changed to another holder. Currently, the chip is placed in the sample holder
from below after which it is screwed onto the sample stage. The optimal way would be to
make a sample holder where the chip is placed from the top. Hereby, it would be much
easier to correct the tilt of the channels compared to the current setup where the sample
holder must be unscrewed from the stage if the channels are tilted. This could also ensure
that the channels always are in the focal plane because the distance would be the same.
64
==PAGE:72==
10
Conclusion
The main goal of this thesis is tracking of single liposomes in a nanofluidic chip undergoing
a concentration gradient using interferometric scattering (iSCAT) microscopy. The track-
ing is demonstrated using both fluorescence microscopy and iSCAT imaging to compare
the obtained results.
In a salt gradient, tracking of liposomes as they move towards a trapping area in nanochan-
nels allows for quantitative analysis. Hereby, the diffusiophoretic velocity, size and zeta
potential of 8 liposomes is obtained using fluorescence microscopy.
Using iSCAT mi-
croscopy, it is shown that the same parameters are obtained for 6 liposomes. The size
is estimated using two methods, the root-mean-squared displacement and the covariance-
estimator. For fluorescence imaging the estimations are very similar. However, in iSCAT
imaging the sizes are more different and vary approximately 100 nm. The reason for this
might be much lower imaging time, whereby the movement can appear more biased than
it would with a longer imaging time. Also, if there is a small tilt of the channels that has
not been accounted for this can result in an image that appears more biased. Increasing
the imaging time in iSCAT microscopy can make it diﬀicult to track the individual lipo-
somes as more will gather in the trapping position. This can create disturbances in the
detected signal. The uncertainty of the measurements with iSCAT are smaller than for
the measurements conducted with fluorescence microscopy. The imaging time for iSCAT
microscopy is lower but the amount of frames per second is much larger (10 fps vs 490 fps)
which increases the precision in the detected signal of the liposomes. Using the trapping
points of the liposomes and their sizes, the zeta potential of the individual liposomes is
estimated. In fluorescence microscopy, the average zeta potential is ζ ≈−27 mV. The
estimated average zeta potential is ζ ≈−30 mV for the liposomes based on iSCAT imag-
ing. These results open the doors for further analysis using iSCAT microscopy in the
nanofluidic chip to obtain e.g. the refractive index of the liposomes and to analyse other
particles such as exosomes.
In the second part of the thesis, three new coatings for surface passivation of the channels
in the nanofluidic chip are investigated. These include two lipid coatings, POPC:POPG 9:1
and POPC:POPG 30:1, and a polymer coating, Pluronic F127. The zeta potential of the
coatings are unknown and based on fluorescence microscopy experiments where trapping of
liposomes is observed, an estimation of the zeta potentials are given based on simulations
of the trapping position as function of the zeta potential. The estimations show that the
coatings are relatively negative when compared to a hypothesis of zeta potentials close to
neutral charge. The new estimations of the zeta potentials for the coatings are ζch,9:1 ≈
−29.0 mV and ζch,30:1 ≈−27.5 mV. An estimation of the zeta potential of Pluronic is
also made based on the observed trapping position whereby ζch,plur. ≈−24.5 mV. For
future use, the zeta potentials should be accurately determined.
Here, a preliminary
estimation of the lipid coatings can be made using dynamic light scattering but a more
secure way of testing it is by measuring the diffusioosmotic flow rates using streptavidin
which was demonstrated by Rasmussen et al. [27]. Knowing that the coatings offer other
trapping points can be used for other experiments. For example, Pluronic is a good surface
passivator when performing experiments with small nanoparticles such as exosomes as they
stick very little to the surface.
In the last part of the thesis, the nanofluidic system of the chip is investigated by replacing
the salt gradient with a pH gradient. This has not been explored before in the nanofluidic
65
==PAGE:73==
chip. Hence, the theory behind a multicomponent electrolyte is introduced for the specific
design of the chip. In future work it will be necessary to investigate the diffusioosmotic
flow more in depth for multielectrolyte components since the theory is based on a system
where the diffusioosmotic contribution to the flow can be excluded. In the experimental
part, three different cases are used to investigate the behaviour of single liposomes using
fluorescence microscopy. In case 1 the pH gradient is strong (pH 3–11) and the liposomes
are diluted with PBS. Trapping of the liposomes is expected but due to a very low detected
signal from the liposomes it is not possible to observe where the liposomes are trapped.
Measurements are also conducted using iSCAT microscopy where a liposome appears to
be trapped. However, there are many liposomes in the channel which interferes with the
detection of the individual liposomes. It is therefore not possible to do imaging for a longer
time duration. In case 2, fluorescence imaging is used to observe liposomes in a moderate
pH gradient (pH 6–11). Here, very few liposomes are observed to enter the nanochannels,
and the ones who do enter pass all the way through. This is further explored for a strong
pH gradient in case 3 where the liposomes are diluted in Milli-Q water. The liposomes
travel through the channels and the velocities of the liposomes are estimated. For future
investigations of liposomes in a pH gradient it is proposed to investigate case 3 as this
showed promising results. In particular, the estimations of the particle velocities appear
to be quite accurate.
66
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1]
J. W. Lichtman, and J. A. Conchello. “Fluorescence microscopy”. Nat. Methods 2
(2005), 910.
[2]
A. D. Kashkanova, M. Blessing, A. Gemeinhardt, D. Soulat, and V. Sandoghdar.
“Precision size and refractive index analysis of weakly scattering nanoparticles in
polydispersions”. Nat. Methods 19 (2022), 586.
[3]
G. De Wit, J. S. Danial, P. Kukura, and M. I. Wallace. “Dynamic label-free imaging
of lipid nanodomains”. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112 (2015), 12299.
[4]
P. Kukura, H. Ewers, C. Müller, A. Renn, A. Helenius, and V. Sandoghdar. “High-
speed nanoscopic tracking of the position and orientation of a single virus”. Nat.
Methods 6 (2009), 923.
[5]
M. Dahmardeh, H. Mirzaalian Dastjerdi, H. Mazal, H. Köstler, and V. Sandoghdar.
“Self-supervised machine learning pushes the sensitivity limit in label-free detection
of single proteins below 10 kDa”. Nat. Methods 20 (2023), 442.
[6]
S. Spindler, J. Ehrig, K. Koenig, T. Nowak, M. Piliarik, H. E. Stein, R. W. Taylor, E.
Garanger, S. Lecommandoux, I. D. Alves, and V. Sandoghdar. “Erratum: Visualiza-
tion of lipids and proteins at high spatial and temporal resolution via interferometric
scattering (iSCAT) microscopy (2016 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 49 274002)”. J. Phys.
D: Appl. Phys. 49 (2016), 349601.
[7]
E. Farrell, and J.-L. Brousseau. Guide for DLS sample preparation. Accessed: 2023-
06-13. url: https://www.research.colostate.edu/wp- content/uploads/2018/11/
Guide_for_DLS_sample_preparation.pdf.
[8]
A. Nano. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) - Understanding the Basics. Accessed:
2023-05-24. url: https://www.azonano.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=3662.
[9]
M. K. Rasmussen, J. N. Pedersen, and R. Marie. “Size and surface charge charac-
terization of nanoparticles with a salt gradient”. Nat. Commun. 11 (2020), 2337.
[10]
J. Palacci, B. Abécassis, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert, and L. Bocquet. “Colloidal
Motility and Pattern Formation under Rectified Diffusiophoresis”. Phys. Rev. Lett.
104 (13 2010), 138302.
[11]
B. Špačková et al. “Label-free nanofluidic scattering microscopy of size and mass of
single diffusing molecules and nanoparticles”. Nat. Methods 19 (2022), 751.
[12]
J. Dong, D. Maestre, C. Conrad-Billroth, and T. Juffmann. “Fundamental bounds
on the precision of iSCAT, COBRI and dark-field microscopy for 3D localization
and mass photometry”. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 54 (2021), 394002.
[13]
J. Wei, T. Qi, C. Hao, S. Zong, Z. Wang, and Y. Cui. “Optical microscopic and
spectroscopic detection of exosomes”. Trends Anal. Chem. 163 (2023), 117077.
[14]
T. Akagi, K. Kato, M. Kobayashi, N. Kosaka, T. Ochiya, and T. Ichiki. “On-chip
immunoelectrophoresis of extracellular vesicles released from human breast cancer
cells”. Plos One 10 (2015), e0123603.
[15]
G. Young, and P. Kukura. “Interferometric Scattering Microscopy”. Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem. 70 (2019), 301.
[16]
F. Zernike. “Phase contrast, a new method for the microscopic observation of trans-
parent objects Part II”. Physica 9 (1942), 974.
[17]
A. S. G. Curtis. “THE MECHANISM OF ADHESION OF CELLS TO GLASS: A
Study by Interference Reflection Microscopy”. J. Cell Biol. 20 (1964), 199.
67
==PAGE:75==
[18]
W. Taylor Richard, and V. Sandoghdar. “Interferometric Scattering (iSCAT) Mi-
croscopy and Related Techniques”. Label-free Super-resolution Microscopy (2019),
25.
[19]
K. Lindfors, T. Kalkbrenner, P. Stoller, and V. Sandoghdar. “Detection and spec-
troscopy of gold nanoparticles using supercontinuum white light confocal microscopy”.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004), 037401.
[20]
R. G. Mahmoodabadi, R. W. Taylor, M. Kaller, S. Spindler, M. Mazaheri, K. Ka-
saian, and V. Sandoghdar. “Point spread function in interferometric scattering mi-
croscopy (iSCAT). Part I: aberrations in defocusing and axial localization”. Opt.
Express 28 (2020), 25969.
[21]
R. W. Taylor, and V. Sandoghdar. “Interferometric Scattering Microscopy: Seeing
Single Nanoparticles and Molecules via Rayleigh Scattering”. Nano Lett. 19 (2019),
4827.
[22]
V. Khandan, V. Boerkamp, A. Jabermoradi, M. Fontana, J. Hohlbein, E. Verpoorte,
R. C. Chiechi, and K. Mathwig. “Viscophoretic particle transport”. arXiv (2022).
[23]
W. L. Hsu, D. J. Harvie, M. R. Davidson, H. Jeong, E. M. Goldys, and D. W. Inglis.
“Concentration gradient focusing and separation in a silica nanofluidic channel with
a non-uniform electroosmotic flow”. Lab Chip 14 (2014), 3539.
[24]
B. Derjaguin, G. Sidorenkov, E. Zubashchenko, and E. Kiseleva. “Kinetic Phenom-
ena in the boundary layers of liquids 1. the capillary osmosis”. Prog. Surf. Sci. 43
(1993), 138.
[25]
S. Shim. “Diffusiophoresis, Diffusioosmosis, and Microfluidics: Surface-Flow-Driven
Phenomena in the Presence of Flow”. Chem. Rev. 122 (2022), 6986.
[26]
C. Lee, C. Cottin-Bizonne, A. L. Biance, P. Joseph, L. Bocquet, and C. Ybert.
“Osmotic flow through fully permeable nanochannels”. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014),
244501.
[27]
M. K. Rasmussen. “Capture, characterization and reactions of nanoparticles in a
diffusiophoretic trap”. Thesis. 2020.
[28]
K. Dill, and S. Bromberg. Molecular Driving Forces: Statistical Thermodynamics in
Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Nanoscience. 2nd ed. Garland Science, 2011.
[29]
D. C. Prieve, J. L. Anderson, J. P. Ebel, and M. E. Lowell. “Motion of a particle
generated by chemical gradients. Part 2. Electrolytes”. J. Fluid Mech. 148 (1984),
247.
[30]
H. Bruus. Theoretical microfluidics. Vol. 18. Oxford University Press, 2007.
[31]
C. L. Vestergaard, J. N. Pedersen, K. I. Mortensen, and H. Flyvbjerg. “Estimation of
motility parameters from trajectory data”. Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics 224 (2015),
1151.
[32]
P. Utko, K. F. Persson, A. Kristensen, and N. B. Larsen. “Injection molded nanoflu-
idic chips: Fabrication method and functional tests using single-molecule DNA ex-
periments”. Lab Chip 11 (2011), 303.
[33]
T. A. P. GmbH. TOPAS® 5013L-10. Accessed: 2023-06-14. url: https://topas.com/
sites/default/files/TDS_5013L-10_english%5C%20units.pdf.
[34]
Zeiss. Oil Immersion and Refractive Index. Accessed: 2023-06-14. url: https://zeiss-
campus.magnet.fsu.edu/tutorials/basics/oilimmersionrefractiveindex/indexflash.html.
[35]
P. F. Østergaard, J. Lopacinska-Jørgensen, J. N. Pedersen, N. Tommerup, A. Kris-
tensen, H. Flyvbjerg, A. Silahtaroglu, R. Marie, and R. J. Taboryski. “Optical map-
ping of single-molecule human DNA in disposable, mass-produced all-polymer”. J.
Micromech. Microeng. 25 (2015), 105002.
68
==PAGE:76==
[36]
A. G. Thompson, E. Gray, S. M. Heman-Ackah, I. Mäger, K. Talbot, S. El An-
daloussi, M. J. Wood, and M. R. Turner. “Extracellular vesicles in neurodegenerative
disease-pathogenesis to biomarkers”. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 12 (2016), 346.
[37]
M. L. Immordino, F. Dosio, and L. Cattel. “Stealth liposomes: review of the basic
science, rationale, and clinical applications, existing and potential”. Int. J. Nanomed.
1 (2006), 297.
[38]
J. F. Nagle, and S. Tristram-Nagle. “Structure of lipid bilayers”. BBA - Reviews on
Biomembranes 1469 (2000), 159.
[39]
S. Tidemand-Lichtenberg. “Interferometric scattering microscopy”. Thesis. 2022. url:
www.healthtech.dtu.dk.
[40]
P. Willmer. “Interferometric scattering microscopy for label-free tracking of nanopar-
ticles in a nanofluidic chip”. Thesis. 2023. url: www.healthtech.dtu.dk.
[41]
P. Willmer. “Combining iSCAT imaging and nanofluidics”. Thesis. 2022.
[42]
T. Photometrics. Prime BSI ExpressTM Scientific CMOS Camera Datasheet. 2020.
url: https://www.photometrics.com/wp- content/uploads/2019/10/Prime- BSI-
Express-Datasheet-Rev-A5-07172020.pdf.
[43]
H. Photonics. Cobolt 06-01 Series Datasheet. 2022. url: https://hubner-photonics.
com/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/D0352-O-Datasheet-Cobolt-06-01-Series.pdf.
[44]
B. E. A. Saleh, and M. C. Teich. Fundamentals of photonics. Wiley-Interscience,
2007.
[45]
J. Ortega Arroyo, D. Cole, and P. Kukura. “Interferometric scattering microscopy
and its combination with single-molecule fluorescence imaging”. Nat. Protoc. 11
(2016), 617.
[46]
Zeiss. Microscopy basics - The Point Spread Function. Accessed: 2023-06-06. url:
https://zeiss-campus.magnet.fsu.edu/articles/basics/psf.html.
[47]
D. B. Murphy, and M. W. Davidson. Fundamentals of light microscopy and electronic
imaging. 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[48]
Laser Safety Facts Class 3B (IIIb) laser safety information. Accessed: 2023-04-30.
url: https://www.lasersafetyfacts.com/3B/.
[49]
IEC. IEC 60825-1 Ed. 3.0 b:2014. Accessed: 2023-04-30. url: https://webstore.ansi.
org/standards/iec/iec60825ed2014.
[50]
Biotium. Fluorescence Spectra Viewer. Accessed: 2023-06-14. url: https://biotium.
com/spectra-viewer/?dye=DiO&em=FITC&ex=Ex.%5C%2C475%5C%2C35.
[51]
E. Scientific. FITC Filter Set for Fluorescence Spectroscopy. Accessed: 2023-06-14.
url: https://www.elliotscientific.com/Iridian-FITC.
[52]
T. Photometrics. Prime 95TM Scientific CMOS Camera Datasheet. Accessed: 2023-
06-15. url: https://www.photometrics.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Prime-
95B-Datasheet-07172020.pdf.
[53]
D. Ershov, M. S. Phan, J. W. Pylvänäinen, S. U. Rigaud, L. Le Blanc, A. Charles-
Orszag, J. R. Conway, R. F. Laine, N. H. Roy, D. Bonazzi, G. Duménil, G. Jacquemet,
and J. Y. Tinevez. “TrackMate 7: integrating state-of-the-art segmentation algo-
rithms into tracking pipelines”. Nat. Methods 19 (2022), 829.
[54]
J. R. Taylor. An introduction to error analysis. University Science Books, 1997,
Appendix E.2.
[55]
M. K. Rasmussen, J. N. Pedersen, and R. Marie. “Label-Free Sensing of Biorecog-
nition on Liposomes”. ACS Sens. 5 (2020), 4057.
[56]
K. Perez-Toralla, J. Champ, M. R. Mohamadi, O. Braun, L. Malaquin, J. L. Viovy,
and S. Descroix. “New non-covalent strategies for stable surface treatment of ther-
moplastic chips”. Lab Chip 13 (2013), 4409.
69
==PAGE:77==
[57]
Sigma-Aldrich. Pluronic® F-127. Accessed: 2023-05-12. url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.
com/DK/en/product/sigma/p2443.
[58]
S. Chanda, and P. A. Tsai. “Competition between electroosmotic and chemiosmotic
flow in charged nanofluidics”. Phys. Fluids 33 (2021), 032008.
[59]
S. Shim, J. K. Nunes, G. Chen, and H. A. Stone. “Diffusiophoresis in the presence
of a pH gradient”. Phys. Rev. Fluids 7 (11 2022), 110513.
[60]
N. Shi, R. Nery-Azevedo, A. I. Abdel-Fattah, and T. M. Squires. “Diffusiophoretic
Focusing of Suspended Colloids”. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (25 2016), 258001.
[61]
P. W. Atkins. Physical Chemistry. 4th ed. Oxford University Press, 1990.
[62]
M. I. Angelova, A.-F. Bitbol, M. Seigneuret, G. Staneva, A. Kodama, Y. Sakuma,
T. Kawakatsu, M. Imai, and N. Puff. “pH sensing by lipids in membranes: The
fundamentals of pH-driven migration, polarization and deformations of lipid bilayer
assemblies”. BBA - Biomembranes 1860 (2018), 2042.
[63]
A. Bioquest. Calcein. Accessed: 2023-06-11. url: https://www.aatbio.com/resources/
application-notes/calcein.
[64]
Biotium. Calcein (High Purity). Accessed: 2023-06-11. url: https://biotium.com/
product/calcein-high-purity/.
[65]
J. S. Park, I. B. Lee, H. M. Moon, J. S. Ryu, S. Y. Kong, S. C. Hong, and M.
Cho. “Fluorescence-Combined Interferometric Scattering Imaging Reveals Nanoscale
Dynamic Events of Single Nascent Adhesions in Living Cells”. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
11 (2020), 10233.
[66]
Agilent. Agilent streptavidin Datasheet. Accessed: 2023-06-21. url: https://www.
agilent.com/cs/library/datasheets/public/5994-1233EN.pdf.
70
==PAGE:78==
A
Diffusiophoretic motion
ζ
−F0
−F1
−F2
−F3
−F4
−F5
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2503
0.16498
1.5124
0.0013117
0.00010238
0.0022920
0.031452
0.3980
0.41897
2.4302
0.0084115
0.0010404
0.014664
0.12692
0.8036
1.7482
5.1742
0.14222
0.034929
0.24510
1.0659
1.0000
2.7529
6.6865
0.34526
0.10427
0.59016
2.0838
1.2267
4.2424
8.6460
0.79535
0.28979
1.3443
3.9252
1.6776
8.4338
13.480
2.9041
1.3887
4.7748
10.567
2.0000
12.657
17.980
6.0878
3.3507
9.7812
18.725
2.1712
15.406
20.830
8.6398
5.0589
13.701
24.597
2.4385
20.533
26.063
14.250
9.0624
22.120
36.426
2.7340
27.598
33.188
23.500
16.111
35.597
54.149
3.0000
35.475
41.081
35.484
25.730
52.559
75.317
3.3716
49.460
55.044
60.102
46.445
86.273
115.44
3.4096
51.120
56.699
63.258
49.164
90.515
120.37
4.0000
83.705
89.185
132.63
110.90
180.80
221.94
4.2927
105.71
111.13
185.423
159.35
247.03
294.13
5.0000
181.63
186.89
389.37
351.59
492.83
555.03
5.6440
295.01
300.14
729.66
679.62
885.44
962.40
6.0000
374.50
379.56
982.81
926.21
1170.1
1254.7
6.7801
642.13
647.08
1882.9
1810.4
2157.1
2259.5
7.0000
745.07
749.99
2241.5
2164.3
2543.7
2651.2
8.0000
1443.0
1447.8
4762.5
4664.0
5212.0
5342.4
9.0000
2736.8
2741.6
9619.5
9499.0
10249
10402
10.000
5105.5
5110.2
18727
18585
19569
19745
Table A.1: The F-functions used for estimating the DP mobility in the scenario where the
Debye length and particle are comparable in size [29].
71
==PAGE:79==
B
Tracking in salt gradient - data
B.1
Fluorescence imaging
Figure B.1: Trajectory of liposome 2 in Figure 6.8a-c.
Figure B.2: Displacement of liposome 2 in Figure 6.8a-c.
72
==PAGE:80==
Figure B.3: Trajectory of liposome 3 in Figure 6.8a-c.
Figure B.4: Displacement of liposome 3 in Figure 6.8a-c.
73
==PAGE:81==
Figure B.5: Trajectory of liposome 4 in Figure 6.8a-c.
Figure B.6: Displacement of liposome 4 in Figure 6.8a-c.
74
==PAGE:82==
Figure B.7: Trajectory of liposome 5 in Figure 6.8a-c.
Figure B.8: Displacement of liposome 5 in Figure 6.8a-c.
75
==PAGE:83==
Figure B.9: Trajectory of liposome 6 in Figure 6.8a-c.
Figure B.10: Displacement of liposome 6 in Figure 6.8a-c.
76
==PAGE:84==
Figure B.11: Trajectory of liposome 7 in Figure 6.8a-c.
Figure B.12: Displacement of liposome 7 in Figure 6.8a-c.
77
==PAGE:85==
Figure B.13: Trajectory of liposome 8 in Figure 6.8a-c.
Figure B.14: Displacement of liposome 8 in Figure 6.8a-c.
78
==PAGE:86==
B.2
iSCAT imaging
Figure B.15: Trajectory of liposome 2 in Figure 6.8b-d.
Figure B.16: Displacement of liposome 2 in Figure 6.8b-d.
B.3
Diffusion coeﬀicients
79
==PAGE:87==
Figure B.17: Trajectory of liposome 3 in Figure 6.8b-d.
Figure B.18: Displacement of liposome 3 in Figure 6.8b-d.
80
==PAGE:88==
Figure B.19: Trajectory of liposome 4 in Figure 6.8b-d.
Figure B.20: Displacement of liposome 4 in Figure 6.8b-d.
81
==PAGE:89==
Figure B.21: Trajectory of liposome 5 in Figure 6.8b-d.
Figure B.22: Displacement of liposome 5 in Figure 6.8b-d.
82
==PAGE:90==
Figure B.23: Trajectory of liposome 6 in Figure 6.8b-d.
Figure B.24: Displacement of liposome 6 in Figure 6.8b-d.
83
==PAGE:91==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Particle no
2
3
4
5
6
Diffusion coefficient [µm2/s]
RMS
CVE
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Particle no
-20
-10
0
10
20
Diffusion coefficient [µm2/s]
RMS
CVE
Figure B.25: Upper: the diffusion constants of eight liposomes obtained using fluorescence
imaging. Lower: the diffusion constants of six liposomes obtained using iSCAT imaging.
The blue spots are estimated using the RMS method and the red spots are based on the
CVE method with error bars based on the variance in Eq. 2.11
84
==PAGE:92==
85
==PAGE:93==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
