==PAGE:1==
Automatic speech recognition­based
systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Wojciech Grzegorz Tyczynski &
Marcus Koldborg Brandt
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with Raffle.ai, to fulfill the requirements for acquiring
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, linear algebra,
machine learning, deep learning, and natural language processing.
ii
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Automatic Speech Recognition systems play a vital role in various domains, including
human­computer interaction, transcription services, and voice assistants. This Master’s
thesis aims to develop an automatic speech recognition service using OpenAI Whisper as
the foundation. Whisper shows impressive results on poor audio recordings and is a ma­
jor step toward solving the problem of Automatic Speech Recognition. The study will pro­
vide an overview of the theoretical concept and recent field research. It will then explore
Whisper and its other implementations, such as Whisper from Hugging Face Transform­
ers. In order to assess their transcription capabilities on audios in different languages,
lengths, and clarity, as well as inference speed, Whisper and Hugging Face Whisper are
benchmarked across state­of­the­art short­ and long­form datasets. Although Whisper
performs well in high­resource languages such as English, it is necessary to fine­tune the
model to improve performance for less common languages. Two methods, full fine­tuning,
and fine­tuning with Low­Rank Adaptation (LoRA) with Parameter Efficient Fine­Tuning
(PEFT) package from Hugging Face, are used to fine­tune Whisper. The results demon­
strate that a huge and diverse dataset containing a mix of short­ and long­form audio is
necessary for effective fine­tuning. Based on the benchmark results, the Hugging Face
Whisper implementation is selected for creating an ASR system. It is significantly faster
than OpenAI Whisper, with negligible differences in performance.
However, Hugging
Face Whisper lacks some features that OpenAI Whisper has built­in, such as word­level
timestamps and automatic language detection of transcribed audio. Both features are
implemented as stand­alone functions integrated with Hugging Face Whisper. Finally, an
ASR service is created as an API that can transcribe audio files and Youtube videos and
provide accurate word­level timestamps.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our deepest gratitude to Raffle.ai for their invaluable support
throughout the completion of our Master’s thesis. Their unwavering commitment, exper­
tise, and resources have been instrumental in shaping this research project. In extend,
we would like to appreciate the individuals:
Ole Winther, Professor and CRO, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science & Raffle.ai
Supervisor
Valentin Liévin, Machine learning researcher, Raffle.ai
Supervisor
Mathias Baltzersen, Senior Data Scientist, Raffle.ai
Supervisor ­ Second half of the thesis
Jonas Lyngsø, Team Lead Data Scientist, Raffle.ai
Supervisor ­ First half of the thesis
Additionally, we would like to thank all the good people at DTU HPC support for always
answering our questions and showing the greatest expertise in their field.
iv
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Our contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Concepts
5
2.1
Signal processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
ASR ­ Traditional methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Deep learning ­ principals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Transformer models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Natural language processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Whisper model
20
3.1
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Whisper Transcription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Problems and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Related work
28
4.1
Automatic speech recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2
Whisper related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Whisper Exploration
32
5.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Fine­tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6
ASR system implementation
55
6.1
Language detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.2
Word­level timestamps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.3
Implementation ASR system as API
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.4
Integration of ASR API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7
Future work and Discussion
63
7.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
8
Conclusion
66
Bibliography
68
A Dynamic Programming based DTW algorithm
73
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
v
==PAGE:8==
B Activation Functions Overview
74
C Tokenizers
77
D Danish Librivox Dataset
79
E
Seq2SeqTrainingArguments setup for finetuning Whisper using PEFT and
LoRA
80
F
Flowchart of merging chunks segments
81
G API models
83
G.1 ASR API models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
G.2 Connector API models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
H DecodingOptions
85
vi
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) is a rapidly evolving technology that aims to develop
methodology and technology capabilities to recognize and transcribe spoken language
into written text. It has been the subject of intensive research and development for years,
from detecting single words to systems capable of automatically transcribing long record­
ings and speech in real time in multiple languages.
In recent years ASR has become an integral part of our everyday lives. It is used by
people in many places without knowing it. On platforms such as YouTube, ASR systems
automatically generate captions for videos [1]. Virtual assistants on phones and home
speakers are used by people daily without thinking about the technology behind them.
Due to ASR systems, assistants can understand human speech. The development of
ASR has changed how people interact with their technology and has broadened content
to users that would not normally see it because of a language barrier.
Initially, traditional statistical algorithms such as Hidden Markov models [2] and Dynamic
time warping [3] were used in speech recognition systems. The prediction methods can
only identify a specific amount of speech that matches one of the known speech samples
used to develop them. For the last few years, better models for doing speech­to­text have
been introduced. They are mostly built using deep learning concepts or hybrid approaches
where both deep learning models and traditional methods are used. Speech recognition
systems based on deep learning models can transcribe speech in multiple languages and
better understand accents, dialects, and context. Moreover, they are more robust to the
noisy environment and do zero­shot speech transcription.
This Master’s thesis aims to explore the latest developments in automatic speech recog­
nition models by looking at one of the newest models in the field created by OpenAI
called Whisper. Through an in­depth examination of the underlying algorithms, training
techniques, and evaluation metrics, this study seeks to provide a comprehensive under­
standing of the state­of­the­art ASR models and their potential for further improvement.
The thesis will present fundamental aspects of ASR technology and encompass the key
components of speech processing, deep learning models, and Natural language process­
ing. By delving into the theory behind ASR Systems, the fundamental concepts, a robust
theoretical groundwork can be laid for understanding the subsequent progressions in ASR
models.
The thesis will focus on the latest research in ASR models. A comprehensive deep dive
into OpenAI’s model Whisper will be made, and a description of Whisper’s architecture,
training, and decoding will be given. Different Whisper implementations will be introduced
and will be benchmarked on various datasets to confirm the performance reported by
OpenAI and compare the performance for the different implementations. An attempt to
improve Whisper’s performance on smaller languages will be made by fine­tuning Whisper
with normal fine­tuning of the model and LoRA fine­tuning. The comparison of the two
fine­tuning methods will be conducted using benchmarking.
The aim of exploring Whisper’s capabilities is to build an ASR system that can be served
as an API. The API will allow transcribing audio and video material in multiple languages
and getting accurate word­level timestamps. The system will be extended to be able
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
1
==PAGE:10==
to download audio material from Youtube and chunk the text into sequences for further
usage.
In conclusion, this Master’s thesis aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the recent
advancements in automatic speech recognition. By examining the underlying algorithms,
training techniques, evaluation metrics, and practical applications, this research seeks to
contribute to the current body of knowledge in ASR and pave the way for future enhance­
ments in this critical field of research.
1.1
Motivation
The Motivation behind this Master’s thesis on automatic speech recognition systems arises
from the increasing importance and potential influence of ASR technology in contempo­
rary society. The capacity for machines to precisely transcribe and comprehend human
speech has become a vital element in various industries and applications, encompass­
ing voice­controlled devices, transcription services, call centers, and language learning
platforms. Nonetheless, despite recent progress, notable obstacles remain that must be
confronted to unlock the capabilities of ASR systems fully.
ASR models have been a major field in AI Research. Facebook AI, Microsoft, OpenAI, and
many other institutions have presented solutions to address various challenges in ASR.
The challenges include; a lack of labeled data for smaller languages, accurate transcrip­
tions, low inference time, and additional functionality such as precise timestamps and
speaker diarization. All of this functionality is important for accurately getting machine­
generated subtitles, summarizing audio and video clips, and many other use cases seen
in everyday scenarios. Current state­of­the­art solutions address many of these chal­
lenges but are missing or can be improved for many of the points mentioned.
OpenAI Whisper is the next milestone in the ASR field. Compared to other state­of­the­art
ASR systems, Whisper, pre­trained on 680,000 hours of multilingual data, is more robust
to accents, background noise, and technical language, showing better performance on
popular benchmark datasets. Whisper is capable of transcribing audio in multiple lan­
guages as well as translating from those languages to English. Even though Whisper
was addressing many ASR field challenges from the start, the community has further
developed the model to extend its functionality and continues to do so.
AI research is very focused on getting the best results in their benchmarks and showcasing
how good their model is. There is, however, a lag in the research of getting the model out
into people’s hands. It is an issue that normal people cannot use the models, and there
is no easy way of doing this. Creating a system where the model gets served and can be
used in a sensible way is of utmost importance. Whisper is a clear example of a model
that can be used in numerous systems and bring more usability to end users.
The current limitations can be addressed by investigating the recent advancements in
ASR models, training techniques, evaluation metrics, and practical applications, paving
the way for the development of more accurate, robust, and adaptable ASR systems.
Additionally, this study has been conducted under the guidance and supervision of Raf­
fle.ai, a Danish company specializing in applying deep learning algorithms for search pur­
poses. The increasing significance of ASR technology has captured the interest of Raf­
fle.ai due to the abundance of information that remains untranscribed in audio or video
formats. The ability to convert such material into written text and facilitate search func­
tionalities holds substantial potential for various customers of Raffle.ai, augmenting their
information retrieval capabilities.
2
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Goals
The introduction has already provided a brief overview of the project’s objectives. This
section expands upon the initial introduction, offering a more elaborate account of the
research context, motivations, and the significance of the proposed improvements to the
Whisper ASR system.
Need­to­Have Objectives. The project’s essential objectives are outlined in this section,
representing the aspects that must be addressed to achieve the desired outcome of the
Master’s thesis. These objectives include:
• Exploration of Whisper Implementations:
Various implementations of the Whisper ASR system will be examined and bench­
marked to identify the most effective and efficient approach. This evaluation process
ensures that the selected implementation aligns with the project’s goals of enhanc­
ing speed, accuracy, and functionality.
• Timestamps in Whisper:
This objective involves investigating the incorporation of word­level timestamps within
the Whisper ASR system.
• Performance Improvement for Smaller Languages:
The project will focus on improving the performance of the Whisper ASR system
for smaller languages. Through Fine­tuning the model and using state­of­the­art
datasets in Danish, the possibility of improving Whisper for the Danish language will
be explored.
• Development of a REST API­based ASR System: A primary objective of this thesis
is to create an ASR system that encapsulates the enhanced features of Whisper
and serves the transcriptions to end­users through a REST API. The development
of such a system ensures easy accessibility and seamless integration of the ASR
service into various applications.
Nice­to­Have Objectives. In addition to the essential objectives discussed above, there
are several desirable features that can further enhance the ASR system’s capabilities.
While not critical for the successful completion of the project, these objectives represent
potential avenues for future work or additional project time, including:
• Speaker Diarization in Whisper Transcription:
The integration of speaker diarization into the Whisper ASR system will enable the
identification and differentiation of multiple speakers in the transcriptions. This fea­
ture adds value to the ASR service, allowing for more sophisticated analysis and
applications such as speaker attribution.
• Captions Generation from Whisper Transcriptions:
Generating captions directly from the transcriptions produced by the Whisper ASR
system provides additional functionality that enhances accessibility and usability,
particularly in multimedia content applications.
• Deployment in a Cloud Environment:
To ensure scalability and robustness, the REST API­based ASR system will be de­
ployed in a cloud environment.
• Acquisition of a Large Danish Long­form Dataset:
Obtaining a substantial Danish long­form dataset would further contribute to the
expansion of the ASR system’s language coverage.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
3
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Our contribution
In this Master’s thesis, our research focuses on several key contributions related to the
field of Automatic speech recognition by exploring the possibilities of the Whisper model
created by OpenAI. First, we collect suitable datasets for benchmarking Whisper in En­
glish and Danish. There is a lack of Danish long­form datasets, and a dataset based on
audio samples from the Librivox project is collected together with the associated texts to
benchmark Whisper on long­form Danish data. The community has created more imple­
mentations of Whisper, and we compare the Hugging Face implementation of Whisper
with OpenAI’s own implementation of Whisper decoding.
An attempt to make Whisper even better at transcribing Danish is being made by fine­
tuning Whisper with normal fine­tuning and using Low­rank adaptation (LoRA). The two
different approaches are being evaluated and compared to see if the LoRA fine­tuning
is just as good as normal fine­tuning. In the end, all the results gathered throughout the
exploration are used to create an API that can serve Whisper and have full functionality,
such as automatic language detection and transcriptions with timestamps.
1.4
Thesis outline
This section gives an overview of how the presented thesis has been compartmental­
ized. First, Chapter 2 provides an overview of the most important theoretical concepts
for understanding and building ASR systems. Then, Chapter 3 goes through Whisper
implementations and describes what speech recognition using Whisper looks like. This is
followed by Chapter 4, which describes other Whisper implementations and related works.
Chapter 5 presents a further exploration of the Whisper model consisting of benchmarking
different implementations and fine­tuning the model. Implementation of the ASR system
as an API with additional functionality such as language detection and word­level times­
tamps is shown in Chapter 6. The final Chapters 7 and 8 discuss possible future work
directions and conclude the thesis.
4
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical Concepts
This chapter will describe the technical concepts of automatic speech recognition. First,
it will describe how audio is converted into a format that a computer can use and how
the audio can be modeled to extract more useful information than just the samples. Later
describing more traditional methods of ASR and how single words or small sentences can
be detected by some simple mathematical procedures which have been known for many
years. A description of machine learning concepts will be introduced, and newer concepts
from deep learning, like transformers, will be described. In the end, essential aspects of
natural language processing will be presented.
2.1
Signal processing
This section will not go in­depth with signal processing but give an overview of the con­
cepts which are necessary to perform ASR tasks on audio signals. A computer can not
understand an analog audio signal. The audio needs to be digitalized by sampling and
quantization of the signal to achieve a finite number of bits that can explain the signal. This
process is called an A/D conversion [4], and these bits can be used for further processing
in a digital signal processor, this can be seen in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Simple illustration of the process for transforming an analog signal into a digital
signal
The digital signal processor is typically a software­defined block that can perform mul­
tiple different tasks. These tasks can include filtering, spectrum estimation, and other
algorithms [4].
2.1.1
Sampling
Sampling is the process of converting a continuous­time analog signal into a discrete­time
signal. This is done by measuring the amplitude at regularly spaced intervals of time. The
discrete­time signal is a series of numbers that all describe the signal at a particular point
in time. An illustration of samples can be seen to the left in figure 2.2.
Let’s consider a signal x(t) that is measured at regular intervals T seconds. As a result,
time is divided into discrete units based on the sampling interval T. it can therefore be
defined that t = nT when n = 0, 1, 2, ... The sampling rate is defined as fs = 1/T and
describes how fast the signal is sampled. To capture the signal, the sampling rate must
be at least twice the maximum frequency fmax given with equation 2.1 for the Sampling
time interval [4].
T ≤
1
2 · fmax
(2.1)
The sampling rate is often given in hertz (Hz) and describes the number of events during
one­second [4].
2.1.2
Quantization
Quantization is the process of approximating a range of values with a smaller, finite set
of discrete values. This means taking the samples of a signal and mapping them to a
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: To the left is a sine wave with some samples illustrated by an ’x’. The right
is the Quantized signals shown with the Quantization error and the quantized samples
shown by ’•’. The original signal is plotted behind with a lower opacity.
smaller set that often has a finite number of elements [4]. Storing very precise floating
point numbers takes up an enormous amount of space. It is, therefore, desirable to round
the samples to the nearest value in a finite set of quantization levels. Looking at figure 2.2,
this can be seen by having some quantization levels that are illustrated by the horizontal
lines. All samples are rounded off to the nearest quantization level, and a quantized
sample can be created. This will introduce some noise since the signal is not as precise
anymore. The noise is called quantization error and is illustrated by the orange curve [4].
Quantization is preferable since the quantized samples will be smaller in terms of bits. As
can be seen then, the quantized signal is more squared, and this is due to the low amount
of quantization levels. Adjusting these levels to the individual purpose is desirable since
signals are different in regard to amplitude [4].
2.1.3
Spectrograms
A spectrogram is a visual representation of the frequencies in a signal over time. It is
commonly used for audio processing and speech recognition. A spectrum is the frequen­
cies in a signal and is commonly found by performing Fast­Fourier Transformation (FFT).
Audio is non­periodic signals meaning that their frequencies vary over time. A method to
find the frequencies over time is therefore desirable [5].
The signal is first divided into small overlapping segments or frames to create a spectro­
gram of a time­varying signal. For each frame, FFT is computed, this process is called
the short­time Fourier transform, and that is what is creating the spectrogram. All these
frames are stacked on top of each other and can be plotted visually. The y­axis is trans­
formed into a log scale, and the colors are decibels [5]. This can be seen in figure 2.3
Spectrograms are often provided as log­mel spectrograms. The Mel scale is a unit of
pitch that ensures equal perceived pitch distance between sounds that are equally distant
in pitch. In other words, the Mel scale is designed to be perceptually uniform. This is
useful since humans are better at telling the difference in audio for low pitch than high
pitch. The mel­spectrogram is, therefore, a spectrogram where the audio is transferred
into mel scale [5]. A log­mel spectrogram can be seen in figure 2.4. Here it is clear that
the frequencies have been stretched over the y­axis in comparison to figure 2.3.
6
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: A spectrogram over a short audio file saying two words
Figure 2.4: A log­mel spectrogram over a short audio file saying two words
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
ASR ­ Traditional methods
Traditional ASR methods were good at converting small recordings of single words into
text. In this section, two of those methods will be described. Both of the methods are
highly effective and are still used for keyword detection today. Dynamic time warping is
used in many other scenarios, which makes it very important to know.
2.2.1
Hidden Markov Models
Hidden Markov Models build on top of the Markov process. It is a statistical model which
can be used for ASR systems to model the temporal dependencies of speech signals. A
Markov process describes a sequence of possible events. The probability of each event
is dependent on the previous event. The hidden part of an HMM refers to the underlying
states from input to output that is hidden, one can only observe the output state of the
model. The goal of an HMM is to learn the most likely sequence of hidden states that
generated the observed data, given the model parameters and the observed sequence
[2].
To use an HMM for ASR purposes, one needs to split a speech signal into smaller frames
and use that as input for the HMM. Each frame can be assumed to generate one or more
hidden states in the HMM. Therefore, the goal of the model is to determine the most likely
sequence of hidden states given the observed speech frames. To give an example: If
one has V words that have to be identified and L tokens for each word. Then for each
word in the vocabulary, the HMM can be built. Given the model λv then, for each word, the
optimum parameters can be found from the L tokens such that for the vth word 1 ≤v ≤V .
An observation sequence for every unknown word can be defined as O = O1, O2...OT .
For each Word model, the probabilities can be calculated Pv = Pr(O|λv). The word can
then be chosen by finding the word with the highest model probability [2]:
v∗= argmax
1≤v≤V
[Pv]
2.2.2
Dynamic Time Warping
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is a widely­used algorithm for measuring the similarity
of two time­dependent signals that may vary in time and speed. Initially proposed for
speech recognition [3], later applied to, among others for written character recognition
and forensic document examination [6] or signature verification [7]. DTW computes the
optimal global alignment between two sequences, exploiting temporal distortions between
them.
Two signals are represented as sequences X and Y :
X = (x1, x2, .., xi, ..., xn)
Y = (y1, y2, ..., yj..., ym)
To align sequences X and Y first local cost matrix C(X, Y ) of size n × m has to be
constructed, where ci,j = ||xi −yj||. Once local cost matrix C is constructed, the next
step is to find the alignment path that defines the correspondence of an element xi to
yj following the boundary condition which assigns the first and last elements of X and
Y to each other. Alignment path is a sequence of points p = (p1, p2, ..., pl, ..., pL) where
pl = (pi, pj) ∈[1 : n] × [1 : m] for l ∈[1 : L]. The alignment path has to meet certain
conditions:
• Boundary condition: p1 = (1, 1) and pL = (n, m)
8
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:17==
• Monotonicity condition: n1 ≤n2 ≤... ≤nL and m1 ≤m2 ≤... ≤mL meaning that
points pl have to be time­ordered.
• Step size condition: pl+1 −pl ∈{(1, 1), (1, 0), (0, 1)}
Cost function Cp(X, Y ) corresponding to a wrapping path {(xnl, yml)}L
l=1 is:
Cp(X, Y ) =
L
∑
l=1
c(xnl, yml)
The optimal wrapping path is the path that has a minimal cost associated with alignment
X, and Y [8]. Finding an alignment path in practice can be computationally challeng­
ing, requiring checking all possible paths. To overcome this, DTW employs a Dynamic
Programming­based algorithm. The whole algorithm can be seen in appendix A. The al­
gorithm’s first part is the construction of the accumulated cost matrix D using the local
cost matrix C in the following way:
1. First row: D(1, j) = ∑M
j=1 c(x1, yj), j ∈[1, M]
2. First column: D(i, 1) = ∑N
i=1 c(xi, y1), i ∈[1, N]
3. Other elements: D(i, j) = min(D(i −1, j −1), D(i −1, j), D(i, j −1) + c(xi, yj), i ∈
[1, N], j ∈[1, M]
Once the accumulated cost matrix D is constructed, the best alignment path can be found
by backtracking from the ending point pL to the starting point p1 [8].
In speech recognition systems DTW algorithm is used to compare template utterances
with recorded speech and find the nearest template. It is achieved by computing the DTW
distance between the record and the template and choosing a template with minimum
distance.
2.3
Deep learning ­ principals
Deep learning is a branch of machine learning that is based on training artificial neural
networks to solve complex tasks like classification or regression problems. Deep learn­
ing models are often complex networks built by multiple layers interconnected through
weighted connections. The weights in the connections are adjusted during model train­
ing through a process called backpropagation [9, 10]. This section will describe different
types of artificial neural networks and their use.
2.3.1
Deep feedforward networks
This type of network has many names and is also known as feedforward neural networks
(FFNN) and multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). This is one of the most important parts of
neural networks since it is widely used in models, either as a full model or part of a model.
In an FFNN, the input data is introduced to the input layer. It then travels through one
or more hidden layers of neurons, eventually generating an output in the output layer.
Each neuron obtains input from the preceding layer within the network and calculates a
weighted sum of these inputs. An activation function subsequently processes the sum to
generate an output, which serves as the input for the next layer in the network.
To understand how an FFNN works then, a single neuron can be looked at. Figure 2.5 is
showing how data is transferred between the layers and to a single neuron. A neuron is
receiving the output from the previous layer as input. Let’s consider a single neuron with
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: Illustration of a single neuron and how the input gets added weights to it in a
Feedforward neural network
inputs x1, x2, ..., xn. Each input has an associated weight w1, w2, ..., wn, which determines
its contribution to the neuron’s output. The inputs’ weighted sum is calculated with a bias
term b [9, 10].
z = w1x1 + w2x2 + ... + wn ∗xn + b
The weighted sum z will typically get an activation function applied to produce the output.
The weights and bias is adjusted during training, and this is applicable to all neurons in
the network [9, 10].
An FFNN network aims to model the target function y = f∗(x). The model, represented
by the function y = f(x; θ), aims to approximate f∗as closely as possible. The learning
algorithm adjusts the parameters θ to minimize the difference between f and f∗. The
parameters θ are the weight and bias as described above f(x; w, b) = xT w + b. The
network comprises multiple layers that feed its output to the next layer. A layer can be
defined as h = g(W T x + b) where W is the weights, x is the input or output from the
previous layer, b is the bias, and g is a non­linear activation function [9].
2.3.2
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are a group of networks designed to process data
in the form of multiple arrays [9]. Examples of such data include 1­D time series data
or text or 2­D images where an array represents a grid of pixels. The main element of
these networks is the convolution layer (CONV). Convolution layer use kernels (filters) K
to perform convolution operation on the input I and obtain output O = I ∗K called feature
map. It is achieved by scanning input I over its dimensions, as shown in Figure 2.6.
10
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: Example of convolution operation
The size of feature map O can be calculated using the following equation:
O = I −K + 2P
S
+ 1
Where I and K are, respectively, the input and kernel size, p is the size of zero­padding
which denotes the number of zeros added to each boundary of the input. Stride S is the
step size that the kernel moves after each operation. After performing convolution in CNN,
the subsequent step typically involves pooling. Pooling is an operation that downsamples
the data and creates spatial invariance. The two most commonly used types of pooling are
max pooling, which takes the maximum value of the kernel, and average pooling, which
calculates the average value of the kernel[11]. The fully connected layers are typically
positioned at the end of a CNN and are applied to flattened outputs from the convolutional
part of the network[9].
2.3.3
Recurrent neural network
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are designed to process sequential data. They are
different from FFNNs which have a unidirectional flow of information from input to output.
RNNs utilize connections that form loops. This allows them to grasp temporal dependen­
cies and contextual information within sequential data. Recurrent networks possess the
ability to handle significantly longer sequences compared to non­specialized networks,
making them suitable for tasks requiring the processing of extensive sequential data.
Additionally, recurrent networks can effectively process sequences of varying lengths,
providing flexibility in handling inputs of different sizes [9].
One of the fundamental characteristics of an RNN is its capability to retain an internal
memory or hidden state, which can hold information from previous inputs. This hidden
state is continually updated and transmitted as the network receives new inputs, enabling
the network to assimilate past information and utilize it to impact the current output. The
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
11
==PAGE:20==
easiest way of looking at this is by looking at the architecture of an RNN. In figure 2.7, a
simple architecture is shown [9].
Figure 2.7: Illutsration of RNN Architecture. x is the input, h are hidden states and o is
the output.
Here the hidden state is illustrated by the blue boxes, and a common way of writing the
math for the hidden state is as shown in equation 2.2. Here x is the input sequence, and
h(t −1) is the output from the previous hidden state. Wxh represents the weight matrix
connecting the input to the hidden state. Whh represents the weight matrix capturing the
influence of the previous hidden state, and bh is the bias vector. g is an activation function
[9, 12].
h(t) = f(h(t−1), x(t); θ)
= g(Wxhxt + Whhht−1 + bh)
(2.2)
An RNN model can have multiple ways of processing sequential data. One common task
is sequence­to­sequence. This converts a sequence of type A to type B. This can, as an
example, be a translation from one language to another. One common way to achieve this
is by using an encoder­decoder architecture. The architecture is illustrated in figure 2.8.
An encoder­decoder or sequence­to­sequence RNN architecture serves the purpose of
learning how to produce an output sequence (y(1), (y(2), ..., y(ny)) by considering an input
sequence (x(1), x(2), ..., x(nx)). The architecture has two major components: An encoder
that processes the input sequence and a decoder that generates the output sequence.
The hidden state of the encoder is employed to compute a generally fixed­size context
variable C, which represents a semantic summary of the input sequence. This context
variable C is then fed as input to the decoder [9, 12].
In this architecture, the context variable C is a vector representing the entire input se­
quence. Since C is storing all information about the input, this can lead to information
loss. Additionally, the decoder will decode from this single vector given which is a very
complex task. The decoder is only receiving information about the last output from the
encoder. This issue can be solved with an attention mechanism [12].
The attention mechanism allows the decoder to focus on relevant parts of the encoded
input sequence selectively. It enhances communication between the encoder and de­
coder, enabling the decoder to generate output while attending to specific information.
The input sequence undergoes processing by the encoder, resulting in hidden states that
retain the input’s information. During the decoding process, at each time step, the de­
coder produces a hidden state. The attention mechanism calculates alignment scores,
12
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.8: Illutsration of an encoder­decoder RNN Architecture
which reflect the importance or relevance of each hidden state from the encoder to the on­
going decoding step. Alignment scores are derived by feeding the decoder, and encoder
states into a feedforward neural network. The resulting alignment scores have a softmax
function applied, generating attention weights. These weights signify the significance of
the encoder’s hidden states with respect to the ongoing decoding step. The attention
weights are then used to compute a context vector, a weighted sum of the encoder’s hid­
den states. The context vector captures relevant information from the input sequence for
the decoder’s current focus. The context vector is combined with the decoder’s hidden
state to generate the output for that time step. The attention will give the decoder the
ability to adjust its focus and adapt to different parts of the input sequence. This allows
the network to capture context and improve the performance [12].
2.3.4
Activation functions
Activation functions have been mentioned multiple times so far as a function that is applied
to an output of a layer in a neural network as h = g(W T x + b) where g is the activation
function. Multiple different types of activation functions exist, but they all serve the same
purpose to introduce non­linearity to the network, allowing it to learn and approximate
complex patterns and relationships in the data [10, 13]. Appendix B goes through some
of the most used activation functions.
2.3.5
Loss functions
Deep learning models involve the optimization of a function f(x) to minimize or maximize it
by modifying x. This process mostly tries to minimize f(x), if it is a maximization problem,
it can be solved by minimizing −f(x). This function is called various names such as cost
function, loss function, and criterion. The loss function will therefore describe the error
between the predicted output of a model and the actual target value associated with the
input data. There are multiple different loss functions, and the choice of an appropriate
loss function depends on the specific problem and the nature of the data [9].
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
13
==PAGE:22==
2.3.6
Backpropagation
Backpropagation is the core algorithm of how neural networks learn. The algorithm com­
putes the gradient, which indicates how the network’s weights and biases should be ad­
justed to minimize the difference between predicted and actual outputs. The backpropa­
gation algorithm consists of two primary stages: the forward pass and the backward pass.
In the forward pass, the input data is sequentially passed through the network’s layers,
producing predictions at the output layer. Every neuron within the network applies an ac­
tivation function to its input, incorporating non­linearities that allow the network to acquire
intricate relationships. After the completion of the forward pass, the backward pass be­
gins. During this phase, the algorithm computes the gradients of the network’s weights
and biases in relation to a selected loss function. These gradients denote the direction
and extent of the weight modifications required to minimize the loss [9].
A forward pass through the network can be defined as seen in equation 2.3. Here z[l]
i is
the weighted sum over the inputs. l denotes the layers in the network, where w is the
weight matrices, g is an activation function and g is applied to obtain the output activation
a[l]
i . The output of the forward pass is generating the predicted output ˆy [9].
z[l]
i =
n[l−1]
∑
j=1
w[l]
ij a[l−1]
j
+ b[l]
i ,
a[l]
i = g
(
z[l]
i
)
(2.3)
A loss function is used to measure the discrepancy between the predicted output ˆy and
the true label y. The backward pass will compute the gradients of the loss function with
respect to the weights and biases in the network. The backward pass is using the chain
rule to compute the gradient. Beginning at the output layer, the gradient of the loss func­
tion with respect to the output activations is computed
∂L
∂a[L]
i
. utilizing this gradient, the
gradients of the loss function with respect to the weighted sums z[l]
i
and the activations
a[l]
i
for each layer l can be recursively computed. The gradients can be calculated as
shown in equation 2.4 [9].
∂L
∂z[l]
i
= ∂L
∂a[l]
i
· g′ (
z[l]
i
)
∂L
∂w[l]
ij
= ∂L
∂z[l]
i
· a[l−1]
j
,
∂L
∂b[l]
i
= ∂L
∂z[l]
i
∂L
∂a[l−1]
j
=
n[l]
∑
i=1
∂L
∂z[l]
i
· w[l]
ij
(2.4)
An optimization algorithm is used based on the gradients to update the weights. There
are multiple optimization algorithms, such as gradient descent, Adam, AdamW, etc. The
update equations for the weight and bias are typically given by equation 2.5. Here α is
the learning rate [9].
w[l]
ij = w[l]
ij −α ·
∂L
∂w[l]
ij
b[l]
i = b[l]
i −α · ∂L
∂b[l]
i
(2.5)
14
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:23==
When iteratively performing these equations, the loss will get minimized and the model
will learn.
2.4
Transformer models
The transformer model was introduced in the paper ”Attention Is All You Need”, where they
introduce a new network architecture based solely on attention mechanisms [14]. The
model architecture is an encoder and decoder architecture built with multi­head attention
blocks. It is the multi­head attention that makes this model special and different from other
models seen previously. The paper introduces a self­attention mechanism, which allows
the network to focus on different parts of the input sequence when making predictions.
Traditional recurrent neural networks process one element at a time and need the previous
element to inform the processing of the current element. This makes them slow, and they
can be very difficult to parallelize.
2.4.1
Model architecture overview
The architecture of the transformer model can be illustrated in figure 2.9. The model is
constructed of stacked self­attention and point­wise, fully connected layers in both the
encoder and decoder. As can be seen, the encoder and decoder look very much alike.
The encoder is built by stacking a number of identical layers. The layer is constructed
by two sublayers, where the first one is multi­head attention and the second is a fully
connected feed­forward network, this can be seen to the left in figure 2.9. A Residual
connection is created around each of the two sublayers, and a layer normalization is
applied.
The Decoder has a very similar architecture to the encoder and is also built by stacking
a number of identical layers. The layer is constructed by the same two layers from the
encoder, but in between them, a new multi­head attention is applied over the output of the
encoder stack. A residual connection over the layers is applied like for the encoder. The
first self­attention is masked to prevent attention to the following positions. This means
that predictions at position i can only be affected by position prior to i [14].
2.4.2
Attention mechanism
So far attention and multi­head attention has been used to explain the layers, but no
explanation for what attention is have been provided. Attention allows the model to focus
on specific parts of the input sequence that are more relevant to the task at hand rather
than treating the entire sequence equally. Multi­head attention is built by linear scaling of
scaled dot­product attention, this can be seen in figure 2.10.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.9: The Transformer ­ model architecture [14]
Note. Adapted from ”Attention Is All You Need” by Vaswani et al. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762
Figure 2.10: (left) Scaled Dot­Product Attention. (right) Multi­Head Attention consists of
several attention layers running in parallel [14]
Note. Adapted from ”Attention Is All You Need” by Vaswani et al. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762
The input is the vectors Q (query), K (key), and V (value), each of dimension dk. The goal
is to compute the attention scores between the query and the key vectors to obtain the
context vector. This is performed by doing a matrix multiplication between Q and K, then
scaling it by the dimension and applying softmax to it. This will give the weights of each
value, and V is then multiplied with that as seen in equation 2.6 [14].
16
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:25==
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKT
√dk
)
V
(2.6)
The attention described above is the building block for multi­head attention. The attention
was found to be more effective if the Q, K, and V were linearly projected h times with
different learned linear projections. This is performed in parallel and then concatenated
together to again perform a linear projection, this can be seen to the right in figure 2.10.
Multihead attention can be written as the following equation seen in 2.7 [14].
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat (head1, . . . , headh) W O
where headi = Attention
(
QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i
)
(2.7)
Multi­head attention is used in three different ways in the transformer model. It is used
in the encoder with self­attention. Self­attention means that all query, key, and value
pairs come from the same place. In the encoder, every position can focus on all posts
in the preceding layer of the encoder. Self­Attention do also exist in the decoder, but
here masking is applied. This will allow each position to attend to all prior positions,
including itself in the decoder. The last is cross­attention or also called encoder­decoder
attention. The queries originate from the decoder’s preceding layer, while the memory
keys and values are derived from the encoder’s output. As a result, each position within
the decoder can focus on every position within the input sequence [14].
2.4.3
Positional encoding
As it can be seen in Figure 2.9 showing transformer architecture, positional encoding has
been added to the input embeddings at the bottoms of the encoder and decoder. Adding
positional encoding allows injecting into the model information about the positions of the
tokens in the sequence, which make the model use the sequence order. The position
embeddings have the same size as the input embeddings dmodel, so they can be summed
up. In the original transformer architecture, authors use sinusoidal positional encoding:
PE(pos,2i) = sin(
pos
100002i/dmodel )
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos(
pos
100002i/dmodel )
In the equations above, pos is the position, and i is the dimension. Each dimension of
the positional encoding corresponds to the sinusoids. Besides sinusoidal positional en­
codings used by the authors there are many choices of other fixed and learned positional
encodings [15, 16]
2.4.4
fine­tuning with Low­Rank Adaptation
Fine­tuning a model Pθ(y|x) is the process of updating the pre­trained weights θ0 to θ0+∆θ
by alliteratively following the gradient to optimize the objective of the model. Low­Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) looks at the specific case of large language models and optimization
of fine­tuning transformer­based models. Fine­tuning a pre­trained large language model
for various downstream tasks involves a dataset that can be represented as context­target
pairs of tokens xi and yi where the set Z is Z = {(xi, yi)}i=1,...,N [17]. A full fine­tuning
of LLMs will therefore optimize the objective of the model by updating all the weights of
the model, meaning that |∆θ| = |θ0|. This makes it inefficient to store and deploy multiple
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
17
==PAGE:26==
fine­tuned models, it is therefore desirable to find a way of fine­tuning a more parameter­
efficient approach. This means optimizing a subset of θ0 that is referred to as Θ such that
|Θ| << |θ0| and therefore optimizing over Θ becomes [17]:
max
Θ
∑
(x,y)∈Z
|y|
∑
t=1
log
(
pθ0+∆θ(Θ) (yt | x, y<t)
)
(2.8)
Typically in neural networks, weight matrixes have full rank. When adapting the network
to a specific task, researchers have found that pre­trained language models have a low
”intrinsic dimension”, meaning they can still learn effectively even if the weight matrices
are projected into a smaller subspace at random. LoRA proposes a way of fine­tuning a
model’s pre­trained weight matrix W0 with a low­rank decomposition W0+∆W = W0+BA.
W0 ∈Rdxk is the pre­trained weights, ∆W is the update, B ∈Rdxr, A ∈Rrxk and the rank
r << min(d, k). This idea of decomposition can be seen in figure 2.11. During training,
W0 remains fixed and does not receive gradient updates, while A and B contain trainable
parameters. Importantly, both W0 and ∆W = BA are multiplied by the same input, and
their respective output vectors are summed coordinate­wise. A is initialized with a random
Gaussian and B is initialized with zeroes meaning that ∆W = BA is zero at the start of
training. ∆Wx is then scaled by α/r and α is a constant specific to r. When using the
Adam optimizer, adjusting α is comparable to adjusting the learning rate if the initialization
is scaled appropriately.[17].
Figure 2.11: Representation of the LoRA­principle. Here only A and B are trained during
fine­tuning of the model [17]
This process has shown that only training a very small percentage of the model, can
result in very good results. The article ”LoRA: Low­Rank Adaptation of Large Language
Models” presents results for fine­tuning the matrices of query, key, and value, and how a
combination of those can lead to good results and even better than a normal fine­tuning
[17].
18
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:27==
2.5
Natural language processing
In the field of computer science and linguistics, Natural Language Processing (NLP) is
dedicated to enabling computers to comprehend human language. It serves as a crucial
component of Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), as it facilitates the transition from
spoken language to written text. This section will elaborate on essential NLP subjects
linked to ASR.
2.5.1
Tokenizers
Deep learning models cannot understand and process raw text as humans do; they can
only process numbers. It is needed to convert text to a representation the model can
use, and this representation should be meaningful from the model perspective and size
efficient. Tokenizers are crucial components in NLP that convert raw text to desired rep­
resentation. They perform a series of processing steps, such as tokenization and token
encoding. Tokenization is splitting raw text into smaller units called tokens. Token encod­
ing is a process of encoding tokenized text into a numerical representation. Each token
is assigned a unique numerical identifier called an index or ID (e.g., ”hey” →17230 ).
Collecting all possible tokens extended by a set of special tokens creates tokenizer vo­
cabulary. Special tokens are not derived from input text but are added to serve various
purposes and provide additional information to the language model. They can be added to
text before or after tokenization. Special tokes follow a specific established pattern which
may vary between tokenizers but has to be the same for all special tokens within one
tokenizer. For instance, the End­of­Sentence token for the BERT tokenizer [18] is going
to look like [EOS], while for GPT­2 tokenizer [19] <|endoftext|>. Some of the commonly
used special tokens:
• Start­of­Sentence (SOS) token
• End­of­Sentence (EOS) token
• Padding token
• Unknown or out­of­vocabulary (OOV) token
• Separator token
• Special tokens specific to the task
Tokenizers can be classified based on what tokenization algorithm they use into the follow­
ing classes: word, character, and subword tokenizers. Detailed descriptions of tokenizer
types with examples can be found in appendix C.
2.5.2
Word error rate
The Word Error Rate (WER) is a metric employed to evaluate the effectiveness of ASR
systems. It calculates the difference between the transcribed output generated by the
model and the actual text. It takes into account even the slightest formatting differences,
resulting in the penalization of all errors[20]. WER is expressed as a percentage of tran­
scription errors in comparison to the total number of words in the spoken text.
WER = S + D + I
N
(2.9)
Where S is the number of substitutions, D is the number of deletions, I is the number of
insertions, and N is the total number of words in reference transcription.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
19
==PAGE:28==
3
Whisper model
OpenAI Whisper [20] model is an automatic speech recognition model trained on 680,000
hours of multilingual and multitask supervised data collected from across the internet. It
can do speech­to­text tasks and gives very impressive results for the most used lan­
guages. It also has the ability to translate a spoken language into written English. Table
3.1 presents a model card of all the available Whisper models.
Model
English­only model
Multilingual model
tiny
✓
✓
base
✓
✓
small
✓
✓
medium
✓
✓
large
✓
Table 3.1: Model card for all available Whisper models. All models besides large are
available in an English­only model. The English­only models have only been trained on
English data and are not multilingual.
In December 2022, OpenAI released an updated version of the large Whisper model,
large­v2 [21]. Large­v2 to model was trained for 2.5 times more epochs, with SpecAug­
ment [22], stochastic depth [23], and BPE dropout [24] for regularization. Model archi­
tecture and size remained the same as the original large model released together with
Whisper paper. In the thesis, the large­v2 model would be referred to as the large model.
3.1
Model architecture
OpenAI utilized an off­the­shelf encoder­decoder Transformer architecture [14] to create
Whisper [20]. An overview of Whisper architecture can be seen in figure 3.1. The input
to the Whisper encoder consists of 80­channel log­magnitude Mel spectrograms of audio
files that have been re­sampled to 16000 Hz. The spectrograms are computed on 25­
millisecond windows with a stride of 10 milliseconds and then processed by 2 convolution
layers with a kernel size of 3 and GELU as the activation function [25]. The second
convolution layer has a stride of 2, followed by sinusoidal position embeddings being
added to the output from the convolution layers. The encoder Transformer blocks are
then applied using pre­activation residual blocks [26]. A final layer normalization is then
applied to the encoder outputs. The decoder, which utilizes learned positional embedding
and tied input­output token representations [27], uses the same size and width of the
transformer block as the encoder. Details about the architectures of different model sizes
from the Whisper model family can be found in Table 3.2
Model
Layers
Width
Heads
Parameters
tiny
4
384
6
39M
base
6
512
8
74M
small
12
768
12
244M
medium
24
1024
16
769M
large
32
1280
20
1550M
Table 3.2: Architecture details of the Whisper model family
20
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1: Overview of Whisper architecture [20]
Note. Adapted from ”Robust speech recognition via large­scale weak supervision.” by Radford, A., Kim, J.
W., Xu, T., Brockman, G., McLeavey, C., & Sutskever, I., arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04356
3.2
Model Training
Whisper was trained on 680.000 hours of audio. The training dataset statistics can be
found in the Whisper article figure 11 [20]. Here it can be seen that about 65% of the
dataset is English, 17% multilingual, and 18% translation. For the multilingual part, it can
be seen that it is mostly bigger languages like Chinese, German, and Spanish, which are
in that category. For Translation tasks, then the three biggest are Korean, Chinese, and
Japanese.
The training hyperparameters can be found in the whisper article in tables 17, 18, and 19
[20]. The models have been trained using a batch size of 256 with 1048576 updates. The
optimizer used is AdamW, the only input parameter to AdamW that fluctuates between
the model size is the learning rate. The different learning rates are listed in the Whisper
article in Table 19 [20]. It can be seen that the initial weights were initiated with Gaussian
Fan­In, and linear decay has been used as a learning rate scheduler. Condition to prior
text rate was 50% during training, meaning that for half of the data, previous text for the
sound is given and given to the decoder during training. Figure 3.1 from Whisper paper
[20] summarizes the model architecture and the multitask training format.
Whisper has been trained to transcribe in multiple languages, create timestamps and
translate transcription into English. This is achieved by using special tokens in the decoder
that will tell the decoder what language it should be using together with the task. The
special tokens are listed below:
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
21
==PAGE:30==
• <|startoftranscript|>: is inserted before all transcriptions to show the decoder it is
the start of the transcription
• <|translate|> / <|transcribe|>: Instruction of the type of task which the decoder should
do
• <|language|>: A language token is created for all languages which the model can
transcribe.
• <|startoflm|>: Not used, it is a leftover token from experiments with creating a lan­
guage model similar to gpt2 using whisper [28].
• <|startofprev|>: Used before text from previous prompt.
• <|nospeech|>: Token to indicate that there is no speech in a segment
• <|notimestamps|>: Tell the model not to give timestamp tokens.
• <|i * 0.02:.2f|> up to i=1500: All the different timestamp tokens the model can gen­
erate.
• <|endoftext|>: No more text to generate after this token.
A combination of these will therefore give the decoder the necessary information to do
the task that it is asked to do.
3.3
Whisper Transcription
Whisper transcription is not as straightforward as taking 30 seconds at a time to con­
vert into mel­spectrograms, doing inference through the encoder and then the decoder.
The transcription function is much more complex, and this section will explain how the
transcription functions work to get better transcriptions.
The transcription function can be found in OpenAI’s GitHub repository1. A simplified flow
diagram of the transcription function can be seen in figure 3.3. The first part is resampling
the audio to 16KHz, and getting the log­mel spectrograms. The language needs to be set
or detected for the decoder to be able to decode correctly. The language can be set in the
‘decode_options‘ or detected using Whisper in the first 30 seconds of the audio. There
are 3000 frames in the input to the model, and ‘content_frames‘ is the length of all frames
in the mel­spectrograms list subtracted 3000 frames. Every time that ‘mel_segments‘ are
taken out, then 3000 frames are taken out of the list and run through the model using
decode with fallback. Decode with fallback adjusts the temperature when decoding to
optimize the transcription. The function returns a transcript that can include timestamp
tokens; for each returned timestamp token, a segment is created. A segment includes
seek, start, end, text, tokens, temperature, and probabilities. The seek is moved forward
every time a segment is created, corresponding to how many frames compose the seg­
ment. A segment is only created if there is an end timestamp; the seek can therefore be
an odd number and are not always a multiple of 3000. If a flag for creating word­level
timestamps is set, then all the segments created will get word­level timestamps. Word­
level timestamps will get explained in Section 3.3.2. This loop runs until all frames have
been decoded, and the full transcript will be returned.
3.3.1
Decoding
Whisper decoding has many options to make the transcriptions as good as possible.
The decoding functions take log­mel spectrograms for up to 30 seconds and a Decodin­
1https://github.com/openai/whisper
22
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.2: Flowchart of Whisper transcription algorithm.
gOptions object. The decoding options object can be seen in appendix H. A simplified
flowchart for the decoding process has been made and can be seen in figure 3.3. This
shows an overview of what the steps are to decode the log­mel spectrograms into text.
This will only show the greedy algorithm for decoding and not the beam search option.
First, a decoding object is set up from the decoding options, and then the decoding method
is run. The first step is to get the audio features by doing a forward pass on the encoder.
If the language is not given, then it will use the audio features and decoder to predict the
language. When the language is found, then the main loop will run. The main loop will
do inference on the decoder. The loop will get a new token until it hits one of the three
possible stopping points. The first stopping point is hit when the number of tokens gener­
ated by the main loop reaches ‘sample_len‘. ‘Sample_len‘ is a number of tokens equal to
‘n_text_ctx/2‘ where ‘n_text_ctx‘ is a fixed maximum sequence length. The second stop­
ping point occurs when an end­of­transcript token is generated and the third when the
length of tokens exceeds the maximum sequence length. After it hits any of the stopping
points a DecodingResult will be returned.
3.3.2
Word­Level Timestamps
Whisper did not initially support word­level timestamps; however, it was one of the com­
munity’s most desired features as it allows to obtain more granulated timestamps and
accurate estimation of speech segments. Few months after releasing Whisper, one of its
authors published in the Whisper GitHub repository proof of concept determining word­
level timestamps using cross­attention weights and DTW, which was further implemented
into the whisper transcribe function. Word­level timestamps can be extracted during tran­
scription by setting the transcription parameter ‘word_timestamps‘. While this parameter
is set to True, the transcription will run normally and transcribe speech segments. After
extracting segments from each chunk, it will extract start­ and end­timestamps for each
word. After the transcription of the segment, tokens corresponding to the transcribed text
(text_tokens) are combined into a list of tokens together with the start of a transcript, no
time stamp, and end of text tokens as it is shown below:
text_token_list = ["<|startoftranscript|>",
"<|nospeech|>",
text_tokens,
"<|endoftext|>"]
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.3: Simplified flowchart of the decoding algorithm for Whisper
The obtained list of tokens and the log­mel spectrograms are passed through the model
with installed hooks on the decoder’s cross­attention layers. The encoder processes the
log­mel spectrogram, and the decoder uses the outputs together with the text tokens.
As the last of the tokens is the ”<|endoftext|>” token, the decoder is not generating any
further tokens. Out of the extracted attention weights, the attention weights associated
with the alignment heads are selected. Alignment heads are cross­attention heads that
are highly correlated to the alignment between audio and text tokens. For each model,
the alignment heads are different. A base85­encoded boolean array that is pointing to the
(n_layers, n_heads) for the attention heads is stored for each model. When a model is
instantiated, the respective boolean array is loaded, and a buffer is set up on the alignment
heads to which the boolean array is pointing. An example of retrieved attention weights
for one of the alignment heads of the Whisper base model is visualized as a heatmap
and is shown in figure 3.4, on which a pattern going from left­top to right­bottom corner is
visible. This pattern shows an alignment between audio and text tokens.
24
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.4: Example of attention weights from one of the alignment heads of the Whisper
base model. The Y­axis refers to text tokens, while the X­axis refers to time frames
In the following steps, weights are normalized according to equation 3.1, smoothed using
a median filter. Next, computed is a matrix of the mean weights from all alignment heads.
WNorm = W −W
s
(3.1)
DTW is used on the matrix to find an alignment path for audio and text tokens based on the
pattern seen in the attention weights. As a result, DTW gives text and time indicates, which
are processed to get word­level timestamps. Text indices are used to find places where
the aligned path jumps to the next tokens. Time indicates corresponding to those jumps
are divided by the number of tokens per second to obtain time jumps. In the next steps,
tokens are combined into words, and word boundaries are computed. Word start­ and
end­timestamps are extracted based on word boundaries from the time jump. Long words
at the segments beginning are truncated to improve acquired word­level timestamps, and
punctuation is merged into words. Figure 3.5 illustrates word and time alignment.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.5: Alignment between the audio and the transcript retrieved from attention
weights using DTW for audio transcribed using the Whisper base model
3.4
Problems and limitations
Whisper shows very impressive ASR results in about 10 languages, even though Whisper
is trained on a dataset containing 97 different languages. This is due to the very limited
amount of data that is in the training set for certain languages. Only 117.000 hours are in
languages other than English and 125.000 hours of X →en translation data. This limits
the model to do transcription tasks for only the most used languages worldwide. It is,
however, possible to fine­tune the model for other languages. This requires that a large
labeled dataset can be found in the desired language.
3.4.1
Whisper updates
During this project, OpenAI has come with some updates to the model. This has mostly
been updated to the transcription function in Whisper and not the model architecture.
This now allows one to do word­level timestamps and not only timestamps for sections.
This has also resolved some issues that Whisper had, such as most of the hallucination
problems. The changes have introduced some new problems that people are discovering
26
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:35==
and reporting in discussions on Whisper’s GitHub. One of the issues that was reported
and also discovered during this work is that the ends of some transcriptions are missing.
After some iterations from OpenAI then, the problem is not seen as often anymore.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
27
==PAGE:36==
4
Related work
The field of ASR is constantly evolving, resulting in a significant amount of relevant work.
In this chapter, we will highlight the most widely used state­of­the­art ASR models, along
with related studies on Whisper and various implementations.
4.1
Automatic speech recognition
This section will provide an overview of several selected papers that showcase cutting­
edge breakthroughs in the field of automatic speech recognition over the past few years.
As it is a rapidly developing field, we decided to select only a few papers related to our
project.
4.1.1
Wav2Vec & Wav2Vec 2.0
Most ASR models require a vast amount of labeled data. Obtaining such an amount of
labeled data is time and resource­consuming. Access to such datasets for widely spoken
languages such as English is not an issue; however, such sources for other languages are
very limited. One of the methods to overcome this issue is pre­training neural networks.
Developed by Facebook AI, Wav2Vec is a self­supervised algorithm using raw unlabeled
audio data to train ASR models [29]. Wav2Vec architecture consists of two stacked mul­
tilayer convolution networks. This network takes as an input raw audio and computes
general representation, which can be fed into the ASR systems. This is in contrast to
most ASR models, which are fed with log­mel filter bank features of speech data. The
model is optimized to predict the next observation from the audio sample. The authors
of the papers showed that using Wav2Vec can improve character­based ASR systems
and outperform the results of the best character­based ASR models reported in the liter­
ature at the time, using two magnitudes fewer data. Figure 4.1 presents pre­training of
Wav2Vec [29].
Figure 4.1: Visualisation of Wav2Vec pre­training [29].
Note.
Adapted from ”Wav2Vec: Unsupervised Pre­training for Speech Recognition” by Schneider, S.,
Baevski, A., Collobert, R., & Auli, M., arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05862
Wav2Vec 2.0 [30] is a successor of Wav2Vec. Like its predecessor, the Wav2Vec 2.0
28
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:37==
processes the raw waveform of speech audio, fed into a multilayer convolutional net­
work, which encodes the input into latent representation. Latent representations are fed
to a quantizer, which chooses a speech unit for the latent audio representation from a
set of learned units and a transformer that outputs contextual representation. The model
was trained by solving contrastive tasks. Figure 4.2 illustrates a framework that learns
contextualized speech representations and an inventory of discretized speech units [30].
Authors pre­trained the model on 960h unlabeled data from the LibriSpeech [31] dataset
and fine­tuned it on different amounts of labeled audio data afterward. Their results show
that using 100 times less labeled data (1h), Wav2Vec 2.0 outperform the previous state of
the art for the 100­hour subset of LibriSpeech. Besides this, the authors explore the con­
cept of cross­lingual training and prove that pre­train a single model on multiple languages
simultaneously results in better representations than training on a single language. This
approach can improve the performance of the ASR model for low­resource languages as
they can benefit from similar higher­resource languages.
Figure 4.2: Visualisation of Wav2Vec 2.0 framework [30].
Note. Adapted from ”Wav2Vec 2.0: A framework for self­supervised learning of speech representations” by
Baevski, A., Zhou, Y., Mohamed, A., & Auli, M., Advances in neural information processing systems, 33,
12449­12460
4.2
Whisper related work
In this section, an overview of related work that has been built using Whisper will be given.
This is mainly to touch on Whisper’s real performance, some of Whisper’s problems, and
how they can be solved.
WhisperX
WhisperX got proposed by Max Bain and his PhD supervisors from the University of Ox­
ford. WhisperX aims to resolve some of Whisper’s issues when the article got published
[32]. Some of the major ones were the lack of batching, word­level timestamps, and hal­
lucination in the transcriptions. WhisperX is trying to solve the issues of heuristic sliding­
window style approaches by using a Voice Activity Detection model to slice the audio into
smaller segments instead of the naive way of slicing for every segment that can fit inside
the model. WhisperX mentions that this should minimize overlapping audio in segments
which could lead to inconsistencies in the transcription since the model would transcribe
the same audio twice. This could also fix incomplete audio when a word gets cut between
two segments. The WhsiperX architecture to do long­form transcriptions is more complex
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
29
==PAGE:38==
than Whisper’s transcription function. The overview of WhisperX can be seen in figure
4.3. The audio is first segmented with voice activity detection. This gives many smaller
segments than 30 seconds. These segments are then concatenated into approximately
30 seconds segments, which have their boundaries that lie on minimally active speech
regions[32]. This is different from Whisper, where they are divided more naively.
Figure 4.3: Overview of WhisperX architecture [32]
Note. Adapted from ”WhisperX: Time­accurate speech transcription of long­form audio” by Bain, M., Huh, J.,
Han, T., & Zisserman, A., arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00747
These segments can now be put into batches and run inference through Whisper. One
thing to note is that the decoder is not given the previous prompt. This is impossible since
the inference on multiple segments of the same audio is done simultaneously. These
chunks are then forced­aligned with a phoneme recognition model. The purpose of this
is to produce much more accurate word­level timestamps[32].
Results for WhisperX are provided. The default configuration for the VAD model and
Phoneme model can be seen in figure 1 of the WhisperX article [32]. Results are provided
for the TED­LIUM dataset [33] and can be seen in the WhisperX article table 2 [32]. The
speedup of WhisperX is reported to be 11.8x. It is not mentioned the batch size used, but
looking at Table 3 in the WhisperX article, then it can be assumed that the batch size is
32. The reported WER for WhisperX is worse than for Whisper. The results reported for
Whisper WER in the WhisperX article are without condition on the previous prompt, why
it is stated in the article that WhisperX has lower WER.
Case specific transcriptions
A challenge for ASR models is to transcribe legal proceedings, the article ”Better Tran­
scription of UK Supreme Court Hearings” proposes a way of fine­tuning off­the­shelf
ASR models to become even better at this task and creating a custom language model
(CLM)[34]. The article describes the challenges of transcribing court hearings and why it
is beneficial that this can be automated. The CLM is fine­tuned on Supreme Court written
judgments and gold­standard transcripts of 10 Supreme Court hearings. The proposal is
comparing the results between Whisper and AWS ASR when they apply their methods
to get better transcriptions. This proves that it is possible to fine­tune whisper and other
ASR models to become better at domain­specific tasks.
4.2.1
Hugging Face
Hugging Face is an open­source data science platform allowing the community to build,
train, and deploy machine learning models. It quickly became popular among data sci­
entists, machine learning engineers, and researchers, offering a hub where they can ex­
plore and share pre­trained models and datasets. Hugging Face is the author of a few
open­source packages within which, the most noticeable one being Transformers. Trans­
formers is a Python package providing open­source implementation of a vast amount of
pre­trained models for different text, vision, and audio tasks [35]. One of the models imple­
mented in Hugging Face Transformers is Whisper (further called Hugging Face Whisper
30
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:39==
instead of Transformers Whisper to avoid confusion with transformer model architecture).
This implementation differs from the OpenAI Whisper implementation despite using pre­
trained weights from the original Whisper. The transfer of weights from the OpenAI Whis­
per model to the Hugging Face Whisper model is made possible through a script created
by Hugging Face. This process ensures seamless conversion between the two models.
When it comes to architecture, Hugging Face tries to generalize model architectures and
how models work by creating a set of objects responsible for different model aspects.
Those objects are different for each of the models, but they inherit from the same general
superclasses. Modules for Hugging Face Whisper are listed below [36]:
• WhisperConfig: Configuration class that stores configuration of WhisperModel
• WhisperTokenizer: Whisper tokenizer
• WhisperFeatureExtractor: Class containing methods responsible for data pro­
cessing, such as converting raw audio into log­mel spectrograms
• WhisperProcessor: Wraps WhisperTokenizer and WhisperFeatureExtractor into
single processor
• WhisperModel: Object containing Hugging Face implementation of Whisper. This
model outputs raw hidden states without any specific head on top.
• WhisperForConditionalGeneration: WhisperModel with a language modeling head.
This object can generate from audio transformed into log­mel spectrograms token
ids that can be decoded using WhisperTokenizer or WhisperProcessor into text. Be­
sides this, depending on configuration, it can output, among others, model weights.
• WhisperForAudioClassification ­ WhisperModel encoder with sequence classifi­
cation head on top.
The above modules can be used in a pipeline. Pipelines are a Hugging Face concept
that creates simple in­use APIs dedicated to different tasks. Hugging Face Whisper can
be used in AutomaticSpeechRecognitionPipeline. Using a pipeline is similar to the tran­
scribe method in Whisper. After creating an instance of a pipeline using Whisper, an
audio file can be transcribed by simply inputting its path into the pipeline. The audio file
will be loaded and processed in the pipeline to extract the transcription. Same as Whis­
per transcribe, Hugging Face Whisper pipeline can split transcription into segments and
predict timestamps for each of them; on the other hand, it lacks features such as lan­
guage detection and word­level timestamps. According to the authors, the Hugging Face
implementation of Whisper has an up to 6× faster inference while losing only losing a
few percentage points on benchmark datasets [37]. One of the factors making Hugging
Face Whisper faster than its original version is batching using chunking with stride. The
Hugging Face community initially developed this approach to enable ASR work on large
files using Wav2Vec 2 [30, 38]. A simple method for batch processing audio files involves
splitting them into short, equal­duration samples, bundling them into batches, running
inference, and reconstructing the final transcription. Although the approach can boost
inference efficiency, it can also result in subpar results for the parts where the audio was
split into chunks. The reason for this is the lack of context that the model needed to make
accurate predictions. To address this challenge, chunking with stride can be employed.
This approach involves overlapping the audio chunks, providing the model with the nec­
essary context in the center of each chunk. The chunks are then combined into batches
for inference. Obtained logits corresponding to the overlapping strides are dropped, and
the remaining logits are used to construct the transcription for the audio.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
31
==PAGE:40==
5
Whisper Exploration
To achieve the goal of creating an ASR system using Whisper, it is essential to conduct
a comprehensive evaluation and comparison of different Whisper implementations. This
will help identify the most efficient and effective implementation in order to complete the
thesis objective successfully.
This chapter will go through benchmarks and fine­tuning of Whisper. First, some datasets
for English and Danish will be described. When all datasets have been introduced, the
benchmarks of Whisper will be conducted. Here the performance for both the OpenAI
implementation of Whisper and Hugging Face implementation will be benchmarked. The
two implementations will be evaluated, and the results will be compared.
After the benchmarks then, fine­tuning will be explored. Whisper will be fine­tuned both
with normal fine­tuning and also with LoRA fine­tuning to see if the performance in Danish
can be improved upon. The two methods of fine­tuning will be evaluated and compared.
5.1
Datasets
To benchmark whisper and fine­tune the model for Danish, a selection of datasets is being
used. This section will give an overview and short description of all the datasets used in
this work. It is important to note the difference between long­form datasets and short­
form since this is important for benchmarking the model later on. A common thing about
all the datasets is that they consist of audio files and their transcriptions. All datasets
have different structures, lengths, alignments, and language. It is, therefore important to
benchmark on more than one dataset to capture the variation in the language.
Short­form audio recordings are brief and typically last only a few seconds or a dozen sec­
onds. These recordings often consist of isolated words or short sentences, such as voice
commands, quick queries, or fast­paced conversation pieces. Long­form content refers
to extended audio recordings that can last from a few minutes to several hours. Common
long­form content examples include movies, videos, podcast episodes, audiobooks, and
recorded conversations.
The datasets that this section will cover can be seen in the list below, and what their
features are:
• English short­form: Librispeech, Common Voice, Fleurs
• English long­form: TED­LIUM 3, REV16
• Danish short­form: Common Voice, Fleurs, NST, FTSpeech
• Danish long­form: Danish Librivox
5.1.1
Librispeech
The English­speaking dataset is derived from readings of audiobooks from the LibriVox
project. The LibriVox project is free public domain audiobooks where volunteers conduct
the readings, and everyone can listen to the audiobooks. The dataset contains approxi­
mately 1000 hours of English speech data, recorded by a diverse set of speakers, covering
a wide range of topics and genres sampled at 16 KHz. All transcriptions have been nor­
malised by converting them into upper­case, removing the punctuation, and expanding
common abbreviations and non­standard words. All recordings have been divided into
32
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:41==
smaller sections with the use of two alignment stages. The two alignment stages give a
bunch of audio recordings with a length of up to 35 seconds that has a good potential of
having good transcriptions. These audio are then divided into smaller sections, the train
sets audio is divided if there is a silence interval of longer than 0.3 seconds, and the test
set was only divided if the reference text had a sentence break. The data for the dataset
were then selected based on information from the LibriVox API such as genre and reader
information. The dataset was then divided into smaller sets for training, development,
and validation. After all the filtering, then there were roughly 14,500 books in the public
domain, comprising a total of approximately 803 million tokens. Among these, there were
around 900,000 distinct words. The dataset is available online for download.[31].
5.1.2
Common Voice
Mozilla created the dataset Common Voice with multiple languages and versions. Com­
mon Voice is created by volunteers who can freely sign up on the Common Voice website.
The dataset is continually developed by volunteers submitting new sentences to be read
and verified by other volunteers. A new release of Common Voice is being released every
3 months expanding the previous dataset with new verified sentences. The dataset is a
short­form dataset, where the recordings are small sentences. All recordings are of high
quality due to the verification process involved in the creation of the dataset. Common
Voice involves many languages and is now one of the largest multilingual datasets freely
available [39].
5.1.3
FLEURS: Few­shot Learning Evaluation of Universal
Representations of Speech
FLEURS is based on the FLoRes­101 benchmark which is 3001 sentences that have been
extracted from the English Wikipedia and then translated into 101 different languages [40,
41]. FLEURS contains approximately 12 hours of supervised speech for each language
and makes it useful for various speech­related tasks such as Automatic Speech Recog­
nition, Speech Language Identification, Translation, and Retrieval. FLEURS adopts 2009
sentences out of the 3001 sentences in FLoRes­101, because the test set from FLoRes­
101 is not publicly available. The sentences are divided into new sets for training, devel­
opment, and testing, consisting of 1509, 150, and 350 sentences, respectively. There are
collected 3 samples for each sentence in each language with a split between male/female
with at least 30/70%. Some recordings have been discarded, and there are therefore not
3 recordings for each sentence [41].
5.1.4
REV16 ­ podcast transcription benchmark
The dataset used by OpenAI to benchmark the performance of Whisper on long forms [20].
It is a subset of 16 from 30 podcasts episodes with transcriptions, which were selected
from the original dataset created by the Rev AI as a benchmark to compare their ASR
service with other ASR services on the market [42]. OpenAI has identified several files in
the original dataset where the audio and labels did not correspond, especially during the
parts where the podcast sponsors were introduced. Therefore, specific files without this
issue were chosen. The dataset consists of over 16 hours of audio recording and 188792
words with corresponding 245125 tokens.
5.1.5
TED­LIUM 3
TED­LIUM 3 [43] is a third release of a well­known ASR corpus, developed by collabora­
tive work of Ubiqus company and the University of Le Mans (LIUM). The corpus is made
up of 2351 TED Talks recordings in English, along with their transcriptions. Talks were
extracted from the TED website, and for each of them was build a sphere audio file (.sph)
and the corresponding transcription in .STM format. All transcriptions in .STM formats
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
33
==PAGE:42==
were automatically aligned to related .sph audio files using the Kaldi toolkit [44]. The ob­
tained dataset comprises 452 hours of audio and corresponding transcriptions comprising
268231 segments and approximately 4.9M words. The TEDLIUM 3 corpus was divided
into three sub­datasets, train, dev, and test sets, to support developing and evaluating
models[43].
5.1.6
FT Speech
FT Speech is the largest Danish dataset and is based on recordings from meetings in the
Danish parliament from 2010­2019. All recordings and transcriptions have been down­
loaded from the Danish Parliament website. The transcriptions were given in XML for­
mat together with the speaker and time for the speech. All transcription underwent a
transformation that included expanding common abbreviations, numbers, dates, and sym­
bols while removing punctuation, capitalization, and any unspoken parenthetical remarks
or references. The timestamps from the XML file are not completely precise, and the
transcriptions are not verbatim. Multiple alignment steps were used to compensate for
the weak timestamps and the transcriptions not being verbatim. The audio was split on
wrongly transcript words or if the segment had a silence longer than 0.3 seconds. All seg­
ments shorter than 2 seconds or longer than a minute were removed from the dataset.
After all cleaning steps, the dataset included 1,857 hours of data split into 1,017,244 utter­
ances with a total of 434 speakers. The dataset is split into multiple sets, train­balanced
and train­other, dev­balanced and test­balanced. The balanced datasets include roughly
the same amount of speaking for each speaker. [45]
5.1.7
NST Dansk ATG­database
The NST dataset is created by Nordisk språkteknologi AS (NST) and is freely available at
språkbanken1 located at the National Library of Norway. The dataset was created in 2011
from recordings created by NST. The original dataset structure had meaningless names
for folders, and it was impractical to use. In 2013 the training set got restructured, and a
new folder structure was introduced [46]. In 2021 the training set called the supplement set
got reconstructed as well. The dataset consists of a training and testing set. In the original
dataset, the training set had 312 lines which 560 people read out loud. And the testing
set had 987 lines which 56 people read out loud. This results in 174720 utterances for
training and 55272 utterances for testing [47]. In 2021 a JSON file containing information
on missing, corrupted, or empty audio files was added to make the dataset even more
usable. [46].
5.1.8
Lack of Danish longform
One of the project’s goals is to create a fine­tuned Danish whisper model. It can give
some reasonable indications of the model’s performance to evaluate it in short form. This
does, however not take into account the full transcribing function which uses the output of
the previous section in the decoder when transcribing the next section. This will give the
model a context of what happened earlier and can potentially give a more precise output.
Therefore, It is desirable to test whisper on a long­form dataset for Danish. It was decided
to try and create a long­form dataset inspired by Librispeech [31].
Danish Librivox dataset
Multiple Danish audiobooks are freely available on Librivox2, which can be used to cre­
ate a dataset. The challenge is finding the text from which the reader has been reading.
When Librispeech were created, they mainly used texts from the Gutenberg project3 that
1https://www.nb.no/sprakbanken/
2https://librivox.org/
3https://www.gutenberg.org/
34
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:43==
are freely available books. There is, however, no overlap between the Danish audiobooks
at Librivox and the books in the Gutenberg project. One thing there is in Librovox is read­
ings of old Danish text from authors like H.C. Andersen and Grundtvig. In this process,
multiple recordings were downloaded. The next step was to find the associated text to
the recordings. The Danish language has evolved over time, just like any other language.
The original texts from H.C. Andersen are different from the Danish we see today. Some
examples of this could be ”aa” is now ”å”, or ”medens” is ”mens”. It is, therefore, important
the text that is found is converted to a modern version of writing since an ASR model will
most likely predict the more modern version of words. The modernized version of the text
for 13 different texts was found. The last step was to listen to all recordings to validate
the quality of the audiobooks and check if the found texts matched.
A dataset consisting of 12 recordings of fairytales from H.C. Andersen and a single record­
ing of a text from Grundtvig was made. The list of texts can be found in appendix D. To
make both the recordings and texts more applicable as a dataset some cleaning steps
were needed. Starting with the audio samples, all audio samples have a disclaimer at
the start and the end saying, ”This is a Librivox recording...”. These disclaimers have
to be removed, and they were removed by manually listening to the samples and dis­
carding the disclaimer part. Some cleaning was applied to the texts by removing new
lines, tabulations, double spaces, and quote marks. It was chosen that this dataset would
only be used to benchmark WER. No Alignment models were used to get timestamps.
The dataset consists of 193 minutes of recordings, 30401 total words, and 6149 unique
words.
5.2
Benchmarking
In this section, the performance benchmarks of both Whisper and Hugging Face Whis­
per will be showcased. These benchmarks were conducted on various datasets to as­
sess the models proficiency in handling different record lengths, languages, and model
inference speeds across different implementations. To facilitate benchmarking with ease
and efficiency, a script has been developed that enables various types of tests on differ­
ent datasets to be performed. Control over the type of benchmark, dataset, model, and
model parameters is provided by the Hydra package and config parameters. The versions
of packages used for benchmarking can be found in the table 5.1.
Package
Version
cuda
11.7
datasets
2.9.0
ffmpeg
4.4
ffmpeg­python
0.2.0
hydra­core
1.3.1
openai­whisper
20230314
torch
2.0.0
torchaudio
2.0.1
transformers
4.29.1
Python
3.9.11
Table 5.1: Versions of packages used when benchmarking.
All the benchmarks were run on DTU HPC 4 using a NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU with
4https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
35
==PAGE:44==
80GB memory. There were no other jobs running on the GPU during the benchmarking
process, ensuring unbiased and uninterrupted results. While benchmarking, all models
were operated with half­precision. For Hugging Face Whisper strides of 6 and 2 secounds
respectively for the before and after each chunk was used. In the following sections,
details on the benchmarks, including their descriptions and the datasets utilized for each
of them can be found. For measuring performance, WER was utilized as a benchmark,
and the average inference time in seconds was used as a speed metric.
All benchmark codes can be found in the GitHub repository5.
5.2.1
Models performance on short­form
Short­form datasets are commonly utilized as a standard for evaluating the performance
of ASR systems. The benchmarks involve transcribing various short forms using ASR
systems and then comparing the results to accurate human transcription.
English
Benchmarks of models for short­form in English were created by selecting datasets used
in the Whisper paper [20] to compare Whisper with other ASR solutions. Test splits from
English versions of Fleurs, Common Voice, and Librispeech datasets were used. The
Whisper paper is using Common Voice 5.1 for benchmarking [20], it is chosen to use a
newer and larger version of Common Voice to benchmark. Common Voice 13 is therefore
used instead of 5.1. Benchmark results on English short­forms can be seen in table 5.2.
Fleurs
Common Voice 13
Librispeech
Whisper
tiny
16.23
33.78
7.69
base
12.12
25.48
5.31
small
9.58
15.87
3.51
medium
6.33
11.93
3.07
large
5.98
10.54
4.39
tiny.en
12.73
29.66
5.91
base.en
9.36
22.36
4.33
small.en
7.58
16.01
3.22
medium.en
6.49
12.64
3.23
Hugging Face
tiny
15.54
36.22
7.55
base
12.74
26.08
5.05
small
8.41
16.01
3.44
medium
8.02
12.16
2.88
large
6.11
10.58
2.87
tiny.en
15.26
37.24
8.08
base.en
13.75
24.86
15.55
small.en
7.76
16.25
4.74
medium.en
6.67
12.55
4.08
Table 5.2: WER (%) for English datasets (lower is better). Standard Whisper model with
default Whisper DecodingOptions.
After analyzing the results, it is evident that both models exhibit better performance when
their size is increased, with the exception of Librispeech. In this case, the large Whis­
per model produced worse results compared to the medium and small versions, and
medium.en version produced worse results than the small.en model. Notably, the Hug­
5https://github.com/WojciechTyczynski/Whisper­benchmarking
36
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:45==
ging Face base.en model produced exceptionally poor results compared to all other mod­
els. The variation between the Whisper and Hugging Face Whisper models is negligible,
usually just a few percentage points. In terms of multilingual models, Whisper showed bet­
ter results for base, medium, and large sizes on Fleurs and all sizes on Common Voice
13. On the other hand, Multilingual Hugging Face Whisper performed better for tiny and
small sizes on Fleurs and for all sizes on Librispeech. The evidence does not indicate
that utilizing English models leads to significantly better results.
Danish
It was chosen to benchmark the Whisper models on the Danish part of Common Voice 13
and Fleurs. Common Voice and fleurs were also used to benchmark whisper in the original
paper[20]. The test splits were taken from Danish versions of Fleurs and Common Voice
13. Two additional datasets, FT Speech, and NST Dansk, were utilized. Any audio clips
that were missing or corrupt in the NST Dansk dataset were excluded. The benchmarking
results for the Danish short­form can be found in table 5.3.
Fleurs
Common Voice 13
NST DK
FTSpeech
Whisper
tiny
91.52
81.78
91.00
89.20
base
65.86
70.77
65.50
62.81
small
37.52
40.33
39.57
41.36
medium
22.80
27.09
26.62
30.89
large
16.68
22.00
24.57
26.99
Hugging Face
tiny
104.85
83.41
101.71
106.65
base
65.47
73.09
74.37
68.63
small
40.09
40.50
40.35
43.92
medium
22.98
27.13
27.21
38.54
large
16.69
22.97
25.60
42.18
Table 5.3: WER (%) for danish datasets (lower is better).
Standard Whisper model
with default Whisper DecodingOptions. FTSpeech is test­balanced, where all recordings
larger than 30 seconds have been removed. Corrupted and empty sound files have been
removed from NST.
Based on the results obtained, it is clear that the models have a much harder time tran­
scribing Danish compared to English. This is likely due to the fact that Whisper was trained
on a much smaller amount of Danish audio compared to English. While both models per­
form better with larger sizes, the differences in performance for the Danish short­form
are more pronounced. Whisper generally performs better than Hugging Face Whisper,
particularly with tiny model sizes. The difference in WER results between the two models
can range from a few percentage points to a dozen.
5.2.2
Models performance on long­form
Transcribing long­form content can be more challenging than shorter recordings, as most
ASR systems cannot process such large files at once and require processing them in
parts. Therefore, this benchmark is designed to test how accurately models can deal with
these challenges and transcribe long­form content.
English
The TED­LIUM 3 and REV16 datasets were utilized as benchmarks to evaluate models
for long­form content in English. Specifically, the test split of the TED­LIUM 3 dataset
was employed, which includes 11 full­length TED talks. The audio file of each talk was
sliced between the beginning of the first labeled segment and the end of the last labeled
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
37
==PAGE:46==
segment, using timestamps provided by the Whisper GitHub repository [48]. Addition­
ally, a subset of 16 podcast transcripts from the REV16 dataset was utilized, which were
selected from the original set by OpenAI. Results on benchmarking models on datasets
TED­LIUM 3 and REV16 can respectively be seen in Tables 5.4 and 5.5.
Whisper
Whisper Hugging Face
Batch size: 1
Batch size: 8
Batch size: 16
tiny
16.72
19.61
19.68
19.68
base
14.21
17.06
17.00
17.05
small
11.98
14.69
14.73
14.76
medium
11.74
14.05
14.01
13.99
large
11.87
14.08
14.09
14.09
tiny.en
14.75
17.85
17.92
17.93
base.en
12.76
15.80
15.83
15.89
small.en
11.71
14.51
14.50
14.56
medium.en
11.80
13.78
13.81
13.78
Table 5.4: WER (%) on REV16 datasets for OpenAI and Hugging Face Whisper distribu­
tion (lower is better). Hugging Face Whisper was benchmarked for different batch sizes:1,
8, and 16, to check the effect of batching long form on model performance.
Whisper
Whisper Hugging Face
Batch size: 1
Batch size: 8
Batch size: 16
tiny
6.62
7.99
8.01
8.05
base
5.13
6.19
6.18
6.21
small
4.21
5.14
5.09
5.11
medium
4.29
4.57
4.56
4.56
large
3.49
4.61
4.58
4.59
tiny.en
5.69
7.17
7.24
7.26
base.en
4.91
4.99
4.98
4.97
small.en
4.43
4.69
4.69
4.69
medium.en
3.70
5.37
5.38
5.38
Table 5.5: WER (%) on test split from TED­LIUM 3 dataset for OpenAI and Hugging
Face Whisper distribution (lower is better). Hugging Face Whisper was benchmarked
for different batch sizes:1, 8, and 16, to check the effect of batching long form on model
performance.
The results of benchmarks of both models on English long­form show that both mod­
els had a difference of only a few percentage points in word error rate (WER). However,
Whispers exhibited better overall performance. The English­only versions of Whisper and
Hugging Face Whisper performed better than their multilingual counterparts for tiny and
base models. The models achieved better performance on the TED­LIUM 3 dataset com­
pared to REV16. This is because TED Talks recordings have clear audio with only one
speaker and no background noise, while REV16 consists of podcasts with multiple speak­
ers, sound effects, and music. Hugging Face Whisper showed no significant difference
in results for batch sizes 1, 8, and 16.
Danish
As previously noted, there was no existing benchmark dataset for Danish long­form.
Therefore, a dataset was developed using audiobook recordings of H.C. Andersen and
38
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:47==
Grundtvig audiobooks from the Librivox project. The dataset creation process is detailed
in section 5.1.8. The dataset consists of 13 audio recordings with corresponding texts.
The results of the Danish­long form benchmark can be found in table 5.6.
Whisper
Whisper Hugging Face
Batch size: 1
Batch size: 8
Batch size: 16
tiny
69.63
71.66
71.62
71.50
base
45.01
48.77
48.71
48.69
small
26.10
30.41
30.46
30.53
medium
16.72
24.00
24.29
24.35
large
13.46
17.56
17.47
17.39
Table 5.6: WER (%) on Danish Librivox (lower is better). Hugging Face Whisper was
benchmarked for different batch sizes:1, 8, and 16, to check the effect of batching long
form on model performance.
During the benchmarking of Whisper and Hugging Face Whisper models for Danish long­
forms, the results confirmed previous findings for Danish short­forms. It was observed
that models perform less optimally for smaller languages, such as Danish, compared to
high­resource languages like English. The WER received was higher than that obtained
during benchmarking of English­long forms on a noisy REV16 dataset, particularly for tiny,
base, and small models. The Whisper large model performed the best in the benchmark
with a WER of 13.46, while the best Hugging Face Whisper model, large with batch size
16, obtained a WER of 17.39. Overall, Whisper outperformed Hugging Face Whisper on
the Danish long­form benchmark. The difference in performance for different batch sizes
in the Hugging Face Whisper model was nearly imperceptible, with a maximum difference
of 0.35 WER for a medium model.
5.2.3
Models speed
During performance benchmarks of the models, Hugging Face Whisper was seen to be
faster, especially during benchmarks of long forms. As the authors claim, it should be
up to 6× faster. To verify this claim, speed benchmarks were run using the ”We Won.”
episode from the Pod Save America podcast, which is part of the REV16 benchmark
dataset. The audio file is 58 minutes and 14 seconds long, and the benchmark consisted
of inferring audio ten times using each model. The average time of inference was used
as a metric, and one warming­up inference was made before each benchmark, which
was not measured. Both models used default decoding parameters and half­precision
during the benchmark. To ensure comparability, the Whisper transcribe function was used
with the provided language, skipping the language detection step not implemented in the
Hugging Face Whisper pipeline. For Hugging Face Whisper, the speed of model inference
was benchmarked using the batching algorithm described in section 4.2.1. The model is
benchmarked using batch sizes 1, 8, and 16. The benchmark results are available in
Table 5.7.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
39
==PAGE:48==
Whisper
Whisper Hugging Face
Batch size: 1
Batch size: 8
Batch size: 16
tiny
72.45
62.87
26.32
23.85
base
98.81
80.16
31.21
25.36
small
194.20
138.12
43.30
33.95
medium
322.86
240.14
69.24
50.77
large
505.98
310.50
86.65
58.24
tiny.en
73.01
60.59
26.01
23.26
base.en
96.35
78.30
30.80
25.01
small.en
179.30
136.13
41.91
32.78
medium.en
367.57
227.78
66.00
49.03
Table 5.7: Average time of inference in seconds (s) (lower is better). The average was
calculated from 10 inferences.
Differences in implementation that affect speed can be observed by comparing the speed
of model inference between Whisper and Hugging Face Whisper with a batch size of 1.
Hugging Face Whisper lacks a decoding mechanism for transcription optimization, unlike
Whisper. Consequently, there are speed­ups of about 10 seconds for the tiny model and
up to 200 seconds for the large model. If Hugging Face Whisper’s batching file mechanism
is applied with batch sizes of 8 and 16, there is a significant speed­up of up to eight times
for the large model with a batch size of 16, compared to Whisper. This confirms the
claim that Hugging Face Whisper is significantly faster than Whisper. Inference speed
shows no significant difference between multilingual and English­only models for both
implementations.
5.2.4
Benchmark outcomes
Both model implementations, Whisper and Hugging Face Whisper, were benchmarked
on short­ and long­form in Danish and English. Benchmarks results showed that models
perform worse for languages that constituted a much smaller part of the training dataset
of Whisper, such as Danish, compared to English which was the main language.
When comparing the performance of Whisper and Hugging Face Whisper, Whisper comes
out slightly ahead. However, the difference between the two is not significant. The reason
for this is that Hugging Face Whisper lacks a more complex decoding mechanism for tran­
scription optimization. On the other hand, Hugging Face Whisper has a faster inference
time compared to Whisper, which can be attributed to its implementation of a file batching
algorithm. This results in a significant speed advantage of up to 8 times faster compared
to Whisper’s inference speed, as demonstrated by inference speed benchmarks.
Furthermore, performance benchmarks have demonstrated that utilizing a language­specific
model can greatly enhance model performance when compared to the multilingual version
of the models when using smaller model sizes.
5.3
Fine­tuning
One aim of the thesis is to make Whisper transcriptions better for the Danish language.
This should be possible to do with fine­tuning the model by introducing the model for more
data in Danish. As already described then, there is a lack of datasets in Danish for long­
form, and the short­form version does not include many hours of information. This can
make it hard to fine­tune Whisper, especially when looking at how Whisper was trained
originally. Whisper is trained on long­form data that has been split into smaller chunks.
40
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:49==
Whisper decoder has been trained with data where it is given the condition from the previ­
ous prompt. This will give Whisper context and not only rely on the log­mel spectrograms
which are given to the encoder. Fine­tuning for Danish can present a challenge as there
are presently no long­form datasets available in Danish. However, the Hugging Face im­
plementation of Whisper should not face this issue as it does not rely on the previous
prompt during decoding.
In this section, there will be two different approaches to fine­tuning Whisper. One will be a
full fine­tuning, and the other will be LoRA fine­tuning using a Hugging Face library called
Parameter­Efficient Fine­Tuning (PEFT).
5.3.1
Datasets
Looking at the Danish datasets, it is only Common Voice, Fleurs, and NST that have not
been normalized. It is preferable to fine­tune models on datasets that retain punctuation
and distinguish between lowercase and uppercase letters. This ensures that the model
maintains its language skills. Despite its large size and high quality, FT­Speech is not as
desirable for fine­tuning in this regard due to it being normalized. All the Danish datasets
still lack information about the previous prompt. NST does also have issues that are hard
to compensate for since it is the same 312 lines that 560 people have been reading out
loud. The difference in the recordings is, therefore, not that big, the recordings are made
in near­to­perfect conditions, and all the recordings are very similar. This leaves Fleurs
and Common Voice, which are both high­quality datasets. The recordings in Common
Voice are not that long, and the number of words in every recording is very low. This can
be seen in figure 5.1, where the word frequency for Common Voice train and Fleurs train
has been plotted. Fleurs is a bit more diverse with some longer recordings, but the mean
is still 20 words per recording. This is considered low since Whisper can be trained on
30­second windows, and people do speak around 10 sentences per minute or 200 words
[49]. This means that, on average, every recording could have 80 words more. As it is
also stated in section 3.3.1, then whisper can generate max ‘n_text_ctx/2‘ tokens with 5
special tokens that have to be generated every time. This gives 219 tokens that Whisper
can generate for each 30 seconds of audio. This is much more than both of the datasets
have, here, Common Voice has a mean of 16 tokens per recording and Flerus 39.5. Even
though the recordings are not as long and dense as they could be, then the two datasets
are the best datasets that are freely available for fine­tuning.
5.3.2
fine­tuning Code
Fine­tuning of Whisper can be divided into two parts; preparation of data and training
loop. To create the code, a GitHub repository has been forked6, which had already im­
plemented a majority of the code and had shown good results for fine­tuning Whisper in
the discussion.
To fine­tune whisper, a few steps have to be made. Both the encoder and decoder need
to be trained. To effectively train the model, three crucial things must be known: the input
to the encoder, the input to the decoder, and the output of the decoder. Obtaining the log­
mel spectrograms from an utterance is a straightforward process which is the input to the
encoder. The decoder input must be built with the special tokens mentioned in section 3.2.
There are multiple different combinations, depending on the previous text, timestamps,
and no speech. All different combinations can be seen in the list below, where transcribe
needs to be changed for translation if that is used:
6https://github.com/koldbrandt/whisper­finetuning
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.1: Word frequency for the trainset recordings in the two datasets Common Voice
13 and Fleurs
• Previous + No Timestamps:
<|startofprev|> Previous text.<|startoftranscript|><|da|><|transcribe|>
<|notimestamps|> This is the current.
• Previous + Timestamps:
<|startofprev|><|0.00|>Previous text. <|0.40|><|startoftranscript|><|da|>
<|transcribe|><|0.00|> This is the current<|1.20|>.
• No Previous + No Timestamps:
<|startoftranscript|><|da|><|transcribe|><|notimestamps|> This is the current.
• No Previous + Timestamps:
<|startoftranscript|><|da|><|transcribe|><|0.00|>This is the current<|1.20|>.
• Previous + No Text
<|startofprev|> Previous text.<|startoftranscript|><|nospeech|>
• No Previous + No Text
<|startoftranscript|><|nospeech|>
The expected output of the decoder will also include everything from and including ”<|startof­
transcript|>” but will have one additional token appended, ”<|endoftext|>”, to make the
generation of text stop. Since the previous prompt is given to the decoder and the goal is
only to learn the generated part, a mask has to be added to the expected output. For this,
”­100” is used as the default value for the mask, which is padded in front of the expected
output, to construct the expected decoder output.
It can be seen from the Whisper article that it is training 50% of the time with timestamps
and 50% of the time with condition on the previous prompt [20]. This has also been imple­
mented for the dataloader and can be given with a float parameter to get a percentage for
how often each of them should be used. Additionally, there is a maximum length of tokens
that Whisper will generate, it is set by ‘model.dims.n_text_ctx=448‘. A split between the
previous prompt and new tokens to generate has to be set. For the previous token, there
is only 1 special token. Meaning it can have 223 tokens. For max tokens to generate,
42
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:51==
there are a maximum of 5 special tokens that can be set, and it can thus generate 219
tokens. This is very important when loading and creating the dataset, because the model
will not generate more than 448, meaning that if the data is larger, then a higher loss will
always be there, and the model won’t learn as expected.
When the data is in order, then a training loop can be created to train the model. All the
hyperparameters can be set as arguments when running the Python script. It was chosen
to use AdamW as Optimizer since it is what OpenAI used to train Whisper originally. One
thing that has not been implemented is the ”Speechless audio subsample factor”. There
is no documentation on what this hyperparameter is. It was chosen to use cross­entropy
as the loss function since it is the most widely used one for classification tasks.
The code that got forked from the original repository had working code for fine­tuning
on single GPU training. Some minor changes were made in the code for more logging
of performance during training using Weights and Biases[50]. The Optimizer was also
changed to match the original Whisper implementation.
Multi­GPU Training code
Whisper was trained in a multi­GPU setup due to the model and dataset size. During the
project, training and experiments could be conducted on DTU HPC7, where it is possible
to run jobs with 2 GPUs at the same time. Code for Multi­GPU was also explored and
implemented to make training faster on large datasets and make it possible to run with
larger batch sizes. To make it possible, Pytorch Distributed Data Parallel (DDP) was used
[11]. To run on multiple GPUs using DDP, a process group is needed. A Process group is
a group of instances that will run simultaneously and train the model. The process group
will set up a server with a specific backend, which will synchronize all the processes that
are running, and it is hosted on a single node. This means that the server is taking care
of all the distribution of tasks to the processes, and this is not done manually. Multiple
backends can be chosen, but for best GPU performance NCCL is chosen, which runs
solely on the GPU and is created by NVIDIA [51]. The code for setting up the process
group can be seen below.
1
def ddp_setup(rank, world_size):
2
"""
3
Args:
4
rank: Unique identifier of each process
5
world_size: Total number of processes
6
"""
7
os.environ["MASTER_ADDR"] = "localhost"
8
os.environ["MASTER_PORT"] = "12366"
9
init_process_group(
10
backend="nccl", rank=rank, world_size=world_size
11
)
# Options NCCl, Gloo, MPI
Each process has to be initialized. For each GPU, the function above needs to be run.
To start multiple processes, Pytorch multiprocessing can be used. This is achieved by
calling the function ‘spawn‘, which has the following constructor:
1
torch.multiprocessing.spawn(fn, args=(), nprocs=1, join=True, daemon=False
, start_method='spawn')
7https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
43
==PAGE:52==
This will run the number of processes given in ‘nprocs‘, with the passed function. Args
can be given to the function as a tuple, but the first argument that the function has to take
is ‘rank‘. This is the unique id for the process. In the case of this implementation, when
only running on a single system with 2 GPUs, then the ‘rank‘ will be the GPU number.
The next thing is that the training dataset needs to be split onto the multiple GPUs that
are available when training. A few things need to be changed in the dataloader to achieve
this, and the dataloader can be seen below. The first thing to notice is ‘pin_memory=True‘.
This is recommended in a multiprocessing setting and enables fast data transfer to CUDA­
enabled devices [11]. ‘Shuffle‘ is set to false, and this is on purpose for the training set.
To be able to push the dataset to multiple GPUs, the ‘sampler‘ is set to be a ‘Distributed­
Sampler‘ that takes the dataset as input. The distributed sampler will not be able to push
the dataset to the GPUs if it is shuffled, and the distributed sampler will take care of the
shuffling. As one might notice, ‘num_workers‘ is not set, the reason for this is that the
‘DistributedSampler‘ works solely on GPU, and giving it more than one core will make the
code break.
1
DataLoader(
2
dataset ,
3
batch_size=batch_size ,
4
pin_memory=True,
5
shuffle=False,
6
sampler=DistributedSampler(dataset),
7
collate_fn=collate_fn ,
8
)
This is how the train loader is created. The dev loader is a bit different because when
doing training on multiple GPUs then, it is not necessary to evaluate the model multiple
times. It is only desired to see how the model is performing at a certain point, and since it is
the same model on all GPUs, then running the evaluation on a single one is desired. The
dev loader will, therefore, only be loaded on ‘rank=0‘, and again the number of workers is
set to 0.
The model needs to get converted to a DDP model. This is easily achieved by a single
line of code that needs to be run in each process. DDP is called around the model, as
shown below. Here the ‘gpu_id‘ will be the rank.
1
DistributedDataParallel(model, device_ids=[gpu_id])
One thing that was encountered when trying to convert Whisper to a DDP model is that
DDP does not support sparse tensors. Whisper is using sparse tensors to save a buffer
with attention heads. This got written into the model code after the introduction of word­
level timestamps. This is, however, not necessary for training the model since it is no
problem to add the buffers again after training. To overcome this a local copy of the model
code was made, where the sparse buffers were removed to overcome this problem.
A class called Trainer was created to do all the training and evaluation. The trainer sim­
ply wraps all the hyperparameters and executes the training of the model when calling
the method ‘train‘. As already mentioned then, the evaluation will only be conducted on
‘GPU:0‘. DDP will do synchronization both on the forward pass and backward pass of the
model. This means that the multiple processes will continue training even though one is
44
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:53==
evaluating. That is not desirable since the model weights will then update while evaluat­
ing the model. When doing the evaluation, the local model of DDP is called and used for
evaluation. This can be achieved by calling the ‘module‘ of the DDP model as follow:
1
model.module.eval()
This is also necessary when doing the forward pass over the model, and the module
is also called. To prevent the other processes from continuing while evaluating, a torch
distributed barrier is set up to synchronize all the processes.
After these steps, the training works like the standard 1 GPU training and takes all the
same hyperparameters for the training of the model. The code will save the best­performing
model based on the loss and the last model after training for the selected steps. Logging
is also set up to synchronize with Weights and Biases [50].
5.3.3
Fine­tuning Results
To fine­tune the model, the two datasets, Common Voice 13 and Fleurs, will be used in
combination, and their respective development sets will be used for evaluation. There
are 2735 utterances in Common Voice 13 for training and 2101 for evaluation. Fleurs
has 2465 utterances for training and 395 for evaluation. The evaluation set for Fleurs is
significantly shorter than the one for Common Voice 13, it is, however, chosen to use the
full sets for evaluation since it is already very little data compared to what Whisper was
originally trained on and assumably evaluated on.
To make sure that it is even possible to fine­tune Whisper, it is chosen to start out with
one of the smaller models from the Whisper model card. The base model will be used for
the first fine­tuning of Whisper. The code described in section 5.3.2 will be used for the
fine­tuning. The hyperparameters for the training can be found in table 5.8.
Hyperparameter
Value
Updates
1050
Batch Size
16
Accumulative grad steps
1
Warmup Updates
0
Learning rate
2 × 10−4
Eval steps
50
Table 5.8: Hyperparameters for fine­tuning of Whisper base model
It was chosen not to use any warm­up steps since they are typically used to get the learn­
ing for the attention weights going. This model has already been trained, and it is fine­
tuning, therefore, a few experiments showed that it was better not to use warmup. The
base model was also trained with a much higher learning rate than that chosen here. This
is on purpose with the same arguments that experiments showed that this would make
the loss go down more smoothly and not explode. 1050 updates are being used, but it is
evaluated every 50 steps, and the best model is saved based on the lowest loss. There
are 2735 + 2465 = 5200 total utterances, and with a batch size of 16, it gives 325 batches
and a total of 3.2 times over the full dataset.
A plot for the train and validation loss has been made, and it can be seen in figure 5.2.
Here it can be seen that the loss for the training set and for the validation set is continuing
to go down. Still, it is significantly lower for the training set than for the validation set.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
45
==PAGE:54==
There is a dip in the training loss around step 325, and this is the size of one epoch. This
could indicate that the model does recognize that it has seen the same data before. It can
also be seen that the validation loss flattens out around this step, and the model learns
the most in the first epoch.
Figure 5.2: Training and validation loss for fine­tuning of Whisper base model
The WER for the validation set is plotted in figure 5.5. Here it can be seen that even
though the loss is flatting out after the first epoch, then the validation WER is still going
down consistently.
Figure 5.3: WER for the validation set for fine­tuning of Whisper base model
To actually see how the model is performing, the same benchmarks on Danish datasets
have been made as in the benchmarks section. The WER for each dataset can be seen
in table 5.9. The first row of the results is the standard base model and is the same results
already presented in the benchmarking section. Performance for the model saved with
46
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:55==
the lowest loss on the validation set is represented in the table as ‘base FT‘.
Fleurs
CV 13
NST DK
FTSpeech
Danish Librivox
base
65.86
70.77
65.50
62.81
45.01
base FT
52.15
44.84
55.89
62.96
73.09
Table 5.9: Results from fine­tuning of Whisper base mode. The first result row is the
standard Whisper base model. Next is the model with the lowest loss on validation set
during training. CV13 refers to Common Voice 13.
From the results, it can be seen that the model has certainly increased in performance for
short form on Common Voice 13 and Fleurs. It also shows better results for NST, but for
FTSpeech, the results are about the same. For long­form, the performance shows worse
results, which is expected. The training is not conducted with training on the previous
prompt, which should make the model struggle a bit more to find context. It is surprising
that it is losing the ability to understand this token so quickly. These results clearly show
that with very little data, it is possible to fine­tune smaller versions of Whisper and get
improved results.
The same experiment will be made with the large version of Whisper to see if it is also
possible to fine­tune it with a very limited amount of data. A very similar setup as for the
base model is used, and the hyperparameters can be seen in table 5.10.
Hyperparameter
Value
Updates
1050
Batch Size
4
Accumulative grad steps
4
Warmup Updates
0
Learning rate
1 × 10−5
Eval steps
50
Table 5.10: Hyperparameters for fine­tuning of Whisper large model
A smaller batch size has to be used because of the VRAM constraints on the Nvidia
A100. To simulate a larger batch size, accumulative grad steps are being used. When
accumulative grad steps are 4, the training will only do a step on the gradient for every
fourth batch, essentially simulating a batch size of 16. This means that one batch again
will be 325 steps. The train and validation loss can be seen in figure 5.4. A similar trend
as for the base model can be seen. The model recognizes the data that has been trained
on earlier and a step in loss is seen in step 325. It is, however, seen that the loss for the
validation set is not going down much after the first 100 batches but rather flattening out.
This could indicate that the model is not learning from the training set.
The WER for the validation set for each validation step can be seen in figure 5.5. Here
it can be seen that the model is learning and providing a smaller WER even though the
loss is not decreasing much.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.4: Training and validation loss for fine­tuning of Whisper large model
Figure 5.5: WER for the validation set for fine­tuning of Whisper large model
Similarly, as for the base model fine­tuning, the Danish benchmarks from the benchmark­
ing section have been made for the large model and can be seen in table 5.11. Here
much smaller improvements can be seen for the model. Even though the model has
been trained on Fleurs the model is performing worse on the test set of Fleurs. It is show­
ing small improvements for Common Voice 13, which is also the majority of the validation
set. The other results are about the same, and it can be concluded that much more data
is needed to fine­tune such a large language model.
From both of the fine­tunings, a similar trend can be seen that more good data is needed.
It is clear from the base model fine­tuning that training on data where the previous prompt
is being used is necessary if the ability to do correct long­form transcriptions is wanted.
This training does also miss training on timestamp tokens, the code for training does
support it, but no datasets are available for this. Hugging Face had an event in December
48
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:57==
Fleurs
CV 13
NST DK
FTSpeech
Danish Librivox
large
16.68
22.00
24.57
26.99
13.46
large FT
17.17
19.13
24.71
29.95
13.40
Table 5.11: Results from fine­tuning of Whisper large model. The first result row is the
standard Whisper large model. Next is the model with the lowest loss on validation set
during training. CV13 refers to Common Voice 13.
2022 on fine­tuning of Whisper 8, here they only tested the fine­tuned models on Common
Voice 11. The results presented here clearly show that the model can do very well for one
dataset but worse for others even if it is in the same language. This state the importance
of testing the model on a variety of data to ensure that the model is actually learning.
To improve Whisper on all the Danish datasets, a big dataset is needed. It is, however not
enough to just have a lot of data, but the data need to be similar to the data that were used
for the training of whisper. This means data that have timestamps for small segments and
are of high quality. If there are timestamps for small segments, then they can be divided
into chunks of <30s, the previous prompt can be pushed in front, and timestamp tokens
can be created.
5.3.4
PEFT Fine­tuning
LoRA is implemented in the Parameter­Efficient Fine­Tuning (PEFT) library of Hugging
Face [52]. Whisper is not listed as a supported model for PEFT, as it was designed with
pre­trained language models (PLMs) in mind. However, as Whisper follows transformer
architecture similar to a lot of PLMs and Hugging Face has its own implementation of
Whisper, where Whisper weights have been converted to the Hugging Face standard, it
is possible to use PEFT fine­tuning for Whisper. A notebook proving that it is possible
was uploaded to the PEFT repository, and this notebook was used as a base for the
implementation [53].
Implementation
Hugging Face has made training of the models with their transformers library very straight­
forward. The same approach has been used for the PEFT library, meaning that the con­
version from a normal Hugging Face model to a PEFT model is done in a single line of
code.
1
model = get_peft_model(model, config)
The ‘get_peft_model‘ function requires two arguments the model and a config object. The
config object is a PeftConfig that describes how PEFT should be set up. In this case, a
LoRA config is being used, which will tell PEFT how the LoRA setup should be. Here it
is possible to list which targets that are wanted to be fine­tuned. When using LoRA, all
weight matrices do not have to be trained. In this config, only the query and value matrices
are targeted. The rank max rank is set to 32; the alpha value is set to 64. It is chosen to
use dropout on LoRA layers, and the probability is set to 0.5. Bias is set to none not to
fine­tune the bias term of the model.
8https://discuss.huggingface.co/t/open­to­the­community­whisper­fine­tuning­event
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
49
==PAGE:58==
1
config = LoraConfig(
2
r=32,
3
lora_alpha=64,
4
target_modules=["q_proj", "v_proj"],
5
lora_dropout=0.05,
6
bias="none",
7
)
After converting the model to a PEFT model, it can be trained using Hugging Face Seq2SeqTrainer.
Seq2SeqTrainer is a Hugging Face API providing feature­complete training in PyTorch for
sequence­to­sequence models.
1
trainer = Seq2SeqTrainer(
2
args=training_args #Seq2SeqTrainingArguments object ,
3
model=model,
4
train_dataset=datasets["train"],
5
eval_dataset=datasets["test"],
6
data_collator=data_collator ,
7
compute_metrics=compute_metrics ,
8
tokenizer=tokenizer ,
9
preprocess_logits_for_metrics=preprocess_logits_for_metrics ,
10
)
To specify hyperparameters and customize training, ‘Seq2SeqTrainingArguments‘ con­
taining training arguments need to be created and passed to ‘Seq2SeqTrainer‘ during in­
stantiating. The entire setup of ‘Seq2SeqTrainingArguments‘ for training the PEFT model
can be found in Appendix E. Apart from ‘Seq2SeqTrainingArguments‘ while instantiat­
ing ‘Seq2SeqTrainer‘ passed are model, tokenizer, data collator for data processing,
train and evaluation datasets. As it is desired to evaluate the model not only evaluate
the model on the loss but also the WER, a ‘compute_metrics‘ function computing WER
must also be passed to ‘Seq2SeqTrainer‘. During experiments, it was discovered that
‘Seq2SeqTrainer‘ has an issue where it accumulates all values when evaluating and then
tries to compute all metrics at once, causing the RAM usage to explode while evaluat­
ing. To solve this issue, a function for ‘preprocess_logits_for_metrics‘ is being used that
process the logits before doing metrics instead of accumulating them.
1
def preprocess_logits_for_metrics(logits , labels):
2
pred_ids = torch.argmax(logits[0], dim=-1)
3
return pred_ids , labels
This way, it was possible to get WER for the evaluation set. To monitor the training, logging
to Weights and Biases is set up [50]. Created ‘Seq2SeqTrainer‘ is utilized for training and
evaluating the model by respective methods ‘train()‘ and ‘evaluate()‘.
Peft Fine­tuning Results
To compare the performance of PEFT fine­tuning with LoRA to the comprehensive fine­
tuning conducted in section 5.3.3, a fine­tuning using PEFT on the same datasets was
performed. To see if it is possible to train Whisper using LoRA and get any good results,
the base model will be fine­tuned first before moving to one of the bigger models. Using
LoRA to fine­tune the base model will only fine­tune around 1% of the parameters in the
50
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:59==
Hyperparameter
Value
Updates
975
Batch Size
16
Accumulative grad steps
1
Warmup Updates
50
Learning rate
2 × 10−4
Eval steps
50
Table 5.12: Hyperparameters for fine­tuning of Whisper base model using Hugging Face
PEFT
model. These extra weights can be saved and added to the model at inference time. The
hyperparameters for the fine­tuning can be seen in table 5.12.
It is chosen to use a batch size of 16, just as in the normal fine­tuning. The training will
run for 3 epochs. This gives 950 steps. It is chosen to use 50 warmup updates since this
showed good results compared to not using any when experimenting.
The loss for both training and validation can be seen in figure 5.6. This shows that the
loss is going down a lot in the first warmup steps and continues to do so most of the first
epoch. After this, the loss flattens out and continues to go down. The loss shows that the
model is learning throughout the training.
Figure 5.6: Training and validation loss for fine­tuning of Whisper base model using Hug­
ging Face PEFT
The WER for the validation set is plotted in figure 5.7. The Validation WER is following the
same trend as for the loss, and it is clear that the model is continuing learning throughout
the training. The WER is not as far down as for the normal fine­tuning conducted earlier,
but it is showing promising signs of a model that learns from the training data.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.7: WER for the validation set for fine­tuning of Whisper base model using Hug­
ging Face PEFT
To evaluate the model, the Danish benchmarks from the benchmarking section are being
used. The results can be observed in table 5.13. Here it is clear that the model has overall
learned more about the Danish language since all the benchmarks have lower WER. Even
the long­form dataset has a lower WER. The reason for this is that Hugging Face is not
using the previous prompt for transcribing long­form data as the original Whisper does
but is using its own batching algorithm. Here the results for batch size 16 are reported.
For this smaller model, a very limited amount of data do result in some learning from the
model. The model does not learn as much about Common Voice 13 as for the normal
fine­tuning, it is, however, considered a good result since it became better for FTSpeech
and for the long­form dataset.
Fleurs
CV 13
NST DK
FTSpeech
Danish Librivox
HF base
65.47
73.09
74.37
68.63
48.69
HF base PEFT
56.79
57.96
59.90
56.05
45.39
Table 5.13: Results from fine­tuning of Whisper base model using LoRA. The first result
row is the standard Whisper base model from Hugging Face, and the next is the PEFT
fine­tuned base Hugging Face model. Results for Danish Librivox are reported for batch
size 16. CV13 refers to Common Voice 13.
These results show that it is possible to fine­tune Whisper using LoRA. To see if a limited
amount of data can also be useful on the larger model, fine­tuning using PEFT will be
conducted on the large model. The hyperparameters for the fine­tuning can be seen
in table 5.14. As for the normal fine­tuning, the batch size has to be smaller to fit on
the GPU’s VRAM. The batch size is set to 4, and to simulate a larger batch size, the
accumulative grad steps are set to 4. 50 warmup updates are being used since this
showed good results for the base model. The learning rate is lowered from the base
model, just as for the normal fine­tuning of Whisper.
52
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:61==
Hyperparameter
Value
Updates
975
Batch Size
4
Accumulative grad steps
4
Warmup Updates
50
Learning rate
1 × 10−5
Eval steps
50
Table 5.14: Hyperparameters for fine­tuning of Whisper large model using Hugging Face
PEFT
The loss for the validation and training can be seen in figure 5.9. This shows that the
validation loss is following the training loss very closely. The loss for the validation set is
just as low as for the training, showing that the model is learning from the training set.
Figure 5.8: WER for the validation set for fine­tuning of Whisper large model using Hug­
ging Face PEFT
This gets approved when looking at the WER for the validation set. The WER for the
validation set is plotted in figure 5.9 and shows that the WER for the validation set is
continuing to go down. It is, however, flatting out around the first epoch, and this is also
what has been seen with the previous fine­tuning.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.9: WER for the validation set for fine­tuning of Whisper large model using Hug­
ging Face PEFT
The Danish benchmarks from the benchmark section are used to evaluate the fine­tuned
model. The results can be seen in table 5.15. From these results, it can be seen that
the large model has only become better at the Common Voice 13 dataset. The rest has
become worse, which is different from the base model fine­tuning. This shows that the
amount of data needed to fine­tune the large model has to be much larger and more
diverse. Then looking at the Danish Librivox dataset, it can be seen that the model has
decreased in performance by almost 13%. This is interesting since it is a much worse
performance than what was seen for normal fine­tuning. This time the previous prompt
token cannot be the issue since Hugging Face is not using it for making inferences.
Fleurs
CV 13
NST DK
FTSpeech
Danish Librivox
Hugging Face large
16.69
22.97
25.60
42.18
17.39
Hugging Face large PEFT
17.29
20.37
30.19
57.00
30.9
Table 5.15: Results from fine­tuning of Hugging Face Whisper large model. The first result
row is the standard Hugging Face Whisper large model. Next is the model with the lowest
loss on validation set during PEFT training. CV13 refers to Common Voice 13.
5.3.5
fine­tuning Conclusion
These results have shown that it is possible to fine­tune the smaller versions of Whisper on
a limited amount of data. It has shown that introducing larger versions for small datasets
will not improve the model. Comparing the results of the normal fine­tuning with the LoRA
fine­tuning, it can be seen that LoRA is a valid option for fine­tuning Whisper. The LoRA
fine­tuning will only fine­tune a very small amount of the parameters, which takes up fewer
resources than normal fine­tuning. Having the extra weights for the LoRA fine­tuning also
takes up less space since a full model does not have to be saved after fine­tuning.
Overall to be able to fine­tune a better large model for Danish, a much larger and more
diverse dataset is needed. The benchmarking datasets have shown that there is a big
difference between the different datasets, and performing well for one dataset does not
mean that the model will perform well for all scenarios with Danish.
54
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:63==
6
ASR system implementation
As stated in the introduction, the project’s primary objective is to develop an ASR system
that encapsulates the enhanced features of Whisper and serves the transcriptions to end
users through a REST API. Such a system should feature easy accessibility, seamless
integration of the ASR service into various applications, low latency, and robustness.
Based on the results and knowledge gained during the exploration part, it was deter­
mined that the Hugging Face Whisper implementation would be used to develop the ASR
system. Performance benchmarking revealed minor differences between Whisper and
Hugging Face Whisper’s performance, while speed benchmarks indicated that Hugging
Face Whisper’s model inference is up to 8 times faster than Whisper’s. This is particularly
important when it comes to service latency.
It has been proved that it is possible to fine­tune the smaller versions of Whisper with
limited data. However, for larger models, a bigger amount of diverse labeled data is
required to commence model learning. LoRA fine­tuning of Whisper allows the full model
to be loaded onto the API, then, when the fine­tuned model is needed, the additional
weights of the fine­tuned model can be loaded. This results in minimal overhead when
performing transcriptions, as opposed to offloading a full Whisper model from the VRAM
and loading the fine­tuned model after. Hugging Face has made it straightforward to store
these additional weights, making it possible to store multiple fine­tunings in the API and
load them in a matter of seconds when needed.
However, Hugging Face Whisper lacks certain functionality, such as the prediction of
word­level timestamps and automatic language detection of transcribed audio. Hence it
was decided to implement both of those functionalities in the ASR system using Hugging
Face Whisper. The subsequent sections will describe how this was implemented to make
it work with Hugging Face Whisper. Next, the implementation of the ASR system as an
API will be described, along with a prototype of the system that includes the integrated
ASR API.
6.1
Language detection
For accurate transcription, Whisper and Hugging Face Whisper require knowledge of the
language being spoken in the transcribed audio. Tokenizers differ depending on the lan­
guage used. If the language is not provided during transcription, Whisper will run lan­
guage detection on the first 30 seconds of the audio. Unfortunately, Hugging Face Whis­
per lacks this feature. English is the default transcription language, and other languages
require manual selection. Therefore, incorporating automatic language detection is vital
to developing a reliable ASR system using Hugging Face Whisper.
To accomplish this, a solution inspired by Whisper approach was implemented [20, 54].
During the training of the Whisper decoder, the decoder learns to anticipate the next token
by relying on prior tokens and output from the encoder. The token sequence generated
by the decoder follows a specific structure that includes special tokens like the start of
transcription, language, and task, which are generated at the beginning of the sequence.
All possible combinations of special tokens are described in Section 5.3.2. The language
can be detected during model inference by feeding the encoder log­mel spectrogram and
the decoder with a single start of transcription special token. Subsequently, the decoder
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
55
==PAGE:64==
uses the outcome from the encoder to predict the next token, which corresponds to the
language of the transcribed speech.
The implemented function requires the Hugging Face Whisper model and tokenizer, along
with a batch of 30­second audio clips that have been converted to log­mel spectrograms.
By utilizing batches, it is possible to detect the language of multiple audio files simul­
taneously. The first step involves extracting the language token ids from the tokenizer.
Afterward, a set of tensors is generated that contains the beginning of the transcription
token. These tensors are then grouped into batches that match the size of the input au­
dio batch. These batches are then fed into the model, with log­mel spectrograms going
into the encoder and tokens into the decoder. Using a mask created based on language
tokens ids extracted before, all logit values which do not correspond to language tokens
are set to ­infinity. Next, the softmax function is used on logits to obtain probabilities for
different language tokens. The language, corresponding to the language token with the
highest probability, is considered the transcribed audio’s language.
6.2
Word­level timestamps
As mentioned before, during the comparison of Whisper implementations, one of the lack­
ing features in Hugging Face Whisper is the possibility to extract word­level timestamps
for transcriptions. It was decided to re­implement it as a stand­alone function. When cre­
ating the solution for extracting word­level timestamps, the Whisper implementation [54]
was used, and discussion from one of the issues from the Hugging Face Transformers
GitHub repository [55].
Extracting word­level timestamps starts with merging chunks obtained from transcription
using the Hugging Face Whisper pipeline. The process involves connecting individual
chunks into segments spanning approximately 30 seconds, with a maximum length of 448
tokens. This practice is implemented due to the typical duration of transcribed chunks,
which are often limited to just a few seconds. The segmentation into 30­second intervals
aligns with the Whisper process, while the constraint of 448 tokens accommodates the
input limitations of the Whisper decoder. Each segment contains timestamps of the be­
ginning and end of the segment, joined text from all chunks merged into the segment,
and a list of text tokens. Segments are indexed using seek index, which is an integer
representation of the timestamp corresponding to the beginning of the segment, as it is
shown below:
seek_index = int(start_timestamp * 100)
Chunks are time ordered to create segments, and time indication: ‘start_seek‘ and ‘end_seek‘
are initialized with 0. Then, it iterates through all chunks. In each iteration start, and end
timestamps of each chunk are extracted, and transcribed text is encoded into tokens and
fragments of the audio corresponding to the segment. As was observed for some of the
recordings and sizes of the models, Whisper sometimes has issues with hallucination.
Hallucinations may degrade the precision of word­level timestamps or make it impossible
to extract them due to receiving a sequence that is longer than 448 tokens. To prevent this
from happening, the length of chunk tokenized text is checked, and if it extends the limit
of 448 tokens, the substring contains only part of the repeating text is taken and encoded
again. After text encoding, the duration between the ‘start_seek‘ and the end of a chunk
and the length of the segment text token list with added tokens from the current chunk is
computed. If the duration is shorter than 29 seconds and the number of tokens is smaller
than 448, the chunk is merged into the segment, and the ‘end_seek‘ is set to the end of
the chunk. Otherwise, the current segment is ended. ‘Start_seek‘ and ‘end_seek‘ are
56
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:65==
assigned as the start and end of the segment and, based on the part of the audio corre­
sponding to the segment, are cut and added to the segment object together with joined
text and text tokens. The current chunk is added as a new segment with the ‘start_seek‘
and ‘end_seek‘ sets, respectively, to the beginning and end of the current chunk. A flow
diagram illustrating the merging segments process can be seen in appendix F
After merging segments, corresponding audio is converted to a log­mel spectrogram and
padded to 30 seconds using Hugging Face WhisperProcessor. Text tokens from the seg­
ment are combined into a list of tokens with the start of a transcript, language, task, no
time stamp, and end of text tokens, the same way as in Whisper. The list of tokens and
log­mel spectrograms are joined into batches allowing the process of multiple segments
simultaneously and speeding up extracting word­level timestamps. Hugging Face Whis­
per allows for extracting the decoder’s attention wights without manually installing hooks
on the model by simply setting the ‘output_attentions‘ parameter to true. The batched
text tokens and the log­mel spectrograms are passed through the model with a set ‘out­
put_attentions‘ parameter. Model inference for extracting weights looks as in the Whisper
model and was described in section 3.3.2. The Model output includes model weights,
from where cross­attention weights are extracted. To select weights corresponding to
alignment heads, binary files containing alignment heads indications for different model
sizes were taken from Whisper ‘__init__.py‘ file [54] and loaded while initializing Hugging
Face Whisper Model. Figure 6.1 shows an example retrieved from the output alignment
weights for one of the alignment heads of the Hugging Face Whisper base model. The
weights are different from Whisper weights shown in figure 3.4 due to different implemen­
tations of the models. However, a pattern being alignment between audio frames and text
tokens is visible here as well.
Selected weights are in the following steps normalized according to equation 3.1, smoothed
using a median filter, and compute matrices of the mean weights from all alignment heads
for each segment in the batch. From matrices removed are rows related to tokens added
at the beginning of segments: start of a transcript, language, task, and no time stamp. For
each matrix corresponding to the segment in the batch, DTW is used to find an alignment
path for audio and text tokens. As was the case with extraction word­level timestamps
in the Whisper Transcribe function, DTW returns in the text indicate and time indicates.
Running a diff between the next text indicates found are places where the aligned path
jumps to the next tokens. Time indicates corresponding to those jumps are divided by
the number of tokens per second to obtain time jumps. Next, tokens are joined into lists
where each list corresponds to one word. Word boundaries are created as a list with a
cumulative sum of word token list lengths, which is padded with 0 at the beginning, and
words are decoded from the word token list. Start­ and end­timestamps for each word in
the segment are extracted from the found time jumps using word boundaries. Figure 6.2
illustrates an example of obtained alignment between the audio and the text. As a final
step, punctuation is merged into words using predefined sets of punctuation, which should
respectively be added before or after words. The function returns a list WordTimestamp
objects with words, words tokens, and start­ and end­timesteps for each word in the seg­
ment. The flow diagram illustrating the whole process of extracting word­level timestamps
is illustrated in figure 6.3.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.1: Example of attention weights from one of the alignment heads of Hugging
Face Whisper base model
58
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.2: Alignment between the audio and the transcript retrieved from attention
weights using DTW for audio transcribed using the Hugging Face Whisper base model
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.3: Flowchart of extracting word­level timestamps
60
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:69==
6.3
Implementation ASR system as API
To implement the ASR system as REST API, the FastAPI [56] framework and the Hugging
Face Whisper base model were used. The base model is used due to local computational
power. The base model could be changed for any other model size with simple configu­
ration changes. The API consists of 2 main endpoints:
• POST /transcribe/:
The endpoint requires attaching audio/video files in the request, ‘word_timestamps‘
a boolean deciding if there should be word­level timestamps and optional ‘language‘
giving the spoken language in the files. The endpoint returns a TranscriptionList,
which is a list containing models of type Transcription for each file.
• POST /transcribe/localfile/:
The endpoint takes three inputs: ‘localfile‘ which is a path to a local file in the tempo­
rary file system, ‘word_timestamps‘ a boolean deciding if there should be word­level
timestamps and optional ‘language‘ giving the language of the spoken language in
the file. The endpoint is returning a model of type Transcription.
All model objects used in the API can be seen in appendix G.1.
In both endpoints, the FFmpeg framework is used to load files [57]. After loading files,
the transcribing process starts. Each file is processed sequentially due to the batching
algorithm implemented in Hugging Face Whisper. The transcribed files are processed and
converted into log­mel spectrograms. Next, if the language of speech in the file was not
provided in the request, automatic language detection described in Section 6.1 is running.
If the detected language is Danish, then the PEFT module loads the additional weights
for the fine­tuned model. The fine­tuned model is the fine­tuned base model described in
section 5.3.4. Otherwise, the default multilingual base model is used. The core of both
endpoints is the ’_get_transcription’ function which is responsible for transcription using
Hugging Face Whisper. It takes log­mel spectrograms, the ’word_timestamps’ parameter,
file name, and language tokens as input. The function is using the Hugging Face Whisper
Pipeline to transcribe the log­mel spectrograms. The output of the transcription function
contains transcribed text and chunks. If the ’word_timestamps’ parameter is set to true,
word­level timestamps are going to be extracted as was described in Section 6.2. Chunks
or segments created from merged chunks during word­level timestamps predictions are
attributed to Segment objects. Segment objects, together with fully transcribed text, file
name, and language, are combined into a Transcription object. The list of Transcription
objects for all files is returned as the endpoint response.
To ensure the robustness of the API, error handling was implemented in all API functions.
As a final step, it was containerized using Docker [58] to serve the ASR API. The Docker
container is structured in a way that the API can be started on a host running Linux with
a GPU. A GPU host is preferred for fast inference time. This means the container can
be ported to any Linux machine with an Nvidia GPU, making it straightforward to run in
a cloud environment. Swagger [59] documentation is created for the API and can be
accessed when the API is running.
6.4
Integration of ASR API
ASR API is intended to integrate into a system with external APIs, such as Raffle.ai API.
As stated in the introduction, Raffle.ai seek to search audio and video clips. A proof of
concept system that can be integrated with Raffle.ai’s API and search small segments of
audio has been made. The diagram in Figure 6.4 illustrates an overview of this system
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
61
==PAGE:70==
with integrated ASR API. An API named Connector API has the purpose of taking links
from a user or other system and downloading the audio/video to a temporary storage
that is shared with the ASR API. The Connector API can essentially be any integration
to an external content platform and serves the purpose of downloading the material. The
Connector API will then make requests to the ASR API using the transcribe/localfile/ end­
point. A full transcription will come back from the ASR API with word­level timestamps.
The transcription will then be divided into segments of which a maximum number of words
and duration time can be set in the request to Connector API. These segments can then
be sent to Raffle’s API to make it possible for the user to search the audio.
Figure 6.4: Overview of system with integrated Whisper API
As it was not possible during the project work to connect to Raffle.ai’s API, code for the
rest of the system has been made. The Connector API can only handle links from youtube
but will download the audio from the video and make the request to ASR API. Both the
Connector API and the ASR API are hosted in a Docker container by themself. They can
both be started using a Docker­compose file [58] that has been made. A common drive
is set up with Docker storage, and an internal network is set up so the two containers
can talk with each other. The code for the APIs is stored in a GitHub repository1. The
Connector API has one endpoint POST api/video/transcribe/ that takes a JSON object
with ‘video_url‘, ‘chunk_seconds‘, ‘max_words_per_chunk‘. The intent is that the user
can choose how long the segments that the words from the transcription are chunked
into. For Raffle to be able to search on the text, the text has to be chunked into smaller
segments. This way, a timestamp to the segment can also be given by saving how far
into the video the segment is in seconds. All models for objects used in the Connector
API can be seen in appendix G.2.
1https://github.com/WojciechTyczynski/Whisper_api
62
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:71==
7
Future work and Discussion
7.1
Discussion
The main goal for the Master’s thesis was to explore the latest research in automatic
speech recognition and build an ASR System around the discoveries. The work involved
the exploration of OpenAI Whisper, which is one of the latest models in ASR. Whisper has
been shown to produce really good results for larger languages, and the capabilities for
Danish were explored. Here it was shown that the performance for Danish is not close to
human­level transcriptions. Benchmarking models like Whisper are not straightforward.
Most datasets that are freely available are short­form datasets. This means that the de­
coding algorithms around the model are hard to benchmark. The model can only decode
small windows, meaning that it is important to find the performance not only for short­
form data but also for long­form. During the project, multiple attempts to get a long­form
Danish dataset were attempted. A dataset based on recordings from the Librivox project
was created. The dataset is very simple and does not test the model for edge cases.
The dataset is recordings of a single person talking directly into a microphone, meaning
that the recording is close to perfect. This can also be seen in the model’s performance
on the Librispeech dataset. The WER for Librispeech is lower generally lower than for
the other English datasets. It would therefore be desirable not only to get a long­form
Danish dataset for testing and validation but also for training. To get a larger dataset,
meetings with TV21, a major Danish media company, were set up. TV2 was interested in
creating a dataset for validation purposes, as they want to move to a transcription service
themselves. The dataset could consist of several hours of human­transcribed materials
that could be used for benchmarking and fine­tuning Whisper. Unfortunately, after a few
months of talks, the meetings with TV2 did not lead to anything due to the required ap­
provals on many levels and many restrictions on the data. However, it showed potential in
creating such a dataset with enough time and will on both sides. The fine­tuning did also
show that it is necessary to have a larger and more diverse dataset to be able to make
the model better for Danish. This could be solved by making data public for research
purposes from the major media companies in Denmark. This issue is not only for Danish
but for most smaller languages that exist.
At the end of May, Meta AI released the Massively Multilingual Speech (MMS) project [60].
The project collects labeled data from 1100+ languages and trains a Wav2Vec 2.0 model
that outperforms Whisper on multiple datasets. The data is based on religious readings,
that have then been aligned to the respective text with a new alignment model created in
the project. The alignment model is now part of PyTorch and can be accessed by anyone.
The purpose of this project was to show that the model will perform better on the more
diverse data that the model has been trained on. This is also what can be seen when
trying to fine­tune Whisper. That the larger version of Whisper only improves a tiny bit
for the dataset that it has been trained on. A similar principle for training on diverse data
could potentially be tried with Whisper.
There is a major community around Whisper that is improving its functionality and per­
formance. This has both brought many good things to the project, but also frustration.
It has been a really good experience to witness and be part of the rapid development of
Whisper. However, maintaining pace with its rapid development has posed difficulties, as
1https://tv2.dk/
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
63
==PAGE:72==
several features have been introduced to Whisper while the development of the specific
feature was still in progress. Multiple Twitter posts during the project showed promising
results for features for Whisper. It was important during the project to validate the re­
sults and use the good features. This is shown in the thesis by using the Hugging Face
implementation of Whisper and benchmarking the batching algorithm. It was chosen to
implement word­level timestamps for the Hugging Face implementation of Whisper. This
feature has been added by Hugging Face after the implementation described in this work
was made.
An API for inference using Whisper was created. This was the first step to creating a
full ASR system that can communicate with Raffle.ai API. The purpose was to create a
system that would make it possible to search in transcriptions and jump to the correct
place in a video. The full integration with Raffle.ai API did not get implemented due to
time constraints. However, the development of such integration in the future enhance the
usability of the system for end users. A huge and interesting part of future development
is going to be exploring the capabilities of search in transcriptions. It will consist of testing
different usage scenarios and adjusting details of integration between ASR systems and
indexing systems, such as the size of the segments.
Another use case of Whisper that was explored was to do live transcriptions. A setup
was created where a client would sample 2 seconds of audio and then send the sampled
audio live to a server that would transcribe it. This would continue until the client discon­
nected. This experiment showed that Whisper was able to transcribe small recordings,
and it showed promising results. It was chosen not to continue with this, it is however
an interesting idea, that could be used in multiple products. This experiment was mainly
pushed by Raffle.ai, which could find a use case for it, and the small experiment showed
that it was possible.
7.2
Future work
Based on the discussion, potential directions for further work can be pointed out to improve
Whisper and the ASR systems.
In order to improve the performance of the Danish ASR system, it is necessary to obtain
larger and more diverse datasets. These datasets can be acquired through collaboration
with external organizations, such as TV stations, that have access to large amounts of
labeled speech. Creating such a dataset would not only be valuable for this project but
also an important milestone for the ASR community in Denmark. Additionally, other meth­
ods for fine­tuning Whisper for Danish can be used, such as those proposed in Wav2Vec
2.0 for fine­tuning multiple languages in the same language group, like Nordic languages
for Danish [baevski2020Wav2Vec]. Another option is to use methods proposed in the
Massively Multilingual Speech (MMS) project [60].
Another area for potential future work is further improving the ASR API. The Whisper
community has shown potential for implementing various improvements to Whisper func­
tionality over the months. One of the most significant improvements could be the imple­
mentation of speaker diarization using the pyannote.audio [61, 62] framework. If the ASR
API had speaker diarization added to it, users would get more detailed information about
spoken audio text. The API’s performance would also be better for audios that contain
speech in multiple languages because speech can be segmented based on the speaker
and transcribed separately. Another excitation of the API functionality could be adding
a module that gives the possibility of converting the current timestamped transcription of
audio/video into captions.
64
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:73==
Since building a system with an integrated ASR API was only a proof­of­concept, the next
logical step is to develop a complete system that can be connected with the Raffle.ai API.
This development involves expanding the list of web platforms that can be handled by the
Connector API and deploying the APIs into a cloud environment.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
65
==PAGE:74==
8
Conclusion
The presented thesis focused on automatic speech recognition and its recent develop­
ment. OpenAI Whisper pathed the way for exploring the possibilities of ASR Systems.
The necessary theory to understand Automatic Speech Recognition and its recent ad­
vancements was presented and explained to the reader. The theory covered the older
methods of ASR to the newest using transformer models. Whisper was presented as a
new ASR model from OpenAI built on the transformer architecture.
Two implementations of Whisper were benchmarked on multiple English and Danish
datasets. There is a lack of Danish long­form datasets. A new Danish long­form dataset
for validation was made using recordings from the Librivox project. The recordings con­
sisted of readings of H.C.Andersen fairytales and a single recording of a text of Grundvig.
The OpenAI and Hugging Face implementations were held up against each other on all
the datasets. It showed that there was not a great difference between the two imple­
mentations. The Hugging Face implementation did, however, perform worse for WER in
long­form data. This is due to the batching algorithm and lack of more complex decoding.
On the other hand, Hugging Face Whisper showed up with about ×8 faster inference time
compared to OpenAI Whisper.
An effort to fine­tune Whisper on Danish datasets was made. The model was fine­tuned
using the Common Voice 13 and Fleurs dataset in Danish. It was shown that it is possible
to fine­tune the smaller versions of Whisper using a limited amount of data. The fine­tuned
models were benchmarked on all the Danish dataset, which was used for benchmarking
the models. The model would not generalize to Danish, which was shown by the model
performing better on the datasets it was fine­tuned on. It was shown that fine­tuning
the larger models with limited data does not yield any performance boost. The models
were fine­tuned with normal fine­tuning but also using LoRA through the PEFT library
from Hugging Face. Fine­tuning using LoRA was possible, and the results were very
comparable with the normal fine­tuning of Whisper while fine­tuning a very small amount
of the parameters, which takes up fewer resources than normal fine­tuning.
From the gathered results, it was chosen to build an ASR API using the Hugging Face
implementation of Whisper. Missing functionality for Hugging Face Implementation of
Whisper was created. This involved language detection and word­level timestamps. An
API was built to transcribe audio from uploaded files or from local files on the system.
A proof of concept system was proposed, which could integrate with Raffle.ai’s API to
make it possible to search transcriptions. The integration was not made due to the time
constraints of the project. An API called Connector API was made. The API can be given
a link to download the audio from a youtube video. The Connector API integrates with the
ASR API and shares a common drive. The transcriptions received from the ASR API will
be segmented into a maximum number of words or time duration given in the API call.
Both the ASR API and Connector API can be run using Docker, and both systems can be
started together with Docker­compose.
The goals for the project were met. Whisper was explored and benchmarked. Word­level
timestamps got implemented by OpenAI during the project, and an implementation of this
was made for Hugging Face. It was tried to optimize whisper performance for Danish
by fine­tuning the model. An ASR System got proposed and implemented. Not all Nice­
to­Have Objectives were implemented. Speaker diarization and subtitle generation were
66
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:75==
explored during the project without any outcome. These are therefore mentioned for fu­
ture work. The ASR system was not deployed in a cloud environment. The system is,
however, running with Docker, it is, therefore, straightforward to port it to a cloud envi­
ronment running Linux. Multiple attempts were made to create a large Danish long­form
dataset. This was not achieved, but a smaller long­form dataset for benchmarking was
created.
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
67
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
Christopher Alberti and Michiel Bacchiani. Automatic Captioning in YouTube. Dec.
2009. URL: https://ai.googleblog.com/2009/12/automatic-captioning-in-youtube.
html.
[2]
L. Rabiner and B. Juang. “An introduction to hidden Markov models”. In: IEEE ASSP
Magazine 3.1 (1986), pp. 4–16. DOI: 10.1109/MASSP.1986.1165342.
[3]
Hiroaki Sakoe and Seibi Chiba. “Dynamic programming algorithm optimization for
spoken word recognition”. In: IEEE transactions on acoustics, speech, and signal
processing 26.1 (1978), pp. 43–49.
[4]
Sophocles J. Orfanidis. Introduction to Signal Processing. USA: Prentice­Hall, Inc.,
1995. ISBN: 0132091720.
[5]
Keunwoo Choi et al. A Comparison of Audio Signal Preprocessing Methods for
Deep Neural Networks on Music Tagging. 2021. arXiv: 1709.01922 [cs.SD].
[6]
Ralph Niels, Louis Vuurpijl, and Lambert Schomaker. “Automatic allograph match­
ing in forensic writer identification”. In: International Journal of Pattern Recognition
and Artificial Intelligence 21.01 (2007), pp. 61–81.
[7]
A Piyush Shanker and AN Rajagopalan. “Off­line signature verification using DTW”.
In: Pattern recognition letters 28.12 (2007), pp. 1407–1414.
[8]
Pavel Senin. “Dynamic time warping algorithm review”. In: Information and Com­
puter Science Department University of Hawaii at Manoa Honolulu, USA 855.1­23
(2008), p. 40.
[9]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[10]
Daniel A. Roberts, Sho Yaida, and Boris Hanin. The Principles of Deep Learning
Theory. Cambridge University Press, May 2022. DOI: 10.1017/9781009023405. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1017/2F9781009023405.
[11]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High­Performance Deep Learn­
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035. URL: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-
pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[12]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural Machine Transla­
tion by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. 2016. arXiv: 1409.0473 [cs.CL].
[13]
Johannes Lederer. Activation Functions in Artificial Neural Networks: A Systematic
Overview. 2021. arXiv: 2101.09957 [cs.LG].
[14]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 30 (2017).
[15]
Jonas Gehring et al. “Convolutional sequence to sequence learning”. In: Interna­
tional conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2017, pp. 1243–1252.
[16]
Yu­An Wang and Yun­Nung Chen. “What do position embeddings learn? an em­
pirical study of pre­trained language model positional encoding”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.04903 (2020).
[17]
Edward J. Hu et al. LoRA: Low­Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. 2021.
arXiv: 2106.09685 [cs.CL].
[18]
Jacob Devlin et al. “Bert: Pre­training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[19]
Irene Solaiman et al. “Release strategies and the social impacts of language mod­
els”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09203 (2019).
68
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:77==
[20]
Alec Radford et al. “Robust speech recognition via large­scale weak supervision”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04356 (2022).
[21]
OpenAI. Announcing the large­V2 model ∙openai/whisper ∙discussion #661. Dec.
2022. URL: https://github.com/openai/whisper/discussions/661.
[22]
Daniel S Park et al. “Specaugment: A simple data augmentation method for auto­
matic speech recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08779 (2019).
[23]
Gao Huang et al. “Deep networks with stochastic depth”. In: Computer Vision–
ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October
11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14. Springer. 2016, pp. 646–661.
[24]
Ivan Provilkov, Dmitrii Emelianenko, and Elena Voita. “BPE­dropout: Simple and
effective subword regularization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13267 (2019).
[25]
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. “Gaussian error linear units (gelus)”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.08415 (2016).
[26]
Rewon Child et al. “Generating long sequences with sparse transformers”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.10509 (2019).
[27]
Ofir Press and Lior Wolf. “Using the output embedding to improve language mod­
els”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.05859 (2016).
[28]
how to use <|startoflm|> in whisper #414. URL: https://github.com/openai/whisper/
discussions/414.
[29]
Steffen Schneider et al. “wav2vec: Unsupervised pre­training for speech recogni­
tion”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05862 (2019).
[30]
Alexei Baevski et al. wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self­Supervised Learning of
Speech Representations. 2020. arXiv: 2006.11477 [cs.CL].
[31]
Vassil Panayotov et al. “Librispeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio
books”. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). 2015, pp. 5206–5210. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2015.7178964.
[32]
Max Bain et al. WhisperX: Time­Accurate Speech Transcription of Long­Form Au­
dio. 2023. arXiv: 2303.00747 [cs.SD].
[33]
François Hernandez et al. “TED­LIUM 3: twice as much data and corpus repartition
for experiments on speaker adaptation”. In: CoRR abs/1805.04699 (2018). arXiv:
1805.04699. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.04699.
[34]
Hadeel Saadany et al. Better Transcription of UK Supreme Court Hearings. 2022.
arXiv: 2211.17094 [eess.AS].
[35]
Thomas Wolf et al. “Transformers: State­of­the­Art Natural Language Processing”.
In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations. Online: Association for Computational Lin­
guistics, Oct. 2020, pp. 38–45. URL: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-
demos.6.
[36]
Hugging Face. Transformers documentation: Whisper. URL: https://huggingface.
co/docs/transformers/model%5C_doc/whisper%5C#whisper.
[37]
Arthur Zucker. Hugging Face Whisper faster inference. URL: https://twitter.com/
art_zucker/status/1618314057718853633?s=20.
[38]
Nicolas Patry. Making automatic speech recognition work on large files with Wav2Vec2
in Transformers. Feb. 2022. URL: https://huggingface.co/blog/asr-chunking.
[39]
Rosana Ardila et al. Common Voice: A Massively­Multilingual Speech Corpus. 2020.
arXiv: 1912.06670 [cs.CL].
[40]
Naman Goyal et al. The FLORES­101 Evaluation Benchmark for Low­Resource
and Multilingual Machine Translation. 2021. arXiv: 2106.03193 [cs.CL].
[41]
Alexis Conneau et al. FLEURS: Few­shot Learning Evaluation of Universal Repre­
sentations of Speech. 2022. arXiv: 2205.12446 [cs.CL].
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
69
==PAGE:78==
[42]
Rev AI. Podcast Transcription Benchmark (Part 1). Feb. 2019. URL: https://www.
rev.ai/blog/podcast-transcription-benchmark-part-1/.
[43]
François Hernandez et al. “TED­LIUM 3: Twice as much data and corpus reparti­
tion for experiments on speaker adaptation”. In: Speech and Computer: 20th Inter­
national Conference, SPECOM 2018, Leipzig, Germany, September 18–22, 2018,
Proceedings 20. Springer. 2018, pp. 198–208.
[44]
Daniel Povey et al. “The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit”. In: IEEE 2011 workshop
on automatic speech recognition and understanding. CONF. IEEE Signal Process­
ing Society. 2011.
[45]
Andreas Kirkedal, Marija Stepanović, and Barbara Plank. “FT Speech: Danish Par­
liament Speech Corpus”. In: Interspeech 2020. ISCA, Oct. 2020. DOI: 10.21437/
interspeech.2020-3164. URL: https://doi.org/10.21437%5C%2Finterspeech.2020-
3164.
[46]
Sprakbanken. “Reorganized speech databases for Danish ASR from Nordisk språk­
teknologi”. In: https://www.nb.no/sprakbanken/en/resource­catalogue/oai­nb­no­sbr­
55/ (2021).
[47]
Sprakbanken. “Akustiske databaser for dansk”. In:
https://www.nb.no/sbfil/dok/nst_taledat_dk.pdf (2011).
[48]
OpenAI. Whisper ­ data. URL: https://github.com/openai/whisper/tree/main/data.
[49]
Jiahong Yuan, Mark Liberman, and Christopher Cieri. “INTERSPEECH 2006 To­
wards an Integrated Understanding of Speaking Rate in Conversation”. In: Sept.
2006. DOI: 10.21437/Interspeech.2006-204.
[50]
Lukas Biewald. Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. Software available
from wandb.com. 2020. URL: https://www.wandb.com/.
[51]
NVIDIA. NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL). URL: https://developer.
nvidia.com/nccl.
[52]
Hugging Face. Parameter­Efficient Fine­Tuning (PEFT). URL: https://huggingface.
co/docs/peft/index.
[53]
Benjamin Bossan. Finetuning Whisper­large­V2 on Colab using PEFT­Lora + BNB
INT8 training. URL: https://github.com/huggingface/peft/blob/main/examples/
int8%5C_training/peft%5C_bnb%5C_whisper%5C_large_v2%5C_training.ipynb.
[54]
OpenAI. Whisper ­ repository. URL: https://github.com/openai/whisper.
[55]
Matthijs Hollemans. Add word­level timestamps to Whisper #23205. May 2023.
URL: https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/23205.
[56]
Sebastián Ramírez. FastAPI framework. URL: https://github.com/tiangolo/fastapi.
[57]
FFmpeg. URL: https://ffmpeg.org/.
[58]
Dirk Merkel. “Docker: lightweight linux containers for consistent development and
deployment”. In: Linux journal 2014.239 (2014), p. 2.
[59]
Sawgger. URL: https://swagger.io/.
[60]
Vineel Pratap et al. “Scaling Speech Technology to 1,000+ Languages”. In: arXiv
(2023).
[61]
Hervé Bredin et al. “pyannote.audio: neural building blocks for speaker diarization”.
In: ICASSP 2020, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing. Barcelona, Spain, May 2020.
[62]
Hervé Bredin and Antoine Laurent. “End­to­end speaker segmentation for overlap­
aware resegmentation”. In: Proc. Interspeech 2021. Brno, Czech Republic, Aug.
2021.
[63]
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural
Network. 2015. arXiv: 1503.02531 [stat.ML].
70
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:79==
[64]
Philip Gage. “A new algorithm for data compression”. In: C Users Journal 12.2
(1994), pp. 23–38.
[65]
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. “Neural machine translation of
rare words with subword units”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909 (2015).
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:81==
A
Dynamic Programming based DTW
algorithm
Algorithm 1 DTW algorithm [8]
Require: Inputs: Cost matrix C, sequences X and Y
# Construct accumulated cost matrix D
n ←|X|
m ←|Y |
D ←new_array[n, m]
D[1, 1] ←0
for i = 2; i ≤n; i + + do
D[i, 1] ←D[i −1, 1] + C[i, 1]
end for
for j = 2; j ≤m; j + + do
D[1, j] ←D[1, j −1] + C[1, j]
end for
for i = 2; i ≤n; i + + do
for j = 2; j < m; j + + do
D[i, j] ←C[i, j] + MIN(D[i −1, j], D[i, j −1], D[i −1, j −1])
end for
end for
# Backtrack to find the optimal warping path
path ←new_array[]
i ←rows(D)
j ←columns(D)
while (i > 1)&(j > 1) do
if i == 1 then
j = j −1
else if j == 1 then
i = i −1
else
if D(i −1, j) == MIN(D[i −1, j], D[i, j −1], D[i −1, j −1]) then
i = i −1
else if D(i, j −1) == MIN(D[i −1, j], D[i, j −1], D[i −1, j −1]) then
j = j −1
else
i = i −1; j = j −1
end if
path.add((i, j))
end if
end while
return path
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
73
==PAGE:82==
B
Activation Functions Overview
A plot of the activation functions can be seen in B.1.
Figure B.1: Illustration of commonly used activation functions
Sigmoid
sigmoid is a logistic function that maps values between 0 and 1, which makes it useful for
classification or estimating probabilities. The mathematical expression is seen in equation
B.1.
g(z) =
1
1 + e(−z)
(B.1)
The sigmoid function can be seen plotted in the top left of figure B.1. The sigmoid function
exhibits an S­shaped curve, where large positive inputs approach a value of 1, large
negative inputs approach a value of 0, and inputs around zero yield an output close to 0.5.
The sigmoid function has limitations: saturating outputs for large/small inputs, causing
near­zero gradients and slow learning; and being non­zero­centred, making convergence
during training more challenging [10].
Tanh
Tanh is also known as the hyperbolic tangent and is mapping values between ­1 and 1.
The mathematical expression is seen in equation B.2.
g(z) = tanh(z) = (ez −e(−z))
(ez + e(−z))
(B.2)
Tanh can be seen plotted in the top right of figure B.1. It is s shaped like sigmoid, but
the tanh function exhibits the following behavior: for large positive inputs, it approaches
74
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:83==
a value of 1, for large negative inputs, it approaches a value of ­1, and for inputs around
zero, it produces an output close to 0. The tanh function is centred around 0. Similar to
the sigmoid function, the tanh function also exhibits the limitation of saturating behavior for
large inputs, resulting in vanishing gradients and slower learning in deep neural networks.
However, the tanh function shares the advantage of being symmetric around zero, which
enables the network to capture both positive and negative input patterns effectively [10].
ReLu
The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function introduces non­linearity by outputting
the input directly if it is positive and zero otherwise. The mathematical expression is seen
in equation B.3.
g(z) = max(0, x)
(B.3)
ReLu can be seen plotted on the left bottom of figure B.1. A crucial feature of the ReLU
function is its ability to avoid saturation when the input is positive. It directly passes through
positive values, preserving their magnitude and strength. This property is beneficial in
mitigating the vanishing gradient problem often associated with activation functions such
as sigmoid or tanh. ReLu is therefore often used in hidden layers of neural networks [10].
GeLu
The Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GeLu) activation function is a non­linear activation func­
tion. The mathematical expression is seen in equation B.4.
g(z) =
[1
2 + 1
2 erf
( z
√
2
)]
× z
(B.4)
Where the erf(z) is given by equation B.5.
erf(z) ≡
2
√π
∫z
0
dte−t2,
(B.5)
The GeLu function can be seen plotted on the right bottom of figure B.1. The Gelu ac­
tivation function aims to strike a balance between linearity and non­linearity by smoothly
mapping input values to output values. It achieves this by incorporating characteristics
from both the sigmoid and ReLU functions. This combination allows Gelu to preserve
the non­linearity necessary for deep learning models while providing a more optimized
trade­off between the two types of activations [10].
Softmax with Temperature
Softmax is an alteration of sigmoid typically used for multi­class classification. The smath­
ematically expression for softmax can be seen in equation B.6.
g(z)i =
ezi
∑ezj
(B.6)
The softmax function receives a K­dimensional vector z comprising of real numbers, and
transforms it into a probability distribution that contains K probabilities. These probabilities
are proportional to the exponentials of the corresponding input numbers.[10] Softmax can
also include temperature which is a parameter that controls the balance between explo­
ration and exploitation in the probability distribution generated by the function. This can
be seen in equation B.7.
g(z)i =
ezi/T
∑ezj/T
(B.7)
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
75
==PAGE:84==
When T is set to 1, then it is the normal softmax function. A higher temperature value,
like T > 1, increases distribution entropy, leading to a more uniform spread of probabili­
ties among elements in the input vector, emphasizing exploration. A lower temperature,
like T < 1, reduces distribution entropy, creating a more concentrated and deterministic
distribution where probabilities prioritize the highest­valued elements in the input vector
[63].
76
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:85==
C
Tokenizers
This appendix gives an overview of different tokenizers.
Word­based
Word­based is one of the most straightforward and intuitive types of tokenization. This
tokenization method splits the text into words based on specific rules such as whitespaces
or punctuation. The information held by every single token is high because words contain
a lot of contextual and semantic pieces of information in a sentence. On the other hand,
this approach leads to a large vocabulary as each word in the language should have its
unique token ID, which is mapped and inputted into the model. One of the solutions for this
issue is creating a basic vocabulary that contains only a subset of the most frequently used
words in the language. However, as a result, the model is losing some of the information
as all words not in the vocabulary will be converted into out­of­vocabulary (OOV) tokens
and have the same representation. Examples of the text tokenized using word­based
tokenization on whitespaces and punctuation are presented in Figure C.1.
Figure C.1: Examples of word­based tokenization of sentence: Let’s do amazing tok­
enization!
Character­based
Character­based tokenization is splitting text into characters rather than words.
The
two main benefits of this approach are that vocabulary is much smaller because there
are fewer different characters (letters and special characters) than different words, and
there are much fewer out­of­vocabulary (unknown) tokens, as all words can be built out
of existing tokens. However, character­based tokens are less meaningful and informa­
tive for models than word­based tokens. Figure C.2 presents examples of the text using
character­based tokenization.
Figure C.2: Example of character­based tokenization of sentence: Let’s do amazing tok­
enization!
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
77
==PAGE:86==
Subword tokenization
Subword tokenization is a hybrid approach between word­ and character­based tokeniza­
tion. It relays on the assumption that frequently used words should not be split into smaller
subwords, but rare words should be decomposed into meaningful subwords. One of the
example of subword tokenization is Byte­Pair Encoding (BPE) tokenization. Initially de­
veloped as a text compress algorithm [64] was adopted as a tokenization method [65,
19]. Usually, the base vocabulary of BPE tokenizers contains all ASCII characters with
additional Unicode characters. Next, vocabulary is extended during training until the de­
sired vocabulary size is reached. It is done by learning merges two existing vocabulary
elements into new ones. In the beginning, merges will contain only two characters, but
further during the training process, longer subwords and words. At each training step,
the BPE algorithm searches for the most frequent combination of two consecutive tokens
existing in the corpus. This pair of tokens are merged and added to the vocabulary, and
the procedure is repeated in the next step. Tokenization of the text with a trained BPE
tokenizer consists of 2 steps: splitting text into individual characters and applying the
merging rules learned in training to merge single­character tokens into subword tokens.
Figure C.3 presents examples of the subword tokenization using BPE tokenization.
Figure C.3: Example of Byte­Pair Encoding tokenization of sentence: Let’s do amazing
tokenization!
78
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:87==
D
Danish Librivox Dataset
A table of the texts from the created Danish Librivox dataset can be seen in table D.1.
Author
Text
H.C. Andersen
Den lille Pige med Svovlstikkerne
H.C. Andersen
Kejserens nye klæder
H.C. Andersen
Fyrtøjet
H.C. Andersen
Paradisets have
H.C. Andersen
Hvad fatter gør, det er altid det rigtige
H.C. Andersen
Lille Claus og store Claus
H.C. Andersen
Den onde fyrste
H.C. Andersen
Skyggen
H.C. Andersen
Den flyvende kuffert
H.C. Andersen
Det er ganske vist!
H.C. Andersen
Om Aartusinder
H.C. Andersen
Den grimme ælling
Severin Grundtvig
For tre Skilling
Table D.1: Texts in the created Danish Librivox dataset
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
79
==PAGE:88==
E
Seq2SeqTrainingArguments setup for
finetuning Whisper using PEFT and
LoRA
1
training_args = Seq2SeqTrainingArguments(
2
output_dir=output_dir ,
3
per_device_train_batch_size=args.batch_size ,
4
gradient_accumulation_steps=args.accumulation_steps ,
5
learning_rate=2e-4,
6
warmup_steps=50,
7
num_train_epochs=3,
8
evaluation_strategy="steps",
9
fp16=True,
10
per_device_eval_batch_size=args.batch_size ,
11
generation_max_length=128,
12
logging_steps=50,
13
remove_unused_columns=False,
14
label_names=["labels"],
15
logging_first_step=True,
16
load_best_model_at_end=True,
17
metric_for_best_model="wer",
18
greater_is_better=False,
19
report_to="wandb",
20
)
80
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:89==
F
Flowchart of merging chunks segments
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure F.1: Flowchart of merging chunks into segments
82
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:91==
G
API models
G.1
ASR API models
1
class WordTimestamp(BaseModel):
2
word: str
3
tokens: List[int]
4
start: float
5
end: float
6
7
class Segment(BaseModel):
8
start: float
9
end: float
10
text: str
11
words: Optional[List[WordTimestamp]] = None
12
13
14
class Transcription(BaseModel):
15
file: str
16
segments: List[Segment]
17
text: str
18
language: str
19
20
21
class TranscriptionList(BaseModel):
22
transcriptions: List[Transcription]
G.2
Connector API models
1
class VideoInput(BaseModel):
2
video_url: str
3
chunk_seconds: int = 60
4
max_words_per_chunk: int = 120
5
6
7
class WordTimestamp(BaseModel):
8
word: str
9
tokens: List[int]
10
start: float
11
end: float
12
13
14
class Segment(BaseModel):
15
start: float
16
end: float
17
text: str
18
words: Optional[List[WordTimestamp]] = None
19
20
21
class Transcription(BaseModel):
22
file: str
23
segments: List[Segment]
24
text: str
25
language: str
26
27
28
class CustomSegment(BaseModel):
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
83
==PAGE:92==
29
start: float
30
end: float
31
text: str
32
33
class Response(BaseModel):
34
video_url: str
35
segments: List[Segment]
36
text: str
37
language: str
84
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
==PAGE:93==
H
DecodingOptions
1
@dataclass(frozen=True)
2
class DecodingOptions:
3
# whether to perform X->X "transcribe" or X->English "translate"
4
task: str = "transcribe"
5
6
# language that the audio is in; uses detected language if None
7
language: Optional[str] = None
8
9
# sampling -related options
10
temperature: float = 0.0
11
sample_len: Optional[int] = None
# maximum number of tokens to sample
12
best_of: Optional[int] = None
# number of independent sample trajectories
, if t > 0
13
beam_size: Optional[int] = None
# number of beams in beam search , if t ==
0
14
patience: Optional[float] = None
# patience in beam search (arxiv
:2204.05424)
15
16
# "alpha" in Google NMT, or None for length norm, when ranking generations
17
# to select which to return among the beams or best-of-N samples
18
length_penalty: Optional[float] = None
19
20
# text or tokens to feed as the prompt or the prefix; for more info:
21
# https://github.com/openai/whisper/discussions/117#discussioncomment
-3727051
22
prompt: Optional[Union[str, List[int]]] = None
# for the previous context
23
prefix: Optional[Union[str, List[int]]] = None
# to prefix the current
context
24
25
# list of tokens ids (or comma-separated token ids) to suppress
26
# "-1" will suppress a set of symbols as defined in `tokenizer.
non_speech_tokens()`
27
suppress_tokens: Optional[Union[str, Iterable[int]]] = "-1"
28
suppress_blank: bool = True
# this will suppress blank outputs
29
30
# timestamp sampling options
31
without_timestamps: bool = False
# use <|notimestamps|> to sample text
tokens only
32
max_initial_timestamp: Optional[float] = 1.0
33
34
# implementation details
35
fp16: bool = True
# use fp16 for most of the calculation
Automatic speech recognition­based systems for multi­lingual transcriptions
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
