==PAGE:1==
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional
Neural Networks
MSc Thesis
Miren Lur Barquin Torre
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
Segmentering af axoner med 3D convolutional neurale networks
MSc Thesis
June, 2023
By
Miren Lur Barquin Torre
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard
Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU Compute), in partial fulfill-
ment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng., on Mathematical Modelling
and Computation. The research presented in this thesis was conducted from February 2023 to
June 2023.
The project was carried out under the primary supervision of Professor Tim B. Dyrby from
DTU Compute and the Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR), Copen-
hagen University Hospital Hvidovre.
The purpose of this dissertation is to explore and analyze the three-dimensional microstructure
of the brain white matter by segmenting axons using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks in 3D
synchrotron X-ray nano-holotomography images, aiming to overcome the current limitations of
diffusion magnetic resonance imaging methods for measuring axon diameter.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Machine Learning and Com-
puter Vision.
Miren Lur Barquin Torre - s210289
Signature
30th June 2023
ii
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Axons are long nerve fibers that facilitate signal communication between different functional
brain sections and constitute a significant portion of the brain’s white matter. Their diameter
and myelin sheath thickness play a crucial role in determining the speed of signal propagation
within the brain network. While commonly modelled as straight cylinders, detailed studies using
light microscopy and electron microscopy have revealed variations in diameter, shape, and tra-
jectory along axons. The presence of local microstructural obstacles in the extra-cellular space
such as blood vessels, vacuoles, and cell clusters, can alter axonal trajectories and bias axon
diameter measurements. Moreover, the diameter of axons, which directly influences conduction
velocity, varies based on the origin and target of the axon and typically ranges within a few
micrometers.
Certain neurodegenerative diseases specifically affect axons of particular sizes,
making axon diameter a valuable biomarker for diagnosing various medical conditions.
Currently, diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the only method available for estimat-
ing axonal diameter in the living brain. However, it has been found to overestimate axonal di-
ameters compared to measurements obtained through light microscopy and electron microscopy.
Moreover, MRI voxels for in vivo studies are on a millimeter scale, whereas axon diameters in
the brain are on a micrometer scale.
This dissertation aims to validate the white matter anatomy and the biophysical models afore-
mentioned by conducting a 3D analysis of axonal and extra-axonal structures. Specifically, the
focus is on testing the validity of modelling axons as cylinders and exploring the morphological
characteristics of axonal structures. To achieve this, the dissertation focuses on the segmenta-
tion of 3D axonal structures using various 3D convolutional neural network methods based on
a U-Net network architecture. The data utilized in this study consists of a volumetric image
sample extracted from the splenium of the vervet monkey brain via synchrotron XNH imaging
techniques. The ground truth label map includes a manual segmentation of 54-axons, as well as
a morphology-based semi-automatic segmentation of blood vessels, cell clusters, and vacuoles,
that will facilitate the evaluation of the experiment performance. By implementing appropriate
data preprocessing techniques and selecting a masked loss function, the training process is en-
hanced, resulting in the ability to capture a denser population of axons, including those with
smaller diameters.
The primary research objective of this dissertation is to achieve a more comprehensive three-
dimensional segmentation of axonal and extra-axonal structures, with a particular emphasis on
accurately capturing axons with varying diameters.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Miren Lur Barquin Torre, MSc Mathematical Modelling and Computation, DTU
Thesis author
Tim Bjørn Dyrby, Professor, DTU Compute/Hvidovre Hospital
Thesis supervisor
Mahsa Amirrashedibonab, Postdoc, DTU Compute
Thesis co-supervisor
iv
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AD Axon Diameter
ADD Axon Diameter Distribution
AP Action Potentials
CC Corpus Callosum
CE Cross Entropy
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
CNS Central Nervous System
CT Computed Tomography
CV Conduction Velocity
DRCMR Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance
ECS Extracellular Space
EM Electron Microscopy
LM Light Microscopy
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging
NIfTI Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative
RAS+ Right-Anterior-Superior positive
ROI Region of interest
SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio
WM White Matter
XNH X-ray Nano-Holotomography
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Organization of the dissertation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methods
5
2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Synchrotron X-ray Nano-Holotomography XNH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Subject
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
3D U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Cross-hair filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.1
Patch-based training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Data loading framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Non-augmented dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Augmented dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.3
Loss functions and performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.4
Other settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Adam Optimizer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Early stopping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
TorchIO’s grid aggregator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Results
27
3.1
Non-augmented baseline U-Net model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Patch size and train loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.2
Combined volume segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Augmented baseline U-Net model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.1
Dataset size and batch size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Dataset size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
vii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Batch size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2.2
Final model trained with data augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3
Analysis of Cross-hair filter approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4
Quantification of Diameter Distribution and Length of Segmented Axons
. . . .
49
4
Discussion
53
5
Conclusions
57
References
59
A Output Images of Different Losses in Baseline Model
61
B Supplementary Images of Axon Segmentation
68
viii
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Context
The brain regulates cognitive and physiological functions by constantly processing and commu-
nicating massive amounts of information. It is an intricate network of neural circuits wherein
neurons transmit information and whose exact configuration and function remains elusive. Neu-
rons are the basic fundamental units of the brain. They are cells consisting of a soma (cell
body), dendrites which function to receive signals from other cells, and an axon that connects
different brain regions and relays signals between them to other neurons.
The brain and the spinal cord constitute the central nervous system (CNS), which is the body’s
processing centre. The brain is composed of grey matter and white matter (WM). Grey mat-
ter is present in the cerebral cortex, the cerebellar cortex, and other regions of the cerebrum,
cerebellum, and brainstem. It contains neuronal cell bodies and dendrites, glial cells, and blood
vessels, it synapses on the microstructural level, and its role is to process signals in the brain
network. On the other hand, WM is the cabling of the brain. It is comprised of axon tracts that
connect the gray matter regions and facilitates signal communication in the brain network. Like
grey matter, it also contains blood vessels, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and other glial cells.
Most of the axons in the WM are ’myelinated’, i.e., they are wrapped in layers of lipid, myelin,
by an oligodendrocyte which insulates them from the extra-axonal environment. Myelination
occurs in segments, with each myelinated section called an ’internode’ and separated from other
internodes by shorter portions of unmyelinated axon called ’Nodes of Ranvier’.
Myelin is a
defining feature of the WM and plays an essential role in facilitating rapid and eﬀicient com-
munication between different regions of the brain. Individual internodes exhibit a distribution
of g-ratios, the ratio of the outer fiber diameter, including the myelin sheath, to the inner axon
diameter. Along the internodes, the myelin thickness is stable, implying that g-ratio variations
along single axons are driven by changes in axon diameter.
Different brain regions’ structure is adaptable and related to function and experiences, such as
aging, learning of visuomotor tasks, training of working memory, and neurodegenerative dis-
eases including Multiple Sclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease. The relationship between structure
and function is present even at the single-axon level. Axon morphology, specifically diameter
and myelin sheath thickness, determines the conduction velocity (CV) of signal propagation
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
within the brain network. Axons, the communication cables of the brain, are long, tubular
structures, often modelled as straight cylinders that constitute a large portion of the brain’s
WM. Despite being tube-like, light microscopy (LM) and electron microscopy (EM) studies re-
veal non-constant diameters, shapes, and trajectories in axonal projections over long distances.
Axon diameter decreases were observed near Nodes of Ranvier and in response to vacuoles plac-
ing tension on the cytoskeleton. The axonal cytoskeleton regulates the diameter downwards or
upwards, when exposed to a decrease or increase in tension, respectively. Axonal diameter -
and thus CV - varies based on the origin and target of the axon. Furthermore, simulations of
diffusion within the intra-axonal space provided evidence that axon diameter estimates based on
the diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) signals perpendicular to the axons, including
those in the corpus callosum, were subject to a time-dependent overestimation. Certain neu-
rodegenerative diseases target specific axon sizes. Small-diameter axon degeneration is observed
in Multiple Sclerosis, while Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis affects the thickest ones. Therefore,
axon diameter can serve as a valuable biomarker for diagnosing these conditions. Cell clusters,
other axons, and blood vessels cause significant trajectory changes in the axons. Disease or
trauma-induced neuroinflammation leads to an accumulation of cells in the extra-cellular space
(ECS), which increases the density of extra-axonal structures that can alter axonal trajectories
and bias axon diameter measurements. The diameter and trajectory of axons exhibit variation
along their length, often attributed to local microstructural obstacles.
Neuronal communication occurs through signal transmission and action potential (AP) genera-
tion. Sensory cues and, most commonly, presynaptic neurons can trigger APs. Thicker myelin
sheaths in nerves with smaller diameters conducted APs faster than thinner myelin sheaths
in nerves with larger diameters, demonstrating the dependence of CV on myelin thickness in
addition to axon diameter. Myelin enhances the CV by more than a factor of 10 in fibers of
more than a few microns in diameter, compared to unmyelinated axons of the same size. Myelin
increases CV by enhancing signal conduction, while internodal distance, axon diameter, Node
of Ranvier length, and g-ratio also affects CV. Axonal structural properties are closely linked
to CV and each other. For example, in a larger diameter axon, the flow of charge along it
experiences less resistance and can depolarize more distal membrane segments, meaning that
the internodal distance should also increase to optimize the signal conduction.
At present, diffusion MRI is the sole method to measure axon diameter in the living brain. It
utilizes water molecule diffusion to investigate white matter microstructure. Nonetheless, since
axon diameters in the brain are on a micrometer scale, whereas MRI voxels for in vivo studies
are on a millimeter scale, biophysical models describing the expected geometries of the WM
compartments must be fitted to the acquired diffusion MRI signal to extract microscale infor-
mation. Additionally, research has shown that diffusion MRI-based axon diameter estimates
tend to overestimate those derived from LM and EM; possibly due to a mismatch between bio-
physical model design, questionable validity of comparing metrics from disparate modalities and
experimental conditions, and a possible impact of MRI hardware limitations on axon diameter
measurements. In EM, axons are only tracked for up to 20 µm, a fraction of their length in MRI
voxels.
A 3D validation of the WM anatomy and the biophysical models mentioned is necessary to test
the validity of modeling axons as cylinders and of axonal structure-function relations.
2
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:13==
1.2.
Objectives
1.2
Objectives
The primary aim of this dissertation is to explore the application and effectiveness of 3D convo-
lutional neural networks for 3D axon segmentation in XNH volumes from the splenium of the
vervet monkey brain. To accomplish this, the specific objectives of this report are: to study,
preprocess and effectively handle the available sample image volumes, to develop a training and
evaluation framework for assessing the segmentation performance of the 3D U-Net model on the
available data under various scenarios, and to obtain an overview of the morphological charac-
teristics of the predicted axons. Ultimately, the final objective of this research is to achieve a
dense and robust annotation of axonal structures within the given volumes.
1.3
Organization of the dissertation
The coming dissertation begins with a thorough examination of the available XNH synchrotron
data, which was previously analyzed by M. Andersson et al. in [2]. This dataset and the pre-
processing steps are explained in detail in chapter 2, along with a comprehensive explanation
of the employed methods, including the 3D U-Net model and the concept of ’cross-hair’ filters
from [13]. The experimental setup and training environment, encompassing patch-based data
loading, performance metrics, and data augmentation, are included in this same chapter. The
outcomes of various experiments are gathered in chapter 3, which investigates different scenarios,
including non-augmented and augmented baseline U-Net models, as well as the integration of
’cross-hair’ filters. This chapter also examines the morphology of the predicted axons. The final
two chapters, 4 and 5, are dedicated to providing a comprehensive comparison and overview of
the outcomes from the previous chapter and developing the conclusions from the research by
summarizing the dissertation as a whole, respectively.
Images that provide visual support and evidence for the visualizations and statements made
throughout the dissertation are collected in Appendix A and B.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
4
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Methods
In this study, PyTorch [10] has been selected as the open-source framework of choice due to
its improved usability in comparison to TensorFlow [1]. TorchIO [11], a unified Python library
specialized in data loading, preprocessing, augmentation, and patch-based sampling of medical
images in the context of deep learning, has been utilized for eﬀicient data handling. This library
focuses on the ease of use for researchers by providing a user-friendly framework that simplifies
the process of working with medical imaging data in PyTorch. Its modularity and flexibility
allowed to easily customize existing methods to make them usable in the context of this thesis.
Additionally, TorchIO considers medical images as physical objects in the space taking into ac-
count spatial metadata. The provided data is stored in Neuroimaging Informatics Technology
Initiative (NIfTI) file format.
In this chapter, the methods used for the study are presented.
Firstly, the data utilized is
described, including the XNH imaging technique, and the data preprocessing steps implemented
to prepare the data for further analysis are outlined. Subsequently, the different models that will
be explored are presented. Following that, details on the training process are provided, including
the data loading framework and the patch-based training, as well as loss functions, performance
metrics, and optimizer. Finally, the chapter concludes by presenting the experimental setup and
experiment tracking platform.
2.1
Data
Volumetric data is abundant in biomedical data analysis. Annotation of such data with seg-
mentation labels is challenging since only 2D slices can be handled at a time. Slice-by-slice
annotation is ineﬀicient and tedious due to the redundant information in neighboring slices.
Thus, complete 3D volume annotation is not an effective method to generate extensive and
generalized training data.
In many biomedical applications, a few images can productively train a network that generalizes
reasonably well on account of the presence of repetitive structures with corresponding variations
in each image. Weighted loss functions and data augmentation facilitate training networks with
sparsely annotated data.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
5
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Methods
2.1.1
Synchrotron X-ray Nano-Holotomography XNH
The study by M. Andersson et al. [3] showcases the interplay between extra-axonal structures
and the micromorphology of axons through the segmentation and analysis of high-resolution
3D volumes obtained from the WM of a vervet monkey brain with synchrotron X-ray nano-
holotomography (XNH), and utilizes the findings to validate diffusion MRI techniques for esti-
mating axon diameters. The study made both anatomical and technical contributions. XNH
technique enables the acquisition of high-resolution 3D maps in the holographic imaging regime
of the inner structure of nano-resolution scale samples, utilizing X-rays. The tissue samples
were meticulously prepared before the synchrotron experiments to minimize image artifacts and
X-ray absorption while preserving structural features and maintaining contrast to the present
biological structures.
However, the constraints of the study conducted by M. Andersson et al. indicate that addi-
tional research is needed. First, the combination of insuﬀicient signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and
limited image resolution challenged the robust segmentation of axons smaller than 2 µm, re-
quiring further investigation of the morphological characteristics of smaller axons, considered to
account for most of the ADD in WM. Second, the time-consuming process caused by the image
resolution and size handling resulted in the segmentation of only 54 axons, despite the XNH
volumes containing a much larger number. Although the segmentation was semi-automatic,
it had to be corrected manually in Nodes of Ranvier and regions of lower contrast where the
myelin boundary between the axoplasm and extracellular space (ECS) was unclear.
There is also a potential to gain more from the already analyzed XNH volumes by the implemen-
tation of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) segmentation method on the XNH volumes
as mentioned in [3], resulting in the segmentation of thousands of axons. This observation will
be studied in detail in this project.
2.1.2
Dataset
The dataset used for the present thesis is the ’Axon Morphology Dataset’, which contains XNH
volumes of the splenium of the vervet monkey brain. This dataset was retrieved from the Danish
Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) and previously utilized by M. Andersson
et al. in [3] and [2].
To obtain the dataset, the DRCMR mapped the WM microstructure using synchrotron XNH
and acquired several image volumes from different WM regions.
No image registration was
required as the sample remained stationary during sampling. The main focus is on the XNH
volume of the splenium region with an isotropic voxel size of 75 nm.
A preliminary segmentation of 54 axons was performed in the XNH volume of the splenium
region, with a cylindrical field of view of height and diameter of 153.6 µm. Segmentation of
cells, blood vessels, and vacuoles was possible within a volume of 153.6 × 153.6 × 584.5 µm3
by combining four adjacent and overlapping XNH volumes. Six large axons (>2 µm diameter)
longer than 660 µm were tracked and analysed within the extended volume, providing informa-
tion on the long-range axon behavior.
6
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:17==
2.1.
Data
Prior to the axon segmentation, the XNH volumes underwent downsampling by a factor of 5
via extraction of every fifth slice and performing a slicewise cubic interpolation and Gaussian
smoothing with a kernel width of 5 pixels. As a result of this downsampling process, the dimen-
sions of each of the four individual volumes became 410 × 410 × 410 voxels, with an isotropic
voxel size of 375 nm, enabling the entire volumes to be loaded into image processing software.
The dimensions of the combined volume resulted in 410 × 410 × 1532 voxels.
Next, a layered surface segmentation method was used to extract the axons and the extra-axonal
structures in the study by M. Andersson et al. [2]. The rough segmentation of the axons from the
volumes was performed using the adaptive paintbrush tool in ITK-Snap [14], while cell clusters,
blood vessels, and vacuoles were extracted by an intensity- and morphology-based approach in
MATLAB. All axons exceeded 120 µm in length, and ADs were quantified every 150 nm. The
dissertation will primarily focus on the fourth fraction of the combined XNH volume shown in
Figure 2.1a, which will be referred to as ’the XNH volume’ henceforth. This volume section
provides both axon and extra-axonal structure segmentations as ground truth for analysis. The
orientation of the volumes corresponds to the Right-Anterior-Superior positive (RAS+) system,
widely used in various imaging modalities including MRI and Computed Tomography (CT).
The dataset presented herein will serve as the study sample for this thesis.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: (a) Combined volume composed of four overlapping XNH volumes (13.5 µm overlap),
and the segmentation of extra-axonal structures: blood vessels (red), vacuoles (green), and cell
clusters (blue). (b) Fourth fraction of the combined XNH volume providing a closer view of vacuoles
and cell clusters. Figures adapted from [3] and [2].
The XNH volume showed distinguishable myelinated axons, cell nuclei, vacuoles, and blood
vessels, depicted in Figure 2.2. The segmentation revealed an even spatial distribution of vacuoles
(1.04% volume fraction), whereas cells (3.21% volume fraction) were clustered, particularly along
the axonal direction, with many closely associated or ’anchored’ in the blood vessels (0.53%
volume fraction).
The study will exclude unmyelinated axons on account of their relatively
small dimensions.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Methods
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: (a) Segmentation of 54 axons in the volume fraction from (Figure 2.1b) visualized
using the ITK-Snap software application. (b) Segmentation of extra-axonal structures in the volume
fraction from (b) visualized using ITK-Snap.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: (a) Traverse sections of axons (yellow) and vacuoles (green) exhibit similarities in their
internal structure. (b) Segmentation of the myelin sheath surrounding the 54 axons segmented in
Figure 2.2a.
8
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:19==
2.1.
Data
Vacuoles present ellipsoidal shape with a mean diameter of 7.8 µm, while the mean axon di-
ameter ranges between 2.1 and 3.8 µm in the primitively segmented axons [2]. Axons exhibit
structural similarities to vacuoles in transverse sections due to their circular shape and light
interior (see Figure 2.3a). Although their diameter can serve as a reliable differentiating factor,
the distinction between the two can be enhanced by considering the unique myelin sheath sur-
rounding axons. A fifth label has been added to the segmentation for the myelin to assist axon
segmentation (see Figure 2.3b). While the myelin sheath remains constant within each intern-
ode but is not uniform across different internodes, it has been depicted as consistent (constant
thickness) everywhere across all axons in this research. The aforementioned could be a potential
limitation of the study, and refining the myelin segmentation via the exclusion of the masked
highest voxel values from the original image may impact model performance.
Blood vessels differ significantly from axons in shape, being considerably larger. Similarly, cell
clusters are generally larger than axons and can be easily distinguished by the presence of dark
dots (cell nuclei) distributed within their shape (Figure 2.1b).
2.1.3
Data preprocessing
This study utilizes three raw data files: one for the downsampled XNH volume, another for the
54 axon segmentation, and the final one for the extra-axonal structure segmentation. While the
first two files contain information corresponding to the fourth fraction of the combined XNH
volume presented in subsection 2.1.1, the last one was only available for the entire combined
volume and had to be cropped to this specific section. As a result, each file contained an image
with dimensions of 410 × 410 × 410 voxels, with 0.38 µm spacing corresponding to the isotropic
voxel size of 375 nm.
Preprocessing the data is essential in machine learning to ensure data quality and consistency,
which helps improve model performance, reduce complexity, and create a more reliable and
effective foundation for training and generalizing machine learning models.
Starting with the XNH 3D volume, the image’s intensity values range from -105 to 122, with a
mean value of -20.28 and a standard deviation of 15.29. It is important to note that the sampled
3D volume in this study has a cylindrical shape. This means that the information is contained
in a cylindrical volume, while the complementary space in the cubic 410×410×410 voxel image
volume contains just background voxels (with intensity value 0). To improve the handling of
foreground voxels and exclude empty voxels during preprocessing, a cylindrical binary mask was
created to fit the image volume. Initially, the zero-intensity voxels were removed from the whole
cubic volume. Subsequently, a binary closing operation was applied to seal the zero values within
the sampled volume, resulting in a compact mask. The mean voxel intensity within the masked
volume became -25.79 with standard deviation of 12.47. The resulting cylindrical binary mask,
referred to as the foreground mask hereafter, along with the intensity histograms of the initial
volume before and after masking, can be visualized in Figure 2.4.
The next step was to normalize the masked cylindrical XNH volume by subtracting its mean
and dividing by its standard deviation to then rescale the voxel intensities to positive values
within the range of 0 to 255. The mean voxel intensity within the cylinder became 88.98, with
a standard deviation of 14.00. Background voxels outside the cylindrical volume remained at a
value of zero.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
9
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Methods
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: (a) View of the cylindrical mask and the original image in their 80th sagittal, coronal,
and axial slices.
(b) Histogram of voxel intensities in the cylindrical region of interest (ROI)
masking and original volumes, ranging from -50 to 50 intensity values (excluding intensity values
in the extremes).
The axon segmentation volume assigns label value 0 to unlabeled voxels and 1 to 54 for each
individually segmented axon, as illustrated in Figure 2.5b. A binary label map was generated
to represent the entire axon class (see Figure 2.5c). The myelin was extracted from the axon
segmentation by dilating the axon mask and subtracting the non-dilated axon mask from it.
This step is expected to assist the model in accurately segmenting axons based on this distinc-
tive characteristic, Figure 2.5d. As mentioned in subsection 2.1.2, in this study, the myelin was
consistently segmented along and across all axons.
Despite the focus of the project is to get the axon segmentation to study their 3D morphology,
a multiclass segmentation approach that includes blood vessels, vacuoles, cell clusters, axons,
and myelin, can be more effective in distinguishing axons from other extra-axonal structures.
The segmentations of axons, myelin, and extra-axonal structures were combined into a single
label map with labels ranging from 0 to 5, representing unlabeled (0), blood vessel (1), vacuole
(2), cell cluster (3), axon (4), and myelin (5). During label map merging, a total of 3062 vox-
els (<0.005%) exhibited overlapping axon and extra-axonal labels. Upon visual inspection of
the labeled volume, it was decided to keep the axon label, due to the observed overlap being
attributed to relatively imprecise labeling of the extra-axonal structures. The merged map and
the mask overlap are depicted in Figure 2.6.
As the sole sample volume for this study, the processed images and segmentations of the sample
were stored locally in NIfTI format, the same format as the initially provided data. They were
subsequently loaded from memory in their modified state for each experimental run to optimize
computation time. The image volume was converted to 32-bit floating-point numbers (float32),
which is the lowest precision data type supported by the PyTorch convolutions used later, and
the segmentations to 8-bit unsigned integer numbers (uint8) to optimize memory usage.
10
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:21==
2.1.
Data
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.5: (a) Normalized and rescaled XNH volume. (b) Provided axon segmentation. (c)
Generated binary axon segmentation. (d) Generated myelin segmentation.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Methods
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.6: (a) Segmentation of, blood vessels (red), vacuoles (green), cell clusters (blue), axons
(yellow), and myelin (magenta) visualized in ITK-Snap. (b) Axonal and extra-axonal mask overlap.
(c) Merged label mask containing all axonal and extra-axonal structures.
2.1.4
Subject
The TorchIO library introduces the Subject data structure, which serves to store subject-
associated images and metadata. This class allows storing the image volume, multiclass segmen-
tation, and foreground mask, as well as shape, spacing, orientation, and memory information. If
necessary, additional subject details such as age, name, and ID could also be stored. Addition-
ally, it offers high usability through its transform reproducibility and invertibility, in addition to
the availability of plotting and image-loading methods. The images stored within a subject can
belong to the ScalarImage or LabelMap image subclasses, representing voxel values as scalars
and categorical labels, respectively. Scalar images are ideal to store the image volume, while
12
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:23==
2.2.
Models
the label maps contain the segmentation masks. Transforms are applied to every image within
the subject, nevertheless, intensity transforms are not applied to label images. Henceforth, the
concept of subject will refer to an element containing the processed image volume, the multiclass
segmentation, the foreground mask, and related metadata.
2.2
Models
The quantification of 3D axonal morphology provides valuable insights into anatomical trends
previously observed in 2D axon diameter investigations and emphasizes the importance of con-
sidering the third dimension for accurately describing the structure and function of individual
axons. Axon segmentation requires accurate identification and separation of axons from sur-
rounding tissue in 3D images.
For axon segmentation, CNNs are a popular approach in deep learning. In this thesis, 3D CNNs
were selected for study over 2D CNNs due to various reasons. First, a 3D CNN surpasses a 2D
CNN in capturing the spatial context and shape of axons, as it considers the whole image vol-
ume instead of processing each slice independently. This is crucial for axon segmentation, where
the shape and orientation of axons can vary significantly in the 3D space. Second, a 3D CNN
can improve segmentation accuracy by utilizing correlated information for neighboring slices
in a 3D image. Last, a 3D CNN can better distinguish between axons and surrounding tissue
that may have similar texture or intensity in a single 2D slice, thus, a 3D CNN can potentially
decrease false positives/negatives in axon segmentation more effectively compared to a 2D CNN.
However, 3D CNNs have a downside as they are computationally expensive and require more
training data compared to 2D CNNs.
2.2.1
3D U-Net
The proposed network, based on the U-Net architecture introduced by Ö. Çiçek et al. [5], ex-
tends the original U-Net architecture proposed by O. Ronneberger et al. [12] by replacing all
2D operations with their 3D counterparts. This extension is motivated by the fact that medical
images, such as the sampled XNH volume, possess an inherent 3D structure for which slice-wise
processing would be suboptimal. The objective of the introduced network is that it learns from
the existing sparse annotations and provides a dense 3D segmentation.
The U-Net is a deep convolutional network architecture designed for fast and precise end-to-end
image segmentation. It was initially designed for the segmentation of biomedical images and it
surpassed prior approaches such as the sliding-window CNN. Figure 2.7 illustrates the network
architecture implemented in this project.
The network processes the raw input image volume to produce the segmentation map. Most
operations are 3×3×3 (or 5×5×5) 3D convolutions followed by a batch normalization operation
and a rectified linear unit (ReLU) non-linear activation function.
These convolution blocks
double the number of feature channels. Subsequently, the Max-Pooling operation reduces the
dimensions of the feature map by propagating the maximum activation from each 2×2×2 window
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Methods
to the next feature map. The sequential application of convolutions and max-pooling leads to
spatial contraction where the network learns to focus on the underlying features while reducing
the influence of their spatial location. This section of the network is commonly referred to as
the ’encoder’, and is responsible for gradually compressing information into a lower-dimensional
representation and processing it at higher levels of abstraction.
Figure 2.7:
Each blue box corresponds to a multi-channel feature map, with the number of
channels indicated on top. Lighter blue boxes represent copied feature masks obtained from skip
connections, which are depicted by grey arrows. Different arrows symbolize the operations within
the network.
While standard classification networks typically terminate here by mapping all features into a
single output vector, the U-Net architecture includes an additional expansion path, also named
’decoder’, specifically designed for creating a high-resolution segmentation map. The expan-
sion path incorporates a combination of up-convolutions and concatenation with high-resolution
features from the contracting path. These connections, known as skip connections, facilitate
information flow from the encoder to the decoder, thereby improving model predictions by com-
bining both low-level and high-level information. As an example, texture differences and edge
information aid in object boundary detection, while high-level knowledge about an object’s class
helps in precisely segmenting voxels according to their corresponding object class.
The up-
convolution, a transposed 3D convolution, applies a learned kernel to each feature vector and
maps it to a 2 × 2 × 2 output window. The resulting mapping is then concatenated with the
equal resolution layer’s features from the contracting path, and passed through a 3D convolution
block including batch normalization operations and ReLU activation maps. On the last layer of
the network, a 1 × 1 × 1 convolution reduces the output channels to six, one for each class to
segment: background, blood vessel, vacuole, cell cluster, axon, and myelin. Then, the Softmax
activation function rescales the raw model outputs (logits) to a probability distribution over the
classes, with each class having a probability between 0 and 1 and the sum of probabilities across
all classes equaling 1.
Convolution padding ensures that the output size remains the same as the input size. This
U-Net implementation will allow the classification of each voxel in the input image to the la-
bel it represents, i.e., voxel-level classification. Note that batch normalization (BN) is applied
before each ReLU activation function to expedite convergence; it helps maintain a stable input
distribution to the activation function and aid in training the network more effectively. During
training, each batch is normalized using its own mean and standard deviation, and the global
statistics are updated accordingly.
14
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:25==
2.2.
Models
Compared to 2D convolutions, the additional dimension in 3D convolutions significantly in-
creases the computational complexity, memory requirements, and training time, by requiring
the processing of a drastically larger number of parameters in each convolutional operation. The
Table 2.1 shows that a 3D patch with dimensions 128 × 128 × 128 voxels requires 133.33 times
more memory (8 MB) compared to a 2D patch of dimensions 128×128 (0.06 MB). Furthermore,
the number of trainable parameters increases drastically from ∼8.5 million to ∼25.6 million from
the 2D case to the 3D case for a 3 × 3 × 3 kernel, and from ∼23.7 million to ∼118.4 million for
a 5 × 5 × 5 kernel, respectively. Consequently, the estimated total size requirements, which rep-
resents the total memory footprint required to store the entire neural network including input,
intermediate and output tensors, and the parameters, increases in between 6 300% and 8 000%
for kernels of size 3 and 5. The concept of ’cross-hair’ filter is introduced in the next section
with the objective of reducing the memory requirements and computational costs of 3D CNNs
while maintaining their benefits over 2D CNNs.
Model
Trainable Parameters
Input size
(MB)
Estimated Total Size
(MB)
Kernel Size
Kernel Size
3
5
3
5
2D U-Net
8 539 360
23 711 456
0.06
217.14
275.01
3D U-net
25 607 968
118 537 056
8.0
17 337.69
17 692.18
Table 2.1: Number of trainable parameters, input size, and estimated total size of the U-Net
network architecture presented in Figure 2.7, with input volume shapes of 128 × 128 and 128 ×
128 × 128 voxels for the 2D and 3D networks, respectively. Computed by torchsummary.
A popular idea would be to perform slice-wise 2D CNNs; however, this approach discards valu-
able 3D context information crucial for tracking tubular structures in 3D.
2.2.2
Cross-hair filters
G. Tetteh et al. presented DeepVesselNet [13], an architecture with the objective of overcom-
ing the execution speed and high memory challenges, faced when extracting vessel trees and
networks, and corresponding features, in 3D angiographic volumes using deep learning. To out-
perform full 3D networks in terms of computational cost, the idea of 2D orthogonal cross-hair
filters is employed, which utilize 3D context information at a reduced computational load.
As presented in Figure 2.8, the idea of cross-hair filters involves the utilization of three inter-
secting 2D planes centered in each target voxel. This concept helps to mitigate memory and
speed problems of classical full 3D networks while learning from the information across slices
in volumetric data and maintaining accuracy. While the slice-wise existing ideas would extract
2D planes in the three directions at a preprocessing step and feed them into the network, the
cross-hair filters are implemented on a layer level within the network, helping to retain the
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
15
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Methods
three-dimensional information through the network.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8: (a) Graphical representation of a classical 3D convolution filter (on the left) and a 3D
convolution with cross-hair filters (on the right). (b) The cross-hair kernel is composed by three
orthogonal 2D filters.
Considering a classical 3D convolutional kernel shape of (kx, ky, kz), the mathematical represen-
tation of a 3D convolution operation ∗, as presented in [13], can be expressed as follows:
I ∗M = A = {aijk}
(2.1)
where I is the input image, M is the kernel or filter, A is the convoluted image, and {aijk} is
the element with index (i, j, k) in matrix A. Then, a classical 3D convoluted element can be
expressed as:
aijk =
kx
∑
r=1
ky
∑
s=1
kz
∑
t=1
I(R,S,T)M(r,s,t)
R = i + r −
(
1 +
[kx
2
])
S = j + s −
(
1 +
[ky
2
])
T = k + t −
(
1 +
[kz
2
])
(2.2)
where I(R,S,T) is the intensity value of image I at voxel position (R, S, T), and M(r,s,t) is the
value of the kernel M at position (r, s, t). Conversely, the elements of a convolution operation ∗
with a cross-hair filter that approximates the standard 3D convolution can be expressed by:
aijk =
ky
∑
s=1
kz
∑
t=1
I(i,S,T)Mi
(s,t) +
kx
∑
r=1
kz
∑
t=1
I(R,j,,T)Mj
(r,t)
+
kx
∑
r=1
ky
∑
s=1
I(R,S,k)Mk
(r,s)
(2.3)
where Mi, M j, M k are the 2D convolutional cross-hair kernels that will intersect to provide an
approximation of the classical 3D kernel M along the i-th, j-th, k-th axes, respectively.
The standard 3D convolution requires kxkykz multiplications and kxkykz −1 additions for each
voxel. In contrast, the cross-hair 3D convolution involves in kykz + kxkz + kxky multiplications
and kykz + kxkz + kxky −1 additions; two of the additions result from adding the output of the
16
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:27==
2.2.
Models
three 2D filters (Mi, M j, M k) together. Applying Equation 2.3 independently for each voxel is
ineﬀicient due to redundant use of memory. For a more eﬀicient implementation, each of the
three intersecting 2D filters is applied to the corresponding sagittal, coronal, and axial planes
of the input volume; in this manner, only one volume is loaded in memory while kernels are
rotated to match the slices in different orientations. Figure 2.9 provides a visual representation
of cross-hair filters and their implementation.
In practice, three 3D convolutions are added
with kernel dimensions (1, ky, kz), (kx, 1, kz), and (kx, ky, 1), respectively, for each convolution
operation in the U-Net network architecture (see Figure 2.8b).
Figure 2.9: Graphical representation of the implementation of a 3D cross-hair filter. Grayscaled
stacks refer to the input to the layer, and brown colored slices refer to extracted features after
convolution operation. Figure retrieved from [13].
Now, let km1, km2, km3 be the sizes of the kernel M such that km1 ≥km2 ≥km3, then:
kykz + kxkz + kxky ≤3(km1km2) ≤kxkykz
(2.4)
where strict inequality holds for km3 > 3. A more detailed description of the previous equations
can be found in [13]. While for a filter (kx, ky, kz) = (3, 3, 3) there is no significant improvement,
for larger filters there is a considerable decrease on the number of operations as it can be see in
a simple example in Table 2.2.
Convolution
No. of operations
Kernel Size
3
5
sums
multiplications
sums
multiplications
Classical 3D
26
27
124
125
Cross-Hair 3D
26
27
74
75
Table 2.2: Number of operations per voxel of the resulting image involved in classical 3D convo-
lution filters versus cross-hair convolution filters.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Methods
Taking inputs from Table 2.1, we compare in Table 2.3 number of parameters reduction when
choosing cross-hair convolution filters over classical 3D convolution filters. Focusing on a kernel
size of 5 voxels, the number and size of trainable parameters gets reduced on approximately by
40%. The memory requirements will be analysed in chapter 3.
Model
Trainable Parameters
Kernel Size
3
5
3D U-Net
25,607,968
118,537,056
Cross Hair 3D U-net
25,607,968
71,124,256
Table 2.3: Number of trainable parameters in the U-Net network architecture presented in Fig-
ure 2.7 with an input volume shape of 128×128×128, utilizing cross-filter convolutions and without
their usage.
The cross-hair filters described in this subsection were implemented in PyTorch, inspired by the
approach used in DeepVesselNet [13] for TensorFlow.
2.3
Training
2.3.1
Patch-based training
Using the entire image volume of size 410×410×410 voxels as input to a 3D CNN is not feasible
due to limitations in memory and computational resources. To address the memory constraints
associated with the large volume size and ensure more eﬀicient processing, it is necessary to
extract smaller patches from the volume. These extracted patches can then be fed to the net-
work for further analysis. By working with patches of an appropriate size, the network can still
effectively learn spatial dependencies within the volume and produce accurate predictions.
The extracted patch should be large enough to contain entire or representative shapes of the
different elements.
The classes that can be more challenging to differentiate are axons and
vacuoles due to their similar circular shape and diameter in a transverse cut, as stated in sub-
section 2.1.2. In the original full resolution volume, segmented axons’ average diameters range
from 2.1 µm to 3.8 µm and vacuoles’ mean diameters from 4.2 µm to 7.8 µm. Thus, with voxel
size of 0.38 µm, patches exceeding dimensions of 21 × 21 × 21 voxels can capture the confusable
transversal shape of these structures. Nevertheless, it is important to capture the characteristic
longitudinal shape of axons. Considering a consistent spatial distribution of labeled axons and
extra-axonal structures within the volume and contemplating their shapes and sizes, a patch of
size 64 × 64 × 64 voxels will contain the necessary information of study. However, to assess and
compare the models’ performance, experiments will initially be conducted using patch sizes of
64 × 64 × 64 and 128 × 128 × 128 voxels.
TorchIO provides different ’sampler’ modules that allow to extract patches of specific dimensions
across a whole volume. None of the available samplers was completely suitable for the current
project; therefore, a customized grid sampler was developed by modifying the source code of the
18
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:29==
2.3.
Training
torchio.GridSampler class. The original grid sampler extracts every patch from a grid across
the entire volume, but neither it nor any other available random samplers effectively handle the
cylindrical shape containing the information in the sample image, resulting in frequent selec-
tion of patches containing scarce information. This issue is further extended when rescaling the
volumes for data augmentation, as it will be observed later in section 3.2. The desired patch
overlap size can be specified.
In order to refer to the patches that contain most information within the image volume, the
concept of ’legal’ patch will refer to those whose eight corners fall inside the foreground mask.
Recall that the original foreground mask is cylindrical but may undergo transformations during
data augmentation. The customized grid sampler first identifies the valid patch locations and
then randomly selects a patch from the volume at one of those locations. If no legal patches
are available in a volume, the sampler will relay into the WeightedSampler from TorchIO and
randomly extract patches from the volume based on the probability map associated with the
foreground mask. In this case, the probability of sampling a patch centered on a particular voxel
is determined by the corresponding value in the probability map, ensuring that the center voxel
of the extracted patch always contains tissue information.
2.3.2
Data loading framework
TorchIO’s Queue is a crucial component for training patch-based models for image segmentation.
It facilitates stochastic patch-based training by enabling the sampling of multiple patches from
a volume, eliminating the need to prepare the volume repeatedly for each patch extraction. The
patches are stored in the queue until the next training iteration, eliminating the requirement for
local or cloud storage and providing memory and computational advantages. In this queueing
system, samplers generate random patches from volumes in the subjects dataset. Furthermore,
the queue supports parallel data loading, ensuring eﬀicient utilization of system resources and
faster processing times.
In the Queue method, at the beginning of each training epoch, a PyTorch loader queries the
datasets copied in each process of loading and processing the volumes in parallel on the CPU.
Next, the queue list is filled and shuffled with patches extracted by the sampler from the different
subjects in the dataset, limited to a specified maximum queue length. A separate data loader
is employed to group patches in the queue into batches and feed them into the neural network.
When the queue gets emptied as patches are used, it is refilled with new patches.
The maximum length of the queue can have various effects on memory requirements and running
time. Longer queues can load more data into memory at once, speeding up training or inference
but increasing memory usage. In general, the optimal queue length will be determined by RAM
capacities.
The queueing pipelines for training with and without data augmentation are depicted in Fig-
ure 2.10 and Figure 2.11, respectively. It is important to note that although the training and
testing phases maintain complete separation between the unchanging training, validation, and
test datasets, a random subset of each of them is selected in each training epoch and predic-
tion run. The variability in the selected subsets is due to the inherent stochastic properties
of TorchIO’s queue. Nevertheless, considering the characteristics of the dataset used in this
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
19
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Methods
project and the distribution of labels within it, there should not be any issues regarding model
evaluation and comparison consistency in the validation and testing steps.
Non-augmented dataset
When training with the original image volume, a sole subject is available. To train, validate, and
test in disjoint patch sets, the customized grid sampler presented in subsection 2.3.1 was adapted
for the non-augmented training case. Within the valid patches, which remain unchanged for the
same subject and patch dimensions, 70% of them were allocated for training, 20% for validation,
and the remaining 10% for testing. The initial train-validation-test dataset split was conducted
in a non-random manner to prevent highly overlapping patches from being assigned to different
subsets. The division was performed among the valid patches rather than the initial volume to
avoid potential issues arising from patch sizes not fitting appropriately in the smaller validation
or test sub-volumes especially.
The queue method from TorchIO needs at least two subjects as input. Therefore, the first step
was to split the XNH volume in two halves and treat them as two different subjects. At the
beginning of each epoch, the training patch queue is shuffled.
Figure 2.10: Pipeline of torchio.Queue for the non-augmented data loading. Figure adapted
from [11].
Augmented dataset
The low image resolution and signal-to-noise ratio of the XNH volumes challenged a robust
segmentation of axons with a mean diameter smaller than 2.1 µm. As a result, the estimated
mean diameter and volume-weighted mean diameter were significantly larger compared to the
estimates derived from diffusion MRI. Furthermore, axon trajectories exhibit greater variabil-
ity in real-life scenarios beyond the 54 segmented axons analyzed in this study. Thereby, the
purpose of data augmentation is to expand the dataset and assist the CNNs in recognizing and
segmenting these yet unlabeled axons.
To align with TorchIO’s queue pipeline, the data augmentation was performed on a per-subject
basis before data loading. Recall that each subject contains the processed image, the merged
segmentation mask containing labels for axonal and extra-axonal structures, and the cylindrical
foreground mask. Initially, twelve copies of the subject were created, with ten copies designated
for training and the remaining two for validation. The original non-transformed volume was
reserved for testing, while a random transformation was applied to each of the twelve subject
copies.
20
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:31==
2.3.
Training
The selected transformations included flipping, scaling, and rotation, which were composed and
each of them applied based on predefined probabilities. Furthermore, each transformation ran-
domly selected one or more axes in which to be applied. The flip probability was set to 0.3,
scaling ranged between 0.25 and 1 while maintaining isotropy, while rotation could occur at
any angle. It is important to note that the transformations applied to the images and masks
remained consistent within each subject. Especially, scaling and rotation are particularly useful
for representing smaller axons and capture different axon trajectories.
In analogy to the non-augmented dataset case, the sampler introduced in subsection 2.3.1 was
used to extract a specified number of random patches from each volume. However, unlike in the
non-augmented dataset case, the valid patches did not need to be divided into train, validation,
and test subsets, since the splitting was conducted prior on a subject-wise basis as previously
explained. At the beginning of each epoch, the training subject list and patch queue are shuffled.
Figure 2.11: Pipeline of torchio.Queue for the augmented data loading. Figure adapted from
[11].
2.3.3
Loss functions and performance metrics
The MONAI [4] Open Source Framework for AI Development in Medical Imaging greatly fa-
cilitated the utilization of loss functions and performance metrics for training and testing the
models.
Another limiting factor in 3D medical image segmentation is class imbalance, which often leads
to over-segmentation of classes with a high voxel share. This issue becomes more critical in
multi-class segmentation scenarios. The merged segmentation volume exhibits clear class im-
balance, with the following proportions for each labeled class across the entire volume: 0.53%
for blood vessels, 1.04% for vacuoles, 3.21% for cell clusters, 1.41% for axons, and 3.01% for
myelin. When considering only the labeled voxels, these proportions become 5.79% for blood
vessels, 11.27% for vacuoles, 34.91% for cell clusters, 15.31% for axons, and 32.72% for myelin.
Taking class imbalance into account when calculating performance losses and metrics is crucial
for adequately evaluating the model. Failure to do so may result in the model struggling to
learn the features and characteristics of the underrepresented classes and can lead to a bias in
the training process, where the model is more likely to predict the majority classes, resulting in
poor performance in the minority classes.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Methods
During training and validation, the main focus was on the Dice loss (Equation 2.5) and the
voxel-wise Cross Entropy (CE) loss (Equation 2.6) for multi-class classification, with subse-
quent modifications. The Dice coeﬀicient quantifies the overlap between the prediction map and
the ground truth map, yielding a value between 0 and 1. A score of 1 indicates perfect and
complete overlap. The Dice calculation was smoothed by adding a small constant to both the
denominator to prevent division by zero, and in the numerator to avoid zero values. The CE
loss quantifies the discrepancy between the class predictions and the target classes for each voxel
in the image volume, and then averages over all voxels.
The multi-class Dice loss can be defined as:
Dice Loss = 1 −
2 ×
C∑
i=1
TPi
2 ×
C∑
i=1
TPi +
C∑
i=1
FPi +
C∑
i=1
FNi
(2.5)
where C is the total number of classes and for each class i: TPi is the number of true positive
predictions, FPi is the number of false positive predictions, and FNi is the number of false
negative predictions.
The multi-class CE loss can be expressed as:
Cross Entropy Loss = −1
N
N
∑
j=1
C
∑
i=1
(yji log(ˆyji))
(2.6)
where C is the total number of classes, N is the total number of voxels in the image and for each
class i and voxel j: yji is the binary ground truth label for voxel j in class i (one-hot encoding),
ˆyji is the predicted probability of voxel j belonging to class i, and log is the natural logarithm
function.
In the initial stage of the experimental phase for the current study, both losses individually, the
generalized Dice loss, and a masked and combined version of each were explored. Subsequently,
the focus shifted to the masked generalized Dice loss due to its outstanding performance as it
described in detail in subsection 3.1.1. The Dice loss class from MONAI and the CE loss from
PyTorch calculate the batch-wise average losses between the ground truth and the predicted
segmentation. Both losses support multi-class segmentation. To address the problem of class
imbalance, the generalized Dice loss was considered because of its class re-balancing ability and
its effectiveness as a deep learning loss function for tasks involving imbalanced data.
Additionally, an approach involving masking the Dice loss and the generalized Dice loss was em-
ployed to address the issue of sparse data annotation and enable the model to identify initially
unlabeled elements. By using the non-masked version of these losses, the unlabeled voxels (la-
beled as 0) were considered as background, which posed challenges for the models to accurately
segment non-labeled axons and extra-axonal structures, due to the features learned from these
voxels. Excluding the unlabeled class from the calculation, i.e., setting the weights of unlabeled
voxels to zero, the model learned only from labeled voxels, resulting in improved generalization
across the entire volume.
22
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:33==
2.3.
Training
In general, MONAI provides the option to exclude the background class in almost all of its loss
methods, leaving out from the loss calculation all the unlabeled voxels from both the ground
truth map and the predicted mask. However, this method missing information from the wrongly
unlabeled regions in the prediction map, which were labeled in the ground truth, leads to prefer
the choice of a masked loss. The merged original segmentation mask was turned binary with
unlabeled (0) and labeled (1) identifiers (Figure 2.12), and it was used to mask the loss taking
into consideration the unlabeled masked voxels in the predicted segmentation.
Dilating the
mask could be beneficial in further research for detecting boundaries between elements within
the mask and the unlabeled background. Various modifications to the source code from MONAI
losses were carried out to meet the requirements of the study.
Figure 2.12: Example of the generated mask utilized for loss computation. The foreground (1)
voxels are considered in the loss calculation, while the background (0) voxels are excluded.
The effects of masking the loss were tested and depicted using the F1-score (Equation 2.7), which
combines precision and recall to provide a balanced measure of the model’s accuracy. It ranges
from 0 to 1, a higher score indicating a better performance, and provides an overall evaluation
of the classification performance.
F1-score = (2 ∗Precision ∗Recall)/(Precision + Recall)
(2.7)
with
Precision =
TP
TP + FP ,
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
where TP is the number of true positive predictions, FP is the number of false positive predic-
tions, and FN is the number of false negative predictions. In multiclass problems, the F1-score
is computed for each class individually, and then averaged to obtain an overall F1-score.
A weighted combination of the Dice loss and the CE loss could enhance segmentation results
for minority classes by simultaneously maximizing the Dice similarity coeﬀicient and optimizing
the class probability of the predicted segmentation, to better align the ground truth segmen-
tation and address class imbalances. Nonetheless, including the CE loss may not be the best
option for sparsely annotated data, following the argumentation in the previous paragraphs.
Note that the application of masks in the loss functions is limited to the Dice loss. Therefore,
when employing a masked combination of Dice and CE loss, the mask is applied to the Dice loss
exclusively, while the CE loss is computed over the whole patch. This distinction arises from
time constraints within the scope of this project and the absence of a pre-implemented masked
CE loss in the available MONAI resources.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2. Methods
Every loss takes as input the probabilities output from the network. For testing, the masked
generalized Dice loss was used in order to compare the performance of different models. Nev-
ertheless, when evaluating the model performance on entire volumes as a last step, where each
voxel belongs to a different class, the Dice loss from torchmetrics was employed, which accepts
label input.
2.3.4
Other settings
Adam Optimizer
The optimizer used during training is the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. The
suitability of this learning rate is supported by the steepness and shape of the average train loss
curve depicted in Figure 2.13 and similar behavior observed in the remaining experiments that
were carried out, which will be explored in detail in chapter 3. The Adam [6] optimizer computes
individual adaptive learning rates for different parameters from estimates of the first and second
moments of the gradients, which is beneficial for capturing fine details and complex structures
within the image and handles sparse gradients commonly encountered in image segmentation
tasks, ensuring stable and effective optimization. Additionally, hyper-parameters have intuitive
interpretations and typically require little tuning.
Early stopping
The number of training epochs was set to one hundred. To prevent overfitting on the training set,
an early stopping strategy [7] with a patience of 7 was utilized. The training process monitored
the validation loss, and if the loss remained unchanged for several consecutive epochs, the
training stopped. A checkpoint of the model was saved each time the validation loss decreased,
ensuring that the best model was retained at the end of the training process.
Figure 2.13: Illustration of early stopping for the 3D U-Net model presented in Figure 2.7 with
patch size of 128 × 128 × 128 and masked generalized Dice loss.
24
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:35==
2.4.
Experimental Setup
TorchIO’s grid aggregator
The grid aggregator offered by TorchIO framework played a crucial role in facilitating dense
inference.
This class enabled to re-build the complete 3D image volume from patches after
inference of batches extracted by a grid sampler. Moreover, the patch overlap mode can be
customized to either crop, average, or weight the overlapping predictions. The overlap selected
for this project was 10 voxels.
After testing the three overlapping mode options offered by TorchIO (crop, average, and ’hann’),
the cropping mode was selected as the most suitable choice. The averaging method incorrectly
classified many voxels as axons in the overlapping sections, resulting in a grid-like segmented
area labeled as axon, as depicted in Figure 2.14a.
On the other hand, when applying the
’hann’ weighted method, the final predicted volume exhibited excessive noise, as illustrated
in Figure 2.14b. However, the cropping mode effectively handled the overlapping sections as
observed in Figure 2.14c, providing satisfactory results overall.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.14: Performance of overlap modes in grid aggregator. (a) Average mode: predictions
in overlapping areas are averaged with equal weights. (b) Hann mode: predictions in overlapping
areas are weighted using a Hann window function. (c) Crop mode: overlapping predictions are
cropped. The predictions were generated using the 3D U-Net model described in Figure 2.7 with a
patch size of 64 × 64 × 64 voxels, data augmentation, and masked generalized Dice loss.
2.4
Experimental Setup
For developing this project the LSF 10 Cluster from the High Performance Computing (HPC)
services provided by DTU Computing Center (DCC) were used. Initially, CPU was employed.
However, to enhance processing speed, the utilization of GPUs became necessary. Specifically,
jobs were submitted to the LSF10-setup, allocating resources from the gpua100 and gpuv100
queues, utilizing the NVIDIA A100 and V100 GPUs, respectively. The code was compiled with
CUDA 11.7 for nodes with GPU.
In this project, neptune.ai [8] platform was employed for logging and visualizing metrics and
parameters, and storing outputs and models generated during the experiment runs. The use
of neptune.ai facilitated experiment tracking and management, enabling effective organization
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 2. Methods
and analysis of the results. The integration of neptune.ai in the code streamlined the logging
process and enhanced the arrangement and reproducibility of the project.
Python implementation and the complete source code developed for the project can be accessed
on GitHub: https://github.com/MirenLurBarquin/msc_thesis.
26
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Results
This chapter explores the different models described in chapter 2, highlighting the parameters
and features that enhance performance and boost the segmentation of different elements in the
image, with a special focus on axons. Throughout the chapter, results obtained during training
and testing will be presented, including relevant metrics or performance measures.
Images,
learning curves, F1 scores, loss trends, and other evaluation charts will be utilized to illustrate
the later decision-making process.
Initially a baseline model will be studied, followed by the incorporation of data augmentation.
Additionally, the concept of ’cross-hair’ filter will be explored. Lastly, a comprehensive analysis
of the diameter and length of the predicted axonal structures will be presented.
3.1
Non-augmented baseline U-Net model
The initial model to be studied is the U-Net CNN described in subsection 2.2.1, which served
as the baseline model in the former sections of this dissertation. The dataset for this case study
consists solely of the original XNH image volume and ground truth segmentation, without any
transformation applied.
3.1.1
Patch size and train loss
The first experiment is to explore various patch sizes and examine the different losses introduced
in subsection 2.3.3. The explored patch sizes are 64×64×64 and 128×128×128 voxels, following
the reasoning described in subsection 2.3.1. The training losses tested can be found in the leg-
end of Figure 3.1, which comprise a combination of masked and non-masked Dice and CE losses.
For testing purposes, the masked generalized Dice loss was selected to evaluate the overlap
performance on the labeled voxels. This selection was made to avoid penalizing newly labeled
voxels that were not initially labeled, as previously mentioned in chapter 2. Additionally, every
test in this section was carried out for a batch size of 6 patches and a dataset composed of 560
patches for training, 160 for validation, and 80 for testing, following a common 70-20-10 percent
train-validation-test data split.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
27
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Results
The results of the model evaluation are presented in Figure 3.1 and Table 3.1. The plot displays
the losses for patch sizes of 64 × 64 × 64 and 128 × 128 × 128 voxels represented by dotted
and continuous lines, respectively.
It is important to note that comparing the Dice loss of
models trained on different patch sizes may not provide a reliable measure of their performance
due to the difference in spatial resolution and captured contextual information in each case.
Nonetheless, both the models trained and evaluated in the smaller patches and the ones using a
larger patch size suggest a better performance with the masked generalized Dice loss. With this
loss, the model trained and evaluated on 128 × 128 × 128 voxel patches maintained an average
test loss per batch below 0.14, reaching values below 0.06. Similarly, for the model trained and
evaluated on 64 × 64 × 64 voxel patches, the average test loss per batch remained below 0.25,
with values below 0.12.
Figure 3.1: Average masked Dice loss per batch in the test set comprising patches of dimensions
128 × 128 × 128 and 64 × 64 × 64 for each corresponding model. ’Gen.’ stands for Generalized
and ’ps’ for patch size. The losses and patch sizes were evaluated for the 3D U-Net presented in
subsection 2.2.1 without data augmentation.
Loss
Average Test Loss
Patch Size
128
64
Masked Dice
0.0898
0.2681
Masked Gen. Dice CE
0.1379
0.2246
Gen Dice
0.1461
0.3932
CE
0.1538
0.4870
Masked Gen. Dice
0.0770
0.1799
Masked Dice CE
0.1525
0.3012
Table 3.1: Average masked Dice loss in the test set. Same model configurations as the ones used
for Figure 3.1.
28
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:39==
3.1.
Non-augmented baseline U-Net model
To provide a better visualization of the model’s performance with each train loss function,
Figure 3.2 presents various examples showcasing different test patch predictions. Additional
test prediction examples and larger figures can be found in Appendix A. Based on the predicted
image outputs, several observations can be made. For a better visualization of the results, a
performance colored mask was generated. This mask assigns colors to voxels as follows: green
for correctly classified voxels, blue for the voxels labeled in the ground truth but not in the
prediction, red for mislabeled voxels, and yellow for the newly labeled voxels. Note that the
voxels colored in yellow do not necessarily indicate a correct classification.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.2: Examples of predictions from the test set using different loss functions. Models trained
in patches of dimensions 128×128×128 voxels. (a) Generalized Dice Loss, (b) Cross Entropy Loss,
(c) Masked Generalized Dice Loss, and (d) Masked Generalized Dice Cross Entropy Loss.
Both the Generalized Dice loss and the CE loss demonstrate effective prediction capabilities for
elements belonging to different classes. However, they exhibit limitations in accurately captur-
ing certain axonal and extra-axonal elements present in the unlabeled background. Moreover,
the presence of unlabeled voxels persists, as the network predominantly learns to classify these
voxels as background, rather than accounting for the sparsely annotated data.
By using a
masked loss for training, such as the masked generalized Dice loss in Figure 3.2c, new labels
are assigned to the initially unlabeled background voxels, allowing the detection of additional
elements in the sparsely annotated image and providing a more dense segmentation. Conse-
quently, it enables the segmentation of a larger number of axons compared to the 54 present in
the ground truth map. The test loss is still measured considering solely voxels labeled in the
original segmentation mask. Figure 3.2d illustrates that combining the masked generalized Dice
loss with the unmasked CE loss, already results in the omission of elements in the unlabeled
background. Thus, for this study, the use of masked losses is essential in order to achieve a
dense segmentation of the sample.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Results
In Figure 3.3, the non-masked loss exhibits a good balance between precision and recall in the
classification model, while the masked case shows the opposite result. It is attributed to the
fact that with the masked loss the ground truth’s unlabeled background voxels rarely remain
unlabeled in the predicted output. This plot supports the observations made in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.3: Validation phase results: average F1-score per epoch for the U-Net model presented
in subsection 2.2.1 without data augmentation and employing masked and non-masked generalized
Dice losses.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.4: Comparative analysis of patch sizes 128 and 64. Comparison of the key monitoring
metrics of the baseline 3D U-Net network for each loss. (a) Total run time. (b) Total RAM used.
(c) Early stopping epoch. (d) GPU memory requirements; different blue hues represent patch size
128 models with different training losses while varying orange hues correspond to patch size 64
models.
30
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:41==
3.1.
Non-augmented baseline U-Net model
Additional insights on runtime, early stopping epoch, and memory usage can be found in Fig-
ure 3.4. When employing a 64 × 64 × 64 voxel patch size, as shown in Figure 3.4a, a substantial
decrease in the total train and evaluation time is evident compared to using 128 × 128 × 128
dimensions. Similarly, the visualization in Figure 3.4b demonstrates a significant reduction in
RAM requirements for the smaller patch case. The convergence of the models does not appear
to rely directly on the patch size, as there is no notable difference in the early stopping epoch
between the two cases (see Figure 3.4c). The GPU memory requirements are considerably higher
for the larger patch size as depicted in Figure 3.4d.
The increased memory and computation time requirements are a direct consequence of the fact
that the 3D U-Net model being used in this initial approach involves 2154 MB forward/back-
ward passes in the 64×64×64 voxel patch size case, while in the case of a 128×128×128 voxel
patch size, they require 17232 MB. Smaller patch sizes result in fewer elements to store, thereby
reducing memory requirements. Moreover, as the patch size increases, the amount of memory
needed to store intermediate results, gradients, and activation maps increases, requiring higher
GPU resources. Models with smaller dimension inputs tend to exhibit improved computational
eﬀiciency at processing and updating weights.
To conclude this section, the loss function for training the subsequent experiments in this thesis
is the masked generalized Dice loss, which has shown superior performance. This loss function
effectively handles class imbalance and considers only voxels labeled in the ground-truth seg-
mentation, enabling to detect unlabeled axonal and extra-axonal elements in the image. Note
that this is the same loss used for testing the model performance.
The patch size will be further investigated in the upcoming subsections on an ongoing basis.
This analysis will be based on testing the performance of each class in entire volume predictions
rather than patch-wise assessments.
3.1.2
Combined volume segmentation
In the non-augmented case presented in this section, the fourth segment of the combined volume
from Figure 2.1 was used for training and testing. Now, the performance of the U-Net model will
be visualized in the combined volume containing the remaining three sub-volumes. This com-
bined volume has dimensions of 410×410×1158 voxels, which corresponds to 153.6 µm diameter
and 443.5 µm height. No ground-truth segmentation is available for the axons in this prediction.
To achieve a dense segmentation of entire volumes in this and the subsequent sections, the ag-
gregator function from TorchIO will be utilized, specifically employing the crop overlap mode,
as introduced in subsection 2.3.4. Once the predicted volume is obtained, the first step involves
unlabeling every background voxel, which refers to voxels not belonging to the cylindrical shape
of the original sample.
This subsection analyzes and compares the predicted combined volumes generated by the U-Net
CNN model with masked generalized Dice loss and no data augmentation, for the two different
patch sizes being studied. For an effective result comparison, a pairwise examination of the
different available output views will be carried out along various figures.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Results
In Figure 3.5, it can be observed how for a larger patch size the segmentation of the myelin is
refined and the cell cluster label dominates the background. Conversely, the smaller patch size
leads to a greater presence of myelin. Moreover, for patch size of dimensions 64×64×64 voxels,
a portion of the voxels remains unlabeled (13.88%), whereas this is not the case for a patch size
128 × 128 × 128 voxels (0.00% of unlabeled voxels). Confusion matrices in Figure 3.6 confirm
these findings, demonstrating that larger patch sizes successfully label previously unlabeled
voxels mainly as cell clusters, while smaller patch sizes leave some voxels unlabeled. Importantly,
recall that there is no available ground truth segmentation of axons and myelin for this combined
volume. Therefore, these classes have not been included in the confusion matrices. Nevertheless,
they have been accounted for their normalization to maintain a consistent evaluation of the
segmentation.
(a) Ground truth
(b) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(c) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.5:
Segmentation of, blood vessels (red), vacuoles (green), cell clusters (blue), axons
(yellow), and myelin (magenta) visualized in ITK-Snap.
32
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:43==
3.1.
Non-augmented baseline U-Net model
(a) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(b) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.6: Confusion matrices for the whole predicted volume, normalized over the entire com-
bined volume.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: (a) Predicted volume and (b) refined predicted volume. The segmentation corresponds
to model training and evaluation conducted with a patch size of 64 × 64 × 64.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
33
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3. Results
In both cases, the axial view reveals a consistently labeled ring along the cylindrical bound-
ary, predominantly corresponding to axons and vacuoles. This feature is even more pronounced
in the 3D view shown in Figure 3.7a. To facilitate the analysis and visualization of results,
the cylindrical foreground mask was eroded to generate a reduced version of it, allowing to
refine the segmentation map by excluding voxels within the cylindrical boundary, as depicted
in Figure 3.7b. This image post-processing step will be performed for every predicted volume
henceforth in this dissertation, without explicitly mentioning it.
To enhance visualization, Figure 3.9 provides a 3D depiction of each label individually. When
comparing the segmentation results between the models trained and evaluated with patch sizes
of 64 × 64 × 64 and 128 × 128 × 128 voxels, a noticeable difference is observed in their ability
to capture blood vessels. This disparity is expected due to the dimensions of the blood vessels,
which range from 4 to 10 µm in diameter [2] and exhibit significantly larger volumes compared
to other structures. Consequently, smaller patches such as 64 × 64 × 64 may not be able to
capture enough intensity and shape information to distinguish these structures from the back-
ground or other elements. Furthermore, during the analysis of vacuoles and cell clusters, it was
observed that the smaller patch size captures a lower number of elements in comparison to the
larger patch size. As a result, the output of the smaller patch sizes exhibits a denser myelin
segmentation, whereas the larger patch size does so for the blood vessel, vacuole, and cell cluster
classes. In any case, post-processing steps based on the microstructural characteristics of each
element class are necessary to eliminate prediction noise.
Nevertheless, the confusion matrices in Figure 3.8 reveal comparable classification performance
between the two cases for voxels which were originally labeled in the ground truth segmentation
map. The myelin segmentation will remain out of focus since it was generated as a helper class
for axon segmentation, and lacks professional manual annotation for comparison. Overall, no
significant performance differences were observed in the visual inspection of axons as a whole
class. Consequently, further analysis using blob analysis and post-processing methods will be
conducted specifically for the axonal structures.
(a) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(b) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.8: Confusion matrices for foreground voxels in the ground truth segmentation, normalized
over the entire combined volume.
34
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:45==
3.1.
Non-augmented baseline U-Net model
(a) Ground truth
(b) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(c) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.9: Individual 3D visualization of each segmented class.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
35
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3. Results
Focusing on the axons, individual blobs within the axonal class were labeled, and their proper-
ties were measured using Python’s built-in functions from the scikit-image image processing
library. Initially, the model trained on 128 × 128 × 128 voxel patches identified 46622 blobs,
while the model trained on 64 × 64 × 64 voxel patches identified 14536 individual structures.
Nevertheless, when considering only the 5000 and 500 elements with the largest major axis
length and volume, respectively, the structures present similar characteristics for both cases,
with a slightly larger estimation of volumes for the model trained in the larger patch size. This
comparison is depicted in the bar plots in Figure 3.10. It is important to note that the major
axis length property represents the length of the major axis of an ellipse fitted to the region,
i.e., it provides an estimate of the longest segment that can be drawn within the region. Thus,
while this property can provide information about the elongation of a region, it may not directly
correspond to the exact estimate of the axon length.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: Sorted major axis length and volumes of the greatest 5000 and 500 predicted axon
segments, respectively.
To remove unwanted axonal artifacts from the predicted volume image, various thresholds were
applied.
Through visual inspection, lower bounds were determined for both the major axis
length and volume.
A lower threshold of 40 µm was set for the major axis length, while a
threshold of 300 µm3 was set for the volume. Considering that axons are thin and long tubular
structures, it is reasonable to assume that the axis major length of a region can not exceed the
diagonal length of the cylindrical structure within the available sample. Therefore, the upper
bound for this feature was set to 450 µm. The maximum volume was thresholded to 5000 µm3
by visual analysis of the bar plot in Figure 3.10b.
The processed predictions of segmented axons are shown in Figure 3.11. After processing, it
is evident that the larger patch size produces a slightly denser axon segmentation compared
to the model trained with a larger patch size. Nevertheless, the exact count on the segmented
axons for each case can not be determined yet due the possibility of different shorter segments
belonging to the same axon. Furthermore, it is important to consider that each axon must cross
the volume longitudinally from one side to the other in out specific sample, and in any direction
in volumes with crossing fibres.
36
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:47==
3.2.
Augmented baseline U-Net model
Finally, the model trained for a patch size of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels occasionally segments non-
tube-like structures as axons, a behavior less frequently observed in models trained with smaller
patch sizes.
(a) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(b) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.11: Axon segmentation in the combined volume. For more detailed views of the figures,
larger images can be found in figures B.1 to B.4 in Appendix B.
The upcoming section will examine the impact of data augmentation, as well as explore the
training sample size and batch size.
3.2
Augmented baseline U-Net model
This section focuses on evaluating the performance of the baseline U-Net model presented in
subsection 2.2.1 and used in section 3.1, with the inclusion of data-augmentation. Furthermore,
different batch sizes and dataset sizes will be explored. Building upon the findings from sec-
tion 3.1, the masked generalized Dice loss will be employed as the training and testing loss metric.
In this experiment, the model is exclusively trained on augmented data, while the original vol-
ume is reserved for testing. Ideally, non-transformed volumes would be included for training if
additional sample volumes and ground truth segmentations were available. The data augmen-
tation transformations described in subsubsection 2.3.2 were applied to augment the training
dataset. The baseline model configuration for this experiment involves a dataset comprising 400
training patches, 80 validation patches, and 40 testing patches, with a batch size of 6 patches.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3. Results
To retrieve the entire predicted volumes, the three available overlap modes (average, crop and
’hann’) were tested in the segmentation of the original volume with patch size of 64 × 64 × 64
voxels and overlap of 10 voxels. For the average mode, the masked weighted Dice coeﬀicient
yielded a value of 0.9832, for the crop mode a value of 0.9835, and 0.9779 for the ’hann’ mode.
These results validate the crop mode selection made in the methods chapter and previously used
in subsection 3.1.2. Similarly, when predicting the model trained and evaluated with patches
of dimensions 128 × 128 × 128 a consistent behaviour was observed; the masked weighted Dice
coeﬀicients for the average, crop, and ’hann’ modes were 0.9788, 0.9797, and 0.9733, respectively.
In this case, the individual sparsely segmented volume including ground truth labels for blood
vessels, vacuoles, cell clusters, and axons was predicted. As in previous stages of the study,
the additional myelin label was generated in an attempt to help axon class segmentation. The
axial, sagittal and coronal views in Figure 3.12 reveal a denser axon segmentation for the model
trained in a patch size of 64 × 64 × 64 voxels. However, in the coronal view, no blood vessel
(red) labels are visible in this particular case. Nonetheless, compared to the previous section’s
case without augmentation, the model trained with the smaller patch size produces significantly
denser predictions.
(a) Ground truth
(b) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(c) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.12: Prediction outputs of the augmented baseline U-Net model.
38
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:49==
3.2.
Augmented baseline U-Net model
Taking a closer look at the individual segmented classes, it becomes evident in Figure 3.13b that,
in the case of larger patch size predictions, certain axon segments were mistakenly identified as
blood vessels or vacuoles, and some vacuoles were incorrectly classified as blood vessels.
In
contrast, in the case of a smaller patch size, shown in Figure 3.13c, only a minimal number of
voxels (specifically, 10) were classified as blood vessels, similar to the non-augmented scenario,
whereas ground-truth blood vessels were segmented as vacuoles and cell clusters in the prediction.
The unlabeled voxels were predominantly segmented as cell clusters, axons, and myelin. Refer to
the confusion matrix in Figure B.5 for a detailed analysis of the dense segmentation. Although
the model trained with a patch size of 64 × 64 × 64 performs poorly in capturing blood vessels
and produces a rougher segmentation of vacuoles, it significantly improves the segmentation of
the axon class by achieving a denser annotation. Furthermore, it effectively captures finer axons,
which constitutes a key objective of this project and justifies the inclusion of data scaling.
(a) Ground truth
(b) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(c) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.13: Prediction outputs of the augmented baseline U-Net model.
After labeling each axon segment individually and eliminating outlier blobs, a denser axon seg-
mentation was confirmed during post-processing for the smaller patch size scenario. The analysis
of the model trained with patch size 128 resulted in the identification of 191 axon segments,
while the model trained with patch size 64 detected 305 segments after removing artifacts. Fig-
ure 3.14 illustrates the final axon segmentation results for models trained in different patch sizes.
Additionally, the Dice score between the labeled ground truth voxels and the predictions was
0.98 for the model trained with the larger patch size and 0.9716 for the model trained with the
smaller patch size.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 3. Results
(a) Ground truth
(b) Patch size = 128 × 128 × 128
(c) Patch size = 64 × 64 × 64
Figure 3.14: Predicted axons with the augmented baseline U-Net model.
In the upcoming subsection, the analysis will focus on varying dataset and batch sizes to optimize
prediction loss, as well as runtime and usage of computational resources.
3.2.1
Dataset size and batch size
Two experiments were carried out in parallel to determine the optimal dataset size and batch
size, considering accuracy of the output as well as eﬀicient utilization of time and memory
resources. The baseline model used in these experiments was, as in previous sections, the U-
Net model described in the methods chapter with masked generalized Dice loss, batch size of 6
patches and a dataset composed of 400 patches for training, 80 for validation, and 40 for testing
the augmented scenario.
Dataset size
In the baseline model, the dataset size was established by randomly selecting 40 patches from
each subject in the train, validation, and test sets. Building upon this approach, subsequent
models were trained using varying numbers of patches per volume, specifically 20, 40, and 80
patches. For each case, the tests were conducted both for patches of size 64 × 64 × 64 and
128×128×128 voxels. Additionally, an experiment was conducted with 160 patches per volume
for the smaller patch size case, aiming to capture equivalent amount of total spatial information
as the larger patch size.
Samples per Volume
Average Test Loss
Runtime
RAM (GB)
Patch Size
Patch Size
Patch Size
128
64
128
64
128
64
20
0.2285
0.1432
5h 18m
2h 19m
213.85
68.89
40
0.3188
0.2427
9h 11m
3h 44m
373.20
114.48
80
0.2048
0.1449
15h 45m
6h 32m
876.81
209.76
160
-
0.2320
-
14h 58m
-
408.67
Table 3.2: Average test loss, runtime, and maximum RAM utilized in each experiment for patch
dimensions of 128 × 128 × 128 and 64 × 64 × 64 voxels.
40
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:51==
3.2.
Augmented baseline U-Net model
The results gathered in Table 3.2 show that a smaller dataset achieves lower loss compared
to the baseline model, and yields similar results to a much larger dataset. Additionally, there
are noticeable differences in terms of runtime and memory requirements.
Furthermore, the
learning curves depicted in Figure 3.15 and Figure 3.16 confirm effective training and validation
procedures, which remain consistent across different dataset sizes.
Despite requiring larger
runtime, in general, the models trained on larger datasets converge faster and stop the training
at an earlier stage than the models trained on smaller dataset sizes. This results from their
improved ability to learn the underlying patterns in the data, due to the incremented data
available to learn from. However, smaller dataset sizes achieve similar outputs and require less
runtime.
Figure 3.15: Average train and validation losses per epoch for models trained on a patch size of
128 × 128 × 128 voxels, with varying dataset sizes.
Figure 3.16: Average train and validation losses per epoch for models trained on a patch size of
64 × 64 × 64 voxels, with varying dataset sizes.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 3. Results
Batch size
In line with the dataset size test, a similar experiment was conducted to investigate the optimal
batch size. The batch size selection was limited to a maximum of 9 patches for the models
trained on patch sizes of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels, due to the limited 80 GB GPU available.
The results that constitute Table 3.3 demonstrate the impact of batch size on GPU memory
usage. It is observed that larger batch sizes require more memory, which aligns with expectations.
However, the runtimes do not comprise notable differences in the ran experiments. With a focus
on optimizing average loss and memory utilization, and taking into account a consistent average
test loss across models with different batch sizes, a suitable choice would be a batch size of 9
patches.
Batch Size
Average Test Loss
Runtime
max. GPU (GB)
Patch Size
Patch Size
Patch Size
128
64
128
64
128
64
3
0.2629
0.2244
10h 50m
7h 59m
41.15
7.58
6
0.3188
0.2427
9h 11m
3h 44m
63.23
9.59
9
0.2504
0.2587
11h 12m
5h 27m
78.80
15.18
20
-
0.2484
-
3h 26m
-
35.18
Table 3.3: Average test loss, runtime, and maximum GPU memory utilized in each experiment
for patch dimensions of 128 × 128 × 128 and 64 × 64 × 64 voxels.
As depicted in Figure 3.17 and Figure 3.18, the training and validation processes maintain a
consistent behaviour across different batch sizes for the baseline model. For larger batch sizes
the convergence is slower requiring a larger number of epochs.
Figure 3.17: Average train and validation losses per epoch for models trained on a patch size of
128 × 128 × 128 voxels, with varying batch sizes.
42
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:53==
3.2.
Augmented baseline U-Net model
Figure 3.18: Average train and validation losses per epoch for models trained on a patch size of
64 × 64 × 64 voxels, with varying batch sizes.
3.2.2
Final model trained with data augmentation
After discussing the optimal batch size and number of samples per volume in the previous sec-
tion, it was determined that a batch size of 9 patches and a dataset obtained by randomly
selecting 20 patches per volume from the subjects dataset would be used for one last predic-
tion. Considering that 10 transformed subjects were chosen for training and 2 for validation,
the training and validation sets consists of 200 and 40 patches, respectively.
The running time required for training and evaluating the models decreased to approximately
5.5 hours for the model trained in patch sizes of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels, and to 3.75 hours for
models trained in 64 × 64 × 64 voxel patches. In terms of performance, the average test loss for
the first case was 0.1743, whereas for the second case, it was 0.2551. However, it is important
to note that these average masked losses were computed based on patch predictions and cannot
be directly compared between models trained with different patch sizes.
To conduct a thorough analysis of the results, the entire volume of size 410×410×410 voxels was
re-predicted. This ensures a comprehensive evaluation and allows for meaningful comparisons
between different models. From the bar plot depicted in Figure 3.19, it can be appreciated that
the greater patch size allows to capture longer and larger axons compared to the model trained
with a smaller patch size.
Although no significant changes were observed in the prediction
from the model trained on patches of 64 × 64 × 64 voxel dimensions, notable differences were
appreciated for the larger patch size, compared to the baseline model. As a result, in this sub-
section, the model trained on the larger patch size will be the main focus of further investigation.
The prominent difference observed in the models trained on a patch size of 128×128×128 voxels
when using smaller training and validation datasets is the exclusion of blood vessels. This is likely
due to a limited number of voxels representing this class, which is the minority class, in the fewer
randomly selected patches from the subjects in the dataset. In the predicted volume, none of the
voxels were classified as blood vessels, despite the ground truth map containing 366,522 voxels
labeled as such. The majority of blood vessels were incorrectly labeled as myelin„ with a smaller
proportion misclassified as cell clusters and axons (Figure B.6). However, the segmentation of
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
43
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 3. Results
vacuoles appears to be much more reliable compared to the augmented baseline model, as shown
in Figure 3.20.
Figure 3.19: Sorted major axis length and volumes of the greatest 5000 and 500 predicted axon
segments, respectively.
(a) batch size = 9, volumes per sample = 20
(b) batch size = 6, volumes per sample = 40
Figure 3.20: (a) Current model vacuole segmentation. (b) Baseline model vacuole segmentation.
Most importantly, the segmentation of axonal structures is notably more dense for this case, as
it can be appreciated in the axial view depicted in Figure 3.21. For a more detailed examination
of the 336 individual axon segments, after eliminating artifacts, refer to Figure 3.22. The masked
Dice score, calculated with respect to the 54 ground-truth axons, is 0.9521.
44
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:55==
3.2.
Augmented baseline U-Net model
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.21: (a) Axial view of the predicted volume, with axons highlighted in yellow.(b) 3D view
of the segmented axonal structures.
Figure 3.22: Axon segment prediction on the initial volume fraction, colored individually.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
45
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 3. Results
Finally, the last model was utilized to predict axonal and extra-axonal structures in the entire
combined volume of 410 × 410 × 1532 voxel dimensions.
The results were satisfactory with
523 axon segments captured after artifact removal. The resulting 3D volume is shown in Fig-
ure 3.23, and more closely in Figure B.7. In the overlapping sections that connect different
volume fractions, there was a noticeable separation between axonal segments, as shown in Fig-
ure 3.24. However, overall, the model effectively addressed this issue and the segments appeared
as connected elements in the individual axon labeling map.
Figure 3.23: Axon visualization the predicted volume with a patch size of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels.
46
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:57==
3.2.
Augmented baseline U-Net model
Figure 3.24: Axon separation in the sub-volume overlap.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
47
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 3. Results
3.3
Analysis of Cross-hair filter approach
Based on the results presented in Table 3.4, it is evident that a greater kernel does not always
yield better outcome.
This study’s segmentation problem serves as a clear example of this
phenomenon, as models trained employing smaller kernel sizes exhibit lower average test losses
overall. However, the incorporation of cross-hair filters in the models yields comparable or even
superior results in contrast to the models trained using kernels of the original shape.
Model
Average Test Loss
Patch Size
Kernel Size
CH Filter
128
64
3

0.1743
0.2551
3
✓
-
0.3180
5

0.2676
0.3068
5
✓
-
0.2423
Table 3.4: Average test loss for models trained with varying kernel sizes, with and without cross-
hair filters. The test loss selected is the masked generalized Dice loss thorough the entire study.
Models trained with a kernel size of 3×3×3 voxels show minimal performance differences when
including cross-hair filters, as expected, since the number of trainable parameters remains the
same. However, models trained with a kernel size of 5 × 5 × 5 voxels and incorporating cross-
hair filters outperform other models. Nevertheless, there is no clear evidence of outstanding
effectiveness of the cross-hair filters.
The larger kernel with original shape may potentially
contribute to slightly overfitting the model (see Figure 3.25) due to its larger receptive field,
which captures more spatial information. Consequently, the increased complexity of the model
can dismiss the ability to generalize well to unseen data, resulting in higher test losses.
Figure 3.25: Average train and validation losses per epoch for models trained on a patch size of
128 × 128 × 128 voxels, with kernels of dimensions 3 × 3 × 3 and 5 × 5 × 5.
The training process performance of models that include cross-hair filters is similar to models
trained with smaller kernel sizes, as it is depicted in Figure 3.26. This comparable behaviour
can be attributed to the significantly decreased number of trainable parameters in these models,
leading to a simplified model architecture.
48
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:59==
3.4.
Quantification of Diameter Distribution and Length of Segmented Axons
Figure 3.26: Average train and validation losses per epoch for the models trained on a patch size
of 64 × 64 × 64 voxels, with a cross-hair kernel of dimension 5 × 5 × 5.
The PyTorch implementation of the cross-hair filters developed in this study, inspired by the
TensorFlow implementation by [13], involved three 3D convolutions with 2D filters per each 3D
convolution operation in the original network. Although the implementation involved consid-
erably fewer parameters compared to the original shape kernel approach, attempts to optimize
time and memory were unsuccessful. This is the case as the main memory usage originates
in the intermediate forward activations in this study’s implementation. Notably, using cross-
hair filters of size 5 and patch size 64 demanded nearly twice the GPU resources compared to
conventional convolution filters of identical dimensions (refer to cells marked in red and green,
respectively, in Table 3.5). Due to GPU memory constraints, the cross-hair filter could not be
tested for kernel size 5 × 5 × 5 and patch size of dimensions 128 × 128 × 128. Furthermore, there
were no noticeable runtime advantages observed.
Model
Run Time
max. GPU (GB)
Patch Size
Patch Size
Kernel Size
CH Filter
128
64
128
64
3

5h 30m
3h 47m
78.80
13.28
3
✓
-
1h 58m
-
23.10
5

7h 50m
2h 27m
79.67
14.83
5
✓
-
2h 41m
-
27.86
Table 3.5: Runtime and memory usage for models trained with varying kernel sizes, with and
without cross-hair filters.
3.4
Quantification of Diameter Distribution and Length of
Segmented Axons
The predictions for the 410 × 410 × 410 voxel volume derived from subsection 3.2.2 were used
to quantify different morphological characteristics of axons. To facilitate the extraction of the
diameter distribution along axons and their length, a MATLAB script previously employed by
M. Andersson et al. in [2] was utilized.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
49
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 3. Results
After removing artifacts from the post-processed volume, each axon segment and its correspond-
ing location were extracted based on a connectivity value of 26. A total of 336 unique axons, or
axonal segments, were extracted. The centerline of each structure was obtained by calculating
a slice-wise centroid estimate from the segmentation, resulting in a single-pixel-wide represen-
tation of each component. Small branches (< 7.5 µm) branching off from the main axon branch
were discarded.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.27: Centerline and visualization of considered cross-sectional slices for different predicted
axon segments. Axes in pixels.
Figure 3.28: Sorted lengths of unique segmented axonal segments.
50
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:61==
3.4.
Quantification of Diameter Distribution and Length of Segmented Axons
The resulting 3D centerline curve of each axon segment has two endpoints, representing the
start and end points of the respective axon. The axon lengths were determined based on these
endpoints, and their distribution is shown in Figure 3.28. Assuming that axons exhibit tubular
characteristic, their slice-wise diameter can be approximated as a circular or ellipsoidal shape,
as depicted in Figure 3.29.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.29: Circular and ellipse fit of central cross-sections for various segmented axonal struc-
tures.
The cross-sectional area of axons at 7-pixel intervals along each fiber enables to determine the
different diameters, resulting in the axon diameter distribution shown in Figure 3.30 for the
entire axonal segment population predicted.
Figure 3.30: Axon diameter distribution consisting of diameter measurements every 7 pixels along
all 336 axon segments.
The cross-sectionally sliced mesh for three different axon segments visualized in Figure 3.31 show
that the employed model effectively segmented axons with different obliquity, length, diameter
and shape.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
51
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 3. Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.31: Cross sectionally sliced mesh for various segmented axons. Axes in pixels.
52
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4
Discussion
In this chapter, the findings from chapter 3 will be summarized by highlighting the key obser-
vations and significant outcomes of the study. An overarching interpretation of the research
process and results is provided, along with a discussion of the study’s limitations.
Throughout the study, U-Net architecture convolutional neural network models were evaluated
in parallel using patch sizes of 128 × 128 × 128 and 64 × 64 × 64 voxels. Several loss functions
were initially tested for training, and ultimately, the generalized Dice loss was selected due to its
remarkable performance. The choice was further enhanced by employing a masking approach,
which effectively enabled the model to capture axonal and extra-axonal structures within the
unlabeled background of the ground truth. The same loss function was applied for evaluating
the model performance during the entire research. The experiment conducted to evaluate the
different training loss functions also provided an opportunity to compare the computational
resources associated with different patch sizes. As anticipated, larger patch sizes resulted in
considerably increased runtime and greater utilization of GPU and RAM memory. However, it
is worth noting that the convergence of the models was not directly influenced by the patch size.
The U-Net model trained on the non-augmented original volume, and with smaller patch size,
exhibited a slightly sparser annotation, leaving a small number of non-annotated voxels. The
length approximation of the predicted axonal segments was comparable for both patch sizes,
while the larger patch size revealed slightly larger volume segments. Accordingly, after removing
outliers based on major axis length and volume, a total of 313 axon segments were captured for
the larger patch size and 300 for the smaller patch size in the combined image volume formed
by three individual 410 × 410 × 410 voxel volume fractions. However, the model using a patch
size of dimensions 64 × 64 × 64 showed limitations in capturing large elements such as blood
vessels — a limitation that was observed throughout the whole dissertation. While no ground
truth label map was available for the axon class in the combined volume, the 3D visualization
of the prediction provides a clear appreciation of long-tubular structures as axons, as shown in
Figure 4.1.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
53
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4. Discussion
Figure 4.1: Axon visualization the predicted volume discussed in subsection 3.1.2 for a patch size
of 64 × 64 × 64 voxel dimensions. Each color indicates an individual axon segment.
After introducing data augmentation, the original volume without any transformation was re-
served for testing. This approach enables a more reliable evaluation of performance by utilizing
the available ground-truth segmentation within this specific image volume fraction. The train-
ing data underwent transformations such as flipping, scaling and rotation, aiming to capture
different axon sizes and models that generalize better. When making predictions on the original
volume, similar to the non-augmented case, the smaller patch size dismissed blood vessel ele-
ments. This is likely because their dimensions do not enable the capture of suﬀicient shape and
voxel intensity information necessary to identify these structures. Although data augmenta-
tion results in a denser axon segmentation, the segmentation of other structures in the baseline
model generally lacks refinement and, in some cases, is even rougher than in the non-augmented
scenario. Moreover, in this case, the model trained with the smaller patch size captured longer
and larger axon segments than the model trained in the larger patch size. Consequently, after
artifact removal, 191 axon segments were captured with the model trained in a larger patch size,
whereas 305 with the smaller patch size. In this case, it could be concluded a better performance
of the smaller patch size.
Various dataset sizes and batch sizes were evaluated and analyzed to improve the output while
considering time constraints and computational resources. Following this experiment, a decision
was made to select a smaller sample size of 200 training patches (compared to the baseline case
of 400 training patches) and a slightly larger batch size of 9 patches (compared to 6 in the
baseline case). This choice resulted in maximizing GPU resource utilization and reducing the
overall runtime, while still achieving satisfactory results based on the masked generalized Dice
loss. The resulting model provided a more refined segmentation of axonal and extra-axonal
structures for both patch sizes. When using a larger patch size, the model showed a better per-
formance in segmenting larger and longer axons, compared to the model trained with smaller
size patches, similar case to the non-augmented output. However, the reduction on the sample
size resulted in a failed segmentation of the blood vessel class even for the model trained with a
patch size of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels. Nevertheless, the Dice loss restricted to the voxels labeled
in the ground truth and to the axon class remained nearly identical for both patch size scenarios.
Figures 4.2 and 4.3 provide a visual comparison of the axon prediction outcomes from the
baseline model and the model trained with a batch size of 9 patches and 20 samples per volume.
For this comparison, the initial volume fraction was used, after eliminating artifacts in the
prediction. As a result, smaller sample size and greater batch size captured considerably more
axonal segments for the model trained in patches of 128 × 128 × 128 voxel dimensions, with
slightly larger estimated lengths and volumes. For the models trained in a smaller size patches,
the results were generally comparable across different models. Thus, an increased patch size can
54
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:65==
effectively align with the objective of segmenting a greater number of axons, and varying axon
sizes.
Figure 4.2: Comparison of predicted axon segment measurements for models trained with a patch
size of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels.
Figure 4.3: Comparison of predicted axon segment measurements for models trained with a patch
size of 64 × 64 × 64 voxels.
The lastly explored method was focused in the concept of ’cross-hair’ filters, which achieved sat-
isfactory predictions while using a significant fewer number of trainable parameters compared
to conventional filters for kernel sizes greater than 3 × 3 × 3 voxels. However, this approach was
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
55
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 4. Discussion
not further studied due to the high computational resource demand of the developed implemen-
tation in PyTorch. Furthermore, in this evaluation, it was demonstrated that more complex
models with a higher number of parameters do not necessarily lead to a improved segmentation
of the different axonal and extra-axonal classes.
In line with the original purpose of this dissertation, the focus was narrowed to axons. Ac-
cordingly, the final model trained with batch size of 9 patches and a dataset consisting of 20
samples per volume from the set of augmented volumes was selected to generate a conclusive
visual representation of the research findings. The prediction results for the complete original
image volume available can be observed in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Axon visualization the predicted volume with a patch size of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels.
Lastly, the quantification of the diameter distribution along axons and their length, revealed
that the study effectively satisfied its purpose of automatically segmenting axons of various
sizes based on sparsely annotated and scarce data. The MATLAB script’s results indicate that
using the major axis length for approximating the length of the segmented axonal structures,
as done in previous experiments of this dissertation, tends to overestimate their true length.
Additionally, the cross-sectional cuts of axons confirmed their elliptical shape in this view. Fur-
thermore, the segmented structures successfully exhibited lower values in the distribution of
axon diameters compared to the ground-truth axons measured by M. Andersson et al. in [2].
In conclusion, a simple model based on a U-Net CNN architecture provides satisfactory re-
sults, even for a small dataset. Larger input patch sizes demonstrate better generalization for
segmenting axonal and extra-axonal structures. However, when specifically targeting axon seg-
mentation, smaller patch sizes can achieve good results while requiring fewer computational
resources. Moreover, the developed model effectively segments small axons (< 2 µm diameter).
Incorporating a post-processing step to join axonal segments based on minimum distance and
angle variation could further enhance the outcomes of this project. Additionally, a more thor-
ough study of the thousands of unique axonal structures identified in the raw segmentation map
may enable the preservation of a greater number of axon segments after artifact removal.
This research faced challenges due to the scarcity of densely annotated data and limited availabil-
ity of samples for study (a sole segmented image volume). Sparse annotations posed diﬀiculties
in the ability to robustly evaluate model performance, resulting in inconclusive and less detailed
comparisons in certain cases. Furthermore, the significantly increased computational resources
and time required to handle and process 3D image data, as opposed to 2D image data, obstructed
the smooth development of this project.
56
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
This thesis aimed to provide a successful segmentation of axonal structures using 3D convolu-
tional neural networks, despite the limited and sparsely annotated data available. The segmen-
tation of extra-axonal structures was also of interest due to their impact on axonal trajectories
and potential bias axon diameter measurements. In addition, this research sought to attain a
more precise axon diameter estimation compared to diffusion MRI techniques and effectively
capture thin axons.
The available volumetric image was extensively analyzed emphasizing the morphological prop-
erties of axonal and extra-axonal structures. This enabled informed decision-making regarding
the subsequent steps. Various 3D convolutional network architectures were explored, over 2D
approaches, targeting to capture spatial context and use correlated information in neighbouring
slices. A simple 3D U-Net network architecture model provided effective results matching the
aforementioned objectives. However, the introduced ’cross-hair’ filter approach was found to be
ineffective in the developed implementation.
The output predictions successfully showcased a diverse range of axons with varying character-
istics regarding axon diameter, trajectory, and shape. Such findings hold potential to aid in the
diagnosis of various medical conditions that specifically target axons of certain sizes.
Notably, in this research study, significantly more microstructural information was extracted
from the XNH volumes compared to the initial semi-manual annotations. This would imply a
substantial benefit for neurology professionals from the time-saving and increased information
provided by the automated extraction process.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
57
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. Conclusions
58
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] Abadi, M., et al. (2015). TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous
Systems. https://www.tensorflow.org/
[2] Andersson, M., et al. (2020). Axon morphology is modulated by the local environment and
impacts the noninvasive investigation of its structure-function relationship. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 117(52), 33649-33659. https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.
1073/pnas.2012533117.
[3] Andersson, M. (2021). Multi-Modal Microstructural Imaging of Brain White Matter. PhD
thesis, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University
of Denmark (DTU Compute).
[4] Cardoso, M. J., Li, W., Brown, R., Ma, N., Kerfoot, E., Wang, Y., Murrey, B., Myronenko,
A., Zhao, C., Yang, D., et al. (2022). MONAI: An open-source framework for deep learning
in healthcare (Version 1.1.0). arXiv preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.02701. https://
github.com/Project-MONAI/MONAI.
[5] Çiçek, Ö., Abdulkadir, A., Lienkamp, S. S., Brox, T., & Ronneberger, O. (2016). 3D U-Net:
learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation. In Medical Image Com-
puting and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2016: 19th International Conference,
Athens, Greece, October 17-21, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 19 (pp. 424-432). Springer.
[6] Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[7] Mehus Sunde, B. (2018). Early stopping for PyTorch. Retrieved from https://github.com/
Bjarten/early-stopping-pytorch/tree/master
[8] Neptune team. (2019). neptune.ai: Metadata store for MLOps. https://neptune.ai.
[9] Niyas, S., Pawan, S. J., Kumar, M. A., & Rajan, J. (2022). Medical image segmentation
with 3D convolutional neural networks: A survey. Neurocomputing, 493, 397-413. Elsevier.
[10] Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison,
A., Antiga, L., & Lerer, A. (2017). PyTorch: Tensors and dynamic neural networks in
Python with strong GPU acceleration (Version 1.13.1). https://pytorch.org.
[11] Pérez-García, F., Sparks, R., & Ourselin, S. (2021). TorchIO: a Python library for eﬀicient
loading, preprocessing, augmentation and patch-based sampling of medical images in deep
learning. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 106236. https://doi.org/doi:
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106236.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
59
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[12] Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., & Brox, T. (2015). U-net:
Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October
5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18 (pp. 234-241). Springer.
[13] Tetteh, G., Efremov, V., Forkert, N. D., Schneider, M., Kirschke, J., Weber, B., Zimmer,
C., Piraud, M., & Menze, B. H. (2020). Deepvesselnet: Vessel segmentation, centerline
prediction, and bifurcation detection in 3-d angiographic volumes. Frontiers in Neuroscience,
14, 1285. Frontiers.
[14] Yushkevich, P. A., Piven, J., Hazlett, C., Gimpel Smith, H., Ho, S., Gee, J. C., & Gerig,
G. (2006). User-Guided 3D Active Contour Segmentation of Anatomical Structures: Sig-
nificantly Improved Eﬀiciency and Reliability. Neuroimage, 31(3), 1116-1128.
60
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Output Images of Different Losses in
Baseline Model
In this appendix, test examples of each loss compared in subsection 3.1.1 are shown. The base-
line model refers to the 3D U-Net network architecture from Figure 2.7 with kernel dimensions
3 × 3 × 3 and no data augmentation.
In each figure the cases of patch sizes of 128×128×128 and 64×64×64 voxels are present. The
original test patch (image), ground truth segmentation (original mask), predicted segmentation
mask (predicted mask), and the performance are compared. The performance visualization has
colors: green for correctly classified voxels, red for mislabeled voxels, blue for voxels that were
labeled in the ground truth but not labeled in the prediction, and yellow for voxels that were
labeled in the prediction but not in the ground truth. The voxels that received a new label
(colored in yellow) are not ensured to be correctly classified.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
61
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A. Output Images of Different Losses in Baseline Model
Figure A.1
62
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.2
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
63
==PAGE:74==
Appendix A. Output Images of Different Losses in Baseline Model
Figure A.3
64
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.4
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
65
==PAGE:76==
Appendix A. Output Images of Different Losses in Baseline Model
Figure A.5
66
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.6
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
67
==PAGE:78==
Appendix B
Supplementary Images of Axon Seg-
mentation
In this appendix, additional figures are provided to offer further support and visual evidence for
the findings commented in chapter 3.
68
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:79==
Figure B.1: Axon visualization for the predicted volume from subsection 3.1.2 for a patch size of
128 × 128 × 128 voxels. Each color represents an individual axonal structure.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
69
==PAGE:80==
Appendix B. Supplementary Images of Axon Segmentation
Figure B.2: Axons in a fraction of the predicted volume from subsection 3.1.2 for a patch size of
128 × 128 × 128 voxels.
70
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:81==
Figure B.3: Axon visualization for the predicted volume from subsection 3.1.2 for a patch size of
64 × 64 × 64 voxels. Each color represents an individual axonal structure.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
71
==PAGE:82==
Appendix B. Supplementary Images of Axon Segmentation
Figure B.4: Axons in a fraction of the predicted volume from subsection 3.1.2 for a patch size of
64 × 64 × 64 voxels.
72
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:83==
Figure B.5: Confusion matrix depicting the prediction results of the augmented baseline model
for a patch size of 64 × 64 × 64 voxels.
Figure B.6: Confusion matrix illustrating the prediction results of the final augmented model
using a patch size of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels, providing evidence for the exclusion of blood vessels
in this particular model.
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
73
==PAGE:84==
Appendix B. Supplementary Images of Axon Segmentation
Figure B.7: Axon visualization the predicted volume from subsection 3.2.2 for a patch size of
128 × 128 × 128 voxels. Each color represents an individual axonal structure.
74
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
==PAGE:85==
Axon segmentation using 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
75
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf. +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
