==PAGE:1==
PERFORMANCE
CHARACTERIZATION
OF
STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-
BASED PV SYSTEMS
Master Thesis
DTU Sustainable Energy
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-
BASED PV SYSTEMS
Master Thesis
23rd June, 2023
By
Marios Constantinou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Photovoltaic Materials and Systems
group, department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of
Denmark in Risø, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
in Sustainable Energy with specialization in Solar Energy.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Marios Constantinou - s212684
Signature
Date
ii
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
POs are becoming an essential part of PV systems that undergo challenging conditions
(shading, different orientations, etc.). Main objectives of this study is to characterize the
performance of a solar inverter and of a PO. Furthermore, the side by side comparison
between a PO based PV system and string inverter based PV system is conducted under
different shading conditions. The performance characterization of the equipment takes
place in a controlled lab environment where all the necessary conditions are kept in order
to be able to complete it. The comparison of the two systems is conducted on two iden-
tical rooftop PV systems installed on Riso Campus, DTU. It is found that the stated by
the manufacturers parameters are not always correct and usually the equipment under-
performs, with deviations found of 2-3% for the tested inverter and higher than 1% for the
PO. PO seems to be a great addition to PV systems that are facing challenging conditions
since it improves the energy performance immediately.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sergiu Viorel Spataru, Main supervisor, DTU ELECTRO Department of Electrical and
Photonics Engineering
Sune Thorsteinsson, Main supervisor, DTU ELECTRO Department of Electrical and
Photonics Engineering
Markus Babin, Supervisor, DTU ELECTRO Department of Electrical and Photonics En-
gineering
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to everyone who has played a role in
the completion of this Master’s Thesis.
Foremost, I deeply appreciate the invaluable
guidance, expertise, and unwavering support provided by my supervisors, Sergiu Viorel
Spataru, Sune Thorsteinsson and Markus Babin, throughout this educational endeavor,
even on the tough times. Their perceptive feedback and constructive criticism have played
a crucial role in shaping the trajectory of this thesis.
iv PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Project Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Project Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Power Optimizers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Inverter characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
PO characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
PO Vs String Inverter based PV systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
String Inverter & PO Efficiency Characterization
10
3.1
String Inverter Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
PO Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
PO Vs String Inverter based PV systems
22
4.1
Rooftop PV systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Conclusions
33
5.1
Main conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Future scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Bibliography
35
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
AC
Alternate Current
DC
Direct Current
FF
Fill Factor
Imp
Current at maximum power point
Isc
Current at short circuit
kW
kiloWatt
LabVIEW
Laboratory Virtual Instrument Engineering Workbench
MLPE
Module Level Power Electronics
MPPT
Maximum Power Point Tracking
Pmp
Power at maximum power point
PA
Power Analyzer
POA
Plane Of Array
PO
Power Optimizer
PR
Performance Ratio
PV
PhotoVoltaic
SAS
Solar Array Simulator
SMS
Solar Module Simulator
SubMICs
Submodule - Integrated Converters
THD
Total Harmonic Distortion
Vmp
Voltage at maximum power point
Voc
Voltage at open circuit
vi PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Over the past few decades, there has been an increasing acknowledgment worldwide of
the pressing necessity to move away from fossil fuels and embrace renewable energy
sources. This transition is motivated by various factors, such as the growing concerns
surrounding climate change, the need for energy security, the adverse effects of environ-
mental degradation, and the pursuit of socioeconomic progress. As the global population
continues to grow and energy requirements escalate, relying on non-renewable resources
becomes progressively unsustainable.
1.1.1
Renewable Energy in Denmark
Denmark is a global front-runner in renewable energy sector, displaying a strong dedica-
tion to achieving a sustainable and low-carbon future. The nation has made noteworthy
progress in utilizing renewable energy sources to meet its electricity and heating demands,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and enhance energy self-sufficiency. Denmark’s re-
newable energy sector encompasses a broad range of renewable sources, innovative
technologies, and ambitious targets. Through effective policies, substantial investments
in research and development, and collaborative efforts with industry stakeholders, Den-
mark has made significant advancements in adopting and promoting renewable energy.
It stands as an inspiring model for other countries striving to accelerate their transition to
clean energy.
Figure 1.1: DENMARK’S ENERGY PRO-
DUCTION (2022) [1]
Figure 1.2:
DENMARK’S ENERGY CON-
SUMPTION (2022) [1]
A relatively small but at the same time important part of the renewable energy production
in Denmark comes from solar energy. This corresponds to around 2.1 TWh each year
and it is increasing slowly.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.3: DENMARK’S RENEWABLE ENERGY PRODUCTION (2020) [2]
1.1.2
Residential PV systems
Residential PV systems are specifically designed solar power systems that produce elec-
tricity for the homes they are usually installed on. These systems comprise PV modules,
which convert sunlight into DC electrical energy. An inverter is used to convert this DC
electricity into AC, aligning it with the electrical system found in residential households
and the grid. It should be emphasized that the design, setup, and performance of a res-
idential PV system can differ depending on each household’s needs, surrounding area,
geographical location, incentives accessible, and local regulations.
String Inverter Based PV Systems
String inverter-based PV systems are widely utilized in residential and commercial solar
power applications. These systems use a central inverter to transform the DC electricity
produced by a series of interconnected solar panels, known as a string, into usable AC
electricity. In the configuration of a string inverter-based PV system, several solar panels
are interconnected in series, forming a string. The DC electricity generated by each panel
is consolidated and directed into a central inverter. The inverter optimizes and converts
the combined DC power into AC power with high efficiency (usually around 98%), which
can be utilized to supply electricity to the building or fed back into the electrical grid [3].
The main advantages of these systems compared to the PO based ones are listed below
[3]:
• Easier maintenance (less equipmeent)
• Lower cost (less equipment)
• Reliability (because of POs’ lower guarantee)
• Compatibility (since the system includes only inverter and PV modules)
PO Based PV Systems
PO based PV systems are solar power systems that utilize POs to improve the perfor-
mance of individual solar panels in an array. They are needed under challenging condi-
tions (eg. shaded panels, different orientations) [3]. The POs are installed at each module,
2
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:11==
enabling individual optimization and monitoring of each panel. PO based systems gen-
erally include a central inverter, too, to convert the DC power from the optimized panels
into usable AC power. This central inverter functions differently from a conventional string
inverter as its primary purpose is power conversion rather than optimization. The main
advantages of these systems compared to the string inverter based ones are listed below
[3]:
• Module level monitoring
• Improved performance under challenging conditions
• Easier expandability (longer strings)
Panels in the PV systems often encounter varying levels of irradiance, such as shading,
differences in orientations, or the use of colored materials that can result in optical losses.
These factors lead to imbalances in current and reduce efficiency in the series-connected
panels. POs can be installed in these cases to minimize these issues. However, these
POs come at an extra expense and can cause conversion losses that might exceed the
expected performance levels stated by the manufacturers when they are needed to per-
form under real-life conditions.
1.2
Project Motivations
Questions and concerns are always the driving forces for conducting a study. It could not
be any different for this one, with the main concern to be whether HUAWEI’s SUN2000-
450W-P PO [4] perform as the manufacturer is stating. In addition, the question of when
do the PO based PV systems become beneficial over the string inverter ones is also
examined.
HUAWEI SUN2000-450W-P PO is suspected in previous studies to not operate accord-
ing to manufacturer’s statements. During a previous Master Thesis, conducted by a dif-
ferent Master’s student [5], it is found that inverter simulation analysis showed that the
efficiency of the PO mentioned in the manufacturer’s datasheet may not accurately re-
flect its performance under actual operating conditions. To address this, the weighted
optimizer efficiency used in specific solar performance software was determined based
on measured data, where the input and output power of the optimizers were compared.
The calculations revealed that the optimizer’s losses range between 1% and 6% (while
the manufacturer states less than 1% losses). Additionally, a significant correlation was
observed between the optimizer’s losses and its conversion ratio and power output.
An interesting finding would be at what point do PO based PV systems offer enough per-
formance advantages over string inverter systems. The answer to this question could
possibly give a quick first estimation to involved stakeholders on whether it is worth it or
not to include POs in a PV system. There are advantages and disadvantages for both
sides [3], which do not allow to jump straight to the conclusion of which one is the opti-
mal choice. The decision has to be taken according to each PV system’s characteristics
and peculiarities. POs usually increase their odds when the PV systems become more
complex and demanding, but this of course is not a rule.
1.3
Project Objectives
The study comprises of three main goals, divided in two steps. The first includes the
characterization of the individual components of the PV system through lab tests using
the necessary simulators and the second the side-by-side performance comparison of
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
3
==PAGE:12==
two identical rooftop PV strings, a string inverter based one and an equivalent PO based
one, under various shading scenarios.
Firstly, it is the inverter’s performance characterization that takes place. The goal of this
test is to find out whether efficiency margins stated by the manufacturer are correct. The
inverter tested under various conditions in order to obtain its experimental efficiency is
HUAWEI SUN2000-3KTL-L1 [6].
Then, PO performance characterization is following. By the same reasoning, as for the
inverter earlier, the PO is tested to evaluate how valid are the specifications that the man-
ufacturer is providing to the users. HUAWEI SUN2000-450W-P [4] is the PO to put under
testing with different inputs.
Finally, after the individual components are characterized, the string inverter based and
PO based PV systems are tested at the same time under different shading conditions in
order to find the point of impact for PO based systems. One of the systems is adapted
in order to include the POs and be able to monitor its performance at the same time with
the string inverter based system.
1.4
Project Outline
In order to cover the mentioned objectives of this report, the following structure is kept:
Chapter 2 Literature review about existing knowledge on PO characterization, as well as the
comparison between string inverter and PO PV systems.
Chapter 3 Lab experiments for inverter and PO characterization
Chapter 4 Field experiments for side-by-side comparison of string inverter based and PO based
PV systems.
Chapter 5 Conclusions
4
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature review
2.1
Power Optimizers
PO is an MLPE device, and more specifically a DC to DC converter which maximizes
the energy production from PV module. MPPT technology on the level module is used
to achieve the maximum energy production. Its main uses are under partial shading mis-
match conditions, different PV modules orientations within the same string, string expan-
sion etc. Main advantages of the PO are the improved energy production under challeng-
ing conditions, module-level control and monitoring and possibilities of system oversiz-
ing. On the other hand, some cons are that it compatible with a selection of inverters, it
increases the total cost of the system and at the same time it lowers its reliability because
of lower warranty [7].
For most of the times, a grid-connected PV system follows a conventional architecture
consisting of a series of PV modules connected to an inverter. In this setup, the MPPT
is performed for the entire set of PV modules, which can limit the power generation when
subjected to challenging conditions. However, advancements in converter’s technology
have made it possible to adopt a modular architecture (MLPE). This means that each
PV module is able to incorporate a DC/DC converter (PO) or DC/AC converter (micro-
inverter), and their outputs are subsequently combined and supplied to the inverter. PO
is an innovative solution designed to minimize losses and enhance the efficiency of PV
systems. It primarily functions as a DC/DC converter that is specifically allocated to in-
dividual or pairs of PV modules. The output of each PO converter is then connected to
other POs converters either in series or parallel. This configuration enables a distinct
operational mode, commonly employing maximum power point tracking (MPPT) for each
PV module. As a result, PO functions as a DC/DC converter equipped with an MPPT
algorithm. To facilitate installation behind the PV module, PO is designed with compact
components, optimizing space utilization [8].
This MLPE architecture effectively addresses issues related to partial shading, persistent
shading caused by factors like soiling, snow, bird droppings, and fallen leaves, as well
as mismatches and aging. By employing distributed module-level converters, the system
achieves a higher level of efficiency in MPPT, resulting in an increased overall energy
output. Partial shading occurs when certain portions of the PV modules are shaded while
others receive sunlight. Persistent shading refers to prolonged shading caused by various
factors such as dirt accumulation, snow cover, or the presence of debris. These shading
effects lead to a reduction in power generation and can significantly impact the overall
system efficiency. Furthermore, distributed module-level converters play a crucial role
in mitigating the effects of aging. Over time, PV modules may experience degradation,
resulting in a decrease in their performance. With the use of dedicated converters, the
impact of aging on individual modules can be minimized, allowing the system to maintain
optimal efficiency [9].
There many different types of PO that split them to different categories which have to do
with the place of installation, the conversion, type of connection and the voltage conver-
sion capabilities (all of these categories are shown in the following Figure 2.1.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Categorization of PO [10]
The initial categorization pertains to the placement of PO, whether it is integrated inside
or outside of the PV module. POs that are integrated inside of the module are known as
SubMICs. SubMICs possess the capability to inject or extract currents to equalize the
sub-string voltages within the module, thereby diminishing mismatch losses. When there
is no voltage difference between modules, the SubMICs are deactivated, reducing inser-
tion losses. Typically, SubMICs are included with the PV module and replace the bypass
diodes located in the PV module’s junction box. POs placed outside of of the module are
split between total and partial power conversion devices. Total conversion involves con-
verting and adjusting all the power generated by the PV module using MPPT. On the other
hand, partial conversion only converts a portion of the power, creating separate paths for
the converted energy from the PV module. Following there is further classification based
on serial or parallel connection. In practical applications, the series connection is com-
monly preferred. This is because the voltages at the outputs of each PO are combined
while maintaining the same current. This arrangement offers increased system security
and lower costs for components such as switchboards and inverters, as the current is
reduced compared to parallel connection configurations [8].
PO based PV systems offer several advantages over conventional systems that have at-
tracted attention in the market and have been the subject of research in various works.
Firstly, it reduces or eliminates direct connections between PV modules, thereby reducing
mismatch losses. Secondly, PO enables individual monitoring of PV modules, enhances
installation security, improves the useful life of the PV system, allows for personalized
disconnection of modules for maintenance, and facilitates automatic or manual fault pre-
diction and identification at the module level [11]. On the other hand, there are some dis-
advantages primarily related to energy self-consumption that come with the use of POs
that cannot be ignored. Additional power losses can occur from the additional connectors
as well as from the internal power electronics of these devices. Regardless of their type,
they pose an additional risk of failure, including the possibility of fire or string breakdown.
This risk becomes even more significant when connectors from different manufacturers
are used. Additionally, as the number of components increases within MLPE systems,
6
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:15==
so does the risk of individual component failures. The more components involved, the
greater the likelihood of encountering a failure in one or more of them. This underscores
the need for careful consideration of system design, stringent quality control measures,
and regular maintenance practices to minimize the potential impact of component failures
on overall system performance and safety. By addressing these challenges, the reliability
and efficiency of MLPE systems can be improved [12].
2.2
Inverter characterization
According to standards DS/IEC TS 63156:2021, Photovoltaic systems - Power conversion
equipment performance - Energy evaluation method [13], and DS/EN 50530, Overall effi-
ciency of grid connected photovoltaic inverters [14], a predefined framework and specific
criteria are followed in order to evaluate the efficiency of PV inverters, which are used in PV
systems connected to the grid and they are basically responsible for converting DC power
from PV modules into AC power. These standards allow to the involved stakeholders to
assess and compare the efficiency performance of various PV inverters. This informa-
tion supports informed decision-making related to inverter selection, system design, and
optimization, with the ultimate target to maximize energy generation and system effective-
ness. PV inverter’s efficiency calculation involves considering various factors such as DC
input power, AC output power, inverter losses, and auxiliary power consumption. Specific
procedures and conditions to test their efficiency must be followed. This typically involves
measuring and recording parameters like input power, output power, voltage, and current
under different operating conditions and loads. Also, minimum efficiency requirements
that PV inverters must meet to comply with the standard are defined, although they may
differ based on various factors such as the inverter’s power rating, voltage range, and
other relevant specifications. Finally, there are clear guidelines on how to report the ef-
ficiency test results and the overall efficiency of the inverter. This may involve specific
reporting formats, mandatory data, and necessary documentation or records.
A detailed procedure for PV inverters’ characterization is Sandia National Laboratories’
Performance Test Protocol for Evaluating Inverters Used in Grid-Connected Photovoltaic
Systems [15], which is a widely accepted standard across the solar PV field for evaluating
the reliability and performance of PV inverters. Inverter’s performance and key param-
eters, such as efficiency, MPPT, voltage and frequency ride-through, harmonic distor-
tion, durability, reliability, etc., are evaluated under specific test conditions according to
it. These metrics show whether the inverter complies with the industry’s standards and
can at the same time they provide valuable information to the interested parties that ac-
tually utilize the inverters. The inverter’s efficiency is measured across various operating
conditions, evaluating its ability to convert DC power from PV modules into AC power effi-
ciently. This testing considers different power levels, input voltages, and temperatures. In
addition, the inverter’s MPPT algorithm is assessed in order to determine its effectiveness
in tracking and extracting maximum power from the PV array. The inverter’s performance
under varying irradiance levels, temperatures, and shading conditions is examined to
accomplish that. Maintaining stable voltage and frequency during grid disturbances is
important for an inverter and it is tested by subjecting voltage and frequency variations to
verify its capability to withstand such disturbances without tripping or impacting the con-
nected PV system. Harmonic Distortion: The inverter’s harmonic distortion levels are also
measured to make sure it complies with grid’s interconnection standards. THD and indi-
vidual harmonic components are assessed to determine their impact on the power quality
of the grid. Furthermore, inverter’s long-term performance and durability can be tested
by accelerating its active operation duration. This can happen with the involvement of
environmental stress tests, temperature cycling, and humidity conditions to to show how
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
7
==PAGE:16==
robust and reliable it will be after long term operation.
2.3
PO characterization
PO efficiency, also known as the DC/DC conversion efficiency, is the ratio of the output
power to the input power of the PO and is assessed based on its maximum and weighted
efficiencies, which take into account the PO’s performance under various operating condi-
tions and environmental factors. Maximum (peak) efficiency refers to the highest DC/DC
conversion efficiency achieved by the PO. Weighted efficiency represents the weighted
average DC/DC conversion efficiency, providing a more accurate representation of the
PO’s performance throughout its operating range. The weighting formula considers the
varying environmental conditions experienced by the PO over time, such as changes in
temperature, sunlight intensity, and other factors. To calculate the weighted efficiency,
measurements are taken at different power loads, input voltages, and string conditions.
The same equation used for calculating the efficiency of inverters is applied to determine
the weighted efficiency of power optimizers [16].
PO’s efficiency can be measured by creating a specific test setup and following defined
testing conditions. The setup should include the PV modules, a power source simulator,
a data acquisition system, and the PO being tested. Various testing conditions have to
be applied to the PO in order to assess its efficiency. This means adjustments in the
input voltage, power level, and string conditions to imitate different real-world operating
scenarios. During the application of the different test conditions, data, such as input and
output power, are acquired using an appropriately prepared system. Tests’ duration may
vary depending the simulated scenarios but it has to represent some real-life conditions.
Finally, PO’s efficiency can be calculated through the measured data (input power, output
power) and then it is investigated whether there are any unexpected efficiency losses
or deviations from the expected PO’s performance for the whole range of the tests. The
results of these efficiency measurements can be used to assess the suitability of the PO for
specific usage conditions and to compare different PO models in terms of their efficiency
performance [17].
According again to standard DS/IEC TS 63156:2021, Photovoltaic systems - Power con-
version equipment performance - Energy evaluation method [13], there are some guide-
lines for PO characterization methods. Parameters suggested to get tested are conver-
sion efficiency, MPPT efficiency, input and output voltage ranges, temperature and safety.
Two more PO’s important parameters that are advised to be tested are the thermal fac-
tor and its reliability. High temperatures can lead to equipment failure and reduction of
system’s lifespan. In order to test the thermal factor a setup comprised of a thermal cham-
ber, thermocouples and data logging system is required. The test takes place for various
MPPT while the internal temperature is being monitored and collected. Reliability factors
can be assessed with different ways and one of them is the reliability prediction based
on collected data from corresponding databases. These databases are usually based on
laboratory data, field data and reliability models [18].
2.4
PO Vs String Inverter based PV systems
The performance of string inverters and POs can be evaluated based on mathematical
models for various conditions (irradiances and shadings for instance). First of all, it is
shown that shading has a non-linear effect on c-Si solar modules, with even partial shading
of half a cell resulting in a power reduction that is 40 times greater than the shaded area’s
size. It is also shown that MLPE tend to generate more energy in specific challenging
conditions of irradiance and partial shading [19].
8
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:17==
The performance of string inverters and POs can also be evaluated using field tests with
actual real-life conditions. A study (which is actually an extension of the previous math-
ematical model study) [20] shows that the impact of shade on photovoltaic systems is
generally less severe than expected for a wide range of shading scenarios. However,
the greatest impact occurs during winter months, with shading losses potentially reach-
ing as high as 30% for a string inverter based PV system. In contrast, the influence of
shading is minimal during summer months when solar irradiance is typically higher and
more sun hours are observed. Among various shading patterns, a shading pattern com-
prised of a standing pole in front of the modules is found to be particularly detrimental to
string inverters, resulting in a significant reduction in annual yield of approximately 6.6%.
This shading pattern’s negative impact is attributed to its ability to obstruct sunlight from
reaching a substantial portion of the PV modules throughout the day but also the whole
year. MLPE have a relatively small advantage over string inverters in areas with high irra-
diance. So, winter months are the greatest challenge for string inverters due to reduced
solar availability and each geographical location has to be evaluated on its own when it
comes to selecting the most appropriate PV system.
A direct power management comparison at module level and string level can in outdoor
conditions can show the impact of shading on the energy yield of PV systems. Two iden-
tical but also independent PV systems are deployed and monitored (their DC and AC PR
are observed continuously) at the same time. The first one is connected to a string inverter
and the second one includes POs. To assess system performance under specific partial
shading, a pole shading covering 1%-2% of the total system surface area is deployed.
The outcome of this test is that the POs are able to increase the PR up to 35% under par-
tial shading conditions, but under clear conditions the string inverter is performing better,
as it is expected [21].
Shading can be impugned with a range of strategies and/or technologies, such as studying
the shading patterns, running simulation models and optimization techniques. A relatively
old study, however, found out that there is not much difference between string inverter and
MLPE under conditions of partial shadowing, parallel mismatch and ”thin lined” obstacles’
shading [22]. This side however looks like it is shut down with the passing of years and
with more developed and advanced equipment and testing methods.
One more study [23] aims to investigate the effects of module mismatch, partial shading,
and varying orientations on the energy generation of PV systems with centralized and
distributed architectures through field tests. It analyzes how these factors impact the
overall system performance, energy yields, and power losses within each architecture.
The findings demonstrate that the distributed architecture including POs offers enhanced
energy generation and reduced power losses compared to the centralized architecture,
especially in scenarios characterized by module mismatch or intense partial shading. POs
effectively optimize the output of individual PV modules, compensating for shading or
mismatch issues and maximizing the overall system performance. This shows that it can
be advantageous to deploy POs in PV systems that operate under mismatched conditions,
in order to achieve maximum energy yield in real-world installations.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
9
==PAGE:18==
3
String Inverter & PO Efficiency
Characterization
3.1
String Inverter Characterization
3.1.1
The Inverter
The first experimental part is regarding the performance characterization of a solar in-
verter. It is noted that the examined inverter is brand new at the time of the tests and it
is replacing an older inverter at Riso research center. The purpose of the replacement
is the plan to also install POs on a PV array and these specific devices comply only with
predetermined inverters (and the older one is not one of those). So, after the inverter is
tested, as it is described later, it is connected to a PV array (the one on which the POs
will be installed too) installed on the rooftop of building B110 at Riso.
The inverter under investigation is HUAWEI’s SUN2000-3KTL-L1 [6]. It is single phase
and produces up to 3 kW of output power, with stated maximum and weighted efficien-
cies at 98.3% and 97.3%, respectively. It incorporates safety features such as arc fault
circuit interrupter protection and integrated surge protection devices for both DC and AC.
It also complies with international safety and grid compliance standards. Furthermore, it is
equipped with built-in monitoring capabilities, enabling users to monitor their PV system’s
performance and supports multiple communication interfaces, such as Ethernet and Wi-
Fi, facilitating remote monitoring and data collection through specialized application. Also,
it enables incorporation of additional energy storage solutions, like batteries, for enhanced
energy management and optimization. Finally, it is easy to handle and install because of
its compact and lightweight design, for which HUAWEI is known.
Figure 3.1:
In-
verter
HUAWEI
SUN2000-3KTL-
L1
Figure 3.2: Inverter’s circuit diagram
3.1.2
Experimental setup
In order to test the inverter a special experimental setup needs to be built. This comprises
a SAS, the inverter and the grid which is needed to connect inverter’s output. In addition,
a PA is used interconnected to LabVIEW (graphical programming software) installed on
a computer.
KEYSIGHT N8957APV SAS
The SAS that is used for the tests is KEYSIGHT TECHNOLOGIES’ N8957APV [24]. This
equipment is specifically designed to replicate the behavior and characteristics of solar
10 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:19==
arrays and PV panels. It can be used in the development, testing, and certification of
solar power-related devices, systems, and components. It can accurately mimic the volt-
age, current, and power output profiles typically observed in real-world solar systems.
The simulator offers a broad operating range for both voltage and current and is able to
match various PV panels and systems. At the same time it is exceptionally precise and
stable when it is generating output power. In addition, this SAS offers flexible control and
programming with several interfaces and protocols for remote control, automation and
integration. Finally, it comes with important safety features such as overvoltage protec-
tion, overcurrent protection, and thermal protection in order to protect the people and the
equipment itself.
Figure 3.3: N8957APV SAS interface
Tektronix PA4000 PA
PA is the intermediate device between the physical test setup and the data logging soft-
ware. It is able to take various measurements during the test and transfer them to a soft-
ware, so the data can be processed later. For the following lab tests Tektronix’s PA4000
[25] is used to complete this task. P4000 is usually used for designing, analysis, and
optimization of power systems and devices. It provides high precision measurements of
voltage, current, power, harmonics, and other power parameters under many different
conditions and for up to 4 different system setups simultaneously. In addition, the PA is
able to conduct harmonic analysis within the system. Finally, the recorded data can be
seen live on the PA’s graphical interface, from which also settings and advanced functions
can be modified.
Figure 3.4: Tektronix PA4000 interface
Figure 3.5: Tektronix PA4000 rear panel
with 4 input channels
LabVIEW Graphical Programming Software
Data that is collected from the PA through out the testings is logged and saved using
LabVIEW [26], which is installed on computer connected to the PA. LabVIEW is a visual
programming language and development environment specialized in test, measurement,
and control of systems in a simple way. It is usually used for test and measurement, indus-
trial automation, scientific research, control systems, and academic education. It allows
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
11
==PAGE:20==
the creation of programs and applications by using visual representations that are inter-
connected via graphical nodes which represent different functions, operations, and data
flows. Some of its main and most important functions are instrument control (sensors, an-
alyzers, etc.) and data acquisition, which allows the data analysis from external sources.
Modular programming is allowed and encouraged in LabVIEW by allowing the formation
of reusable components, which improves organization and scalability in the correspond-
ing programs. Finally, the inclusion of other programming languages, external databases
and applications is enabled.
Figure 3.6: LabVIEW interface during one of the following tests
So, the experimental setup for the inverter characterization includes all of the aforemen-
tioned components and is as shown in the following Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Inverter efficiency test setup
SAS is the power source that imitates the power production from a PV array and provides
the produced power to the inverter through DC cables. Then, the inverter is responsible
to convert the DC to AC and feed it directly to the grid. Meanwhile, circles in between the
cables labeled with V and A represent the measurement points. Current (A) and voltage
12 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:21==
(V) are measured at the input and output of the inverter in order to be able later on to
find inverter’s efficiency. The measurements are taken by the PA and provided directly
to LabVIEW where the data can be viewed and saved. It is worth mentioning that the
measurements at the input of the inverter are taken for DC, since this is what SAS and
in general PV modules produce, while at the output of the inverter the measurements are
taken for AC since the current is converted and directed to the grid through an appropriate
socket.
3.1.3
Methodology
Test Initial Conditions
In order to characterize the inverter, specific steps have to be followed, starting with the
setting of the test initial conditions, moving to the data acquisition and finally the data
analysis.
The initial conditions of the test are set taking into consideration inverter’s
specifications and standardized inverter efficiency characterization methods. HUAWEI
SUN2000-3KTL-L1 inverter has rated output power 3 kW and rated input voltage of 360
V. Therefore, the initial conditions for the test are found using FF = 0.8 and Vmp/Voc =
0.82, which are considered usual values for this kind of tests. The test is conducted for
loads corresponding to 5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the rated power and
the needed SAS input conditions for each case are Vmp, Imp, Voc and Isc. Voltages remain
constant for the whole range of power inputs, while currents are the ones that change at
each load. Vmp equals to 360 V which is the nominal input voltage of the inverter and Voc
is found through the Vmp/Voc ratio to be 439.02 V. Imp is found by diving Pmp by Vmp and
Isc equals to Pmp/Voc/FF. The following Table 3.1 shows the exact initial conditions used
for this test.
Load
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
100%
Pmp [W]
150
300
600
900
1500
2250
3000
Imp [A]
0.417
0.833
1.667
2.500
4.167
6.250
8.333
Isc [A]
0.427
0.854
1.708
2.562
4.271
6.406
8.542
Voc [V]
439.0243902
Table 3.1: Inverter Characterization Test Initial Conditions for Vmp = 360 V
The previously described procedure is repeated for two more voltage levels, Vmp = 260
V and Vmp = 480 V. The following Tables 3.2 and 3.3 show the initial conditions for these
voltage levels.
Load
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
100%
Pmp [W]
150
300
600
900
1500
2250
3000
Imp [A]
0.577
1.154
2.308
3.462
5.769
8.654
11.538
Isc [A]
0.591
1.183
2.365
3.548
5.913
8.870
11.827
Voc [V]
317.073
Table 3.2: Inverter Characterization Test Initial Conditions for Vmp = 260 V
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
13
==PAGE:22==
Load
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
100%
Pmp [W]
150
300
600
900
1500
2250
3000
Imp [A]
0.313
0.625
1.250
1.875
3.125
4.688
6.250
Isc [A]
0.320
0.641
1.281
1.922
3.203
4.805
6.406
Voc [V]
585.366
Table 3.3: Inverter Characterization Test Initial Conditions for Vmp = 480 V
Data Acquisition
The data gathered during the test are logged in to LabVIEW, using the PA which is collect-
ing them. Two channels of the PA are used, one for the input of the inverter and one for
its output. Cables are connected to the PA and in the system in order to get the needed
measurements, as shown in Figure 3.7. It is noted that in order to measure voltage in
a close loop, the measurement needs to be taken in parallel while for the current mea-
surement it is taken in series with the loop. So, the values measured on the input of the
inverter are DC, while on the output they are AC. The program developed in LabVIEW is
gathering the data during the whole duration of the tests and saving them at the end in
the form of text file.
Data Analysis
After all the described tests are completed, the data are processed in order to get the
desired results. Firstly, the data are filtered in order to take out measurements that are
collected before and after the times that the tests began and finished. Also, data that
correspond to unexpected anomalies, for instance a spike or a momentarily drop in the
power measurements, caused mostly by the SAS are neglected to avoid messing the
final results. After the filtering of the data is done and only the desired processed data
remain, it is time to calculate inverter’s efficiency. This can be found by dividing the output
power by the input. By doing that for all the time-steps of the gathered data, a really good
picture of the efficiency is created. Of course, the efficiency is averaged for each power
level (load) from the corresponding time-steps. This means that an averaged efficiency
is left for each power level at the three different voltage levels.
3.1.4
Results
The outcome of the previously described methods, results in the following Table 3.4, which
presents the efficiency for each power level (load) under the three tested voltage levels.
Load
5.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
50.00%
75.00%
100.00%
Voltage [V]
260
86.97%
92.06%
95.23%
95.97%
96.53%
96.53%
96.38%
360
86.52%
92.50%
95.18%
96.12%
96.77%
96.91%
96.86%
480
85.26%
92.21%
95.62%
96.54%
97.13%
97.37%
97.40%
Table 3.4: Inverter Characterization Test Results
These results correspond to the following Figure 3.8 which is a lot easier to read and
understand. Each tested voltage level is shown with different colour for the whole power
range. The three efficiency curves follow similar path, which starts from around 86% and
ends up over 96%. However, the path that the curves follow below 20% load looks a bit
abnormal as it should probably be higher and more in line with the rest of the curve. Other
than that the efficiency curves of the inverter appear to be within reasonable and expected
limits. By taking a look on the manufacturer’s efficiency curve, Figure 3.9, it is noticeable
that the curves follow similar trajectory for loads higher than 20%. However, for lower than
14 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:23==
20% there is significant deviation which exceeds 6% in efficiency. This can be caused to
some internal grid settings of the HUAWEI inverter, that have not been modified, that drop
the production when extracting low power. For loads higher than 20% even though the
curve matches what the manufacturer is stating, it is still around 2% lower in efficiency than
the expected. Also, in the case of the test 480V efficiency curve is the best performing
one, while according to the manufacturer the 360V should be the highest, which is the
inverter’s nominal input voltage, too. These differences could be due to differences in the
characterization methods used during the process and the methods that the manufacturer
is using to get these data. The difference can also be observed by comparing the weighted
efficiency, which is stated as 98.3% by the manufacturer, but it is found to be 95.95% (that
is European Efficiency (EE = 0.03*Load5% + 0.05*Load10% + 0.13*Load20% + 0.1*Load30%
+ 0.48*Load50% + 0.2*Load100%) calculated for the nominal voltage of 360 V) based on
the test results. Overall, the outcome of the inverter characterization test is satisfactory,
since the efficiency curves are following similar paths, but it needs to be noted that there
is around 2-3% lower efficiencies, than the manufacturer’s stated, according to the test
results.
Figure 3.8: Inverter efficiency curve (test results)
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.9: Inverter efficiency curve (manufacturer) [6]
3.2
PO Characterization
3.2.1
The PO
The second part of the lab experiments is for the characterization of a PO. As mentioned
earlier in the literature review the PO under investigation has shown signs of questionable
performance in previous projects that it has been used. So an effort is made now to try
and find out if it is lacking in performance. It is also useful to know that since this PO
will be implemented in a PV system with the HUAWEI inverter characterized just before
(since they are compatible), as described in the following chapter, and get tested there so
it is important to know if there are any unexpected losses.
The PO that is examined is HUAWEI’s SUN2000-450W-P [4]. Its rated power input is 450
W with maximum input voltage of 80 V and maximum and weighted efficiencies 99.5%
and 99% respectively. This device comes with build in safety features such as rapid
down option in the event of emergency or maintenance and arc fault pinpoint positioning,
that can prevent electrical hazards and thus increase safety. Furthermore, this PO is
compatible with a variety of PV modules and solar inverters which makes it easier to fit it
in many systems. Also, it can be paired to the connected inverter really quickly and map
the PV module in a matter of seconds, too.
16 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.10: HUAWEI SUN2000-450W-P PO
3.2.2
Experimental setup
The characterization test of the PO requires a similar setup as the one earlier for the
inverter. However, this time except the SAS, the inverter and the grid, it also includes
a SMS and of course the examined PO. PA is used again to connect LabVIEW with the
physical equipment.
KEYSIGHT E4360 SMS
The available SMS for the test is KEYSIGHT TECHNOLOGY’s E4360 [27]. This device
is responsible in this part to imitate the the behavior of a singel PV module, the one that is
connected to the PO. SMS E4360 is utilized in research, development, and manufacturing
setups, for which performance and efficiency evaluations are conducted. It is able to carry
out accurate testing under various external conditions because of its ability to generate
controlled variations of solar irradiance. This can be done by controlling voltage and cur-
rent outputs with high precision. In addition, the SMS comes with features and interfaces
that allow direct programming which then unlocks remote controlling, data logging and
integration options.
The experimental setup for this test includes in addition to the previous one the PO and
the SMS, as mentioned before, and it looks like the following Figure 3.11.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.11: PO characterization test experimental setup
First of all, it has to be noted that the intention was to use the same SAS as in the inverter
characterization test, however this was not possible. That is probably because of some
grounding issues at the grid connection points in the lab, which were causing the fuse of
the whole connection point to turn off really often. So, it is decided that a real PV array is
used instead, which is installed on the rooftop of building B110 at Riso. The rooftop PV
array consists of 10 295Wp panels [28]. This of course limits the experiment because it
now depends on the actual solar irradiance that hits the PV panels and it is not possible
anymore to test the PO for its rated output power of 450W, because this requires high and
continuous irradiance. The PV array is not connected directly to the inverter this time, as
it was the case for the SAS in the previous setup, but only its positive side goes to the
inverter because the other side is connected to the PO. The PO is also connected to the
SMS through its input port. Its output is connected to the inverter where the circuit is
closing since the positive side of the PV array is also connected. Finally, the inverter is
connected to the grid in order to be able to feed the output power there. PA interconnected
to LabVIEW is now using 4 channels to manage and get all the necessary data and ensure
that the system is operating as it should. Channel 1 is the input to the PO coming from
the SMS, channel 2 is the output of the inverter to the grid, channel 3 is from the PV array
to the inverter and finally channel 4 is the output of the PO to the inverter.
3.2.3
Methodology
Test Initial Conditions
The first step of the PO characterization procedure is to set the initial conditions needed
to run the tests. The rated power of the HUAWEI SUN2000-450W-P PO is 450 W, but
as it is mentioned a bit earlier this power cannot be reached because of limitations in
the experimental setup. Those are the dependency on the continuously fluctuating solar
irradiance and the limited capabilities of the SMS which can generate only up to 300 W.
This value however cannot be reached because of the first limitation which is the PV array
exposed to solar irradiance, and in practice the maximum it is possible to generate from
the SMS is around 250 W. Also, the nominal input voltage of the PO is not stated by
the manufacturer, so a nominal voltage of 36 V is assumed (which is the closest to the
nominal voltage of the 295 Wp modules included on the rooftop system and the working
conditions of the SMS). So, this time not only the different power levels must be tested,
but also different irradiances. The examined power levels of the SMS are 100 W, 150 W,
18 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:27==
200 W and 250 W at the defined nominal voltage of 36 V. These measurements should be
conducted under as steady as possible solar irradiance on the rooftop system. Following
that, the tests should be repeated but this time under different irradiances in order to
achieve various current levels passing through the PO. The following Tables 3.5, 3.6 and
3.7 show the initial conditions for the 150 W tests that are conducted during different times
of the day to achieve various irradiance levels. The procedure is repeated for the other
power and voltage levels, too.
Load
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
100%
Pmp [W]
7.5
15
30
45
75
112.5
150
Imp [A]
0.208
0.417
0.833
1.250
2.083
3.125
4.167
Isc [A]
0.214
0.427
0.854
1.281
2.135
3.203
4.271
Voc [V]
43.902
Table 3.5: PO Characterization Test Initial Conditions for Vmp = 36 V
Load
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
100%
Pmp [W]
7.5
15
30
45
75
112.5
150
Imp [A]
0.188
0.375
0.750
1.125
1.875
2.813
3.750
Isc [A]
0.192
0.384
0.769
1.153
1.922
2.883
3.844
Voc [V]
48.780
Table 3.6: PO Characterization Test Initial Conditions for Vmp = 40 V
Load
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
100%
Pmp [W]
7.5
15
30
45
75
112.5
150
Imp [A]
0.150
0.300
0.600
0.900
1.500
2.250
3.000
Isc [A]
0.154
0.308
0.615
0.923
1.538
2.306
3.075
Voc [V]
60.976
Table 3.7: PO Characterization Test Initial Conditions for Vmp = 50 V
Data acquisition
The data gathered during the test are logged in to LabVIEW, using the PA which is col-
lecting them. 4 channels of the PA are used this time, 1 is the input to the PO coming
from the SMS, 2 is the output of the inverter to the grid, 3 is from the PV array to the
inverter and finally 4 is the output of the PO to the inverter. Cables are connected to the
PA and in the system in order to get the needed measurements, as shown in Figure 3.11.
It is noted that in order to measure voltage in a close loop, the measurement needs to
be taken in parallel while for the current measurement it is taken in series with the loop.
So, the values measured on channels 1, 3 and 4 DC, while on channel 2 they are AC.
The program developed in LabVIEW is gathering the data during the whole duration of
the tests and saving them at the end in the form of text file.
Data Analysis
Then, the data are processed in order to get the desired results out of them. The first step
is again the filtering of the raw data in a similar way as for the first part. Data outside of the
defined time-steps are disregarded, as well as measurements that indicate momentarily
changes, which are mostly because of sudden and short transitions either from the SMS
or the PV array. Then, the conversion ratio k and at the same time the efficiency of the
PO can be found for the different tested conditions. Conversion ratio is calculated for
each data row as the output current of the inverter divided by the input current, k=Iout/Iin.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
19
==PAGE:28==
Efficiency is again the the output power divided by the input of the PO. This shows how the
conversion ratio affects the efficiency of the PO and whether the PO reaches its expected
performance levels.
3.2.4
Results
The outcome of the previously described methods, results in the following Figure 3.12
which includes all the tested conditions.
Figure 3.12: PO characterization test results
The figure displays the efficiency with the colours in respect to the conversion ratio on the
x-axis. On the y-axis the power level range of the SMS is displayed. It is observed that
as the conversion ratio increases, the efficiency of the PO increases, too. It is worth to
remember that the manufacturer is stating a maximum efficiency of 99.5% for the exam-
ined PO. It is clear that not higher than 98.5% values of efficiency are shown in the figure.
That means that the PO operates with at least 1% lower efficiency even on the highest
conversion ratios. It is clear that the deviation is a lot higher for the lower conversion
ratios. This however is not completely representative and relative to the manufacturer’s
statement, because as discussed earlier, the PO is not tested for its nominal input power
which is 450 W. In order to create a complete picture the PO has to be tested for its whole
range of operation, as it is done for the string inverter in the previous section where it is a
lot easier to arrive to complete conclusions.
Since the manufacture is not providing any efficiency curves for the PO’s operating range,
in the following Figures 3.13 and 3.14 the efficiency found through the tests is compared to
another manufacturer’s efficiency curve for a really similar power level PO. The efficiency
curve comes for SolarEdge [16], it is for 440 W PO with a stated maximum efficiency of
99.5%, while the examined HUAWEI is 450 W rated with 99.5% maximum efficiency, too.
The maximum recorded efficiency though during the tests reaches 98.3%.
20 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.13: HUAWEI PO efficiency results
Figure 3.14: SolarEdge PO efficiency curves
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
21
==PAGE:30==
4
PO Vs String Inverter based PV systems
After the characterization of the individual equipment (inverter and PO) of the PV system,
the direct performance comparison between them, in their equivalent systems, is done
under real-life conditions and shading scenarios. Two identical PV systems, with the
same model and number of PV modules in a single string in series and are installed side
by side, which results of course in identical exposition to solar irradiance. This gives the
opportunity to equip one of them with POs and conducting shading scenarios for both of
them at the same time and thus under the same environment conditions.
4.1
Rooftop PV systems
The 2 rooftop systems are identical in terms of location, arrangement and PV modules.
They are located at the 30 degrees southeastern facing roof (azimuth=-74o) of building
B110 of DTU Riso campus (55.69o N, 12.10o E), as shown in the following Figure 4.1. The
2 systems are connected to inverters that are placed next to each other in the laboratory
just under the roof the panels are placed.
Figure 4.1: Satellite picture of the rooftop PV systems at Riso
Each of the systems comprise 10 identical Trina TSM-DD05A.05(II) mono 295 W [28],
22 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:31==
which makes the two identical 3 kWp PV systems. The arrangement of both system’s PV
modules on the roof can be seen in the following combined Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: PV modules arrangement on the roof
The numbered teams and individual PV modules that constitute each system are pre-
sented in below Table 4.1. It is observed that the 2 roof systems are symmetrically mixed,
with both systems having modules on both rows as well as on both ends, in an effort to
make the levels of incident irradiance as close as possible between them. (The 4 modules
in the middle of the low row do not belong to any of the 2 systems, but to another system
that is not related with this study.)
PO system
String inverter system
Team no
Module no
Team no
Module no
1
261
2
264
260
265
262
266
263
267
3
256
5
248
257
249
4
252
250
253
251
254
6
258
255
259
Table 4.1: Module’s team and numbering per system
4.1.1
PO based PV system
The PO based PV system is the one in which 10 POs are installed, one on each of the
PV modules. The selected PO is of course the HUAWEI SUN2000-450W-P [4], which
is thoroughly examined in the previous chapter. The POs are mounted on the panels
with specially manufactured metal adjustment, which is configured in a way that makes it
possible for it to hold the POs attached under the modules. Since this PO is compatible
only with specific inverters, the old inverter of the system is replaced with the brand new
HUAWEI SUN2000-3KTL-L1 [6], which is also examined in the previous chapter. The
inverter and the POs are commissioned and registered through HUAWEI’s specialized
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
23
==PAGE:32==
application FusionSolar [29] (which also allows the performance monitoring and control
of the system through the inverter and of each module through the corresponding PO),
and power is produced and fed to the grid.
4.1.2
String inverter based PV system
On the other hand, no modification is made to the string inverter based PV system. The
PV modules are connected to the 3 kW Fronius Symo 3.0-3-S inverter [30] without any
POs or any other devices included in the system.
4.2
Methodology
The two PV systems are put to test under clear sky and then different shading scenarios,
with the ultimate aim to find out if and when the PO based system’s performance gets
significantly improved compared to the string inverter’s system. It is worth noting that after
the installation of the POs, all the PV modules (both systems) are cleaned thoroughly in
order to remove big stains that have been created mainly from birds’ excrements, mood
but also accumulated dust. The panels became dusty again during the last stages of
the testing, but this is acceptable since the dust accumulation was the same on all the
modules and there are no major stains anywhere.
4.2.1
Test conditions
The PV systems are firstly tested without any distractions under clear sky conditions.
Then, various ascending shading scenarios are applied, in order to gather data under
many different conditions. The shading scenarios are applied with the use of cardboard
pieces attached over the modules’ cells, top to bottom of the panels, shading entire sub-
strings every time. All the shading scenarios are executed simultaneously for both sys-
tems. The following Table 4.2 and Figures 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7 present all the tested
shading scenarios (for scenario 0 refer to Figure 4.2 since no shading is applied). As
soon as the POs new inverter are registered, scenario 0 starts which is left to run for a
few days. The shading scenarios are running for 2-3 days on average.
Scenario
Shading ”weight”
Shading %
Shaded substrings
0
None
0
0
1
Light
6.67%
2
2
Enhanced Light
10%
3
3
Moderate
13.34%
4
4
Enhanced Moderate
16.67%
5
5
Heavy
20%
6
Table 4.2: Shading scenarios
24 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: Shading scenario 1
Figure 4.4: Shading scenario 2
Figure 4.5: Shading scenario 3
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.6: Shading scenario 4
Figure 4.7: Shading scenario 5
4.2.2
Data acquisition
Data logging of the 2 PV systems is done through a NI cRIO C9038 datalogger [31] and
logged in a DTU SQL Server database. Time-step of the data logging is 10 seconds. Input
voltages and currents to the systems are measured by voltage dividers and shunt resis-
tors. AC output of the systems is measured with Janitza UMG 604-PRO power analyser
[32]. Finally, systems’ voltages, currents and powers can be monitored using Grafana
[33], which is a data visualization and monitoring tool.
4.2.3
Data Analysis
Subsequently, data are analyzed in the process to find out whether the PO based system
becomes beneficial in terms of energy production over the string inverter based system.
As mentioned earlier, data are collected for 2-3 days in average for the previously de-
scribed scenarios. Therefore, the selected data for comparison of the two systems are
primarily selected to be clear sky days. If there are more than one clear sky day within
this period, then the average of these days is calculated and used for the comparison.
On the other hand, if there are no clear sky days, then the day with the less disturbances
is selected. Also, only the most productive, in terms of energy, part of the day is utilized
26 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:35==
for the direct comparison of the systems. That is because conditions are preferred to
be as optimal as possible, so other losses not directly related to the experiment can be
minimized. This part of the day is selected to be between a 5-hour period between 9:00
and 14:00, during which the POA irradiance is peaking (over 700 W/m2) and it remains
relatively stable in a clear sky day, as shown in Figure 4.8. This period is considered the
most reliable since earlier than 9:00 the solar irradiance is not powerful enough and after
15:00 the PV arrays get shaded from the building’s roof, as the roof has southeastern
orientation, as explained earlier.
Figure 4.8: POA irradiance on clear sky day
Following, the energy produced by the systems over this period can be calculated, using
E = Psum * Nodays / 3600 and a direct comparison between them is conducted, for each
shading scenario. When the results for all the shading scenarios are collected, they are
combined in order to be able to view the bigger picture of the tests and how the optimizers
are actually behaving under different conditions.
4.3
Results
After gathering the data according to the previous explanations, their processing begins
to get to the target of the direct comparison of the 2 PV systems. The filtered data for
each of the 6 cases is then turned to the following Figures 4.9, 4.9, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13 and
4.14, that present the power generation of the PV systems over the predefined duration
for all the shading scenarios, to help first of all to visualize the obvious differences.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.9: Power production for shading scenario 0
Figure 4.10: Power production for shading scenario 1
28 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.11: Power production for shading scenario 2
Figure 4.12: Power production for shading scenario 3
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.13: Power production for shading scenario 4
Figure 4.14: Power production for shading scenario 5
It becomes already clear from scenario 0 (4.9), at which no shadings are implemented
at all, that the PO based system it is starting to make an impact over the string inverter
system, even though with small difference. This difference though is becoming a lot more
clear advancing to the first couple of shading scenarios. Scenarios 1 (4.10) and 2 (4.11)
make it a lot easier to distinguish the gap in power outcome between the 2 systems, es-
pecially after the pass of the solar noon (12:00), even though for scenario 1 the day was
30 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:39==
cloudy it is still visible. However, as the shading area of the systems increase after sce-
nario 2, the difference between the power outcome of the systems is reduced drastically,
but the PO based system is still superior.
Since the power data is available for every 10 seconds, the next step is to calculate the
energy production of each system at all the shading scenarios. The produced energy is
shown in the following Table 4.3 for all the cases, and as it is expected by looking at the
power figures, it is higher for the PO based system in all the occasions.
Shading %
Inverter system
[kWh]
PO system
[kWh]
0
5.13
5.20
6.67%
4.03
4.14
10%
4.30
4.51
13.34%
4.27
4.34
16.67%
4.05
4.11
20%
3.55
3.60
Table 4.3: Energy produced by the PV systems in each scenario.
After calculating the produced energy at each case, a more extent comparison should be
done, which shows the difference between the energy generation of the systems more
clearly. This becomes possible by calculating the absolute difference between the energy
produced by both systems. It is done by taking the absolute value of the subtraction of
the two. In addition, the increase in energy generation of the PO system compared to
the inverter system can be shown and assists to clarify the results. These values are
presented in the following Table 4.4 and Figure 4.15, as well.
Shading %
Inverter system
[kWh]
Energy gain
[kWh]
0
0.07
1.26%
6.67%
0.11
2.59%
10%
0.21
4.73%
13.34%
0.07
1.65%
16.67%
0.05
1.25%
20%
0.05
1.48%
Table 4.4: Energy production difference & Energy production gain for the PO system
compared to the string.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.15: Energy production difference & Energy production gain for the PO system
compared to the string.
First of all, it is clear that the PO based PV system is superior over the string inverter
based under all the tested conditions, even for no forced shading at all. This argument
is reinforced just by looking at the first shaded scenarios. Under light shading conditions,
of up to 10%, the PO system is thriving over the inverter system. The energy production
is increased for almost 5% under these conditions, which is a satisfactory outcome but
not as exceptional as expected. Also, the energy gain for higher shading scenarios is
reduced a lot, going down to only 1% which is actually the opposite of what is expected. It
is normal to wait for higher gains as the shading is getting higher. However, this statement
cannot be supported by these results. As it appears, everything is working properly up to
the 10% shading scenario, but after that the results are really unexpected. This could be
due to some of the POs malfunctioning or being damaged, because even then the results
show some energy gain (even though it is low), a fact that supports the idea that some of
the POs are still in operation, but definitely not all of them are operating as they should.
32 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:41==
5
Conclusions
5.1
Main conclusions
Residential PV systems are a big portion of applied solar industry. Usually these sys-
tems’ PV modules are connected to the grid through a string inverter. However, in many
occasions the use of extra performance optimization equipment is examined and imple-
mented. One of the main options for PV systems performance optimization and energy
production maximization is POs.
However, these devices are found sometimes to under-perform compared to what the
manufacturers are stating. This is the case for HUAWEI SUN2000-450W-P PO, which is
tested and its performance is characterized to the maximum possible level in this study. In
addition, a string inverter’s (HUAWEI SUN2000 3KTL-L1) performance is characterized
in the context of this study. Finally, and probably the most interesting research objective
of this study, a side-by-side comparison of two identical PV systems takes place, with one
of the systems having POs installed on all the PV modules, while the second system is
only connected to a string inverter.
All of the described objectives are assessed up to a satisfactory or even complete level
during the duration of this study. Starting with the inverter characterization, it is totally
completed, since the examined inverter is tested for its whole operating range. The out-
come shows that the inverter’s efficiency is overall around 2%-3% lower than what the
manufacturer is stating.
The PO performance characterization is conducted up to a certain level, because some
physical equipment limitations do not allow tests under its entire operating range. How-
ever, even for these lower operating conditions, it is quite clear that the PO does not meet
the efficiency expectations that the manufacturer is stating. In the best case scenario, of
conversion ratio equal or close to 1, the PO is operating with at least 1% lower efficiency
than the expected.
The PO based PV system side by side comparison with the string inverter PV system is
also completed. Different shading scenarios are applied to both systems simultaneously
in order to find out when it becomes beneficial to install POs. Unfortunately, this evaluation
is not properly completed because some malfunctioning is observed around the middle of
the tests and onward. Nevertheless, the evaluation is completed as expected for shading
that reaches up to 10% of the total PV system area. Up until that point, the energy gain of
the PO system it is almost 5% than the inverter system and this gain is expected to grow
more as the shading is increasing.
The most important outcomes of this study concern the characterization of equipment
and the prospect that PO is having in the field. Through the inverter and PO performance
characterizations it is found that manufacturers’ stated parameters might not always be
accurate and according to the findings of this study, the equipment usually underperforms
relatively to the expected performance. In addition, it is shown that POs can be a really
useful tool in PV systems that are facing challenging conditions, such as high and constant
shading. Each case should be examined individually though in order to apprehend if this
kind of devices are really needed and worth it.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
33
==PAGE:42==
5.2
Future scope
Additional research on topics of this study can be done in the future since there is still
aspects to investigate.
Firstly, the performance evaluation of the PO should be completed for its entire power
range in order to collect all the necessary information to characterize it. Also, more than
just one of these devices could be tested to avoid any malfunctions that might appear on
the first tested device and create a larger data pool, which corresponds to safest conclu-
sions.
In terms of the comparison of the two systems, higher shading scenarios should be exam-
ined (similar to the ones planned in this study) and gather data for them. And finally, an
economic evaluation could take place in parallel in order to actually find the real turning
point towards POs.
34 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Danish Energy Agency. Denmark’s Energy Statistics. 2023. URL: https://ens.dk/
en/our-services/statistics-data-key-figures-and-energy-maps/annual-and-monthly-
statistics.
[2]
Lucía Fernández. Annual renewable energy production in Denmark in 2020, by
source. 2023. URL: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1015251/total-renewable-
energy-production-in-denmark-by-source/.
[3]
Russel H. Plante. The Essential Differences of String Inverters, Microinverters, and
Power Optimizers. 2018. URL: https://scitechconnect.elsevier.com/differences-string-
inverters-microinverters-power-optimizers/.
[4]
HUAWEI. HUAWEI SUN2000-450W-P SMART PV OPTIMIZER DATASHEET. 2020.
URL: https://solar.huawei.com/-/media/Solar/attachment/pdf/apac/datasheet/P2%
5C%20Datasheet/SUN2000-450W-P2%5C%20%5C%20600W-P%5C%20Datasheet.
pdf.
[5]
Arunas Kelmickas. Performance model validation of BIPV curtain walls in SAM.
2023. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/63fea5e14475403bca57e377?single_
revert=%5C%2Fen%5C%2Fcatalog%5C%3Fq%5C%3DPerformance%5C%2Bmodel%
5C%2Bvalidation%5C%2Bof%5C%2BBIPV%5C%2Bcurtain%5C%2Bwalls%5C%
2Bin%5C%2BSAM%5C%26show_single%5C%3Doff%5C%26utf8%5C%3D%5C%
25E2%5C%259C%5C%2593.
[6]
HUAWEI. HUAWEI SUN2000-3KTL-L1 INVERTER DATASHEET. 2020. URL: https:
//solar.huawei.com/en-GB/download?p=%5C%2F-%5C%2Fmedia%5C%2FSolar%
5C%2Fattachment%5C%2Fpdf%5C%2Feu%5C%2Fdatasheet%5C%2FSUN2000-2-
6KTL-L1.pdf.
[7]
Russel H. Plante. The Essential Differences of String Inverters, Microinverters, and
Power Optimizers. 2018. URL: https://scitechconnect.elsevier.com/differences-string-
inverters-microinverters-power-optimizers/.
[8]
De Souza Silva Joao Lucas; Moreira Hugo Soeiro; De Mesquita Daniel Bastos; Cav-
alcante Michelle Melo; Villalva Marcelo Gradella. Modular Architecture with Power
Optimizers for Photovoltaic Systems. 2019. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5db8dfb7d9001d019222eadf.
[9]
Spagnuolo Giovanni; Kouro Samir; Vinnikov Dmitri. Photovoltaic Module and Sub-
module Level Power Electronics and Control. 2019. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/5caca9c9d9001d01a17b88fe.
[10]
D. Bortis; J. W. Kolar M. Kasper. Classification and comparative evaluation of PV
panel-integrated DC-DC converter concepts. 2014. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/544a68d5e44c7a866722e6fd.
[11]
João Lucas de Souza Silva; Hugo Soeiro Moreira; Marcos Vinicios Gomes dos
Reis; Tárcio André dos Santos Barros; Marcelo Gradella Villalva. Theoretical and
behavioral analysis of power optimizers for grid-connected photovoltaic systems.
2022. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/630c1078d3674425102faeda.
[12]
Toke Franke. The Impact of Optimizers for PV-Modules. 2019. URL: https://portal.
findresearcher.sdu.dk/en/publications/the-impact-of-optimizers-for-pv-modules-a-
comparative-study.
[13]
IEC. PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS - POWER CONVERSION EQUIPMENT PER-
FORMANCE - ENERGY EVALUATION METHOD. 2021. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/
en/catalog/60228100d9001d00de675ebc?single_revert=%5C%2Fen%5C%2Fcatalog%
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
35
==PAGE:44==
5C%3Fq%5C%3DDS%5C%252FIEC%5C%2BTS%5C%2B63156%5C%26show_
single%5C%3Doff%5C%26utf8%5C%3D%5C%25E2%5C%259C%5C%2593.
[14]
Technical Comittee CENELEC TC 82. OVERALL EFFICIENCY OF GRID CON-
NECTED PHOTOVOLTAIC INVERTERS. 2010. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/583ed0cb7b1e518d7500040b.
[15]
Ward Bower; Chuck Whitaker; William Erdman; Michael Behnke; Mark Fitzgerald.
Sandia Performance Test Protocol for Evaluating Inverters Used in Grid-Connected
Photovoltaic Systems. 2010. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication /
228743291_Performance_Test_Protocol_for_Evaluating_Inverters_Used_in_Grid-
Connected_Photovoltaic_Systems.
[16]
SolarEdge. SolarEdge Application Note – Efficiency of S-Series and P-Series Power
Optimizers. 2023. URL: https://knowledge- center.solaredge.com/sites/kc/files/
application_note_solaredge_optimizers_efficiency.pd.
[17]
Chris Deline; Sara MacAlpine. Use Conditions and Efficiency Measurements of DC
Power Optimizers for Photovoltaic Systems. 2013. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/645b1492838cd72a953737d3.
[18]
Sara M. MacAlpine; Robert W. Erickson; Fellow; IEEE; Michael J. Brandemuehl.
Characterization of Power Optimizer Potential to Increase Energy Capture in Pho-
tovoltaic Systems Operating Under Nonuniform Conditions. 2013. URL: https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5448c097e44c7a8667136cf0?single_revert=%5C%2Fen%
5C%2Fcatalog%5C%3Fq%5C%3DCharacterization%5C%2Bof%5C%2BPower%5C%
2BOptimizer%5C%2BPotential%5C%2Bto%5C%2BIncrease%5C%2BEnergy%5C%
2BCapture%5C%2Bin%5C%2BPhotovoltaic%5C%2BSystems%5C%2BOperating%
5C%2BUnder%5C%2BNonuniform%5C%2BConditions%5C%26show_single%5C%
3Doff%5C%26utf8%5C%3D%5C%25E2%5C%259C%5C%2593s.
[19]
Kosta Sinapis; Chris Tzikas; Geert Litjens; M Van Den Donker. Yield modelling for
micro inverter, power optimizer and string inverter under clear and partially shaded
conditions. 2015. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/303941769_Yield_
modelling_for_micro_inverter_power_optimizer_and_string_inverter_under_clear_
and_partially_shaded_conditions.
[20]
K. Sinapis; C. Tzikas; G. Litjens; M Van Den Donker; W. Folkerts; W.G.J.M. van
Sark; A. Smets. A comprehensive study on partial shading response of c-Si modules
and yield modeling of string inverter and module level power electronics. 2016. URL:
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5784f51cdd18f7b070004cea?single_revert=%5C%
2Fen%5C%2Fcatalog%5C%3Fq%5C%3DA%5C%2Bcomprehensive%5C%2Bstudy%
5C%2Bon%5C%2Bpartial%5C%2Bshading%5C%2Bresponse%5C%2Bof%5C%2Bc-
Si%5C%2Bmodules%5C%2Band%5C%2Byield%5C%2Bmodeling%5C%2Bof%5C%
2Bstring%5C%2Binverter%5C%2Band%5C%2Bmodule%5C%2Blevel%5C%2Bpower%
5C%2Belectronics%5C%26show_single%5C%3Doff%5C%26utf8%5C%3D%5C%
25E2%5C%259C%5C%2593.
[21]
Sinapis Kostas; Litjens Geert; van den Donker Menno; Folkerts Wiep; van Sark
Wilfried. Outdoor characterization and comparison of string and MLPE under clear
and partially shaded conditions. 2015. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5ceafafbd9001d44523f33da.
[22]
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Department of Electrical Engineering. Partial shad-
owing of photovoltaic arrays with different system configurations: literature review
and field test results. 2003. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/543e97beacc4e2154d2222ec.
[23]
A. Sainz; I. Vidaurrazaga; A. Pereda; R. Alonso; E. Roman; V. Martinez. CENTRAL-
IZED VS DISTRIBUTED (POWER OPTIMIZER) PV SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
36 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
==PAGE:45==
FIELD TEST RESULTS UNDER MISMATCHED OPERATING CONDITIONS. 2011.
URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/544247c6acc4e2154d577c01.
[24]
Photovoltaic / Solar Array Simulation Solution N8957APV. URL: https : / / www .
keysight.com/us/en/assets/7018-04924/data-sheets/5992-0999.pdf.
[25]
Tektronix Power Analyzer PA4000. URL: https://download.tek.com/datasheet/
PA4000-Multi-Phase-Power-Analyzer-Datasheet-55W289402.pdf.
[26]
National Instriments’ LabVIEW. URL: https://www.ni.com/da-dk/shop/labview.html.
[27]
Series E4360 Modular Solar Array Simulator. URL: https://www.keysight.com/us/
en/assets/7018-01813/data-sheets/5989-8485.pdf.
[28]
Trinasolar TSM-DD05A.05(II) 295W PV module. URL: http://static.trinasolar.com/
sites/default/files/Datasheet-DD05A.08(II).pdf.
[29]
HUAWEI’s FusionSolar application. URL: https://support.huawei.com/enterprise/
en/fusionsolar/fusionsolar.-pid-21571652.
[30]
Fronius Symo Hybrid 3.0-3-S inverter datasheet. URL: https://www.fronius.com/ar-
ae/middle-east/solar-energy/installers-partners/technical-data/all-products/inverters/
fronius-symo/fronius-symo-3-0-3-s.
[31]
Data logger NI cRIO C9038. URL: https://www.ni.com/da-dk/support/model.crio-
9073.html.
[32]
Janitza UMG 604-PRO power analyser. URL: https://www.janitza.com/umg-604-
pro.html.
[33]
Grafana data visualization and monitoring tool webpage. URL: http://dtu-czc8278098.
win.dtu.dk:3000/d/tDpLp5Enk/dtu-b110_pvsystem?orgId=1&refresh=30s.
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION OF STRING INVERTER VS POWER OPTIMIZER-BASED PV
SYSTEMS
37
==PAGE:46==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 101
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4545251199
https://www.dtu.dk/
