==PAGE:1==
Chinese family relationship verification via
video and audio modalities
Master Thesis
Zihao Fu ­ s202533
DTU Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Zihao Fu ­ s202533
Supervisors:
Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen ­ Technical University of Denmark
Sneha Das ­ Technical University of Denmark
Dominik Pružinský ­ Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava
Date:June 23, 2023
ii
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Kinship verification presents a formidable challenge, aiming to automatically determine
the presence of kinship between two individuals based on their biometric characteristics.
In the past decade, research efforts in kinship verification have predominantly focused
on utilizing single biometric information, particularly facial features. In this study, I
propose a novel approach that leverages both video and audio modalities to enhance
the accuracy of kinship verification.
To facilitate my study, I establish a novel Chinese kinship dataset comprising multiple
pairs of Chinese speech video segments. These speech segments encompass seven
distinct types of kinship relations, which are well­distributed. This dataset serves as a
valuable resource for exploring kinship verification in the context of video and audio
modalities.
Subsequently, a novel Siamese network architecture is introduced which is designed to
effectively fuse information from multiple modalities for kinship verification. By fusing
both video and audio modalities, this proposed network surpasses the performance of
traditional methods relying solely on single biometric information for kinship verification.
This improvement underscores the potential benefits of multimodal fusion in addressing
kinship verification challenges.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen,
Sneha Das and Dominik Pružinským for their strong support and providing guidance
throughout this research. It was a privilege to work and study under their guidance.
I would like to thank my family and especially my wife for their support and endless
comfort.
iv
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Scope and An Overview of Research Content . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Audio Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Faical Kinship Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Multi­modal methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
10
3.1
ResNet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
ResNet for Audio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
I­vector and X­vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Multi­modal factorized bilinear pooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
The Siamese Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Methodology
17
4.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Model Proposed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Compared methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Experiments and Results
23
5.1
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Experiments setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
Result and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6
Discussion and Future Work
27
6.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7
Conclusion
30
Bibliography
31
A Title
35
B Project plan
36
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
v
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Kinship verification has been an active subject of investigation within the machine
learning and deep learning domains since 2010. Fang et al. [1] first tackle this task by
using facial features and plan to utilize this innovative kinship verification approach and
inherent facial features to aid in addressing societal issues such as the search for
missing children and the identification of historical consanguinity. Given its promising
prospects for development, there has been an increasing amount of research conducted
in this domain, e.g. Xia, Shao, and Fu [2] presents an experiment that demonstrates the
feasibility of kinship verification using facial features and transfer learning, even in the
case of young parents. Zhang12 et al. [3] propose a model that demonstrates the
efficacy of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) in enhancing the accuracy of
kinship verification tasks. In 2016, Robinson et al. [4] constructed a comprehensive and
extensive kinship image database to facilitate further research in the field.
Previous studies in the field of kinship verification have predominantly concentrated on
investigating kinship features derived from visual modalities of facial images/videos.
However, there has been a notable scarcity of research addressing the utilization of
kinship information extracted from the auditory modality. Several studies have provided
evidence to show the notion that voice similarity is also relevant to making accurate
kinship judgments. For instance, Sataloff [5] presents compelling evidence in support of
the genetic influence on vocal tract shape, consequently impacting voice properties.
Their research findings suggest that individuals who share a kinship relation often
demonstrate resemblances in their vocal characteristics, attributed to the hereditary
genetic factors that shape and structure the vocal tract. Taylor [6] suggest that humans
possess the capability to discern kinship relations through the auditory perception of the
speaking voice. The evidence provided by Ariyaeeinia et al. [7] suggests potential
performance degradation in automatic speaker verification systems when tested with the
voices of identical twins. It also indicates that voice information could be a useful
resource for kinship verification purposes.
In 2019, Wu et al. [8] first conducted a pioneering investigation into kinship verification
systems that enable the fusion of face and voice modalities to capture distinctive
kin­related information to improve the performance of the kinship verification task. Wu
et al. [8]has demonstrated the feasibility of incorporating both facial and audio
information for kinship verification. I am excited about this finding as well, and I have
identified some areas for improvement in their work, which has inspired me. The
TALKIN dataset collected by Wu et al. [8] has some limitations, such as uncontrolled
environmental conditions, and only parent­children kinship relations. In addition, the
approach proposed in this paper for fusing video and audio features involves utilizing
Principal Component Analysis (PCA)[9] to reduce the dimensionality of the two features.
Subsequently, the reduced­dimensional features are concatenated directly to compute
the similarity. With the advancement of multimodal research, there could exist other
multimodal fusion techniques that could potentially be applied to audio­facial verification
to achieve improved performance.
Inspired by that, I conducted this study.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
1
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Problem Scope and An Overview of Research Content
This study addresses two primary challenges of audio­facial kinship verification: 1) the
absence of an audio­visual kinship dataset, regardless of the language, whether it is
Chinese or any other language and 2) the lack of research on methods for fusing audio
and facial information to enhance audio­visual kinship verification performance.
For the first challenge, a novel kinship dataset is introduced in this study, comprising
both visual and audio information extracted from videos featuring several individuals
delivering speeches. The dataset encompasses seven distinct familial relationships,
including parent­child relationships and sibling relationships. To ensure a controlled
environment and minimize potential noise, all videos were collected during individual
speech sessions. With the aim of investigating Chinese family relationship verification,
all the speakers included in the dataset are Chinese individuals who speak Mandarin.
To address the second challenge, a novel framework is proposed for audio­visual
kinship verification by leveraging a novel multi­modal feature fusion method. This
framework involves two primary steps. Firstly, the extraction of suitable audio and facial
features is performed on the speech video. This step aims to capture relevant
information from both the audio and visual modalities. Secondly, the extracted audio and
facial features are fused together for the final verification task. It is important to choose
how to fuse the audio and facial features for the multi­modalities task. In the previous
work, Wu et al. [8] directly concatenate the audio and facial features after performing
PCA for dimensionality reduction to calculate the similarity. I was inspired by the
research of Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji [10], which indicate that bilinear models have
demonstrated a higher efficacy in integrating and leveraging synergistic information from
diverse modalities, resulting in enhanced performance in multi­modalities classification
tasks. Therefore, I decided to employ a bilinear method to fuse the audio and facial
features for the kinship verification task to assess the feasibility of this approach in the
audio­facial kinship verification fields. Lastly, for the multi­modal kinship verification, a
Siamese architecture is employed, utilizing pair­wise similarities and contrastive loss.
Siamese architectures are characterized by the presence of identical sub­networks that
share the same configurations, parameters, and weights. This architectural design
proves promising for multi­modal fusion tasks due to the reduced number of parameters
that need to be optimized[11].
More details about the dataset and model implementation will be presented thoroughly
throughout the thesis.
1.2
Thesis Structure
The rest of the thesis is organized as follows: Chapter 2 provides a comprehensive
review of the pertinent literature in the areas of audio verification, visual verification
especially for kinship verification, and multi­modal methods. Chapter 3 provides the
necessary theoretical background to enhance understanding of the methodology
employed in constructing the proposed model. Chapter 4 details information regarding
the dataset that was collected, the construction of the proposed model and the compared
model. Chapter 5 presents the details of the experimental setup, the compared result
with the compared model mentioned in Chapter 4 and the analysis of the result.
Discussion and future work are in Chapter 6, and Chapter 7 concludes this thesis.
2
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:8==
2
Related Work
In this chapter, an exploration of the related work is conducted, focusing on the areas of
audio verification, faical kinship verification, and multi­modal methods. The primary
objective is to investigate the contributions and advancements that have been made in
these research areas and explore their evolution in recent years. Additionally, the
chapter aims to provide an assessment of the current state of these topics in relation to
kinship verification.
2.1
Audio Verification
The fundamental goal of audio verification is determining whether a given test audio is
spoken by a target speaker, given the audio biometric information of the enrolled
speaker. Audio verification can be approached using two main strategies: stage­wise
and end­to­end. The specific strategies employed in audio verification are illustrated in
figure 2.1. The stagewise audio verification system consists of two primary components:
the front­end voiceprint feature extraction module and the back­end voiceprint feature
similarity calculation module. The feature extraction module converts audio segments in
the time domain into high­dimensional feature vectors, which represent voiceprint
features. Subsequently, the similarity calculation module measures the similarity
between the extracted voiceprint features of the enrolled speaker and those of the
verification speaker, comparing the result to a predefined threshold value. In contrast,
the end­to­end audio verification system directly performs speaker verification without
explicit separation of stages. It takes a pair of speech audio inputs and provides a direct
output in the form of a similarity score, indicating the degree of similarity between the
two audio segments[12]. In this study, the focus lies primarily on the related work of
extraction of voiceprint features.
In 1980, Davis and Mermelstein [13] introduced Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients
(MFCCs) as a technique for audio features extraction, which remains in use today. They
discovered that mel­frequency cepstra have notable advantages over linear­frequency
cepstra, providing a particularly compact representation. Even with just six coefficients,
MFCCs can capture a significant amount of information from audio signals. Given their
superior discriminative capability, this approach has gained wide popularity in the field of
audio verification.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2.1: Overview of deep­learning based Audio verification
In 2010, Dehak et al. [14] introduced GMM­UBM/i­vector as a feature representation
method for speaker verification tasks. I­vector is used to capture speaker variability and
has shown effectiveness in enhancing speaker verification performance. I­vector
modelling has garnered significant attention in the field of speaker verification and has
been widely studied and extended by researchers.
In 2014, Variani et al. [15] introduced a method for small­footprint text­dependent
speaker verification using deep neural networks (DNNs). In order to obtain better
speaker feature representations, they employed D­vectors as a novel approach.
D­vectors are feature vectors extracted from intermediate layers of the DNN, prior to the
output layer. The experimental results presented in the paper demonstrate that
D­vectors can capture richer speaker feature information and achieve better
performance in text­dependent speaker verification tasks. Subsequently, D­vectors have
become an important feature representation method in the field of speaker verification,
and have been widely applied in subsequent research studies.
Inspired by D­vectors, Snyder et al. [16] introduced X­vectors which represent a
significant advancement over the D­vector, as it employs a pooling process to aggregate
frame­level features into sentence­level representations. The experimental results
presented in the paper demonstrate that the X­vector exhibits excellent robustness
across various environmental and speech variations, outperforming traditional methods
in terms of speaker recognition performance. Consequently, X­vector has emerged as a
significant feature representation method in the field of speaker recognition and has
found widespread applications in tasks such as speaker identification and speaker
verification.
In this study, I consider using the i­vector and X­vector as compared methods to get the
speaker embedding features.
4
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:10==
Under the impetus of pioneering works such as d­vector and x­vector, numerous deep
embedding techniques have emerged, most of which consists of four key components:
network input, network architecture, temporal pooling, and objective function.
Network input and network architecture: Network input can be categorized into two
types: raw waveform signals in the time domain and acoustic features in the
time­frequency domain, including spectrograms, mel filterbanks (F­bank), and MFCCs.
The network architecture exhibits greater diversity but fundamentally derives from
DNNs, RNNs[17]/LSTMs[18] and CNN[19].
Temporal pooling: Temporal pooling refers to the transformation layer in neural
networks that aggregates frame­level embedding features into segment­level
embedding features. Temporal pooling strategies can be categorized into two types:
statistical pooling and learning­based pooling.
Objective function: Objective function also known as the loss function or cost function,
is a crucial component in neural networks that quantifies the discrepancy between the
predicted output and the ground truth. It serves as a measure of how well the model is
performing and guides the learning process by optimizing the network’s parameters.
As the X­vector uses Time Delay Neural Networks (TDNNs)[20] to extract the audio
features, some other network architectures are also used for extracting the audio
features. In my study, Residual Neural Network (ResNet)[21] is used for extracting the
audio feature.
ResNet, proposed by He et al. [21], is a deep learning architecture specifically
developed to tackle the degradation problem encountered when training deep neural
networks. The degradation problem refers to the phenomenon where adding more
layers to a network leads to a decrease in performance due to optimization difficulties.
The study demonstrated that ResNet achieved remarkable performance improvements
over previous state­of­the­art models in various image recognition benchmarks,
including the widely used ImageNet dataset. Consequently, ResNet has emerged as a
fundamental architecture in the field of computer vision and has been extensively
adopted in diverse deep learning tasks.
ResNet is widely employed in the field of image analysis, but its utilization in the domain
of audio is not as prevalent until Nagrani, Chung, and Zisserman [22] introduces the
VoxCeleb dataset, which is a large­scale speaker identification dataset designed for
training and evaluating speaker recognition systems. ResNet has the best performance
on the VoxCeleb dataset and is considered the state­of­the­art speaker verification
technique.
Therefore, in my work, I also consider using ResNet as my audio feature extraction
method. Regrettably, the majority of research in audio verification has primarily focused
on same­person verification tasks, while comparatively fewer methods have been
specifically designed for kinship verification. This area of study remains largely
unexplored and under­researched.
2.2
Faical Kinship Verification
In contrast to the field of audio kinship verification, the field of visual kinship verification
has witnessed numerous significant research contributions. Consequently, this section
will primarily focus on discussing the relevant literature pertaining to visual verification in
the context of kinship verification.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
5
==PAGE:11==
Facial kinship verification refers to the application of computer vision and machine
learning techniques to analyze the facial feature similarity between two face images
from different individuals in order to determine whether they share a specific kinship.
This topic was initially proposed by Fang et al. [1] in 2010 and has a research history of
just over a decade. It is a relatively new and challenging research direction that has
gained increasing attention from researchers worldwide in recent years. Given the
potential academic and practical value of facial kinship verification, there has been a
growing interest in this problem among researchers worldwide.
The main components of visual kinship verification can be categorized into four three
stages: face detection, alignment and segmentation; kinship feature extraction and
similarity calculation.
Face detection, alignment and segmentation : Face detection aims to identify and
localize faces in the original input image. After successful detection, crucial facial
landmarks, such as the positions of the eyes, are utilized as reference points for
subsequent face alignment and normalization. The primary objective of alignment and
normalization is to reduce the influence of variations in facial scale and angles, thereby
ensuring consistent and standardized representations of the faces. Commonly used
methods include Multi­task convolutional neural network (MTCNN)[23] and Ensemble of
regression trees (ERT)[24]. In my study, I choose to use the MTCNN method.
Kinship feature extraction: For the given pair of input face images, feature extraction
is performed separately on each image to represent them as compact feature vectors.
This component is a core research component in kinship verification and is crucial for
determining its performance. The subsequent part of this section will primarily focus on
kinship feature extraction.
Similarity calculation: After kinship feature extraction, the two face images are
represented as fixed­dimensional feature vectors. Next, an appropriate similarity
calculation method is employed to evaluate the similarity between the two face images.
Xing et al. [25] introduce Metric learning which can optimize a transformation matrix that
minimizes the distance between positive sample pairs (i.e., pairs exhibiting kinship
relationships) while simultaneously maximizing the distance between negative sample
pairs (i.e., pairs lacking kinship relationships). This learned transformation matrix is
employed to project the extracted feature vectors into a new feature space,
consequently improving the performance of face kinship verification[26].
In 2010, Fang et al. [1] initially extracted facial low­level features from multiple
dimensions, incorporating facial colour attributes such as eye colour, skin colour, and
hair colour. They further considered inter­feature distances by computing the Euclidean
distance between different facial regions and examining their gradient characteristics.
Moreover, facial shape, including the dimensions of facial organs, was also taken into
account.
Then Xia, Shao, and Fu [27] aimed to provide a more comprehensive depiction of facial
information by incorporating additional attributes such as age, gender, and ethnicity of
individuals in the images. These attributes were represented as binary features,
indicating their presence or absence. The final feature vector was constructed by
concatenating 20 attribute features.
However, these methods have some noticeable drawbacks. It is important to note that
the annotation of these features often requires manual intervention to define the
attributes. Additionally, the low dimensionality of the feature vector and the limited
6
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:12==
information representation may impose constraints on the exhaustive exploration of
kinship characteristics within the images. In contrast, the deep learning method exhibits
excellent feature representation capabilities by analyzing large­scale datasets and
adaptively extracting effective feature vectors from raw data. They avoid the limitations
of manual feature engineering, which often relies on specific and limited feature
extraction rules. Therefore, researchers have gradually shifted their focus towards deep
learning methods.
In the study by Zhang12 et al. [3] in 2015, the application of CNN networks for kinship
verification was first introduced. The authors achieved exceptional performance in
kinship verification on publicly available datasets. Specifically, on the KinFaceW­I and
KinFaceW­II datasets, they achieved average recognition rates of 77.5% and 88.4%,
respectively. These outcomes provide strong evidence for the efficacy of deep CNNs in
accurately determining the genetic relationship between individuals based on their facial
images.
In 2016, the hierarchical representation learning method for kinship verification was
introduced by Kohli et al. [28]. By leveraging the hierarchical structure of the DBN, the
proposed method aims to capture informative representations that are discriminative for
kinship verification tasks. This approach utilizes a deep belief network (DBN) to extract
features that can effectively reduce the gap across generations.
In 2017, Duan and Zhang [29] proposes a novel approach for kinship recognition that
leverages an adversarial contrastive residual network. The experimental evaluation is
conducted on the large­scale kinship recognition dataset, where the proposed method
achieves impressive performance. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
adversarial contrastive residual network, achieving significant improvements over
state­of­the­art methods in terms of recognition accuracy.
In 2020, Nguyen, Nguyen, and Dao [30] conducted a comparative study on several
pre­trained models for facial kinship verification. They evaluated the performance of the
ResNet­50 model pre­trained on the VGG­Face2 dataset[31], the FaceNet model
pre­trained on the VGG­Face2 dataset[31], and the StyleGAN2 model pre­trained on the
FFHQ dataset[32]. Among these models, the pre­trained ResNet­50 model exhibited
superior performance in the task of facial kinship verification.
Based on these findings, I decided to utilize the pre­trained ResNet model for facial
feature extraction in their study. Due to limitations in computational resources, a
pre­trained ResNet­18 model was utilized instead of the ResNet­50 model. This
decision was made to address the computational constraints while still benefiting from
the capabilities of a pre­trained deep­learning model. Although ResNet­18 has a
shallower architecture compared to ResNet­50, it still offers sufficient capacity to capture
meaningful facial features for the task at hand, albeit with potentially slightly reduced
performance compared to ResNet­50.
2.3
Multi­modal methods
Multi­modal fusion techniques have been widely adopted to improve recognition
accuracy across various domains. For instance, in 2016 Neverova et al. [33] employed
multi­modal methods to enhance gesture recognition performance. In 2017, Tzirakis
et al. [34] utilized multi­modal approaches for emotion recognition. In 2018, Liu, Yuan,
and Wang [35] leveraged the combination of visual frames and audio information to
effectively enhance large­scale video classification. Additionally, Chowdhury et al. [36]
focused on the fusion of voice and face modalities to enhance person recognition
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
7
==PAGE:13==
accuracy. These studies exemplify the successful application of multi­modal fusion
techniques in different domains to harness complementary information and improve
recognition performance.
There are two main types of multi­modal fusion methods: through early fusion (feature
level) and through late fusion (score or decision levels)[37]. Feature­level fusion,
achieved through concatenation or aggregation, is often regarded as a method that can
yield high accuracy. However, it is important to note that feature patterns may not
always be compatible, leading to increased system complexity. On the other hand,
score­level fusion techniques, which involve the use of deterministic methods (such as
average fusion) or learned functions, are commonly employed. However, these
techniques can be sensitive to the impact of score normalization methods on the overall
decision boundaries.
In 2015, Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji [10] conducted a study using bilinear pooling for
fine­grained classification, which achieved excellent results and attracted significant
attention. However, the original bilinear pooling method suffers from the issue of
high­dimensional feature representation after fusion, where the dimensionality of the
fused features equals the product of the dimensions of the input features, x and y. To
address this problem, Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji [10] attempted to apply PCA for
dimensionality reduction but found the results to be unsatisfactory. Since then, several
research studies have emerged that focus on reducing the dimensionality of bilinear
pooling features.
After the remarkable success of bilinear pooling, the work on Li et al. [38] effectively
bridged the gap between bilinear models and bilinear pooling. The authors overlooked
the normalization operation in bilinear pooling and proposed the Factorized Bilinear
Model, which leverages both the first­order and second­order information of features.
This approach achieved impressive results, particularly in the field of fine­grained image
classification.
In 2016, Gao et al. [39] proposed two methods, Random Maclaurin (RM) and Tensor
Sketch (TS), for dimensionality reduction of bilinear pooling. Building upon these
techniques, Fukui et al. [40] made slight modifications to the TS algorithm to make it
suitable for fusing features from different modalities and introduced the Multimodal
Compact Bilinear Pooling(MCBP) method, which was applied in the field of Visual
Question Answering (VQA).
In the work by Kim et al. [41], the Hadamard product (element­wise multiplication) was
used to implement the bilinear model, leading to the proposal of Multimodal Low­rank
Bilinear Pooling (MLB) for multi­modal fusion. Yu et al. [42] introduced Multi­modal
factorized bilinear pooling (MFB) by performing sum pooling for channel fusion, resulting
in a final representation. In a subsequent study, Yu et al. [43] divided the MFB operation
into two stages, namely the Expand Stage and Squeeze Stage, and stacked MFB
modules to capture high­order interactions, giving rise to Multi­modal factorized
high­order pooling (MFH). Yu et al. [43] successfully applied MFB/MFH in the context of
Visual Question Answering (VQA) and achieved promising results.
From then on, the MFB/MFH methods have been applied to various domains. For
instance, Yu et al. [44] employed these techniques in the field of image classification. In
the domain of person re­identification, Suh et al. [45] utilized MFB/MFH methods to
improve performance. Additionally, Hu et al. [46] employed MFB/MFH techniques for
effective action recognition.
8
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:14==
The MFB/MFH methods have also been applied to fuse information from images and
audio. In the study by Zhao, Yang, and Zhang [47], MFB was used to combine image
and audio features to improve the accuracy of emotion recognition, yielding promising
results. Inspired by this article, I have decided to employ MFB for the fusion of audio and
facial features for audio­facial kinship verification.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
9
==PAGE:15==
3
Theory
In this chapter, I aim to provide the necessary theoretical background to comprehend the
proposed model and the compared model. Firstly, I will provide a brief introduction to
ResNet, particularly ResNet­18, which was utilized for both facial feature extraction and
audio feature extraction. Since ResNet­18 is primarily designed for image inputs, special
pre­processing techniques are required for ResNet for audio, which will be discussed in
detail in the ”ResNet for Audio” section. Additionally, I will present some background
knowledge on I­vectors and X­vectors as they serve as my compared methods.
Next, I will delve into the theoretical aspects of Multi­modal Factorized Bilinear Pooling
(MFB), which will aid in understanding the process of fusing multi­modal features in my
model. Since my entire model is built upon a Siamese Network architecture, I will also
introduce relevant theoretical knowledge pertaining to Siamese Networks.
3.1
ResNet
ResNet (Residual Network) is a deep convolutional neural network architecture that was
proposed by He et al. [21] in 2015. It was designed to address the challenge of training
very deep neural networks by alleviating the degradation problem, where accuracy
saturates or even degrades as network depth increases.
The ResNet network was inspired by the VGG19 network and modified based on it,
incorporating residual units through shortcut connections. The main modifications in
ResNet include using convolutional layers with a stride of 2 for downsampling and
replacing fully connected layers with a global average pooling layer. An important design
principle of ResNet is that when the size of the feature map is reduced by half, the
number of feature maps is doubled, thus maintaining the complexity of the network
layers. ResNet introduces the residual learning framework by incorporating shortcut
connections between every two layers, which enables the formation of residual blocks.
Residual blocks are specifically designed to address the degradation problem
encountered in deep networks. Residual blocks aim to enable the internal structure of
the model to have the capability of identity mapping (the ability to do nothing) at the very
least. For a convolutional block in a VGG­style convolutional network, assuming the
input to the block is denoted as x, the expected output is denoted as H(x), where the
block performs the function of non­linear mapping. In order to achieve identity mapping,
we can let the model learn H(x) = x. Due to it being difficult to learn H(x) = x, a
shortcut is added to make the direct connection block in the network learn to be zero. It
is easy to use an L2 normalization to make the block learn to be zero. Thus the network
is designed as H(x) = F(x) + x, we only need to make F(x) = 0 to achieve the
capability of identity mapping.
10
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1: The structure of Residual Block
Residual Block is designed as figure 3.1. We can see that a Residual Block has two
paths F(x) and x. In this way, we can have H(x) = F(x) + x, and transfer the problem
of how to learn H(x) = x to learn F(x) = H(x) −x, which is much easier.
The ResNet­18 I used in the study is defined as figure 3.2. The number of Residual
Block contained in ResNet­18 is [2, 2, 2, 2]. And every Residual Block contains 2
convolution layers. Adding the first layer and last fully connected layer, this network
structure contains a total of 18 layers, so it is called ResNet­18.
Figure 3.2: The structure of ResNet­18 network
3.2
ResNet for Audio
As ResNet is primarily designed for image recognition tasks in the field of deep learning,
the input shape of ResNet is defined as a four­dimensional tensor with dimensions
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
11
==PAGE:17==
(batch_size, channels, height, width), where ”batch_size” represents the number of
images in each batch, ”channels” refers to the number of channels in an image (e.g., 3
channels for RGB images), ”height” represents the height of an image, and ”width”
represents the width of an image.
Hence, in order to conform to the input shape required by ResNet, pre­processing steps
need to be applied to the audio data. The proposed approach involves utilizing the
Short­Time Fourier Transform(STFT)[48] to convert the audio signals into spectral
images.
Before introducing the Short­Time Fourier Transform (STFT), it is essential to briefly
mention the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)[49]. It is known that any periodic signal
can be represented as a linear combination of sinusoidal and cosinusoidal components.
The purpose of the DFT is to assist in identifying these components and provide
information about their frequencies, magnitudes, and phases.
If we have collected N samples at a sampling frequency F, in order to obtain the
frequency information of the original signal, we need to generate N cosine basis signals
that vibrate with 0 ∼N −1 cycles within N sample points. Then, we compute the cosine
similarity between the original signal and the N cosine basis signals sequentially. The
cosine similarity ccos is defined as 3.1. Then we save N number of ccos in the array Xcos,
we will get 3.2.
correlation (x, y) = ΣN−1
i=0 x[i]y[i]
(3.1)
Xcos[k] = ΣN−1
i=0 x[i] cos
(
2π ki
N
)
(3.2)
The x is the original signal, cos
(
2π ki
N
)
is the basic signal of N samples vibrate i cycles.
In the meantime, we also need N sine basis signals, the difference from cosine basis
signals is that we compute the sine similarity csin, and we also save these N number of
csin in the array Xsin, and get 3.3.
Xsin[k] = ΣN−1
i=0 x[i] sin
(
2π ki
N
)
(3.3)
Then we can have the DFT as 3.4, where the frequencies are iF
N , magnitudes are
√
Xcos[i]2+Xsin[i]2
N/2
and phases are arctan
(
Xsin [i]
Xcos[i]
)
.
X[k] = ΣN−1
i=0 x[i]e−2πj ki
N = ΣN−1
i=0 x[i] cos
(
2π ki
N
)
−jΣN−1
i=0 x[i] sin
(
2π ki
N
)
= Xcos[k]
−jXsin[k]
(3.4)
In situations where the signal within the N sampled points does not exhibit an integer
number of cycles, the DFT can encounter frequency leakage issues. This phenomenon
poses challenges when reconstructing the original signal using its spectrum. To mitigate
the impact of frequency leakage, it is a common practice to multiply the origin signal with
a window function.
12
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:18==
However, performing the DFT directly on a non­stationary signal does not provide the
temporal information of signal variations. Hence, STFT is employed where each
segment of the signal extracted is denoted as a frame. The duration between
consecutive frames, known as the hop size, is commonly set to be between 25% and
75% of the frame length. By performing the DFT on each frame and concatenating the
results, a spectrogram can be obtained. Subsequently, the spectrogram images can be
utilized as the input for ResNet, enabling the application of the Residual Neural Network
for further analysis or processing.
3.3
I­vector and X­vector
In 1995, Reynolds and Rose [50] first proposed GMM­based speaker recognition, which
has been effective in speaker­identification tasks. However, in the verification tasks,
other speakers besides the target one are needed. In 2000, Reynolds, Quatieri, and
Dunn [51] proposed an approach named GMM­UBM which uses the Universal
Background Model(UBM) to overcome the challenges of verification tasks. The UBM is
designed to model the entire population of speakers. It captures the common
characteristics shared by the speaker population, serving as a reference baseline for
better differentiation of distinct speech features among individual speakers. However,
the dimension of vectors extracted by GMM­UBM is relatively high, which is not friendly
for processing large­scale data. In 2009, Dehak et al. [14] proposed i­Vector, which
reduced the super vectors dimension before the classification. The computation
complexity of the I­Vector has been significantly reduced, making it suitable for
processing large­scale data.
s = m + Tω
(3.5)
The i­vector process primarily consists of two stages: the training stage and the
extraction stage. The training stage is the same as the GMM­UBM. The equation 3.5
shows how the extract stage works. s is the Gaussian Mean Supervector (obtained by
GMM) for the speaker’s audio signal, m is the Gaussian Mean Supervector of UBM
(obtained by UBM), T is the total­variability matrix, and the posterior mean of w is
i­vector. Therefore, by using Baum­Welch algorithm[52] to calculate T, we can extract
the i­vector by calculating the posterior mean of w. I­vectors have found widespread
application across various domains in the field of audio since their inception. The
i­vector, although not a deep learning model, can be considered as the last model in the
speech domain to be surpassed by deep learning models. Therefore, I considered using
one pre­trained I­vector model as the basis for comparison in this study.
The X­vector model is derived from the d­vector model, therefore we began with the
d­vector model. The idea behind d­vectors is straightforward. During training, small
segments of speech are extracted and fed into a DNN for training. The DNN is trained to
predict which person spoke in the given segment. After training, the desired audio
feature can be obtained from the second­to­last layer of the network. In practical
prediction scenarios, the input speech segments may have varying lengths. Therefore,
d­vectors are obtained by dividing the speech into multiple segments and taking the
average of the features from these segments.
In 2018, Snyder et al. [16] used a specific method to aggregate the features obtained
from the second­to­last layer rather than simply taking an average as in the case of
d­vectors. Therefore, the X­vector is considered an upgraded version of the d­vector.
X­vector considers the complete audio signal information during training. It computes
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
13
==PAGE:19==
the mean and variance of the output features for each small segment of the audio signal,
concatenates them together, and then feeds them into a DNN to determine the speaker
identity. The remaining aspects remain consistent with the d­vector approach. It is easy
to improve the performance of the X­vector by replacing DNN with RNN. There are
abundant resources of the x­vector pre­trained model available, thereby, the x­vector is
also considered as a comparison method in this study. The pre­trained model used in
this study is provided by Ravanelli et al. [53].
3.4
Multi­modal factorized bilinear pooling
In order to understand Multi­modal factorized bilinear pooling(MFB), we need to learn
Multimodal Low­rank Bilinear Pooling(MLB) first. For the feature vector x and y, A
normal bilinear model is defined as 3.6, where W is the matrix of parameters of the
full­connected layer.
fi =
N
∑
j=1
M
∑
k=1
wijkxjyk + bi = xT Wiy + bi
(3.6)
MLB is using the Hadamard product (denoted by the symbol ◦) to achieve the bilinear
model. Thus, we will have 3.7, which using low­rank matrix Ui and Vi approximate the
high­rank matrix Wi to simplify the compute.
fi = xT Wiy + bi = xT UiVT
i y + bi = 1T (
UT
i x ◦VT
i y
)
+ bi
(3.7)
And when we expect the output f to be a vector, we only need to expand the matrix Ui
and Vi, and use a matrix P to control the length of the output as 3.8.
f = PT (
UT x ◦VT y
)
+ b
(3.8)
This is the main difference between MFB and MLB. When expecting the output f to be a
vector, MFB changes U and V into three­order tensors U = [U1, . . . , Uo] ∈Rm×k×o and
V = [V1, . . . , Vd] ∈Rn×k×o. Without sacrificing generality, we can reformulate U and V
as matrices ˜U ∈Rm×ko and ˜V ∈Rn×ko and then uses sum pooling to get the final output
shown in Figure 3.3. Therefore, the 3.7 could be rewritten as 3.9, where
SumPooling(x, k) means utilizing a one­dimensional, non­overlapping window of size k,
sum pooling is applied over x. And with changing the parameter k and o, we can control
the expanded feature size and final fusion feature size, which are considered
hypo­parameters to train the model.
f = SumPooling
(
˜UT x ◦˜V T y + b, k
)
(3.9)
14
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: Multi­modal Factorized Bilinear Pooling
3.5
The Siamese Network
The Siamese networks are employed for handling scenarios involving two inputs that
are comparatively similar. Siamese networks are always trained by binary cross­entropy
loss, contrastive loss or triplet loss functions. In this study, Contrastive Loss is used
which is defined as 3.10, the details of this loss function are illustrated in the
Methodology Chapter.
L −1
2N
N
∑
n=1
(
ynd2 + (1 −yn) max(M −d, 0)2)
(3.10)
The fundamental concept of the Siamese network revolves around weight sharing
between two networks with disparate inputs. (shown in Figure 3.4). Typically, Network 1
and Network 2 have identical structures. If the structures differ, the weights will not be
shared between the two networks, thus classifying them as pseudo­Siamese networks.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4: The basic architecture of Siamese network
The primary advantage of the Siamese network lies in its ability to mitigate the
dependence on labels, thereby enhancing its scalability. It can proficiently classify
categories that have not been explicitly trained for, which represents an improvement
over numerous algorithms. Furthermore, this algorithm demonstrates suitability for
datasets with limited data, effectively augmenting the effective size of the entire dataset.
Consequently, it enables the training of deep networks on datasets with relatively small
sample sizes, yielding promising outcomes. As the scale of my data set is relatively
small, the Siamese network is super suitable for this study. The second advantage is
that the Siamese network is considered as a one­shot classification model. A one­shot
classification model is defined as an accurate prediction that can be made using a single
training sample from each new class. This advantage is also highly suitable for the aim
of kinship verification in this study.
16
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:22==
4
Methodology
In this chapter, I will present a comprehensive description of the proposed dataset,
including the collection pipeline and detailed parameters. Furthermore, I will elaborate
on the intricate aspects of the proposed model, encompassing the overall architecture,
the employed loss function, and pertinent information regarding the sub­model, Finally, I
will introduce the compared methods employed in this study.
4.1
Dataset
In this section, the dataset I established for Chinese family relationship verification is
described. The dataset contains several video clips and related metadata which
describe the pairwise structure of the video in kin pairs. All the video clips are in a
semi­wild environment. Semi­wild environment is meant that these video clips were
captured without controlling factors such as background music and illumination.
However, it should be noted that all the clips were extracted from personal speech
videos, which means that the posture, actor voice (referring to the voice used for acting
or singing instead of the real voice), and speech intelligibility can be considered as
controlled factors. All speakers in the videos are of Chinese origin and speak Mandarin
and all video clips were sourced from YouTube and BiliBili.
4.1.1
Data collection pipeline
Step 1. List of celebrities who are in kinship. The first step is to search the Chinese
celebrities who have a family member who is also a celebrity. Limited to various Chinese
dialects, only celebrities who speak standard Mandarin are chosen. The list contains 57
pairs of celebrities involved in 7 different types of kinship including parent­child and
siblings relation.
Step 2. Downloading and clipping the videos. Videos are downloaded from YouTube
and BiliBili by searching for the name of celebrities. The majority of the videos are
sourced from talk shows or interviews, as we are more interested in capturing people’s
natural voices rather than their performative ones. The complete video was cropped into
multiple segments, each consisting solely of clips featuring the celebrities of our interest.
The total video length of each celebrity is over 3 minutes as a minimum.
Step 3. Data preparation For the audio part, I extract the audio from the video clips and
used the mdx_extra_q[54] model to remove the background music and other noises to
preserve only the human voice.
(a) Original Spectrogram
(b) A subfigure
Figure 4.1: Spectrogram after removing noise by mdx_extra_q
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
17
==PAGE:23==
4.1.2
Parameters of the dataset
Table 4.1: Distribution of the dataset
MS
MD
FS
FD
BB
BS
SS
5
6
11
9
10
8
8
The dataset contains seven major relations: Father­Son(FS), Father­Daughter(FD),
Mother­Son(MS), Mother­Daughter(MD), Brother­Brother(BB), Brother­Sister(BS) and
Sister­Sister(SS). In addition, a label named half­sibling is included to show whether the
siblings only have one parent in common. The age range, resources, country and
mother tongue are also labelled for future work. The texts of the videos are not included
in the dataset as the task is text­independent family relationship verification. There is a
variation in the duration of video clips, ranging from a minimum of four seconds to a
maximum of almost six minutes. The aggregate length of video segments featuring each
individual celebrity exceeds five minutes. The majority of videos have a resolution of
1280*720 and a sample rate of 44.1 kHz. The comparison between my dataset and
other public kinship datasets can be found in table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Main characteristics of publicly kinship datasets
Dataset
Modalities
Size
Resolution ratio
Controlled
environment
Cornell KinFace[1]
Image
150 pairs
100 × 100
No
UB KinFace[55]
Image
200 groups
89 × 96
No
UvA­NEMO Smile[56]
Video
1240 videos
1920 × 1080
Yes
Family101[57]
Image
14816 images
120 × 150
No
TSKinFace[58]
Image
1015 tri­subjects
64 × 64
No
KFVW[59]
Video
418 pairs of videos
900 × 500
No
FIW[60]
Image
1000 family trees
224 × 224
No
TALKIN[8]
Video & Audio
400 pairs of videos
1920 × 1080
No
My Dataset
Video & Audio
57 pairs of people
1280 × 720
Semi
4.2
Model Proposed
In this section, a novel Siamese network is proposed for the integration of video and
audio modalities specifically for Chinese family relationship verification (shown in figure
4.2). Our approach involves leveraging a pre­trained ResNet­18 model[61] for audio
feature extraction while employing a pre­trained ResNet­18 model[21] for extracting
facial features from images. Subsequently, the MFB (Multi­modal Factorized Bilinear)
fusion method[62] was employed to combine the audio and facial features. The learning
of the relationship between the two inputs, based on audio and visual modalities, was
achieved using backpropagation and contrastive loss.
18
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.2: Proposed Novel Siamese Network
4.2.1
Audio Network
In this work, I used ResNet­18 pre­trained model with a large speaker verification
dataset named VoxCeleb2[63], the pre­trained model I used is trained by haoxintong[61]
which used a simpler and better­trained Resnet­18 network instead of Resnet­50
network in the paper[63], achieving excellent accuracy of the classification work. To fit
this pre­trained model input size, the audio samples are converted into single­channel
with 16 kHz and segmented into 2.4 seconds. We applied Short­time Fourier Transform
(STFT)[48] to divide the input signal into multiple windows to obtain spectral information.
The step of the window is 16ms and the width of the window is 40ms. After that, the
spectrograms with the size of 224x224 can be computed to fit the ResNet­18 pre­trained
model.
4.2.2
Facial Network
In this work, I used ResNet­18 per­trained model from Torchvision[21] to extract the
image features. First, I extracted images every 2.4 seconds to match the voice network.
After extracting the images, we use MTCNN[23] to extract the facial images. Then we
resize the facial images to the format of 224x224 to fit the network. By removing the last
FC layer of the ResNet­18 network, we can extract the feature of facial images with 512
dimensions.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
19
==PAGE:25==
4.2.3
Fusion Network
Figure 4.3: MFB Module
Following the audio and facial networks, 512­dimensional audio features and
512­dimensional facial features were extracted. Subsequently, the MFB fusion
method[62] was employed to integrate these two feature representations (shown in
figure 4.3). After applying a Fully Connected layer, the contrastive loss was computed to
facilitate learning the kinship relationship between the two input samples. The
contrastive loss is defined as 4.1
L −1
2N
N
∑
n=1
(
ynd2 + (1 −yn) max(M −d, 0)2)
(4.1)
Where M is the margin used to control the distance difference between pairs of samples
of the same class and pairs of samples of different classes, in this work, the margin is
20
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:26==
predefined as 0.2. The variable d represents the cosine distance between the fused
features of two inputs. The label of kinship denoted as yn, takes a value of 1 when the
two inputs belong to individuals with kinship and 0 otherwise.
4.3
Compared methods
4.3.1
Only audio modality
I utilized a simple Siamese network(shown in figure 4.4) to compare my proposed model
with three distinct audio features, namely i­vector, x­vector, and ResNet­18 features.
The i­vector and x­vector are pre­trained by Kaldi[64]. In order to improve accuracy, I
incorporated two convolutional layers in the Siamese network specifically for the i­vector
and x­vector audio features. For the ResNet­18 features, I used the same Siamese
network as our proposed model without the MFB module.
Figure 4.4: I­vector/x­vector Siamese network
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
21
==PAGE:27==
4.3.2
Only video modality
I utilized the identical ResNet­18 model to extract facial features and learn the kinship
relationship using the same Siamese network as our proposed model, with the
exception that the MFB module was excluded.
4.3.3
Other fusion method
I extracted audio and video features using the same methodology as proposed in our
method. However, I employed different fusion techniques for comparison purposes.
Late Fusion (Mean): In the late fusion approach, similarity scores are individually
computed for two modalities. Subsequently, the mean fusion average scores are
obtained by combining the scores from multiple modalities to generate the final decision
score.
Late Fusion (Max): Instead of calculating the average score, the max fusion approach
selects the maximum score of two modalities as the final decision score.
Early Fusion: In contrast to fusing the facial and audio features using the MFB
module, this method directly concatenates the facial and audio features to calculate the
similarity.
22
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:28==
5
Experiments and Results
In this chapter, a comprehensive account of the experiments will be provided,
encompassing the data pre­processing methodology, detailed parameters of the
proposed model, and the outcomes obtained from both the proposed model and the
compared methods. A comparative analysis will be conducted to examine the results
and derive meaningful insights.
5.1
Data preparation
To begin, the dataset was categorized into two main groups: parent­child pairs and
sibling pairs. With a total of 57 pairs from seven distinct kinship relationships, the
division resulted in 26 pairs of siblings and 31 pairs of parent­child relationships.
Subsequently, a dictionary was constructed to store the pairs. For instance, if individuals
Xiaoming and Lihua share a kinship, two entries would be added to the dictionary:
”Lihua”: [”Xiaoming”] and ”Xiaoming”: [”Lihua”]. Each person was designated as a key in
the dictionary for convenient retrieval, while the dictionary values were stored as lists.
This was necessary because some individuals were involved in multiple kinship pairs
within my dataset. For example, if Lihua is both the sister of LiLei and the mother of
Xiaoming, Lihua would be associated with two different kinship pairs. For the final
verification task, the focus was solely on determining whether subject A had a kinship
relationship with subject B, rather than identifying the specific type of kinship they have.
Then, using the STFT method mentioned in the methodology chapter generate the
spectrograms from the audio, and MTCNN to capture the personal face image and
resize it into 224 x 224 to fit the input shape of the image pre­trained ResNet­18 model.
To accommodate the input shape requirements of the audio pre­trained ResNet­18
model, the audio was segmented into 2.4­second intervals (2.4 seconds audio segment
with STFT with 16ms step and 40ms width of the window will generate 224 x 224 size of
spectrograms). If the remaining time was less than 2.4 seconds, the remaining segment
was discarded. In order to align the audio and visual data, facial images were captured
at intervals of 2.4 seconds apart from the segments whose remaining time was less than
2.4 seconds. Finally, I save the spectrograms corresponding facial images and the
labels into the dataframe provided by pandas. The parent­child pairs and sibling pairs
are saved in two different dataframe.
Subsequently, the sibling dataframe consisted of 4,392 columns of data, while the
parent­child dataframe comprised 5,704 columns of data. Following that, all the kinship
pairs are obtained by using the label of the datafame and the dictionary I mentioned
above. The kinship pairs were extracted from both dataframes and split using an 8:2
ratio through the utilization of the train_test_split method provided by the sklearn library.
The reason why I have an independent sibling pair dataframe and a parent­child pair
dataframe is for the future test. An equal number of negative samples for nonkinship
pairs were randomly generated, ensuring that the number of negative samples matched
that of the kinship pairs. The subjects involved in the nonkinship pairs were randomly
chosen and did not share a sibling kinship or a parent­child kinship.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
23
==PAGE:29==
5.2
Experiments setting
5.2.1
Implementation Details
All of my experiments were conducted on Google Colab using an A100 GPU with 40 GB
of RAM provided by Colab. For training the proposed method, the network parameters
were optimized using the Adam optimizer. The initial learning rate was set to 0.01, the
decay rate was 0.1, the decay step was 5000, and the mini­batch size was 32. The
model was trained for 10 epochs without utilizing the early stop method. The model
obtained from the final epoch was used for testing purposes.
Multiple experiments were conducted with different values of the k parameter for the
MFB module. However, the o parameter was consistently set to 1000, as the proposed
model included a fully connected layer following the MFB module. The table 5.1
demonstrates that there is not a significant difference observed among different values
of k. Based on the performance evaluation, the model with k = 0 exhibited the best
results. Consequently, it was selected as the optimal choice.
Table 5.1: Verification accuracy for different k of MFB
ParentChild
Sibling
Overall
k=1
76.1
79.2
77.7
k=3
76.4
79.2
77.9
k=5
76.3
79.7
78.1
k=8
76.1
79.3
77.8
k=10
75.8
79.5
77.8
5.2.2
Evaluation Protocol
In my experiments, I calculated the cosine distance between two features, with a
predefined margin of 0.2 for the contrastive loss. The model performance was evaluated
using verification accuracy and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves.
5.3
Result and Analysis
Table 5.2: Verification accuracy for compared model and the proposed model
Parent­Child
Sibling
Overall
i­vector
63.2
67.8
65.7
x­vector
71.2
77.9
74.8
Audio Resnet­18
71.8
76.3
74.3
Facial Resnet­18
73.6
76.1
75.0
Late Fusion (Mean)
77.8
78.3
78.1
Late Fusion (Max)
76.1
77.3
76.7
Early Fusion
75.2
78.3
76.9
Proposed model
76.3
79.7
78.1
Table 5.2 presents the accuracy of different models for kinship verification. In
comparison to the i­vector, x­vector, and Audio ResNet­18, the results indicate that facial
features, as employed in the Facial ResNet­18, can yield superior accuracy relative to
audio features in the context of this experimental study. Upon contrasting four
multi­modal models with four uni­modal models, it becomes readily apparent that the
24
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:30==
multi­modal models exhibit superior performance. This suggests that multi­modal
kinship verification represents a feasible approach.
When compared with other early fusion models, the model proposed in this study
exhibits a noteworthy improvement, with a 1.1% enhancement in parent­child
categorization, a 1.4% enhancement in sibling categorization, and an overall
enhancement of 1.2%. The result indicates that the MBF feature fusion method has
some advantages on the kinship verification tasks rather than concatenating the
features together directly. Compared with the late fusion method, the early fusion
methods, in fact, do not demonstrate a substantial improvement over the late fusion
methods for both parent­child and sibling relationships.
Another intriguing observation is that the kinship verification process yields a
comparatively higher accuracy for siblings as opposed to parent­child relationships.
(a) Roc curves for parent­child
(b) Roc curves for sibling
(c) Roc curves for overall relationship
Figure 5.1: ROC curves for all the models for kinship verification on the proposed dataset
The corresponding ROC curves are shown in Figure 5.1. The empirical evidence
highlights that the multimodal models attain a notably elevated degree of accuracy
relative to their unimodal counterparts. The Receiver ROC curve associated with the
model proposed in this study exhibits a comparatively smoother trajectory. This
characteristic may be interpreted as a positive indicator, implying that the proposed
model’s predictions uphold a degree of consistency and are not significantly influenced
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
25
==PAGE:31==
by specific threshold adjustments. The Area Under the Curve (AUC) for all models
exceeds 0.5, which substantiates the utility of both audio and facial features in the
domain of kinship verification.
The ROC curves collectively indicate that all the models demonstrate superior
performance in verifying sibling kinship as compared to parent­child relationships. For
all audio modal models, ResNet­18 exhibits superior performance, thus suggesting that
employing image networks within the domain of audio for classification tasks appears to
be a viable approach.
26
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:32==
6
Discussion and Future Work
In this study, an exploration into the potential of employing video and audio modalities
for kinship verification has been undertaken. The preceding section delineated the
results derived from these modalities. In the ensuing discussion, I shall separately
address the limitations, and implications, and recommend future work for this study.
6.1
Limitations
One of the main challenges in audio­visual kinship verification is the lack of widely
available large­scale open­source datasets, comparable to ImageNet[65] or
OpenImage[66]. Researchers always have to construct their own datasets for studying
kinship verification. The process of dataset construction in this domain, however, poses
various challenges, including the presence of distribution imbalance and inadequate
sample sizes.
Hence, this study is not exempt from encountering these challenges and possesses
certain limitations. One notable limitation is the relatively small scale of the proposed
dataset, which may restrict the generalizability of the findings. Additionally, the dataset
may suffer from distributional issues, for instance, the dataset utilized in this study
exhibits an overrepresentation of brother­brother and sister­sister relationships, while
the mother­son relationship is comparatively underrepresented. Additionally, it is worth
noting that the dataset lacks individuals below the age of 20, considering one potential
application of this study is to aid in the identification of missing children.
Another limitation of this study is the absence of an investigation into the impact of large
models. Due to constraints in computational resources and the scarcity of readily
available large pre­trained models specifically designed for audio feature extraction, a
relatively small model was constructed for this study. For instance, the choice to employ
ResNet­18 for processing audio information was driven by the unavailability of an
open­source pre­trained audio ResNet­50 model.
This study also faces a limitation which is the absence of validation of the proposed
model on different datasets. Due to the scarcity of datasets specifically designed for
kinship verification, especially in the context of Chinese kinship verification, alternative
datasets were not available to validate the proposed model. As a result, the
generalizability and robustness of the model beyond the specific dataset used in this
study remain unexplored.
6.2
Implications
In this study, I first used the MFB method to fuse the facial and audio features for the
kinship verification task, resulting in promising outcomes. It indicates that employing
suitable methods to integrate audio and facial information can contribute to the enhanced
performance of kinship verification tasks, surpassing the use of facial information alone.
The results obtained in the previous chapter demonstrate that the performance of all the
multi­modal methods surpasses that of the uni­modal methods in this study.
Another implication of this study is the creation of a Chinese audio­facial dataset. The
development of this dataset contributes to the availability of resources for research in
the field of audio­facial analysis, specifically in the context of Chinese kinship
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
27
==PAGE:33==
verification. This dataset can serve as a valuable asset for future studies and provide a
foundation for further advancements in the field.
In this study, it was observed that network architectures originally designed for image
classification tasks, such as ResNet, exhibit favourable performance in audio­facial
kinship verification, particularly in the extraction of audio features. This highlights the
potential transferability and adaptability of image­based networks to the analysis of
multimodal data, specifically in the context of kinship verification.
6.3
Future Work
Due to the limitations of the proposed dataset, future work should primarily concentrate
on expanding the dataset’s scale. Currently, the dataset is relatively small, consisting of
only 57 pairs of kinship. Expanding the dataset by collecting additional samples from
diverse sources and populations would significantly enhance its representativeness and
increase its utility for kinship verification research. In addition, it is important to improve
the distribution of the dataset, as the current age range of subjects mainly spans from 25
to 50. To enhance the dataset’s applicability across different age groups, it is necessary
to supplement the dataset with samples from individuals of various age ranges. This
expansion would make the dataset more representative and extend its utility for kinship
verification across different age demographics. Furthermore, the data collection pipeline
of the proposed dataset in this study focuses on sourcing data from open­source
platforms such as YouTube and Bilibili, specifically targeting speeches delivered by
celebrities. To some extent, this dataset can be considered as one without controlled
environments. Future work could focus on adopting an offline approach to rigorously
control the surrounding environment during data collection. This would help minimize
the impact of other environmental noise on future research. Furthermore, the current
dataset only includes speeches delivered by Mandarin­speaking individuals from China.
Future work could be dedicated to collecting videos from multiple countries and
languages to enhance the scalability of the models built in subsequent studies.
Due to resource limitations, in this study, I did not attempt to use larger­scale models to
investigate multi­modal kinship verification. In future work, it would be beneficial to
explore the use of larger pre­trained models for extracting audio and facial features to
examine the impact of MBF on audio­facial kinship verification. Furthermore, compared
with the Bilinear model such as MBF, attention­based models have gained significant
popularity in the field of multi­modal fusion. In the context of audio­facial kinship
verification, it would be worthwhile to explore the use of attention­based approaches for
fusing facial and audio features. Attention mechanisms enable the model to focus on
relevant information in each modality, allowing for more effective feature fusion and
capturing of informative cues for kinship verification.
Additionally, in the result of the previous chapter, it was observed that all the multi­modal
models exhibited better performance compared to the uni­modal models. This indicates
that the incorporation of both audio and facial features enhances the performance of
kinship verification. This leads to the question of whether the introduction of other
biometric information can further improve performance. For instance, the human gait,
recent studies have demonstrated that the human gait can be utilized for individual
identification, which can be regarded as valuable biometric information[67]. The fusion
of easily obtainable biometric features like human gait with existing voice and facial
information holds great promise as a future direction.
During the process of collecting data to build the dataset, I noticed that it is now
28
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:34==
relatively easy to find audio­visual materials of celebrities from approximately even two
decades ago. This convenience provides opportunities for expanding research in
audio­facial kinship verification. Cross­generation kinship verification is indeed a
promising research topic that holds great potential for the future. Kinship verification
without age divergences has been proven to be effective by using facial information[68].
The integration of voice features in the context of cross­generation kinship verification
holds promising prospects for future research.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
29
==PAGE:35==
7
Conclusion
In this work, a novel Chinese kinship audio­visual dataset is conducted. This novel
dataset contains seven different kinships and high qualities of speech video. This
dataset holds the potential for facilitating various kinship research endeavours, including
both audio and video kinship verification as well as recognition tasks.
In addition, this study introduces a novel deep Siamese network for kinship verification.
Compared the results of this deep Siamese network with other uni­modal networks and
multi­modal networks of the kinship verification task on the proposed dataset, the
network proposed in this study exhibits a noteworthy performance. The results
demonstrate the feasibility of leveraging both video and audio modalities for kinship
verification tasks. Moreover, the adopted fusion method in the network exemplifies the
viability of employing a bilinear model to fuse audio and video features for the kinship
verification task.
30
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:36==
Bibliography
[1]
Ruogu Fang et al. “Towards computational models of kinship verification”. In: 2010
IEEE International conference on image processing. IEEE. 2010, pp. 1577–1580.
[2]
Siyu Xia, Ming Shao, and Yun Fu. “Kinship verification through transfer learning”.
In: Twenty­second international joint conference on artificial intelligence. Citeseer.
2011.
[3]
Kaihao Zhang12 et al. “Kinship verification with deep convolutional neural
networks”. In: In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC). 2015.
[4]
Joseph P Robinson et al. “Families in the wild (fiw) large­scale kinship image
database and benchmarks”. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM international
conference on Multimedia. 2016, pp. 242–246.
[5]
Robert Thayer Sataloff. “Genetics of the voice”. In: Journal of Voice 9.1 (1995),
pp. 16–19.
[6]
Samantha Michelle Taylor. Acoustic Correlates of Aging and Familial Relationship.
Brigham Young University, 2018.
[7]
Aladdin Ariyaeeinia et al. “A test of the effectiveness of speaker verification for
differentiating between identical twins”. In: Science & Justice 48.4 (2008),
pp. 182–186.
[8]
Xiaoting Wu et al. “Audio­visual kinship verification in the wild”. In: 2019
international conference on biometrics (ICB). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–8.
[9]
DF Frey and RA Pimentel. “Principal component analysis and factor analysis”. In:
(1978).
[10]
Tsung­Yu Lin, Aruni RoyChowdhury, and Subhransu Maji. “Bilinear CNN models
for fine­grained visual recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision. 2015, pp. 1449–1457.
[11]
Edgar Simo­Serra et al. “Discriminative learning of deep convolutional feature
point descriptors”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision. 2015, pp. 118–126.
[12]
Zhongxin Bai and Xiao­Lei Zhang. “Speaker recognition based on deep learning:
An overview”. In: Neural Networks 140 (2021), pp. 65–99.
[13]
Steven Davis and Paul Mermelstein. “Comparison of parametric representations
for monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken sentences”. In: IEEE
transactions on acoustics, speech, and signal processing 28.4 (1980),
pp. 357–366.
[14]
Najim Dehak et al. “Front­end factor analysis for speaker verification”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 19.4 (2010),
pp. 788–798.
[15]
Ehsan Variani et al. “Deep neural networks for small footprint text­dependent
speaker verification”. In: 2014 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech
and signal processing (ICASSP). IEEE. 2014, pp. 4052–4056.
[16]
David Snyder et al. “X­vectors: Robust dnn embeddings for speaker recognition”.
In: 2018 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal
processing (ICASSP). IEEE. 2018, pp. 5329–5333.
[17]
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learning
representations by back­propagating errors”. In: nature 323.6088 (1986),
pp. 533–536.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
31
==PAGE:37==
[18]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long short­term memory”. In: Neural
computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780.
[19]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient­based learning applied to document recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pp. 2278–2324.
[20]
Alexander Waibel et al. “Phoneme recognition using time­delay neural networks”.
In: IEEE transactions on acoustics, speech, and signal processing 37.3 (1989),
pp. 328–339.
[21]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[22]
Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. “Voxceleb: a large­scale
speaker identification dataset”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612 (2017).
[23]
Kaipeng Zhang et al. “Joint face detection and alignment using multitask cascaded
convolutional networks”. In: IEEE signal processing letters 23.10 (2016),
pp. 1499–1503.
[24]
Vahid Kazemi and Josephine Sullivan. “One millisecond face alignment with an
ensemble of regression trees”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2014, pp. 1867–1874.
[25]
Eric Xing et al. “Distance metric learning with application to clustering with
side­information”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 15
(2002).
[26]
Haibin Yan et al. “Discriminative multimetric learning for kinship verification”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Information forensics and security 9.7 (2014),
pp. 1169–1178.
[27]
Siyu Xia, Ming Shao, and Yun Fu. “Toward kinship verification using visual
attributes”. In: Proceedings of the 21st international conference on pattern
recognition (ICPR2012). IEEE. 2012, pp. 549–552.
[28]
Naman Kohli et al. “Hierarchical representation learning for kinship verification”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 26.1 (2016), pp. 289–302.
[29]
Qingyan Duan and Lei Zhang. “Advnet: Adversarial contrastive residual net for 1
million kinship recognition”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 workshop on recognizing
families in the wild. 2017, pp. 21–29.
[30]
Tuan­Duy H Nguyen, Huu­Nghia H Nguyen, and Hieu Dao. “Recognizing families
through images with pretrained encoder”. In: 2020 15th IEEE International
Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2020). IEEE. 2020,
pp. 887–891.
[31]
Qiong Cao et al. “Vggface2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and
age”. In: 2018 13th IEEE international conference on automatic face & gesture
recognition (FG 2018). IEEE. 2018, pp. 67–74.
[32]
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. “A style­based generator architecture
for generative adversarial networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2019, pp. 4401–4410.
[33]
Natalia Neverova et al. “Moddrop: adaptive multi­modal gesture recognition”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 38.8 (2015),
pp. 1692–1706.
[34]
Panagiotis Tzirakis et al. “End­to­end multimodal emotion recognition using deep
neural networks”. In: IEEE Journal of selected topics in signal processing 11.8
(2017), pp. 1301–1309.
32
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:38==
[35]
Jinlai Liu, Zehuan Yuan, and Changhu Wang. “Towards good practices for
multi­modal fusion in large­scale video classification”. In: Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops. 2018, pp. 0–0.
[36]
Anurag Chowdhury et al. “Msu­avis dataset: Fusing face and voice modalities for
biometric recognition in indoor surveillance videos”. In: 2018 24th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR). IEEE. 2018, pp. 3567–3573.
[37]
Tadas Baltrušaitis, Chaitanya Ahuja, and Louis­Philippe Morency. “Multimodal
machine learning: A survey and taxonomy”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence 41.2 (2018), pp. 423–443.
[38]
Yanghao Li et al. “Factorized bilinear models for image recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. 2017,
pp. 2079–2087.
[39]
Yang Gao et al. “Compact bilinear pooling”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 317–326.
[40]
Akira Fukui et al. “Multimodal compact bilinear pooling for visual question
answering and visual grounding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01847 (2016).
[41]
Jin­Hwa Kim et al. “Hadamard product for low­rank bilinear pooling”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1610.04325 (2016).
[42]
Zhou Yu et al. “Multi­modal factorized bilinear pooling with co­attention learning for
visual question answering”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision. 2017, pp. 1821–1830.
[43]
Zhou Yu et al. “Beyond Bilinear: Generalized Multimodal Factorized High­Order
Pooling for Visual Question Answering”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems 29.12 (2018), pp. 5947–5959.
[44]
Chaojian Yu et al. “Hierarchical bilinear pooling for fine­grained visual recognition”.
In: Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 2018,
pp. 574–589.
[45]
Yumin Suh et al. “Part­aligned bilinear representations for person re­identification”.
In: Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 2018,
pp. 402–419.
[46]
Jian­Fang Hu et al. “Deep bilinear learning for rgb­d action recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 2018,
pp. 335–351.
[47]
Xiaoming Zhao, Yijiao Yang, and Shiqing Zhang. “Research Progress on
Multi­modal Emotion Recognition for Deep Learning”. In: Journal of Computer
Science and Exploration 16.7, 1479 (2022), pp. 1479–1503. DOI:
http://fcst.ceaj.org/CN/10.3778/j.issn.1673-9418.2112081.
[48]
Lutfiye Durak and Orhan Arikan. “Short­time Fourier transform: two fundamental
properties and an optimal implementation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing 51.5 (2003), pp. 1231–1242.
[49]
E Oran Brigham and RE Morrow. “The fast Fourier transform”. In: IEEE spectrum
4.12 (1967), pp. 63–70.
[50]
Douglas A Reynolds and Richard C Rose. “Robust text­independent speaker
identification using Gaussian mixture speaker models”. In: IEEE transactions on
speech and audio processing 3.1 (1995), pp. 72–83.
[51]
Douglas A Reynolds, Thomas F Quatieri, and Robert B Dunn. “Speaker
verification using adapted Gaussian mixture models”. In: Digital signal processing
10.1­3 (2000), pp. 19–41.
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
33
==PAGE:39==
[52]
Leonard E Baum et al. “A maximization technique occurring in the statistical
analysis of probabilistic functions of Markov chains”. In: The annals of
mathematical statistics 41.1 (1970), pp. 164–171.
[53]
Mirco Ravanelli et al. SpeechBrain: A General­Purpose Speech Toolkit.
arXiv:2106.04624. 2021. arXiv: 2106.04624 [eess.AS].
[54]
Alexandre Défossez. “Hybrid Spectrogram and Waveform Source Separation”. In:
Proceedings of the ISMIR 2021 Workshop on Music Source Separation. 2021.
[55]
Siyu Xia et al. “Understanding kin relationships in a photo”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Multimedia 14.4 (2012), pp. 1046–1056.
[56]
Hamdi Dibeklioglu, Albert Ali Salah, and Theo Gevers. “Like father, like son: Facial
expression dynamics for kinship verification”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision. 2013, pp. 1497–1504.
[57]
Ruogu Fang et al. “Kinship classification by modeling facial feature heredity”. In:
2013 IEEE international conference on image processing. IEEE. 2013,
pp. 2983–2987.
[58]
Xiaoqian Qin, Xiaoyang Tan, and Songcan Chen. “Tri­subject kinship verification:
Understanding the core of a family”. In: IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 17.10
(2015), pp. 1855–1867.
[59]
Haibin Yan and Junlin Hu. “Video­based kinship verification using distance metric
learning”. In: Pattern Recognition 75 (2018), pp. 15–24.
[60]
Joseph P Robinson et al. “Visual kinship recognition of families in the wild”. In:
IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 40.11 (2018),
pp. 2624–2637.
[61]
haoxintong. gluon­audio. https://gluon-audio.readthedocs.io/.
[62]
Zhou Yu et al. “Multi­modal Factorized Bilinear Pooling with Co­Attention Learning
for Visual Question Answering”. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV) (2017), pp. 1839–1848.
[63]
Joon Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman. “Voxceleb2: Deep
speaker recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622 (2018).
[64]
Kaldi ASR Website. http://www.kaldi-asr.org/index.html. Accessed: [access date].
[65]
Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large­scale hierarchical image database”. In: 2009
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009,
pp. 248–255.
[66]
Ivan Krasin et al. “OpenImages: A public dataset for large­scale multi­label and
multi­class image classification.” In: Dataset available from
https://storage.googleapis.com/openimages/web/index.html (2017).
[67]
Veenu Rani and Munish Kumar. “Human gait recognition: A systematic review”. In:
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023), pp. 1–35.
[68]
Shuyang Wang, Zhengming Ding, and Yun Fu. “Cross­Generation Kinship
Verification with Sparse Discriminative Metric”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 41.11 (2019), pp. 2783–2790. DOI:
10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2861871.
34
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:40==
A
Title
1
class MFB(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, __C, img__size , audio_size , is_first):
3
super(MFB, self).__init__()
4
self.__C = __C
5
self.is_first = is_first
6
self.proj_i = nn.Linear(img__size , __C.MFB_K * __C.MFB_O)
7
self.proj_q = nn.Linear(audio_size , __C.MFB_K * __C.MFB_O)
8
self.dropout = nn.Dropout(__C.DROPOUT_R)
9
self.pool = nn.AvgPool1d(__C.MFB_K, stride=__C.MFB_K)
10
11
def forward(self, img_feat , audio_feat , exp_in=1):
12
batch_size = img_feat.shape[0]
13
img_feat = self.proj_i(img_feat)
14
audio_feat = self.proj_q(audio_feat)
15
exp_out = img_feat * audio_feat
16
exp_out = self.dropout(exp_out) if self.is_first else self.dropout(
exp_out * exp_in)
17
z = self.pool(exp_out) * self.__C.MFB_K
18
z = torch.sqrt(F.relu(z)) - torch.sqrt(F.relu(-z))
19
z = F.normalize(z.view(batch_size , -1))
20
z = z.view(batch_size , -1, self.__C.MFB_O)
21
return z
Listing A.1: Structure of the MFB module
1
class SiameseNetwork(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, __C, img__size , audio_size , is_first , audio_model ,
img_model):
3
super(SiameseNetwork , self).__init__()
4
self.__C = __C
5
self.audio_model=audio_model
6
self.img_model=img_model
7
self.mfb_model = MFB(__C, img__size , audio_size , is_first)
8
self.cosine_similarity = nn.CosineSimilarity(dim=1)
9
10
def forward(self, x1, y1, x2, y2):
11
x1=self.img_model(x1)
12
x2=self.img_model(x1)
13
y1=self.audio_model(y1)
14
y2=self.audio_model(y2)
15
encoded1 = self.mfb_model(x1, y1)
16
encoded2 = self.mfb_model(x2, y2)
17
fc1 = self.fc_layer(encoded1)
18
fc2 = self.fc_layer(encoded2)
19
similarities = self.cosine_similarity(fc1, fc2)
20
return similarities
21
22
def fc_layer(self, x):
23
fc = nn.Linear(1000, self.__C.FC_DIM)
24
x = fc(x)
25
return x
Listing A.2: Structure of the SiameseNetwork
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
35
==PAGE:41==
B
Project plan
36
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
==PAGE:42==
Chinese family relationship verification via video and audio modalities
37
