==PAGE:1==
Urban Decarbonization
A tool for early­stage informed carbon reductions in urban development
Master Thesis
Christian Oettinger
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Urban Decarbonization
A tool for early­stage informed carbon reductions in urban development
Author
Christian Oettinger
Supervisor
Kristoffer Negendahl
Institution
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Collaborative company
Henning Larsen Architects
Vesterbrogade 76
1620 København V
Denmark
Research extent
30 ECTS
Project period
30/01­2023
­
30/06­2023
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Fælledby by Henning Larsen Architects, https://faelledby.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Christian Oettinger ­ s173838
Signature
30/06/2023
Date
ii
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The global population in urban areas is expected to increase by 60% from 4.2 billion peo­
ple in 2018 to 6.7 billion people in 2050. Currently, cities are responsible for more than
70% of global carbon dioxide emissions with buildings being the single largest contribu­
tor. As urban areas are expanding, it is therefore of utmost importance that environmental
impacts from urban development are quantified and that low­emission development is pri­
oritized. Recently, life­cycle assessments are becoming more integrated into the design
of buildings, however, LCAs are yet to become a natural part of the early design of urban
developments.
As a part of the joint Henning Larsen and Rambøll research project ”Urban Decarboniza­
tion”, this study aims to develop a method and tool for the quantification of environmental
emissions from the most important parameters in urban design in order to decarbonize
cities. With a basis in the standardized LCA method, a simplified parametric workflow
for bottom­up inventory analysis and impact assessment of urban areas is proposed. To
guide early design decisions, the urban LCA workflow is developed in the visual pro­
gramming language Grasshopper, which is deeply integrated with the 3D CAD software
Rhinoceros used by most architects and urban designers for the design of urban areas.
By utilizing the Urban Decarb tool, a wide range of urban and building design parameters
are investigated in order to determine their influence on the environmental impacts of ur­
ban areas and how carbon emissions can be reduced through knowledge­based design.
The parameter study highlights that urban carbon emissions already deeply depend on
the initial requirements set for the urban areas in the brief, including area per person,
parking norms, and plot ratio. Subsequently, it shows that actual urban and building de­
sign parameters as determined by architects and urban designers can greatly affect the
environmental footprint, thereby showing a use for an LCA tool. At last, a case study
of the residential neighborhood Fælledby in Copenhagen is analyzed, showing how the
Urban Decarb tool can be used to influence design decisions and resultantly reduce the
environmental impacts of urban design projects.
Urban Decarbonization
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been written as the final part of the Master of Science in Architectural
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis was conducted
from January to June 2023 at the Section for Design and Processes, Department of Civil
and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Kristoffer Negendahl, for his guidance, support, and
positive energy during this research. Furthermore, I would like to express my gratitude
to the collaborative company, Henning Larsen Architects, and especially Jakob, Signe,
Gustav, Nielsine, and Mariusz for their invaluable professional insights and constructive
feedback, which significantly enhanced the development of this thesis, as well as for pro­
viding access to great case studies.
Thanks to:
Kristoffer Negendahl, Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering, DTU
Jakob Strømann­Andersen, Director, Innovation and Sustainability, Henning
Larsen Architects
Signe Kongebro, Global Design Director, Urbanism, Henning Larsen Architects
Gustav Brade, Director, Strategic Urban Development, Henning Larsen Archi­
tects
Nielsine Otto, Architect and Urbanist, Henning Larsen Architects
Mariusz Hermansdorfer, Head of Computational Design, Henning Larsen Archi­
tects
iv
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Urban Decarbonization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Definition of research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
A reader’s guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
Life­cycle assessment in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Life­cycle assessment of buildings and built environment
. . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Life­cycle assessment and BIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3
Literature study
25
3.1
Life­cycle assessment of urban areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Life­cycle assessment of buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3
Life­cycle assessment of open spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4
Methodology
43
4.1
Process for design science research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.2
Goal and scope definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3
Computational workflow and integration of software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5
Inventory analysis
55
5.1
Estimation of quantities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.2
Configuration of database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.3
Operational energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.4
Reference service life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
5.5
LCA calculation formulas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
5.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
6
Impact assessment
81
6.1
Validation of building constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
6.2
Validation of category elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6.3
Study of urban parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Urban Decarbonization
v
==PAGE:8==
6.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
7
Case study
125
7.1
Inventory analysis of Fælledby
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
7.2
Impact assessment of Fælledby
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
7.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
8
Discussion
131
8.1
Model limitations and sources of errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
8.2
Discussion of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
8.3
Use cases and the need for an urban LCA tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
8.4
Suggestions for future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
9
Conclusion
139
Bibliography
141
A Overview of constructions
149
B Material passport
151
C UHI­modified EPW
158
D Validation of constructions
159
E
Overview of building parts
164
F
Validation of buildings
165
G Inventory of baseline urban area
167
H Contributions from LCA stages
168
I
Inventory of proposed urban area
173
J
Building typologies in Fælledby
174
K Inventory of Fælledby baseline
175
L
Inventory of Fælledby proposal
176
vi
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
BBR Danish National Building Register
BEM Building Energy Modelling
BIM Building Information Modeling
BoQ Bill of Quantities
BUILD Department of the Built Environment
CAD Computer Aided Design
CLT Cross Laminated Timber
DSRP Design Science Research Process
EPD Environmental Product Declaration
EPW EnergyPlus Weather
EUI Energy Use Intensity
FBK Voluntary Sustainability Class
FU Functional Unit
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GWP Global Warming Potential
IFC Industry Foundation Classes
ILCD International Reference Life Cycle Data System
ISO International Organization for Standardization
JSON JavaScript Object Notation
LCA Life­Cycle Assessment
LCI Life­Cycle Inventory
LCIA Life­Cycle Impact Assessment
LOD Level of Detail
Urban Decarbonization
vii
==PAGE:10==
LVL Laminated Veneer Lumber
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology
PV Photovoltaics
REPA Resource and Environmental Profile Analysis
RSL Reference Service Life
RSP Reference Study Period
UBEM Urban Building Energy Modelling
UHI Urban Heat Island
UMI Urban Modelling Interface
UWG Urban Weather Generator
WWR Window­to­Wall Ratio
viii
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
”The future of the world’s population is urban.” Such states the United Nations in the World
Urbanization Prospects from 2018 [1], where it is estimated that the population in urban
areas will increase by 60% from 4.2 billion people in 2018 to 6.7 billion people in 2050. Ur­
banization has generally been seen as a positive driver for economic growth and human
development. However, today cities are responsible for more than 70% of global carbon
dioxide emissions [2] and approx. 75% of natural resource consumption [3], meaning that
”cities are where the climate battle will largely be won or lost” as stated by the secretary
general of the United Nations, António Guterres [4]. The built environment accounts for
a majority of these impacts, with buildings being the single largest contributor to carbon
dioxide emissions (39%) [5]. Yet urban areas consist of much more than only the buildings
where people live, work and stay. It includes roads and networks for daily transportation
around or out of the city. It includes parks for recreation and leisure. It includes the net­
works which supply people with their daily water, electricity, and heating. And it includes
much more, all of which have an impact on global emissions and resources. As urban
areas are expanding, it is therefore of utmost importance that environmental impacts from
urban development are quantified and that low­emission and low­resource development
is prioritized.
Life­cycle assessment (LCA) was first introduced in the 1960s under the names Resource
and Environmental Profile Analysis (REPA) or Ecobalances [6]. The first LCAs focused
on analyzing packaging, with Coca­Cola being one of the first major companies to com­
mission an LCA comparing their beverage containers in 1969 [7]. As public concerns
around environmental emissions grew, there was an evolution in the development of im­
pact assessment methods in the 1990s, where the term LCA was coined. As defined in
ISO 14040, ”LCA addresses the environmental aspects and potential environmental im­
pacts throughout a product’s life cycle from raw material acquisition through production,
use, end­of­life treatment, recycling and final disposal” [8]. The overall goal of an LCA is
therefore to include a broad whole­life cycle perspective including all aspects of the prod­
uct system in order to make decisions as informed as possible and avoid burden shifting
between sectors, life­cycle stages, and/or environmental impact categories.
Today, LCA plays a large role in environmental regulations and is included in the inter­
national ISO standardization for many product and system categories. These categories
also cover buildings and LCA is recognized as the scientific methodology for quantita­
tive assessment of buildings over their entire lifespan [9]. The building assessments are
often performed as process­based LCAs, which is a bottom­up approach where the sys­
tem is modeled from the specific components which it consists of [10]. The analysis is
Urban Decarbonization
1
==PAGE:12==
thereby based on the calculation of quantities of different building components and mate­
rials, which are matched with their environmental impact based on Environmental Product
Declarations (EPDs), generic databases or reference values. Countries have started to
introduce regulations for the environmental impact of buildings based on this method. This
includes Denmark, where LCAs are mandatory for all new buildings as of 1st of January
2023.
While the focus on LCA for buildings has intensified, few studies have been conducted
on LCA for urban areas and there is no standardized method as with buildings. However,
there seems to be a growing interest in the assessment of environmental impacts on an
urban scale [10]. Many parameters of the individual building design are highly affected
by the urban settings and are often decided at this scale, for example orientation, com­
pactness, and urban density, all of which affect the environmental impact of the building.
Furthermore, design parameters such as bioclimatic design, energy and water supplies,
and infrastructure, parks, and mobility are settled at the urban scale. Because of this, it
is crucial that the environmental impact of these design decisions can be analyzed at an
urban scale where highly impactful decisions are actually made.
In order to affect these significant design decisions, estimations of the environmental im­
pact need to be deeply integrated into the design process of urban planners as early as
possible for the highest possible impact. During the past years, parametric design has
become more and more incorporated into the workflow of architects and urban design­
ers [11]. Particularly the visual scripting interface Grasshopper is being employed as it is
deeply integrated with the CAD tool Rhinoceros 3D used by many architects and urban
designers. By utilizing parametric tools it is possible to automatize the estimation of the
impact of design decisions, whether this is area calculations, daylight, microclimate, or en­
vironmental impacts. When it comes to LCA, parametric models can be especially helpful,
as construction quantities from buildings and infrastructure can be exported and matched
with materials with predefined environmental impacts, or the models can be used to per­
form energy simulations in order to calculate operational carbon. By using these tools
early in the design process, it will truly be possible to design with knowledge.
2
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:13==
1.1
Urban Decarbonization
It has long been a design philosophy of Henning Larsen Architects to design with knowl­
edge. Henning Larsen’s sustainability deparments started with the PhDs of three architec­
tural engineers from DTU in 2008 and has since expanded to a department of computa­
tional designers, PhD researchers, and sustainability engineers, as well as a widespread
strategy of designing with knowledge and sustainability in mind. In 2019, Henning Larsen
Architects and Rambøll joined forces to become an international spearhead for architec­
ture and urban solutions. Since then, Henning Larsen and Rambøll have launched the
joint strategy ”Partner for Sustainable Change”. The ambition of the strategy is to be­
come a global leader within four unifying sustainability themes: Decarbonize for net­zero,
Resilient societies and liveability, Resource management and circular economy, and Bio­
diversity and ecosystem. As a direct result of this, Henning Larsen and Rambøll have
received funding for the internal research and development project Urban Decarboniza­
tion, hereafter called Urban Decarb.
The goal of Urban Decarb is to find and quantify the environmental emissions of the most
important parameters in urban design in order to decarbonize cities. The project aims
to standardize data for the environmental impacts of all aspects of urban areas (incl.
buildings, roads, parking, landscape, networks, mobility, etc.) in the whole life cycle. In
addition, the aim of the project is to develop a calculation tool that can estimate the envi­
ronmental impacts of future projects in the early design stages and thus become a natural
part of architects’ and urban designers’ workflow. This thesis is centered around this re­
search project in order to systematize the theory and methodology, as well as prototype
development focused on buildings and open spaces.
Urban Decarbonization
3
==PAGE:14==
1.2
Definition of research
This research aims to create and implement a method for the life­cycle assessment (LCA)
of urban areas. The method should be based on the building life­cycle stages as included
in EN 15978, including production, construction, use, and end­of­life [12], however, should
not only assess buildings, but also other components of an urban area, including the cat­
egories hardscape and landscape. The implementation should be based on a bottom­up
approach where the LCA is performed as a part of a parametric simulation of the urban
area. The studies conducted as part of this research will seek to validate the following
hypothesis:
Early life­cycle assessments can precisely and dynamically calculate the environmental
impacts of the various components of an urban area through digital parametric models
and thereby inform the design process to minimize the environmental footprint of urban
development.
The calculation of the environmental impacts is dependent on a long list of parameters,
of which some are still yet to be thoroughly modeled. Furthermore, a large part of the
implementation focuses on the actual use of the life­cycle assessment in a digital design
process. Because of that, the following research questions will be used to validate the
hypothesis:
• Which elements within an urban area have the greatest environmental impact?
• How can a precise life­cycle assessment be performed of all life­cycle stages, in­
cluding production, construction, use, and end­of­life, of the various components in
an urban area?
• Which considerations must be taken into account when evaluating the dynamic na­
ture of urban development in life­cycle assessments?
• How can life­cycle assessments parametrically be integrated into the digital design
process of urban areas?
• Which general principles can be deduced for the realization of low­emission urban
development?
4
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:15==
1.3
A reader’s guide
As the research conducted in this thesis presents both the theoretical background of LCA,
a literature review of existing studies on the subject, a practical walk­through of the work­
flow of the proposed tool, validation of the method, and several use cases in the form of a
parameter study and a case study, the different sections are introduced here as a reader’s
guide:
• Section 2 ”Background” describes the theoretical background necessary to per­
form life­cycle assessments in the early stages of the architectural design of urban
development, as well as the integration between BIM and LCA.
• Section 3 ”Literature study” presents previous literature on urban life­cycle as­
sessment and its subcategories, including buildings, hardscapes, and landscapes.
• Section 4 ”Methodology” introduces the methodology and computational workflow
of the urban LCA tool, including a goal and scope definition of the LCA.
• Section 5 ”Inventory analysis” details the simplified workflow for the generation of
the inventory for the urban LCA, including estimation of quantities, data collection,
simulation of operational energy, and LCA calculation formulas.
• Section 6 ”Impact assessment” seeks to validate the model based on the results
found in the literature study. Furthermore, an intensive urban parameter study is
performed in order to determine the most influential design parameters in urban
design, as well as the elements with the greatest environmental impact.
• Section 7 ”Case study” shows a short example of how the Urban Decarb tool has
been used on the actual project Fælledby at Henning Larsen Architects.
• Section 8 ”Discussion” discusses the limitations and sources of errors of the urban
LCA method and tool, discusses the results found, and argues for the need for an
urban LCA tool. Finally, suggestions for future work are given.
• Section 9 ”Conclusion” concludes the study and attempts to answer the hypoth­
esis and research questions asked in the definition of research.
Urban Decarbonization
5
==PAGE:16==
6
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:17==
2
Background
This section will describe the theory and background necessary to perform life­cycle as­
sessments in the early stages of the architectural design of urban development. First,
the methodological framework of LCA will be described. Hereafter, LCA in the context
of buildings and the built environment will be presented, including an overview of urban
components, as well as a description of crucial LCA properties such as functional unit,
life­cycle stages, and representativeness of life­cycle inventory (LCI) data. At last, the
connection between building information modeling (BIM) and LCA will be introduced.
2.1
Life­cycle assessment in general
Life­cycle assessment (LCA) is an international method for addressing the environmental
aspects and potential environmental impact throughout a product’s life cycle in order to
make decisions as informed as possible and avoid burden shifting between sectors, life­
cycle stages, and/or environmental impact categories [8].
2.1.1
The methodological framework of LCA
The framework of LCA includes four phases: Goal and scope definition, inventory analysis
(LCI), impact assessment (LCIA), and interpretation [7].
Figure 2.1: Life­cycle assessment framework as defined in ISO 14040 [8]
Urban Decarbonization
7
==PAGE:18==
1. Goal and scope definition: Every LCA should start with a well­considered defini­
tion of the goal of the study, including the intended application and reasoning for
carrying out the study, as well as the intended audience. This continues with the
scope definition, where several crucial LCA properties are presented. These in­
clude the product system, the functional unit, system boundaries, selected impact
categories, reference flows, and representativeness of inventory data.
2. Inventory analysis (LCI): The next step is the life­cycle inventory analysis, which
involves the data collection of all input flows of resources, materials, and products,
as well as the output of emissions and waste of the product system. These inputs
and outputs are scaled according to the functional unit of the product, meaning that
the outcome of the analysis is a list of quantified flows needed to provide the inves­
tigated product.
3. Impact assessment (LCIA): Following the inventory analysis, the impact assess­
ment translates the quantified flows of resources and processes into impacts based
on emission factors obtained from environmental knowledge and scientific models.
4. Interpretation: Hereafter, the results from the LCI and LCIA are interpreted in order
to answer the questions asked in the goal definition. In this process, it is important
to keep in mind the properties defined in the scope definition, as well as the repre­
sentativeness of the data from the LCI. These interpretations are used to evaluate
the quality of the conclusion and to identify further work.
Figure 2.2: The iterative process of life­cycle assessment
Even though this four­step process seems linear, a key part of LCA is the iterative pro­
cess. Based on the insights gained in the different LCA phases, the earlier phases should
often be revisited and refined. This means for example that issues found in the data col­
lection of the inventory analysis can result in a redefinition of the goal, or results found
8
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:19==
in the impact assessment and interpretation require adjustments in the scope. As this
iterative process continues, the uncertainty of the LCA decreases, until the goal definition
is answered with the lowest possible uncertainty.
Life­cycle assessments can be used efficiently for many direct applications including prod­
uct development and improvement, strategic planning, public policy making, marketing,
etc. [8].
2.2
Life­cycle assessment of buildings and built environment
As described in EN 15978, the widely recognized calculation method to assess the envi­
ronmental performance of buildings and other construction work is based on the method­
ology of LCA [12]. These life­cycle assessments work within the general method as de­
scribed in the methodological framework of LCA, however as there is some complexity
regarding scale, scope, data, etc. in the method of building LCAs, specific standards have
been created such as EN 15978.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of overall life­cycle stages in a construction project
Even though EN 15978 focuses on buildings, many of the processes are also relevant
for urban development. However, as there is such a difference in the scale of the two
systems, there will be key differences in the properties of the life­cycle assessment.
Urban Decarbonization
9
==PAGE:20==
In Hauschild et al. [7], settlements are defined as being ”comprised of buildings along with
the spaces and infrastructure between them, the design of which strongly influences the
environmental performance of the overall system.” It is described how a settlement is not
only a collection of buildings, but instead an interplay of buildings, infrastructure, spaces,
etc. which shapes the behavior of residents and visitors alike, and thereby also their
consumption and environmental impacts. Therefore, research has divided the life­cycle
assessment of settlements into two different categories:
1. The building provides shelter from the elements and facilities human activities such
as living, working, manufacturing, etc.
2. The built environment is an overall term for buildings, infrastructure, and the hu­
man activities between them.
There is a list of crucial differences between these two categories, which according to
Hauschild et al. [7] among others include:
• Scale: Building LCAs focus on a single building and attempt to model this with high
accuracy. Built environment LCAs focus on a neighborhood or city and attempt to
model this with reasonable accuracy.
• Temporal scope: Building LCAs focus on the whole building lifetime. Built environ­
ment LCAs often focus on material, energy, or waste over a short period of time, for
example a year.
• LCI method and data: With the goal of high accuracy in the building LCAs, the
data is preferably precise in terms of quantities and emissions. As the goal of built
environment LCAs is to show general trends, the data is often coarser.
• LCA method: Building LCAs typically use process­based LCA. Built environment
LCAs use both input­output LCA and process­based LCA.
With the scope of built environment LCA and the differences between buildings and the
built environment in mind, a few important LCA properties will be described here.
2.2.1
Functional unit
As described in Hauschild et al. [7], one of the strengths, but also a limitation for LCA, is
that it can conclude which product system is better for the environment, however, it can
10
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:21==
not conclude if better is good enough. Due to the comparable nature of LCA, the function
of the product system should always be clear, as a comparison is only fair if the compared
product systems have approximately the same function. To support this fair comparison,
a key LCA property is the functional unit, which defines the qualitative and quantitative
aspects of the function. The purpose of the functional unit is therefore to answer the ques­
tions ”what?”, ”how much?”, ”for how long/how many times?”, ”where?”, and ”how well?”.
However, in practice, the functional unit is often less detailed in building product and build­
ing LCAs. Even though EN 15978 states that a functional unit in a EPD should include
the application, minimum performance characteristics, and a specified period of time [12],
usually the functional unit is replaced with a declared unit such as an item, mass, length,
area, or volume, for example 1 m3 of ready­mix concrete. Equally, EN 15978 states that
a functional equivalent in a building LCA should include building type, relevant technical
and functional requirements, pattern of use, and reference study period. Yet, the compar­
ison between buildings LCAs are regularly based on a common reference unit such as
per m2, per m2 per year, or per person.
Figure 2.4: The functional unit and its specificity differs dependent on the product and
scale
As there are no standards or common methods for built environment LCAs, there is no
definition of the required functional unit. In Hauschild et al. [7], this definition is listed as
Urban Decarbonization
11
==PAGE:22==
one of the challenges with built environment LCAs, as urban areas provide many different
functions, of which many are difficult to quantify. Because of this, and the fact that built
environment LCAs are often used for benchmarking or decision­support, the functional
unit is often replaced with a common reference unit as with building LCAs. Examples of
the challenge of defining the functional unit, as well as using common reference units, are
shown in the critical review of LCAs at the neighborhood scale in Lotteau et al. [10]. Here
the different studies include several different functional units such as per neighborhood,
per km2 neighborhood, per m2 floor area, per household, or per inhabitant.
2.2.2
System boundary ­ elements
Urban areas are complex and consist of many different elements. To model the correct
reference flow in the LCA calculation, the elements within the system boundary should be
clearly defined. In Lotteau et al. [10], it is proposed to separate the built environment into
four categories: buildings, open spaces, networks, and mobility.
Figure 2.5: Urban categories and their elements as presented in Lotteau et al. [10]
12
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:23==
Based on the papers reviewed in Lotteau et al. [10], the elements and contributors en­
countered within the various urban categories are listed in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Elements and contributors for the various urban categories as presented in
Lotteau et al. [10]
Categories
Buildings (B)
Open spaces (OS)
Networks (N)
Mobility (M)
Elements
­ Buildings
­ Roads
­ Electricity network
­ Passenger car
­ Sidewalks
­ Water network
­ Train
­ Parking
­ Wastewater network
­ Bus
­ Green spaces
­ Gas network
­ District heating network
Contributors
­ Construction materials
­ Construction materials
­ Construction materials
­ Vehicle manufacturing
­ Construction waste
­ Construction waste
­ Construction materials
­ Daily mobility
­ Maintenance materials
­ Maintenance materials
­ Maintenance materials
­ Maintenance waste
­ Maintenance waste
­ Maintenance waste
­ Heating
­ Public lighting
­ Demolition waste
­ Cooling
­ Water for maintenance
­ Domestic hot water
­ Public wastes
­ Ventilation
­ Demolition wastes
­ Specific electricity
­ Cooking
­ Drinking water
­ Domestic wastes
­ Wastewater
­ Demolition waste
2.2.3
System boundary ­ life­cycle stages
By taking the life cycle perspective, it is possible for the LCA to take all the processes into
account which are necessary for the function of the product to be achieved. Within build­
ings LCAs the life­cycle stages are often divided into three sections which in Hauschild et
al. [7] is defined as pre­use, use, and after­use.
A Pre­use (also called construction) includes the extraction of raw materials, transport
to the manufacturing site, the manufacturing itself, transport to the building site, and
the construction site activities. In EN 15978, pre­use is divided into production
(A1­A3) and construction (A4­A5).
B Use (also called operation) defines the emissions related to the building use over
the expected service life and thereby includes maintenance and replacements of
the building components (B1­B5), as well as operational energy and water (B6­B7).
C After­use (also called deconstruction or end­of­life) defines the demolition, waste
processing, and disposal of the building (C1­C4).
Furthermore, EN 15978 adds the emissions beyond the system boundary in the life­
cycle stage D which includes benefits and loads from reuse, recovery, and recycling. The
life­cycle stages as defined in EN 15978 can be seen in Figure 2.6.
Urban Decarbonization
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.6: Life­cycle stages according to EN 15978 [12]
Similar stages are presented for the life­cycle assessment of the built environment. In the
framework presented by Popovici [13], it is proposed that mobility is added to the opera­
tional stage on the neighborhood scale equally to operational energy on the building scale.
Based on these life­cycle stages, Lotteau et al. [10] presents a framework with the stages
of construction, operation, and deconstruction, which each have neighborhood and build­
ing scale contributors. This framework can be seen in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Life­cycle stages and contributors according to Lotteau et al. [10]
2.2.4
Reference study period and reference service life
Life­cycle assessments are performed with a chosen reference study period (RSP) which
as a default should be the reference service life (RSL) of the product system. However,
dependent on the use of the assessment or specific regulations, the reference study pe­
riod can differ from the reference service life. In Figure 2.8, three cases of the reference
study period versus reference service life are shown based on EN 15978.
14
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.8: Comparison of reference study period and reference service life [12]
• RSP 1: If RSP = RSL, the quantities and impacts from the reference study period
are representative of the reference service life and no adjustments are needed.
• RSP 2: If RSP < RSL, the quantities and impacts from the use stage (B) should be
adjusted with a factor RSP/RSL (as visible in Figure 2.9).
• RSP 3: If RSP > RSL, scenarios for renovation/transformation or demolition and
construction of new must be developed in order to provide the function within the
whole reference service life. All impacts due to this should also be included in the
assessment.
In all three cases, the quantities and impacts from the production (A1­A3), construction
(A4­A5), and end­of­life (C1­C4) should be included fully as seen in Figure 2.9.
Urban LCAs work within the three product system levels of products, buildings, and neigh­
borhoods. As all levels are interdependent on each other, the reference service life of the
product systems will be interdependent as well. Adjustments of impacts according to
these lifetimes should be applied with the same principles as in EN 15978.
Figure 2.9: If RSP < RSL, the impacts from the use stage (B) are adjusted [12]
Urban Decarbonization
15
==PAGE:26==
2.2.5
Selection of environmental data
In LCA, there are two main approaches to data collection [10]:
• Process­based LCA is a bottom­up analysis where the system is modeled with its
specific information.
• Input­Output LCA (IO­LCA) uses economy or industry sector­wide data and breaks
these down in a top­down process.
Furthermore, by merging these two approaches, a hybrid­LCA can be performed. All
three approaches have been applied in the built environment. However, process­based
LCA has mainly been applied to buildings, as it attempts to model the building with high
accuracy, as defined in EN 15978. IO­LCA and hybrid­LCA have typically been applied
to urban areas, where a complex inventory has made it difficult for process­based LCA to
correctly model all reference flows. IO­LCA has the advantage here that it is not based
on product emissions, but instead on the emissions at a whole economy level, which is
then economically allocated to specific products or services [7]. IO­LCA also has some
challenges, for example, that it assumes a linear relationship between economics and
impacts, and that it often relies on national­level data which is then scaled down to urban
areas.
An LCA is only as reliable as its data. The results of the assessment will therefore depend
on the precision of the data, which should match the stage at which the LCA is performed.
As defined in EN 15978, the preferred data in the concept stage is mainly generic and
average, while product­specific data is also preferred in the construction stage, as seen
in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Preferred type of data according to EN 15978 [12]
Preferred data
Concept design
Detailed design
Construction
Use stage
End of life
Generic data
X
X
X
X
X
Aggregated data
X
X
Average data
X
X
X
X
X
Product collective data
O
X
X
X
X
Product average data
O
X
X
X
X
Product specific data
O
X
X
X
X
Model scenarios for use
X
X
X
X
Measured data
X
X
X
Other data
O
O
O
O
O
X represents the preferred data, O represents alternative sources
16
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:27==
2.2.6
Environmental impacts
Another part of the prevention of burden shifting in the life­cycle assessment is the in­
clusion of multiple impact categories. In accordance with ILCD, Table 2.3 presents the
impact indicators which should be included in all EPDs [14].
Table 2.3: Environmental impact indicators to include in EPDs according to EN 15804 [14]
Abbrv.
Indicator
GWP
Global warming potential
ODP
Ozone depletion
PM
Particulate matter
AP
Acidification potential
EP
Eutrophication potential
POCP
Photochemical ozone formation
IRP
Ionizing radiation
ADP
Abiotic depletion potential
WDP
Water deprivation potential
ETP
Eco­toxicity
HTP
Human toxicity
SQP
Potential soil quality index
Based on this, EN 15978 determines that all building LCAs should include the environ­
mental impact indicators GWP, ODP, AP, EP, POCP, and ADP [12]. However, as there
has been a great focus on operational energy in the building sector historically, primary
energy demand is the most used indicator in building LCAs [15]. With the attention on
climate change and embodied impacts, most building LCAs also include global warming
potential. Impact categories more or less frequently included in building LCAs can be
seen in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Impact categories seen in building LCA studies according to Hauschild et al.
[7]
Often included
Less frequently included
Rarely included
Primary energy demand
Acidification
Ionising radiation
Global warming
Eutrophication
Toxicity
Photochemical ozone creation
Land transformation
Ozone depletion
Land occupations
Resource depletions
Urban Decarbonization
17
==PAGE:28==
2.2.7
Regulations
From 1st of January 2023, the Danish building regulations (BR23) introduced LCA require­
ments for all new buildings, where the buildings are assessed over a building lifetime of
50 years for the life­cycle stages A1­A3, B4, B6, C3­C4, and D [16]. Besides the building
regulations, the voluntary sustainability class (FBK) has also been introduced. However,
contrary to the building regulations, the LCA in FBK should also include the life­cycle
stages for transportation from the producer to the construction site (A4) and installation
at the construction site (A5).
In order to comply with BR23, all buildings above 1 000 m2 must have a global warming
potential within 12 kg CO2/m2/year. Furthermore, if the global warming potential is within
8 kg CO2/m2/year, the building can comply with the BR23 low­emission class. Both of
these criteria are expected to become more strict over the next years, however, it is not
yet finally determined by how much.
2.3
Life­cycle assessment and BIM
Building information modeling (BIM) is a method to digitalize the construction process
throughout the life­cycle of the project. BIM models are virtual models that can store
graphic representations of buildings and their components, as well as material properties.
In ISO 19650 [17], BIM is defined as ”the use of a shared digital representation of a built
asset to facilitate design, construction, and operation processes to form a reliable basis
for decisions.” BIM is used in all stages of the design of the building, as BIM models are
used for both initial concept design, design development to construction detailing, and
potentially also for monitoring in the use stage. An important part of BIM is therefore the
collaborative aspect, where different actors can access the model and combine their spe­
cialized knowledge and modeling for the final design and construction.
As BIM models can both store quantity information and material properties, it is recog­
nized that the combination of BIM and LCA could reduce and optimize the application of
LCA in the design of buildings [18], which otherwise can be time­consuming and requires
a high level of information [19].
2.3.1
Design stages and level of detail
When working with BIM, the Level of Detail (LOD) defines the state of the BIM model at
various stages of the design process [20]. In concept design, the level of detail will be
low, but as it proceeds toward the construction, the detail level will increase. There are
some differences in the definition of the LOD from various countries’ standards, however,
according to the UK convention, the level of detail is defined in 6 steps from LOD 1 to
LOD 6 [21], as presented in Figure 2.10.
18
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.10: The Levels of Detail [21]
• LOD 1 ­ Preparation and brief: A model showing performance requirements and
site constraints.
• LOD 2 ­ Concept design: A concept model for massing studies such as area,
volume, orientation, etc.
• LOD 3 ­ Developed design: A developed model with estimated quantities, shapes,
and orientation.
• LOD 4 ­ Technical design: A preconstruction model at the end of the design stages
with accurate modeling of elements.
• LOD 5 ­ Construction: An accurate model for construction with specific specialist
building components.
• LOD 6 ­ Handover: An as­built model to show how the building was constructed.
Can also be used for monitoring of maintenance and operation.
As LCA is a complex method that requires a lot of information, the building assessment is
often first performed once the building has been constructed and all information is avail­
able [19]. When the building LCA is performed in the later design stages such as LOD
5 or 6, the LCA only acts as documentations, and not as a method to affect the design
decisions in order to optimize, for example in terms of environmental impacts. This is
shown in Figure 2.11 from Hollberg and Ruth [22], where the uncertainty in terms of data
decreases as the design proceeds, thereby making the LCA more accurate. However,
at the same time, the relevance of decisions decreases similarly, and the costs and en­
vironmental impacts increase considerably once the construction begins. Applying the
LCA in the early design phases can therefore highly influence the design and improve
environmental performance without significantly increasing costs [23].
Urban Decarbonization
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.11: Relevance of decisions in the design stages [22]
Even though the LCA can be applied with higher influence in the early design stages, it
is recognized that it can not be performed with the same level of detail as in later stages.
In the EeBGuide, three different LCA study types are therefore defined [24]. The cho­
sen study type will affect several LCA properties such as included components, life cycle
stages, and impact categories, as well as data representativeness and accuracy of re­
sults. The three types are defined as:
1. The screening LCA is used to give a quick overview of environmental impacts in
order to affect decisions in the early stages. It can focus on a single indicator or
several and should be based on generic data or default values.
2. The simplified LCA also serves as a quick assessment, however, should be more
advanced than the screening LCA in order to take more detailed decisions. Specific
information from EPDs should be used if possible.
3. The complete LCA should meet the LCA requirements of [25] and impact cate­
gories from [14]. The quantities should be accurate and it should be based on spe­
cific product information.
BIM can successfully ease the LCA process in all three of these study types. However,
BIM is especially useful in the early design stages of the screening and simplified LCA,
as it can quickly link numerous design options with large amounts of data [19] and para­
metrically compare different design variants [22].
2.3.2
LCA­BIM integration strategies
Based on the rising demand, several BIM tools have been developed in order to per­
form the LCA in the early design stages. From a review of existing tools, Wastiels and
20
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:31==
Decuypere proposed to define the workflows of the integration of LCA and BIM in five
strategies [26], as seen in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: LCA­BIM integration strategies as proposed by Wastiels and Decuypere [26]
1. Bill of quantities (BoQ) export: The bill of quantities are extracted from the BIM
software often in the form of a spreadsheet. This serves as the inventory for the LCA
which is calculated and visualized in a dedicated LCA software. As the quantities
are manually linked to LCA profiles, it can be time­consuming to perform iterative
designs.
Urban Decarbonization
21
==PAGE:32==
2. IFC import of surfaces: The BIM model is imported into the LCA software in a
format such as IFC. This is linked with LCA profiles for the calculation and visualiza­
tion, meaning that the BIM quantities can potentially be changed and the LCA will
automatically be recalculated, thereby supporting iterative design.
3. BIM viewer for linking LCA profiles: The BIM model is imported into a BIM viewer
where the LCA profiles are defined and then send to a dedicated LCA software. It
has the advantage of being able to define the LCA profiles in a 3D environment and
also keeping the link with the BIM software for iterative design.
4. LCA plug­in for BIM­software: In order to perform as much as possible of the LCA
within the native BIM environment, both defining LCA profiles, the LCA calculation,
and the visualization can be done with integrated LCA plug­ins, meaning that instant
feedback can be given while designing.
5. LCA enriched BIM objects: The LCA information is embedded in the predefined
BIM objects instead of being assigned later. The BIM model therefore already has
the LCA profiles from which the LCA can be calculated in either a dedicated LCA
software or plug­in. It has the advantage of having the LCA data centralized in the
BIM objects. But it could be time­consuming if the BIM objects should be remodeled
for each design iteration.
Most LCAs with BIM integration are currently performed using the BoQ export from the
first strategy [26]. However, dependent on the goal of the study, other strategies could
optimize how LCA studies are performed. In Wastiels and Decuypere [26], an expert
group was presented with the five strategies. For example, they found that the first strat­
egy would be unfit for an iterative design process, as well as the fifth strategy due to the
potential remodeling. For this, strategies 2, 3, and 4 could be more efficient, however, es­
pecially the fourth strategy with the LCA plug­in could face challenges if other than generic
data should be included in the assessment. Based on this, Wastiels and Decuypere con­
cluded that the most suitable workflow will be highly dependent on the goal of the LCA,
the design stage, and the discipline performing the LCA [26].
2.4
Summary
In this section, the theory and background necessary to perform life­cycle assessments in
the early stages of the architectural design of urban development were described. This in­
cluded a description of the methodological framework of LCA from ISO 14040 [8], as well
as an introduction to the iterative aspect of LCA. Hereafter, the division between LCAs of
buildings and the built environment according to Hauschild et al. [7] was presented, as
well a run­through of crucial differences between these in terms of functional unit, system
boundary (both for elements and life­cycle stages), reference study period, selection of
environmental data, and environmental impact categories to include. This section also
22
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:33==
defined the categories to include in an urban LCA calculation as buildings, open spaces,
networks, and mobility according to Lotteau et al. [10].
Furthermore, the background included an introduction to the combination of LCA and BIM.
It started by defining BIM as a method to digitalize the construction process throughout
the life cycle of the project, which could reduce and optimize the application of LCA in the
design of buildings by storing quantity information and material properties. Furthermore,
the various stages of design were defined according to their Level of Detail (LOD), and
it was presented how the influence on the design due to the LCA could be significantly
higher in the early design stages. Last, five strategies for the workflow of the integration
of LCA and BIM were defined according to Wastiels and Decuypere [26], of which one
should be chosen dependent on the goal of the LCA, the design stage, and the discipline
performing the LCA.
Urban Decarbonization
23
==PAGE:34==
24
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:35==
3
Literature study
Even though there is no standardized method for urban life­cycle assessment, papers
have been published proposing methods for calculating the environmental impacts of ur­
ban areas. In this section, previous literature will be described, first generally concerning
studies on urban life­cycle assessment and then more detailed on the urban categories
of buildings and open spaces. Furthermore, LCA tools for the various sections will be
presented.
3.1
Life­cycle assessment of urban areas
Multiple divergent methods for life­cycle assessment for urban development have been
proposed. Lotteau et al. perform a critical review of 14 papers, showing a great difference
in the approach to quantifying environmental impacts [10]. The case studies are ranging
from 370 to 34 400 inhabitants, from neighborhoods of 0.02 to 13.10 km2, and are located
in different cities all over Europe and North America (except for one project in China). The
areas also include different compositions of use with some being 100% residential, while
others are a mixture of residential, office, shops, educational, etc. Furthermore, the stud­
ies differ in a number of important LCA properties. First of all, they vary in the functional
unit (FU). Some of the studies simply state the functional unit as the neighborhood, while
others define it as per inhabitant, per m2 of the neighborhood, or per m2 of occupied floor
area.
Figure 3.1: Various functional units in Lotteau et al. [10]
Urban Decarbonization
25
==PAGE:36==
Secondly, the calculated lifetime of the urban areas are ranging between 50 and 100
years in most of the studies, while other studies do not state the lifetime. Third, different
life­cycle stages are included in the assessment. All of the studies include operations
(B6), and most include the production of materials (A1­A3), but only a few also include
deconstruction and end­of­life (C1­C4). Furthermore, some of the studies do not include
replacements (B4) and none of them include transportation to the construction site (A4)
and the construction on site (A5).
Table 3.1: Case studies, their key info and LCA properties [10]
Ref.
Location
Size
Pop.
Mix
FU
Lifetime
Stages
Cat.
[27]
Melbourne
1.4 km2
700 inhab.
100% res.
­ m2 neigh.
­ inhab.
100 years
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ B
­ OS
­ N
­ M
[28]
Toronto
NA
NA
NA
NA
100% res.
100% res.
­ m2 GFA
­ inhab.
50 years
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ B
­ OS
­ N
­ M
[29]
Lausanne
0.07 km2
1 029 inhab.
­ m2 GFA
60 years
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ Decons.
­ B
­ M
[30]
La Rochelle
0.02 km2
650 inhab.
100% res.
­ neigh.
80 years
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ Decons.
­ B
[31]
Hammarby
NA
NA
100% res.
­ inhab.
NA
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ B
­ OS
­ N
­ M
[32]
Paris
0.15 km2
NA
Mixed
­ neigh.
80 years
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ Decons.
­ B
­ OS
­ N
[33]
Freiburg
0.024 km2
0.039 km2
394 inhab.
Mixed
63% res.
­ neigh.
80 years
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ Decons.
­ B
­ OS
­ N
[34]
Lyon
NA
NA
Mixed
­ neigh.
80 years
­ Cons.
­ Op.
­ Decons.
­ B
­ OS
­ N
At last, the studies differ in the included elements. Lotteau et al. propose to divide the
urban components into four categories; buildings, open spaces, networks, and mobility
[10]. Of the 14 papers, only four investigate all four categories. All of them include build­
ings, however, some are in combination with other categories, and two of the studies only
26
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:37==
focus on buildings. Eight of the studies have results for climate change impact and their
key information can be seen in Table 3.1.
As the included studies differ to this extent in their prerequisites [10], the results are dif­
ficult to compare directly. Only looking at the climate change indicator (as seen in Table
3.2), the total impact of the urban areas ranges from 400 to 5 400 tonnes CO2. By chang­
ing the functional unit to inhabitants, it ranges from 0.6 to 8.6 tonnes CO2 per inhabitant,
while it is between 3.6 to 59.2 kg CO2 per m2 neighborhood and between 10.8 to 123.8 kg
CO2 per m2 floor area, thereby showing a more than a tenfold result between the highest
and lowest result in all functional units.
However, some learnings can be derived from these studies. First, it is noted in Lotteau
et al. [10] that the building category (including operational and embodied carbon) gen­
erally is the major contributor, followed by mobility as the second largest contributor. It
can also be seen that in a high­density neighborhood, building operations are dominant,
while mobility is contributing proportionally more in a low­density neighborhood. Building
operations are generally the most contributing category for the buildings from a life­cycle
perspective, however, in energy­efficient neighborhoods, the production phase can be
dominant. These are general trends and the contribution of the categories differs greatly
in the studies.
Table 3.2: Case studies and their carbon footprint in CO2 per year [10]
Ref.
[tonnes per neigh.]
[tonnes per inhab.]
[kg per m2 neigh.]
[kg per m2 GFA]
[27]
5 400
7.8
3.6
123.8
[28]
­
­
3.3
8.6
­
­
77.7
107.3
[29]
4 100
4.0
59.2
70.2
[30]
400
0.6
19.4
19.9
[31]
­
2.8
­
­
[32]
2 300
­
15.3
25.8
[33]
400
500
1.1
1.2
17.6
12.5
­
­
[34]
800
­
­
10.8
3.1.1
LCA tools for urban areas
Some tools for the life­cycle assessment of urban developments already exist. A few
highlighted tools are listed here:
Urban Decarbonization
27
==PAGE:38==
• Urban Modelling Interface (UMI) is an open­source tool developed by the Sustain­
able Design Lab at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) [35]. It is integrated
into Rhinoceros 3D and Grasshopper and can therefore be applied as a natural part
of an architect’s workflow. Initially created as an urban simulation environment for
multiple building energy use, it can predict the operational energy use of multiple
buildings in an urban area. Besides the thermal simulation, an embodied carbon
feature later has been added to the UMI tool [36], which is calculated from a geom­
etry simplification where generic materials are added based on the window­to­wall
ratio, structural density ratio, partition density ratio, etc. UMI is however only focus­
ing on the carbon footprint from buildings in urban developments and can therefore
not estimate carbon emissions from open spaces, networks, and mobility.
• CCAP Precinct by Kinesis examines five modules including energy and greenhouse
gases, embodied emissions, potable water, vehicle hours traveled, and cost [37].
The embodied carbon emissions are based on databases from the SimaPro LCA
software, however, the different building typologies already have predefined ma­
terials and it is therefore not possible to change the building materials in different
scenarios. Furthermore, it is not integrated with any early­design CAD software.
• eTool is a software program that calculates embodied and operational carbon for
buildings and infrastructure. The calculation is based on an estimation of the build­
ings’ lifetimes, initial embodied carbon emissions from materials, recurring embod­
ied carbon emissions from replacements and maintenance, transport during con­
struction, and operational energy [37]. Emissions related to end­of­life processes
are not included. The tool does not calculate carbon emissions from mobility and is
not integrated with any early­design CAD software.
3.2
Life­cycle assessment of buildings
Life­cycle assessment of buildings is a research topic that is truly in progress. Buildings
account for 39% of global carbon emissions, of which 28% is operational carbon from
electricity, heating, and cooling, and 11% is embodied carbon, which comes from the pro­
duction of materials [5]. Even with standardized methods for buildings LCAs in European
and international standards such as EN 15978 and ISO 14044, there is still both academic
and practical debate concerning key prerequisites for the LCA, including life­cycle stages,
covered building components and building reference service life. As a result, LCA regu­
lations differ greatly, even in neighboring countries such as Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
and Finland, and thereby also the results of the LCAs.
3.2.1
Danish benchmarking values
In Denmark, most building LCAs are performed in the software tool LCAbyg, which has
been developed by the Department of the Built Environment (BUILD) together with the
Danish Housing and Planning Authority. Based on 60 buildings LCAs in LCAbyg, BUILD
28
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:39==
has summarized reference values for offices, apartment buildings, terraced houses, de­
tached houses, and other buildings (schools, hospitals, etc.) [38]. The study is based
on a bottom­up approach with a 50­ and 80­year building service life and is the largest
collection of building LCAs in Denmark.
The 60 buildings in the study include 11 detached houses, 12 terraced houses, 11 apart­
ment buildings, 22 office buildings, and 4 other buildings. 12 of the buildings are below
1 000 m2, while 32 are between 1 000 ­ 10 000 m2, and 16 are above 10 000 m2. The
buildings represent a wide range of materials for all building components, with for exam­
ple structural systems in concrete, timber, or a hybrid between those two, and facades in
brick, timber, metal, or concrete. Furthermore, they include technical installations and op­
erational energy. In the original version of the study, the material emissions were based
on generic values from the Ökobaudat 2016 database. However, in the updated version
of the study [39], the material emissions are based on generic values from the Ökobaudat
2020 database, as well as Danish industry­specific EPDs if available.
The updated study shows that there is a large range in building emissions from the 60
Danish buildings, therefore potentially showing a great possibility for reducing the car­
bon footprint compared to conventional construction, even within the regulations of 12 kg
CO2/m2/year. The emissions are ranging from 6.5 to 14.3 kg CO2/m2/year over 50 years
and 5.2 to 11.7 kg CO2/m2/year over 80 years. Furthermore, it shows that the embodied
carbon impacts from materials are 2­4 times larger than the impacts from operational en­
ergy in the case buildings. The emissions from materials are ranging from 4.1 to 11.1 kg
CO2/m2/year over 50 years and emissions from operations are ranging from 0.3 to 4.9 kg
CO2/m2/year. For 80 years, embodied carbon is ranging from 3.5 to 9.3 kg CO2/m2/year
and operational carbon from 0.2 to 4.8 kg CO2/m2/year.
Table 3.3: Benchmark values from the 60 case buildings [39]
Scenario
Embodied carbon
A1­A3, B4, C3­C4
Operational carbon
B6
Full carbon
A1­A3, B4, B6, C3­C4
50 years
Minimum value
Median
Maximum value
Difference (min to max)
4.1
7.3
11.1
7.0
0.3
2.6
4.9
4.6
6.5
9.8
14.3
7.8
80 years
Minimum value
Median
Maximum value
Difference (min to max)
3.5
5.9
9.3
5.8
0.2
2.4
4.8
4.5
5.2
8.3
11.7
6.5
Additionally, the study concludes that there is no significant difference in the impacts of
the various building typologies, as seen in the boxplots in Figure 3.2.
Urban Decarbonization
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.2: Global warming potential of various building typologies [39]
Besides the building regulations, Denmark also introduced the voluntary sustainability
class (FBK) in 2023. Here, the LCA should also include transport (A4) and construction
(A5). BUILD investigates 20 timber buildings with this method [40]. Even when built in
timber, only 8 buildings comply with the FBK regulations. However, the report interestingly
provides reference values for A4 and A5 in Danish timber buildings, showing that A4 is
ranging from 0.2 to 0.7 kg CO2/m2/year, while A5 ranges from 0.3 to 0.7 kg CO2/m2/year.
The impact of the different life­cycle stages can be seen in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Global warming potential of different life­cycle stages [40]
30
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:41==
Based on the 20 timber buildings as well as additional cases, BUILD released a study of
45 timber buildings in May 2023 [41]. It uses the same method as the study of 20 buildings
according to FBK. The study shows that 41 cases are within the building regulations of
12 kg CO2/m2/year, while 14 cases are within the FBK regulations of 8 kg CO2/m2/year.
Furthermore, the study concludes that all cases have higher embodied carbon emissions
than operational and that terrain slabs, external walls, roofs, and windows are the major
contributors with over 50% of the embodied carbon emissions.
When comparing the results from the three BUILD studies with the results from Lotteau
et al. [10], it can be seen that most of the urban LCA studies have a much larger impact
than the BUILD studies (in the only comparable unit of kg CO2/m2/year). In the studies
of 60 buildings and 20 timber buildings, the total carbon results are ranging between 3.9
and 14.3 kg CO2/m2/year for 50 years, while the results in Lotteau et al. [10] are ranging
between 10.8 and 123.8 in kg CO2/m2/year for various lifetimes. However, most of these
urban studies also include more components than only buildings, and besides different
scopes, locations, and lifetimes, a large part of the difference can likely be referred to
as this. The only urban study which exclusively looks at buildings has an impact of 19.9
kg CO2/m2/year over 80 years for a residential area with 650 inhabitants in France [30].
This thereby shows almost a doubling compared to the maximum value in the study of 60
buildings of 11.7 kg CO2/m2/year over 80 years [39].
3.2.2
Operational emissions
Operational carbon was found to be the most contributing category for buildings in Lotteau
et al. [10], and even though it was found to be 2­4 times lower than embodied carbon in the
Danish context [39], operational carbon has a major impact when it comes to the overall
carbon footprint of urban areas. Building Energy Modeling (BEM) is now an integrated part
of the construction of buildings from design to operation to comply with regulations and
ensure optimal building conditions [42]. BEM is dependent on a wide range of inputs such
as climate, geometry, materials, occupancy, HVAC, lighting, etc., and can provide results
for the heating and cooling demand, electricity use for ventilation, and lighting among
others. When simulating the energy performance of a building in regards to LCA, it is
crucial to calculate the Energy Use Intensity (EUI), which is the building’s annual energy
use per unit area in kWh/m2/year. This can then be multiplied with emission factors from
the current or future grid in order to calculate the operational carbon.
Figure 3.4: Operational energy results to include according to BR23 [16]
Urban Decarbonization
31
==PAGE:42==
BEM tools could theoretically be applied to urban areas by simulating one building at a
time, however, this would be a time­consuming simulation for many buildings and it would
likely require an equally time­consuming process of applying the relevant inputs for the
different buildings. To solve this issue, Urban Building Energy Modeling (UBEM) is used
to apply physical models of heat and mass flows in and around buildings to predict opera­
tional energy use on the urban scale. In a study by Reinhardt and Davila [43], the authors
review previous studies on the application of bottom­up UBEM tools for decision support
for architects, urban planners, and policymakers. They state that UBEM tools need three
overall types of data input:
• Climate data: As with BEM tools, climatic data is necessary to simulate the thermal
performance and energy use. This has been available for many years, mainly used
in the EPW weather data format.
• Building geometry: The building geometry input should include information about
the envelope of the building and window openings, and also give information about
the terrain that surrounds the buildings.
• Non­geometric building properties: Non­geometric building properties include
the build­ups of the construction parts and their thermal properties, as well as HVAC
systems and usage schedules.
The last step is often time­consuming for individual buildings and one of the main rea­
sons for differences between the simulated and measured energy use. In the studies
presented, the common method is to divide the building stock into ”building archetypes”
with roughly the same properties within typology, systems, materials, and usage patterns
[43]. After adding all the input for the buildings, they must be applied to a thermal model,
which can be more or less complex depending on whether it simulates a single­zone or
multi­zone for each building, if it is a steady­state or dynamic simulation, or if it takes the
context shading between buildings into account or not. The simplest method is to sim­
ulate a single zone, steady­state heat balance model for each archetype which is then
multiplied by the number of buildings within that archetype. However, for more precise
simulations, context­specific multi­zone dynamic thermal models should be applied.
Even with context­specific multi­zone dynamic thermal models, there will be a lot of as­
sumptions in the simulation and therefore also in the resulting energy use, meaning that
it is necessary to be aware of potential uncertainties. However, based on the studies, it
was shown that the individual building uncertainties tend to average out when including
many buildings and that the reported error ranges between the aggregated annual energy
use and the simulated energy use was only 1­19% for the total Energy Use Intensity (EUI)
[43]. Even so, this is only useful when taking decisions on an urban scale, as the reported
error ranges on individual buildings were 5­99% for the urban models.
32
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:43==
An example of a context­specific multi­zone dynamic thermal model is the Rhino tool
UMI by MIT. UMI is based on the developed simulation engines in EnergyPlus and Radi­
ance/Daysim [35]. It runs dynamic multi­zone simulations accounting for context­specific
shading between buildings and can thereby precisely predict the operational energy. With
this model and the embodied carbon feature based on geometry simplifications [36], the
authors could study the impact of added insulation in an urban building block, showing
that adding 10 cm insulation instead of 2 cm would be beneficial already after 6 years
when looking at total carbon impacts. Another integration of urban energy simulation in
the Rhinoceros 3D environment is proposed by [44], where the urban building simulation
tool CitySim is incorporated into the parametric design platform Grasshopper 3D. CitySim
is intended for urban scale applications and therefore requires fewer parameters than
usual building performance simulation tools and is faster.
3.2.3
Embodied emissions
Embodied carbon emissions from materials in buildings are responsible for 11% of global
carbon emissions and the major impact in new Danish buildings [39]. In the study of
60 Danish buildings [38], the emissions from various building components are presented
and it concludes that the major impacts are primarily from the roofs, exterior walls, floor
slabs, and terrain slabs. However, also windows, interior walls, foundations, and solar
cells result in large embodied carbon emissions. Furthermore, the study states that the
material production in A1­A3 typically is the most contributing part of the building life­cycle.
Another study by Rambøll and BUILD investigates whole­life embodied carbon from five
European countries [45] from a total of 769 buildings. The Danish case studies are based
on building LCAs from Rambøll and BUILD, and some of the 60 case buildings are there­
fore also included in this report. The report studies both the embodied carbon in com­
parison between various countries and building uses, but also the contributions from the
different life­cycle stages and building parts. As seen in Table 3.4, Denmark has the low­
est average embodied carbon footprint of the five countries, 40% lower than the average.
Table 3.4: Mean embodied carbon [kg CO2/m2] for various countries [45]
Countries
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Netherlands
All
Non­residential
­
348
532
1102
397
593
Residential
591
356
457
634
385
591
All types
591
352
497
661
389
591
On the other hand, France has the highest average embodied carbon footprint, 12%
higher than the average, where especially non­residential buildings have high emissions.
However, from the results for all the European buildings, it can not be concluded that
residential buildings have a lower embodied carbon footprint than non­residential build­
Urban Decarbonization
33
==PAGE:44==
ings. Furthermore, the study investigated the impacts of different life­cycle stages and
the results can be seen in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Mean contribution to embodied carbon from life­cycle stages [45]
Life­cycle stages
A1­A3
A4­A5
B1­B4
C1­C2
C3­C4
Mean contribution
from life­cycle stages
56%
7%
22%
4%
11%
As seen in the table, almost two­thirds of the impacts are emitted upfront with the major­
ity being a result of A1­A3. The second largest contribution is due to maintenance and
replacements, while only 15% is due to the end­of­life processes. At last, the study also
looks into the contribution of different building parts, which are divided into the categories
of ground, load­bearing structure, envelope, internal, services, and appliances. The mean
contribution can be seen in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Mean contribution to embodied carbon from building parts [45]
Building parts
Ground
Structure
Envelope
Internal
Services
Appliances
Mean contribution
from building parts
7%
24%
15%
21%
27%
6%
The study shows that the largest contribution on average is from the services (heating,
cooling, domestic hot water, and sewage systems) with 27%. The second largest contri­
bution of 24% is due to the load­bearing structure (structural frame, load­bearing walls,
floor slabs). Hereafter comes internal elements (partition walls, floor finishes, wall fin­
ishes) with 21% and envelope (cladding, insulation, windows) with 15%. The two low­
est contributing categories are ground (foundation, basement) with 7% and appliances
(kitchen equipment, laundry washing machines, etc.) with 6%. However, the study also
states that a part of the data for technical systems and appliances is proxy data due to
missing information. These generic proxy data are overestimated purposely to give the
incentive to include specific data for all building parts and the categories of technical sys­
tems and appliances can therefore be overestimated in this study.
The quantities of many building parts can be estimated from area calculations from a
massing model for an LCA. However, structural systems are dependent on multiple factors
besides area such as construction method, loads, and building size, and area­normalized
emissions for structure can therefore potentially be very imprecise. Being responsible for
a major part of emissions, the structural quantities should be estimated precisely. In a
study by Weber et al., the authors propose a generative structural design model for em­
34
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:45==
bodied carbon estimations of steel structures [46]. The model takes a building massing
model and separates it into floors. Based on this building geometry and manual inputs
such as span length and loads, the model generates a structural geometric grid, performs
a structural analysis, and dimensions the sizes of the structure, thereby estimating quan­
tities for the structural system based on actual physics­based structural analysis. In the
study, four constructed reference buildings are used to compare their actual structural
quantities with the simulated quantities. The results show that the error range between
the actual and the simulated quantities is within 10% for all reference buildings, meaning
that there is a potential for using generative structural design models to estimate embod­
ied carbon for building structures instead of benchmark values in early­stage design.
3.2.4
Transformation and renovation
In 2050, 85­95% of the EU building stock will still exist [47], and many urban developments
will therefore be created in areas where existing infrastructure is already present. In order
to reduce the carbon emissions from urban development, preservation and transformation
of existing buildings can be preferred over demolition and construction of new buildings.
The added embodied carbon emissions from the renovation of an existing building are
typically less than 50% of the embodied carbon emissions of a new building, dependent
on the extensiveness of the renovation and the materials used [48]. However, if the ren­
ovation mainly focuses on insulation and optimization of technical systems instead of
structural changes, the added emissions of renovation can be significantly lower.
Yet in some cases, renovation may not more carbon­friendly than demolition and new
construction, and assessments of the buildings should therefore be performed. In a study
by Zimmermann et al., the authors propose an LCA framework to evaluate carbon emis­
sions from either preservation, renovation, or demolition and new construction [49]. First
of all, they discuss where the burden of the emissions from the existing building should be
placed, and argues that previous impacts should not be included, as they are not impor­
tant for the decisions made today. Therefore, all current and future emissions are included
in the LCA, thereby also including potential end­of­life processes (called C1) from the ex­
isting building in the renovation and demolition/new construction scenarios.
The framework is subsequently used in a case study with a Danish school from the 1950s.
The LCA is performed according to ISO 14040, ISO 14044, and EN 15978, and includes
life­cycle stages according to Danish regulations (A1­A3, B4, B6, and C3­C4). The study
is conducted in LCAbyg and calculates only GWP over a 50­year period for three scenar­
ios:
• Preservation: In the preservation scenario, nothing is done to optimize the building
and impacts are therefore only from the use (B4 and B6) and end­of­life processes
(C3­C4).
• Renovation: In the renovation scenario, insulation is added to the external walls
Urban Decarbonization
35
==PAGE:46==
and roof, and the windows are replaced, meaning there will both be impacts from
end­of­life (C3­C41) for the existing building components, as well as production of
new materials (A1­A3), use (B4 and B6) and end­of­life (C3­C4) for the renovated
building.
• Demolition and new construction: In the demolition and new construction sce­
nario, the building is first demolished (C3­C41) and replaced with a completely new
building (A1­A3, B4, B6, and C3­C4).
Figure 3.5: Global warming potential from the different scenarios [49]
The results of the study as presented in Figure 3.5 show that the preservation scenario
has large emissions from the operations (B6), roughly 50% more than the renovation sce­
nario and 4 times the new construction scenario. The renovation scenario also has the
largest emissions from operations, but also proportionally large emissions from the pro­
duction of materials (A1­A3) and end­of­life (C3­C4). The new construction scenario has a
majority of its emissions from the production of new materials. Looking at the full LCA, the
preservation and new construction scenario have almost the same GWP, while the reno­
vation scenario shows roughly a 20% reduction. Furthermore, the study shows that 12%
of the emissions in the new construction scenario is from the demolition of the existing
structure, meaning that these emissions are significant and should be included in the LCA.
As the extensiveness of the renovation and thereby the carbon emissions are very de­
pendent on the condition of the existing building, it is crucial to know the inventories of the
building when making decisions whether to preserve, renovate or demolish and build new.
Kanafani et al. propose a parametric inventory generator for existing buildings [50], ini­
tially based on the typical Danish building typology of a masonry apartment building from
36
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:47==
1850­1920. The model takes simple input parameters (footprint area, no. staircases,
no. floors, roof type, deck type, basement or not) and generates the quantities of various
building elements. The inventory of the existing building can then be supplemented with
a library of generic renovation components in order to perform an initial LCA screening
of the renovated building. A similar approach is presented by Negendahl et al., where a
parametric model of the existing building is generated based on a number of the simple
input parameters linked to the Danish national building register BBR [51].
3.2.5
LCA tools for buildings
As life­cycle assessments of buildings is a part of many building certification schemes and
building regulations in some countries, several building LCA tools have been developed,
while several other workflows have been created in Microsoft Excel, Grasshopper 3D, etc.
Some highlighted tools are presented here:
• LCAbyg is a Danish whole­building LCA tool developed by BUILD in collaboration
with stakeholders from the Danish construction industry [52]. It calculates both em­
bodied and operational impacts and includes environmental profiles based on the
generic Ökobaudat database, as well as Danish industry­specific EPDs. Further­
more, it is possible to input product­specific EPDs. Several integrations of LCAbyg
in BIM software such as Autodesk Revit has been proposed. LCAbyg is often used
for documentation, for example to the certification scheme DGNB or the Danish
building regulations, but has recently released LCAlive, a tool for LCA in the early
design stages [53].
• One Click LCA is an automated life­cycle assessment software with a wide variety
of uses for life­cycle assessment of products, buildings, and infrastructure projects
[54]. It includes a database of generic and product­specific EPDs from all over the
world, as well as calculation methods for the whole building life­cycle. One Click LCA
is highly BIM­integrated and can import data from Autodesk Revit, Tekla Structures,
Rhinoceros 3D, etc., but also includes the early­stage design tool Carbon Designer
3D, which can estimate embodied carbon from only building typology and size.
• Tally is a whole­building LCA tool deeply integrated into Revit, thereby making it
easy to estimate the environmental impacts directly in the BIM model [55]. The
environmental profiles of the materials are based on the American LCI database
GaBi and its modeling principles.
3.3
Life­cycle assessment of open spaces
In Lotteau et al., open spaces are defined as roads, sidewalks, parking, and green spaces
[10]. From the studies reviewed here, one study showed that infrastructure (roads and
networks) was responsible for 16.9% of the total GHG emissions [27], while another study
found the contribution of road infrastructure to be ranging between 1% and 6% of total
Urban Decarbonization
37
==PAGE:48==
emissions in four scenarios of a residential neighborhood [56]. In the research presented
here, it is proposed to divide the urban category of open spaces into hardscapes and
landscapes.
3.3.1
Hardscape
Hardscapes such as streets, parking areas, and sidewalks cover approximately 40% of
the surface area of cities developed since 2050 but can account for up to 65% in urban
areas designed for cars as the primary transportation mode [57]. The most widely used
materials for road and pavement construction are asphalt and concrete, both known to
have high environmental impacts [58]. As urbanization continues, the construction, main­
tenance, reconstruction, and demolition of hardscapes, as well as the large quantities of
materials, can result in significant carbon emissions [59].
In 1996, the Portland Cement Association commissioned the first LCA study of pavement
infrastructure by Roudebush with the comparison of concrete and asphalt highway pave­
ment systems [60]. However, contrary to other industries, LCA is still not widespread in
infrastructure projects [61]. In 2016, Inyim et al. conducted a systematic review of envi­
ronmental assessments of pavement infrastructure with a focus on asphalt and concrete
pavements [59]. With a total of 32 studies from all over the world, the review focused
on the goal and scope definition of the LCA. First of all, it showed the great differences
in functional units with both lane­kilometer, square­meter, and structural capacity as ex­
amples. Another difference was the LCA approach with a majority of the studies using
process­based LCA, while only a few studies used the input­output method. The anal­
ysis period of the studies ranged from 5 to 50 years. Only 27% of studies considered
all life­cycle stages, while almost all considered the material production stage. From the
studies that considered all life­cycle stages, 75% found asphalt pavement to have higher
GHG emissions than concrete, while 25% found concrete to be more emitting. Looking
at the various life­cycle stages, it is noticeable that concrete in all cases had the highest
emissions in terms of material production, while asphalt had the highest emissions for use
and end­of­life. The percentage of studies with concrete or asphalt as the major impact
in the various life­cycle stages can be seen in Figure 3.6.
Based on this review, the authors concluded that considering all life­cycle stages was cru­
cial to determine the environmental impacts of road infrastructure [59], as only looking at
upfront emissions such as material production could result in burden shifting to construc­
tion and use. A similar point was made by Trunzo et al., who studied an 8.5 km­long road
in Italy during a 60­year service life [62]. Only looking at upfront GWP, the material pro­
duction was responsible for 40%, while the transportation to the site accounted for roughly
3% and the road construction had the largest emissions with 57%. However, when adding
the use of the road (maintenance, traffic, and lighting), this became the largest contributor
with 47% emissions, again highlighting the significance of the whole life­cycle perspective
in estimating emissions for hardscape elements.
38
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.6: Percentage of studies with concrete or asphalt as the major impact [59]
3.3.2
Landscape
Urban green spaces are well­known to have several benefits for the liveability and sus­
tainability of cities [63]. Among others, these include human health and well­being (both
mental and physical), biodiversity, water management, air quality, and mitigation of the
urban heat island effect [64]. However, with recent goals in the building industry for net­
positive buildings, another advantage of urban green spaces is their capability of carbon
sequestration and storage [65]. Carbon sequestration is defined as ”the process of ac­
tively removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, often but not exclusively through
the growth of vegetation.” [66] Even though increasing natural forest area is probably the
most effective way to enhance carbon sequestration, Varshney et al. state that integrating
green spaces in urban areas has the potential to make a valuable contribution. This is
supported by Davies et al., who suggest that even in a typical dense urbanized city center,
vegetation can offset embodied and operational carbon emissions [67]. In the study by
Varshney et al., five implementation strategies to optimize carbon sequestration in urban
areas are presented:
Figure 3.7: Strategies to optimize carbon sequestration in building projects [65]
Urban Decarbonization
39
==PAGE:50==
1. Conserve existing urban biodiversity
2. Add vegetation on and around buildings
3. Select vegetation species based on their carbon sequestration rates
4. Optimize abiotic conditions (soil composition, water quality, sunlight availability, etc.)
to maximize carbon sequestration rates
5. Keep maintenance requirements low
By using extensive building­integrated strategies such as these, as well as on­site renew­
able energy measures, Renger et al. showed that a case building could sequester more
carbon over its life cycle than it emits and thereby be net­positive [68]. By only focusing
on biomass sequestration, it was found to be equal to 10.5% of the estimated annual op­
erational energy. Another study showed that the carbon sequestration from vegetation
could compensate for between 1.2% to 11.9% of the whole building life­cycle (produc­
tion, construction, use, and end­of­life over 50 years) for seven different housing areas in
Finland [69]. The case buildings included townhouses, apartment blocks, mixed areas,
and single­family housing, with the highest percentage of carbon uptake for single­family
housing and the lowest for apartment blocks. The study concluded that the site efficiency
and the number of trees were the most significant factors when optimizing for carbon se­
questration.
3.3.3
LCA tools for open spaces
As presented in a review of digital carbon footprint tools by Yan et al., fewer tools are
available for infrastructure compared to those developed for buildings. However, LCA
tools for open spaces include:
• InfraLCA is an LCA tool developed by the Danish Road Directorate (Vejdirektoratet)
and Banedanmark [70]. It includes generic environmental data for various materials
and emissions in infrastructure projects in Denmark. It is open source and available
in a spreadsheet format.
• Infrastructure LCA is One Click LCA’s tool for infrastructure projects [71]. Equally
to their building LCA tool, Infrastructure LCA includes a database of global generic
and product­specific EPDs and is highly BIM­integrated.
• Climate Positive Design is a LCA tool for exterior built and natural environments
created in 2019 as a part of a research project by the Landscape Architecture Foun­
dation [72]. It presents the environmental impacts via its online tool Pathfinder which
is based on data for hardscapes from the Athena Impact Estimator [73] and from
various academic studies for the landscape, including carbon sequestration and
maintenance.
40
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:51==
3.4
Summary
This section presented the previous literature on studies of urban life­cycle assessment.
This included the key LCA properties and results from a critical review of urban case stud­
ies performed by Lotteau et al. [10], which showed that there were significant differences
in the results, likely due to the equally significant differences in properties such as number
of inhabitants, size, location, composition of building typologies, included elements, and
included life­cycle stages.
Hereafter, literature on LCA of buildings was introduced, including Danish benchmarking
values based on three studies by BUILD, showing that there was a large range in the
emissions from various buildings, but that embodied carbon emissions were 2­4 times
larger than operational carbon emissions. Furthermore, studies on urban building energy
modeling were presented, as well as the main contributors to embodied carbon emissions
from life­cycle stages and building parts. Additionally, a study on the comparison between
preservation, renovation, and demolition and new construction was included, showing that
renovation could have the lowest environmental impacts.
At last, studies on the life­cycle assessment of open spaces were reviewed. This included
hardscapes defined as streets, parking spaces, and sidewalks, and the importance of in­
vestigating the whole life­cycle of these impacts to avoid burden shifting between life­cycle
stages. Hereafter, carbon sequestration from the vegetation and landscape in urban ar­
eas was introduced, showing that vegetation can offset embodied and operational carbon
emissions from urban areas through carbon sequestration.
Urban Decarbonization
41
==PAGE:52==
42
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:53==
4
Methodology
This section will introduce the methodology for the modeling of the framework and tool
which can perform LCAs for urban areas. First, the process of this research will be pre­
sented based on the design science research process (DSRP) model by Peffers et al.
Hereafter, the LCA goal and scope definition will be defined. At last, the computational
workflow of the urban LCA tool will be shown.
4.1
Process for design science research
The process of this research is conducted in accordance with the design science research
process (DSRP) model designed by Peffers et al. [74]. This model presents a consistent
process for the design of artifacts that could provide solutions to existing or future prob­
lems within a specific research field. The process is iterative with six steps as presented
in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Design science research process (DSRP) model [74]
Urban Decarbonization
43
==PAGE:54==
• Problem identification and motivation: The research problem should be defined
and thereby justify why it needs a solution. This was described in Section 1 ”Intro­
duction”, but is in short based on the lack of environmental knowledge in the early
design stages of urban areas, potentially leading to them not living up to their po­
tential in terms of environmental impacts.
• Objectives of a solution: The aim of the solution should be characterized in this
step, based on knowledge from the research field, as well as current solutions. A
part of this was covered in Section 2 ”Background” and in Section 3 ”Literature
study”, but will also be described in this Section 4 ”Methodology”. The aim includes
the creation of LCA tool that can automize the quantification of environmental im­
pacts from urban areas.
• Design and development: In this step, the artifactual solution is created. This
will be presented in Section 5 ”Inventory analysis”, where the development of the
parametric tool will be explained.
• Demonstration: In the demonstration, the artifact is used to solve a problem in a
suitable context. This could be in the experimentation of parameters or a case study,
of which both will be covered in this research in Section 6 ”Impact assessment” and
Section 7 ”Case study” respectively.
• Evaluation: It is evaluated how well the artifact solves the problems. This can be
done by validating the results with knowledge from the research field, as well as
with conclusions on if the artifact efficiently lives up to the objectives of a solution.
Furthermore, this evaluation iterates back to the definition of the objectives and the
development of the artifact. This step will be performed as a part of Section 6 ”Impact
assessment”, and will also be described in Section 8 ”Discussion”.
• Communication: At last, the communication of the problem, the solution by the
artifact, and the evaluation of how efficiently it lives up to its objectives, are commu­
nicated. This will be described in Section 8 ”Discussion” and Section 9 ”Conclusion”,
but eventually result in the publication of this study.
4.2
Goal and scope definition
A well­considered goal and scope definition sets the tone of an LCA study and highly af­
fects the execution of the study and interpretation of the results, as it defines why and how
the study should be performed [7]. First, the motives of the study will be described, and
then the scope will be defined in terms of functional unit, system boundary, geographical
and temporal boundaries, and assessed impacts.
44
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:55==
4.2.1
Intended applications and target audience
The research in this study has multiple intended applications. First of all, it is a hot spot
identification analysis of urban areas, in order to investigate which urban components that
contribute the most in terms of environmental impacts, and thereby where the environ­
mental focus should be. Furthermore, the purpose of the study is to create a tool that
can evaluate improvement potentials from different design scenarios in order to reduce
the environmental impact and create more sustainable urban areas. At last, another in­
tention is to document the environmental performance of an urban area compared with a
baseline.
The target audience of the LCA studies are initially the architects and urban designers
who are designing the masterplans of urban areas, and, through them, the developers
of the masterplan. This highly affects the way the results should be presented and in­
terpreted, as it is not expected that the target audience will be familiar with how LCAs
are technically performed. A part of the tool development will therefore also focus on the
interpretively of the results. However, the target audience of the research presented in
this report is expected to be familiar with LCA in the built environment, meaning that it will
be described in detail how the LCA is performed.
4.2.2
Functional unit
As presented in Section 2 ”Background”, Hauschild et al. described how the definition
of a functional unit of urban areas was one of the challenges of urban LCAs, as urban
areas provide many different functions with often can not be quantified [7]. The authors
proposed to instead use a common basis of assessment. This principle was used in
many of the studies reviewed by Lotteau et al., where at least five common reference
units were presented [10]. The authors presented the approach of combining three types
of functional units, including an absolute, a per capita, and a spatial. This approach is
adapted here, meaning that the results will be presented in a combination of an absolute
”per neighborhood” unit, a spatial ”per m2 floor area” unit, and a ”per inhabitant” unit.
Figure 4.2: Functional units of the urban LCA performed in this study
Urban Decarbonization
45
==PAGE:56==
4.2.3
System boundary ­ elements
Lotteau et al. proposed to separate the elements of the built environment into four urban
categories for environmental emissions: buildings, open spaces, networks, and mobility
[10]. As each of these categories requires a high degree of data collection in order to
estimate their environmental impacts correctly, this research will focus on the development
of an urban modeling method for the first two categories: buildings and open spaces.
Figure 4.3: Urban categories in the urban LCA performed in this study
Buildings and open spaces are the most visible categories in the design of urban areas
and the architects and urban designers will therefore have a direct influence on the ele­
ments and materials that are included in the design. It is further proposed to divide the
open spaces into two sections: hardscape (roads, sidewalks, and parking) and landscape
(green spaces). The elements included in the scope of this study is thereby buildings,
roads, sidewalks, parking, and green spaces.
The design of urban areas will however highly affect the emissions from networks and
mobility. These categories should therefore be kept in mind with design principles until
the emissions can precisely be quantified by the tool.
46
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:57==
4.2.4
System boundary ­ life­cycle stages
The whole life­cycle perspective is crucial for the LCA method. All parts of the building
life­cycle should therefore be considered, including production, construction, use, and
end­of­life, as defined in ISO 14040 [8]. However, as data for all life­cycle stages are
often not declared or easily accessible, the Danish building regulations have determined
that Danish building LCAs should include the life­cycle stages A1­A3, B4, B6, C3­C4, and
D [16]. According to EN 15978, life­cycle stage D is beyond the system boundary [12].
In BR23, it should therefore be accounted for in its own category and is not included in
the calculation in accordance with the limit value of 12 kg CO2/m2/year. Furthermore, the
voluntary sustainability class (FBK) includes the life­cycle stages A4 and A5. As a result
of this, the life­cycle stages accounted for in this research are A1­A3, A4, A5, B4, B6, and
C3­C4, with A4 and A5 being optional, as seen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Life­cycle stages in the urban LCA performed in this study
4.2.5
Reference study period and required service life
Another important part of the functional unit is the reference study period. In the LCA
calculation according to BR23, the reference study period is defined as 50 years, which
is similar to the European and international practice with service lives between 50 and 60
years [75]. This is not necessarily representative of the actual service life of the investi­
gated building, but instead an expression of a study period where it is expected that both
upfront emissions from production and construction as well as operational emissions from
energy and replacements in the use phase are included reasonably [38]. The expected
service life of various building typologies is instead defined by Haugbølle et al. [76] and
can be seen for some selected typologies in Table 4.1.
Urban Decarbonization
47
==PAGE:58==
Table 4.1: Service life of selected building typologies according to Haugbølle et al. [76]
Building typology
Average service life [years]
Residential
120
Office
80
School
100
Institution
100
Retail
80
Parking
60
Industry
80
Transport
60
Hotel
80
Hospital
100
The lifespan of buildings is however one of the most uncertain parameters in an LCA, as
it is close to impossible to know exactly when they will no longer serve a function and be
demolished [77]. Therefore, the uncertainty of the expected service lives in Table 4.1 is
also highlighted by Haugbølle et al. themselves. Based on BBR data for the demolition
of 124 096 buildings in Denmark between 2007 and 2020, Andersen and Negendahl pro­
posed a generalized logistic lifespan prediction model [77]. With this, they found that the
lifespan of existing buildings in Denmark highly depends on the construction period and
typology. However, interestingly the study showed that newer buildings had a lifespan re­
markably shorter than older buildings, and especially that new office buildings could have
a lifespan as short as 41 years, which is almost half of the expected lifespan by Haugbølle
et al. Even though the service lives as defined by Table 4.1 will be used as default in the
tool, it should therefore be possible to adjust the expected service life of each typology
and take measures in order to prolong it by introducing flexible and adaptable design.
As opposed to building LCAs, urban LCAs do not have a standardized reference study
period. In Hauschild et al., it is noted that built environment LCAs often take a snapshot
of the emissions from a single year [7]. However, in this case, the use phase would be
neglected and burden shifting could easily happen. In the review by Lotteau et al., the
reference study period ranges from 50 to 100 years, however with several studies using
a reference study period of 80 years [10].
In the research presented in this study, the reference study period will be set as a vari­
able that can be changed and thereby investigated. However, as 50 years is dominant
in building regulations, this should be a focus, as well as the 80 years as presented in
Lotteau et al. Furthermore, the service lives of building typologies will equally be included
as a variable, however also with the option of defining them according to Haugbølle et al.
[76], as presented in Table 4.1.
48
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:59==
4.2.6
Selection of environmental data
As presented in Section 2 ”Background”, LCAs can utilize three approaches to data col­
lection: process­based, input­output, or hybrid LCA. In this research, the process­based
method will be used, where the material quantities and product emissions are directly
linked to the modeling in a bottom­up approach, in order to show the implications of dif­
ferent design decisions directly.
As presented in Table 2.2 in Section 2 ”Background”, the preferred type of data changes
depending on the design stage at which the LCA is performed. In this case, the analysis
is intended to affect early­stage design decisions in the concept design stage (LOD 2)
by using a screening LCA method, meaning that the preferred type of data will mainly be
generic or average data. As a result of this, three categories are defined for the type of
data:
• Product data includes EPDs for specific products and materials by determined man­
ufacturers. An example could be an EPD for C30/37 ready­mix concrete with Fu­
tureCEM cement from Unicon A/S (MD­21109­DA).
• Industry data represents a type of product from multiple manufacturers and is based
on average data, thereby making it possible to compare products without a specific
manufacturer. An example could be an EPD for CLT wood from the Danish wood
and furniture industry (MD­20007­EN).
• Generic data is sourced from a third party database and is therefore not directly
collected from a specific product [78]. An example is the public German database
for construction materials, ÖKOBAUDAT.
Furthermore, the geographical representativeness of the data should also be determined.
With Denmark as the case, this can also be defined in three categories:
• Local data is representative of Denmark.
• Regional data is representative of Europe, however preferably from the Nordic
countries or Germany.
• Global data is representative of the entire world.
Based on these categories, a hierarchy for data collection has been created. The hierar­
chy from most preferred to least preferred data can be seen in Figure 4.5.
Urban Decarbonization
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.5: Hierarchy for data collection
4.2.7
Environmental impacts
The methodology of life­cycle assessments states that multiple impact categories should
be evaluated in order to prevent burden shifting. However, due to the complexity of build­
ing and urban LCAs, there is often a focus solely on global warming potential (GWP). The
screening LCA tool proposed in this study will exclusively look at the GWP emissions from
urban areas, as this reduces the complexity and scale of the data collection. However,
the method of data collection and LCA calculation is representative of multiple impact cat­
egories and could therefore be included by collecting this data as well.
4.3
Computational workflow and integration of software
The computational workflow of the urban LCA tool is based on LCA­BIM integration strat­
egy 4, ”LCA plug­in for BIM­software”, as proposed by Wastiels and Decuypere [26]. By
using this strategy, the entire LCA can be performed within the native BIM environment,
meaning that the architects and urban designers can receive instant feedback while de­
signing and thereby integrate it directly into their design process. However, in order to
prevent large amounts of data from being stored within the BIM plug­in, a database of
LCA profiles in the JSON data format is defined outside and then imported into the plug­
in. The modified integration strategy can be seen in Figure 4.6.
50
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.6: LCA­BIM integration strategy used in this study
The simulation of the environmental impacts, conducted as a part of the development
of the tool in this study, is based on the concept of a digital workbench. Here, real­life
impacts can be simulated in a digital environment by integrating the theory into software
tools. These software tools include:
• Rhinoceros 7 is a 3D CAD software by Robert McNeel & Associates popularly used
in architecture and design. (https://www.rhino3d.com/)
• Grasshopper 3D is a graphical programming language deeply integrated with Rhino.
(https://www.grasshopper3d.com/)
• Rambøll FENIX is a structural generator developed by Rambøll Finland that dimen­
sions structural profiles for slabs, beams, and columns from buildings blocks defined
as breps in Rhino (https://c.ramboll.com/fi/fenix-by-ramboll)
• Ladybug Tools is a collection of open­source tools which enable environmental
design in Rhino by connecting Grasshopper with simulation engines such as Ener­
gyPlus, OpenStudio, and Daysim. (https://www.ladybug.tools/)
– Ladybug performs detailed analyses of climate data and simulations for decision­
making in early­stage design, mainly by using EnergyPlus Weather (EPW) files.
(https://www.ladybug.tools/ladybug.html)
– Honeybee creates and runs energy models using EnergyPlus and OpenStudio
as well as daylight simulations using Radiance. (https://www.ladybug.tools/
honeybee.html)
– Dragonfly creates and runs district­scale models for energy simulation using
URBANopt. (https://www.ladybug.tools/dragonfly.html)
Urban Decarbonization
51
==PAGE:62==
• UrbanOPT is a simulation platform for district­scale thermal and electrical analysis
for Urban District Energy modeling using EnergyPlus and OpenStudio. (https://
docs.urbanopt.net/)
• EnergyPlus is a whole­building energy simulation program that models energy con­
sumption for heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, etc. (https://energyplus.net/)
• OpenStudio is an open­source collection of software tools to support whole­building
energy modeling using EnergyPlus (https://openstudio.net/)
• GhPython is the Python interpreter component integrated directly in Grasshopper
(https://www.food4rhino.com/en/app/ghpython)
The tool is created as a Grasshopper canvas script which imports and exports data be­
tween the different software. A simplified workflow of the tool and the integration between
software is visible in Figure 4.7. The tool setup will be further described in detail in Section
5 ”Inventory analysis”.
Figure 4.7: Simplified workflow of the tool and integration between software
52
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:63==
4.4
Summary
In this section, the methodology of the creation of the urban LCA tool was presented.
This included an overview of the chapters of this research based on the DSRP model by
Peffers et al. Furthermore, it defined multiple intended applications of this study, such
as hot spot identification and scenario comparison, and the target audience as architects
and urban designers. Hereafter, the functional unit was proposed to be a combination
of an absolute, a per capita, and a spatial unit according to Lotteau et al. The system
boundary included a description of the included categories of buildings and open spaces,
and an overview of the included life­cycle stages matching the Danish building regulations.
The section also presented the creation of a hierarchy for the data collection, used to
find the most suitable data for a screening LCA in the concept design stage (LOD 2). At
last, the computational workflow was described, showing that the tool is created in the
graphical programming language Grasshopper, deeply integrated with Rhinoceros, using
a wide range of plug­ins such as Rambøll FENIX and the Ladybug Tools.
Urban Decarbonization
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:65==
5
Inventory analysis
In this section, the method for the inventory analysis will be described. The inventory anal­
ysis in an LCA collects all the product flows and processes, including inputs of resources,
materials, and products. As the urban LCA in this research is intended for the early­stage
design of various new urban developments, a parametric workflow is proposed. This is
based on direct quantity estimations from the BIM model, as well as simulations of the
structural system and operational energy. This section will therefore introduce the esti­
mation of quantities, as well as the configuration and import of the component database.
Hereafter, the calculations of the impacts from each of the life­cycle stages will be pre­
sented.
5.1
Estimation of quantities
The quantities are estimated based on an urban Rhino model, which is detailed and de­
signed by architects and urban designers. This Rhino model is expected to be at a de­
tailing stage of LOD 2 (concept design), meaning that it will only include building masses
split into floors, as well as hardscape and landscape surfaces. If the building masses are
not already split into floors, they can be split either manually or automatically by using
Grasshopper. An example of this level of detail in the urban Rhino model can be seen
in Figure 5.1, where building masses, hardscape and landscape surfaces, and trees are
represented geometrically.
Figure 5.1: Example of the detailing level of the urban Rhino model
Urban Decarbonization
55
==PAGE:66==
5.1.1
Category components
The urban categories included in the assessment are buildings, hardscape, and land­
scape. Each of these categories consists of a list of components. In the LCA calculation
in BR23, the included building components are defined according to § 297.4 and listed
in BR23 Appendix 2, Table 6 [16]. The building components included in the urban LCA
method presented in this research follow the included components in BR23. Furthermore,
BR23 includes hardscapes such as roads and pavements in the ”paving” category, if it is
within the area definition. Here, it is proposed to include all hardscapes in the urban area
in the area definition and thereby in the analysis. Only extensive planting systems are
included in the ”planting” category in BR23, however, it is also proposed here to extend
this to all landscapes, including trees, shrubs, lawns, etc. The components included in
BR23 and in the proposed urban LCA tool are presented in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Components included in the LCA in BR23 and in the urban LCA tool
Based on these regulations for the inclusion of building and urban components, the quan­
tities are extracted from the urban Rhino model. This is done by geometry processing in
Grasshopper, which will be described later in this section. In order to match this geom­
etry processing, the organization of the included components slightly differs from BR23.
The included components within each of the categories and the unit in which they are
extracted are presented in Table 5.1.
56
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:67==
Table 5.1: The included components within each of the categories and their unit
Category
Component
Unit
Estimation
Building
Footing foundation
m3
Structure
Line foundation
m
Direct
Ground slab
m2
Direct
Slab
m3
Structure
Column
m3
Structure
Beam
m3
Structure
Basement wall
m2
Direct
External wall
m2
Indirect
Window
m2
Indirect
External door
m2
Indirect
Partition and core wall
m2
Indirect
Internal wall
m2
Indirect
Internal door
m2
Indirect
Roof finish
m2
Direct
Floor finish
m2
Direct
Ceiling finish
m2
Direct
Stairs and elevators
m
Indirect
Services
m2
Direct
Hardscape
Roads and pavements
m2
Direct
Landscape
Trees and shrubs
pcs
Direct
Lawn and perennials
m2
Direct
Table 5.1 also includes the estimation method. The quantities for some of these categories
can be extracted directly from the Rhino model without further geometry processing. This
includes area extraction for the ground slab, basement walls, roof finish, floor finish, ceil­
ing finish, services, roads and pavements, lawn and perennials, but also length extraction
for line foundation, and the number of objects for trees and shrubs. Other quantities can
be estimated indirectly by introducing rules and variables based on direct estimates in
Grasshopper. An example of this is the window area which can be calculated from a per­
centage of the facade area. This also includes area estimation for external walls, external
doors, partition and core walls, internal walls, and internal doors, as well as length extrac­
tion for stairs and elevators.
At last, the quantities are estimated based on generative structural analysis and sizing,
including footing foundation, slabs, columns, and beams. Modified from a workflow by
Weber et al. [46], the proposed workflow for the estimation of quantities for the inventory
analysis can be seen in Figure 5.3.
Urban Decarbonization
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.3: Proposed workflow for carbon calculation inspired by Weber et al. [46]
5.1.2
Direct and indirect quantity extraction
The buildings in the Rhino model are expected to be modeled as simple, closed breps
(boundary representations), where the buildings are split into floors. With a simple model
such as this, direct and indirect quantities can be extracted by creating rules for geometry
processing. Examples of direct and indirect quantity estimations from the Rhino model
can be seen in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Examples of direct and indirect quantity estimations from the Rhino model
58
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:69==
For example, the direct quantities for surfaces can be extracted automatically by creating
rules for the normal vector. This includes the ground slab, floor finish, roof finish, ceiling
finish, and facade. Furthermore, the walls of the breps are separated into facade and par­
tition walls, dependent on whether the surface is overlapping with the surface of another
brep. If there are any basement floors, these are defined in order to separate the base­
ment walls from the facade. Additionally, the length of the line foundation is calculated
based on the perimeter of the building.
Figure 5.5: Direct quantity estimations of ground floors, floors, roof, facade, and partition
walls
Hereafter, the indirect quantities are calculated. This first includes the areas for windows,
external doors, and external walls, which are all based on the extracted facade area mul­
tiplied with a ratio in order to simplify the modeling. In this case, a variable for the ratio
of external doors to external walls, Rexternal door, is introduced, as well as window­to­wall
ratios (WWR) which can be modified based on the building typology. The equations for
the area calculation can be seen in Equations 5.1 to 5.3.
Awindow = Afacade · WWR
(5.1)
Aexternal door = Afacade · Rexternal door
(5.2)
Aexternal wall = Afacade −(Awindow + Aexternal door)
(5.3)
Another quantity necessary is the internal wall area. As this is not something that will be
modeled nor considered in an urban master plan, this calculation should be done entirely
without inputs. One option is to use automated floorplan generation tools such as Testfit,
Spacemaker, or PlanFinder as reviewed by Weber et al. [79], however, most of these are
not integrated into the Rhino Grasshopper environment or are time­consuming to run. For
now, it is therefore proposed to estimate the internal wall area from other extracted quan­
Urban Decarbonization
59
==PAGE:70==
tities. In a study by Gepts et al., a database of almost 6 000 Belgian buildings constructed
between 2010 and 2017 was used to create a model for the estimation of the internal wall
area through the R2 k­fold method [80]. The analysis showed that the building volume
was by far the most important variable. Therefore, they proposed a simplified equation
for the internal wall area based on the building volume, as seen in Equation 5.4.
Ainternal wall = 106.58 + 0.40 · Vbuilding
(5.4)
This equation is used to estimate the quantities for the internal wall area, however also with
the introduction of a variable for the ratio of internal doors to internal walls, Rinternal door.
Ainternal wall = (106.58 + 0.40 · Vbuilding) · (1 −Rinternal door)
(5.5)
Ainternal wall = (106.58 + 0.40 · Vbuilding) · Rinternal door
(5.6)
The last indirect quantities included are the area of core walls and the length of the stairs
and elevators. These quantities are extracted based on input for the maximum area per
core (default: 800 m2), the minimum number of floors for a core and elevator (default:
4 floors), and the size of the rectangular core (default: 5x5 m), which provides a simpli­
fied calculation of the area of the core walls and the length of the stairs and elevators in
Grasshopper.
Figure 5.6: Grasshopper script for estimating the area of the core walls and the length of
the stairs and elevators
In addition to the building component quantities, the quantities for hardscape and land­
scape are estimated. As these are all modeled as surfaces and individual objects, they
can be estimated directly from the model from the surface areas or from the number of
objects.
60
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:71==
5.1.3
Generative structure quantity extraction
Using area­normalized emissions for the structural system can potentially be very impre­
cise, as it is highly dependent on the construction method, loads, size, and material. In
order to get precise estimations for the structural system for the LCA analysis, it is pro­
posed to use a generative structural design method similar to the one proposed by Weber
et al. [46] reviewed in the literature study. Here, the structure is generated based on
geometry and simple inputs such as materials, live load, and span length.
Figure 5.7: Inputs for the generative structural design method
As live loads are one of these simple inputs, they can be estimated for different typologies
from DS/EN 1991 [81], as seen for selected typologies in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Projected live load of selected building typologies according to DS/EN 1991
[81]. Values with * are not directly indicated and estimated from similar typologies
Building typology
Live load [kN/m2]
Residential
1.5
Office
2.5
School
2.5*
Institution
2.5*
Retail
4.0
Parking
2.5
Industry
7.5
Transport
5.0*
Hotel
1.5*
Hospital
2.5*
Urban Decarbonization
61
==PAGE:72==
In this study, it is proposed to integrate the Rambøll tool FENIX into the workflow. FENIX
generates building blocks from Breps in Rhino and finds the structural profiles for slabs,
beams, columns, and foundations, making it possible to compare different structural con­
figurations [82].
Figure 5.8: The interface of FENIX (and associated SODA) integrated in Rhino
In addition to the Breps, FENIX generates the structure based on the simple inputs of live
load and beam span, as well as material choice for vertical, beam, and slab structures.
Here, several options can be chosen, including reinforced concrete, steel, and timber
columns and beams, and reinforced concrete, hollow core concrete, timber LVL, and tim­
ber CLT slabs. An example of the generation of an all­concrete and an all­timber structure
can be seen in Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Concrete and timber structural system as generated by Rambøll FENIX
62
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:73==
5.1.4
Transformation and renovation
As described in Section 3 ”Literature study”, new urban developments will often be cre­
ated in areas with existing buildings and infrastructure, and renovation and transformation
of existing buildings can therefore reduce environmental impacts compared to demolition
and new construction. In order to integrate these considerations into the calculation of
the urban LCA, it is proposed to introduce replacement factors for the quantities of the
various building components. As a result, the previously described quantity estimation
is performed on the existing building, which is then multiplied with a replacement fac­
tor dependent on the building component. The replacement factors for various building
components can be seen in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Replacement factors for quantities in building renovation projects
Component
Replacements
Footing foundation
None
Line foundation
None
Ground slab
None
Slab
Fstructure
Column
Fstructure
Beam
Fstructure
Basement wall
None
External wall
Fenvelope
Window
All
External door
All
Partition and core wall
Fstructure
Internal wall
All
Internal door
All
Roof finish
Fenvelope
Floor finish
All
Ceiling finish
All
Stairs and elevators
All
Services
All
For foundations, ground slab, and basement, none of the quantities are expected to be
replaced and the factor is therefore defined as 0%. For doors, windows, and finishes for
floors, roofs, and ceilings, it is expected that all quantities are replaced and the replace­
ment factor is therefore set to 100%. The renovation potential of the structure and the
envelope is highly dependent on the existing building, and the variables, Fstructure and
Fenvelope, are therefore introduced, making it possible to change these factors for different
buildings.
Urban Decarbonization
63
==PAGE:74==
5.2
Configuration of database
In order to simplify the inventory analysis of the early­stage LCA calculation, a workflow is
created where the quantities are estimated for the various components (as described in
the previous section) and then matched with a catelogue of so­called ”standard compo­
nents” and their related LCA profiles. To make this possible, these standard components
are all created in the same unit as the quantities are extracted from the model and thereby
follow the units in Table 5.1. This workflow is presented in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Workflow for matching the inventory with the standard components
5.2.1
Component catelogue
The catelogue of standard components is created based on the constructions presented
in the BUILD publication ”Example library for LCAbyg” [83]. Here, the authors present the
build­ups of the generic constructions used in LCAbyg, which are typical for the construc­
tion of new buildings in Denmark. Various constructions for components such as roofs,
walls, slabs, foundations, etc. are described in detail with materials, layers, and quanti­
ties. Furthermore, the publication includes the global warming potential per unit for each
of these constructions, making it possible to get a quick overview of the environmental
impact of different constructions from which design decisions can be made. These im­
pacts are calculated for the life­cycle phases A1­A3, B4, and C3­C4 over 50 years, and
the material emissions are based on generic values from the Ökobaudat database.
However, as the constructions are only based on data from Ökobaudat and not from Dan­
ish industry­specific EPDs, and the lifetime is constant at 50 years instead of being a
variable as proposed in the urban LCA, a separate component catelogue was created.
This makes it possible to add further constructions if wanted, such as FutureCEM con­
crete or photovoltaics, as well as constructions for hardscape and landscape. As a result
of this, a component catelogue with a total of 75 different constructions within the 21 com­
ponent categories was created. An overview of all the various constructions within each
component can be seen in Figure A.1 in Appendix A. An example of the 7 constructions
within the external wall component can be seen in Figure 5.11, where the timber frame
wall is presented in more detail. Additionally, the constructions within the components
columns, slabs, and roads and pavements can be seen in Figure A.2 in Appendix A.
64
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:75==
Figure 5.11: The 7 possible constructions for the external wall
The 75 different constructions consist of a total of 284 materials. However, as some
materials appear in multiple constructions, data for exactly 100 individual materials were
found. The information included the quantity and weight of material in the construction,
and an LCA profile from an EPD or generic dataset, as well as default reference service
life, waste factor, and transportation distance.
Focusing on the collection of LCA profiles, Figure 4.5 presented the hierarchy for data
Urban Decarbonization
65
==PAGE:76==
collection. Based on this, data from Danish industry­specific EPDs and hereafter from
the German generic database Ökobaudat were preferred for building components. This
matches the generic dataset in BR23 according to § 297.5 and listed in BR23 Appendix
2, Table 7 [16]. Furthermore, a single product­specific dataset for an interior door was
found in the Norwegian EPD database. For hardscape, the generic database InfraLCA
by Vejdirektoratet [70] was used, and generic constructions for roads and pavements were
provided by the Roads and Traffic department in Rambøll. At last, carbon sequestration
values for landscape were found in the database of the Climate Positive Design tool [72].
The number of datasets based on source, type, and location can be seen in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12: Number of datasets from various sources, types, and locations
Additionally, it was noticed whether all life­cycle stages were included in the dataset. As
seen in Figure 5.13, the majority of the datasets include A1­A3 and C3­C4, as this was
a requirement since they cannot be estimated. However, for the landscape components
such as trees and shrubs, only data for annual carbon sequestration and maintenance
addressed in B6 were found, meaning A1­A3 and C3­C4 are set to 0. 30 and 23 of
the datasets included A4 and A5 respectively, while only 11 (excluding the 17 landscape
components) included any of the use stages.
66
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:77==
Figure 5.13: Number of datasets including the various life­cycle stages
As seen in Figure 5.12, nine datasets are taken directly from BR23. These represent the
technical installations that are often lacking in building LCAs. In order to include these in
the building LCA, MOE (now Artelia) has calculated reference values for technical instal­
lations for drainage, water, and HVAC for residential buildings, office, school and educa­
tional buildings, and other buildings [84]. The reference values are calculated per m2 floor
area over 50 years and the totals can be seen in Table 5.4. The reference values are also
divided into A1­A3 and C3­C4, which are the values that are included in the database.
Table 5.4: Reference values for technical installations in the unit kg CO2/m2/year [84]
Building typology
Drainage
Water
HVAC
Residential
0.12
0.06
0.51
Office, school and education
0.04
0.06
0.84
Others buildings
0.05
0.08
1.09
The expected service life of each product is included in the database based on the BUILD
lifetime table [76], as defined in BR23 § 297.7. Furthermore, the transportation distance
and waste percentage are included for each material according to Andersen et al. [41],
as seen in Table 5.5, which makes it possible to include A4 and A5 in the LCA calculation.
Table 5.5: Default transportation distance by road and waste percentage [41]
Building material
Transportation [km]
Waste [%]
Construction timber
600
5
CLT
1 400
5
Glulam
70
5
Plywood
600
5
Chipboard
200
5
Ready­mix concrete
50
5
Precast concrete elements
150
5
Other materials
500
10
Soilworks
200
5
Urban Decarbonization
67
==PAGE:78==
5.2.2
File format
It is proposed to integrate the LCA calculation as a plug­in within Rhino. However, instead
of defining all the components in the plug­in, the database is created outside Rhino and
then imported into Grasshopper. One method of storing the database is with the JSON
data format. JSON is an open data format that is human­readable and can easily be inte­
grated with a long list of software. Furthermore, it is possible to import constructions and
EPDs in JSON to LCAbyg, as well as export LCAbyg projects in JSON [85]. Due to these
advantages, it is proposed here to create the database in JSON.
As a part of the DTU research project regarding building and material passports [86],
Vest and Pagh presented a method for the digitalization of the SUSb material passport in
the JSON format [87]. Based on this format, the data of the materials in the component
catelogue for the urban LCA is stored. However, as this file format does not include
all the data points necessary, it is proposed to modify the format and thereby include
information about the usage category, component, and construction, as well as global
warming emissions for all life­cycle stages and the EPD. A part of the modified JSON file
with an example of a ready­mix concrete product in a building footing foundation can be
seen in Listing 5.1. For visualization, * marks modified lines, while ** marks new lines.
{
...
'01_product_info': {
'01_product_name': "Ready-mix concrete , Danish industry average ,
C35/45, XD1/XS1/XS2/XF2/XF3/XA2 CEM I",
'01_product_description': "Ready-mix concrete , C35/C45",
*
'01_usage': {
**
'01_usage_construction': "Footing foundation",
**
'01_usage_component': "Footing foundation",
**
'01_usage_category': "Building"
},
*
'01_weight_per_component_unit': 2267,
...
'01_unit': "m3",
*
'01_CO2_emission': {
*
'01_CO2_emission_a1 -a3': 362,
**
'01_CO2_emission_a4': 4.57,
**
'01_CO2_emission_a5': "NA",
**
'01_CO2_emission_b4': "NA",
**
'01_CO2_emission_b6': "NA",
**
'01_CO2_emission_c3 -c4': 12.3
},
...
},
...
}
Listing 5.1: The section with product information in the modified JSON file format
68
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:79==
Furthermore, the section regarding the EPD of the product is extended, as seen in Listing
5.2. It is expected that this section can be easily integrated with future EPDs if they
are digitalized in the JSON format or similar. Additionally, further environmental impact
categories can be listed and integrated in the tool, once this data has been collected.
{
...
'03_category_name': {
'03_certifications_and_datasheets': {
...
*
'03_epd_product': {
**
'03_epd_product_number': "MD-20013-DA_rev1",
**
'03_epd_product_owner': "Fabriksbetonforeningen",
**
'03_epd_product_link': "https:/www.epddanmark.dk/
media/nvwgry4v/md-20013-da_rev1 -dansk-beton-
fabriksbetonforeningen.pdf",
**
'03_epd_product_type': "Industry",
**
'03_epd_product_expiration_date': "20-07-2025",
**
'03_epd_product_unit': "m3",
**
'03_epd_product_country': "Denmark",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission': {
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_a1 -a3': 362,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_a4': 4.57,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_a5': "MND",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b1': -19,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b2': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b3': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b4': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b5': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b6': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b7': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c1': 12.7,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c2': 6.89,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c3': 7.07,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c4': 5.23,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_d': -4.84
}
},
...
},
...
},
...
}
Listing 5.2: The section with EPD information in the modified JSON file format
In addition, a section in the JSON file regarding waste percentage and transportation dis­
tance is created. The full modified JSON file can be seen in Listing B.1 in Appendix B.
Urban Decarbonization
69
==PAGE:80==
5.3
Operational energy
The energy use of the urban area is simulated with Dragonfly by Ladybug Tools. Dragon­
fly creates and runs district­scale models for energy simulation using URBANopt based
on EnergyPlus and OpenStudio [88]. In contrast to Honeybee, Dragonfly models its en­
ergy simulation with 2D floors and a floor­to­floor height instead of 3D volumes to reduce
simulation time. The lowest level of detail is therefore 2D rooms. From this, stories can be
created that form a building, and eventually, all the buildings make up the urban model.
Figure 5.14: The simplified urban massing model for energy simulation
5.3.1
Simplifications of the urban energy model
Some simplifications are necessary for the creation of the urban energy model. First of
all, pitched roofs can not be represented by 2D floors. As seen in Figure 5.14, all stories
in the simplified urban model are extruded floor plans. Furthermore, each building must
have one specific program, even though it consists of multiple typologies (for example
office and retail). Honeybee includes a long variety of programs such as offices, apart­
ments, retail, school, etc. with default values for crucial energy properties including the
number of people, lighting schedules, ventilation rate, and heating and cooling setpoints.
By using the HB Blend ProgramTypes component, it is possible to blend the various pro­
grams (chosen from their typologies) in a building based on area ratios. The allocation of
programs from typologies can be seen in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Allocation of Honeybee programs from typologies
70
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:81==
Another simplification necessary is the definition of construction materials. Here, Hon­
eybee also has a component to easily create the full building construction set (HB Con­
struction Set by Climate) based on climate zone, vintage template, and construction type.
As defined in the EPW file, Denmark is ASHRAE climate zone 5 (cool), and the newest
ASHRAE vintage template from 2019 is used. The available construction types are ”steel
framed”, ”wood framed”, ”mass”, and ”metal building”, which are defined according to the
structural materials for columns, beams, and slabs as chosen in the structural calcula­
tion. However, by investigating the resulting constructions, it can be seen that multiple
constructions do not comply with minimum U­values for the insulation of the building en­
velope according to BR23 Appendix 2, Table 1 [16]. This includes the default U­value for
the windows of 2.06 W/m2*K and for the external walls of 0.46 W/m2*K, which should be
below 1.80 and 0.30 W/m2*K respectively. As a result, the U­values for the ground floor,
external wall, and external roof are recalculated according to the insulation thickness and
thermal conductivity used in the constructions defined in the component catelogue, while
a U­value of 0.8 W/m2*K is used for the windows from the triple­pane window EPDs. The
modified U­values can be seen in Figure 5.6.
Table 5.6: Modified U­values for the constructions
Construction
U­value [W/m2*K]
Ground floor
0.09
External wall
0.11
External roof
0.09
Window
0.80
At last, the energy simulation also highly depends on the window­to­wall ratio (WWR).
The WWR can be defined for each building typology, however, if multiple typologies are
defined for a building, the area­averaged WWR is used in the energy simulation. Further­
more, the windows are modeled as a single scaled surface, as seen in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: Window simplification based on WWR
Urban Decarbonization
71
==PAGE:82==
The result of the urban energy simulation in Dragonfly is a list of annual energy use for
every building. In compliance with BR23, the results include heating, cooling, hot water,
and lighting, of which heating and hot water can be selected to be from district heating.
5.3.2
Integrating the urban heat island effect
Another feature of the Dragonfly plug­in is the possibility to incorporate the effects of the
urban heat island effect (UHI) in the energy simulation. The UHI effect is a complex
phenomenon that describes the elevation of temperatures in urban areas compared to
surrounding rural areas due to a dense concentration of buildings, pavements, and other
infrastructure [89]. Its effect on various types of development can be seen in Figure 5.17
inspired by Fuladlu et al. [90].
Figure 5.17: The effect of urban heat island as inspired by Fuladlu et al. [90]
The UHI effect is included in Dragonfly with the Urban Weather Generator (UWG), which
was developed by Bruno Bueno for his Ph.D. at MIT [91]. By simulating the UHI effect
due to inputs such as buildings, pavement materials, traffic, and vegetation, the original
EPW file can be morphed to account for the urban heat island effect. In Dragonfly, the
inputs from the urban building model are supplemented with the percentage of exposed
terrain covered by trees and grass, as well as approximated traffic intensity calculated by
Dragonfly based on the average building story count. The effects of the UHI effect on
the dry bulb temperature and relative humidity in the EPW file for Copenhagen due to the
urban area shown in Figure 5.1 can be seen in Figure C.1 and C.2 in Appendix C.
5.3.3
Emission factors for operational energy
The operational emissions are calculated from the simulated EUI multiplied with the emis­
sion factors for electricity and district heating. As more of the electrical grid comes from
renewable energy, these emission factors will be reduced. The emission factors are cal­
culated by COWI [92] and defined in BR23 for 2023 to 2040, whereafter the values from
2040 are used. The emission factors can be seen in Figure 5.18.
72
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:83==
Figure 5.18: Danish emission factors for electricity, district heating, and gas [16]
5.3.4
Building integrated photovoltaics
The emissions from the operational energy can be reduced by integrating energy produc­
tion systems such as photovoltaic systems (PVs) in the design of the building. However,
the embodied emissions from PVs are also high, meaning that the reduced emissions
from the energy production should be lower than this for it to be beneficial. The energy
production will depend on the system and site­specific values such as annual average
solar radiation. The analysis performed here is based on the Danish product­specific
EPD for a building­integrated photovoltaic roof module by Ernogie [93]. The embodied
emissions from the roof module are defined in the component catelogue and the energy
production can be calculated from formulas defined in the EPD. Equation 5.7 defines the
energy production from the first year, while Equation 5.8 calculates the energy production
from the entire service life of the module.
PVelectricity,1 = Srad · A · y · PR · (1 −deg)
(5.7)
PVelectricity,RSL = PVelectricity,1 · (1 +
RSL−1
∑
n=1
(1 −deg)n)
(5.8)
As seen in the equations, the energy production depends on a variety of parameters.
These parameters and their values are detailed in Table 5.7.
Urban Decarbonization
73
==PAGE:84==
Table 5.7: Applied parameters in the calculation of electricity production from PVs [93]
Parameter
Description
Unit
Value
Srad
Annual average solar radiation
kWh/m2/year
Site­specific
A
PV surface area
m2
Site­specific
y
Module yield
­
0.175
PR
Performance ratio
­
0.75
deg
Yearly degradation rate
%
0.7
n
Year of operation
­
­
RSL
Reference service life of the PV
years
25
As defined in the table, the annual average solar radiation is site­specific and varies greatly
depending on the geographical location of the project. As a result, the incident radiation
on the roofs with PVs are calculated using Ladybug components and a local EPW file, of
which an example can be seen in Figure 5.19.
Figure 5.19: Simulation of annual average solar radiation on roofs with Ladybug
5.4
Reference service life
Another crucial part of the proposed LCA calculation is the reference service life (RSL)
and reference study period (RSP). As described in Section 2 ”Background”, the impacts
from the use stage should be adjusted if RSP < RSL. This could be the case for the emis­
74
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:85==
sions from the operational energy use, where only emissions from the reference study
period are considered no matter the reference service life. On the other hand, if RSP
> RSL, scenarios for replacements/transformation or demolition and construction of new
must be developed in order to provide the function within the whole reference study period.
5.4.1
Replacements
When calculating the environmental impacts of buildings or infrastructure, some products
will likely have a reference service life shorter than the reference study period, RSP > RSL.
In this case, the emissions from replacing these products (end­of­life for original products,
and production and construction for new products) are assigned to the life­cycle stage B4.
This principle can be seen in Figure 5.20 for a product with a RSL of 20 years in a building
LCA calculation with a RSP of 50 years, meaning the product is replaced twice.
Figure 5.20: Replacements of products in the LCA of buildings as inspired by BR23 [16]
This same principle is adopted by the urban LCA method in this research. If the reference
study period of the urban LCA was defined as 100 years, building typologies such as office
and retail would have shorter reference service lifetimes (see Table 4.1). As the product
function must be provided within the whole reference study period and the urban area is
designed to maintain this function, these buildings must be demolished and rebuilt. The
emissions from this are again assigned to B4. An example can be seen in Figure 5.21 for
a building with a RSL of 80 years in an urban LCA calculation with a RSP of 100 years. For
calculation purposes, it is assumed that a building with the same properties is constructed
again, meaning the emissions for the life­cycle stages of production, construction, and
end­of­life would be equal to the original building, while replacements of products are
calculated for the remaining service life. The emissions from the operational energy use
will not be affected by the building replacement, and will therefore increase annually as
seen in the figure. This increase is shown as linear in the figure, but will in reality depend
on the emission factors presented earlier.
Urban Decarbonization
75
==PAGE:86==
Figure 5.21: Replacements of buildings in the LCA of urban areas
5.4.2
Flexibility and adaptability
When designing urban areas, it is often not taken into account that some buildings will
have a shorter reference service life than the urban area, and few buildings are designed
with a complete replacement of the exact same building in mind, as the LCA method pro­
poses. To avoid the large cost of demolishing and constructing new, designing adaptable
and flexible buildings can extend the lifetime of the building.
An adaptable building is defined as a building that can adapt and adjust to various uses by
having the possibility to include different spatial and functional layouts without significant
changes in the design [94]. As defined by Kincaid, the adaptability of a building depends
on a long list of physical characteristics, including site access, building depth, floor­to­
floor height, number of staircases, etc. [95]. In this research, a building is considered
adaptable if it complies with the parameters in Table 5.8.
Table 5.8: Parameters and their requirements for an adaptable building
Parameter
Requirement
Source
Number of access points
≥2 open sides
ABCU [95]
Floor­to­floor height
≥3.0 m
DGNB [96]
Live load
≥2.5 kN/m2
DS/EN 1991 [81]
Building depth
≥11.5 m
DGNB [96]
Floor area per core
≤1 200 m2
DGNB [96]
76
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:87==
By introducing these parameters for adaptability into the design of the building, the refer­
ence service life of a building can be adjusted to the value representing the longest lifetime
of the typologies to which the building can be adapted. An example could be an office,
with an expected lifetime of 80 years, which is designed for adaptability and therefore can
take an expected lifetime from a residential building of 120 years.
5.5
LCA calculation formulas
The calculation of the total GWP of the urban area (U) will be a result of the sum of the
impacts of its components. The impacts from these components will equally be the sum
of the impacts from each of its elements, for example meaning that the environmental
impact from the building category is the sum of the impacts from all buildings. This can
be seen in Equation 5.9, where B represents buildings, H represents hardscape, and L
represents landscape.
GWPtotal,U =
∑
GWPB +
∑
GWPH +
∑
GWPL
(5.9)
The impact of each of the elements is the sum of the environmental impacts from the life­
cycle stages considered. For buildings, this includes all investigated life­cycle phases (Eq.
5.10), for hardscapes it includes all except B6 (Eq. 5.11), and for landscape it includes
only B6 (Eq. 5.12).
GWPB = A1­A3B + A4B + A5B + B4B + B6B + C3­C4B
(5.10)
GWPH = A1­A3H + A4H + A5H + B4H + C3­C4H
(5.11)
GWPL = B6L
(5.12)
As mentioned in Section 4 ”Methodology”, a combination of three functional units are
used in this research. The absolute ”per neighborhood” unit is the total impact and thereby
presented in Equation 5.9, while the spatial ”per m2 floor area” and the ”per inhabitant” unit
can be calculated by dividing the total with the floor area or number of people respectively,
possibly also normalizing with the reference study period as seen in Equation 5.13 and
5.14.
GWPfloorArea,U =
GWPtotal,U
∑floorAreaB · RSPU
(5.13)
GWPpeople,U =
GWPtotal,U
∑peopleB · RSPU
(5.14)
Urban Decarbonization
77
==PAGE:88==
In the next sections, the calculation formulas for each of the life­cycle stages will be further
described.
5.5.1
Production (A1­A3)
The environmental impact of the production stage is calculated from the sum of the pro­
duction emissions (raw material supply, transport, and manufacturing) multiplied by the
quantities of each product. This is then summed to find the total production impact for the
entire building or hardscape element.
A1­A3B,H =
∑
(QP · (A1P + A2P + A3P ))
(5.15)
5.5.2
Transportation (A4)
The environmental impacts of transportation from the production to the construction site
are calculated from the weight of each product multiplied by the transportation distance
as defined according to Table 5.5. This is then multiplied by the emission factor for trans­
portation by road of 0.0001136 kg CO2e/kg/km as defined in the act carbon tool by Arup
[97].
A4B =
∑
(WeightP · DistanceP ) · EFtransport
(5.16)
The environmental impacts of transportation for hardscapes are already found in the In­
fraLCA database and these are therefore not recalculated.
5.5.3
Construction (A5)
The environmental impacts of the construction can be divided into two parts: emissions
from the construction waste, and the energy and fuel used to construct the building.
A5B =
∑
A5waste,P + A5construction,B
(5.17)
The impacts of the construction waste can be calculated from the product waste percent­
age (as presented in Table 5.5) multiplied by the quantity of material and the sum of the
impact categories A1­A3, A4, and C3­C4.
A5waste,P = WasteP · QP · (A1­A3P + A4P + C3­C4P )
(5.18)
The impacts of the construction of the building are calculated from energy and fuel use.
Here, it is proposed to simplify this calculation by using reference values for the energy
use (CEB) and diesel fuel use (FUB) per floor area and multiplying this with emission
factors for energy and fuel. The emission factor for energy is based on the electricity grid
from the year of construction.
78
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:89==
A5construction,B = floorAreaB · (CEB · EFelectricity,yc + FUB · EFfuel)
(5.19)
The environmental impacts of construction for hardscapes are already found in the In­
fraLCA database and these are therefore not recalculated.
5.5.4
Replacements (B4)
As shown in Figure 5.20, the emissions in life­cycle stage B4 are calculated based on the
production, construction, and end­of­life emissions if the product reference service life is
shorter than the reference study period.
B4B =
∑
(QP · (A1­A3P + A4P + A5waste,P + C3­C4P ) · (roundup(RSPB
RSLP
) −1)) (5.20)
Furthermore, the emissions from the demolition and new construction of buildings with
reference service lifetimes shorter than the reference study period are assigned to B4, as
presented in Figure 5.21.
5.5.5
Operational energy (B6)
The emissions due to operational energy use are calculated from the simulated annual
energy use (EUI) for electricity and district heating multiplied by their respective emission
factors for each year in the reference service life of the building. The energy production
from photovoltaics can be subtracted from the electricity use.
B6B =
yc+RSPB
∑
y=yc
((EUIelectricity−PVelectricity,y)·EFenergy,y+EUIdistrict·EFdistrict,y) (5.21)
It is stated in BR23 that only a maximum of 13.2 kWh/m2/year due to energy production
from photovoltaics can be subtracted from the electricity use. However, as the calculation
is intended for decision­making on an urban scale, it is left optional in the tool if this limit
should be applied or not.
5.5.6
End­of­life (C3­C4)
Similar to the calculation for A1­A3, C3­C4 is calculated directly from the end­of­life emis­
sions (waste processing and disposal) multiplied by the product quantities.
C3­C4B,H =
∑
(QP · (C3P + C4P ))
(5.22)
Urban Decarbonization
79
==PAGE:90==
5.6
Summary
In this section, the workflow for the estimation of quantities from the urban Rhino model
was presented, including the definition of the building category components in compli­
ance with BR23. It was shown how these quantities were calculated directly, indirectly,
or through structural simulations with the Rambøll tool FENIX. Furthermore, replacement
factors for transformation were shown in Table 5.3, which included variable inputs for
structure and envelope.
Hereafter, the creation of the component catelogue was presented, showing how various
components were created based on the BUILD publication ”Example library for LCAbyg”
[83]. For each of these components, emission data was found, mainly based on the Dan­
ish database EPD Danmark and the German generic database Ökobaudat. This com­
ponent catelogue was defined in a JSON data format modified from the digitalized SUSb
material passport by Vest and Pagh [87] for easy integration in a Rhino Grasshopper
workflow.
Additionally, the simplified urban energy model using Dragonfly was introduced, where
also the urban heat island effect, Danish emission factors, and photovoltaics were inte­
grated. The section also presented the concept of adaptable buildings, making it possible
to extend the reference service life of buildings by complying with parameters defined ac­
cording to DGNB, DS/EN 1991, and BR23. At last, the LCA calculation rules for urban
areas were defined, showing how each life­cycle stage is calculated by the tool.
80
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:91==
6
Impact assessment
This section presents the impact assessment of the urban LCA method. First, the global
warming potential of the various building constructions will be compared with the BUILD
example library from which they were inspired. Hereafter, the LCAs of a baseline and tim­
ber version of a single building and sections of hardscape and landscape will be calculated
and compared with the results from the literature study. At last, an intensive parameter
study of a range of the many urban parameters will be presented.
6.1
Validation of building constructions
The majority of the building constructions are inspired by the ”Example library for LCAbyg”
[83]. However, these constructions are only based on data from the Ökobaudat database,
while the component catelogue includes Danish industry­specific EPDs for materials such
as concrete, timber, and windows. Therefore, some deviations are expected when com­
paring the catelogue and example library. In order to perform this comparison, the GWP
of the catelogue constructions is calculated based on the same prerequisites as the ex­
ample library, which include the life­cycle stages A1­A3, B4, and C3­C4 over 50 years.
When excluding services, the component catelogue includes 55 constructions for build­
ings. 15 of these constructions can not be found in the example library, for example
basement walls, constructions with FutureCEM, photovoltaics, and stairs. The other 40
constructions are primarily based on the example library. For each of these, the deviation
of the component catelogue GWP from the example library is calculated. In Table 6.1, the
number and percentage of constructions with different ranges of deviation can be seen.
Table 6.1: Deviation of the component catelogue GWP from the example library
Deviation
No. constructions
Percentage of total
<10%
15
27%
10­20%
4
7%
20­30%
2
4%
30­40%
8
15%
40­50%
5
9%
50­60%
4
7%
60­70%
1
2%
70­80%
0
0%
>80%
1
2%
NA
15
27%
Total
55
­
Urban Decarbonization
81
==PAGE:92==
27% of the constructions have a deviation of less than 10%, while 11% have a deviation
of more than 50%. The highest deviation is the in­situ concrete beam, where the GWP of
the created construction is 89% higher than the one in the example library. However, the
GWP in the example library is based on a specific 240/540mm RB concrete beam, while
the created construction is per m3. The lowest deviation is the external door with 0%, as
this is the same Ökobaudat dataset. Figure 6.1 to 6.3 show the comparison between the
component catelogue and the example library for constructions of the components slabs,
external walls, and roof finishes. The comparison for the rest of the constructions can be
seen in Appendix D.
Figure 6.1: Comparison of GWP for catelogue and example library for slab
Figure 6.2: Comparison of GWP for catelogue and example library for external wall
82
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:93==
Figure 6.3: Comparison of GWP for catelogue and example library for roof finish
Looking first at the slabs, it is noticeable that the concrete in­situ and hollow core slabs
have slightly higher GWP based on the Danish industry­specific EPDs in the catelogue
compared to German generic data. On the other hand, the emissions from the Danish
industry­specific EPDs for timber LVL and CLT are much lower than the German generic
data. Looking specifically at the CLT slab, which only consists of that one material, the
Danish industry­specific EPD is 67% lower than the Ökobaudat data. This tendency of
timber products having lower emissions in Denmark compared to Germany can also be
seen in the external wall, where both the CLT, timber frame, and biogenic max wall have
lower emissions in the catelogue compared to the example library. At last, the roof finishes
show similar results for the catelogue and example library. Even though some of the
deviations are major, the calculation is continuing with these constructions, as they are all
based on preferred Danish industry­specific EPDs or Ökobaudat data.
6.2
Validation of category elements
By using the bottom­up process­based LCA method, the emissions of the categories are
created from the sum of its components. Here, the impact of these components will be
described within the three categories of buildings, hardscape, and landscape, while com­
paring it with the results found in the literature study.
6.2.1
Buildings
First, the results of the tool are investigated for the building category. This is done by
examining the inventory and results of a single building and comparing this with the results
found in the literature study. The examined building is a residential building from the
master plan for Fælledby in Copenhagen by Henning Larsen and the baseline version in
concrete and brick can be seen in Figure 6.4.
Urban Decarbonization
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure 6.4: The baseline version of the residential building in Fælledby
In order to compare the results with the reports presented in the literature study, a similar
reference service period of 50 years is used. Other key properties for the LCA calculation
such as area, live load, and WWR can be seen in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: LCA and inventory parameters for the baseline building
Parameter
Value
Area
4 610.8 m2
Typology
Residential
Construction year
2023
RSP
50 years
Live load
1.5 m2
Span length
6.0 m2
WWR
40%
In order to simulate a conventional residential building, the foundation and structural sys­
tem are chosen to be reinforced concrete. Furthermore, a brick facade with plastic/steel
windows and a bitumen roof finish are selected. At last, internal constructions include
steel stud internal walls and timber floor finish. Based on the massing model and these
selections, the quantities are estimated. The selected constructions and their estimated
quantities can be seen in Table 6.3.
84
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:95==
Table 6.3: Selected constructions for each of the building components and their estimated
quantities for the baseline building
Component
Construction
Quantity
Unit
Footing foundation
Normal
86.0
m3
Line foundation
Normal
282.6
m
Ground slab
Normal
829.5
m2
Slab
In­situ concrete
1 127.3
m3
Column
In­situ concrete
78.6
m3
Beam
In­situ concrete
219.8
m3
Basement wall
­
0.0
m2
External wall
Brick
1 690.8
m2
Window
Plastic/steel
1 146.3
m2
External door
External door
28.7
m2
Partition and core wall
Concrete element
2 570.8
m2
Internal wall
Steel stud
8 750.1
m2
Internal door
Internal door
460.5
m2
Roof finish
Bitumen
858.6
m2
Floor finish
Timber
4 610.8
m2
Ceiling finish
Gypsum plaster board
4 639.9
m2
Stairs and elevators
Stairs and elevator
34.4
m
Services
Residential
4 610.8
m2
The operational energy use is calculated from the simplified massing based on a ”midrise
apartment” program, a ”mass” construction type, and a WWR of 40%. The original EPW
for Copenhagen is used, meaning that the effects of the UHI effect are not included. No
photovoltaics are integrated into the building. The energy results for the cooling, heating,
lighting, and hot water can be seen in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Annual energy use of the residential building
Energy use
Cooling
Heating
Lighting
Hot water
[kWh/m2]
4.1
16.7
11.1
7.7
The cooling and lighting are multiplied by the emission factor from electricity while heating
and hot water are multiplied by the emission factor from district heating.
From this, the LCA calculation of the building is performed, resulting in a GWP of 11.5
kg CO2/m2/year for the life­cycle stages A1­A3, B4, B6, and C3­C4. Looking at the 60
buildings by BUILD, the emissions are ranging from 6.5 to 14.3 kg CO2/m2/year. If sorting
the emissions from lowest to highest, the baseline building matches the 47th building
(78%) and is therefore in the most emitting quarter of the 60 buildings. Furthermore, the
Urban Decarbonization
85
==PAGE:96==
embodied emissions are at 9.0 kg CO2/m2/year, matching the 50th building (83%), while
the operational emissions are at 2.5 CO2/m2/year, matching the 27th building (45%). The
results of the baseline compared to the 60 buildings can be seen in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Comparison of the baseline building (yellow arrows) with the 60 buildings
Furthermore, the various building parts are investigated. Table E.1 in Appendix E presents
which components are included in each building part. The GWP of the various building
parts can be seen in Figure 6.6 including A4 and A5, while Figure F.1 in Appendix F
presents them excluding A4 and A5.
Figure 6.6: GWP of the various building parts of the baseline building incl. A4 and A5
From the figure, it is seen that the highest emissions are from the structure with 3.9 kg
CO2/m2/year, followed by the envelope with 2.8 kg CO2/m2/year and the operational en­
86
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:97==
ergy with 2.5 kg CO2/m2/year. Hereafter comes the internal with 1.9 kg CO2/m2/year. The
ground and services are contributing with 1.0 and 0.8 kg CO2/m2/year respectively. Last
is the construction energy with 0.4 kg CO2/m2/year. In Table 6.5, the embodied carbon
emissions from these building parts are compared with the study by Rambøll and BUILD.
However, as appliances are not included in the urban tool, the contributions from Table
3.6 are recalculated to exclude applications.
Table 6.5: Comparison of contribution to embodied carbon from building parts
Building parts
Ground
Structure
Envelope
Internal
Services
Rambøll/BUILD [45]
7.5%
25.5%
16.0%
22.3%
28.7%
Baseline building
9.6%
37.6%
27.4%
18.0%
7.3%
The table shows similar tendencies in the building parts of ground and internal. However,
the contribution from the structure and the envelope is significantly higher in this case,
while the services are significantly lower. The structure and envelope are likely higher due
to the high amount of concrete and brick, while the average is calculated from buildings
with all sorts of structural systems and external walls. As mentioned in the literature study,
the technical systems are mostly based on proxy data which is purposely overestimated.
Furthermore, the contributions from the various life­cycle stages are shown in Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: GWP of the various life­cycle stages of the baseline building
The figure shows that A1­A3 is responsible for the majority of the emissions, followed
by B6. Table 6.6 presents the comparison of the contribution from the life­cycle stages
with the study by Rambøll and BUILD. However, as C1­C2 are not included in the urban
Urban Decarbonization
87
==PAGE:98==
tool, the contributions from Table 3.5 are recalculated to exclude C1­C2. Again, the study
shows similar tendencies to the tool, however the use stages of B1­B4 are significantly
higher. However, the tool also only includes B4 and therefore does not take any emissions
from B1­B3.
Table 6.6: Comparison of contribution to embodied carbon from life­cycle stages
Life­cycle stages
A1­A3
A4­A5
B1­B4
C3­C4
Rambøll/BUILD[45]
58.3%
7.3%
22.9%
11.5%
Baseline building
64.5%
15.4%
9.0%
11.1%
In addition to the study of the baseline building, a similar study is performed on a timber
building. The massing of the timber building is equal to the baseline building and the same
parameters for typology, live load, WWR, as defined in Table 6.2, are used. The timber
building can be seen in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: The timber version of the residential building in Fælledby
The timber building differs from the baseline building in the structural system, where the
slabs are LVL, while the columns and beams are in glulam. Furthermore, the external wall
is a timber frame, and the windows are in aluminum and timber. Internal constructions
include timber stud internal walls and timber floor finish. The selected constructions and
their estimated quantities for the timber building can be seen in Table 6.7.
88
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:99==
Table 6.7: Selected constructions for each of the building components and their estimated
quantities for the timber building
Component
Construction
Quantity
Unit
Footing foundation
Normal
30.5
m3
Line foundation
Normal
282.6
m
Ground slab
Normal
829.5
m2
Slab
LVL
1 204.5
m3
Column
Glulam
34.4
m3
Beam
Glulam
153.0
m3
Basement wall
­
0.0
m2
External wall
Timber frame
1 690.8
m2
Window
Aluminium/timber
1 146.3
m2
External door
External door
28.7
m2
Partition and core wall
CLT
2 570.8
m2
Internal wall
Timber stud
8 750.1
m2
Internal door
Internal door
460.5
m2
Roof finish
Bitumen
858.6
m2
Floor finish
Timber
4 610.8
m2
Ceiling finish
Gypsum plaster board
4 639.9
m2
Stairs and elevators
Stairs and elevator
34.4
m
Services
Residential
4 610.8
m2
In order to compare with the 20 timber buildings by BUILD, the life­cycle stages A1­A3,
A4, A5, B4, B6, and C3­C4 are considered. The calculation for the timber building shows
a GWP of 8.8 kg CO2/m2/year with 6.3 kg CO2/m2/year from embodied emissions and
2.5 kg CO2/m2/year from operational emissions. As seen in Figure 6.9, these emissions
are similar to the mean of the 20 timber buildings.
Figure 6.9: Comparison of the timber building (yellow arrows) with the 20 timber buildings
Urban Decarbonization
89
==PAGE:100==
The contribution of the various building parts excluding and including A4 and A5 can be
seen in Figure F.2 and F.3 respectively in Appendix F. The figures show that the opera­
tional emissions are the most significant, followed by envelope and internal. Figure 6.10
shows the contribution from the various life­cycle stages.
Figure 6.10: GWP of the various life­cycle stages of the timber building
Comparing these results with the contributions from the various life­cycle stages of the 20
timber buildings by BUILD in Figure 3.3, it can be seen that the emissions from A1­A3 are
significantly lower with ­0.6 kg CO2/m2/year than most of the 20 timber buildings. Only
three buildings have lower emissions in A1­A3, two of them with ­3.2 kg CO2/m2/year. On
the other hand, C3­C4 is similarly higher in the calculation, thereby equalling the totals to
some extent. Both A4 and A5 are on the higher end compared to the 20 buildings, while
B4 and B6 are similar.
6.2.2
Hardscape
The component catelogue includes 8 different constructions of roads and pavements, in­
cluding a highway, three types of roads, a bike path, a pavement, a parking space, and a
path. Each of these roads and pavements have obviously different use cases for the type
of traffic, but in addition the three types of roads also have different strength classes and
can therefore be used for various types of vehicles.
The literature study found that including all life­cycle stages was crucial when assessing
the environmental impacts of roads and pavements, as transportation, construction, main­
tenance, and replacements of the roads had significant emissions. This can also be seen
in Figure 6.11, where the contributions from the various life­cycle stages are considered
over 50 years.
90
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:101==
Figure 6.11: GWP of the various life­cycle stages for roads and pavements over 50 years
The figure shows that the highway is the most emitting construction, while the path is
the least. Noticeably, the pavement has higher emissions than both the small road, bike
path, and parking space per m2. Furthermore, the figure shows that the major life­cycle
stages are A1­A3, A4, and B4. On average for all the constructions, the production of
materials in A1­A3 is responsible for 29%, the transportation is responsible for 48%, and
the replacements in B4 are responsible for 21%, while the construction in A5 and end­of­
life in C3­C4 are only responsible for 1% each.
Figure 6.12: GWP of the various life­cycle stages for roads and pavements over 80 years
Urban Decarbonization
91
==PAGE:102==
As many of the materials in the roads have an expected reference service life of 50 years,
the replacements become significantly higher when extending the reference study period
to 80 years, as seen in Figure 6.12. Here, the emissions from the roads and pavements
are on average 36% higher, and the replacements are now responsible for 40%. The
most noticeable is the pavement, where the emissions are 74% higher with a RSP of 80
years instead of 50 years.
6.2.3
Landscape
The landscape category includes two types of components: trees and shrubs which are
estimated per piece, and lawn and perennials with quantities per m2. The trees and shrubs
only have negative emissions from carbon sequestration, while the lawn and perennials
include both carbon sequestration and maintenance. Looking first at the trees and shrubs,
the emissions depend on the size and if it is deciduous or evergreen. The annual carbon
sequestration for trees and shrubs can be seen in Figure 6.13.
Figure 6.13: Annual GWP of trees and shrubs
The figure shows that the shrubs have significantly lower carbon sequestration rates per
piece compared to the shrubs.
The shrubs are ranging between ­0.02 and ­0.08 kg
CO2/pc/year for evergreen and ­0.14 and ­0.58 kg CO2/pc/year for deciduous. The trees
on the other hand range from ­0.2 to ­12.88 kg CO2/pc/year for the evergreen and ­1.42 to
­11.16 kg CO2/pc/year for the deciduous, dependent on if it a small (below 10 m), medium
(10 to 15 m), or large tree (above 15 m). The emissions are much lower for the lawn and
perennials, however per m2 instead of per piece. Furthermore, both maintenance and
carbon sequestration is included in the annual GWP. As seen in Figure 6.14, only lawns
without mowing and perennials have negative emissions with ­0.79 kg CO2/m2/year, while
lawns with minimal to intensive management range from 0.04 to 0.20 kg CO2/m2/year.
92
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:103==
Figure 6.14: Annual GWP of lawn and perennials
6.3
Study of urban parameters
A wide range of parameters are present when designing urban areas. Some of these
parameters are already decided in the project brief, however, others are directly affected
by the design choices taken by the architects and urban designers. Figure 6.15 shows
these parameters on a scale from how ”hard to affect” to how ”easy to affect” they are in
the urban design process.
Figure 6.15: The urban parameters studied in this research. ”Flexibility and adaptability”
(yellow) will be investigated after the other parameters
As presented in the figure, the service life of the urban area is a parameter that is often
impossible to determine in the initial design. Therefore, several reference study periods
are investigated in this research to study the environmental impacts over time. However,
Urban Decarbonization
93
==PAGE:104==
by integrating flexibility and adaptability in the design, it is possible to extend the expected
lifetime of the buildings and urban areas. Other parameters include the typologies to be
included in the urban area, the plot ratio as a factor of the floor area per urban area, and
the area per person. These factors are often predefined in the brief to some extent, for
example listing the total building floor area, the area of the various building typologies,
and the number of people to live and work in the urban area. However, these parameters
will highly affect the environmental impacts, which can likely be significantly decreased
by integrating and challenging these parameters early in the design.
The environmental impacts will also depend on if there are any existing buildings and
infrastructure on the site which can be either demolished or transformed. Other urban
design parameters include various options for parking and the design of open spaces.
The building design parameters can be affected later in the design than the urban design
parameters, however many of them will often be decided on the urban scale, or at least
affected by the choices made at this scale. As a result, the study will also investigate
floor­to­floor height, structural system, window­to­wall ratio, envelope, and photovoltaics.
In order to study these parameters, an urban ”shoebox” model is created. In building
design, a shoebox model is an oversimplified model only presenting the building as a
rectangular box. In this case, an urban version of a shoebox model is created, which can
be seen in Figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16: The urban ”shoebox” model used for the urban parameter study
94
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:105==
The urban ”shoebox” model consists of a 360 x 360 m urban area with 16 squares of 6
000 m2. 12 of the squares include a 10 844 m2 building, mainly consisting of 11.5 x 23
x 3.5 m blocks between 4 and 7 stories, resulting in a plot ratio of approx. 100%. The
same building is rotated to various orientations in the 12 blocks in order to normalize the
energy use caused by orientation. The buildings are simulated as residential blocks with
an area per person of 35 m2. Each of the buildings includes a courtyard with lawns and
trees. Furthermore, two of the squares are modeled as parks with lawns, trees, shrubs,
and paths, while the last two squares are modeled as squares with pavement.
Between the squares is a road network consisting of a normal road with a bike path and
pavement on each side. Four of the squares include 2­story full­size parking basements
below the buildings with a floor­to­floor height of 5 m, resulting in a parking area of 25
450 m2. The site area, building area excl. and incl. parking, and number of residents
can be seen in Table 6.8, as well as the simulated construction year and included life­
cycle stages. As seen in the table, A4 and A5 are also included, due to the relatively high
impacts for especially open spaces in these life­cycle stages.
Table 6.8: Initial model and LCA properties for the urban parameter study
Parameter
Value
Site area
129 596 m2
Building area excl. parking
130 134 m2
Building area incl. parking
155 584 m2
Population
3 718 residents
Construction year
2023
Life­cycle stages
A1­A3, A4, A5, B4, B6, C3­C4
In order to study the environmental impacts directly linked to the value of each of the listed
parameters in Figure 6.15, one parameter is changed at a time. Table 6.9 presents all of
the parameters, as well as the three investigated values for each of them. Furthermore,
the underline marks the modeled value in the baseline. As seen in the table, changing
some of these parameters will affect the properties in Table 6.8, such as building area,
parking building area, and population. In order to take these changes into account, the
resulting GWP is presented in a combination of an absolute ”per neighborhood” unit, a
spatial ”per m2 floor area” unit, and a ”per inhabitant” unit, thereby making it possible to
compare the various scenarios for each of the values.
Urban Decarbonization
95
==PAGE:106==
Table 6.9: Urban parameters in the study and their investigated values. Underline marks
the baseline value
Parameter
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
RSP
50 years
80 years
100 years
Typology
Residential
Office
Retail
Plot ratio
50%
100%
150%
Area per person
20 m2
35 m2
50 m2
Transformation
Demolition and build new
Transformation
Renovation
Parking
Below ground
On ground
Separate building
Open spaces
Hard
Mix
Green
Floor­to­floor height
3.0 m
3.5 m
4.0 m
Structure
Concrete
Hybrid
Timber
WWR
20%
40%
60%
Envelope
Brick
Fibercement
Timber
Photovoltaics
None
Flat
Pitched
6.3.1
Baseline
The urban baseline model is similar to the ”shoebox” model from Figure 6.16, but can be
seen with assigned properties and materials in Figure 6.17.
Figure 6.17: The baseline model of the urban parameter study
96
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:107==
The assigned properties and materials match the baseline values marked in Table 6.9.
Furthermore, Table G.1 in Appendix G presents the selected components and their esti­
mated quantities for the urban baseline model. When performing the LCA, the total GWP
of the baseline model is 131.6 tons CO2. The GWP per m2 floor area per year and per
inhabitant per year can be seen in Table 6.10.
Table 6.10: GWP of the baseline urban area in the three functional units
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Baseline
131.6
10.5
442.5
Normalizing by floor area, the total GWP of the baseline urban area is 10.5 kg CO2/m2/year.
Looking back at the results from Lotteau et al. [10] in Section 3 ”Literature study”, six of the
studies had results for climate change impact per floor area, as shown in Table 3.2. These
results were ranging between 10.8 and 123.8 kg CO2/m2/year, however varying on many
different LCA properties including size, population, lifetime, included life­cycle stages,
and included urban categories. Three of these studies had a reference study period of 80
years and included the life­cycle stages of construction, operation, and deconstruction.
Furthermore, two of the studies included buildings, open spaces, and networks, while
the third only included buildings, meaning that none of them included mobility. The re­
sults from these urban areas were ranging between 10.8 and 25.8 CO2/m2/year, thereby
showing more similar results compared to the 10.5 kg CO2/m2/year from the baseline.
The three other studies with results from 70.2 to 123.8 kg CO2/m2/year all included mo­
bility, meaning that a part of the difference in the results could likely be caused by this
change in included categories.
Looking at per inhabitant instead, the total GWP of the baseline urban area is 442.5 kg
CO2/pers/year or 0.4 tons CO2/pers/year. Again, this differs significantly from the results
from Lotteau et al., where the results are ranging between 0.6 and 8.6 tons CO2/pers/year.
Two of the three studies with similar RSP, life­cycle studies and without mobility have re­
sults per inhabitant and show results between 0.6 and 1.2 tons CO2/pers/year, while the
three other studies with mobility have results between 3.3 and 7.8 tons CO2/pers/year,
again showing a great increase in the environmental impacts when including mobility.
However, the critical review also stated that the building category generally was the ma­
jor contributor in the studies, meaning that a lot of the various parameters included in this
category also could affect the results.
Urban Decarbonization
97
==PAGE:108==
Focusing again on the environmental impacts of the baseline urban area, the contribution
from the various urban elements normalized by floor area can be seen in Figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18: GWP of the various urban elements of the baseline urban area
As seen in the figure, the building category is responsible for the majority of the envi­
ronmental impacts with 95% of the total GWP, equalling 10.0 kg CO2/m2/year. The 60
buildings by BUILD from the literature study also included results with a RSP of 80 years,
where the total GWP was ranging between 5.2 and 11.7 kg CO2/m2/year. Compared with
this, the baseline matches the results of the 51th building (85%), which is similar to how
the baseline building compared with the 60 buildings over 50 years in the validation study.
Looking at the building parts, the largest contributor is the envelope with 2.2 kg CO2/m2/year,
while other major contributors are the structure and operational with 2.0 kg CO2/m2/year.
It is noticeable how the envelope shifted from being the second largest contributor after
structure in the baseline building to being the largest here. However, with a RSP of 80
years, there will also be a high amount of replacements in the envelope with its fiberce­
ment cladding and windows, while the structure will include few replacements.
Even with a road network of normal roads, bike paths, and pavements, as well as two
squares, the contributions from roads and pavements in the baseline urban area are only
0.5 kg CO2/m2/year or 5%. The landscape in the form of trees, shrubs, and lawns only
sequesters 0.015 kg CO2/m2/year when subtracting the maintenance of the lawns, which
is only 0.14% of the total GWP.
Looking at the contributions from the various life­cycle stages in Figure 6.19, A1­A3 is still
the major contributor with 36.3%. However, with a RSP of 80 years, the replacements in
B4 are responsible for a large percentage with 27.8%. The operational energy results in
98
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:109==
a contribution of 19.3%, while A4 and A5 in total are responsible for 10%. As there are
few timber products in the baseline urban area, C3­C4 is only responsible for 6.6%.
Figure 6.19: GWP of the various life­cycle stages of the baseline urban area
In the next sections, each of the urban parameters will be presented, as well as the var­
ious values investigated. The results in GWP will be listed, as well as a figure showing
the contributions from the different urban elements for the scenarios. In addition to show­
ing the emissions from buildings, hardscape, and landscape, the figure will highlight the
category with the highest variation due to the change in the parameter value. For each of
the investigated parameters, the contributions from the various life­cycle stages can be
seen in Appendix H.
6.3.2
Reference study period
The first parameter investigated is the reference study period. The RSP in building LCAs
are often not directly linked to the actual lifetime of the building, but instead an expression
of when all life­cycle stages are considered.
As inspired by a majority of the studies reviewed by Lotteau et al., an urban RSP of 80
years is chosen as the baseline. Danish LCA regulations use a RSP of 50 years, which is
investigated, while the last value is set to 100 years to see how the urban area performs
with an even longer lifetime. As the building typology is defined as residential with an
expected lifetime of 120 years, none of the scenarios include a full replacement of the
building. However, this and the inclusion of flexibility and adaptability in the buildings are
investigated in the end of the urban parameter study.
Urban Decarbonization
99
==PAGE:110==
Figure 6.20: The investigated scenarios for reference service period
As seen in Figure 6.20, the research studies a reference service period of 50 years, 80
years, and 100 years. The global warming potential of these three scenarios can be seen
in Table 6.11.
Table 6.11: GWP of the various scenarios for reference service period in the three func­
tional units
RSP
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
50 years
94.9
12.1
510.6
80 years
131.6
10.5
442.5
100 years
147.1
9.4
395.7
When extending the RSP, the table shows an increase in the total GWP of the neigh­
borhood due to more replacements and a longer use period with operational emissions.
Compared with the baseline of 80 years, an RSP of 50 years show a reduction of 28%,
while the RSP of 100 years results in an increase of 12%. However, when normalizing
with the RSP, the opposite tendency is seen. Here, the value of 50 years increases the
GWP with 15% compared to the 80 years, and 100 years increase it with 11%. Looking at
the contribution from the various life­cycle stages in Figure H.1 in Appendix H, it can be
seen how the emissions from A1­A3 become relatively smaller when extending the RSP,
while the replacements in B4 are increasing.
Figure 6.21 shows the contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios. The
impacts from structure experience the largest difference between the scenarios, going
from 3.1 kg CO2/m2/year for 50 years to 2.0 kg CO2/m2/year for 80 years to 1.6 kg
CO2/m2/year for 100 years. As few materials in the structure are replaced within 100
years, the emissions per year will decrease when extending the RSP.
100
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:111==
Figure 6.21: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for reference
service period
6.3.3
Typology
Next, the building typology is investigated. The selected typology will affect both the live
load as defined in Table 5.2, the program for the simulation of energy use, and internal
materials such as ceiling finishes. In addition, it will affect the number of people in the
building. Here, the residential and office buildings have a chosen area per person of
35 and 17.5 m2 which is used for the population calculation. In the tool, the people in
retail buildings are not a part of the population calculation, as it is expected that the same
people are already accounted for in the residential and office buildings. However, in order
to study the typology per inhabitant too, the retail building uses an area per person of 6.5
m2 according to the Honeybee ”retail” program. Furthermore, the typology will also affect
the expected building lifetime, however, both residential, office, and retail buildings are
expected to stand for 80 years or more, meaning this will not affect the results here.
Figure 6.22: The investigated scenarios for typology
As seen in Figure 6.22, the research studies a residential, office, and retail building. The
global warming potential of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.12.
Urban Decarbonization
101
==PAGE:112==
Table 6.12: GWP of the various scenarios for typology in the three functional units
Typology
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Residential
131.6
10.5
442.5
Office
144.2
11.5
242.4
Retail
156.2
12.5
93.4
The results show that the residential building has the lowest GWP per neighborhood and
per m2 floor area, while the retail building has the highest. This matches the higher live
loads and operational requirements for office and retail buildings compared to residential
buildings. The opposite tendency is shown when normalizing per inhabitant, as a direct
result of the increase in people in the office and retail buildings compared to the residential
building. However, especially the result of retail per inhabitant is misleading, as the people
included in the population calculation will often only spend a short time in the building
compared to office and residential buildings. In Figure 6.23, it can be seen that the element
with the highest variation in GWP is the operational emissions, as the requirements for
the energy system differ greatly dependent on the program.
Figure 6.23: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for typology
6.3.4
Plot ratio
The plot ratio describes the amount of building floor area per urban site area. In this study,
the urban site area is constant while the floor area differs by decreasing and increasing the
number of building floors. Equally, the number of parking basements will be decreased
and increased with the plot ratio. As a result, both the floor area and the population will
102
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:113==
be different in the three scenarios, while the open spaces with hardscape and landscape
are constant. Even though the plot ratio is defined as the changed parameter, the results
will also imply if is environmentally better to construct buildings with more or fewer floors.
Figure 6.24: The investigated scenarios for plot ratio
As seen in Figure 6.24, the research studies a plot ratio of 50%, 100%, and 150%. The
global warming potential of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.13.
Table 6.13: GWP of the various scenarios for plot ratio in the three functional units
Plot ratio
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
50%
73.5
11.7
494.3
100%
131.6
10.5
442.5
150%
188.8
10.0
423.2
As the total floor area is increasing with the plot ratio, so is the total GWP. Here, it can be
seen that a 50% plot ratio decreases the total GWP with 44% compared to a 100% plot
ratio, while a 150% plot ratio increases the GWP with 43%. Again, the opposite tendency
is shown when normalizing per floor area and per inhabitant. Here, a higher plot ratio
results in a lower GWP per floor area, showing a tendency of lower GWP by introducing
more floors. The variation of a plot ratio of 50% compared to the baseline of 100% shows
an increase of 12%, while a plot ratio of 150% decreases the GWP per floor area with 4%.
Looking at the contributions from the various elements, it can be seen that especially the
contributions from the envelope are lower when increasing the plot ratio, due to a lower
percentage of roof area compared to floor area. The building ground and structure show
no significant difference. On the other hand, the contributions from roads and pavements
become lower when increasing the plot ratio, as more building floor area is included with
the same amount of open spaces.
Urban Decarbonization
103
==PAGE:114==
Figure 6.25: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for plot ratio
6.3.5
Area per person
The area per person will highly affect the environmental impacts per inhabitant, as it will
only affect a few building parameters such as the operational energy use, but highly in­
crease the normalizing factor when dividing with the population. Therefore, this is also a
parameter worth investigating when designing urban areas.
Figure 6.26: The investigated scenarios for area per person
As seen in Figure 6.26, the research studies an area per person of 20 m2, 35 m2, and 50
m2. The global warming potential of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.14.
Table 6.14: GWP of the various scenarios for area per person in the three functional units
Area per person
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
20 m2
128.5
10.3
246.9
35 m2
131.6
10.5
442.5
50 m2
133.0
10.6
638.5
104
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:115==
As expected, the table shows only a small change in the total and per floor area GWP,
while the GWP per inhabitant significantly decreases when including more people on
fewer square meters. Compared with the baseline of 35 m2, the GWP per inhabitant
increases and decreases by 44% when changing the area per person to 20 and 50 m2
respectively. Looking at the contributions from the urban elements per floor area, only the
operational energy use is changing, as seen in Figure 6.27.
Figure 6.27: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for area per
person
6.3.6
Transformation
Another parameter that can highly affect environmental emissions is how potential ex­
isting buildings in urban areas are dealt with. When designing a new urban area, there
are often some existing buildings present, which can either be demolished, transformed,
or renovated. In the baseline urban area, none of the buildings are modeled as existing
buildings. However, in order to investigate the potential of transformation, a scenario is
created where all of the buildings are already present as existing buildings. The three
values are defined as a scenario where all of the buildings are demolished and similar
new buildings are built, a scenario where the buildings are heavily transformed, and a
scenario where the buildings are slightly renovated.
The simplified inventory generation of the transformation and renovation scenarios fol­
lows the method described in Section 5 ”Inventory analysis”, and more specifically with
the replacement values defined in Table 5.3. The replacements factors for envelope and
structure, Fenvelope and Fstructure, are set to 75% and 25% in the transformation scenario,
meaning that 75% of the facade and 25% of the structure will be replaced. In the renova­
tion scenario, the variables are set to 50% and 0% for facade and structure respectively.
In both scenarios, none of the foundations and all of the internal finishes and windows are
Urban Decarbonization
105
==PAGE:116==
replaced. Furthermore, the end­of­life of the existing buildings or their replaced parts is
included in the calculation as deconstruction.
Figure 6.28: The investigated scenarios for transformation
As seen in Figure 6.28, the research studies a scenario with demolition and build new,
transformation, and renovation. The global warming potential of these three scenarios
can be seen in Table 6.15.
Table 6.15: GWP of the various scenarios for transformation in the three functional units
Transformation
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Demolition and build new
140.3
11.2
471.7
Transformation
102.1
8.2
343.4
Renovation
93.0
7.4
312.6
All of the scenarios have the same floor area and population, meaning that all three func­
tional units show the same tendency. This tendency shows that the environmental impacts
are significantly reduced when both transforming or renovating the buildings in the urban
area. Compared to the scenario with demolition and building new, the transformation and
renovation scenarios show reductions of 27% and 34% respectively.
Looking at contributions from the various elements in the three scenarios in Figure 6.29,
multiple elements are responsible for these reductions. First of all, the deconstruction
in the demolition and building new scenario contributes with 0.7 kg CO2/m2/year, while
it only contributes with 0.1 kg CO2/m2/year in both the transformation and renovation
scenarios. Secondly, the emissions from the ground and structure are greatly reduced in
both scenarios, as these are both expected to be kept completely or partly. The same can
be seen in the envelope, however with a smaller reduction since more of the envelope is
replaced, including all windows.
106
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:117==
Figure 6.29: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for transforma­
tion
Looking at the life­cycle stages in Figure H.5 in Appendix H, the greatest reductions can
be seen in A1­A3, as more materials are directly reused, meaning that fewer new materi­
als are needed for the buildings. Compared to the scenario with demolition and building
new, A1­A3 is reduced by 50% and 64% in the transformation and renovation scenarios
respectively. Furthermore, the figure shows how C3­C4 is accounted for twice, as both
the emissions from the end­of­life for the existing and new buildings are included in the
calculation.
In the literature study, a similar study was presented by Zimmermann et al. [49]. Here, a
scenario with the demolition of an existing building and building a new construction was
compared with scenarios for preservation or renovation of the existing building. There, the
renovation scenario showed a total reduction of 20% compared to demolition and building
new, and a reduction of 76% in A1­A3, thereby showing similar results to the ones found
here.
6.3.7
Parking
The amount and design of parking are often highly debated in the urban design process,
as parking norms can require high amounts of parking which can be difficult to prioritize
and find space for. Several scenarios for creating parking exist, whether this is below
ground in parking basements, on the ground in parking spaces and parking lots, in sep­
arate parking buildings above ground, etc. As this is crucial for land use, several factors
are affected by the design decisions regarding parking including environmental impacts.
In all three scenarios, the same parking area of 25 450 m is modeled.
Urban Decarbonization
107
==PAGE:118==
Figure 6.30: The investigated scenarios for parking
As seen in Figure 6.30, the research studies a scenario with parking below ground, parking
on ground, and parking in a separate building. The global warming potential of these three
scenarios can be seen in Table 6.16.
Table 6.16: GWP of the various scenarios for parking in the three functional units
Parking
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Below ground
131.6
10.5
442.5
On ground
113.9
10.9
382.9
Separate building
129.7
10.4
436.2
Looking first at the functional units per neighborhood and per inhabitant, the scenario with
parking on ground shows a significant reduction in GWP of 13% compared to the scenario
with parking below ground, while the scenario with parking in a separate building only
shows a reduction of 1%. In the scenario with parking on ground, all of the concrete and
other materials used for the parking basements in the baseline scenario are only replaced
with parking spaces on ground, while the parking buildings in the separate building sce­
nario are constructed in concrete with facades, internal finishes, cores, etc. However, as
parking is included in the building floor area, looking at the functional unit per floor area
shows that the scenario with on ground parking (and thereby the lowest floor area) has
the highest environmental impacts.
From Figure 6.31, it is seen that the environmental impacts from the ground are reduced
from 0.8 kg CO2/m2/year in the scenario with below ground parking to 0.6 kg CO2/m2/year
in the two other scenarios. Furthermore, it can be seen that the roads and pavements are
responsible for a larger impact in the scenario with on ground parking.
108
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:119==
Figure 6.31: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for parking
The scenario with parking in a separate building opens up the possibility to construct
parts of the building in timber. By modeling the parking building as a hybrid timber/con­
crete building instead of a complete concrete building, further reductions in GWP can be
achieved, as seen in Table 6.17.
Table 6.17: GWP of the updated scenarios for parking in the three functional units
Parking
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Below ground
131.6
10.5
442.5
On ground
113.9
10.9
382.9
Hybrid building
125.8
10.0
423.1
Instead of a total reduction of 1%, the parking in a separate building now shows a reduction
of 4% compared to the scenario with below ground parking.
6.3.8
Open spaces
With roads, squares, parking, and parks, the category of open spaces accounts for a large
part of the land use in urban areas. However, the baseline urban area showed that with a
plot ratio of 100% and including a large road network, only 5% of the total GWP could be
attributed to hardscapes, while the carbon sequestration from trees and other landscapes
was less than 1% of the total GWP. To investigate this further, three scenarios for the
open spaces are modeled.
Urban Decarbonization
109
==PAGE:120==
Figure 6.32: The investigated scenarios for open spaces
As seen in Figure 6.32, the research studies a scenario with a majority of hardscape, a mix
of hardscape and landscape, and a majority of landscape. The global warming potential
of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.18.
Table 6.18: GWP of the various scenarios for open spaces in the three functional units
Open spaces
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Hard
135.3
10.8
454.9
Mix
131.6
10.5
442.5
Green
128.0
10.2
430.3
The floor area and population are equal in all scenarios, meaning that the differences
in GWP between the three scenarios are similar in all three functional units. The ”hard”
scenario shows an increase in GWP of 3% compared to the baseline, while the ”green”
scenario shows a reduction of 3%.
Figure 6.33: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for open spaces
110
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:121==
From Figure 6.33, it is seen that the difference in GWP is almost solely caused by the
road and pavements, while the carbon sequestration from trees and other landscapes is
insignificant.
The same scenarios are investigated taking the urban heat island effect into account. This
is done by altering the EPW weather file dependent on the density of the buildings, the
ratio between hard and green surfaces, and the number and size of the trees. However,
even with significant changes in the amount of vegetation between the ”hard” and ”green
scenario, Table 6.19 shows that none of the results experience any significant changes
due to the UHI effect, meaning the results show the same tendency as in Table 6.18.
Table 6.19: GWP of the various scenarios for open spaces including the UHI effect in the
three functional units
Open spaces (UHI)
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Hard
135.2
10.8
454.5
Mix
131.5
10.5
442.0
Green
127.8
10.2
429.8
6.3.9
Floor­to­floor height
The first building design parameter considered in the urban parameter study is the floor­
to­floor height. The floor­to­floor height is often a part of the design on the urban scale, as
it can be a limiting factor for the number of building stories and thereby the total building
area. Here, three typical floor­to­floor heights between 3 and 4 m are investigated.
Figure 6.34: The investigated scenarios for floor­to­floor height
As seen in Figure 6.34, the research studies a floor­to­floor height of 3.0 m, 3.5 m, and
4.0 m. The global warming potential of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.20.
Urban Decarbonization
111
==PAGE:122==
Table 6.20: GWP of the various scenarios for floor­to­floor height in the three functional
units
Floor­to­floor height
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
3.0 m
123.4
9.8
414.7
3.5 m
131.6
10.5
442.5
4.0 m
137.5
11.0
462.2
The results show a significant difference in GWP, where a lower floor­to­floor height re­
duces the environmental impacts. Compared with the baseline of 3.5 m, the scenario
with a floor­to­floor height of 3.0 m reduces the GWP with 6%, while the scenario with 4.0
increases it with 4%. Looking at the contribution from the urban elements, this difference
is mainly caused by the envelope and internal building parts, as these quantities increase
proportionally with the floor­to­floor height.
Figure 6.35: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for floor­to­floor
height
6.3.10
Structure
The structure is often considered as the most important building element and the literature
study also found that it was one of the major contributors in most buildings. Even though
the structural system is not modeled in the urban design process, some design decisions
regarding the material type of building are taken at the urban scale. Furthermore, the size
and massing of the buildings will also affect how easy it is to for example construct the
buildings in timber.
112
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:123==
Figure 6.36: The investigated scenarios for structure
As seen in Figure 6.36, the research studies a structure in concrete, hybrid, and timber.
The hybrid building includes beams and columns in timber, while the slab is hybrid CLT
and the cores are in concrete. The timber building also has beams and columns in timber,
but a slab in LVL and CLT cores. The GWP of these three scenarios can be seen in Table
6.21.
Table 6.21: GWP of the various scenarios for structure in the three functional units
Structure
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Concrete
131.6
10.5
442.5
Hybrid
121.7
9.7
409.2
Timber
115.1
9.2
386.9
Compared to the baseline with a structural system in concrete, the hybrid structural sys­
tem shows a reduction of 8% and the timber structural systems shows a reduction of 13%.
As seen in Figure 6.37, the difference is almost only due to the structural system, which is
reduced from 2.0 kg CO2/m2/year for the baseline to 1.3 and 0.8 kg CO2/m2/year for the
hybrid and timber system respectively. In addition, a slight reduction in the contribution
from the ground due to a lighter structural system in timber is seen, as it goes from 0.8 in
the baseline to 0.7 kg CO2/m2/year in the two other scenarios.
Focusing on the life­cycle stages, Figure H.9 in Appendix H shows a great reduction in
A1­A3 when using both a hybrid or timber structural system instead of concrete in the
structural system, as it is reduced with 52% and 62% respectively. On the other hand, C3­
C4 increases drastically with the end­of­life processes for timber, resulting in more than
a doubling in the environmental impacts from C3­C4 in the hybrid and timber structural
system.
Urban Decarbonization
113
==PAGE:124==
Figure 6.37: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for structure
6.3.11
Window­to­wall ratio
Another parameter to investigate is the window­to­wall ratio which can affect both the
embodied emissions from the envelope and the operational emissions due to energy use.
Figure 6.38: The investigated scenarios for window­to­wall ratio
As seen in Figure 6.38, the research studies a window­to­wall ratio of 20%, 40%, and
60%. The global warming potential of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.22.
Table 6.22: GWP of the various scenarios for window­to­wall ratio in the three functional
units
WWR
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
20%
122.8
9.8
412.7
40%
131.6
10.5
442.5
60%
140.7
11.2
473.0
114
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:125==
The results show an increase in GWP when the window­to­wall ratio becomes higher. A
window­to­wall ratio of 60% increases the total GWP with 7% compared to the baseline of
40%, while a similar 7% reduction is seen when reducing the window­to­wall ratio to 20%.
As seen in Figure 6.39, this is mainly caused by the envelope, which is 1.7 kg CO2/m2/year
for a WWR of 20%, but 2.7 kg CO2/m2/year for a WWR of 60%. Furthermore, emissions
from the operational energy are also becoming larger with the WWR, especially showing
an increase of 10% in GWP when modeling the WWR as 60%.
Figure 6.39: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for window­to­
wall ratio
6.3.12
Envelope
Even though final decisions on the facade materials are not taken as part of the urban
design, the external materiality of the buildings is considered in the urban design process.
This is especially the case when visualizing urban areas in renderings, sketches, etc.,
as well as for the storytelling of the area. Even though it is easy to change the facade
materials in later design stages, considering it early could reduce environmental impacts.
Figure 6.40: The investigated scenarios for envelope
Urban Decarbonization
115
==PAGE:126==
As seen in Figure 6.40, the research studies an envelope in brick, fibercement, and timber.
The global warming potential of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.23.
Table 6.23: GWP of the various scenarios for envelope in the three functional units
Envelope
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Brick
137.2
11.0
461.3
Fibercement
131.6
10.5
442.5
Timber
124.8
10.0
419.5
A brick facade instead of fibercement increases the total GWP with 4%, while a timber
facade reduces the total GWP with 5%. As all of the envelope constructions are modeled
with the same insulation type and thickness, the operational emissions are not affected
by the change in facade material, and the difference is only caused by the envelope. This
can be seen in Figure 6.41, where the emission from the envelope of the brick scenario
is 2.6 kg CO2/m2/year, while it is 2.2 and 1.6 kg CO2/m2/year for fibercement and timber
facade respectively.
Figure 6.41: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for envelope
6.3.13
Photovoltaics
At last, the use of photovoltaics is investigated. Photovoltaics have high embodied emis­
sions and short reference service lives but can reduce operational emissions due to their
energy production. Whether or not they are a good investment in terms of environmental
impacts depends on how they are placed on the, as well as the amount of radiation at the
location.
116
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:127==
Figure 6.42: The investigated scenarios for photovoltaics
As seen in Figure 6.42, the research studies a scenario without photovoltaics, with photo­
voltaics on flat roofs, and with photovoltaics on pitched roofs. The global warming potential
of these three scenarios can be seen in Table 6.24.
Table 6.24: GWP of the various scenarios for photovoltaics in the three functional units
Photovoltaics
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
None
131.6
10.5
442.5
All flat
138.7
11.1
466.2
All pitched
140.1
11.2
471.0
The integration of photovoltaics reduces the operational emissions from 2.0 kg CO2/m2/year
for the baseline without photovoltaics to 1.2 and 1.3 kg CO2/m2/year for the flat and pitched
roof with photovoltaics respectively. However, at the same time, the emissions from the
envelope increase from 2.2 kg CO2/m2/year for the baseline to 3.5 kg CO2/m2/year for
both of the scenarios with photovoltaics, as seen in Figure 6.43. The total GWP emissions
are therefore increasing with 5% for the flat roof with photovoltaics and 6% for the pitched
roof with photovoltaics compared to without photovoltaics. In the calculation, the energy
production from the photovoltaics is not limited to 13.2 kWh/m2/year as BR23 states, and
the full energy production from the photovoltaics is thereby included.
From Figure H.12 in Appendix H, it is seen how especially the replacements in B4 are
increasing when introducing photovoltaics on the building.
In both cases with photo­
voltaics, B4 increases from 2.9 to 4.0 kg CO2/m2/year, as a result of the short reference
service life of 25 years for photovoltaics. Additionally, A1­A3 increases from 3.8 to 4.1 kg
CO2/m2/year.
Urban Decarbonization
117
==PAGE:128==
Figure 6.43: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for photovoltaics
6.3.14
Overview
The previous sections showed that variating some of the design parameters highly af­
fected the GWP of the urban area, while changing others did not affect it significantly.
Furthermore, some of the parameters affected the results of one or two of the functional
units, while not affecting the other(s). In order to get an overview of which of the pa­
rameters had a great significance, Table 6.25 presents the largest percentual difference
between the changed value compared to the baseline value.
Table 6.25: Overview of the largest percentual difference compared to the baseline
Parameter
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
RSP
28%
15%
15%
Typology
19%
19%
79%
Plot ratio
44%
12%
12%
Area per person
2%
2%
44%
Transformation
34%
34%
34%
Parking
13%
4%
13%
Open spaces
3%
3%
3%
Floor­to­floor height
6%
6%
6%
Structure
13%
13%
13%
WWR
7%
7%
7%
Envelope
5%
5%
5%
Photovoltaics
6%
6%
6%
118
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:129==
As seen in the table, the largest percentual difference compared to the baseline is the plot
ratio scenario, where reducing the plot ratio from 100% to 50% decreased the total GWP
with 44%. Another large difference was the transformation, where renovation instead of
demolishing and building new showed a reduction in of 34%. Creating parking on ground
instead of below ground also showed a great difference in total GWP of 13%. Focusing
on the GWP per floor area, the building typology showed the greatest difference besides
the transformation. If ignoring the result for typology per inhabitant, the area per person
was the most significant parameter when normalizing per inhabitant. Looking at the last
six parameters, of which none of them differs in the results from the various functional
units, it is seen that changing the structure was significant with a percentual difference of
13% in GWP between the concrete and timber structure. The other building parameters
showed a difference of 5­7% when differing between the different values, while the open
spaces only showed a maximum difference of 3%.
6.3.15
Proposal
Based on the parameter study, an updated version of the urban area is proposed. Here,
all the values with the lowest GWP are chosen to investigate how large a reduction the
parameters can achieve in total. To be able to compare the proposed urban area with the
baseline directly, it is chosen to maintain the values that affect the functional unit, even
though multiple of these parameters showed significant influence. This includes the RSP,
typology, plot ratio, and area per person. The proposed value of each of the parameters
can be seen in Table 6.9.
Table 6.26: Urban parameters with underline marking the proposed value
Parameter
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
RSP
50 years
80 years
100 years
Typology
Residential
Office
Retail
Plot ratio
50%
100%
150%
Area per person
20 m2
35 m2
50 m2
Parking
Below ground
On ground
Separate building
Open spaces
Hard
Mix
Green
Floor­to­floor height
3.0 m
3.5 m
4.0 m
Structure
Concrete
Hybrid
Timber
WWR
20%
40%
60%
Envelope
Brick
Fibercement
Timber
Photovoltaics
None
Flat
Pitched
Urban Decarbonization
119
==PAGE:130==
The inventory of the proposed urban area, including the selected components and their
estimated quantities, can be seen in Table I.1 in Appendix I. A visualization of the proposed
urban area can be seen in Figure 6.44.
Figure 6.44: The proposed model based on the urban parameter study
Based on this inventory, the GWP of the proposed urban area are presented in Table 6.27,
where the results for the baseline are also seen.
Table 6.27: Comparison of GWP for the baseline and proposed urban area in the three
functional units
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Baseline
131.6
10.5
442.5
Proposal
90.1
7.2
302.9
As neither the building floor area, population, nor reference study period are affected by
the change in parameters, all three functional units show the same reduction between the
baseline and the proposal. The results show that the proposal reduces the GWP by 32%
compared to the baseline, meaning that the GWP per floor area decreases from 10.5 to
7.2 kg CO2/m2/year. The contribution per floor area of the various urban elements for the
baseline and proposal is seen in Figure 6.45.
120
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:131==
Figure 6.45: Comparison of GWP of various urban elements for baseline and proposal
The figure shows reductions for almost all of the elements. The most significant is the
building structure which shows a reduction of 72% from 2.0 to 0.6 kg CO2/m2/year. An­
other significant measure is the building envelope which is reduced by 42% from 2.2 to
1.3 kg CO2/m2/year. Furthermore, the building ground decreases by 33% from 0.8 to 0.5
kg CO2/m2/year. The operational emissions decrease by 15%, while no difference is seen
in the services and construction, as these are based only on area. Looking at the open
spaces instead, the roads and pavements show a reduction of 44% and 51% respectively.
However, as the emissions from the open spaces are small compared to the buildings,
this only results in a total difference of 0.3 kg CO2/m2/year.
Figure 6.46: Comparison of GWP of various life­cycle stages for baseline and proposal
Urban Decarbonization
121
==PAGE:132==
Even with 937 more trees and 870 more shrubs, the carbon sequestration only increases
with 0.04 kg CO2/m2/year, thereby showing an insignificant difference compared to the
other elements.
Figure 6.46 shows the contribution from the various life­cycle stages for the baseline and
proposed urban area. It is noticeable how A1­A3 shows a large reduction of 89% from
3.8 to 0.4 kg CO2/m2/year, however, the proposed urban area also includes significantly
more timber material than the baseline. Therefore, C3­C4 also increases from 0.7 to 2.1
kg CO2/m2/year. Furthermore, the replacements decrease with 29% from 2.9 to 2.1 kg
CO2/m2/year, while A4 and A5 are almost indifferent.
6.3.16
Flexibility and adaptability
As mentioned at the beginning of the parameter study, the expected lifetime of a build­
ing can be extended by integrating flexibility and adaptability in the design. In Section 5
”Inventory analysis”, a method for integrating flexibility and adaptability in the design was
presented, where the reference service life of an adaptable building could be adjusted
to the value representing the longest lifetime of the typologies to which the building can
be adapted. Here it was also defined that a building is adaptable if it complies with the
requirements listed in Table 5.8, which includes requirements for the number of access
points, floor­to­floor height, live load, floor area per core, etc.
In order to investigate the effects of flexibility on the GWP on an urban scale, again three
scenarios are created. The scenarios are based on the baseline urban model. In order to
study flexibility, a reference study period of 100 years is chosen. Furthermore, the build­
ing typology is set to office, as an office building has an expected reference service life of
80 years according to Table 4.1. This means that it, in theory, should be replaced within
the reference study period of 100 years. The first scenario is used as a baseline, as it
includes an inflexible office building that keeps standing and is not replaced after 80 years
but lives all 100 years. According to the theory, this should not be the case, meaning this
scenario will only be used to compare the additional impacts between an inflexible and
flexible building. The second scenario is an inflexible building that is demolished and re­
placed after 80 years, as it should be according to the theory. The third and last scenario
includes a flexible office building which can take the reference service life of 120 years for
a residential building and is therefore not replaced.
As the buildings modeled in the baseline urban area already comply with the requirements
for adaptability, the buildings are also modeled as inflexible. Therefore, the flexible build­
ings have a floor­to­floor height of 3.0 m and a maximum area per core of 800 m2, while
the inflexible buildings have a floor­to­floor height of 2.75 m and a maximum area per core
of 1400 m2. Based on these three scenarios, the GWP per neighborhood, per floor area,
and per inhibitant are presented in Table 6.28.
122
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:133==
Table 6.28: GWP of the various scenarios for flexibility in the three functional units
Flexibility
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Inflexible w/o repl.
149.3
9.5
200.8
Inflexible w/ repl.
217.0
13.9
291.8
Flexible w/o repl.
153.9
9.8
207.0
As seen in the table, the additional expenses for making the building flexible (including
increasing the floor­to­floor height and the amount of cores) only increase the GWP with
3% from 9.5 to 9.8 kg CO2/m2/year. On the other hand, replacing the inflexible building
after 80 years results in an increase of 45% in total GWP compared to not replacing it, re­
sulting in 13.9 kg CO2/m2/year. The results, therefore, show that building flexible instead
of building inflexible and having to replace the buildings could reduce the GWP with 41%.
Figure 6.47 presents the GWP per floor area for the three scenarios. Here, it is seen how
especially the ground and structure increase significantly when replacing the building,
while the envelope and internal emissions do not increase drastically, as a large part
of these materials would be replaced anyway within a RSP of 100 years. Furthermore,
Figure H.13 in Appendix H shows how the replacements in B6 increase drastically in the
inflexible replacement scenario, as both the deconstruction of the old building and the
construction of the new building are included here.
Figure 6.47: Contributions from urban elements for the various scenarios for flexibility
Urban Decarbonization
123
==PAGE:134==
6.4
Summary
This section first presented the impact assessments of the building constructions created
in the component catelogue. These constructions were compared with the constructions
from the ”Example library for LCAbyg”, showing how 27% of the constructions had a de­
viation of less than 10%, while 11% had a deviation of more than 50%. It was found that
especially the timber products showed a large difference between the German generic
data from Ökobaudat and the Danish industry­specific EPDs.
Next, the category elements were compared with the reference studies presented in the
literature study. Starting with the buildings, the results of using the tool on a baseline
building in concrete and brick were similar to the higher end of the 60 buildings by BUILD,
as expected since it was modeled with conventional materials. Furthermore, the different
building parts and life­cycle stages of the baseline building were compared with the study
of embodied carbon by Rambøll and BUILD. Similar tendencies were found for the ground
and internal, while the structure and envelope were higher in the baseline building, and
the services were significantly lower. Furthermore, the life­cycle stages also showed simi­
lar tendencies, however with a larger percentage in the use stage in the study by Rambøll
and BUILD, as more use stages were included. Hereafter, a timber building was com­
pared with the 20 timber buildings by BUILD, showing that the timber building modeled
by the tool was similar to the median of the 20 timber buildings. Additionally, the impacts
of the roads and pavements were investigated, showing the importance of including the
life­cycle stages A4 and A5, and the carbon sequestration rates for the landscape were
presented.
At last, a parameter study of the various urban variables was presented. The study sorted
the parameters from ”hard­to­affect” to ”easy­to­effect”, and showed the variation from
three different scenarios for each of the parameters. This showed that multiple parame­
ters affect the GWP of urban areas, especially including the plot ratio, the transformation
of existing buildings, the area per person, and the design of parking. Only focusing on
parameters that did not affect the prerequisites of the functional unit, the building structure
showed the largest potential for reductions with a variation of 13%, while the open spaces
showed the least with a variation of 3%. By introducing these parameters in the design of
an urban area, the GWP of the baseline urban area was reduced by 32%. Finally, it was
shown how designing flexible and adaptable buildings could highly reduce the GWP with
a reference study period of 100 years, compared to designing inflexible buildings which
require replacement.
124
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:135==
7
Case study
The Urban Decarb method and tool is developed in close collaboration with Henning
Larsen Architects and Rambøll, meaning it has been used on actual design projects from
the beginning of its development. Currently, the tool has been a part of the early design
process or design development of six Henning Larsen projects, which has significantly
guided both the projects, but also the development of the tool. Five of the six projects are
located in Denmark, while the last project was in Norway. The projects are ranging from
sites within already established urban areas, where a large focus has been on transfor­
mation, parking, and density, to projects located on newly developed sites. Here, instead,
the maintenance of existing nature and construction of low­carbon buildings have been
highly prioritized. One of these projects is Fælledby in Copenhagen.
Fælledby is an 18­hectare new neighborhood in Copenhagen, which will be constructed
on a part of the 223­hectare, predominantly naturally reserved area, Amager Fælled. As
a majority of Amager Fælled is preserved for nature, the design of Fælledby has focused
on partly maintaining the existing nature, as well as constructing the buildings mainly in
natural materials such as timber. The Fælledby masterplan can be seen in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: The Fælledby masterplan in Copenhagen
Urban Decarbonization
125
==PAGE:136==
As the design development of Fælledby has finished and the construction of the neigh­
borhood has already started, the Urban Decarb tool was used in neither the competition
design nor the design development of the project. However, the tool has instead been
used to quantify the total GWP emissions from the neighborhood, as well as highlighting
the reduction in GWP when constructing the buildings mainly in timber instead of concrete.
7.1
Inventory analysis of Fælledby
Fælledby is primarily a residential neighborhood with 80% of the building floor area being
assigned for apartments, terraced houses, and senior housing. However, it also includes
a school, several institutions, and retail. Furthermore, each of the three smaller neighbor­
hoods includes parking houses, with the largest being at the entrance of Fælledby from
the main road. None of the parking buildings are designed as parking basements, but
are instead integrated at the lower floors of the buildings with residential buildings above.
The total area of each of the typologies can be seen in Table 7.1, while a visualization of
the location of the typologies in the masterplan can be seen in Figure J.1 in Appendix J.
Table 7.1: Areas of the various building typologies in Fælledby
Typology
Area [m2]
Residential
174 921
School
21 482
Institution
2 813
Retail
2 867
Parking
15 724
Total
217 807
The site area of Fælledby is 18 hectares, meaning that the plot ratio is 120%. The build­
ings have a relatively low total height, ranging from two to six floors, with a typical floor
height of 3 m. It is expected that Fælledby will include approximately 2 000 housing units,
which, with an area per person of 35 m2, results in a population of almost 5 000 people. In
reality, the various smaller neighborhoods in Fælledby will be constructed gradually from
2025 to 2030, however, the construction year of 2025 is used for all constructions in the
calculation. As the analysis is mainly intended to show the difference between concrete
and timber buildings in comparison with general guidelines, the reference study period
of the LCA calculation is defined as 50 years. However, as hardscape and landscape
are also considered, the LCA will investigate all life­cycle stages included in the tool,
thereby also A4 and A5. A few inventory and LCA properties for the impact assessment
of Fælledby can be seen in Table 7.2.
126
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:137==
Table 7.2: Inventory and LCA properties for Fælledby
Parameter
Value
Site area
181 098 m2
Building area excl. parking
202 083 m2
Building area incl. parking
217 807 m2
Population
4 998 residents
Construction year
2025
Reference study period
50 years
Life­cycle stages
A1­A3, A4, A5, B4, B6, C3­C4
The urban parameter study in Section 6 showed a method for the investigation of emis­
sions from a baseline and proposal in order to compare design scenarios.
A similar
method will be used here for Fælledby. In this case, the baseline is mainly modeled as
concrete structures with conventional materials. This includes a column­beam structural
system in in­situ concrete. For the residential, school, institution, and retail buildings, the
external walls are modeled as brick, while an aluminum facade is selected for the park­
ing buildings. The partition and core walls are concrete elements, and the non­bearing
internal walls are steel studs. All of the selected constructiions and their quantities for the
baseline can be seen in Table K.1 in Appendix K. In contrast to the baseline, the majority of
the proposal includes biogenic materials. This includes a column­beam system in glulam
with LVL slabs, except for the parking buildings which are kept in concrete. Furthermore,
the brick external walls are replaced with timber frame walls, while the facades of the
parking buildings remain in aluminum. The partition and core walls are modeled as CLT
elements, and the non­bearing internal walls are replaced with timber studs to increase
the biogenic material. The selected constructions and their quantities for the proposal can
be seen in Table L.1 in Appendix L.
Both the baseline and the proposal have window­to­wall ratios of 40% for residential, 30%
for school, institution, and retail, and 0% for parking. Furthermore, all of the open spaces
are the same in both scenarios. This includes roads, pavements, and paths, as well as a
few on­ground parking spaces. FA large part of the area has lawns that are not expected
to be maintained, and 656 trees are included in the design. The quantities of each of
these elements can equally be seen in Table K.1 in Appendix K.
7.2
Impact assessment of Fælledby
The results of the global warming potential in the LCA calculation of the baseline and
proposal are presented in Table 7.3.
Urban Decarbonization
127
==PAGE:138==
Table 7.3: Comparison of GWP for the baseline and proposed scenario for Fælledby in
the three functional units
Fælledby
Per neighborhood
Per m2 floor area
Per inhabitant
[tons CO2]
[kg CO2/m2/year]
[kg CO2/pers/year]
Baseline
140.6
12.9
562.7
Proposal
92.8
8.5
371.3
As seen in the table, the emissions of the neighborhood are reduced by 34%, going from
a GWP of 12.9 kg CO2/m2/year for the baseline to 8.5 kg CO2/m2/year for the proposal.
Looking back at the urban parameter study, a similar reduction of 32% was seen between
the baseline and proposal. Furthermore, the contribution from the various urban elements
for the baseline and proposal for Fælledby can be seen in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: Comparison of GWP of various urban elements for Fælledby baseline and
proposal
The figure presents the same tendency as seen in the urban parameter study, where the
buildings are responsible for the majority of the GWP of the neighborhood. Ignoring the
negative emissions from the carbon sequestration from the landscape, the buildings are
responsible for a total of 98% and 97% of the GWP in the baseline and proposal respec­
tively, meaning the hardscapes are only responsible for 2% and 3% in the two scenarios.
The difference in the contribution is only due to the larger total GWP of the baseline.
Similarly, the carbon sequestration only reduces the GWP with 3% and 4%. Opposite to
the urban parameter study, where the carbon sequestration was insignificant, the lack of
maintenance of the lawn increases the sequestration rate of the lawn drastically, and the
majority of the carbon sequestration is a result of this and not the trees.
128
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:139==
Focusing on the buildings, 35% of the total building GWP in the baseline is from the
ground and structure, while this is only 21% of the total building GWP of the proposal.
Comparing the structure of the baseline and proposal, the change from concrete to timber
reduces the GWP with 2.7 kg CO2/m2/year or 76%. Furthermore, the contribution of the
envelope is reduced from 2.7 kg CO2/m2/year for the baseline to 1.4 kg CO2/m2/year
for the proposal, resulting in a decrease of 48%. As the total emissions from services,
operational energy, and construction are almost unchanged, their percentual contribution
becomes proportionally larger in the proposal than in the baseline, since the total GWP is
reduced. At last, the contribution from the various life­cycle stages for the baseline and
proposal for Fælledby can be seen in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Comparison of GWP of various life­cycle stages for Fælledby baseline and
proposal
Looking at the figure, the most significant result is the reduction of the contribution from
A1­A3. In the baseline, A1­A3 is responsible for 6.9 kg CO2/m2/year or 53% of the GWP,
while it is only responsible for 0.4 kg CO2/m2/year or 5% in the proposal. These results
are directly caused by the majority of timber products in the proposal which have nega­
tive emissions in A1­A3. On the other hand, C3­C4 increases from 1.1 kg CO2/m2/year
in the baseline to 3.6 kg CO2/m2/year in the proposal. The emissions from operational
energy are almost unchanged in the two scenarios. Furthermore, A4, A5, and B4 are also
reduced in the proposal compared to the baseline, however only marginally compared to
the decrease in A1­A3 and the increase in C3­C4.
Conclusively, the results have shown that the selection of biogenic materials instead of
conventional materials can significantly reduce the GWP of Fælledby on the urban scale.
The final proposal for Fælledby is shown in Figure 7.4.
Urban Decarbonization
129
==PAGE:140==
Figure 7.4: Fælledby is proposed to be built mainly in timber in order to reduce the global
warming potential of the neighborhood
7.3
Summary
The case study presented a short introduction to how the Urban Decarb tool has been
used on one of the urban projects at Henning Larsen Architects. The case study focused
on Fælledby, an 18­hectare new neighborhood in Amager Fælled in Copenhagen. The
study presented the comparison of a baseline in concrete and brick with a proposal with
a majority of the building materials being in biogenic materials. The results showed a
significant reduction of 34% between the two scenarios, with a reduced GWP of 8.5 kg
CO2/m2/year for the proposal. Furthermore, the case study showed that the buildings
were responsible for a large majority of the emissions, with 98% and 97% of the total
GWP of the baseline and proposal respectively, when excluding the carbon sequestration
from the landscape.
130
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:141==
8
Discussion
This section presents a discussion of the limitations and sources of errors of the urban
LCA method and tool proposed in this research, as well as a discussion of the results
found in the impact assessment and case study of Fælledby. Additionally, the use cases
of the tool and if there is an actual need for LCAs on the urban scale will be discussed.
Furthermore, suggestions for future development of the tool and the analysis it can per­
form are given.
8.1
Model limitations and sources of errors
Based on the research found and the calculations performed, it is clear that the proposed
method and tool have some obvious limitations and sources of errors. To generalize,
these can be divided into four categories: Limitations due to the defined system boundary,
the simplified inventory generation, data availability, and from using theoretical simulations
as an experimental tool.
8.1.1
Limitations due to the system boundary
One of the major limitations of the tool is a result of the included categories and elements
in the assessment. The development of the tool has highly focused on an adequate cal­
culation of buildings on the urban scale, as well as open spaces divided into hardscape
and landscape. However, Lotteau et al. proposed that an LCA of urban areas should
include both buildings, open spaces, networks, and mobility in order to achieve a full as­
sessment of the environmental impacts of decisions on the urban scale. In this research,
the emissions from networks and mobility are not modeled, even though the critical review
by Lotteau et al. found that especially mobility was often the second largest contributor to
environmental impacts in urban areas. This was chosen as the inclusion of networks and
mobility requires significant additional methodological considerations, particularly since
the design of transportation systems not only affects mobility internally in the urban area
but also far beyond the defined boundaries of the neighborhood. However, as networks
and mobility are not included, the model is clearly limited if investigating the environmental
impacts of different energy supply systems or transportation systems.
Another limitation of the tool is due to the included life­cycle stages in the LCA calculation.
As defined by the Danish building regulations, the LCA calculation proposed here includes
A1­A3, B4, B6, and C3­C4, while A4 and A5 can be incorporated as well. Looking at all
the building life­cycle stages as defined by EN 15978, the calculation only includes 9 out
of 17 life­cycle stages. Impacts such as repairs in the use stage, operational water, trans­
port of the materials in end­of­life, and benefits and loads beyond the system boundary
are therefore not considered. This is a result of these generally life­cycle stages being
Urban Decarbonization
131
==PAGE:142==
considered insignificant compared to the others, but also due to lack of data. Neverthe­
less, in a LCA perspective, this is a general limitation of almost all building LCAs as they
are performed currently.
At last, the tool is limited to only consider the environmental impact category of global
warming potential. Even though GWP is by far the most debated impact category cur­
rently and the only one which is regulated in Denmark, other life­cycle stages are equally
crucial to consider from a life­cycle perspective and should be included according to EN
15978. It can be expected that other impact categories could show different tenden­
cies in scenario comparisons, for example, that timber products have low GWP but could
have high environmental impacts on land use, and these tendencies would therefore be
ignored if not quantified. Again, a significant increase in data harvesting is required to
include other impact categories. Therefore, screening LCAs for design decisions such as
this tool often do not include other impact categories. Here, it is assumed that GWP will
give an indication of the environmental performance of the urban areas, but in order to
study the full environmental impacts other impact categories should be included.
8.1.2
Limitations due to simplified inventory generation
The urban scale presents some obvious challenges when it comes to the inventory anal­
ysis for the LCA, as it simply includes an abundance of categories, elements, and compo­
nents to consider. Even when limiting the inventory to buildings and open spaces, a long
list of simplifications is necessary, and the model therefore aims to model urban elements
with reasonable accuracy as suggested by Hauschild et al. First of all, the inventory pre­
dominantly only includes the elements which are sketched in the urban design model.
The benefits of this bottom­up process­based LCA are that the environmental impacts
are directly affected by the design decisions made by the architects and urban designers.
However, it also means that some elements may be overlooked, which would otherwise
have been included with the top­down input­output LCA method.
Even when modeled, the estimations of quantities for some of the components are sim­
plified. This especially includes the building category, as the areas and amounts for open
spaces are based directly on the model without any additional inventory generation. For
the buildings, the workflow for the estimation of quantities includes direct and indirect ex­
tractions from a volume model at LOD 2 (concept design). This model is already greatly
simplified compared to the BIM models in later design stages, and the direct quantities
such as ground slab, roof finish, ceiling finish, etc. can therefore vary from the area­
based calculation. Furthermore, indirect quantity extraction such as the windows based
on a window­to­wall ratio presents a simplification. This simplification is even greater for
the internal walls and cores which usually would be highly dependent on construction and
typology. However, as this is not considered on the urban scale, these simplifications for
internal materials are necessary. Additionally, the structural quantities are calculated with
the generative structural design tool FENIX by Rambøll. Even though this should be more
132
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:143==
precise than area­normalized emissions for the structural system, the structural systems
could differ greatly in the final design. The simplified urban energy model using Dragonfly
equally presents some sources of errors, since it is only based on 2D floors, floor­to­floor
height, WWR, and predefined Honeybee programs. Furthermore, the U­values for the
ground floors, external walls, external roofs, and windows are constant, meaning they
will not differ when changing the components. At last, the workflow for the estimation of
quantities of transformation projects is highly simplified, as it is based on variable replace­
ment factors for structure and envelope. In reality, this greatly depends on the condition
of the existing building, and deciding to transform should therefore be based on an actual
inspection of the existing building.
In addition to the estimation of quantities, the workflow for the inventory analysis is based
on a list of ”standard components” and their respective LCA profiles. Even though mul­
tiple constructions are available for many of the components, the standard components
are still only a section of typical constructions in Denmark, and therefore not necessarily
representative of all projects. However, here it is assumed that the standard components
cover the most typical constructions considered in the early design stages and that they
can provide guidance for design decisions.
8.1.3
Limitations due to data availability
As described in the beginning, an LCA is only as reliable as its data. Furthermore, the data
should match the stage at which the LCA is performed. As the urban LCA is intended to
be performed in the concept stage, generic and industry­average data has been preferred
over product­specific data, even though it to some extent has comprised the geographical
representativeness of the data. This means that a majority of the building constructions
are based on the German generic database Ökobaudat, resulting in some differences in
GWP compared to Danish products. This difference was especially noticeable in the val­
idation of the building constructions, where particularly Danish timber products had lower
emissions compared to the German generic data. Even though a majority of the timber
products included are based on Danish industry­specific EPDs, it should be noticed in the
LCA calculation that a large part of the data is from Ökobaudat. On the contrary, the data
for roads and pavements are based on Danish generic data from Vejdirektoratet, which
ranks as the most preferred type of data in the data collection hierarchy presented. As
the data is so specific for Denmark, additional data would also have to be found if the tool
should be used in other countries.
Another uncertainty is the data for carbon sequestration of the landscape. The data was
found in the database of the Climate Positive Design tool based on several scientific stud­
ies and is representative of the North Growth Zone. However, even when defining the size
and if it is deciduous or not, carbon sequestration rates include many uncertainties, as it
depends on the type of plant, climate, age, etc. Furthermore, the carbon sequestrated
will eventually be emitted again, when the tree is burned or decomposes. It is therefore
Urban Decarbonization
133
==PAGE:144==
debatable whether carbon sequestration of the landscape should even be included as a
negative impact in an LCA calculation.
A last uncertainty of the data is the fact that not all of the datasets include emissions for the
same life­cycle stages. In the data collection, it was chosen that at least A1­A3 and C3­
C4 should be included in the data (except for the items with carbon sequestration where
A1­A3 and C3­C4 are defined as 0), as these can not be estimated. The other life­cycle
stages were calculated from default lifetime, transportation distance, waste percentage,
etc., resulting in some sources of errors.
8.1.4
Limitations of theoretical simulations as an experimental tool
The calculation presented in this research is based on the method of digitalized exper­
iments. This means that software and simulations in combination with theoretical con­
siderations are used to model otherwise very physical elements such as buildings and
open spaces in urban areas. An advantage of this parametric tool is that it can be used to
model several scenarios in multiple projects rather fast. These calculations can therefore
potentially affect the design decisions taken in the physical planning and reduce the actual
emissions of several urban projects. However, it should be noted that these calculations
are based on generic data and theoretical assumptions such as expected reference ser­
vice life, which could differ greatly in reality.
8.2
Discussion of results
Looking at the impact assessment, the building constructions were first compared with the
BUILD example library from which they were inspired. The validation showed that 27% of
the constructions had a deviation of less than 10% and 11% had a deviation of more than
50%, while another 27% could not be found in the example library. Generally, the results
showed a tendency of slightly higher GWP for concrete products in the Danish industry­
specific EPDs in the created component catelogue compared to the German generic data
in the BUILD example library. On the contrary, the emissions from the Danish timber
products were significantly lower than the generic German timber products, with for ex­
ample a reduction in emissions from CLT of 67%. As the Danish industry­specifics EPDs
were preferred and therefore included in the tool, it should be noted that the emissions
from timber products will generally be lower than if using the generic data from Ökobaudat.
Hereafter, the tool’s capabilities of estimating the emissions from buildings were validated
against the 60 buildings and 20 timber buildings by BUILD. Investigating first a baseline
building in concrete and brick from Fælledby, the calculation resulted in a GWP of 11.5 kg
CO2/m2/year with life­cycle stages and reference study period according to BR23, show­
ing results similar to the higher end of the 60 buildings as expected. Furthermore, the
contributions from the various building parts and life­cycle stages were compared with a
study of embodied carbon in European buildings by BUILD and Rambøll which was pre­
sented in the literature review. Here, it was noticeable that the contributions from structure
134
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:145==
and envelope were significantly higher in the tool compared to the study by BUILD and
Rambøll, while the services were lower. However, the services were also based primarily
on overestimated proxy data, especially from France, therefore showing higher emissions
than the Danish reference values for technical installations used in the tool. Furthermore,
a timber version of the same building was compared with the study of 20 timber buildings
by BUILD, showing similar results to the mean of the 20 timber buildings in both embod­
ied, operational, and total emissions.
Focusing on the urban parameter study, 13 parameters were investigated on a simplified
scale from ”hard to affect” to ”easy to affect”. To explore the implications of altering these
parameters, an urban ”shoebox” model was created, which included buildings, parking,
roads, squares, and green areas. First, a model with the most conventional value of each
parameter was investigated in order to create a baseline for further studies of the param­
eters. As introduced in the methodology, the results are all shown in a combination of an
absolute ”per neighborhood” unit, a spatial ”per m2 floor area” unit, and a ”per inhabitant”
unit. The baseline showed a GWP of 131.6 tons CO2, 10.5 kg CO2/m2/year, or 442.5 kg
CO2/pers/year. Comparing this with the critical review of urban LCA studies by Lotteau
et al., the results in all functional units were generally lower. This was especially the case
when comparing with the studies including mobility, highlighting the large emissions from
this category. The study with the closest results had a GWP of 10.8 kg CO2/m2/year,
therefore only showing a difference of 3%. Again, it should be noted that the urban LCA
studies included in the review vary in almost all possible LCA properties, such as location,
size, building typologies, number of inhabitants, reference study period, life­cycle stages,
included categories, etc. As the results differ to this degree dependent on these prop­
erties, it is crucial to clarify them when performing LCA calculations and compare on a
similar basis.
From the LCA calculation of the baseline, it was found that the buildings contributed with
the majority of the environmental impacts with 95% of the GWP. The hardscapes including
roads and pavements were responsible for only 5%, showing similar tendencies to one of
the studies reviewed by Lotteau et al. where open spaces accounted for between 1% and
6% of the total emissions. Even with 500 trees and 200 shrubs, the carbon sequestration
of the landscape was found to be insignificant with a reduction of only 0.14% of the total
GWP. Focusing on the building parts, the envelope was the most contributing element,
followed by structure and operational energy. Here, it should be noticed that the reference
study period is 80 years, meaning the envelope will experience more replacements than
for example the structure.
The study of the parameters highlighted how crucial the functional unit is for the compar­
ison of the different scenarios. Multiple parameters affected the basis for the calculation
of some of the functional units, including the reference study period, plot ratio, parking,
and area per person. An example of this was especially seen in the parking scenario,
Urban Decarbonization
135
==PAGE:146==
where on­ground parking resulted in a lower total and per inhabitant GWP compared to
parking basements. However, as the areas of parking basements are included in the per
floor area unit, the on­ground parking showed the highest emissions in this unit. Simi­
larly, an increase in plot ratio (and therefore also area and population) resulted in a higher
total GWP, while the normalized results per floor area and per inhabitant showed lower
results. Conclusively, the overview of the parameters showed that the transformation of
existing buildings could reduce GWP with 34%, but also that constructing timber struc­
tures, reducing window­to­wall ratio, selecting facades in biogenic materials, and reducing
the floor­to­floor height could decrease environmental impacts. Finally, an updated ver­
sion of the urban area was proposed with optimized versions of the various parameters,
showing a reduction in GWP of 32% compared to the baseline.
The last part of the parameter study focused on the flexibility and adaptability of buildings.
Here, it was proposed that constructing flexible buildings could extend the lifetime of se­
lected building typologies since they would be able to change their purpose instead of
being demolished after the end of their desired use. Here, it was shown that constructing
a flexible building could increase the total GWP with only 3%, while having to replace the
building after 80 years would increase the GWP with 45%. This study was performed
with an expected service life of 80 years for an office building. However, a recent study
by Andersen and Negendahl showed that new office buildings could have a service life
of as short as 41 years, meaning that creating flexible buildings could be one of the most
important parameters when it comes to reducing environmental impacts from a life­cycle
perspective.
Conclusively, the research showed one of the six case studies in which the Urban Decarb
tool has been used. The case study in focus was the residential neighborhood Fælledby
in Copenhagen. Here, the Urban Decarb tool was used to quantify the reductions in GWP
when constructing timber buildings instead of concrete buildings, as well as prioritizing to
maintain nature. The study showed a reduction of 32% between the baseline in concrete
and the proposal in timber. Again, it was seen that the buildings were responsible for the
majority of the emissions with 97% of the GWP for the proposal for Fælledby.
8.3
Use cases and the need for an urban LCA tool
The presentation of the Urban Decarb tool has shown how it has been used for direct com­
parisons of different design scenarios in the urban design process, resulting in arguments
for choosing a design solution that would reduce the environmental impacts of a project.
At the current stage of development, this is how the tool has been used on a majority of
the projects. However, based on the parameter study, a range of general guidelines for
reducing environmental impacts have been presented, meaning that the tool can be used
even earlier in the design process, and perhaps even before the modeling in Rhino. From
general guidelines about area per person, requirements for the amount of parking, and
136
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:147==
prioritization of transformation, the environmental impacts can be reduced even before
the design. Furthermore, this could guide the requirements defined in the brief by devel­
opers and municipalities.
Additionally, it is worth discussing whether the tool will even be used as intended in its
current form. At the moment, the tool is solely based on a Grasshopper script, which
some, but not all architects and urban designers are familiar with. As the tool is intended
for guiding early­stage urban design decisions, it would likely be beneficial for the expan­
sion of the tool if it was integrated directly into the Rhino environment, thereby becoming
a natural part of the urban design process. This could also be a simplified version for
decisions in the early design process, whereafter the detailed version of the calculation
would be performed by computational designers or engineers.
At last, it can be discussed whether there even is a need for an urban LCA tool, since
the study has shown that the buildings are responsible for a majority of the environmental
impacts and regulations already require buildings to be within a certain threshold. How­
ever, as several of these design decisions are taken early at the urban scale, as well as
starting to consider impacts per person instead of impacts per floor area with the inclusion
of mobility, it has been seen that an urban LCA tool can be beneficial for reductions of
environmental impacts.
8.4
Suggestions for future work
As the scale of the urban life­cycle assessment is large and each of its components has a
high complexity, several subjects are left for future work. This includes the incorporation
of other categories, elements, and impact categories in the tool, the extension of data for
other markets, and the optimization of the digital workflow of the tool. A list of suggestions
for future work is therefore presented here.
• Include mobility in the urban LCA tool: In the critical review of 14 studies by
Lotteau et al., mobility is included as one of the four categories to investigate in an
urban LCA, and the literature review showed that mobility was one of the largest
contributors after buildings. Being able to quantify the emissions of different trans­
portation scenarios and thereby influence urban design decisions could therefore
potentially reduce the environmental impacts of urban areas significantly.
• Include networks in the urban LCA tool: The category of networks is equally one
of the four categories to investigate according to Lotteau et al. Even though the con­
tribution from networks was not shown to be as significant as the other categories,
including it can also influence the decisions for large­scale energy supply systems
which could potentially affect operational carbon.
• Extend the database for open spaces: A great focus of this study has been on
the different constructions for buildings, however, multiple constructions are also
Urban Decarbonization
137
==PAGE:148==
present for roads, pavements, pathways, etc. The inclusion of more options for hard­
scape and landscape, as well as other infrastructure components such as bridges,
railways, metro, etc., could significantly extend the use cases of the urban LCA tool
beyond only buildings.
• Extend the database to other markets: As Henning Larsen Architects is a global
design studio with urban projects in several countries all over the world, it is the goal
of the Urban Decarb tool to be able to calculate environmental impacts beyond Dan­
ish projects. As geographical representativeness is crucial for an LCA, this requires
further data harvesting from these markets.
• Include other impact categories: The tool is currently limited to only assess the
impact category of global warming potential. However, multiple other impact cate­
gories should be considered in an LCA in order to prevent burden­shifting, meaning
that these impact categories should be included in the tool. Furthermore, it is sug­
gested that other environmental analyses such as the assessment of biodiversity
could be added to the tool.
• Focus on flexibility and adaptability on the urban scale: The results showed
that the flexibility of buildings could be one of the most influential parameters when
it comes to the environmental emissions of urban areas in their whole lifetime. How­
ever, in the research presented, the adaptability of the buildings is mainly deter­
mined by building parameters such as floor­to­floor height and loads. It is expected
that the service life of a building would also depend on urban parameters such as
density and proximity to public transportation and public spaces, which could be
investigated.
• Integrate an automated floor plan generator in the tool: In order to compare with
usual building LCA results, the internal walls, floor finishes, and ceiling finishes are
included in the urban LCA tool, even though they will not be designed at the urban
scale. An automated floor plan generator could be integrated into the tool to reduce
the simplifications in the estimations of these quantities.
• Integrate the tool directly in Rhino: The intention of the Urban Decarb tool is
to be used directly by the architects and urban planners in the design process of
urban areas to reduce environmental impacts. In order for the architects and urban
planners to integrate the tool naturally in their design projects, it should be within
a familiar environment. Therefore, it is suggested that the Urban Decarb tool is
developed as a direct plug­in for Rhino.
138
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:149==
9
Conclusion
The goal of this research has been to develop a method and a tool that can inform early­
stage architectural design of urban areas in order to reduce their environmental impacts.
Based on the tool developed and the results obtained by utilizing it in an urban parameter
study and a case study, the following can be concluded.
The buildings are by far the category with the highest environmental impacts when consid­
ering buildings, hardscapes, and landscapes. Within buildings, it can be concluded that
the structure, envelope, and operational emissions are generally the most contributing el­
ements. Furthermore, it is noticed that especially mobility can be a significant contributor,
and an urban LCA tool should aim to model this category as well.
The tool has shown its capability of being able to precisely quantify the emissions of mul­
tiple life­cycle stages, including production, construction, use, and end­of­life, however
with some simplifications that could influence the final results. It is estimated that these
simplifications are necessary due to the urban scale and that the design decisions can
still be correctly influenced by the tool. The inventory analysis presented a method for
the parametric calculation of environmental impacts from the models created in the ur­
ban design process, meaning that the tool can be used to influence decisions on several
projects. However, it was also noted that in order for it to be integrated completely into
the urban design process, it should likely be developed as a plug­in directly in the design
environment familiar to the architects and urban designers.
The research has shown that it can be difficult to model the dynamic nature of urban de­
velopment in the design of urban areas and therefore also in the quantification of their
environmental impacts. However, by using the life­cycle perspective, as well as integrat­
ing flexibility as a parameter, it is possible to design with this dynamic nature in mind.
Furthermore, the urban parameter study presented 13 parameters that would more or
less influence the emissions of urban areas. It can be concluded that the influence of
these parameters highly depends on the functional unit considered and that it therefore
should be considered if the design is optimized in terms of total emissions, per floor area,
or per person. However, it was shown that the transformation of existing buildings could
reduce emissions significantly, as well as building fewer square meters per person, re­
ducing parking, and constructing buildings in biogenic materials.
It can thus be concluded that early life­cycle assessments can precisely and dynamically
calculate the environmental impacts of the various components of an urban area through
digital parametric models and thereby inform the design process to minimize the environ­
mental footprint of urban development.
Urban Decarbonization
139
==PAGE:150==
140
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:151==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations. World Urbanization Prospects 2018 Highlights. Tech. rep. 2018.
URL: https://population.un.org/wup/Publications/.
[2]
UNFCCC. Urban climate action is crucial to bend the emissions curve. Oct. 2022.
URL: https://unfccc.int/news/urban-climate-action-is-crucial-to-bend-the-emissions-
curve.
[3]
UNEP. Resilience and resource efficiency in cities. 2017. ISBN: 9789280736489.
URL: https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/20629/Resilience_
resource_efficiency_cities.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
[4]
UNFCCC. Guterres: “Cities are where the climate battle will largely be won or lost”.
2019. URL: https://unfccc.int/news/guterres-cities-are-where-the-climate-battle-will-
largely-be-won-or-lost.
[5]
World Green Building Council. Bringing embodied carbon upfront. Tech. rep. 2019.
URL: www.worldgbc.org/embodied-carbon.
[6]
Robert G. Hunt, Jere D. Sellers, and William E. Franklin. “Resource and environ­
mental profile analysis: A life cycle environmental assessment for products and pro­
cedures”. In: Environmental Impact Assessment Review 12.3 (Sept. 1992), pp. 245–
269. ISSN: 0195­9255. DOI: 10.1016/0195-9255(92)90020-X.
[7]
Michael Z Hauschild, Ralph K Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen. Life cycle assess­
ment: Theory and practice. Tech. rep. 2018.
[8]
ISO14040. “Environmental management ­ Life cycle assessment ­ Principles and
framework”. In: (2008).
[9]
John E. Anderson, Gebhard Wulfhorst, and Werner Lang. Energy analysis of the
built environment ­ A review and outlook. 2015. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2014.12.027.
[10]
Marc Lotteau et al. Critical review of life cycle assessment (LCA) for the built envi­
ronment at the neighborhood scale. Nov. 2015. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.06.029.
[11]
Daniel Davis. A history of parametric. Aug. 2013. URL: https://www.danieldavis.
com/a-history-of-parametric/.
[12]
EN15978. Sustainability of construction works ­ Assessment of environmental per­
formance of buildings ­ Calculation method. Tech. rep. 2011.
[13]
Emil Popovici. “Contribution a l’analyse du cycle de vie des quartiers”. PhD thesis.
Paris: Ecole Nationale superieure des Mines de Paris, 2006.
[14]
EN 15804. Sustainability of construction works ­ Environmental product declarations
­ Core rules for the product category of construction products. Tech. rep. Copen­
hagen: Danish Standards Association, 2019. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/standard/
M335258/ds-en-15804-2012-a2-2019.
Urban Decarbonization
141
==PAGE:152==
[15]
Mohamad Monkiz Khasreen, Phillip F.G. Banfill, and Gillian F. Menzies. “Life­cycle
assessment and the environmental impact of buildings: A review”. In: Sustainability
1.3 (2009), pp. 674–701. ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/su1030674.
[16]
BR23. Bygningsreglementet.dk. 2023. URL: https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/11/Krav.
[17]
ISO19650. Organization and digitization of information about buildings and civil en­
gineering works, including building information modelling (BIM) ­ Information man­
agement using building information modelling ­ Part 1: Concepts and principles.
Tech. rep. 2018. URL: www.ds.dk.
[18]
Bernardette Soust­Verdaguer, Carmen Llatas, and Antonio García­Martínez. Criti­
cal review of bim­based LCA method to buildings. Feb. 2017. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.
2016.12.009.
[19]
Martin Röck et al. “LCA and BIM: Visualization of environmental potentials in build­
ing construction at early design stages”. In: Building and Environment 140 (Aug.
2018), pp. 153–161. ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.05.006.
[20]
U.S. General Services Administration. Level of Detail. July 2022. URL: https://www.
gsa.gov/real-estate/design-and-construction/3d4d-building-information-modeling/
bim-software-guidelines/document-guides/level-of-detail.
[21]
Evolve Consultancy. LOD = LOD + LOI. Oct. 2014. URL: https://evolve-consultancy.
com/lod-lod-loi/.
[22]
Alexander Hollberg and Jürgen Ruth. “LCA in architectural design—a parametric
approach”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 21.7 (July 2016),
pp. 943–960. ISSN: 16147502. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-016-1065-1.
[23]
Laura Álvarez Antón and Joaquin Díaz. “Integration of life cycle assessment in a
BIM environment”. In: Procedia Engineering. Vol. 85. Elsevier Ltd, 2014, pp. 26–
32. DOI: 10.1016/j.proeng.2014.10.525.
[24]
Energy­Efficient Building European Initiative. EeBGuide Guidance Document ­ Part
B: Buildings. Tech. rep. 2011.
[25]
ISO14044. Environmental management ­ Life cycle assessment ­ Requirements
and guidelines. Tech. rep. 2006.
[26]
L. Wastiels and R. Decuypere. “Identification and comparison of LCA­BIM inte­
gration strategies”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science.
Vol. 323. 1. Institute of Physics Publishing, Sept. 2019. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/
323/1/012101.
[27]
André Stephan, Robert H. Crawford, and Kristel de Myttenaere. “Multi­scale life cy­
cle energy analysis of a low­density suburban neighbourhood in Melbourne, Aus­
tralia”. In: Building and Environment 68 (Oct. 2013), pp. 35–49. ISSN: 03601323.
DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.06.003.
[28]
Jonathan Norman, Heather L. MacLean, and Christopher A. Kennedy. “Comparing
high and low residential density: Life­cycle analysis of energy use and greenhouse
142
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:153==
gas emissions”. In: Journal of Urban Planning and Development 132.1 (Mar. 2006),
pp. 10–21. ISSN: 0733­9488. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)0733-9488(2006)132:1(10).
[29]
Maria Gracia Riera Pérez and Emmanuel Rey. “A multi­criteria approach to com­
pare urban renewal scenarios for an existing neighborhood. Case study in Lau­
sanne (Switzerland)”. In: Building and Environment 65 (July 2013), pp. 58–70. ISSN:
03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.03.017.
[30]
F. Cherqui. Méthodologie d’evaluation d’un projet d’aménagement durable d’un
Quartier. Tech. rep. 2005.
[31]
Anna Forsberg. Environmental assessment of the urban environment ­ Develop­
ment and first application of the environmental load profile for Hammarby Sjöstad.
Tech. rep. 2003.
[32]
Morgane Colombert et al. “Analyse de cycle de vie à l’échelle du quartier : un outil
d’aide à la décision? Le cas de la ZAC Claude Bernard à Paris (France)”. In: Envi­
ronnement urbain 5 (Sept. 2011), pp. c1–c21. DOI: 10.7202/1007605ar.
[33]
Grégory Herfray, Eric Vorger, and Bruno Peuportier. Life cycle assessment applied
to urban settlements and urban morphology studies. Tech. rep. 2011.
[34]
Bruno Peuportier, Emil Popovici, and Maxime Trocmé. Analyse de cycle de vie à
l’échelle du quartier. Tech. rep. 2006.
[35]
Christoph F Reinhart et al. UMI ­ An urban simulation environment for building en­
ergy use, daylighting and walkability. Tech. rep. 2013.
[36]
Carlos Cerezo Davila and Christoph Reinhart. Urban energy lifecycle: An analytical
framework to evaluate the embodied energy use of urban developments. Tech. rep.
2013.
[37]
Jessica Bunning et al. “Measuring carbon for urban development planning”. In:
The International Journal of Climate Change: Impacts and Responses 3.4 (2012),
pp. 35–52. ISSN: 1835­7156. DOI: 10.18848/1835-7156/cgp/v03i04/37140.
[38]
Regitze Kjær Zimmermann et al. Klimapåvirkning fra 60 bygninger: Muligheder for
udformning af referenceværdier til LCA for bygninger. Polyteknisk Boghandel og
Forlag, 2020. ISBN: 9788793585218.
[39]
Buket Tozan, Emilie Brisson Jørgensen, and Harpa Birgisdottir. Klimapåvirkning
fra 60 bygninger: Opdaterede værdier baseret på nyere data og danske branche
EPD’er. Polyteknisk Boghandel og Forlag, 2021. ISBN: 9788793585218.
[40]
Alexandra Wittchen et al. Klimapåvirkning fra 20 træbyggerier: LCA på eksisterende
træbyggerier. 2021. ISBN: 9788756320139.
[41]
Camilla Ernst Andersen et al. Klimapåvirkning fra 45 træbyggerier. BUILD, Byggeri,
By og Miljø, Aalborg Universitet, 2023. ISBN: 9788756321129.
[42]
Marco Casini. “Chapter 5 ­ Building performance simulation tools”. In: Construction
4.0. Elsevier, 2022, pp. 221–262. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-821797-9.00004-0.
[43]
Christoph F. Reinhart and Carlos Cerezo Davila. Urban building energy modeling ­
A review of a nascent field. Feb. 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.12.001.
Urban Decarbonization
143
==PAGE:154==
[44]
Giuseppe Peronato et al. Integrating urban energy simulation in a parametric envi­
ronment: A Grasshopper interface for CitySim. Tech. rep. 2017.
[45]
Martin Röck et al. “Towards embodied carbon benchmarks for buildings in Europe
­ #2 Setting the baseline: A bottom­up approach”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.
5895051. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5895051..
[46]
Ramon Elias Weber, Caitlin Mueller, and Christoph Reinhart. Generative structural
design for embodied carbon estimation. Tech. rep. 2021.
[47]
European Commision. A renovation wave for Europe ­ greening our buildings, cre­
ating jobs, improving lives. Tech. rep. 2020.
[48]
European Academies Science Advisory Council. Decarbonisation of buildings: for
climate, health and jobs. 2021. ISBN: 9783804742635.
[49]
Regitze Kjær Zimmermann et al. “LCA­Framework to evaluate circular economy
strategies in existing buildings”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environ­
mental Science. Vol. 588. 4. IOP Publishing Ltd, Nov. 2020. DOI: 10.1088/1755-
1315/588/4/042044.
[50]
K. Kanafani et al. “Automated life cycle inventories for existing buildings ­ a paramet­
ric reference model approach”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science. Vol. 1078. 1. Institute of Physics, 2022. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/1078/1/
012097.
[51]
Kristoffer Negendahl, Alexander Barholm­Hansen, and Rune Andersen. “Paramet­
ric stock flow modelling of historical building typologies”. In: Buildings 12.9 (Sept.
2022). ISSN: 20755309. DOI: 10.3390/buildings12091423.
[52]
LCAbyg. About LCAbyg. URL: https://www.lcabyg.dk/en/about-lcabyg/.
[53]
BUILD. LCAlive: Boligbyggeriets nye værktøj til den tidlige designfase. URL: https:
//www.build.aau.dk/lcalive-boligbyggeriets-nye-vaerktoj-til-den-tidlige-designfase-
n80359.
[54]
One Click LCA. One Click LCA. URL: oneclicklca.com.
[55]
Tally. Tally. URL: https://choosetally.com/.
[56]
D. Trigaux, K. Allacker, and F. De Troyer. “Model for the environmental impact as­
sessment of neighbourhoods”. In: WIT Transactions on Ecology and the Environ­
ment 181 (2014), pp. 103–114. ISSN: 17433541. DOI: 10.2495/EID140091.
[57]
A. A. Butt et al. “A conceptual framework for urban metabolism of hardscapes”.
In: International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018: Planning,
Sustainability, and Infrastructure Systems ­ Selected Papers from the International
Conference on Transportation and Development 2018. American Society of Civil
Engineers (ASCE), 2018, pp. 299–305. ISBN: 9780784481561. DOI: 10 . 1061 /
9780784481561.029.
[58]
Lendra, M. A. Wibowo, and J. U.D. Hatmoko. “Life cycle assessment (LCA) on road
infrastructure projects: A systematic mapping study”. In: IOP Conference Series:
144
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:155==
Earth and Environmental Science. Vol. 832. 1. IOP Publishing Ltd, Aug. 2021. DOI:
10.1088/1755-1315/832/1/012037.
[59]
Peeraya Inyim et al. Environmental assessment of pavement infrastructure: A sys­
tematic review. July 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.03.042.
[60]
Wilfred H. Roudebush. Environmental value engineering (EVE) Environmental life
cycle assessment of concrete and asphalt highway pavement systems. Tech. rep.
1996.
[61]
John Harvey, Joep Meijer, and Alissa Kendall. Life cycle assessment of pavements.
Tech. rep. 2014.
[62]
Giampiero Trunzo, Laura Moretti, and Antonio D’Andrea. “Life cycle analysis of
road construction and use”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 11.2 (Jan. 2019). ISSN:
20711050. DOI: 10.3390/su11020377.
[63]
Jari Lyytimäki and Maija Sipilä. “Hopping on one leg ­ The challenge of ecosystem
disservices for urban green management”. In: Urban Forestry and Urban Greening
8.4 (2009), pp. 309–315. ISSN: 16188667. DOI: 10.1016/j.ufug.2009.09.003.
[64]
Cecil C Konijnendijk et al. Benefits of urban parks: A systematic review. Tech. rep.
International Federation of Parks and Recreation Administration, 2013. URL: www.
ifpra.org.
[65]
K. Varshney, M. P. Zari, and N. Bakshi. “Decarbonisation of the urban built environ­
ment through vegetation­based carbon sequestration”. In: IOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science. Vol. 1101. 6. Institute of Physics, 2022. DOI:
10.1088/1755-1315/1101/6/062025.
[66]
Kamiya Varshney, Maibritt Pedersen Zari, and Nilesh Bakshi. “Carbon sequestration
through building­integrated vegetation”. In: The Palgrave Encyclopedia of Urban
and Regional Futures. Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 1–9. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-030-51812-7{\_}319-1.
[67]
Zoe G. Davies et al. “Mapping an urban ecosystem service: Quantifying above­
ground carbon storage at a city­wide scale”. In: Journal of Applied Ecology 48.5
(Oct. 2011), pp. 1125–1134. ISSN: 00218901. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365- 2664.2011.
02021.x.
[68]
Birte Christina Renger, Janis L. Birkeland, and David J. Midmore. “Net­positive
building carbon sequestration”. In: Building Research and Information 43.1 (Jan.
2015), pp. 11–24. ISSN: 14664321. DOI: 10.1080/09613218.2015.961001.
[69]
Matti Kuittinen, Caroline Moinel, and Kristjana Adalgeirsdottir. “Carbon sequestra­
tion through urban ecosystem services: A case study from Finland”. In: Science of
the Total Environment 563­564 (Sept. 2016), pp. 623–632. ISSN: 18791026. DOI:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.03.168.
[70]
Vejdirektoratet. InfraLCA. URL: https://www.vejdirektoratet.dk/infralca.
[71]
One Click LCA. One Click LCA Infrastructure LCA. URL: https://www.oneclicklca.
com/construction/infrastructure-life-cycle-assessment/.
Urban Decarbonization
145
==PAGE:156==
[72]
Climate Positive Design. Climate Positive Design.
[73]
Athena Sustainable Materials Institute. Athena Impact estimator for buildings. URL:
https://calculatelca.com/software/impact-estimator/.
[74]
Ken Peffers, Tuure Tuunanen, and Matti Rossi. The design science research pro­
cess: A model for producing and presenting information systems research. Tech.
rep. 2006. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228650671.
[75]
R. Frischknecht et al. “Comparison of the environmental assessment of an identical
office building with national methods”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and En­
vironmental Science. Vol. 323. 1. Institute of Physics Publishing, Sept. 2019. DOI:
10.1088/1755-1315/323/1/012037.
[76]
K ; Haugbølle et al. BUILD levetidstabel. Tech. rep. 2021. URL: https://build.dk/
Pages/BUILD-levetidstabel.aspx.
[77]
Rune Andersen and Kristoffer Negendahl. “Lifespan prediction of existing building
typologies”. In: Journal of Building Engineering 65 (Apr. 2023). ISSN: 23527102.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jobe.2022.105696.
[78]
European Commision. Generic data: Knowledge for policy. Jan. 2021. URL: https:
//knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/glossary-item/generic-data_en.
[79]
Ramon Elias Weber, Caitlin Mueller, and Christoph Reinhart. Automated floorplan
generation in architectural design: A review of methods and applications. Aug. 2022.
DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104385.
[80]
B. Gepts et al. “Existing databases as means to explore the potential of the building
stock as material bank”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Sci­
ence. Vol. 225. 1. Institute of Physics Publishing, Feb. 2019. DOI: 10.1088/1755-
1315/225/1/012002.
[81]
DS/EN 1991. Forkortet udgave af Eurocode 1 ­ Last på bærende konstruktioner.
Dansk Standard, 2015. ISBN: 9788773109427.
[82]
Laura Kainulainen and Petri Kortelainen. Fenix by Ramboll. 2023. URL: https://c.
ramboll.com/fi/fenix-by-ramboll.
[83]
Kai Kanafani et al. Eksempelbibliotek til LCAbyg. BUILD, 2022. ISBN: 9788756320191.
[84]
MOE. Oplæg til defaultværdier for installationer ­ etageboliger, kontorbyggerier,
skoler og dagsinstitutioner. Tech. rep. 2022. URL: www.moe.dk.
[85]
Terese Pagh, Christian Grau Sørensen, and Anne Mathilde Gøtke. JSON guide for
LCAbyg version 5.3.1.0. Tech. rep. 2022. URL: https://www.lcabyg.dk/da/.
[86]
Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen, Kristoffer Negendahl, and Jan Karlshøj. Analyse af frivillig
ordning for bygnings­ og materialepas. Tech. rep. Technical University of Denmark,
Department of Civil Engineering., 2021.
[87]
Andreas Sode Vest and Terese Pagh. Implementering af materiale og bygningspas
i IFC. Tech. rep. 2021. URL: www.byg.dtu.dk.
[88]
Ladybug Tools. Dragonfly. URL: https://www.ladybug.tools/dragonfly.html.
146
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:157==
[89]
U.S. EPA. Reduce urban heat island effect. URL: https://www.epa.gov/green-
infrastructure/reduce-urban-heat-island-effect.
[90]
Kamyar Fuladlu, Müge Riza, and Mustafa İlkan. The effect of rapid urbanization
on the physical modification of urban area. Tech. rep. 1. 2018, p. 5. URL: http:
//coolparramatta.com.au/about_us.
[91]
Bruno Bueno Unzeta. An urban weather generator coupling a building simulation
program with an urban canopy model. Tech. rep. 2007.
[92]
COWI. Opdaterede emissionsfaktorer for el og fjernvarme. Tech. rep. 2020.
[93]
EPD Danmark. “MD­23028­EN”. In: (2023). URL: https://www.epddanmark.dk/
media/axvfzpaw/md-23028-en.pdf.
[94]
F ’ Nakib and City. Toward an adaptable architecture guidelines to integrate adapt­
ability in the building. Tech. rep. 2010. URL: http://www.ruimtelab.nl/.
[95]
David Kincaid. Adapting buildings for changing uses: Guidelines for change of use
refurbishment. Tech. rep. 2002. URL: www.ebook777.comwww.ebook777.com.
[96]
Green Building Council Denmark. DGNB Danmark: Bæredygtighedscertificering af
nye bygninger og omfattende renoveringer. Tech. rep. 2023. URL: https://rfbb.dk/
publikation/dgnb-manual-for-nye-bygninger-og-omfattende-renoveringer-2023.
[97]
Arup. act | a carbon tool β. URL: https://act.speckle.arup.com/about.
Urban Decarbonization
147
==PAGE:158==
148
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:159==
A
Overview of constructions
Figure A.1: All included constructions within each component
Urban Decarbonization
149
==PAGE:160==
Figure A.2: Examples of constructions within the component columns, slabs, and road
and pavements
150
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:161==
B
Material passport
{
'00_general_info': {
'00_owner_passport': null,
'00_passport_nr': 0,
'00_creation_date': "2023-05-31",
'00_percent_declared': null,
'00_rev_nr': null,
'00_3part_verified': null,
'00_verified_by': null,
'00_verified_nr': null,
'00_nr_of_revisions': null
},
'01_product_info': {
'01_product_name': "Ready-mix concrete , Danish industry average ,
C35/45, XD1/XS1/XS2/XF2/XF3/XA2 CEM I",
'01_CCS_CoClass_CCI_classification_1': null,
'01_GTIN_EAN -nr': null,
'01_other_product_numbers': null,
'01_product_description': "Ready-mix concrete , C35/C45",
*
'01_usage': {
**
'01_usage_construction': "Footing foundation",
**
'01_usage_component': "Footing foundation",
**
'01_usage_category': "Building"
},
*
'01_weight_per_component_unit': 2267,
'01_thickness_per_component': null,
'01_size': null,
'01_density': null,
'01_amount': null,
'01_unit': "m3",
*
'01_CO2_emission': {
*
'01_CO2_emission_a1 -a3': 362,
**
'01_CO2_emission_a4': 4.57,
**
'01_CO2_emission_a5': "NA",
**
'01_CO2_emission_b4': "NA",
**
'01_CO2_emission_b6': "NA",
**
'01_CO2_emission_c3 -c4': 12.3
},
'01_production_year': null,
'01_production_city': null,
'01_production_country': null,
'01_reason_if_no_country_allocated': null,
'01_new_material_passport': null,
'01_revised_material_passport': null,
'01_declaration_of_performance': null,
Urban Decarbonization
151
==PAGE:162==
'01_declaration_of_performance_nr': null,
'01_additional_product_info': null,
'01_revision_1': null
},
'02_supplier_info': {
'02_manufactorer': null,
'02_cvr_nr': null,
'02_address': null,
'02_webpage': null,
'02_contact_person': null,
'02_phone': null,
'02_email': null,
'02_has_environmental_management_system': null,
'02_manufactorer_certified': null,
'02_manufactorer_certified_other': null
},
'03_category_name': {
'03_certifications_and_datasheets': {
'03_safety_datasheet_product': null,
'03_safety_dataseet_item_in_product': null,
'03_eco_label': null,
*
'03_epd_product': {
**
'03_epd_product_number': "MD-20013-DA_rev1",
**
'03_epd_product_owner': "Fabriksbetonforeningen",
**
'03_epd_product_link': "https:/www.epddanmark.dk/
media/nvwgry4v/md-20013-da_rev1 -dansk-beton-
fabriksbetonforeningen.pdf",
**
'03_epd_product_type': "Industry",
**
'03_epd_product_expiration_date': "20-07-2025",
**
'03_epd_product_unit': "m3",
**
'03_epd_product_country': "Denmark",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission': {
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_a1 -a3': 362,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_a4': 4.57,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_a5': "MND",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b1': -19,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b2': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b3': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b4': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b5': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b6': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_b7': "MNR",
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c1': 12.7,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c2': 6.89,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c3': 7.07,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_c4': 5.23,
**
'03_epd_product_CO2_emission_d': -4.84
}
},
'03_units_used_in_declaration': null,
152
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:163==
'03_declaration_level': null
},
'03_product_recycled': {
'03_product_recycled_percent': null,
'03_not_declared_due_to_direct_recycling_percent': null
},
'03_components_in_product_1': {
'03_component_in_product_1': null,
'03_component_consists_of_1': null,
'03_ingredients_1': null,
'03_weight_1': null,
'03_amount_of_component_declared_1': null,
'03_component_classifications_1': null,
'03_component_EF_or_CAS_nr_1': null,
'03_component_origin_1': null,
'03_component_additional_info_1': null
},
'03_VOCs': {
'03_VOCs': null
},
'03_REACH_list_checked_date': {
'03_REACH_list_checked_date': null
},
'03_recycled_materials_in_product': {
'03_recycled_material_1': null
},
'03_recycled_materials_checked': {
'03_recycled_materials_checked': null
},
'03_product_contain_nanomaterial': {
'03_nanomaterial': null
},
'03_wood_info': {
'03_wood_EUTR_regulation': null,
'03_wood_protected_CITES': null,
'03_wood_type': null,
'03_wood_geographic_origin': null,
'03_certification_system': null,
'03_wood_additional_info': null
},
'03_no_chemical_treatment': {
'03_no_chemical_treatment': null
},
'03_chemical_treatment_of_product_1': {
'03_substance_1': null,
'03_substance_1_EF_or_CAS_nr': null,
'03_substance_1_classification': null,
'03_substance_1_safety_data_attached': null,
'03_substance_1_comment': null
},
Urban Decarbonization
153
==PAGE:164==
'03_electronic_content_not_in_accordance_RoHS': {
'03_electronic_content_not_in_accordance_RoHS': null
},
'03_does_the_product_change_chemical_composition_after_build': {
'03_substance': null,
'03_ingredients': null,
'03_weight': null,
'03_substance_EF_or_CAS_nr': null
},
'03_chemical_composition_additional_info': {
'03_chemical_composition_additional_info': null
}
},
'04_category_name': {
'04_raw_materials_used_during_production_of_product': {
'04_raw_materials_used_during_production_of_product': null
},
'04_raw_materials_used_during_production_of_product_1': {
'04_component_in_product_1': null,
'04_component_consists_of_1': null,
'04_ingredients_1': null,
'04_weight_1': null,
'04_amount_of_component_declared_1': null,
'04_component_classifications_1': null,
'04_component_EF_or_CAS_nr_1': null,
'04_component_origin_1': null,
'04_component_additional_info_1': null
}
},
'05_packaging_info': {
'05_product_delivered_with_returnable_packaging': null,
'05_product_delivered_with_reusable_packaging': null,
'05_packaging_need_returned': null,
'05_additional_info': null
},
'06_construction_phase': {
'06_special_requirements_storage': null,
'06_special_requirements_surrounding_building_materials': null,
'06_requirements_for_assembling': null,
'06_additional_info': null
},
'07_category_name': {
'07_specific_requirements_usage_maintenance': {
'07_specific_requirements_usage_maintenance': null
},
'07_specific_requirements_for_energy_supply_during_use': {
'07_specific_requirements_for_energy_supply_during_use': null
},
'07_product_lifetime': {
'07_product_lifetime': "120 years"
154
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:165==
},
**
'07_product_waste_factor': {
**
'07_product_waste_factor': 0.05
},
**
'07_product_transportation_distance': {
**
'07_product_transportation_distance': 50
},
'07_emissions_are_measured': {
'07_emissions_are_measured': null
},
'07_indoor_climate_and_emissions': {
'07_TVOC_72h': null,
'07_TVOC_4weeks': null,
'07_TVOC_comment': null,
'07_formaldehyde_72h': null,
'07_formaldehyde_4weeks': null
},
'07_product_certifications': {
'07_product_certifications': null
},
'07_sound_absorption_class_ISO354': {
'07_sound_absorption_class_ISO354': null
},
'07_noice_reduction_class_NRC': {
'07_noice_reduction_class_NRC': null
},
'07_product_fire_rating': {
'07_fire_rating_country': null,
'07_fire_rating_standard': null,
'07_fire_rating_class': null
},
'07_cladding_certifications': {
'07_cladding_certification_country': null,
'07_cladding_certification_standard': null,
'07_cladding_certifiation_class': null
},
'07_smoke_class': {
'07_smoke_class_country': null,
'07_smoke_class_standard': null
},
'07_hazardous_materials_when_burning': {
'07_hazardous_materials_when_burning': null
},
'07_product_has_critical_humidity': {
'07_product_has_critical_humidity': null
},
'07_additional_info': {
'07_additional_info': null
}
},
Urban Decarbonization
155
==PAGE:166==
'08_category_name': {
'08_disassembly_and_demolition': {
'08_product_prepared_for_disassembly': null,
'08_special_requirements_health_environment_during_demolition':
null,
'08_product_built_into_building_can_be_removed': null,
'08_removal_that_can_only_be_made_destructively_where_the_
component_loses_technical_and_functional_use_value': null,
'08_seperation_that_can_not_be_performed_on_the_construction_site'
: null,
'08_difficult_removal_of_stuck_remnants_of_materials': null,
'08_can_be_removed_by_hand_or_with_simple_tools': null,
'08_product_can_be_seperated_in_parts': null
},
'08_how_is_product_seperated': {
'08_chemical_or_cement_non_soluble': null,
'08_adhesive_or_water_soluble': null,
'08_cast_on_site': null,
'08_welded': null,
'08_revits': null,
'08_nails': null,
'08_screws': null,
'08_bolts': null,
'08_friction': null,
'08_fast_release_or_shared_click_or_gravity': null,
'08_calcium_mortar': null
},
'08_material_recycling_possible_for_entire': {
'08_material_recycling_possible_for_entire': null
},
'08_material_recycling_possible_for_parts_of_product': {
'08_material_recycling_possible_for_parts_of_product': null
},
'08_asses_the_future_potential_of_product_by_adding_percent': {
'08_hazardous_toxic_radioactive_waste': null,
'08_deposition': null,
'08_energy_production': null,
'08_functional_filling_downcycling': null,
'08_recycling_in_new_building_with_the_addition_of_materials_
and_thus_higher_functional_value': null,
'08_recycling_in_new_building_without_the_addition_of_materials_
and_thus_lower_functional_value': null,
'08_biodegradation_compost_return_to_source_without_decomposition_
or_ecological_loss_of_value': null,
'08_ready_for_reuse_after_simple_cleaning': null,
'08_ready_for_reuse_after_extensive_cleaning': null
},
'08_future_use_of_product': {
'08_supplier_has_restrictions_recommendations_for_
material_or_energy_recovery_or_disposal': null,
156
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:167==
'08_take_back_agreement_at_time_of_purchase': null,
'08_possibility_of_leasing_agreement_during_use_phase': null,
'08_waste_code_for_delivered_item': null,
'08_waste_code_for_delivered_item_after_construction_phase': null,
'08_the_delivered_product_classified_as_hazardous_waste': null,
'08_the_built_in_item_is_classified_as_hazardous_waste': null,
'08_additional_info_built_in_item': null
}
}
}
Listing B.1: The modified material passport for ready­mix concrete by Fabriksbeton­
foreningen in the JSON data format inspired by Vest and Pagh [87] as a part of the DTU
research project regarding building and material passports [86]
Urban Decarbonization
157
==PAGE:168==
C
UHI­modified EPW
Figure C.1: Daily average dry bulb temperature of original and UHI­modified EPW
Figure C.2: Daily average relative humidity of original and UHI­modified EPW
158
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:169==
D
Validation of constructions
Figure D.1: Comparison of catelogue and example library for footing foundation
Figure D.2: Comparison of catelogue and example library for line foundation
Urban Decarbonization
159
==PAGE:170==
Figure D.3: Comparison of catelogue and example library for ground slab
Figure D.4: Comparison of catelogue and example library for column
Figure D.5: Comparison of catelogue and example library for beam
160
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:171==
Figure D.6: Comparison of catelogue and example library for basement wall
Figure D.7: Comparison of catelogue and example library for window
Figure D.8: Comparison of catelogue and example library for external door
Urban Decarbonization
161
==PAGE:172==
Figure D.9: Comparison of catelogue and example library for partition and core wall
Figure D.10: Comparison of catelogue and example library for internal wall
Figure D.11: Comparison of catelogue and example library for internal door
162
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:173==
Figure D.12: Comparison of catelogue and example library for floor finish
Figure D.13: Comparison of catelogue and example library for ceiling finish
Figure D.14: Comparison of catelogue and example library for stairs and elevator
Urban Decarbonization
163
==PAGE:174==
E
Overview of building parts
Table E.1: The building components grouped in various building parts
Building part
Component
Ground
Footing foundation
Line foundation
Ground slab
Basement wall
Structure
Slab
Column
Beam
Partition and core wall
Envelope
External wall
Window
External door
Roof finish
Internal
Internal wall
Internal door
Floor finish
Ceiling finish
Stairs and elevator
Services
Services
Operational
Operational
Construction
Construction
164
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:175==
F
Validation of buildings
Figure F.1: GWP of the various building parts of the baseline building
Figure F.2: GWP of the various building parts of the timber building
Urban Decarbonization
165
==PAGE:176==
Figure F.3: GWP of the various building parts of the timber building incl. A4 and A5
166
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:177==
G
Inventory of baseline urban area
Table G.1: Selected components and their estimated quantities for the baseline urban
parameter study. The floor finish, ceiling finish, and services (*) are different constructions
for the parking basements compared to the residential buildings
Category
Component
Construction
Quantity
Unit
Building
Footing foundation
Normal
4 585.7
m3
Line foundation
Normal
4 968.0
m
Ground slab
Normal
29 095.0
m2
Slab
In­situ concrete
31 845.8
m3
Column
In­situ concrete
3 260.2
m3
Beam
In­situ concrete
6 103.7
m3
Basement wall
Normal 2 floors
9 200.0
m2
External wall
Fibercement
50 724.7
m2
Window
Aluminium/timber
34 389.6
m2
External door
External door
859.7
m2
Partition and core wall
Concrete element
50 722.0
m2
Internal wall
Steel stud
270 313.7
m2
Internal door
Internal door
14 227.0
m2
Roof finish
Bitumen
29 095.0
m2
Floor finish
Timber *
156 584.0
m2
Ceiling finish
Gypsum plaster board *
156 584.0
m2
Stairs and elevators
Stairs and elevator
1 118.8
m
Services
Residential *
156 584.0
m2
Hardscape
Roads
T6: Heavy road
13 999.5
m2
T4: Normal road
19 559.7
m2
Bike path
11 992.1
m2
Pavements
Pavement
25 684.0
m2
Path
1 093.4
m2
Landscape
Trees and shrubs
Trees (deciduous medium)
500
pcs
Shrubs (deciduous medium)
200
pcs
Lawn and perennials
Lawn minimal management
33 461.9
m2
Urban Decarbonization
167
==PAGE:178==
H
Contributions from LCA stages
Figure H.1: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for reference
study period
Figure H.2: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for typology
168
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:179==
Figure H.3: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for plot ratio
Figure H.4: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for area per
person
Figure H.5: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for transforma­
tion
Urban Decarbonization
169
==PAGE:180==
Figure H.6: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for parking
Figure H.7: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for open spaces
Figure H.8: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for floor­to­floor
height
170
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:181==
Figure H.9: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for structure
Figure H.10: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for window­to­
wall ratio
Figure H.11: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for envelope
Urban Decarbonization
171
==PAGE:182==
Figure H.12: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for photo­
voltaics
Figure H.13: Contributions from life­cycle stages for the various scenarios for flexibility
172
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:183==
I
Inventory of proposed urban area
Table I.1: Selected components and their estimated quantities for the proposed urban pa­
rameter study. Multiple constructions (*) are different for the parking buildings compared
to the residential buildings
Category
Component
Construction
Quantity
Unit
Building
Footing foundation
Normal
1 149.0
m3
Line foundation
Normal
6 532.0
m
Ground slab
Normal
30 417.5
m2
Slab
LVL *
37 691.3
m3
Column
Glulam
1 164.9
m3
Beam
Glulam
4 979.9
m3
Basement wall
­
0.0
m2
External wall
Timber frame *
67 324.7
m2
Window
Timber
14 738.4
m2
External door
External door
828.9
m2
Partition and core wall
CLT *
37 691.6
m2
Internal wall
Steel stud
245 588.2
m2
Internal door
Internal door
12 925.7
m2
Roof finish
Bitumen
30 417.5
m2
Floor finish
Timber *
156 584.0
m2
Ceiling finish
Gypsum plaster board *
156 584.0
m2
Stairs and elevators
Stairs and elevator
786.9
m
Services
Residential *
156 584.0
m2
Hardscape
Roads
T6: Heavy road
13 999.5
m2
Bike path
11 992.1
m2
Pavements
Pavement
11 192.6
m2
Path
6 613.4
m2
Landscape
Trees and shrubs
Trees (deciduous medium)
1 437
pcs
Shrubs (deciduous medium)
1 070
pcs
Lawn and perennials
Lawn minimal management
55 380.5
m2
Urban Decarbonization
173
==PAGE:184==
J
Building typologies in Fælledby
Figure J.1: The building typologies in Fælledby. The majority of the buildings are resi­
dential (purple), but the masterplan also includes a school (red), institutions (yellow), and
retail (green), as well as parking (grey)
174
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:185==
K
Inventory of Fælledby baseline
Table K.1: Selected components and their estimated quantities for the Fælledby baseline.
Multiple constructions (*) vary dependent on the typology and the selected components
are therefore only shown for the residential buildings
Category
Component
Construction
Quantity
Unit
Building
Footing foundation
Normal
3 987.4
m3
Line foundation
Normal
12 868.3
m
Ground slab
Normal
47 108.5
m2
Slab
In­situ concrete
51 132.3
m3
Column
In­situ concrete
3 381.3
m3
Beam
In­situ concrete
11 116.2
m3
Basement wall
­
0.0
m2
External wall
Brick *
73 098.0
m2
Window
Aluminium/timber
46 738.0
m2
External door
External door
1 210.5
m2
Partition and core wall
Concrete element
89 704.9
m2
Internal wall
Steel stud
369 053.6
m2
Internal door
Internal door
19 423.9
m2
Roof finish
Bitumen
49 284.0
m2
Floor finish
Timber *
217 806.8
m2
Ceiling finish
Gypsum plaster board *
219 982.3
m2
Stairs and elevators
Stairs and elevator
1 292.4
m
Services
Residential *
217 806.8
m2
Hardscape
Roads
T6: Heavy road
13 999.5
m2
T4: Normal road
6 037.6
m2
Parking space
6 425.1
m2
Pavements
Pavement
24 252.4
m2
Path
6 239.7
m2
Landscape
Trees and shrubs
Trees (deciduous medium)
656
pcs
Lawn and perennials
Lawn no­mow
91 599.2
m2
Urban Decarbonization
175
==PAGE:186==
L
Inventory of Fælledby proposal
Table L.1: Selected components and their estimated quantities for the Fælledby proposal.
Multiple constructions (*) vary dependent on the typology and the selected components
are therefore only shown for the residential buildings
Category
Component
Construction
Quantity
Unit
Building
Footing foundation
Normal
1 331.4
m3
Line foundation
Normal
12 868.3
m
Ground slab
Normal
47 108.5
m2
Slab
LVL *
40 473.1
m3
Column
Glulam *
1 163.1
m3
Beam
Glulam *
5 806.4
m3
Basement wall
­
0.0
m2
External wall
Timber frame *
73 098.0
m2
Window
Timber
46 738.0
m2
External door
External door
1 210.5
m2
Partition and core wall
CLT *
89 582.7
m2
Internal wall
Timber stud *
369 053.6
m2
Internal door
Internal door
19 423.9
m2
Roof finish
Bitumen
49 284.0
m2
Floor finish
Timber *
217 806.8
m2
Ceiling finish
Gypsum plaster board *
219 982.3
m2
Stairs and elevators
Stairs and elevator
1 292.4
m
Services
Residential *
217 806.8
m2
Hardscape
Roads
T6: Heavy road
13 999.5
m2
T4: Normal road
6 037.6
m2
Parking space
6 425.1
m2
Pavements
Pavement
24 252.4
m2
Path
6 239.7
m2
Landscape
Trees and shrubs
Trees (deciduous medium)
656
pcs
Lawn and perennials
Lawn no­mow
91 599.2
m2
176
Urban Decarbonization
==PAGE:187==
Urban Decarbonization
177
==PAGE:188==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1960
www.construct.dtu.dk
