==PAGE:1==
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish
Waters
Extending Cross-Survey Marine Frame
Master Thesis
DTU SPACE
GEO
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at Geodesy and Earth Observation, De-
partment of Space Research and Technology at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Kristian Villadsen Kristmar - s174033
Signature
Date
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this project it was desired to work upon an already existing software package respon-
sible for processing free air gravity anomaly surveys.
This project sat out to automize the estimation of unmodelled corrections for free air gravity
anomalies, which was a manual process and a time consuming bottleneck. It did this in
part via changes to the processing strategy, and in part via semi-automatisation of the
processing.
In this project the processing went from a system of manual review and modification of
all gravity anomaly data. To working in batches of data defined by areas of spatially
close measurements collected during surveys. The software now automatically processes
an area and then either accepts or rejects corrections within that area. Any rejected
correction within an area are then reprocessed with the added context of the accepted
corrections as input.
In addition this survey developed new graphical tools allowing users greater insight into
the data.
This survey also found that the cross survey reference frame of previously corrected sur-
veys wasn’t internally consistent enough to rely on as a foundation for correcting surveys
and that future work needs to be done to correct the frame.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
List of Figures
v
Glossary
vi
1
About this project
1
2
Introduction
1
2.1
The Marine geoid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Origin of the data used in this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Operational practicalities
6
4
Related student work
7
5
Method of Marine Gravimetry
9
5.1
Semi-Manual adjustment of the corrections budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Classification of cross points
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.3
Intra survey processing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.4
Extra survey processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.5
The Cross Survey Reference Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6
This project
15
6.1
Ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.2
Graphical tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.3
Processing Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6.4
Processing Speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6.5
Semi-automation of Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
7
Processing order of survey-lines
18
7.1
New method of line ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
7.2
Discussion of line ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
8
Graphical Tools
20
8.1
Discussion of updated graphical tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
9
Survey line processing strategy
26
9.1
Discussion of new survey line processing strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
10 Speed up of processing
29
10.1 Discussion of speed up of processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
11 Semi-automation of estimation of unmodelled corrections of survey-lines
31
11.1 Discussion of semi-automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
12 Preliminary statistics of survey consistency
35
12.1 Intra survey statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
12.2 Extra survey statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
iii
==PAGE:5==
13 Conclusion
37
Bibliography
38
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
Map showing the dense patches of measurements taken during hydro-
graphic surveys (Hydrographic Survey Area (HSA)s). These patches are
ideally suited for collecting gravity anomaly data as the spatially close mea-
surements can be used to verify one another. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Illustration of the 2 types of crossings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
A survey line with current line (cline) support points marked as squares and
potential points marked as circels. Every 10th point is filled in for the sake
of readability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Example of problem with Cross Survey Reference Frame (CSRF). Green
lines represent extra-survey crossing lines. The red line is the Stand Alone
(SA) solution of survey-line 23 of survey 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Depiction of the solution for line 5 in project 15 with the old software . . . . 20
6
Depiction of the 1st type of figure for line 13 of survey 15
. . . . . . . . . . 21
7
Depiction of the 2nd type of figure for line 13 of survey 15 . . . . . . . . . . 22
8
Depiction of the 3rd type of figure for line 13 of survey 15
. . . . . . . . . . 23
9
Depiction of the 4th type of figure for line 13 of survey 15
. . . . . . . . . . 24
10
Extended data view for line 5 in project 15 with the current software
. . . . 25
11
Map showing the dense patches of measurements taken during hydro-
graphic surveys (Hydrographis syrvey areas). These patches are ideally
suited for collecting gravity anomaly data as the spatially close measure-
ments can be used to verify one another.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
12
Diagram of the old file structure system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
13
Diagram of the new file structure system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
14
Example of ”wrk” file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
15
Depiction of the automated fine tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
16
Example figure showing the thought process behind the semi automated
corrections estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
17
Intra survey statistics in mGal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
18
Extra survey statistics with project 1 in mGal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
19
Extra survey statistics with project 14 in mGal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
v
==PAGE:7==
Glossary
BSCD2000 Baltic Sea Chart Datum 2000. 3, 6
CSRF Cross Survey Reference Frame. v, 14–16, 18, 19, 26, 35, 37
CU counter units. 9
FAMOS Finalizing Surveys for the Baltic Motorways of the Sea. 3, 6
GOCE Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer. 4
HSA Hydrographic Survey Area. v, 5, 6, 16, 18, 19, 26, 29, 31
LAT Lowest Astronomical Tide. 3
MDT Mean Dynamic Topography. 4
MSS Mean Sea Surface. 4
NKG Nordic Geodetic Commission. 6
pchip Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial. 7, 12, 13, 28, 31, 33
RTK Real Time Kinematic. 5, 6, 9, 10
SA Stand Alone. v, 7, 13, 14, 16, 19, 20, 22, 24, 26, 27, 29, 31, 33, 35
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
About this project
This thesis is part of a series of other student projects aimed at improving the semi auto-
mated processing software for DTU space’s collected CHEKAN-AM marine gravity data.
(section 4)
The data is collected for the purposes of geoid estimation in the Baltic sea. (section 2)
This project concerns itself with the estimation of unmodelled corrections to free air gravity
anomaly measurements via elimination of misfit between crossing lines. (section 5)
This project set out to revise and automate the software responsible for theses estima-
tions with a focus on eliminating the processing bottleneck that is in place in the current
software. (section 6)
2
Introduction
The U.S National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration defines geodesy as ”... the science
of accurately measuring and understanding three fundamental properties of the Earth: its
geometric shape, its orientation in space, and its gravity field— as well as the changes of
these properties with time.” [1].
Aristotle approximated the Earth’s shape as a sphere. Newton approximated the Earth’s
shape as an oblate spheroid based on the argument that the Earth’s rotation causes
flattening at the poles which was based upon observation that the oscillation period of the
pendulum clocks was larger at the Equator than in Paris [2]. The Earth’s shape can also be
approximated by a surface called a geoid which Gauss described as ”...that surface which
intersects everywhere the direction of gravity at right angels, and part of which coincides
with the surface of the oceans.” [3]. More precisely the geoid is an abstract reference
surface defined as a global gravity equipotential surface that coincides globally with the
undisturbed sea surface (i.e. undisturbed by for example sea currents and weather). The
geoid is used as a common global vertical reference surface for physical heights.
The geoid is realised globally through models [4] which are then refined on local and
regional scales.
The geoid model can be approximated using 3D spherical harmonic functions. Spherical
harmonics are sets of base functions used to represent functions on and above the surface
of a sphere [5].
The spherical expansion of the quasi geoidal height (ζ) if defined as the difference be-
tween the ellipsoidal height h and the normal height H∗(ζ = h −H∗)[3]. For a given
location (ϑ, λ) the model of ζ is given by Equation 1 [6].
ζ(r, ϑ, λ) = GM
rγ
Nmax
X
l=2
a
r
l
l
X
m=0
 ∆Clmcos(mλ) + ∆Slmsin(mλ)

P lm(cos(ϑ))
(1)
In this formula ζ(r, ϑ, λ) is the local height of the quasi-geoid over the ellipsoid dependent
on the point’s location on the Earth’s surface relative to the radial distance from the Earth’s
center r, its polar distance ϑ and its longitude λ. a is the mean earth radius, G is the
gravitational constant, M is the Earth’s mass and γ is the normal gravity value. Nmax is
the truncation degree of the model, and it can in theory be infinite. l and m are integers
denoting the degree and order of the harmonics and govern the spatial resolution of any
given spherical harmonic model. ∆Clm and ∆Slm are the spherical harmonic coefficient
while P lm is the global associated Legendre polynomial. The subscript lm denotes that
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
1
==PAGE:9==
each coefficient is matched to a certain degree and order of the model. The different
coefficients for all combinations of degree and order are what constitutes a given global
spherical harmonic model.
A corresponding expression exist for the geoid height N. The geoid height is defined as
the difference between the ellipsoidal height and the orothometric height H (N = h −H).
Assuming spherical approximation and γ = γ0 which is the normal gravity value on the
ellipsoid [3]. This expression can be seen from Equation 2 by inserting Equation 1.
N(r, ϑ, λ) = ζ(r, ϑ, λ) + ∆gB
γ
H
(2)
∆gB is the so called Bouguer gravity anomaly and γ is mean normal gravity anomaly,
refer [3] It follows from Equation 2 that the quasigeoid is equal to the geoid at global mean
sea level (H = 0) and thus these two surfaces coincide for marine areas. In the following
project ( because we work in marine areas) we will not discriminate between quasi-geoid
ζ and geoid N and simply refer to any of them as ”the geoid”.
Using the same harmonic coefficients as for Equation 1 the theory of physical geodesy
yields the expansion of the free air gravity anomaly model Equation 3 [3].
∆g(r, ϑ, λ) = GM
r2
Nmax
X
l=2
(l −1)
a
r
l
l
X
m=0
 ∆Clmcos(mλ) + ∆Slmsin(mλ)

P lm(cos(ϑ))
(3)
It can be seen that Equation 1 and Equation 3 are very similar and that there is a link
between geoid height and gravity anomaly via the spherical harmonic coefficients ∆Clm
and ∆Slm. Modelling of gravity anomalies through spherical harmonics is useful, but
obtaining accurate coefficients for high degree and order models are difficult.
The main modelling technique for determining the geoid is surface integration [7] [6] [3].
The surface integration uses measured free-air gravity anomalies ∆gFA distributed over
an area as input. The output is the geometric height N of the geoid with respect to the ref-
erence ellipsoid along the ellipsoidal normal. Surface integration requires as good aerial
data coverage as possible at the Earth’s surface irrespectable of whether it covers land or
sea. This means that for geoid determination in coastal areas gravity measurements both
from land and sea are needed. A generic technique for surface integration in spherical
approximation is the Stoke’s formula. See Equation 4 [7].
N =
R
4πγm
Z
σ
Z
∆gFAS(Ψ)dσ
(4)
N is the geoid height over the ellipsoid with R being the mean earth radius, γm is the
normal gravity value on the ellipsoid at 45°degrees lattitude (which yields a satisfactory
approximation globally of N at a decimeter level), ∆gFA is the free-air gravity anomaly
on the geoid, S(Ψ) is the spherical Stoke’s function dependent on the spherical distance
Ψ and σ is a surface element [3]. Stoke’s formula can be modified by using the local
normal gravity value γ0 on the reference ellipsoid instead of γm. Surface integration is the
most fundamental technique for modelling the geoid and is also used to find the global
coefficients Clm and Slm.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
2
==PAGE:10==
Stoke’s formula is often used together with the remove −compute −restore method to
estimate local geoid heights. In a local area the remove −compute −restore method
works by using a global geoid models and terrain reductions to remove the respective
long and short wavelength parts from measured ∆g (see Equation 1 and Equation 3),
then computing N from the residuals, and subsequently re-adding the signals from the
global model and terrain. This leaves a local realisation of the used global geoid model.
[3]
∆gFA is derived from gravity measurements and is the difference between the observed
absolute gravity acceleration on the Earth’s surface gobs and the gravity acceleration on
the ellipsoidal model given by the gravity on the ellipsoid γ0 and δgF the free-air correction
[3]. This is described by Equation 5.
∆gFA = gobs −(γ0 + δgF )
(5)
δgF is the free-air reduction which provides the reduction of the surface gravity to the
geoid [3] and is defined as:
δgF ≡
∂γ
∂h

m
· H
(6)
In Equation 6, for a given point on the Earth’s surface h is the ellipsoidal height, H
is the orthometric height along the ellipsoidal normal. above the geoid and

∂γ
∂h

m is
the latitude independent vertical normal gravity gradient [3], which is approximated as

∂γ
∂h

m = −0.3086 mGal
m .
Thus, through the free-air reduction the height H above the geid, at which the measure-
ment is made is taken into account.
2.1
The Marine geoid
As explained in connection with Equation 4 good spatial coverage of gravity observations
∆gFA both from land and sea is important for accurate geoid modelling.
The geoid is a surface that is defined both for land and at sea. Direct knowledge of the
geoid at sea (also called the marine geoid) is also important on its own. One relevant
example of practical use of accurate marine geoid is in marine navigation as a reference
surface for bathymetry [6]. Knowledge of the regional geoid in the Baltic Sea is for example
being used to create the Baltic Sea Chart Datum 2000 (BSCD2000), which is a pilot project
aiming at estimating a common chart datum for the bathymetry mapping in the Baltic sea.
This common chart datum serves as a reference to the previous system of national chart
datums based on a surface called Lowest Astronomical Tide (LAT).
BSCD2000 is an experimental project carried out under the auspices of the Baltic Sea
Hydrographic Commission which is a sub organisation of the International Hydrographic
Organization [8]. The marine gravity data used in this project was in part collected via the
Finalizing Surveys for the Baltic Motorways of the Sea (FAMOS) project serving as input
for BSCD2000. See subsection 2.2 for details.
Another practical use of the marine geoid is as a reference surfaces for research purposes.
For example the geoid can be used as a reference surface to monitor the sea level rise.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
3
==PAGE:11==
2.1.1
Marine geoid and free-air gravity anomalies from satellites
Surface integration methods such as remove −compute −restore requires global geoid
models as input. A way to obtain global gravity anomaly data to create these global models
is through the use of satellites. A typical technique in geodesy is using perturbations in
satellite orbits to determine the low frequency part of the Earth’s gravity field as they exist
in spherically harmonic models. This is done by a network ground stations precisely track
the orbit of satellites and using deviation between the predicted and observed orbit to find
coefficients [3].
Another technique is satellite gravity gradiometry missions, and example of such a mission
would be the Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE) mission.
The GOCE missions is equipped with 3 pairs of accelerometers allowing it to measure
acceleration along 3 axes, and through that the Earths gravity field. These 3 axes of
measurement along with precise position and orientation of the satellite allows for the
calculation of the geoid and the gravity anomalies. [3]
As the geoid in these cases is based upon satellite data there is a limit to how high spatial
resolution of geoid model can be found by such techniques. Satellite based models are
however the ones with best coverage as these models collects data from the entire globe
minus the polar gaps.
2.1.2
Free-air gravity anomalies from satellite altimetry
Another technique is satellite altimetry [9]. A grid of Mean Sea Surface (MSS) values are
acquired through altimeter measurements made in a marine area. MSS follow Equation 7
where it can be seen that it is the sum of the geoid height over the ellipsoid N and the
Mean Dynamic Topography (MDT). The MDT is a term summing the effects of various
local phenomena that causes changes in ocean height such as sea currents, salinity,
tides, pressure or temperature.
MDT is not measured directly, but first estimated via the combination of an initial satel-
lite based geoid model and Equation 7. This initial estimate of MDT is then refined via
oceanographic modelling taking into account effects such as local currents, and MSS/-
geoid gradients [10].
MSS = N + MDT
(7)
This method for estimating ∆gFA is dependent on a good model for MDT. It’s resolution
is variable depending on how the altimetry data was collected, but it is easy to achieve
good data coverage of marine areas. Lastly this model has the particularity that it only
works at sea and in some cases on sea ice, and as such the results can’t be compared
to accurate nearby land results.
Once geoid estimates, have been obtained via altimetry survey it is possible to derive
∆gFA via inverse Stoke’s formula (see Equation 4) or other similar methods and compare
them with results from other surveys/data collection methods [10].
This project also relies on free air gravity anomaly data derived from satellite altimetry.
These satellite altimetry derived gravity anomalies comes from different versions of the
same DTU ∆gFA models as it was published over a number of years.
2.1.3
Marine Gravimetry
It is also possible to measure ∆gFA via measurements from ships.
A ship mounted gravimeter makes dense measurements and keeps track of its location
via GNSS navigation, and thus generates gravity data which can be processed into free
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
4
==PAGE:12==
(a) Map showing the 1st and 2nd HSA of the
15th survey.
(b) Zoomed in view of 2nd HSA. Lines are clas-
sified and coloured according to their azimuth.
Figure 1: Map showing the dense patches of measurements taken during hydrographic
surveys (HSAs). These patches are ideally suited for collecting gravity anomaly data as
the spatially close measurements can be used to verify one another.
air gravity anomalies ∆gFA. As mentioned before the ship-borne measurements of ∆gFA
are difficult to use as they are subject to numerous accelerations other than gravity. This
can be mitigated by choosing contained Hydrographic Survey Area (HSA)s in which to
sail in patterns and gather geographically dense gravity reading. By sailing in patterns of
parallel lines so called cross points either from when the ship pass over the same location
twice or travels parallel for a number of measurements can be acquired.
These parallel or crossing lines of measurement can then be combined and used to elim-
inate the non gravity signals in the observations.
This method of estimating ∆gFA has excellent resolution and good quality of data, but
possibly sparse data coverage.
2.2
Origin of the data used in this project
The data for this project has been collected by semi automated ship borne marine gravity
surveys carried out over a number of years. The surveys are opportunity projects added
as additional objectives to a series of hydrographic survey missions. This has several
fortunate consequences as the ships carrying out hydrographic surveys sails in between
HSAs where it sails in tight parallel lines collecting spatially dense measurements see
Figure 1. This allows for multiple close readings that can be used to verify each other. It
also has the practical consequence of keeping data collection costs down.
A DTU Space CHECKAN-AM marine gravimeter is placed onboard the hydrographic sur-
vey ship and is switched on by DTU personnel, and later during the survey mission op-
erated by the ship’s crew after brief instruction in the instruments use and maintenance
from DTU personnel. The ship will usually carry out a 2 week survey missions collecting
gravity readings via the gravimiter and collecting navigation data via the ship’s separate
Real Time Kinematic (RTK) navigation see section 3 for details.
After a survey mission is completed the data is segmented into so called ”survey-lines”
defined as parts of navigation with constant azimuth suitable for the Eötvös correction
[11]. Numerous other corrections are then applied to the date such as corrections for
instrument drift etc. though this is not within the scope of this project to discuss these. The
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
5
==PAGE:13==
data is then post processed by identifying survey-line crossings and using the possible
misfit between gravity anomalies in these to correct the collected data see section 5 for
details.
A number of the surveys used in this work are done as part of the FAMOS project, which
is an EU initiative that seeks to expand the data foundation of BSCD2000. Other data
from previous surveys is found in Nordic Geodetic Commission (NKG) databases.
2.2.1
Data used
This project has mostly worked with data from the 15th survey mission to the Baltic sea
carried out over 2 weeks in 2018. It was the 15th survey out of 22. The survey mission
measured 205 survey-lines of varying length distributed in 3 HSAs as well as 44 survey-
lines outside any HSAs for a total of 249 survey lines. It has also made use of crossings
with the 14th and 2nd survey.
3
Operational practicalities
As mentioned in subsection 2.2 data used in this project is collected in a semi automated
manner from a ship borne gravimeter. This gravimeter needs to be attended to every 24
hours so as to save that days data. The gravimeter is crew operated with only a short
introduction from DTU space personnel. This lack of dedicated instrument personel saves
money, but introduces potential data loss in case of unexpected events such as instrument
power loss where the crew lacks knowledge of how to best operate the gravimeter, or
simple human error where inexperience or forgetfulness leads to data for a given period
being lost.
Collection of navigation data is not linked directly to the gravimeter, but rather is linked
to the ship’s primary bathymetry instrument. These separate data stream for naviga-
tional and gravity data is a potential cause of holes in data coverage. Navigational data
comes from an RTK receiver mounted on the ships mast. The RTK receiver is not always
switched on, so if at one point it’s turned off the generated gravimetry data can not be
linked to a position, and must as such be discarded. This can cause gaps in the produced
results. Furthermore there is in general a clock difference between the gravimeter and the
RTK navigation that must be taken into account in order to avoid mismatched navigation
and gravity data.
There are also some other practical considerations with the CHEKAN-AM gravimeter used
for data collection. Firstly it is the case that the gravimeter is subject to a warm up error
which greatly impacts measurements made shortly after the instrument is switched on in
the first harbour. This error decreases exponentially, but may be relevant for early lines.
It is therefore important to keep in mind that early survey-lines may have been measured
with a not entirely warmed up instrument when processing surveys. The time required for
warm up can be up to 15 hours [11].
Lastly in sea conditions the gravimeter can suffer from a significant non linear drift. This
drift is a noticeable change in instrument values over time and the modelling of this drift
is a significant step in the processing of the data. The drift has been attempted modelled
numerous times based both on real data and laboratory measurements. To address this
drift error reference values from each harbour the ship stops in are utilized. A reference
database of gravity anomalies in danish harbours is maintained, so that whenever a ship
stops at a given harbour during a survey the difference between ship borne gravimeter
measured gravity anomaly and reference anomaly can be used to estimate instrument
drift. These coupled measurements are referred to as harbour ties. Harbour ties are made
in each harbour following the first, so that the measurement made from the CHEKAN-AM
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
6
==PAGE:14==
gravimeter can be compared to the previously recorded value and this difference used to
compensate for the instrument’s drift.
4
Related student work
This thesis is part of a series of other student projects aimed at improving the semi auto-
mated processing software for DTU space’s collected CHEKAN-AM marine gravity data.
In 2017 Tanya Sunding did a synthesis project which addressed several parts of the matlab
survey processing code. Part of this code was the automatic extraction of survey-lines
from the general navigation data ensuring that they have constant azimuth and speed.
Work was also done to empirically model the warm up error of the CHEKAN-AM gravime-
ter based both on laboratory and field data. With this warm up model it is possible to
estimated the time necessary for the warm up error to decrease below an acceptable
threshold, typically 0.1mgal. Examination of the gravimeter drift error was also done by
looking at changes to the accuracy of the measurements between harbour ties. Lastly
the existing plotting routines were improved. [11]
In June 2018 Anders Slotsbo and Christian Jørgensen carried out a project establishing
reference values for harbour ties for Hirshals and Thyborøn harbours. These harbour ties
were subsequently used to to develop a model for the non linear gravimeter drift using
the Matlab Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial (pchip) function. [12]
In December 2018 Rikke Uglebjerg carried out a project processing surveys from 2015 us-
ing both previously developed methods as well as new methods developed for the project.
The project in part focused on the removal of gross errors from the collected gravity read-
ings as wells as further automation of the software. As part of the project a survey was
processed in an Stand Alone (SA) manner with the software as it existed at the time. [13]
Also in December 2018 Camilla Ommen carried out a project focusing on the classification
of survey-lines from non dedicated surveys. The project also improved existing plotting
software to make it easier to compare an contrast relevant survey lines. As part of the
project a survey was processed in an SA manner with the software as it existed at the
time.[14]
In 2021 Gustav Jørgensen carried out a project concerned with the development of graph-
ical tools for survey analysis, as well as the testing of the use of extra survey cross
points.The graphical tools developed for the project are for visualisation of the survey
ships navigation and harbour stops allowing for easier modelling of the instrument drift.
Comparison of crossing lines from different surveys was tested as a method for correct-
ing misfitting lines, and for tackling errors such as instrument drift that are expected to be
independent across surveys. The cross survey analysis method proposed in the project
is complex and non automated relying on subjective judgements when correcting surveys
against one another. These attempts at cross survey analysis were positive and helped
with eliminating differences between surveys. It was also interesting to be able to com-
pare diffrent surveys, which was difficult before. The developed tool for extra survey cross
point analysis represent a first attempt at cross survey analysis and successfully serves
as a proof of concept. [15]
In 2022 Fransesco Catania developed and improved strategies for cross survey process-
ing building largely on Gustav Jørgensens project from the previous year. His project set
out to understands the limitations of SA models and how cross survey data could most
effectively overcome them. Additionally the project also explored how altimetric geoid
models could be used to aid in the processing of survey data. Lastly the project tested
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
7
==PAGE:15==
and applied its developed ideas on surveys number 2 and 4 thus demonstrating the de-
veloped methods effectiveness. It is these previously developed processing strategies
that are the starting point for this project. [16]
In 2022 Mira Backes worked on a project that explored the possibility of using Long Short
Term Memory machine learning models to process survey lines thereby fully automatiz-
ing the process. While this specific implementation didn’t yield useful results, the project
concluded that further attempts with different machine learning tools might be more suc-
cessful. [17]
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
8
==PAGE:16==
5
Method of Marine Gravimetry
As discussed in subsection 2.2 data has been collected by placing a CHEKAN-AM gravime-
ter on a vessel and making dense 1 Hz measurements of both the gravity and the vessels
RTK navigation data. The gravimeter is integrated with a 2 axis gyrostabalized platform
so that it is always aligned with the local plumb line.
The gravimeter collects gravity readings rCU(t) in instrument specific counter units (CU).
Gravimeter readings are transformed into gravity readings g(t) in mGal via a scale factor
α and a land measured reference gravity gref as well as a coupled ship measured refer-
ence gravity from the same location rCU,REF . This can be seen in an idealized version in
Equation 8 [18].
g(t) = gref + α · (rCU(t) −rCU,REF )
(8)
The reference gravity gref is obtained from relative land gravity readings in harbours where
the survey vessel has stayed. A record of gref values is maintained, but if no value is saved
for a given harbour, or the vessel is moored too far away from the location of previous
gref measurements in a harbour a new measurement is made. Once a land gravity value
has been established in a given harbour it can be tied to the marine gravimiter readings
rCU,REF in the same harbour. The coupling of a land gravity readings from a harbour with
survey vessel gravity sea readings is called a harbour tie. All harbours of a survey have
harbour ties, but in our case only one is chosen as a reference. Typically the last one, so
as to minimize the warm-up error from the instrument. The other harbour ties are used
for drift estimation as explained in section 4.
The output of the marine gravimeter are the (filtered) gravimeter readings erCU(t). The
gravimiter readings include both gravity readings rCU, but also numerous other acceler-
ations unrelated to gravity that has to be accounted for by the corrections budget corrg.
Their relationship an be seen in Equation 9
rCU ≈erCU(t) −corrg
(9)
corrg represents the total correction budget and contains all the many necessary correc-
tions and reductions that are applied to the gravimeter readings in order to bring them in
line with local gravity acceleration.
corrg is the sum of two parts. First is the standard modelled corrections budget corrmodelled,
which contains all predictable corrections to survey lines. Examples of predictable cor-
rections include the modeled instrument drift and the Eötvös correction. The standard
corrections budget is initially modeled, but is often incomplete or inaccurate. This incom-
plete corrections budget occurs due to unmodelled corrections which can be detected
in cross points where measurements of the same point will give slightly different results.
These unmodelled corrections corrunmod are the second part of the corrections budget
and are found by analysing the misfit between the readings of crossing survey-lines. [18]
By substituting Equation 9 into Equation 8 a more accurate version of the latter is had in
the form of Equation 10.
g(t) = gref + α · [{erCU(t) −corrg} −rCU,REF ]
(10)
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
9
==PAGE:17==
A crossing is defined by two readings of gravity in approximately the same position at
two different times as shown in ??. It follows from Equation 11 that any case where
g(t1) ̸= g(t2) the problem is with incomplete corrections.
g(t1) = g(t2) for P(t1) ≈P(t2)
(11)
Pseudo free air gravity anomalies ∆g(t)FA are preferred to pseudo absolute gravity anoma-
lies g(t) as they allow for direct comparison between different results from different sources
such as altimetry. It is the case that the RTK navigation only yields 2D data. The correc-
tions budget is therefor made to include the free air gravity correction (See Equation 6).
Equation 12 is defined for a given position and time.
∆gref ≡gref −γref
(12)
With γref described as follows:
γref = γ0,ref −δgF,ref
(13)
By using Equation 5 Equation 10 can be expanded into Equation 14 with γt being the
value of the normal gravity at the location of reading.
g(t) −γt = (gref −γref) + α · [{erCU(t) −corrg} −rCU,ref] + (γref −γt)
(14)
This can more compactly be rewritten as:
∆g(t) = ∆gref + α · [{erCU(t) −corr∆g} −rCU,REF ]
(15)
With corr∆g = corrg + (γref−γt)
α
and ∆g(t) = g(t) −γt
The reason for using pseudo free air gravity anomalies is that the free air gravity anoma-
lies are very nearly independent from height. Thinking back to the equation for free air
anomalies Equation 5 gobs is measured at a certain height H. Should a crossing occur at
H + ∆H then ∆g would be nearly identical because the gravity gradient ∂g
∂h and normal
gravity vertical gravity-gradient ∂γ
∂h are nearly identical, and thus can be neglected. See
Equation 16 [16].

−∂g
∂h + ∂γ
∂h

· ∆H ≈0
(16)
All this is done on a survey-line by survey-line basis, with a survey-line being defined as
a series of readings with constant navigation azimuth. Survey-lines are used as the basic
processing unit because constant azimuth allows for easy handling of the coriolis effect
via the Eötvös [19] correction.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
10
==PAGE:18==
5.1
Semi-Manual adjustment of the corrections budget
The modelled corrections budget is mostly automated with scripts existing that automati-
cally calculates the standard corrections. These are corrections based upon known mod-
els and physical phenomena such as the Etvös correction or the linear instrument drift
(Based on harbour ties).
These automated scripts cannot however model the entire corrections budget due to its
complexity and as such a partially manual last step exist where a user estimates the final
unmodelled parts of the corrections budget by comparing the gravity readings of the line
currently being processed with those of other nearby ”crossing lines”.
A given survey-line of index i with a sequence of pseudo free air gravity anomaly model
values with record indices of j ∆gi,j consist of a bias- and shape-part. The bias part of a
survey line describes its mean gravity anomaly values and is defined by Equation 17.
BIASi ≡mean(∆gi,j)
(17)
The shape part of a survey lines describes the deviation from the mean value and is
defined by Equation 18
SHAPEi,j ≡∆gi,j −BIASi
(18)
By combining Equation 17 and Equation 18 line model ∆gi,j can be described by Equa-
tion 19.
∆gi,j = BIASi + SHAPEi,j
(19)
The final estimation of the corrections budget is the correction of the line signals towards
more trusted lines. This correction is split into manually adjusting first the SHAPE via
∆SHAPE and then the BIAS via ∆BIAS of the survey-line. The total corrections budget
of a given survey line can be said to follow Equation 20.
corr∆g = corrmodelled + (∆SHAPE + ∆BIAS)
(20)
The SHAPE correction ∆SHAPE ensures that the survey-lines follow the crossing sur-
vey lines of type 1 and type 2 (As defined in subsection 5.2) in trend and shape accounting
for the unmodelled corrections. A typical shape correction could be the adjusting of the
beginning of a survey lines that has distorted measurements due to the ship just having
exited a turn and the momentum of that motion impacting measurements.
The second step is BIAS correction ∆BIAS which adds or subtracts a bias value to all
∆gFA values in a survey-line. This is either done to bring the current line into agreement
with surrounding crossing lines from within the current survey, or it is done to bring the
line into agreement with crossing lines from other previously processed surveys. Either
way this is the last correction carried out, as it depends on the SHAPE already having
been corrected.
The correction of survey-lines is only done in respect to already processed survey-lines,
which mean that order of survey-line processing is a deciding factor in result consistency.
The correction of a survey is based upon a chain of decisions starting with the first line
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
11
==PAGE:19==
chosen, and then the decision of each chosen line thereafter as well as choosing what
line or lines to correct towards.
5.2
Classification of cross points
In the data a crossing is defined as a set of one or more pairs of unique gravity readings
distributed across 2 types. A type 1 crossing is a single pair of measurement records
close to the point of intersection of two survey-lines. An example of a type 1 crossing can
be seen in Figure 2a. A type 2 crossing is multiple pairs of unique gravity measurements
from parallel survey-lines that travel along with a certain a set distance of up to 100 m
from each other. A type 2 crossing is depicted in Figure 2b. Type 2 crossings have a very
small deviation in gravity value between that is accounted for via a correction based on
altimetry based gravity data.
A type 1 crossing is not seen as more authoritative than a type 2 crossing due to the small
difference in gravity between closely running parallel survey-lines. Unless enough type
1 crossings are available to trace a line through, type 1 crossings can only be used to
correct survey-line BIAS. Type 2 crossings can be used to correct both SHAPE and
BIAS of survey-lines.
Survey cross points can either come from the same survey (intra survey) or from a differ-
ent survey conducted at a different time (extra survey). When correcting a survey there
will be more access to intra cross survey-lines than extra cross survey-lines. Extra survey
crossings are seen as somewhat more authoritative given that they are based on previ-
ously processed surveys and are part of ”The Cross Survey Reference Frame” which will
be explained in subsection 5.5.
(a) A type 1 (Intersection) crossing.
(b) A type 2 (Parallel) crossing.
Figure 2: Illustration of the 2 types of crossings.
5.3
Intra survey processing.
The comparison of intra survey readings at cross points makes it possible to account for
errors in the individual readings and their survey line and thereby improve overall accu-
racy. This is first done automatically as part of the corrections budget [16], but afterwards
intra survey comparison is the main tool for SHAPE correction of lines.
In practice the method for shape correction utilizes the MATLAB pchip function which is a
shape preserving interpolation function. The pchip function works by fitting a line model
to a dataset based on a finite number of support points which it then very closely follows
[20].
The pchip function is then used by selecting a series of pchip support points based on the
available crossing lines. A number of these crossing lines are decided to be more trust-
worthy than the rest. These lines are also in agreement with each other so as to maintain
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
12
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3: A survey line with current line (cline) support points marked as squares and
potential points marked as circels. Every 10th point is filled in for the sake of readability.
intra survey consitency. A number of support points are then selected at points where
the current line and chosen crossing lines intersect. These support points which initially
follows the SA processed version of the current line are then modified via ∆SHAPE and
∆BIAS, so as to bring them in line with the chosen crossing line. When the current line is
then reprocessed it will follow the newly changed support points and thereby the chosen
crossing line.
The reason for using a shape preserving function such as the pchip function rather than
something more prone to runaway interpolation like the spline function is that the large
frequency of gravity readings allows for closely fitted modelling of data. An example of
pchip support point selection can be seen in Figure 3.
To summarize the objective of using the pchip function when doing intra survey crossing
analysis is to correct the shape of the line currently being processed as closely to the
surrounding data as possible.
5.4
Extra survey processing
Where intra survey processing aims to improve the consistency of survey-lines within
a single survey, extra survey processing aim to improve surveys consitency with each
other. It is often the case that processed surveys will have BIAS or SHAPE differences
between them when compared at crossing points, and it is therefore desired to compare
survey-lines with available extra survey crossing lines during processing.
In previous software generations extra survey processing was a step carried out after all
intra survey processing had been carried out, which often made bringing other crossing
surveys into agreement difficult.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
13
==PAGE:21==
In the current software generation extra survey processing is carried out both before and
in parallel with intra survey processing.
Processing of survey lines can also be aided by the use of altimetry based ∆gFA values.
As discussed in subsubsection 2.1.1 it is possible to derive gravity anomalies from altime-
try. These altimetry derived gravity anomalies can aid in estimating both the shape and
the values of a survey-line, but decrease in quality closer to land and can some times be
misleading.
The objective of extra survey processing is that the processed surveys need to not only be
in agreement with themselves, but also be in agreement with each other, so that different
surveys can be used together for The Cross Survey Reference Frame.
5.5
The Cross Survey Reference Frame
It has previously been the case that each survey the Cross Survey Reference Frame
(CSRF) proceeded has been corrected in a SA manner. The survey-lines of a survey
corrected on its own can be brought into agreement with themselves, but experience
shows that different surveys processed in this manner are not necessarily in agreement
with each other. There is therefore a desire to process surveys in such a way that the
crossing surveys are consistent, this is the purpose of CSRF. [21]
CSRF is a theoretical framework made out of previously processed surveys that have
been brought into agreement with one another. The lines from these surveys are collected
and made accessible, so that they may be called on as extra survey crossings for any
future survey processing. Through the comparison of different surveys the processing of a
survey can be constrained, and a survey processed in this manner can then be introduced
to CSRF in turn.
CSRF is not a static entity. Whenever a new survey is processed that intersects with the
frame there is the possibility expected that it will be recomputed whenever a new survey
is added to the frame as a new survey will add new cross points and cross lines that can
improve the accuracy of previously computed surveys.
Over time CSRF is expected to become so accurate that it can be used for reference
values at sea. Currently when processing surveys reference points are only available in
harbours via. harbour ties. This is inconvenient as a surveying ships spends most of its
time at sea where its instrument is subject to drift caused by the varied conditions and
sea states. More frequent access to reference points is believed to further increase the
accuracy and precision of survey processing i Danish waters.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
14
==PAGE:22==
6
This project
This project intended to improve upon the gravimetry processing software package used
to process the semi automated gravity surveys described in subsection 2.2.
This project has multiple points of focus that all relate to eliminating the misfits in cross-
ings which corresponds to estimating the unmodelled corrections. It was agreed that the
project supervisor Gabriel Strykowski would extract ”sandboxes” of code covering distinct
parts of the software package. These ”sandboxes” could then be modified without me,
as the project author, having to understand the entirety of the data pipeline for survey
processing.
While the software ”sandboxes” were developed within an agreed upon framework, the
project tended to deviate from the initial project description. This was done with the con-
sent of both supervisor and project author based upon experience gathered during the
development of the project. For example, this project does not contribute any new sur-
veys to CSRF due to the new developed graphical tools showing that there was more to
be gained by correcting the previously computed survey 15 that was processed as well
as was possible with the current software. It was decided that reinterpreting survey 15
with the new software was of more value and this was focused on instead.
The development of the software for this project was in large part a cooperative process
with my supervisor. As my supervisor is the primary author and end user of the new
software developed in this project, he has a strong interest in the end product. He was
therefore helpful throughout the project in preparing software ”sandboxes” and advising
with regards to what suggested improvements would be best for the end user.
The previous projects working with this software package as well as users experience with
the software has generated certain experiences that were used as the setting off point for
this project. The software used in this project was in part the result of previous student
projects and this project can be seen as a contribution to and modification of previous
student contributions.
4 generic software requirements were in focus during the software development.
1. Reliability of interpretation
2. Automatization of work
3. Flexibility of software
4. Speed of software
One or more of these 4 requirements touch each separate software contribution made
during this project as detailed in the overview below.
6.1
Ordering
One of the first experiences from previous projects was that the current ordering of survey-
lines opens surveys up to propagating errors resulting in wrongly corrected lines easily
corrupting other lines whose correction they should support. This was specifically seen in
results which relied on the altimetry model solutions rather than solutions from measured
data. Altimetry based solutions often propagate their reliance on the external models
guiding survey solutions away from measured data against the intention of users. It was
therefore important for the reliability of the software to look at the line ordering.
6.2
Graphical tools
Given the challenges suspected with the survey-line ordering in current software, the first
step of this project was the development of expanded graphical tools. These tools help
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
15
==PAGE:23==
with taking informed decisions when correcting lines, and with verifying the experiences
that motivate this project. Several different figures were created for previous solutions,
which confirmed that there were challenges with the current survey-line processing order
as well as problems with at the time current solutions over relying on altimetry models.
The creation of these tools has made the software more reliable as users now have more
tools for verifying their solutions.
6.3
Processing Strategy
The confirmation of experiences via the new figures motivated the development of a new
survey-line processing strategy. This strategy was together with the new line ordering
method designed to maximize the availability of solved crossing lines available for refer-
ence when processing a given survey-line.
The strategy is built around processing surveys HSA per HSA (refer to subsection 2.2) ac-
cording to the insight from the new line ordering method. Firstly a SA processing solution
is generated for all lines within a survey. Then for a HSA a survey-line SA solution that
the user is confident in is selected, and the HSA is then reprocessed and all other lines
aligned towards the selected line. This is done so as to maximize internal consistency.
Additionally key figures for each survey line is now saved as png figures for reference, so
that users doesn’t have to reprocess a survey-line to view it’s figures. The new process-
ing strategy seeks to once again improve the reliability of results, by tying results more
closely to CSRF and by processing them in units of HSAs. The new strategy also aids in
automatisation via it’s figure saving.
6.4
Processing Speed
After these new processing strategies were implemented, the new challenge was a bot-
tleneck in processing speed. Whenever a survey-line was being processed it took around
a minute for each manual change to be viewed in the figures due to inefficient code. Be-
cause many changes were necessary to manually fine tune a survey-line this made the
experience of working with the software clunky and unintuitive.
These problems were solved by optimizing the code to minimize obvious inefficiencies
such as nested for-loops, but primarily the speed up comes from the introduction of a
temporary work file for each survey-line that contains all intermediate processing steps,
so they do not need to be recalculated each time a survey-line is processed or viewed.
These work files also greatly aids in the ability of users to return to problematic survey-lines
and reconsider them as all intermediate steps are saved, and it is no longer necessary to
process the line from scratch each time.
6.5
Semi-automation of Processing
Lastly it was determined that even with the improvements to processing speed the manual
fine tuning of survey-line resulted in a tight bottleneck with regards to survey processing.
Therefore a semi automated fine tuning system was introduced based upon processing
the survey HSA per HSA. Each HSA is iteratively processed with manual review of the
results after each itteration. Unsatisfactory lines are reprocessed while satisfactory lines
are kept as crossing lines for the unsatisfactory line to correct themselves towards. This
change in processing strategy partially automates what used to be a time consuming
bottleneck in the processing of surveys. It also adds flexibility to the software allowing
users to prioritize different lines when correcting surveys and reprocess lines that become
troublesome once more crossings are revealed.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
16
==PAGE:24==
6.6
Summary
To summarise. This project has sought to improve and refine upon the work done with
regards to the processing software and processing strategy based upon the experiences
of previous projects in particular Gustav Jørgensen 2021 [15] and Fransesco Catania
2022 [16]. The software and the experiences from these projects can be considered the
starting point of this project. There are 5 areas that have been focused on during this
project.
1. Line ordering
2. Graphical tools
3. Survey line processing strategy
4. Processing speed.
5. Automation of finding the unmodelled errors
The improvements made to these areas as well as the considerations behind the improve-
ment will be covered in the following sections.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
17
==PAGE:25==
7
Processing order of survey-lines
In the current software for the processing of survey-lines the processing order is only
based upon survey-line azimuth classes, with type 1 and type 2 survey-lines within HSAs
being processed first followed by type 3 and 4 running orthogonal to HSAs and lastly type
5 lines connecting HSA.
This somewhat arbitrary ordering introduces potential errors into the processing of the
lines as intra survey processing relies upon the found solutions of previously corrected
lines within a survey. It’s therefore a risk that a line may be processed incorrectly based
on ambiguous data, instrument warm-up error or other factors and introduce a faulty line
interpretation. A faulty line interpretation may be relied upon when processing later lines
thus producing a cascading error effect within the solution of a survey. This was some-
what the case within survey 15 where reliance on altimetry for ∆gFA data caused early
processed lines to deviate from measured data and carry this misinterpetation forward
through subsequent interpretation of the survey. See subsection 8.1 where it’s discussed
how the new graphical tools helps show this problem.
The current method of line ordering was based on ”chains” of connection where a starting
line chosen manually would be corrected with no other lines available to correct it against.
One of this lines crossing lines was then selected and corrected against the first line and
one of the crossing lines to the now current line was selected in turn. This ”chain” of lines
was followed until no uncorrected crossing line could be selected, and a new chain was
instead started continuing to repeat this process until all lines had been corrected. These
chains first filled out azimuth type 1 and 2 survey-lines, then type 3 and 4 and lastly the
type 5 lines which being outside HSAs rarely has any crossings.
7.1
New method of line ordering
The new line ordering method has 2 objectives behind its design. The first is to ensure
that the corrected survey will be mostly in agreement with the CSRF and can be attached
to it without much difficulty and the second is to ensure that the line ordering gives good
internal survey consistency.
The first change with the new line ordering method work on a HSA per HSA basis rather
than going by azmuth classes. The reason for this change is that it maximises available
crossings when computing a survey line as the majority of survey-lines and crossings
thereof are contained within hydrographic survey ares (Refer to Figure 1).
The new ordering method starts with processing line with extra survey crossings based
on the assumption that the previously processed surveys are accurate and can safely be
used for correcting the starting line. This also aids in the objective of ensuring the even-
tual finished surveys will be more in line with the CSRF. The survey-line with more extra
survey crossing points are processed first continuing until no more lines with extra survey
crossings are available. This means that type 2 extra survey crossings are processed first
as they have the most data points.
Hereafter the rest of the lines in the HSA are processed in sequential order of most cross-
ings with currently processed lines. In cases where no crossings with processed lines can
be found the latest measured line is used so as to account for possible warm up error. If
this results in lines with crossings now being available then they are processed.
After all lines in the first HSA have been processed, the next line and its HSA is cho-
sen based on having the most extra survey crossings and the process repeats. After all
survey-lines within HSAs have been processed the left over lines are processed in order
of latest measurement to once again minimize warmup error.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4: Example of problem with CSRF. Green lines represent extra-survey crossing
lines. The red line is the SA solution of survey-line 23 of survey 15
. The red line cannot be sensibly modified to fit within CSRF.
7.2
Discussion of line ordering
As mentioned it was previously the case that suvey-lines were computed in connected
chains. The method was judged unreliable, and as such one of the main goals of this
project was to systematize line ordering to ensure greater consistency in results.
Of the 2 primary changes to the line ordering method the first change of computing lines
in batches of being in the same HSA can be said to have been implemented successfully.
The logic behind the change has proven sound throughout use of the new software. The
HSA separation has had the additional positive effect of segregating the processing of a
survey into separate chunks of work, as there are no survey-lines that cross two HSAs
at the same time. Each HSA constitutes one chunk of work that can be modified without
the changes on lines belonging to one HSA affecting any other. This has been helpful for
overview of surveys when working on them and makes working on a survey more natural
as there are distinct groups of lines rather than several 100’s all interconnected.
The second primary change of the line ordering method has only been semi success-
ful. While I believe in the idea of starting the processing of surveys with lines that touch
CSRF the current state of CSRF makes using this method challenging. As can be seen in
Figure 4 there are survey-lines that cannot meaningfully be brought into agreement with
CSRF due to CSRF not being internally consistent. For this reason extra survey crossings
are not actually used in the code to correct the SHAPE of lines, but are only left in the
figures for reference and for later BIAS fine tuning. While this compromises the core idea
of the new line ordering method of relying as much as possible on the CSRF the frame
work of ordering lines in the order of most available data is still implemented and appears
to deliver sound results after having been tested on survey 15.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
19
==PAGE:27==
8
Graphical Tools
Part of the work for this project was the development of new graphical tools for interpreting
survey results.
In this project, the graphical tools for estimating the ∆SHAPE and the ∆BIAS correc-
tions of survey-lines have been in focus. These estimations are described in subsec-
tion 5.1, and was at the beginning of this project in the current software a somewhat
manual process where a line currently being processed was compared to surrounding
post processed crossing lines and external altimetry based data.
The purpose of the ideal graphical tools is to present as much information about the cross-
ing lines as possible while simultaneously keeping the figure succinct and readable.
Graphical tools for detail correcting survey results as they exist in the current software, and
are what was used for processing previously. An example of how the previous software
presented data can be seen in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Depiction of the solution for line 5 in project 15 with the old software
In Figure 5 the current line is depicted 3 times. Firstly it is depicted as original data plus
standard corrections (”in statu nascendi”) as the striped grey line, secondly it is depicted
as it appears after SA processing as the thin blue line (SA means the solution is processed
without reference to crossing lines) and lastly the thick blue line indicates the best estimate
of the current line according to the software and manual review as it existed at the time.
The crossing lines are each twice depicted in pink. The thin pink lines are SA processed
crossing parallel survey-lines while the corrected parallel lines are depicted in a hard to
distinguish thicker pink. Only lines which have completed their processing prior to the
current line are shown as reference on the figure. It is ambiguous whether or not additional
crossing lines are available.
Lastly external pseudo free air gravity anomalies derived from DTU altimetry models are
plotted in the background as thin grey lines of varying types.
It can be seen that with the previous graphical tools survey line 5 was interpreted as
agreeing more with the altimetry models than the crossing lines as indicated by the lines
plotted in pink. This might also be supported by the in ”statu nascendi” plotted current line
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
20
==PAGE:28==
following them in trend for the most part except for an anomalous bump near the start of
the figure.
As can be understood form the difficult interpretation of Figure 5 the old graphical tool
were somewhat ambiguous and incomplete. The use of varying thickness and similar
colors made it difficult to interpret the results accurately, and made it difficult to identify
whether there was a certain problem with a given line or group of lines.
It can be understood that there is motivation for updating the graphical tools used for fine
tuning survey results due to the ambiguity of Figure 5. This was done in this project with
a focus on splitting the previous solitary figure into multiple figures and communicating as
much information as possible through them.
4 separate figures are created that can be consulted during processing.
Each one of the figures have general improvements to ease of interpetation that are com-
mon amongst all of them. Firstly the introduction of an updated legend allows users to
identify anomalous lines and carry out processing without accidentally including outliers.
To further this goal colors have been added to the lines so they can be more easily dis-
tinguished from one another. Secondly all crossing lines are now either dashed or solid
depending on if they go against the most common direction making them a type 2 cross-
ing line or follows the most common direction making them a type 1 crossing line. This
distinction is helpful to include as there are certain biases to type 1 or 2 lines such as in
the beginning of a survey-line where a signal from the survey ships turn can some time
impact the readings. Having a line type 1 or 2 distinction is helpful in this case as the sig-
nal from exiting a turn will show up intermittently in type 1 and 2 lines. Lastly the figures
now also show extra survey crossings.
Figure 6: Depiction of the 1st type of figure for line 13 of survey 15
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
21
==PAGE:29==
The 1st of the 4 new figures shows the ”in statu nascendi” data of each crossing line to
the current line. This figure doesn’t only show the parts of lines that are directly parallel
with the current line, but also shows an ”extended data view” of how the crossing line
continue to develop across their full length. The parts of the type 2 crossing lines that are
directly parallel (within a 100 m) are slightly thicker than the extended parts of the lines,
additionally vertical black lines mark out the extent of the current line. Furthermore the
current solution found in previous projects based on SA solution is shown alongside the
new standalone solution and the altimetry models, an example of the 1st type of figure
can be seen in Figure 6. It can be seen in this figure that the current interpretation (seen
as the black dashed line) cannot be BIAS adjusted to fit the extra survey crossing points
and that it furthermore disagrees with all the ”in statu nascendi” gravity readings, this is
evidence in favour of the hypothesis that the current interpretation of survey results is
flawed.
Figure 7: Depiction of the 2nd type of figure for line 13 of survey 15
The 2nd of the 4 new figures show the pchip points of the crossing lines as well as both the
SA solution and the SHAPE and BIAS corrected solution. The figure is mostly similar
to the previous with regards to showing extended data, but focuses on showing the pchip
points that guides the processed solution of the line. Depicted as squares are the pchip
points which guides the current line, with every 10th point being filled in. Each crossing
lines has the pchip points guiding it depicted as circles. The purpose of this type of figure
is to grant insight into the softwares decision making process when the semi-automated
fine tuning process produces a strange result. An example of this type of figure can be
seen in Figure 7.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 8: Depiction of the 3rd type of figure for line 13 of survey 15
The 3rd of the 4 new figures again has the extended data view as its basis, but this time
focuses on showing the SHAPE and BIAS corrected solution in context. The purpose
of this figure is to indicate to the user wheter or not the fine tuned solution deviates signif-
ficantly from ”in statu nascendi” data in such a way it casts doubt upon the solution. An
example of this type of figure can be seen in Figure 8
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 9: Depiction of the 4th type of figure for line 13 of survey 15
The 4th and final of the figures shows the SHAPE and BIAS corrected solution of the
current line as well as the SHAPE and BIAS corrected solutions of all the crossing lines
that were previously processed. This type of figure is the final product of the software and
shows only the parts of crossing lines that are strictly parallel with the current line. The
purpose of this type of figure is to indicate to the user if the processing of the survey yields
internal consistency between the solutions to survey-lines. There is a warning attached
to this type of figure as it will sometimes be misleading if used during processing. On this
figure the SHAPE and BIAS corrections have been added to the crossing lines, but if a
line has yet to be processed these corrections will be null, meaning that the SA solution
is plotted instead which can be misleading. To solve this problem as separate script has
been created which recreates and saves this type of figure for a group of selected lines
that can be run after the fine tuning of a hydrogrpahic survey area is complete. An example
of this type of figure can be seen in Figure 9
8.1
Discussion of updated graphical tools
The new graphical tools fulfill their objective of increasing clarity when processing sur-
veys excellently. Part of the challenge with the current software was the ambiguity of line
SHAPE when viewing figures with current software. Thinking back to Figure 5 it can be
remade with the new graphical tools as seen in Figure 10. It can be seen that current solu-
tion depicted via the dashed black line does not fit in shape or trajectory with the extended
data view of the multiple crossing lines.
The new figures are also helpful in line selection when correcting lines, as an example
see Figure 11. Here Figure 11a shows that the azimuth type 1 crossing lines are impacted
by the ship coming out of a swing giving the distinctive steep beginning of the line. The
user therefore knows to rely on azimuth line type 2 crossing lines when correcting re-
sulting in figure Figure 11b. This is an example of the value of the generic visual clarity
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 10: Extended data view for line 5 in project 15 with the current software
(a) Figure showing the extended data view for
line 98.
(b) Figure showing the solved line 98
Figure 11: Map showing the dense patches of measurements taken during hydrographic
surveys (Hydrographis syrvey areas). These patches are ideally suited for collecting grav-
ity anomaly data as the spatially close measurements can be used to verify one another.
improvements.
All in all the new graphical tools serve their function of removing ambiguity for the user
and granting a greater data overview than is available in current software. The extended
data view provided by the new graphical tools ensures the reliability of found results.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 12: Diagram of the old file structure system.
9
Survey line processing strategy
This project deals with the estimation of non standard unmodelled parts of the correc-
tions budget. It was the case with current versions of this software that this was a time
consuming and difficult semi-manual process, that was often subject to errors. When cor-
recting a survey-line the current software computed its final estimate directly from survey
data each time meaning that no intermediate steps were saved and lines had to be repro-
cessed constantly, a brief diagram of this can be seen in Figure 12. The old method was
not only slow, but also difficult to work with as returning to correct previously processed
survey lines wasn’t easy. The new survey processing strategy is a 3 step process.
Step 1 is to pre-process SA solutions defined by their SHAPE and BIAS for each survey-
line. SHAPESA and BIASSA are then saved in line specific ”wrk” files alongside other
information relevant for each survey-line which will be discussed in detail in section 10.
Step 2 and 3 are done together and go HSA by HSA.
For Step 2 the user selects a SA survey-line solution from the HSA currently being worked
on which they are most confident in. This will typically be a solution which can be seen as
having good connection with CSRF, being made up of a long stretch of records, having
many crossing lines and having no visible anomalies in the original data. This will typically
be one of the early lines of the line ordering for the given HSA.
This most valued SA solution is now added to a list of ”target lines” within the software
which contains the line number of all line solution which the user is confident in. The
HSA is now processed with the ”target line” as input and one by one the survey-lines are
corrected towards the ”target line”. Once a survey-line has been corrected its number is
added to the ”target lines” meaning that lines to be processed later have more targets to
correct towards. The corrections towards the ”target lines” are saved as ∆SHAPE and
∆BIAS. Theses are the difference between the corrected solution and the SA solution
according to Equation 21, and they too are saved in the ”wrk” file for the current line.
SHAPE = SHAPESA + ∆SHAPE , BIAS = BIASSA + ∆BIAS
(21)
The reason for keeping ∆SHAPE, ∆BIAS and SHAPESA, BIASSA separate is that
this makes returning to previously processed lines much easier as maintaining the SA
solution as a reasonable base means lines can be reprocessed over an over again until
a satisfactory solution has been found.
The initial processing of a HSA is carried out without supervision and the results saved in
the intermediate ”wrk” files as well as in png figures of type 4 figures (see Figure 9).
Step 3 now involves looking through the saved type 4 png figures and selecting any out-
liers that appear to have been computed badly. This can for example happen in cases
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 13: Diagram of the new file structure system. The introduction of the temporary
saves for survey lines greatly speeds up the processing time of surveys as all pre pro-
cessing and other standerdized calculations only need to be carried out once per survey
line. Furthermore this new file sytems makes reviewing the quality of surveys much easier
as surveys can easily be reprocessed upon the introduction of new future crossing survey
data.
were ∆gFA measurements were taken shortly after the survey ship experienced a turn or
in cases were the processing of lines have lead to clusters of solutions in disagreement
with one another. Having looked through the outliers a number of lines are selected for
re-adjustment and they are removed from the list of ”target lines” and processed in the
order of they were input into the system. They are processed according to the same cri-
teria and with the same software as they first were in step 2, but now ideally with a larger
group of manually curated crossing lines.
As a final step. Once the entire survey has been processed to satisfaction the complete
line descriptions defined by Equation 21 are pushed and overwrites the SA solutions. Now
when processing future surveys that has crossing lines from the processed survey the
crossing lines will show up in their most complete form. Should it be desirable to return to
the processed survey at a later day to revise based on for example a new crossing survey
the lines would have the completed SHAPE and BIAS as bases replacing the old SA
base. The use of ”wrk” files as temporary saves is illustrated in Figure 13, where the
central idea of saving intermediate calculations for easy revisiting before final overwrite
of results is illustrated.
9.1
Discussion of new survey line processing strategy
The new processing strategy has several advantages when compared to the current strat-
egy. The key change is the updated file structure which has made revisiting previously
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
27
==PAGE:35==
processed lines easier.
The system of correcting towards ”target lines” is a standardization of a previously informal
system. In the current software users adjusted the individual pchip support points toward
some perceived best fit solution. This adjustment often had to be carried out multiple
times as the results of modifcations weren’t obvious to users of the software.
The new system of saving figures though a minor change, also improves the new software.
In current software users has to awkwardly reprocess lines whenever they desire to view
them. This new system eliminates that step and leaves an easy to use visual record of
latest interpretation of a given survey-line.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 14: Example of ”wrk” file
10
Speed up of processing
It was noticed during this thesis that processing time of a single survey-line was so high
that it limited the amount of work that could be done on a survey in a single day. There
was therefore a desire to speed up the processing time for surveys. This was done mainly
via 2 strategies.
Firstly there was the already mentioned introduction of ”wrk” files containing intermediate
calculations for each survey-line, and secondly a portion of the old software was rewritten,
so as to have fewer computational inefficiencies like unnecessary if statements in for
loops, and by removing double computation of variables across scripts.
The introduction of intermediate ”wrk” files serves the purpose of both increasing process-
ing speed and making reprocessing survey-lines easier as mentioned in section 9. The
file system more so than other parts of this project was developed with close collabora-
tion from my supervisor Gabriel Strykowski. He had the overview of how crossings were
stored in current software and his insight motivated and structured the development of
this new system. In the new software each survey-line will have a ”wrk” file created and
assigned to it during the initial step 1 SA processing of the survey.
This file will include information about the line itself in the form of the SHAPE and BIAS of
the SA solution as well as current ∆SHAPE and ∆BIAS. The file also carries information
about all intra and extra survey crossings such that the survey-line and all its crossings
can be plotted without having to juggle multiple ”wrk” files. The file also carries information
about line classes of it self and crossing lines as well as its HSA. An example of the content
of a ”wrk” file can be seen in Figure 14
The ”wrk” files are created during the inital SA processing of surveys. All processing steps
involved in ”wrk” file creation has been gathered in a single script for ease of overview and
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
29
==PAGE:37==
to prevent the same calculations being done multiple times. It was previously the case
with the current software that each time a figure was plotted all components of the figure
were processed nearly from scratch. This resulted in it taking around 1 minute to produce
a single figure for a single line. With the updated software it takes roughly 1 second to
plot all figure mentioned in section 8.
10.1
Discussion of speed up of processing
The speed up of the processing software is difficult to quantify as there have been both im-
provements made to software, but also automation of previously manual time consuming
processing steps.
It is however judged that there has been important improvements to processing speed.
The elimination of significant waiting times when reviewing figures has made the process
of manual review of figures carried out as the third step of the processing as described in
section 9
The rewriting of software to minimize double calculations of variables is also a useful
improvement to the software. This is currently the case because it decreases processing
time, but it is also useful as it makes future modification of the software much easier given
that code only has to be modified in a single script rather than in each script where the
variable is called upon.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
30
==PAGE:38==
11
Semi-automation of estimation of unmodelled corrections
of survey-lines
In the current software the fine tuning of surveys is carried out via manual survey-line by
survey-line review by the user. The user must for each survey line compare it against at
the time corrected crossing lines. This represents a major bottleneck in the processing of
surveys as this is a difficult and time consuming process. For each survey-line the user
manually selected a number of pchip support points and adjusted the towards another
line judged truth full (see subsection 5.3 for pchip explanation). This manual selection and
adjustment of pchip support points often had to be repeated multiple times per survey-
line, due to user guesses at support point changes weren’t always ideal. Therefore it was
often required to process the same survey-line multiple times so as to minimize the misfit
with crossing lines. Having this finicky manual work attached to each survey-line was a
major time consuming processing bottleneck.
The new method seeks to semi-automaize the manual review of each individual survey
line. The objective with the new semi-automated software is to drastically cut down on
the time it takes to process a survey and reduce the required amount of decision making
necessary to process a survey.
This new software can be said to cover step 2 and step 3 of the new processing strategy
as mentioned in section 9. The idea behind the new software is that for a HSA a starting
line is selected as being more truthful and all other lines in that same area are then cor-
rected towards the chosen line. Once a line has been corrected in this manner it is judged
truthful in turn and lines yet to be corrected are corrected towards all processed lines.
After the software has covered an entire HSA, a manual review of the results are carried
out and any results deemed strange or imprecise are marked to be reprocessed. These
lines to be reprocessed are removed from the list of corrected lines and are corrected
towards all the lines whose correction was accepted. The whole process is depicted in
Figure 15
The way a survey-line is corrected towards another survey-line is explained by Figure 16.
The figure in question depicts survey-line 61 of survey 15 and how the software considers
corrections. Firstly pchip support points are added for all the crossing lines depicted in
green, then support points are added with the average BIAS of the crossing lines, but for
the SHAPE of the SA solutions. If there is only a small gap in records (200<) between 2
crossing lines support points aren’t added.
Special constraints are also added such as always placing a support point in the first
and last record of the survey-line. This is done due to the pchip function being prone to
develop wildly unless constrained in beginning and end of data.
Only type 2 crossing lines are used for correcting the current line as the software is in-
tended to focus on estimating ∆SHAPE. ∆BIAS is more precisely estimated later via
already existing BIAS fine tuning software.
11.1
Discussion of semi-automation
The new semi-automated software for estimating the unmodelled parts of the corrections
budget has several advantages when compared with current software. Chief amongst
these is the desired objective of automatisation drastically decreasing time spent pro-
cessing surveys. Anecdotically it can be said that I as a user of current software spent
between 20-30 minutes per line adjusting pchip support points.
The process of estimating the unmodelled corrections of survey-lines is only semi-automated
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 15: Depiction of the automated fine tuning
as previous student work indicates that full automation of this process is difficult (As cov-
ered in section 4 [17]).
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 16: Example figure showing the thought process behind the semi automated cor-
rections estimation. The SA solution is depicted in red, and each green line is a corrected
crossing line. Pchip points depicted as circels are placed every 100 records within the
corrected crossing lines. Afterwards the mean difference between crossing lines and cur-
rent line is used to place bias shifted pchip points every 100 records following the SA
solution. The pchip function is now run using the depicted points as input and yielding the
line model depicted by the dotted blue line.
The process of manually reviewing the automated line corrections is therefore seen as
necessary. It is still however judged better than reviving and correcting individual survey-
lines, as this was a lengthy and decision heavy process.
The new semi automated method minimizes the decisions a user has to make with re-
gards to each line simply accepting or rejecting the automated solution. This accept reject
system is in theory less precise than manually adjusting each survey-line, but it has the
benefit of generating more consistent results as the judgements of each user is less im-
pactfull.
There are cases where the semi automated processing struggles. These are for example
cases where the beginning of the current line or crossing lines is impacted by the survey
vessel exiting a turn. In these cases carefull curation of which lines impacted by a given
turn are ”target lines” during step 3 reprocessing is important. In these limited cases the
current software system of manual line review may be superior.
If less manual review and reprocessing of semi-automated results is desired, future users
of the software could experiment with greater curation of the data. Future users may for
example change the definition of a survey-line to not simply follow the constant azimuth of
the paired navigation data. They could experiment with implementing a time buffer from
constant azimuth, ∆gFA smoothness requirements or some other third thing which has
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
33
==PAGE:41==
the purpose of ”cutting” the difficult bits of survey-lines from the data set.
This would slightly reduce the amount of data available per survey in exchange for greater
amortisation of survey processing.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
34
==PAGE:42==
12
Preliminary statistics of survey consistency
As part of this project survey 15 was reprocessed with the new software tools described
in the above sections. Due to work on the software continuing until the end of June only a
preliminary solution to the survey is available. This preliminary solution has been subject
to iterative BIAS fine tuning, and statistics has been made of the results as will be covered
in this section. Both the statistics software and the iterative BIAS fine tuning software
was already part of the software package [16].
The statistics cover the Mean deviation between results, the Standard Deviation be-
tween results, the Root Mean Squares of the residuals, and the Maximum and Minimum
deviation between crossings. Additionally the amount of records for each type of crossing
is indicated with NDAT.
12.1
Intra survey statistics
The preliminary intra survey statistics can be seen in Figure 17. It can be seen that while
the type 1 crossing statistics improved the type 2 crossing statistics ever so slightly wors-
ened. The degradation of type 2 crossing results are expected due the iterative BIAS fine
tuning having been carried out and it being a process that that improves type 1 crossing
statistics at the expense of type 2 crossing statistics there is therefore an expectation that
without BIAS fine tuning the software modifications introduced in this project would have
yielded improvements to type 2 crossing intra survey statistics [22].
It should also be noted that the initial SA statistics for type 2 crossings are quite good and
for example the standard deviation for type 2 crossings of the solved survey only worsens
with 0.4mGal.
12.2
Extra survey statistics
The crossover statistics with external surveys are a mixed bag with the crossing statistics
for survey 1 greatly improving and the statistics for survey 14 either staying the same or
worsening.
The positive improvements to crossings with survey 1 seen in Figure 18 can in part be
contributed to the low number of crossing records (only 9) and in part to the great spread
of these as can be seen in the large maximum and minimum values.
The crossings with survey Figure 19 on the other hand slightly worsened. While there
was a reduction in mean deviation for type 1 crossings with survey 14 it worsened slightly
on other statistical measures.
This worsening of results for extra survey crossings is somewhat expected as part of the
realisation from this project has been that the CSRF needs to be improved upon, and the
new software isn’t using extra survey crossings.
Figure 17: Intra survey statistics in mGal
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
35
==PAGE:43==
A method for future users to improve upon cross survey statistics could be to implement a
system of two sided corrections. Currently all corrections carried out are one sided correc-
tions where the current line of the current survey being worked on are shifted towards the
external survey. Given that the extra survey crossing represents new data for survey-lines
future users can explore the possibility of implementing a system of 2 sided corrections
where lines from both surveys are corrected towards each other simultaneously.
Figure 18: Extra survey statistics with project 1 in mGal
Figure 19: Extra survey statistics with project 14 in mGal
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
36
==PAGE:44==
13
Conclusion
As a result of work done this project several conclusions can be drawn. Firstly it can
be concluded that the processing of unmodelled survey-line corrections in large part can
be automated to greatly speed up the process. Manual review of the results from the
automated software is however necessary for good results as the software for alignment
of survey lines is vulnerable to bad input data.
Future work to challenge this problem could potentially be the introduction of stricter data
quality requirements. Changes to what constitutes a survey-line could be made, so that
unwanted signals in the gravity data like for example turns, are cut off from input data to
the software.
The new automation of previously manual processes combined with the efforts to reduce
software processing time can be said to have partially removed the unmodelled survey-
line corrections bottleneck.
The new graphical tools developed as part of this project has helped to improve survey
result reliability as it makes it easier to chose which lines to rely on when processing a
given survey-line. The new graphical tools also helps identify the weakness in the altimetry
based ∆gFA data. It can be seen that while the altimetry based data often more or less
agrees with survey-lines in BIAS there are cases where the extended data view shows
that it cannot be relied upon for SHAPE correction.
The results from the automated processing are for the most part decent, but it has become
apparent that the desired strategy of aligning results early to CSRF is challenged by the
fact that CSRF has somewhat poor internal consistency. There are instances where this
survey cannot meaningfully bring itself into alignment with CSRF at one point without
being unable to fit together with CSRF at a different point. It is therefore important to rec-
ognize that CSRF is not inviolable and ought to be subject to change with the introduction
of new data.
Future work on this software could aim to establish an easy way to check the ”quality”
of individual extra survey crossings to help chose between them when necessary. Addi-
tionally implementing a system of 2 sided corrections might make fitting new surveys into
CSRF easier. Another way to solve this problem could be some internal system that could
be made to flag problematic extra survey crossings, so that they can be easily revisited.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
37
==PAGE:45==
References
[1]
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. What is geodesy? 2021. URL:
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/geodesy.html.
[2]
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. History of Geodesy. 2021. URL:
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/education/tutorial_geodesy/geo02_hist.html.
[3]
Wolfgang Torge and Jürgen Müller. Geodesy. 4th ed. De Gruyter, 2012.
[4]
E. S. Ince et al. International Centre for Global Earth Models. URL: http://icgem.gfz-
potsdam.de/home.
[5]
Spherical Harmonics. URL: https://brilliant.org/wiki/spherical-harmonics/.
[6]
Wolfgang Torge. Gravimetry. 3rd ed. De Gruyter, 1989.
[7]
Bernhard Hofmann - Wellenhof and Helmut Moritz. Physical Geodesy. 2nd ed.
Springer, 1967.
[8]
Baltic Sea Hydrographic Comission. URL: https://iho.int/en/baltic-sea-hc.
[9]
Per Knudsen and Ole B. Andersen. “Improved Recovery of the Global Marine Grav-
ity Field from the GEOSAT and the ERS-1 Geodetic Mission Altimetry”. In: Grav-
ity, Geoid and Marine Geodesy. Ed. by Jiro Segawa, Hiromi Fujimoto, and Shuhei
Okubo. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1997, pp. 429–436. ISBN: 978-3-662-03482-8.
[10]
Daocheng Yu et al. “Gravity recovery from SWOT altimetry using geoid height and
geoid gradient”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 265 (2021), p. 112650. ISSN:
0034-4257. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2021.112650. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0034425721003709.
[11]
Tanya Pheiffer Sunding. Selected Topics from Marine Gravimetry. 2017.
[12]
Anders Slotsbo and Christian Jørgensen. Harbour gravity ties in selected Danish
Harbours. 2018.
[13]
Rikke Uglebjerg. Automatic marine gravity surveys in Denmark; Processing of 2015
gravity surveys. 2018.
[14]
Camilla Lind Ommen. Automatic marine gravity survey in Denmark; Extracting grav-
ity data in hydrographic survey areas. 2018.
[15]
Gustav Alexander Jørgensen. Automated Marine Gravity Surveys: Graphical- and
Cross-Survey Tools. 2021.
[16]
Francesco Catania. Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters: Cross-
Survey Processing Strategies. 2022.
[17]
Mira Backes. Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters: Machine Learn-
ing and Automated Processing of Survey Lines. 2022.
[18]
Gabriel Strykowski. Cross Survey Modelling in Marine Gravimetry: selected topics.
Mar. 2023.
[19]
Eötvös effect Wikipedia article. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E%5C%C3%
5C%B6tv%5C%C3%5C%B6s_effect.
[20]
Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial (PCHIP). URL: https://se.mathworks.
com/help/matlab/ref/pchip.html.
[21]
Gabriel Strykowski. Conversation with my supervisor 24th of April. 2023.
[22]
Gabriel Strykowski. Conversation with my supervisor 1st of July. 2023.
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
38
==PAGE:46==
Automated Marine Gravity Surveys in Danish Waters
I
==PAGE:47==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.space.dtu.dk
