==PAGE:1==
Micro­
and
Nanofabrication
of
3D­printed
Microneedle
Electrochemical
Biosensor
for
Dermal Detection of TNF­alpha
Filip Angelov
Master Thesis
DTU Nanolab
National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization
Main Supervisor:
Prof. Stephan Sylvest Keller
Co­Supervisors:
Assoc. Prof. Yi Sun
Senior Researcher Arto Heiskanen
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Micro­ and Nanofabrication of 3D­printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor
for Dermal Detection of TNF­alpha
Filip Angelov
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Filip Angelov MSc Student in Advanced Materials and Healthcare Engineering (Bioma­
terial Engineering for Medicine)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Filip Angelov, 2023
Published by:
DTU, National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 347, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark Denmark
www.nanolab.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preamble
This thesis has been prepared from February to July 2023 at the National Centre for Nano
Fabrication and Characterization with a cross­collaboration with the Department of Health­
care Technology at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering programme in Biomaterial Engineering for
Medicine
Filip Angelov ­ s210268
Signature
Date
ii
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis project marks a significant milestone in the field of electrochemical biosens­
ing by introducing a novel integration of additive manufacturing and microneedle­based
sensing. The project employs an innovative approach of developing a 3D­printed, py­
rolytic carbon­based microneedle biosensor, specifically designed for TNF­α detection, a
medically relevant pro­inflammatory cytokine.
The undertaken work describes the method of functionalizing the microneedle biosensor
with gold nanoparticles and capture antibodies, realized through a rigorous optimization
process. Key steps in this optimization process included the establishment of an optimal
gold nanoparticle deposition protocol and the determination of suitable parameters for
electrochemical sensing via differential pulse voltammetry.
The robustness of the biosensor was validated through a series of characterizations, us­
ing electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry and scanning electron
microscopy. The biosensor demonstrated exceptional linearity over a range of 0.1 to 100
ng/mL, and a theoretical limit of detection as low as 28 pg/mL.
This master thesis highlights the potential of additive manufacturing in enhancing biosen­
sor technology and underscores the need for ongoing innovation in the rapidly progressing
fields of medical diagnostics and materials science. The exploration of 3D printing, mi­
croneedle technology, and pyrolytic carbon application in this work signifies an important
contribution towards the development of point­of­care diagnostic solutions. The insights
generated form a solid foundation for future investigations in these converging scientific
areas, emphasizing the value of further advancement in this field.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Although this thesis project took place in the spring of 2023, the initial start and intro­
duction to this topic happened over the course of three special projects in the preceding
semesters, so I would like to thank my supervisor Stephan Keller for granting me the op­
portunity to do this work over this prolonged period and for guidance and input along the
way. Also would like to thank Babak Rezaei for all the solutions that were provided to
the many problems encountered in the lab work along the way and also for the good table
tennis practice. I am especially grateful to my co­supervisors Yi­Sun and Arto Heiskanen,
for helping me acquire knowledge for key steps and protocols which were foundational
for this work and this result would not have happened without it. As already mentioned, 3
semesters ago when this project initially started I would like to thank my then­supervisors
Stephanie Bisgaard and Jesper Pan for the great introduction to the project and the pa­
tience they showed while I was learning how to do things in the lab and last but not least
the whole Biomaterial Microsystems team for the great work environment that facilitates
the incredible work that comes out of the group.
Finally, I think it is important to acknowledge La Sosta kebabs for providing the caloric
resources, which this thesis project was mostly run on, as well as DTU coffee policy pro­
viding the much­needed industrial amounts that it took to make this project work. And at
the very end, I would like to thank me for doing all the work that had to be done.
Filip Angelov, MSc Eng Student in Biomaterial Engineering for Medicine, DTU
iv
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Introduction to biosensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Electrochemical biosensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Microneedle Biosensing Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Microneedle fabrication
9
2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
MN Microfabrication Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
MN Microfabrication Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Biosensing Assay Development and Optimization
22
3.1
Biosensor preparation methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Bioassay optimizations ­ AuNP deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Understanding and optimizing and the electrochemical detection . . . . .
35
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Biosensing and validation
45
4.1
TNF­α detection via DPV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Calibration curve, detection and quantification limits . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
A
57
A.1
MN holder evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2
First initial biosensing proof of concept and alternative sensing approach .
60
A.3
Additional SEM images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.4
BMF settings for MN 3D printing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.5
DPV waiting time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the topic of the critical role of diagnostic tools in healthcare,
the fundamental principles of biosensors, and the unique advantages of electrochemical
biosensors, followed by an introduction to microneedles and how they are used as state­
of­the­art biosensing tools. In the end, the limitations of these systems are discussed and
how this thesis work aims to address them.
1.1
Motivation
Importance of diagnostic tools for healthcare
In the rapidly evolving landscape of healthcare, diagnostic tools play a piv­
otal role in ensuring optimal patient outcomes. These tools, ranging from
simple physical examination techniques to complex laboratory tests and
imaging technologies, are the cornerstone of modern medicine. They en­
able healthcare professionals to accurately identify diseases, monitor pa­
tient progress, and evaluate the effectiveness of treatments.
Early and accurate diagnosis is a critical first step in the management of any
health condition. It allows for timely intervention, which can significantly
improve prognosis and reduce the risk of complications. For instance, early
detection of conditions like cancer or cardiovascular disease can dramati­
cally increase survival rates and improve quality of life. These and other
chronic diseases contribute to 74% of all deaths globally, which accounts
for 41 million people per year as accounted per the World Health Organi­
zation [1].
Traditional laboratory tests, while effective, often involve invasive proce­
dures, require significant time for results, and can be costly. They typically
necessitate the extraction of a substantial volume of biological samples,
such as blood, which can cause discomfort to the patient. Moreover, these
tests often require specialized laboratory equipment and trained personnel
to conduct the tests and interpret the results, which can limit their accessi­
bility, particularly in resource­limited settings.
Furthermore, many of these tests do not provide real­time or near­real­time
monitoring of health conditions, which is increasingly important for the
management of chronic diseases. The need for repeated testing to monitor
disease progression or treatment effectiveness can also increase the burden
on patients and healthcare systems.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
1
==PAGE:10==
In recent years, microneedle (MN) technology has emerged as a revolution­
ary approach in biosensing strategies, particularly in point­of­care (PoC)
settings [2]. Microneedles, which are micron­sized needles, have opened
new horizons for improving existing PoC devices. This is a significant
advancement over the current standard of diagnostics, which typically re­
quires a medically trained person to perform the blood sampling procedure.
Various MN­based platforms have been developed for different purposes
using a range of techniques and materials. The development of MN­based
biosensors for both real­time and near­real­time monitoring of chronic disease­
associated biomarkers has garnered significant attention in recent years [3].
This introduction will delve into the basic concepts of biosensors and their
electrochemical subdivision, as well as different microneedle­based sens­
ing techniques.
1.2
Introduction to biosensors
Figure 1.1: Schematic depicting the diﬀerent components of a biosensor. Adapted
from [4]
Biosensors are analytical devices that combine a biological recognition
element with a physicochemical transducer to detect specific biological
molecules, structures, or processes (Figure 1.1). They are designed to con­
vert a biological response into a quantifiable and processable signal.
The biological recognition element, or bioreceptor, is a biomolecule that in­
teracts specifically with the target analyte. Common types of bioreceptors
used in biosensors include enzymes, antibodies, nucleic acids, and cells [4].
The choice of bioreceptor depends on the specific analyte to be detected and
the desired selectivity and sensitivity of the biosensor.
The transducer is the component of the biosensor that converts the biologi­
cal response into a measurable signal. There are several types of transduc­
2
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:11==
ers, including optical, electrochemical, piezoelectric, and thermal transduc­
ers [5]. The choice of transducer depends on the nature of the biological
response and the requirements of the detection task.
Biosensors can be made from a variety of materials, including carbon, met­
als, semiconductors, polymers, and biological materials [5]. The choice of
material depends on the requirements of the biosensor, such as its sensitiv­
ity, selectivity, response time, and stability. Recent advances in materials
science have led to the development of new materials with improved prop­
erties for biosensor applications, such as graphene [6], silicon nanowires
[7] and gold nanoparticles (AuNP) [8].
There are several sensing methods used in biosensors, including direct de­
tection, where the presence or concentration of the analyte is measured di­
rectly, and indirect detection, where the analyte is detected through its ef­
fect on a secondary molecule or process [9]. The choice of sensing method
depends on the nature of the analyte and the requirements of the detection
task.
Depending on the design of the biosensor and the transducer used one de­
termines the detection strategy which will be used for the signal generation.
One category, namely electrochemical biosensors have been recognized for
their numerous advantages in various fields, particularly in healthcare and
environmental monitoring. The next section will explore their versatility
and advantages.
1.3
Electrochemical biosensors
What are they and how do they work?
Electrochemical biosensors are a subset of biosensors that rely on the elec­
trical properties of biological materials to detect and quantify analytes. They
are known for their high sensitivity, which allows for the detection of minute
quantities of analytes, and their wide linear range, which enables them to
measure a broad spectrum of analyte concentrations spanning multiple or­
ders of magnitude [10].
There are several types of such sensors, including potentiometric, ampero­
metric, and conductometric biosensors [9]. Potentiometric biosensors mea­
sure the potential difference between two electrodes, amperometric biosen­
sors measure the current produced by a chemical reaction, and conducto­
metric biosensors measure the change in electrical conductivity of the ana­
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
3
==PAGE:12==
lyte solution [9]. Each of these types has unique mechanisms and applica­
tions, offering a versatile toolkit for various biosensing needs.
The mechanisms of detection used by electrochemical biosensors are di­
verse and sophisticated. For instance, some biosensors analyze interactions
under in vitro conditions to provide precise and rapid results. This allows
for real­time and near­real­time monitoring applications, making electro­
chemical biosensors particularly valuable in healthcare monitoring [11],
while their robustness and durability, coupled with their small dimensions,
make them portable and suitable for point­of­care testing [12].
The versatility of electrochemical biosensors extends to their ability to be
modified with various materials to enhance their performance. For instance,
a study by Findik (2023) demonstrated the use of ZnO nanoflowers to mod­
ify a pencil graphite electrode, which was then used for DNA detection and
the investigation of drug­DNA interactions [13]. Another study by Wu et
al. (2023) reported the modification of carbon fibre electrodes with chi­
tosan, cell membrane, and aptamer­cholesterol amphiphiles (a molecular
construct having both hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties) for dopamine
monitoring in brain and nerve cells [11].
Electrochemical biosensors have found numerous real­world applications,
most famously for monitoring glucose levels in diabetic patients and in­
creasingly for many other conditions. For example, they have been used for
the detection of prostate­specific antigens, a key biomarker in the diagnosis
and management of prostate cancer [14]. Furthermore, a recent study by
Mollamohammadi et al. (2023) demonstrated an electrochemical biosensor
for the detection of L­DOPA ­ a critical molecule in the study and treatment
of Parkinson’s disease. This sensor was designed using tyrosinase immo­
bilized on a nanocomposite of carboxymethyl starch­graft­polyaniline and
multi­walled carbon nanotubes [15].
These examples of electrochemical biosensors demonstrate their capability
to detect various analytes of clinical significance, however, it is important
to note that they can be used following the extraction of sample fluid from
a patient, which still necessitates professionally trained personnel. This is
where microneedles prove to be beneficial as a biosensing platform. There
are however multiple strategies which can be employed for such application
and this is the topic of the next section.
4
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:13==
1.4
Microneedle Biosensing Strategies
Microneedles represent a significant advancement in the field of biosens­
ing, offering a minimally invasive alternative to traditional hypodermic nee­
dles. These tiny, needle­like structures, typically ranging from hundreds of
micrometres to a few millimetres in length, are designed to penetrate the
outermost layers of the skin, known as the stratum corneum and epidermis,
to access the underlying interstitial fluid in the dermal layer of the skin.
This allows for the extraction of biological fluids or the delivery of thera­
peutic agents directly into the body [16], without causing significant pain
or discomfort typically associated with hypodermic needles.
The versatile approach that MNs offer for their fabrication and sensing
methods, allows for a wide range of biosensing strategies, each with unique
advantages and applications. As illustrated in Figure 1.2, these strategies
can be broadly categorized into four methods:
Figure 1.2: Diﬀerent strategies for MN sensing as adapted from [17]. A) Multiple
options that allow for molecular transport and sampling through the skin barrier.
B) Analyte capture approach via recognition elements, antibodies, aptamers, etc.
C) Hollow or solid variant for integration with detection probe. D) MNs used for
electrical or mechanical signal recordings
• Transdermal Sampling: In this method, MNs are used solely for
trans­ and intradermal sampling. The collected samples are then an­
alyzed using external methods such as mass spectrometry or chro­
matography. This approach is beneficial for non­invasive sample col­
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
5
==PAGE:14==
lection and can be used with a variety of analytical techniques [18].
• Selective Biomarker Capture: In this strategy, the MN array is de­
signed to selectively capture specific biomarkers. This selective cap­
ture can be achieved through the incorporation of specific biorecep­
tors on the MN surface, such as antibodies for protein biomarkers as
demonstrated in this study by Zhang et. al. [19] or oligonucleotides
for nucleic acid biomarkers [20]. This approach enhances the speci­
ficity of the biosensor and can be used for the detection of a wide range
of biomarkers. Although these solutions have been documented in re­
search environments, the one case which has been well established in
clinical use is for continuous glucose monitoring, where MNs coated
with glucose oxidase enzyme provide diabetes patients with their glu­
cose level in real­time [21].
• Integrated Sensor for In­Situ Detection: Here, MNs are integrated
into a sensor that can detect or monitor analytes within the skin. This
allows for real­time, in­situ monitoring of biomarkers, providing con­
tinuous data that can be crucial for managing chronic diseases [18].
• Bio­Signal Recording Platforms: In this method, MNs are used as
bio­signal recording platforms. These MNs can record electrical or
mechanical signals from the body, providing valuable information
about physiological processes [22].
While microneedle biosensors hold great promise for revolutionizing point­
of­care diagnostics, several challenges and limitations must be addressed to
realize their full potential. One of the primary challenges is the fabrication
of microneedles with precise dimensions and structures, which is crucial for
their performance and patient comfort. Traditional fabrication methods can
be complex, time­consuming, and lack the flexibility for rapid prototyping.
Additionally, the stability of the biological recognition elements on the mi­
croneedle surface is another concern, as it directly influences the sensor’s
sensitivity and selectivity. Furthermore, the integration of microneedles
with signal transduction and readout systems can be technically challeng­
ing, potentially limiting their widespread use.
Therefore this thesis aims to address these and other points, which are de­
scribed in the next section.
6
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:15==
1.5
Research Objectives
1. Design and Fabrication: Traditional methods for fabricating micronee­
dles can be complex and time­consuming. This thesis aims to leverage
the versatility of 3D printing technology to simplify and expedite the
fabrication process. Additionally, the use of pyrolytic carbon, a ro­
bust and biocompatible material, will be explored as a platform for
microneedle biosensors.
2. Characterization of Microneedle Electrode: The physical and elec­
trochemical properties of the fabricated microneedle electrode will
be characterized using electrochemical methods and Scanning Elec­
tron Microscopy (SEM). This will provide insights into the electrode’s
structure and performance characteristics.
3. Surface Functionalization: The stability and performance of the biosen­
sor are influenced by the biological recognition elements on the mi­
croneedle surface. This work will investigate the deposition param­
eters of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and their optimizations together
with the conjugation of antibodies for surface functionalization. Elec­
trochemical characterizations of these steps will also be conducted.
4. Establishing the Sandwich Immunoassay: The development and
optimization of a sandwich immunoassay for the detection of TNF­
alpha will be a key focus of this thesis. Understanding the working
mechanism of the immunoassay and optimizing the process will be
crucial for the successful application of the microneedle biosensor.
5. Validation of the Biosensor: The final stage of this work will in­
volve the validation of the biosensor. This will include determining
the range, limit of detection and quantification. The validation process
will ensure that the biosensor is reliable and suitable for the detection
of TNF­alpha.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.3: Graphical Abstract of this thesis work, depicting the aimed processes,
starting from a 3D printed model in the top left and progressing through the fabri-
cation, surface functionalizations and electrochemical detection methods
8
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Microneedle fabrication
This chapter covers the methods utilized for the microfabrication of the MN
electrodes in its first section as well as the construction of the custom­made
setup which allowed for the electrochemical experiments. The second sec­
tion of this chapter includes the results and characterizations resulting from
these methods.
2.1
Materials
3D printer used was S140 from Boston Micro Fabrication, the resin used
was high­temperature S20 resin. The pyrolysis furnace was 1.7MHz Ultra­
sonic Spray Pyrolysis Furnace 1200C OTF­1200X­PGEP (MTI corpora­
tion), for gold nanoplarticles tetrachloroauric(III) acid trihydrate was pur­
chased from Sigma Aldrich (Product number 1015820001). For bioas­
say ­ TNF alpha Human Matched Antibody Pair (cat. BMS2034MST)
was bought from Thermofisher Scientific, Zeba™Spin Desalting Columns,
(89883, Thermofisher), Pierce™SATA (N­succinimidyl S­acetylthioacetate),
Catalog number: 26102 (Thermofiser Scientific) were used for the conju­
gation. Other materials include Hydroquinone, 99.5%, (Thermo Scientific
Catalog number: 219930500) Human TNF­alpha Recombinant Protein ­
5 µg (Thermo Scientific, Catalog Number: A42551), Hydrogen peroxide,
35% w/w aq. soln., stab., (Thermo Scientific, Catalog number: L14000.AU),
PBS (10X), pH 7.4 (Thermo Scientific, Catalog number: 70011044). For
all electrochemical methods PalmSens4 potentiostant was used. Assay was
conducted in Hard­Shell® 96­Well PCR Plates, high profile, semi­skirted,
green/clear (Biorad HSS9641)
2.2
MN Microfabrication Methods
2.2.1
Microneedle design and fabrication
Microneeldes (MNs) were first designed in the software Autodesk Fusion
360. The design of the whole structure (Figure 2.1) includes a cylindrical
base with an incorporated honeycomb hexagon pattern of 2 mm in height
and 7.5 mm in diameter, as seen in figure 2.1E, from which a hexagonal
prism is extruded for 6.6 mm, finishing with a hexagonal pyramid on the
top where all the sides meet at the tip as seen in figure 2.1A. The inner
structure of the MN included a rectangular lattice pattern which provided
stability for the whole structure (Figure 2.1B).
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
9
==PAGE:18==
Additional features of the MN design included an opening in the base of
each side of the hexagonal prism, which provided an open area to the inner
lattice so that following the printing process all the non­polymerized resin
had space to go out and drain during the washing steps.
Following the design of the whole structure, the files were exported as an
STL file and were uploaded to the Boston Micro Fabrication (BMF) soft­
ware where structures are segmented along the vertical Z axis in 20 μm par­
titions, where each partition corresponds of 20 μm of the structure along its
height, thus producing 430 images.
10
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: The 3D design of the MN created in Autodesk Fusion360 of the whole
microneedle (A) and a cross-section through a vertical axis (B) of the structure. C)
The MN as seen from the bottom. D) The hexagonal pyramid which is positioned
on the top of the MN. E) The base structure on which the MN sits. The middle
of the base has a hexagon structure, which serves the function to integrate the MN
better.+
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2.2
Introduction to Projection Micro Stereolithography (PµSL)
To understand how a digital design is converted to a physical 3D printed
structure, a brief description of projection Micro Stereolithographic addi­
tive manufacturing is given.
The 3D printer in use ­ the ultra­high resolution 10 μm S140 (Boston Mi­
cro Fabrication) has a container of high temperature photo­curable resin,
where upon exposure with UV light of 405 nm a polymerization reaction is
triggered. This effect is exploited so that the first image of the structure is
exposed on a stainless steel platform through a thin transparent membrane,
after which the platform moves 20 μm down, making a place for the new
liquid resin to come in, which is consequently polymerized as well. This
process is repeated adding layers on top of the previous one, thus the term
additive manufacturing is used to describe this method of 3D printing. The
exact printing parameters for MN print are shown in figure A.6, briefly,
the printing process uses 3 settings ­ one for the very first layer, so that the
resin sticks to the steel platform, a 2nd one for the following 9 layers, a 3rd
setting for the remaining 420 layers. The overall printing methodology is
visualized in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Schematic showing the process of PµSL adapted from [23]
12
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:21==
2.2.3
Conversion to pyrolytic carbon
Following the 3D printing procedure the MNs were transferred to a ceramic
pyrolysis furnace by arranging them on an iron mesh on top of a ceramic
boat, wherein the presence of nitrogen atmosphere and absence of oxygen,
a step­wise heat protocol was executed, starting from ambient room temper­
ature. The thermal protocol initiates with an increase of the temperature to
350 °C at a rate of 5 °C per minute. This temperature is maintained for two
hours, then it’s incrementally raised to 375 °C at a rate of 1 °C per minute,
followed by a secondary dwelling period of two hours. The temperature
is then increased at the same rate to 425 °C, where it remains for one hour.
This is followed by an increase at a rate of 5 degrees per minute to 900 °C
and a final one­hour holding period before the oven is allowed to cool down
to room temperature. This heating protocol is based on previous studies
[24] as well as additional optimizations which were done specifically for
MN fabrication as part of work preceding this thesis project. The final heat
protocol described can be seen in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Graph which shows the temperature change during the pyrolytic process
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
13
==PAGE:22==
2.2.4
Electrochemical setup integration
In order to integrate the MNs in a way that would allow for electrochemical
processes to be carried out, a custom electrochemical setup was 3D­printed
and nested in a 40 mL glass beaker. This enabled the tip of the MN to be in
contact with the electrolyte solution together with a counter electrode, con­
sisting of a custom­made platinum electrode, consisting of a silicon wafer
with platinum deposited on top of it and a commercial Ag/AgCl reference
electrode. The whole setup with all of its components is depicted in figure
2.4.
The 3D printed holder consisted of two parts ­ a lower MN holder, which
had a small platform (figure 2.4B) where the circular base could stand and
the protruding needle could extend downwards as shown in figure 2.4B.
The top part of the holder had a golden piston that was secured in a way
that the golden metal tip would come in contact with the flat part of the
bottom of the MN structure (Figure 2.4C). This integration allowed for a
reproducible contact of the MN carbon electrodes with the potentiostat elec­
tronics ­ a vital aspect that enabled consistent outcomes in the electrochem­
ical processes including the biosensing itself. Both parts were connected
tightly via two screws and bolts. The volume of the solution in the beaker
was constantly set at 5.2 mL so that only the very tip of the MN would be
in contact with the solution as seen in figure 2.4F
From the top of the golden piston, a metal wire was soldered (figure 2.4A),
which was connected to the potentiostat. The counter and reference elec­
trodes were connected with micro­crocodile clip wires as seen in figure
2.4F, which were then connected to the PalmSens4 potentiostat, which was
operated by its corresponding PSTrace (ver.5) software via the connected
PC
14
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.4: Photographic pictures depicting the electrochemical setup with all of its
components and integration with MN electrodes. A) Top part of the electrochemical
cell, consists of a 3D-printed lid, a golden piston and a wire soldered to it. B) Bottom
part of the holder, showing the space area where the MN shape is nested. On the
two sides are screws that connect with the top part. C) Top and bottom part with
a MN in the holder. D) All components are placed in a beaker with an electrolyte
solution. E) View from the bottom of the solution, where the MN tip is penetrating
the surface of the liquid, marked as WE for the working electrode. Platinum counter
electrode - CE and reference electrode RE are also visible. F) All three electrodes
as imaged from the top and their connection to the potentiostat via micro-crocodile
wires.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
15
==PAGE:24==
2.2.5
Electrochemical and structural characterization of
microneedles
The carbon MNs were characterized throughout the fabrication process via
cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging.
CV and EIS were carried out in the electrochemical cell described above in
the presence of 5.2 mL, 10 mM ferro/ferri cyanide PBS solution at pH 7,4.
For the CV, potential was cycled from ­0,2 V to 0,6 V, with a scan rate of
100 mV/s. For EIS, frequencies were scanned from 100 kHz down to 0,1
Hz, at Edc potential of 0 V and 10 mV potential amplitude. SEM imaging
took place on a Zeiss Supra 40VP SEM with the secondary electron or
inlens detector at an imaging voltage of 5 kV, 10 kV and 15 kV.
2.3
MN Microfabrication Results
2.3.1
3D printing and pyrolysis of MN structures
After the 3D printing process, the structures were washed with isopropanol
and dried with nitrogen gas, in order to remove excess resin. The fine
details of the inner lattice structure were retained as seen in figure 2.5. Next,
the MNs were arranged on a metal mesh and placed in a furnace, where a
heating protocol was executed as described previously. After this process,
the MN samples have shrunken in size due to the evaporation of all non­
carbon materials and have turned black in colour (Figure 2.6)
Figure 2.5: Picture of the printed MN, where the inner lattice structure is visible
16
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:25==
(a) MN samples before pyrolysis
(b) MN samples after pyrolysis
Figure 2.6: Comparison of MN samples before and after pyrolysis
2.3.2
SEM characterization of pyrolysed MNs
Following pyrolysis, MN samples were further characterized with the help
of SEM imaging (Figure 2.7). MNs were imaged from the top and for the
side view the tip was broken from the structure in order to be imaged from
the side. From that view, it is evident that the length of the MN is 2.87 mm,
while its size in width measures 1.03 mm as measured from edge to edge
of the hexagonal prism and 883µm when the distance from side to side is
measured. This shows that the pyrolytic conversion induces a shrinkage of
56% in the height of the structure and 58 % on its horizontal axis.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.7: SEM images of the MN structure. A) Image of the overall structure
from the top, focused on the base, which measures 3.53 mm in diameter. B)Image
focused on the tip of the MN from the top. The green line measures an edge-to-edge
distance of 1.03 mm, blue line - a side-to-side distance measuring 883 µm. C) SEM
image of the MN from the side where the length of the structure measures 2.87mm
and the bottom opening at 646 µm.
18
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:27==
2.3.3
Characterization of MNs via Cyclic Voltammetry
As the material of the needle was converted to pyrolytic carbon after the
pyrolysis process, its ability to function as an electrode was investigated via
cyclic voltammetry (CV). Measurements were done on 3 electrodes and the
mean values are presented. As described previously, CV was carried out
in the presence of 10 mM ferro/ferricyanide and a scan rate of 100 mV/s,
with the potential being cycled from ­0.2 V to 0.6 V. The resulting data
which was measured by the peak extraction feature of PS trace software
shows that the carbon MN achieves anodic peak currents of 66 µA ± 11
µA and cathodic peak currents of 55 µA ± 11 µA. The potentials where the
peak currents take place are at 300 mV (±10 mV) and 160 mV (±10 mV)
as measured against Ag/AgCl RE for anodic and cathodic peaks respec­
tively. The ∆E values of these carbon electrodes are 140 mV (±20 mV). A
representative CV from one of the replicates can be seen in figure 2.8
Figure 2.8: Cyclic voltammogram of carbon MN electrode in the presence of 10 mM
ferro/ferricyanide redox probe, where only the tip is in contact of the electrolyte
solution
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
19
==PAGE:28==
2.4
Discussion
The first objective of this research project was to leverage the versatility
of 3D printing for MN fabrication. The results presented in this chapter
demonstrate that this objective was successfully achieved. The use of Au­
todesk Fusion 360 for the design of the microneedles allowed for the cre­
ation of a complex structure with a cylindrical base, a hexagonal prism, and
a hexagonal pyramid at the top, all of which were designed and 3D printed
with precision. The inner lattice structure, which was included to provide
stability, was also successfully incorporated into the design (Figure 2.5).
The 3D printing process, using BMF S140, was able to accurately replicate
the digital design into a physical structure. The use of projection Micro
Stereolithographic additive manufacturing allowed for the creation of the
microneedles layer by layer, with 20 µm resolution in Z­axis and down to
10 µm resolution in the X and Y axes. This method of additive manufac­
turing proved to be efficient and precise, as evidenced by the retention of
the fine details of the inner lattice structure following the 3D printing pro­
cess when the samples were observed with SEM after pyrolysis as shown
in figure 2.7 .
The second part of the fabrication process involved the conversion of the
3D printed structures to pyrolytic carbon, a robust and biocompatible ma­
terial, with extensive use for biomedical applications [25][26]. The use
of a ceramic pyrolysis furnace under a nitrogen atmosphere allowed for
the successful conversion of the microneedles to pyrolytic carbon with the
resulting structures being black in colour and shrunken in size due to the
evaporation of all non­carbon materials and aromatization of carbon atoms,
indicating a successful pyrolysis process. This process of a 3D printing
resin to carbon conversion has been thoroughly characterized by Rezaei et.
al. and the results of this study are consistent in regards to the shrinkage
observed in the MN structure [24].
The electrochemical characterization via CV revealed the good conductiv­
ity of the carbon electrode and confirmed that the custom 3D printed setup
works well and can indeed be used to integrate the small pyrolysed carbon
MN in a 3­electrode system with a counter and reference electrodes. Fur­
thermore, the ∆E values of 140 mV (±20 mV) provide good evidence for
electron transfer from the redox probe through the MN electrode, which is
comparable to other studies [27]. One limitation of the present setup would
be its inability to measure the surface area in a meaningful way. Currently,
20
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:29==
the amount of surface area is dependent on the amount of electrolyte in the
beaker. To ensure reproducible results the same volume of 5.2 mL was
dispensed with the same pipette and although one could measure the area
which would be in contact during that setup, that would not reflect the com­
plete surface area of the whole MN which would change with any different
volume. One could submerge the whole structure ­ the base and the MN
which would generate a large signal originating from 3D structure of the
base, including all the internal components of the needle, like its structural
lattice, which would participate in the reaction in that case. A lot of air
bubbles would also be trapped during such an experiment, necessitating
a degassing step before each electrochemical measurement. All these as­
pects were investigated as part of preliminary work preceding this project,
and it was decided that submerging a technically unknown but reproducible
amount of the tip of the MN would be better for the further development of
this project.
Overall, this was the first indication that this material can be used as an
electrochemical biosensor, however, to do that, multiple surface function­
alization steps have to be undertaken and evaluated and this process will
be described in the next chapter.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
21
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3
Biosensing Assay
Development and
Optimization
This chapter in its first section describes the process of biosensor prepara­
tion methods, once the pyrolytic carbon MN electrode is established as well
as the electrochemical detection method used for sensing of TNF­α. The
following two sections focus on the study and optimizations which took
place both for the nanofabrication of the sensor and the electrochemical
detection method.
3.1
Biosensor preparation methods
The described parameters in this section reflect the final biosensing fabrica­
tion method. In the next section, where optimization processes are covered
one can see how and why these parameters were selected.
3.1.1
Deposition of Au nanoparticles on the MN carbon surface
During pyrolysis MNs were converted to an electroconductive material ­
pyrolytic carbon. This property, which is central to the application of the
MNs as a biosensor in this work, was exploited in the fabrication process in
order to further enhance the conductivity by electrochemically depositing
AuNP on the surface of the structure. This process was done via chronoam­
perometry. MNs were set up in the electrochemical cell as described in the
previous section and 5.2 mL of 3 mM H[AuCl4] chloroauric acid was pre­
pared from tetrachloroauric(III) acid trihydrate 3H2O­H[AuCl4] dissolved
in 0.5 M H2SO4. Next, potential was applied at −200 mV for the duration
of 20 s, after which each MN was carefully removed from the electrochem­
ical cell, taking care not to touch the tip of the MN and was washed with
ddH2O for 10 s, dried under with N gas and stored until further use.
3.1.2
Antibody modification and conjugation
The next step of the process involved the chemical conjugation of antibod­
ies to the surface of the MN electrodes and more specifically to the AuNP
forming a gold­thiol covalent bond. This was carried out by first modifying
the antibody with N­Succinimidyl S­Acetylthioacetate (SATA) which intro­
duces protected sulfhydryl groups on the free amines of the lysine amino
22
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:31==
acids on the heavy chains of the antibody, thus forming a stable amide
bond. This process is visualized in figure 3.1 This modification introduces
a protected SH group, which following a deacylation procedure with hy­
droxylamine (HLA) exposes the SH groups, at which point the modified
antibody is incubated with AuNP deposited MNs, forming a covalent gold­
thiol bond. The detailed procedure for modification of a batch of 20 MNs
is described in the following paragraph.
Figure 3.1: Modiﬁcation steps of antibody and SATA for introduction of an SH
group [28].
The first SATA solution was prepared by dissolving it in DMSO to a final
concentration of 133 µM. Next, a 200 µL of TNF­α antibody (100 µg/mL)
was transferred to an 1.5 mL centrifuge tube and 20 µL of the SATA solu­
tion was added to the antibody tube as 1:20 molar ratio was to be achieved
(0.66 µM : 13.34 µM) between antibody:SATA respectively. Following a
30 min incubation at RT, the resulting mixture was passed through a desalt­
ing column, previously equilibrated 3 times with PBS. This was followed
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
23
==PAGE:32==
by a centrifuge spin at 1500 g for 2 min and the flow­through was collected
in a clean tube.
At this stage, the antibody has the incorporated protected SH group. In
order to activate it, a deacylation deprotection is triggered by the addition
of 20 µL 0.1 M HLA solution (25 mM EDTA, PBS) to the antibody:SATA
conjugate, gently mixed with a pipette and followed by incubation at RT for
2 h. This was followed by purification with a desalting column, previously
equilibrated 3 times with a PBS containing 10 mM EDTA. The resulting
flow­through was further diluted to 2 mL with 10 mM EDTA PBS solu­
tion and 100 µL were distributed in 20 wells of V­shaped 96­well plate,
followed by an introduction of the MNs into the wells as shown in figure
3.2C. The plate was incubated overnight at 4 °C
3.1.3
Setting up the biosensing assay
Following the antibody conjugation procedure the MNs were washed with
PBS and incubated with blocking buffer (1 % BSA, 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS)
for 2 h at RT on a plate shaker at 300 RPM. Following the blocking step,
another wash with PBS took place, after which MNs were incubated with
TNF­α concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 100 ng/mL in a 96­well plate, at
RT for 2 h, on a plate shaker at 300 RPM. After that, another PBS washing
step was commenced and followed by incubation with biotin­conjugated
secondary antibody diluted 1:1000 with assay buffer (0.5% BSA, 0.05%
Tween 20 in PBS) for 1 h at RT on a plate shaker at 300 RPM. Lastly, after
another PBS wash, last incubation step was initiated with streptavidin­HRP
complex, which was diluted 1:1000 in assay buffer and incubated for 1
h at RT on a plate shaker at 300 RPM. Following a last wash with PBS
the whole biosensing assay was built and the MN sensor was ready for
electrochemical detection.
The process described took place on a custom 3D printed MN holder (Fig­
ure 3.2A), which contained 1 row of 8 MNs so that it could fit precisely on
a single row on a V­shaped 96­well plate (Figure 3.2C). The PBS washing
steps happened by taking this holder out and with the use of 60 mL syringe
each electrode was washed carefully 3 times for 15 seconds, making sure
not to touch the tip of the needle (Figure 3.2B)
24
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.2: A) Picture of the custom-made holders that allow each MN to ﬁt securely.
B) Washing steps were done with the use of 60 mL syringe and each MN was washed
individually. C) Picture of the MN holder in a 96-well plate, in which antibodies,
analyte and enzymatic label were added.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
25
==PAGE:34==
3.1.4
Electrochemical detection of an analyte via DPV
The MNs were carefully taken out of the well­plate and transferred to the
custom­built electrochemical cell described previously, taking care not to
touch the tip of MN, where the sensing components were located. The
electrolyte solution in the electrochemical cell consisted of 2 mM hydro­
quinone, 1 mM H2O2 in PBS for a total volume of 5,2 mL. First, the MN
biosensor was placed in the holder and the top lid was placed on top, with
two screws anchoring the whole structure in place. Then the holder was
inserted in the beaker, with the tip of the MN touching the electrolyte solu­
tion and after 2 minutes incubation time, a DPV measurement was initiated
from a potential range of 0.4 V to ­0.3 V, with a potential step of 10 mV,
pulse potential of 100 mV, pulse duration of 10 ms, and a scan rate of 100
mV/s
3.2
Bioassay optimizations ­ AuNP deposition
This section covers the optimization steps undertaken in order to under­
stand the optimal AuNP deposition parameters as well as the electrochemi­
cal characterizations which described the electrochemical behaviour of the
functionalized MN electrode.
3.2.1
AuNP Deposition, optimization and characterization
In order to increase the conductivity of the MN electrodes, as well as to pro­
vide a suitable conjugation platform for the antibodies to bind, by utilization
of gold­thiol covalent bonds, AuNP were selected to be electrochemically
deposited on the surface of the MN electrode. This process was carried
out via chronoamperometry, as described previously and a representative
graph of the process can be seen in figure 3.3
There were two key parameters that control the size and distribution of
the AuNP along the surface of the electrode ­ concentration of the gold
precursor solution ­ H[AuCl4], and the deposition time, during which the
gold atoms are reduced on the surface of the carbon and are crystallized into
a nanoparticle. In order to understand the effect of these parameters a study
was carried out where four different concentrations were investigated ­ 3
mM, 4mM, 8mM and 12 mM of H[AuCl4], and four deposition times ­ 20
s, 30 s, 60 s and 90 sec. Combinations of these factors were done, followed
by SEM imaging, so that the AuNP distributions could be visualized.
First, the three concentrations ranging from 12 mM to 4 mM were inves­
tigated, combined with 30 s, 60 s or 90 s of deposition time. As seen in
26
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.3:
Graph depicting the chronoamperometric AuNP deposition on the
surface of the MNs. In this example, the chronoamperometry lasts for 20 s.
figure 3.4, when the chloroauric acid is at 12 mM concentration, even at
the lowest deposition time of 30 s (Figure 3.4A) the gold forms a film on
the surface of the MN. It can also be seen in figure 3.4A and B that this
film is easily peeled off from the carbon surface. When the deposition time
increases further to 60 s and 90 s the gold starts forming massive clusters
(Figure 3.4D and E) which increase their size with the prolonged deposi­
tion. Neither of these parameters were found to be applicable for further
functionalization of the MN surface for biosensing application as the pres­
ence of such clusters would likely contribute to molecular fouling of the
antibodies, which would have a negative effect on the functionality of the
sensor. It can also be seen that delamination of the gold film is observed
which would be problematic for further integration as a mechanically stable
structure would be needed for antibody conjugations.
In order to further study how the carbon electrode surface changes when
less H[AuCl4] is being used, the chronoamperometric process was carried
out in the presence of 8 mM chloroauric acid for the duration of 30 s and
60 s (Figure 3.5). Although less intense than the gold formations which
were formed in 12 mM H[AuCl4], still one can conclude that there is over­
saturation of gold on the MN surface. In both the 30 s and 60 s conditions
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.4: SEM images of MN electrodes after deposition in the presence of 12 mM
H[AuCl4] for 30 sec (A)bar: 10 µm (B) bar: 4 µm (C)bar: 5 µm, 60 sec (D) bar: 20
µm and 90 sec (E) deposition time, bar: 20 µm
there are metallic crystalline extrusions forming on the edges of each MN
layer (Figure 3.5B and E, which is not a desired occurrence. Furthermore,
it can be seen in figure 3.5C that the AuNP starts fusing into a thin film
over the carbon surface, which yet again is undesired.
Figure 3.5: SEM images of MN electrodes after 30 sec (A)bar: 10 µm(B) bar: 5
µm(C) bar: 500 nm and 60 sec deposition time (D)bar: 20 µm (E)bar: 5 µm in the
presence of 8 mM H[AuCl4].
28
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.6: SEM images of MN electrodes after 30 sec (A)bar: 20 µm (B)bar: 1
µm(C)bar: 400 nm and 60 sec deposition time(D)bar: 20 µm (E)bar: 8 µm (F)bar:
4 µm in the presence of 4 mM H[AuCl4].
Next, the concentration of the gold precursor solution was further decreased
to 4 mM and the procedure was repeated for 30 s and 60 s (Figure 3.6). At
this concentration, a significant improvement can be observed, as the tip of
the MN can be clearly observed especially at the 30 s condition (Figure 3.6
A). From these SEM images, it can be seen quite well how the deposition
progresses from the 30 s to 60 s, by generating more clustered sections,
especially at the edges of the different layers, which can be attributed to
local electromagnetic fields accumulating more charges, thus generating a
forward feedback loop, where more gold is deposited there, leading to even
more gold being deposited at the next instant.
Another observation that becomes evident is the presence of larger nanoflower
structures that grow above and over the nanoparticle plane (Figure 3.6B, C
and F). In these sample conditions, similar to the 8 mM condition, a fus­
ing of the AuNP into a surface film can be observed, even at the 30 s de­
position time (Figure 3.6C), signifying that either the deposition time or
H[AuCl4] concentration are too high if single and non­merged AuNP is to
be achieved.
Taking all the data described thus far together, a chronoamperometric AuNP
deposition in the presence of 3 mM H[AuCl4] for 20 s was carried out. This
protocol delivered uniformly dispersed AuNP (Figure 3.7), which did not
present with the problematic features of the conditions discussed above.
Furthermore, the carbon MN surface presented a very well­distributed pop­
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
29
==PAGE:38==
ulation of AuNP. It has to be noted that different densities of AuNP were
observed near the tip of the MN (Figure 3.7A) and further down the hexag­
onal pyramid (Figure 3.7B and C). This could be due to stronger electro­
magnetic fields near the tip of the pyramidal structure, which would trigger
higher seeding and crystalization rates of the gold atoms on the carbon sur­
face.
Figure 3.7: SEM images of MN electrodes after 20 sec deposition time in the presence
of 3 mM H[AuCl4]. A) 5000x magniﬁcation at the tip of the MN, bar: 10 µm, B)
5000x magniﬁcation further away from the tip, bar: 10 µm, C) 20 000x magniﬁcation
of the same location, bar: 2 µm, D) 250 000x magniﬁcation of 4 nanoﬂower structures
and their measurements from end to end, bar: 200 nm.
30
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:39==
The size and morphology of the nanostructures were also measured in more
detail (Figure 3.7D) and it can be seen that the gold composites resemble
nanoflower structures, which range in size from 180 to 300 nm. These
particles represent the majority of the structures when the MN is viewed
from the top, however, that is not the case when the MN is imaged from
the side (Figure 3.8F) where the NPs have a more classical oval shape.
One can see the distribution of NPs on the vertical walls of the carbon MN
electrode in figure 3.8, where also the different layers, reflecting the 3D
printing manufacturing method can be clearly visualized. The height of
these layers was measured to be 7.3 µm and the AuNP diameter averages
around 90 nm.
Based on the study conducted and described in this section, the condition
where AuNPs are deposited for 20 s in the presence of 3 mM H[AuCl4] was
selected to continue for the biosensor development process. The reason for
that was due to the NP distribution appearing well distributed over the car­
bon surface, which would be vital for the following steps of the fabrication
process which involves the conjugation of capture antibodies to these NPs.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.8: SEM images of the side view of the MN electrode after 20 s deposition
time in 3mM H[AuCl4]. A) 500x magniﬁcation of the tip of the needle, bar: 100
µm, B) 3000x magniﬁcation of the upper area of the needle, where multiple diﬀerent
layers are visible, bar: 20 µm, C) 5000x magniﬁcation of the 4 top layers of the MN,
bar: 20 µm, D) 10 000x magniﬁcation of the very tip of the MN, with the height
of the second layer being measured at 7.3 µm, bar: 5 µm, E) 10 000x magniﬁcation
depicting 3 diﬀerent layers, bar: 5 µm, F) 150 000x magniﬁcation image of the
AuNP present to the vertical walls of the MN, where a NP measurement was done
with its size being 91 nm, bar: 400 nm.
32
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:41==
3.2.2
Confirmation of surface functionalization and electrode
characterization by EIS
This subsection will include EIS data from both bare carbon and AuNP in
order to illustrate how the surface of the MN changes with the addition of
each component ­ from the bare carbon, followed by AuNP, conjugation of
capture antibody, blocking of unspecific sites with BSA, incubation with
the analyte, secondary biotinylated antibody and lastly streptavidin­HRP
label.
This technique was chosen because it is a robust method that provides a
wealth of information about the electrochemical processes occurring at an
electrode surface. By using alternating current (AC) over a range of fre­
quencies, in this case from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz, EIS is capable of identifying
and quantifying kinetic and mass transfer processes at the electrode/elec­
trolyte interface, providing valuable insight into surface coverage, reaction
rates, and charge transfer resistance.
In the context of biosensors, EIS can be particularly useful in characteriz­
ing the surface of the electrode before and after the attachment of biologi­
cal elements such as antibodies or antigens. Specifically, EIS can monitor
changes in charge transfer resistance that arise due to the immobilization
of such biomolecules and the subsequent binding of the analyte. The con­
jugation of these biomolecules onto the electrode surface creates a physical
barrier that impedes electron transfer, leading to an increase in impedance.
Therefore, any subsequent binding event (e.g., the binding of an antigen to
its immobilized antibody) can be effectively quantified by further changes
in impedance.
In this experiment, 6 MN electrodes went through the preparation steps
analogous to the biosensing assay with the difference that after each step,
EIS study was carried out in a 1:1 molar ratio of 10 mM ferro/ferri cyanide
as described in the methods section. After that electrodes were washed
with PBS and placed back in the MN holder and the next incubation part
of the biosensing preparation step was commenced, followed by another
wash, EIS and so on until all steps were evaluated.
A circuit curve was fitted to the impedance spectra (Figure 3.9) so that
electrolyte resistance RS and charge transfer resistance RCT values could
be extracted. Although there was large variability between the electrodes,
the notion of increasing RCT values with each step was observed (Figure
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
33
==PAGE:42==
3.10).
Figure 3.9: Representative Nyquist plot that was generated from EIS experiments,
which were done in between each biosensing fabrication step. The ﬁtted circuit is
depicted on the top left of the ﬁgure, while a legend with all the colour coding of
the last elements added is shown on the right
Initially, bare carbon MNs achieved charge transfer resistance of 715Ω±
45Ω. These values decreased following AuNP deposition to 136.1 Ω±
23 Ω, which is aligned with initial expectations as AuNP both increases
the electroactive surface area due to the large surface­to­volume ratio of
the nanoparticles and also gold is well known for its conductive properties,
therefore a decrease in impedance is consistent with these effects.
Next, the MNs went through an antibody conjugation procedure as de­
scribed in the methods section and the electrodes were placed again in the
electrochemical cell for further EIS studies, where mean RCT values of
1061 Ω± 500 Ωwas achieved (Figure 3.10). The next step of the biosensor
fabrication involved blocking of free surfaces with BSA, which increased
34
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.10: Bar chart depicting the evolution of the RCT values as measured by
EIS of each step fabrication and detection of the biosensor
RCT to 1960 Ω± 327 Ω. At this point the sensor could be considered ready
for sensing the analyte, therefore 500 ng/mL TNF­α solution was incubated
with the MNs. This increased RCT values to 2291 Ω± 632 Ω. This was
followed by incubation with a biotinylated secondary antibody which had
the effect of further increasing the charge transfer resistance to 2536 Ω±
540 Ω. Lastly, the MN sensors were incubated with streptavidin­HRP and
the last EIS measurements were carried out, resulting in RCT values of
2620 Ω± 514 Ω. All of these data points are summarized in figure 3.10
and a representative EIS spectra of one of the electrodes is shown depict­
ing the changes after the addition of each component in figure 3.9
3.3
Understanding and optimizing and the
electrochemical detection
At this point, the whole micro­ and nanofabrication of the biosensor can be
considered complete. The next step required for the successful application
of the sensor is to apply the electrochemical detection via differential pulse
voltammetry (DPV), however, due to the novel nature of the constructed
biosensor, work was undertaken 1) to study and optimize the effect that
different parameters of the DPV have on signal generation and to find the
optimal combination which would allow for best electrochemical detection
and 2) to understand the behaviour of the sensing system employing HQ
and H2O2 with DPV detection. These points are covered in this section.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
35
==PAGE:44==
3.3.1
Differential Pulse Voltammetry parameters investigation
This section describes the in more detail the DPV electrochemical method
and the investigation of the different parameters which play a role in its ap­
plication. The study of the effects of these parameters is presented towards
increasing the generated signal output so that optimal biosensing DPV pro­
tocol could be established.
Introduction to DPV Parameters
DPV is considered a powerful technique in biosensing applications due to
a number of key advantages it holds over other methods. For example,
DPV has enhanced sensitivity and selectivity, as it operates by superim­
posing a small pulse on a linear potential sweep and measures the current
immediately before the end of each pulse, allowing it to disregard much of
the capacitive current. This leads to a better signal­to­noise ratio, enabling
the detection of low analyte concentrations that might be obscured in other
methods. The potential change with respect to time is visualized in figure
3.11
Figure 3.11: A ﬁgure showing the DPV method and how the potential changes in
respect to time [29].
Several parameters play a crucial role in DPV and significantly impact its
performance. The pulse amplitude (Epulse )determines the magnitude of the
voltage applied, affecting the peak current and signal­to­noise ratio. The
pulse width defines the duration of each voltage pulse, influencing the res­
36
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:45==
olution and sensitivity of the measurement. The pulse period regulates the
time between successive voltage pulses, ensuring sufficient time for elec­
trode reconditioning. Furthermore, the scan rate governs the speed at which
the potential is varied, influencing the peak separation and electrochemical
kinetics. Understanding and optimizing these parameters are essential for
achieving accurate and reliable results in DPV­based biosensing, therefore
investigation of pulse amplitude and duration was undertaken with the MN
electrodes.
Pulse duration
In order to investigate the effect that the pulse width is having on the current
output, an experiment was done using the HRP­coated electrodes, which
were described in the previous section. All the other parameters were as
described in the methods section, while the pulse duration, defined as tpulse
in figure 3.11 was varied between 300 ms down to 5 ms and the peak cur­
rents were measured (Figure 3.12). Optimizing the duration of the pulse is
important as the right balance would provide the best signal­to­noise ratio.
When 300 ms was used this produced a peak of 7 µA and it was observed
that when shortening the duration to 50 ms, 25 ms and 15 ms produced
larger currents of ­23 µA, ­24 µA and ­28 µA respectively. A pulse dura­
tion of 10 ms gave a current output of ­37 µA and 5 ms ­36 µA.
Based on this study 10 ms was selected as the pulse duration as smaller tem­
poral width did not provide increasing benefit in terms of currents output.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.12: DPV experiments where the pulse duration has been varied from 300
ms to 5 ms and the current peak was recorded. In the 10ms DPV a dotted line
visualizes how the peak current is being measured.
Pulse amplitude
In addition, the relationship between the pulse potential amplitude ­ Epulse
and the current output was investigated. Experiments were carried out us­
ing the HRP­coated electrodes described previously, while Epulse was var­
ied from 25 mV to 100 mV (Figure 3.13). It was observed that the increased
Epulse correlated positively with the increased current peak values as the am­
plitude potentials of 25 mV, 50 mV, and 75 mV and 100 mV generated peak
current values of 13 µA, 24 µA, 39 µA, and 51 µA respectively.
This experiment demonstrated that an increased signal­to­noise ratio is gen­
erated with increasing Epulse, however, it is important to note that too high
amplitude can have adverse effects on the electrochemical system due to
the possibility of triggering Faradeic currents which may lead to unwanted
chemical transformations, interfering with the accurate detection and quan­
tification of the target analyte [30]. Therefore, an amplitude of 100 mV
was selected for the final biosensing DPV protocol.
38
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.13: DPV experiments where the pulse amplitude has been varied from 25
mV to 100 mV and the current peak was recorded.
Taking in the experimental data generated and described in this section,
the final DPV parameters were settled at a pulse duration of 10 ms, pulse
amplitude of 100 mV with a step potential of 10 mV and a scan rate of 100
mV/sec. The potential range was from 0,4 V to ­0,3 V.
3.3.2
Hydroqinone, Hydrogen peroxide, HRP and their interplay
during DPV
When applied to sandwich immunosensing assays, the whole premise of the
detection is based on the electron generation from the catalysis of H2O2 via
HRP, while hydroquinone (HQ) is acting as an electron transfer mediator,
getting oxidized by HRP to benzoquinone and then reduced back to HQ at
electrode surface during DPV, generating a detectable signal in the process.
This electrochemical system, which is applied extensively in literature [14]
is visualized in figure 3.14.
In order to understand how this system behaves in the context of the work
described here, experiments were undertaken where DPV was done in the
presence or absence of each of the 3 electrochemical components ­ HQ,
H2O2 and HRP according to Table 3.1
To accelerate the development of the process and focus solely on studying
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.14: Schematic of the electrochemical system which drives signal generation
and allows for detection of the analyte. Adapted from [31]
the HQ, H2O2 and HRP detection system, a biosensor mimicking system
was developed, where the MN electrodes were treated with HRP directly
following AuNP deposition, skipping antibody­analyte­antibody sandwich
immunocomplex. This system works as the HRP enzyme has charged re­
gions which allow for very effective adsorption to AuNP and this feature
has indeed been exploited for the fabrications of hydrogen peroxide biosen­
sors [14]
Table 3.1: Experimental Conditions
Conditions
HQ
+
+
+
+
H2O2
−
+
−
+
HRP
−
−
+
+
First DPV was carried out in the presence of only 2 mM HQ (in PBS) in the
electrochemical cell, with a MN having no HRP ­ only carbon and AuNPs
were on the surface. This generated a peak at 160 mV (Figure 3.15 yellow
graph), indicating that reduction of benzoquinone (BQ) to HQ does take
place, in spite of the fact that the HQ solution was prepared fresh and there
should be no benzoquinone to be reduced in the solution. However, it was
observed (Data not shown) that in the presence of PBS HQ solution changes
to redder colour, indicating oxidation to BQ takes place when HQ is dis­
solved in PBS but not in H2O. When H2O2 was added to the electrochem­
ical cell to a final concentration of 1 mM, DPV was performed again on
the same electrode. The resulting graph (Figure 3.15 light green) achieves
peak currents at the same potential of 160 mV with a small decrease with
40
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:49==
total currents compared to HQ only, which whenever is corrected for the
initial current, the difference is negligible (30.2 µA for HQ vs 29.1 µA for
HQ + H2O2).
Next, the MN electrode was taken out of the electrochemical cell and incu­
bated with a concentrated solution (1:500 dilution) of HRP for a duration
of 1 hour, after which the electrode was placed back in the cell and another
DPV was conducted in the presence of 2 mM HQ (in PBS) only. The result­
ing graph, which can be seen in figure 3.15 (dark green), shows a broader
peak near the same potential as observed with the previous two conditions ­
130 mV. The current is decreased ­ 17.2µA, which could be due to the HRP
enzyme layer passivating the electrode, decreasing its conductivity. This
data demonstrates that in the presence of HRP, HQ does not have any in­
creased oxidation rate or much different behaviour as when the experiment
was conducted in the absence of HRP.
Lastly, a DPV measurement was carried out, when all three components
of the sensing system were present in the electrochemical cell ­ 2 mM HQ,
1 mM H2O2 and the HRP­coated MN. The resulting output graph (Figure
3.15 purple) shows a dramatically different situation compared to the previ­
ous conditions, as there are two peaks clearly visible one achieving currents
of 8,1 µA at 150 mV, which is near the range already observed, and another
new peak at ­30 mV with a current of ­19.6 µA.
Figure 3.15: Voltammogram from a DPV experiment depicting the diﬀerences in the
peaks between detection in the presence of HQ only (yellow), HQ and H2O2 (light
green), HQ and HRP (dark green) and all three components HQ, H2O2 and HRP
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
41
==PAGE:50==
This result indicates that when all three components are present together
the catalytic reaction that takes place leads to oxidation from HQ to BQ,
which then is reduced back to HQ at the electrode surface at a much lower
potential compared to all of the cases when any one of the three components
is missing. Furthermore, it is important to note the observation that there
is still a peak at these higher potential values and with the increased time
where all three components are incubated in the electrochemical cell before
the initiation of DPV, the more ’peak conversion’ takes place from one peak
to the other as seen in figure 3.16, where DPV was carried immediately
after the needle was in contact with electrolyte, and then every following
30 seconds for 2 min
Figure 3.16: DPV on the HRP coated electrode where measurements were done
immediately after MN was in the beaker, and then every following 30 seconds for
the next 2 minutes.
3.4
Discussion
The successful development of a biosensor relies on effective surface func­
tionalization and the establishment of a robust immunoassay. In the sec­
tions covered in this chapter, significant progress was made in optimiz­
ing the surface functionalization process and establishing a sandwich im­
munoassay for the detection of TNF­α.
Surface functionalization plays a crucial role in ensuring the stability and
performance of biosensors. It was found that high concentrations of H[AuCl4]
42
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:51==
and prolonged deposition times led to the formation of clusters and film­
like structures, which were unsuitable for further functionalization of the
MN surface.
By optimizing the parameters, a deposition condition of 3 mM H[AuCl4]
for 20 seconds was identified. This condition resulted in uniformly dis­
persed AuNPs on the carbon surface of the MN electrodes. The size and
morphology of the AuNPs were a combination of structures which resem­
bled nanoflowers ranging in size from 180 to 300 nm as well as classical
oval NPs of a smaller size of 90 nm. These nanoflowers were also present
in the conditions which had higher concentrations of the gold precursor so­
lution. Although there was no aim for the synthesis of these structures, they
have been shown to be forming when additional molecules like dopamine
or ascorbic acid are added to the chloroauric acid precursor solution [32].
In the deposition described in this thesis work, H[AuCl4] was dissolved in
0.5 M H4SO4 so it is possible the complex nature and multitude of reactions
that take place at the electrode surface contribute to these formations as for
example O2 reduction has been shown to be involved in differently shaped
AuNP synthesis on glassy carbon electrodes [33]
The next steps of biosensor fabrication involved the chemical conjugation
of SATA­modified antibodies, which exploited thiol chemistry to function­
alize the surface of the MN electrode. The key factor of this process is
the concentration of the capture antibody used, which in this case was 10
µg/mL when the SATA­modified antibody solution was introduced to the
gold on the surface of the MN. Due to time constraints, it was not possible
to explore different concentrations and it could be argued that increasing
the amount of antibodies could contribute to a wider linear range and lower
detection limits, however, too high concentrations will cause protein foul­
ing and will have a reduction of the sensing capabilities. In this case, during
initial biosensing, it was confirmed that this concentration works (Figure
A.3) so it was kept going forwards, however, it will be important to explore
how different concentrations will affect the sensitivity of the sensor.
The successful conjugation was also confirmed by EIS as it was observed
that following the antibody conjugation reaction that the biggest increase
of charge transfer resistance was observed (Figure 3.10). This is to be ex­
pected as the previous step ­ AuNP deposition ­ increases the electron trans­
fer rate, presenting the lowest resistance as well. Following the addition of
an antibody on the surface, less of the electrode is available for the elec­
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
43
==PAGE:52==
tron transfer reaction. On average, each step of the process ­ the blocking
with BSA, incubation with a high dose of TNF­α of 500 ng/mL, secondary
biotinylated antibody and streptavidin­HRP complex had a net increase ef­
fect of RCT values. However, when individual electrodes were observed
that was not always the outcome as in a few of the electrodes RCT values
peaked at TNFα (Figire3.9) or secondary antibody followed by a small de­
crease of RCT. This could be due to parts of these proteins being removed
during the washing steps or when overall handling of the sensor.
In addition, experiments were conducted to understand the behaviour of the
sensing system in the presence or absence of each component (HQ, H2O2,
and HRP). It was observed that when all three components were present,
the catalytic reaction resulted in oxidation from HQ to BQ, followed by
reduction back to HQ at a lower potential compared to the cases when any
one of the components was missing. One possible explanation for this phe­
nomenon is that the presence of all three components creates a favourable
environment for the catalytic reaction to occur more efficiently. HRP acts
as a catalyst, facilitating the decomposition of H2O2, which can then oxi­
dize HQ to BQ. The reduced form of HRP is regenerated by the reaction
between H2O2 and HRP, completing the catalytic cycle [34].
The study of DPV parameters, including pulse duration and pulse ampli­
tude, was crucial for optimizing the electrochemical detection process. It
was found that a pulse duration of 10 ms and a pulse amplitude of 100 mV
generated the best current peak values, therefore these parameters were se­
lected for the final biosensing DPV protocol and validation of the system ­
topic covered in the next chapter.
44
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Biosensing and validation
In order to validate the successful functioning of the MN biosensor, electro­
chemical measurements utilizing differential pulse voltammetry were car­
ried out after incubation with different TNF­α concentrations or a blank
sample.
4.1
TNF­α detection via DPV
The MN sensors were incubated with 100 ng/mL, 10 ng/mL, 1 ng/mL, and
0.1 ng/mL of TNF­α for 1 h during the analyte incubation steps, after which
MNs were washed and incubated with secondary antibodies and HRP as
described previously. The blank samples were incubated with assay buffer
only. After that MNs were placed in the electrochemical cell in the presence
of 1 mM H2O2 and 2 mM HQ and after 2 min DPV was initiated. This
waiting time was determined by additional experimentation A.8, the results
of which can be seen in the appendix. The experiment was repeated 3 times
for each concentration and 4 times with the blanks. Peak currents were
measured by PSTrace software by its peak detection function.
The highest concentration of 100 ng/mL of TNF­α achieved peak currents
of ­51.4 µA ± 2.9 µA as seen in figure 4.1. When the concentration was
decreased to 10 ng/mL achieved currents were ­38.7 µA ± 0.8 µA and for
1 ng/mL and 0.1 ng/mL the resulting currents were ­27.4 µA ± 1.7µA and
­16.2 µA ± 3 µA respectively (Figure 4.1). The blank samples, where no
TNF­α was introduced to the MN biosensors had mean currents of ­7.3 µA
± 0.73 µA.
4.2
Calibration curve, detection and quantification
limits
The data from the previous section was used to make a calibration curve,
which can be seen in figure 4.2. X­axis is presented as a log of concentra­
tion values in the ng/mL range and the Y­axis contains the current values in
µA. The MN biosensor achieved a correlation coefficient of 0.9991, which
means that an excellent correlation and linearity have been achieved within
the ng/mL range down to 100 pg/mL. The blank samples demonstrated a
low standard deviation of 0.73µA and theoretical detection limit of 28.47
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.1: Output voltammogram from DPV experiment showing the cathodic
currents in the applied potential range 0.4 V to -0.3 V. a) blank sample, b) 0.1 ng/mL,
c) 1 ng/mL, d) 10 ng/mL, e) 100 ng/mL. The data is representative of out of 3
experimental replicates (4 for blank samples)
pg/mL and a quantification limit of 77.51 pg/mL. These values were calcu­
lated by using the standard deviation from the blank sample and multiplying
it 3 times or 10 times for LOD and LOQ respectively using the slope from
the calibration plot
46
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.2: Calibration curve depicting the linear relationship between the detected
current values and log of TNF-α concentration from 0.1 to 100 ng/mL. The top
right corner shows the slope and intercept as well as the R2 value of 0.9991. Error
bars represent standard deviation from 3 experimental replicates
4.3
Discussion
MN based TNF­α electrochemical assay
The validation experiment conducted in this study demonstrated the suc­
cessful detection of TNF­α using the fabricated 3D­printed pyrolytic car­
bon microneedle biosensor. It was able to detect analyte concentrations
ranging from 0.1 ng/mL to 100 ng/mL, with a high degree of linearity (R2
= 0.9991) observed within this range. This indicates that the biosensor can
accurately measure the pro­inflammatory cytokine concentrations within
the tested range, making it a potentially useful tool for monitoring in clini­
cal settings.
The theoretical detection limit of the biosensor was found to be 28.47 pg/mL,
with a quantification limit of 77.51 pg/mL. It is important to relate these
limits to TNF­α levels which are found to have clinical significance. In
literature, healthy controls subjects have measured plasma TNF­α concen­
trations ranging from 1.5 up to 19 pg/mL with these levels being elevated
up to 42 pg/mL in different studies [35][36][37]. As it has been shown that
there is a similar protein signature profiles between dermal ISF and plasma
[38] having a sensor which can detect levels in sub­pg/mL levels should be
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
47
==PAGE:56==
sufficient for TNF­α, so additional improvements of the sensor are needed
to get to that sensitivity. It is also important to note that the fabrication
protocol as it is involving antibodies, they can be exchanged for whatever
analyte is of clinical importance and many biomarkers are in the range of
ng/mL [39].
In addition, although the dermal ISF is underexplored, there have been stud­
ies which have measured inflammatory biomarkers, including TNF­α, in
both sepsis patients and healthy controls and have compared the ISF with
plasma levels [40]. The results revealed that most inflammatory mark­
ers were higher in ISF compared to plasma, however, the fluid extraction
method in that study, the so­called suction blister fluid generation is quite
damaging to the dermal cells, which might be causing local inflammation,
increasing these levels. It matters how the sensing is done and more studies
are needed to evaluate the inflammation caused by MNs penetrating the top
layers of the skin, and how this is accounted for when trying the measure
whole­body inflammation.
Regardless, it is strongly desirable to improve the sensitivity of the assay de­
scribed in this work, which can be done by applying a signal amplification
strategy. One commonly used approach would be to modify the secondary
part of the sandwich immunoassay with metallic NPs, which would allow
for multiple HRP labels to refer to a single analyte molecule and binding
event [41] as illustrated in figure 4.3 as compared to a single HRP to single
analyte as it is the case in the current study. In addition, an approach where
catalytic NPs together with HRP allow for a dual­signal amplification sys­
tem can bring down the LOD an order of magnitude down to fg/mL [42].
These methods are all to be explored in the future continuation of this work
One potential limitation of the validation experiment is that it was con­
ducted in a controlled laboratory setting, using prepared samples of TNF­α.
In a real­world clinical setting, the biosensor would need to detect TNF­α
in dermal interstitial fluid, which contains a complex mixture of other sub­
stances that could potentially interfere with the detection of TNF­α. There­
fore, further validation studies are needed to evaluate the performance of
the biosensor in a more complex matrix where its specificity can be evalu­
ated as well. Considering the nature of the widely applied antibody­antigen
reaction in molecular biology and medicine there should be good speci­
ficity and near to no cross­reactivity, never the less spiked studies in ISF or
plasma have to be conducted.
48
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.3: Example of a signal ampliﬁcation strategy to be incorporated in future
continuation of the study. As adapted from [43]
In addition, there is a key consideration when extending the biosensor’s ap­
plication to skin penetration scenarios ­ the potential impact of mechanical
stress exerted by skin penetration on the robustness of the sensor’s surface
functionalization. The act of skin penetration could disrupt the AuNPs and
capture antibodies ­ elements that are pivotal for the biosensor’s sensitivity
and specificity. Any disruption to these elements could compromise the
biosensor’s performance. Thus, comprehensive investigations are needed
to understand and mitigate these potential impacts.
Furthermore, there exists a potential risk of these functionalization molecules,
remaining in the skin during sensor withdrawal, which could trigger local
inflammatory reactions or other adverse biological effects. One potential
solution to address these concerns could involve treating the sensor’s sur­
face with a biocompatible, biodegradable polymer [44] that encapsulates
and protects the functional elements during skin penetration and subse­
quently dissolves in the skin, minimizing the risk of unintended reactions.
Building on our single microneedle­based biosensor, future research should
prioritize developing an array of microneedles, potentially boosting signal
strength and detection reliability. The size of our current microneedle, ap­
proximately 2.87mm, also requires reevaluation. To balance effective stra­
tum corneum penetration and user comfort, future iterations should aim for
microneedles no larger than 1.5mm, ideally around 1mm. Refining the fab­
rication process to achieve this reduction could enhance the practicality and
acceptance of this biosensing technology.
Despite these challenges, the 3D­printed microneedle biosensor’s potential
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
49
==PAGE:58==
for clinical application remains promising. Future work should focus on
addressing these concerns, with the overarching aim of advancing the per­
formance of this biosensor for real­world clinical applications.
50
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
This micro and nanoengineering research project has successfully show­
cased the innovative application of additive manufacturing in the domain
of electrochemical biosensing. Through the process, it was demonstrated
that microneedles can be 3D printed, converted to pyrolytic carbon, and
effectively functionalized with AuNP and capture antibodies.
An essential part of this work was a rigorous optimization process, during
which an optimal AuNP deposition protocol was established and suitable
parameters for electrochemical sensing via DPV were identified. The re­
sult of this intensive optimization was a robust biosensor, which was elec­
trochemically characterized using EIS. The established assay demonstrated
remarkable linearity, ranging from 0.1 to 100 ng/mL, and a theoretical LOD
as low as 28 pg/mL.
However, while this LOD may be sufficient for many biomarkers, it falls
short of the sensitivity required for TNF­α detection within the dermal ISF.
This underscores the need for further enhancement of the sensor’s sensi­
tivity ­ a task that will be tackled in future research by applying strategies
for signal amplification systems to amplify the assay’s sensitivity. Further­
more, it’s important to note that the validation of the assay was carried out
in a controlled laboratory environment. Future validation studies should
aim to evaluate the biosensor’s performance and specificity in a more com­
plex, real­world biological matrix.
With the capability to exchange antibodies for different analytes of clinical
importance, the biosensor could be adapted for the detection of a variety
of biomarkers, extending its utility beyond TNF­α detection, which makes
this biosensor remarkably versatile.
In summary, this project represents an important development in the field of
biosensing technology with the findings presented highlighting the poten­
tial of additive manufacturing in the creation of electrochemical biosensors.
The current limitations identified provide critical directions for further re­
finement of this 3D­printed microneedle biosensor. With continuous im­
provement and validation, this approach has the potential to enhance the
capabilities of point­of­care diagnostics, underlining the critical role of mi­
cro and nanoengineering in advancing medical diagnostics.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
51
==PAGE:60==
This thesis, therefore, marks a significant contribution to the advancement
of biosensor technology and provides a strong foundation for future explo­
rations, with the overarching aim of enhancing point­of­care solutions and
improving patient outcomes.
52
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization. Non communicable diseases. Sept. 2022. URL:
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/noncommunicable-diseases.
[2]
Özgecan Erdem et al. “Recent advances in microneedle-based sensors for sam-
pling, diagnosis and monitoring of chronic diseases”. In: Biosensors 11.9 (2021),
p. 296. DOI: 10.3390/bios11090296.
[3]
Khaled Mohammed Saifullah and Zahra Faraji Rad. “Sampling dermal inter-
stitial ﬂuid using microneedles: A review of recent developments in sampling
methods and microneedlebased biosensors”. In: Advanced Materials Interfaces
10.10 (2023). DOI: 10.1002/admi.202201763.
[4]
Ali A. Ensaﬁ. “An introduction to sensors and Biosensors”. In: Electrochemical
Biosensors (2019), pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-816491-4.00001-2.
[5]
Daniel R. Thévenot et al. “Electrochemical biosensors: Recommended deﬁni-
tions and classiﬁcation1international union of Pure and Applied Chemistry:
Physical Chemistry Division, Commission I.7 (Biophysical Chemistry); Ana-
lytical Chemistry Division, commission v.5 (Electroanalytical Chemistry).1”.
In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics 16.12 (2001), pp. 121–131. DOI: 10.1016/
s0956-5663(01)00115-4.
[6]
Shun Mao et al. “Highly sensitive protein sensor based on thermally-reduced
graphene oxide ﬁeld-eﬀect transistor”. In: Nano Research 4.10 (2011), pp. 921–
930. DOI: 10.1007/s12274-011-0148-3.
[7]
Anran Gao et al. “Silicon-nanowire-based CMOS-compatible ﬁeld-eﬀect tran-
sistor nanosensors for ultrasensitive electrical detection of Nucleic Acids”. In:
Nano Letters 11.9 (2011), pp. 3974–3978. DOI: 10.1021/nl202303y.
[8]
Xiaodong Cao, Yongkang Ye, and Songqin Liu. “Gold nanoparticle-based sig-
nal ampliﬁcation for biosensing”. In: Analytical Biochemistry 417.1 (2011),
pp. 1–16. DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2011.05.027.
[9]
Dorothee Grieshaber et al. “Electrochemical biosensors - sensor principles and
Architectures”. In: Sensors 8.3 (2008), pp. 1400–1458. DOI: 10.3390/s80314000.
[10]
Yanxin Li et al. “Peptide nucleic acid and antifouling peptide based biosensor
for the non-fouling detection of covid-19 nucleic acid in saliva”. In: Biosensors
and Bioelectronics 225 (2023), p. 115101. DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115101.
[11]
Hui Wu et al. “Aptamer functionalized cell membrane for brain and nerve cell
sensing with high sensitivity and stability”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics
227 (2023), p. 115149. DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115149.
[12]
Wei Zhang et al. “Miniaturized electrochemical sensors and their point-of-care
applications”. In: Chinese Chemical Letters 31.3 (2020), pp. 589–600. DOI:
10.1016/j.cclet.2019.09.022.
[13]
Mukerrem Findik. “ZnO nanoﬂowers modiﬁed pencil graphite electrode for
voltammetric DNA detection and investigation of GemcitabineDNA Interac-
tion”. In: Materials Chemistry and Physics 307 (2023), p. 128117. DOI: 10.
1016/j.matchemphys.2023.128117.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
53
==PAGE:62==
[14]
Zahra Akbari jonous et al. “An electrochemical biosensor for prostate cancer
biomarker detection using graphene oxide-gold nanostructures”. In: Engineer-
ing in Life Sciences 19.3 (2019), pp. 206–216. DOI: 10.1002/elsc.201800093.
[15]
Fahimeh Mollamohammadi, Hassan Faridnouri, and Ehsan Nazarzadeh Zare.
“Electrochemical biosensing of L-DOPA using tyrosinase immobilized on car-
boxymethyl starch-graft-polyaniline@mwcnts nanocomposite”. In: Biosensors
13.5 (2023), p. 562. DOI: 10.3390/bios13050562.
[16]
Ipshita Menon et al. “Microneedles: A new generation vaccine delivery system”.
In: Micromachines 12.4 (2021), p. 435. DOI: 10.3390/mi12040435.
[17]
Huiting Lu et al. “Microneedle-based device for biological analysis”. In: Fron-
tiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 10 (2022). DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.
851134.
[18]
Mottour Vinayagam Chinnamani et al. “Soft microﬁber-based hollow micronee-
dle array for stretchable microﬂuidic biosensing patch with negative pressure-
driven sampling”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics 237 (2023), p. 115468. DOI:
10.1016/j.bios.2023.115468.
[19]
Xiaoxuan Zhang et al. “Encoded Microneedle arrays for detection of skin in-
terstitial ﬂuid biomarkers”. In: Advanced Materials 31.37 (2019), p. 1902825.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.201902825.
[20]
Fatemeh Keyvani et al. “A hydrogel microneedle assay combined with Nu-
cleic Acid Probes for onsite detection of small molecules and proteins”. In:
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 62.21 (2023). DOI: 10.1002/anie.
202301624.
[21]
David Rodbard. “Continuous Glucose Monitoring: A review of successes, chal-
lenges, and opportunities”. In: Diabetes Technology and Therapeutics 18.S2
(2016). DOI: 10.1089/dia.2015.0417.
[22]
Hui- Ling Peng et al. “Parylene-based ﬂexible dry electrode for bioptential
recording”. In: Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 231 (2016), pp. 1–11. DOI:
10.1016/j.snb.2016.02.061.
[23]
Yayue Pan and Yong Chen. “Fast Micro-Stereolithography Process based on
Bottom-up Projection for Complex Geometry”. In: 2015.
[24]
Babak Rezaei et al. “Highly structured 3D pyrolytic carbon electrodes de-
rived from additive manufacturing technology”. In: Materials amp; Design 193
(2020), p. 108834. DOI: 10.1016/j.matdes.2020.108834.
[25]
Roger Narayan. Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering. Elsevier, 2019.
[26]
Paul Ducheyne et al. Comprehensive biomaterials II. Elsevier, 2017.
[27]
Abha Umesh Sardesai et al. “Design and Electrochemical Characterization
of Spiral Electrochemical Notiﬁcation Coupled Electrode (SENCE) Platform
for Biosensing Application”. In: Micromachines 11.3 (2020). ISSN: 2072-666X.
DOI: 10.3390/mi11030333. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-666X/11/3/
333.
[28]
URL: https://www.thermoﬁsher.com/order/catalog/product/26102.
[29]
Oct. 2022. URL: https://www.palmsens.com/knowledgebase-article/diﬀerential-
pulse-voltammetry-dpv/.
[30]
B. Jill Venton and Dana J. DiScenza. “Voltammetry”. In: Electrochemistry for
Bioanalysis (2020), pp. 27–50. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-821203-5.00004-x.
54
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:63==
[31]
In: Bulletin of the Korean Chemical Society 27.5 (2006), pp. 672–678. DOI:
10.5012/bkcs.2006.27.5.672.
[32]
Sijia Yi et al. “One-step synthesis of dendritic gold nanoﬂowers with high
surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) properties”. In: RSC Advances
3.26 (2013), p. 10139. DOI: 10.1039/c3ra40716k.
[33]
Guillaume Gotti et al. “Electrodeposited gold nanoparticles on glassy carbon:
Correlation between nanoparticles characteristics and oxygen reduction kinet-
ics in neutral media”. In: Electrochimica Acta 128 (2014), pp. 412–419. DOI:
10.1016/j.electacta.2013.10.172.
[34]
Conrado Camacho et al. “Novel enzyme biosensor for hydrogen peroxide via
supramolecular associations”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics 24.7 (2009),
pp. 2028–2033. DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2008.10.008.
[35]
Ozer Arican et al. “Serum levels of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-6, IL-8, IL-
12, IL-17, and IL-18 in patients with active psoriasis and correlation with
disease severity”. In: Mediators of Inﬂammation 2005.5 (2005), pp. 273–279.
DOI: 10.1155/mi.2005.273.
[36]
Maura Cristina Feitosa et al. “Plasma concentration of IL-6 and TNF- and its
relationship with zincemia in obese women”. In: Revista da Associação Médica
Brasileira 59.5 (2013), pp. 429–434. DOI: 10.1016/j.ramb.2013.03.003.
[37]
Yoshikatsu Nakai et al. “Plasma concentrations of tumor necrosis factor- (TNF-
) and soluble TNF receptors in patients with anorexia nervosa”. In: The Jour-
nal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 84.4 (1999), pp. 1226–1228.
DOI: 10.1210/jcem.84.4.5589.
[38]
Philip R. Miller et al. “Extraction and biomolecular analysis of dermal inter-
stitial ﬂuid collected with hollow microneedles”. In: Communications Biology
1.1 (2018). DOI: 10.1038/s42003-018-0170-z.
[39]
James F. Rusling et al. “Measurement of biomarker proteins for point-of-care
early detection and monitoring of cancer”. In: The Analyst 135.10 (2010),
p. 2496. DOI: 10.1039/c0an00204f.
[40]
M. Koskela et al. “Blister ﬂuid and serum cytokine levels in severe sepsis in
humans reﬂect skin dysfunction”. In: Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica 61.1
(2016), pp. 53–61. DOI: 10.1111/aas.12771.
[41]
Zhaoxiang Zhang et al. “Horseradish peroxidase and antibody labeled gold
nanoparticle probe for ampliﬁed immunoassay of ciguatoxin in ﬁsh samples
based on capillary electrophoresis with electrochemical detection”. In: Toxicon
96 (2015), pp. 89–95. DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.01.015.
[42]
Peipei Chen et al. “A dual ampliﬁcation electrochemical immunosensor based
on HRP-Au@Ag NPS for carcinoembryonic antigen detection”. In: Analytical
Biochemistry 574 (2019), pp. 23–30. DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2019.03.003.
[43]
Ruchuon Yokchom et al. “Paper-based immunosensor with signal ampliﬁcation
by enzyme-labeled anti-p16ink4a multifunctionalized gold nanoparticles for
cervical cancer screening”. In: Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and
Medicine 14.3 (2018), pp. 1051–1058. DOI: 10.1016/j.nano.2018.01.016.
[44]
Fanmao Liu et al. “Protection of nanostructures-integrated microneedle biosen-
sor using dissolvable polymer coating”. In: ACS Applied Materials ;amp; In-
terfaces 11.5 (2019), pp. 4809–4819. DOI: 10.1021/acsami.8b18981.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:65==
Appendix A
In the following pages data, which did not make it into the main body of
the thesis would be included.
A.1
MN holder evolution
One of the challenges of this project was related to inventing how to carry
out the steps which involved the addition of the proteins to the surface of the
MN (antibodies, analyte, HRP). Multiple variations were 3D printed, tested
and evaluated before it final version was reached. Below some of these
previous versions are depicted. The issue with the first design ­ figureA.1,
was that the MNs were too difficult to remove and place from the holders
without the risk of being dropped. Also, the MNs were moving too much
and were occasionally falling off from the holder. The issue with the next
design shown in figure A.2 was that the lid was falling off and overall the
structure was unstable.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.1: A version of the MN holder that occupied 6 wells in a ﬂat-bottomed
96-well plate. Top left - interaction with the MNs nested in the holder while the
tip is in contact with the solution. One of the issues of this design was that the
meniscus was changing in a way that was leaving the MNs exposed to air which
would cause the proteins to denature. Top right - a 3D rendering of the holder as
a digital ﬁle before its 3D printing. Bottom left - how two holders ﬁt in a 96-well
plate as seen from above. Bottom right - close-up of a MN in a well.
58
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.2: Secondary iteration of the MN holder, where each holder had a frontal
lid that was supposed to hold the MN in place. Top - the row for all MNs, Middle -
images from the top, side, and the lid that was supposed to keep the MN in place.
Bottom - the holder in a 96-well plate.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
59
==PAGE:68==
A.2
First initial biosensing proof of concept and
alternative sensing approach
As in the beginning, the sensing method via DPV was matured enough in
order to verify the presence of HRP as a final label on the surface. There­
fore in order to verify that the biosensing concept has worked an alterna­
tive detection was applied by dipping the MNs in a well with 3,3′,5,5′­
Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), which is widely used chromogenic substrate
in ELISA reactions as in the presence of H2O2 and HRP produces a blue
colour which can be measured with a plate reader. Below in figure A.3 are
pictures from that experiment. After 30 minutes of incubation at RT, the
well was mixed with a pipette and 1M H3PO4 was added, which changed
the blue colour to a yellow, which was measured in a spectrophotometer at
604 nm and the output from the measurement can be seen in figure A.4
Figure A.3: Pictures following incubation of the MN holder with the tips of the
MNs being in contact with TMB solution. TOP - 3 concentrations - 0.1, 10 and
1000ng/mL of TNF-α incubation in duplicates.BOTTOM - 3 blanks
60
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.4: Absorbance data from ﬁrst biosensing, where TMB was used as a de-
tection probe.
A.3
Additional SEM images
Below are two additional SEM images A.5 which have magnification of
over the inner lattice structure visible through the bottom opening of the
MN. Images were taken after the pyrolytic process.
Figure A.5: Two SEM images of the pyrolytic carbon MNs zoomed into the bottom
part of the needle. Further magniﬁcation on to the lattice structure reveals how the
symmetry is being preserved after pyrolysis.
A.4
BMF settings for MN 3D printing
Below in figure A.6 the detailed settings that were used for the MN printing
are shown.
Below in figure A.7 two example images are shown to visualise how the
3D STL files are segmented in a multitude of images. These in particular
represent the last image file for the base and the first file that initiates the
MN.
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.6: Picture from the BMF printing software, where the printed settings are
shown. The ﬁrst column shows which image number the settings apply for. There
are 430 layers in total for the structure and there are 3 diﬀerent settings - for the
1st layer, for the following 9 and for the rest 420. The second column depicts the
exposure time of the laser in seconds, followed by the intensity of the laser, where
the number is a percentage of total laser power. The next 4 columns operate the
movement of the platform along the Z axis and the waiting times in seconds between
layers. The last column controls how many scraper cleanings are to be applied within
dedicated printing layers.
Figure A.7: Example of two out of the 430 images that are fed into the printer
following the segmentation. Left - the last layer of the base, right - the ﬁrst layer of
the MN.
62
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
==PAGE:71==
A.5
DPV waiting time
An experiment was conducted to evaluate the effect of time during the mea­
surement process. The aim was to investigate once the whole biosensor
complex on the needle surface was in contact with the electrolyte solution
which contained 2 mM HQ and 1 mM H2O2, how much time one needed
to wait before the initiation of DPV. Initially, measurements were done im­
mediately, but it was observed that increasing this waiting had an impact
on the outcome A.8. It was observed that the signal peaked at the 2 min
mark and there was no observed significant increase after that time point
Figure A.8: DPV measurement of the whole biosensing complex, where data was
collected immediately after the needle was in contact with the electrolyte solution,
2 minutes later and 4 minutes later
Micro- and Nanofabrication of 3D-printed Microneedle Electrochemical Biosensor for Dermal
Detection of TNF-alpha
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 347
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.nanolab.dtu.dk
