==PAGE:1==
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
A modern level-of-detail approach
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
A modern level-of-detail approach
Master Thesis
June 23, 2023
By
Öjvind Nilsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months (Febuary-June) at the Department of Ap-
plied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
as part of the fulfillment for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng).
It is assumed that the reader of this paper has some knowledge in the traditional vertex
render pipeline and some understanding of the foundation for computer graphics.
Öjvind Nilsson - s213061
Signature
Date
ii
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
6/23/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
High polygon count models are becoming evermore common place in 3D computer graph-
ics, through the adoption of photogrammetry and other highly detailed 3D scan tools. As
the demand for visual fidelity increases through the emergence of rendering in movies,
and continued rise of popularity that the video game industry experiences. So too will
the number of polygons that will needs to be rendered in real-time. As such, this paper
illustrates how the mesh shading pipeline can be combined with a hierarchical level of
detail system in order to reduce scene complexity. In order to do so, this paper explores
state of the art technologies aimed around real-time processing of level of detail. From
the researched technologies comes an implementation of a system that provides insight
in the development process of such a technology. The implementation explored in this
paper includes the building of a BVH/DAG, where the nodes of the tree represent various
nodes in the scene at different levels of detail. To make a unified scene-wide tree the im-
plementation clusters each of the meshes in the scene using a triangle grouping method
colloquially known as meshlet generation. The vertices of the meshlets are translated into
a scene-wide vertex index buffer which at render time the CPU can decide which mesh-
lets to draw and pack them into draw calls for the GPU’s mesh shader pipeline to render.
Such an implementation is capable of delivering view-dependant continous level of detail
where parts of the model can be in different levels of detail. This system results in lower
GPU utilization for pixel similar render results.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
J. Andreas Bærentzen, Professor of Computer Graphics, DTU Compute
I would like to thank my principle supervisor for the quick and consistent feedback and
suggestions for the execution of the project. The feedback and redirecting proved to be
invaluable especially in head-starting the project work. Andreas is also the author of the
simplification library used for this project (GEL).
Mark Bo Jensen, PostDoc, DTU compute Visual Computing
I would also like to thank Mark Bo Jensen, who acted as co-supervisor for the thesis, for
his constant input, suggestions, and code contributions. They are the strong foundation
required for the completion of such a project and he was a tremendous help throughout
the entire implementation of this thesis.
Mohaiman Rahim, Research Assistant, DTU Cybersecurity
Lastly, I would like to thank Mohaiman Rahim who mentored me though the writing and
presentation of the thesis. His re-assurance and support were a tremendous boost to the
the whole research process.
iv
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Prior Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.4
Objectives of the Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.6
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2
Methodology
13
2.1
Theory Crafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Proof of Theory Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
State of the Art
20
3.1
Voxels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
Point Clouds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Batched Rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
Meshlet Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.6
Nanite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.7
Other Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.8
Results of Theoretical Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Implementation
29
4.1
Simplification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Monolithic Vertex Buffer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Command Buffers and Draw Calls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4
Serialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.5
Meshlet Hierarchy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.6
LoD Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.7
Culling Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Results
39
5.1
Test Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.2
Single Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Multi-Model Scenes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.4
Discrete LoD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Discussion
45
6.1
Comparison of Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Analysis of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.4
Ethics and Social Relevance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Conclusion
51
7.1
Objectives of The Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.2
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Bibliography
54
A Appendix
59
A.1 Implementation Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.2 Benchmark and Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.3 Models Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.4 Traditional Vertex Shader Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.5 Code Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
vi
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Real-time rendering is the end goal of all graphics engineers. It is the aim of academic re-
searchers, industry engineers, and even hobby developers that renderings are completed
within an acceptable time limit. The largest demand for real-time rendering comes from
the video game industry, where there is an estimated 3.09 billion users [1]. However,
there are use cases emerging in industries such as movies and city planning [2]. The
demand to be the best in the industry in combination with capture techniques such as
photogrammetry are pushing the detail requirements of scenes to the sky. It is becoming
more common that complex models are being used such as game models being as large
as 550,000 polygons [3]. Furthermore, we are seeing graphics processing hardware that
is capable of rendering billions of triangles per second [4]. With such hardware becoming
quite common and being adopted by more users than ever before [5]. The possibility to
render such geometrically complex scenes like the one shown in Figure 1.1 in real time
is being held back by the development of the technology and not of the hardware. The
motivation behind needing it to be in real time is that the film industry is realizing the
”game changing” way that filming in front of a render screen environment is enhancing
the experience for viewers [2]. Filming on a set that is rendered in real time in comparison
to a post-filming render can open up actors to interacting with the environment in ways
that have not been possible before. Simple things like having actors’ eye positioning be
exactly as it should be without the needed manual post-filming processing can reduce the
workload for the film by months [6].
Figure 1.1: A Sample Geometrically Complex Scene
In addition more than 171 million users are playing video games in VR where scenes
have to be rendered twice by the engine [7], placing a lot of restrictions on VR. Not only
has the scene been restricted in complexity but VR places a heavy restriction on frame
rate due to motion sickness. In order to keep user from getting sick it is required that the
rendering of both screens inside the VR goggles are rendered at 60 FPS [8]. This means
that VR gaming is expected to be of a lesser scene fidelity as compared to traditional
game engines[9].However, the opposite should be true as high geometric detail in scenes
not only helps to immerse the player but to reduce issues such as VR sickness caused
by the low internal render resolution of a VR game engine [10].
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Background
It is important to understand the context of how rendering is traditionally done in computer
graphics to understand the goals of this thesis. Therefore we take a short deviation to
introduce the reader to what this paper refers to as the ”Traditional Render Pipeline”, as
well as an introduction into meshlets and the meshlet render pipeline.
1.1.1
Rendering a Scene
Computer graphics works by inferring different mathematical outputs given an input scene.The
complexity of the algorithm could range from something simple, such as how much light
is refracted by a transparent object, to something more complex, such as tracing the path
of a simulated light ray through a scene. Generally speaking the formulas should most of
a render engine’s workload and scales with the complexity of the scene. Render engines
for the most part differ in what formulas they are using to calculate and how they are in-
terpreted. However, the foundation is the same and the action that the user performs is
choosing which scenes interact with the engine and its formulas. The scene is staged
usually by inputting to the engine a list of coordinates (vertices) of an object, known as a
mesh. These meshes contain where each of the points that make up a polygon (usually a
triangle) should be placed in a virtual scene. In order to not overuse memory and unnec-
essary CPU instructions vertices, can be reused. The way that the computer interprets
them is through the use of an index buffer. This index buffer is a list of what vertices to
use. For example, if you have a set of 8 vertices you can make a cube with an index
buffer of 36 indices making sure that those 8 vertices are reused to make up 12 triangles
making up the cube.
1.1.2
Render Pipeline
A computer’s hardware purpose in computer graphics is to render a set of objects, nor-
mally structured in a mesh of triangles, onto the screen. The render pipeline describes
the process in which these meshes are rendered onto the screen. This is the architecture
that is traditionally used in render engines in order to rasterize or re-interpret the mathe-
matical data within the engine and output an image. An outline of the render pipeline we
consider to be the traditional pipeline can be seen in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Traditional Render Pipeline
The three main steps are the following:
1. Gather mesh data and command buffers which are sent to the GPU
2. The GPU then has a command processing stage responsible for interpreting the
requests made by the CPU
3. Geometry is then processed by three sub phases; Vertex Shading, Tessellation
Shaders, Geometry Shaders, Primitive Assembly, and Primitive Culling.
4. Pixel Processing stage is responsible for rasterizing the primitives from the output
taken from the geometric stage as well as shading the fragments that were raster-
ized.
2
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:11==
To run this process the CPU uploads different types of data resources:
• Shader Programs are responsible for different tasks such as lighting, screen space
transformation, and other rendering tasks. They are uploaded to the GPU in a for-
matting in accordance to SPIR-V specification. These programs are written in a
shader language for abstraction depending on what API is being used. For exam-
ple, OpenGL/Vulkan use GLSL while DirectX uses HLSL. These programs are then
compiled into SPIR-V and uploaded to the GPU.
• Data Buffers contain different object data such as; index vertex buffers, primitive
connectivity, transformation matrices, or lighting information.
• Textures are images which most commonly contain coloring information or depth
information.
• Descriptors provide supplemental information to the GPU. They are responsible
for listing what resources are available to what pipelines and how they should be
accessed from memory.
At the end of the process the command buffer will have different descriptor sets which will
be used to draw a certain set of triangles. Then as the geometry processing finishes a
set of vertices/primitives will be sent to the pixel processing stage.
There is also a supplementary stage which can be integrated anywhere on the pipeline
which is Compute Processing. Compute Processing accesses inputs from main memory
and writes results back to main memory which can be accessed by any of the other stages.
This output is usually in the format of modified buffers and textures. Of the different parts
of the render pipeline the most relevant one to this report is the geometry processing stage
which is made up of the following sub-stages:
• The Vertex shading Stage is normally responsible for translating vertices to screen-
space and computing any additional per vertex data like coloring or lighting informa-
tion which is needed down the pipeline. Each vertex in a draw call gets their own
unique copy of the vertex shader meaning that they can only output data and are
isolated from other vertex shader programs. The tessellation shader is responsible
for the optional tessellation on the vertex data. Tessellation can be a simplification of
vertex data or the subdividing of data in order to create more detailed geometry on
top. The Geometry stage is responsible for programmatically creating or destroying
new primitives. A common use case for this stage is to animate particle systems
on the fly by using the input data to define the time step and animation state of the
particles. However, this step is rarely used as its function is better performed by
other parts of the render pipeline.
• The Primitive Assembly Stage takes the vertex/index stream from earlier stages
of the pipeline and transforms them into the programmed primitive topology. This
topology is normally triangles but can be lines, points, or patches as well. This stage
usually uses either implicit assignment for primitives, where the order of the vertices
define the primitive, or an explicit construction, where vertices are pointed to by an
index buffer. Explicit construction is the more efficient method as it reuses vertex
data.
• The purpose of the Pixel Processing Stage is to take in the screen-space primitives
and outputs a completed image in the form of a set of pixels known as a frame buffer.
Frame buffers can be thought off as completed scenes where they can have multiple
attachments, such as a depth buffer or color buffers. These frame buffers are often
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
3
==PAGE:12==
finished before the display’s refresh rate. As such the handling of the frame buffers
that are being rendered in between refresh rates (also known as frames in flight) is
a very important task. This is where the Swap Chain comes in. The swap chain is
responsible for choosing which frame buffer is being displayed. Most applications
use two or three frame buffers in between refresh rates referred to as Double and
Triple buffering. The frame buffer that is being displayed is called the front buffer,
while the buffer that it is being rendered to is called the back buffer. Triple buffering
is used to reduce the wasted GPU idle time but requires more VRAM.
1.1.3
Level of Detail
Level of Detail (LoD) in computer graphics is a concept of sacrificing memory or storage in
order to have multiple copies of the original mesh. The copies are increasingly simplified
versions as the LoD increases reducing the number of vertices. Then during the render
loop or elsewhere in the render pipeline you can swap these LoD models so that less data
needs to be processed in later steps of the render pipeline. This is especially needed in
models that are made up of several hundred thousand vertices or more. Limiting the
number of vertices can have a significant impact on rendering speeds. An example of
simplified models and thus different LoDs can be seen in Figure 1.3. This paper refers
to the original model (pre-simplification) as LoD 0 and all subsequent simplified models
would be LoD = n where n is the index of the simplification step.
Figure 1.3: An example of LoDs of the Bruce Model
Figure 1.3 demonstrates a noticeable difference between the amount of detail that a dif-
fering number of vertices can provide Reduction of the vertex count limits how much detail
can be seen in the model. It is due to this that 3D artists or photo-scans use a large count
of vertices in order to preserve as much detail of the object they are representing. The
LoD technique follows the principle that models should be swapped based on the dis-
tance to the camera. The closer the camera gets a more detailed model is chosen to be
rendered. This principle is based on the notion that if the object is close up the object is
taking up most of the screen and thus very visible so more complexity should be shown
to the viewer. On the other hand, if the object is far away the object does not take up a lot
of the screen so is most likely not very visible to the viewer so less complexity is needed
for a perceptible difference. Choosing the correct distance parameters at which the ob-
ject should switch LoDs is a time consuming task which is further compicated by trying to
minimize the noticeable switch between LoDs. This noticeable switch is often referred to
as ”popping” due to how the new detail seems to pop when swapping. There are different
methods to minimize the popping effect (see subsection 1.1.4) but the main problem with
LoD is that the lower LoDs should be similar enough so that visual disturbances are kept
to a minimum.
4
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:13==
1.1.4
View Dependant vs In-dependant LoD Switching
The previous section discusses switching models based on camera distance, this type
of selection is usually referred to as a a View-Dependant LoD. This is a technique which
adjusts the LoD based on the viewer’s perspective, and swapping based on distance is a
very common practice. However an increasingly more common practice is to swap based
on a screen-space error (SPE) calculation that is normally a calculation of the pixel error
factor between the original mesh and the lesser LoD mesh. This SPE can be calculated
in many different ways including based on viewing angle, speed of the camera, size of
the object, distance, texture mappings, lighting, and more. In theory when a lower LoD
receives an SPE less than a pixel when swapping between them the user would not be
able to notice the missing details. In practice there is an additional calculation that needs
to be done and thus more sophisticated SPE calculations sacrifice CPU for higher-quality
renderings.
In contrast, View-Independent LoD is a technique that determines the LoD independently
of the viewer’s perspective. This is typically done using some form of static metric, such
as a fixed distance or a measure of geometric complexity. For instance, a model might
have several predetermined LoDs, and the renderer chooses which one to use based
on these fixed criteria, regardless of the viewer’s position or orientation. This can be
simpler to implement and provide more predictable performance, but it might not always
use resources as efficiently as a view-dependent technique.
1.1.5
Discrete, Continuous, and Hierarchical LoD
Whether you chose a view-dependant or in-dependant version of LoD, the technique you
are using will fall into one of the categories mentioned in this section. Discrete LoD (DLoD)
is the simplest version of LoD, where there is a pre-processing step of creating the differ-
ent finite number of LoD meshes then simply choosing one at run-time to render. This is
why it is sometimes referred to as static LoD. As previously stated, this category suffers
from popping due to the abrupt transition between models. Opposite DLoD, continuous
LoD (CLoD) is the modifying of models in real-time to adjust to the desired LoD. A pop-
ular technique in this category of LoD is morphing, in where meshes are morphed when
in between LoD to reduce the noticeable popping effect. Due to the dynamically chang-
ing polygons that CLoD employs, it can be a more visually pleasing approach but also
more computationally expensive. CLoD does have the advantage in limiting precisely
how many polygons are in a scene and allowing a single object to span several LoDs
[11].
The founder of the LoD principle, James H. Clark, suggested a continuation of the DLoD
category where the more detailed LoD can be structured in a tree format, or a hierarchy,
thus this method is called a Hierarchical LoD (HLoD). The hierarchy that he suggested
is a root of the tree being the lower LoD and traversal will add more detail to the scene.
The algorithm would thus check if a node was sufficient detail otherwise it moves down
the tree until a sufficient level is reached. In his structure the calculation would be if the
polygon area of the LoD is smaller than the rasterizer of the engine. In his words ”it makes
no sense to use 500 polygons if an object covers only 20 raster units of the display” [12].
Furthermore, it has become common practice to create the hierarchy based on parts of
the mesh. Taking a car mesh as an example, sub-trees would be created for each of the
materials, a group for the rubber tires, a group for the metallic doors, etc., which spatially
divides the scene. Since Clark there have been many different approaches to dividing the
scene such as Bounding Volumes or Octrees which are further discussed in Chapter 3.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
5
==PAGE:14==
1.1.6
Simplification
Simplification is the core concept of reducing the data of a mesh. Since meshes are
a list of vertices the connectivity between these vertices is called an edge. The space
(polygon) that edges enclose is considered a face. For this thesis, simplification is done
on a manifold mesh, manifolds are a complex topological, mathematical, and geometrical
structure, but for simplicity sakes a mesh can be considered a manifold as long it meets
the following: Each edge is shared by exactly two faces and around each vertex, the
faces and edges that touch form a disk-like structure forming a coherent surface. Making
sure that meshes are manifolds is an important property since non-manifold meshes can
lead to ambiguous situations to produce incorrect results after simplification. Furthermore,
since an edge in a manifold is shared by exactly two faces it can be represented in a data
structure where each side of the edge is represented separately in two parts. This data
structure is colloquially known as the a Double Connected Edge List (DCEL). The DCEL
represents the mesh in a list of edges that have; an origin and destination vertex, the face
it borders, and an iteration to the previous and next half-edges (he) making it simple to
traverse a manifold [13]. Such a data-structure can be seen in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4: Half-edge Data-Structure
Taking a step back you can perform simplification in a number of ways. In the scope of
this report we look at two of the most common: vertex removal and edge collapsing. In
edge collapsing an edge is removed and the two connected vertices are merged into one
vertex, while in vertex removal a single vertex is removed and the faces that contained
this vertex are reconnected without it [14]. Each method has it pros/cons which are fur-
ther reviewed in the Appendix, but it boils down to calculation speed and mesh topology
preservation with edge collapsing usually having more constraints on what edge can be
collapsed to avoid errors. An example picture showing how the methods work can be
seen in Figure 1.5.
Since we are working with a half-edge data-structure, edge collapsing works where the
start vertex of the half-edge is moved towards an optimal point, usually the end-point of
the half-edge but is also normally the mid-point of the two by moving both. This turns two
vertices into a single vertex per-edge. The placement of the vertex also follows certain
criteria with their own constraints and error thresholds. The half-edge method is shown
in Figure 1.6.
Simplification is not a flawless method and there are many problems with simplification
that can arise especially with shading and material mapping mismatches. For the context
of this report there are two main problems that can be encountered with simplification;
holes and cruft. Holes are gaps or missing data that should be there in a mesh. This can
be caused by topology changes making the re-connection of the triangles in ways that
leave out areas that otherwise shouldn’t. Another form of holes appearing is when the
simplification process does not take into consideration the importance of an area. The
simplest way to picture this is by thinking of thin and detailed part of a model such as an
6
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.5: Simplification Methods
Figure 1.6: Half-edge Simplification
insect’s antenna. If the simplification method is not aware of geometric significant areas
such as the antennas they might be removed entirely leaving the end of the antenna
intact while the stem is removed creating a ”hole” of information between the end of the
antenna and the base. Expanding on holes is the concept of cracks. Cracks are not
inherit to simplification but are relevant to CLoD and HLoD methods. Cracks are holes
that appear when areas of high detail LoDs are next to areas of low detail especially in
CLoD which we take a further look into in chapter 4.
Cracks between LoDs are often mitigated in computer graphics by locking certain bound-
aries of the model in order to prevent cracks. CLoD and HLoD methods will limit the
vertices and edges that can be removed so they cannot be simplified (i.e., they cannot be
removed or have their positions significantly changed). However, this leads to problems.
Inside each of the areas that were locked, the simplification is free to remove vertices and
change the mesh’s topology in order to reduce complexity. But along the boundary, it’s
forced to keep certain vertices and edges intact. This can lead to higher density of trian-
gles along the boundary (i.e. more ”cruft”) compared to the interior of the locked area.
This not only increases the complexity (and thus decreases the performance), but it can
also cause visual artifacts. The higher triangle density along the boundary can lead to
noticeable seams or discontinuities in shading, especially when the mesh is viewed from
a distance.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
7
==PAGE:16==
1.1.7
Meshlets
In 2018 NVIDIA presented a method of rendering that did not require as many draw calls to
render a scene with multiple objects and/or lots of geometry [15]. The presented method
has been slowly adapted in the industry showed promise in rendering lots of small meshes
and large meshes. The principle behind the new method is the subdividing large meshes
into sub-meshes known as meshlets (shown in Figure 1.7). The way that meshlets are
generated can differ and is still an ongoing research topic, however, usually it is grouping
different polygons based on vertex re-usability. These clustering techniques are executed
by an algorithm that selects a max number of polygons to be in a meshlet which repeats
until all the mesh has been segmented.
(a) Utah Teapot Mesh
(b) Utah Teapot segmented into Meshlets
Figure 1.7: Utah Teapot Mesh to Meshlets
The technique of using meshlets is that more geometry in a scene can be processed
in parallel without the need to use the entire model’s data. These meshlets could be
combined with the then new compute pipelines that were gaining popularity, in order to
rasterize each of the meshlets separately. Compute shaders gave engineers the freedom
to use GPU threads for different purposes and share data between them. Such an ap-
proach saw benefits with the implementation of some subsequent real-time game engines
as the meshlet approach allowed for a two-stage approach to rendering; the scene setup
and the shading. This technique was specifically useful for efficient culling, procedural
generation, and LoD techniques. NVIDIA proposed using two programmable units where
their inputs and outputs are user defined; Task Shader: operates in work groups and
allows each to emit (or not) mesh shader work groups. This shader is proposed as a way
to dynamically generate work for later stages in the pipeline. Mesh Shader: operates in
work groups and allows each to generate primitives such as triangles for the rasterizer.
Figure 1.8: Traditional Render Pipeline
These two steps would replace the geometry processing stage in the traditional pipeline
in order to have the structure seen in Figure 1.8. Overall, this mesh shader pipeline saw
higher scalability, bandwidth reduction as the de-duplication of vertices could be done
at the start of the pipeline, and higher flexibility in comparison to using strict tessellation
patterns needed in traditional geometry shaders.
8
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:17==
1.1.8
GPU Concerns
LoD aims to improve performance, but the techniques used to implement LoD can in-
troduce some issues or challenges on the GPU. While higher LoDs use more memory
than lower ones, managing shaders data can increase program complexity. There are
some popular technologies which can store vertices for all the models in a megalithic ver-
tex buffer and introduce a selection on the GPU side to select the correct LoD vertices
called a sliding pane selection [16]. Such technologies sacrifice the ability to parallelize
the selection process as well as an introduction of potential CPU overhead in order to
store all data on the GPU, which is a memory intensive sacrifice, in some cases more
than 57% more memory intensive [17]. Furthermore, the management of populating the
GPU dynamically through render time can introduce bandwidth constraints and memory
synchronization issues that would otherwise reduce the benefit of using LoD techniques.
Alternatively there is a technique when it comes to LoD where each of the levels will have
their own shaders and the application will switch shaders depending on what the desired
level should be [18]. Such practices suffer from relatively expensive operations on the
GPU which can lead to performance decreases when not developed properly. Lastly a
concern with LoD is that of limiting draw calls. A common misconception is that the num-
ber of polygons or vertices in a scene is the primary factor determining rendering perfor-
mance. While it’s true that rendering more polygons does take more time, the CPU-GPU
communication overhead involved in issuing each draw call can also have a significant
impact on performance. This is particularly the case in modern, high-performance GPUs
which can process large numbers of polygons very quickly. If an engine has a lot of draw
calls, this overhead can add up and become a significant performance bottleneck. As a
result, minimizing the number of draw calls is often an important optimization strategy in
real-time rendering. Techniques such as batching (grouping multiple pieces of geometry
together into a single draw call) and instancing (rendering multiple copies of the same
geometry with a single draw call) are commonly used to reduce the number of draw calls
and improve rendering performance [19].
1.2
Prior Work
This thesis is formulated around a continuation concept of a paper by the supervisors
of the thesis, called ”Tools for Virtual Reality Visualization of Highly Detailed Meshes”
[20]. In their thesis the authors go over a presentation for the engine they developed
called ”Jinsoku”. Jinsoku works similar to the meshlet shader pipeline presented in sub-
section 1.1.7. In principle it works around the notion that vertex information needs to be
optimized for paralleling for the traditional pipeline in order to rapidly process different
fragments. The traditional pipeline would have an extra memory cache for vertices that
have been transformed and re-use vertices from that cache. As modern hardware transi-
tioned out of using the cache, the meshlet renderer would then transform the vertices and
procure triangle connectivity. Although this step was once done in the traditional pipeline,
manual handling of the meshlet data allowed for improvements in early-culling and par-
allelization. The report goes on to test GPU assisted ray-tracing and shows a traditional
mesh data optimizer and it’s lack of performance with the meshlet render pipeline. The
report concludes with highlighting the importance of optimization strategies such as the
pre-processing removing required data to be looked at and compares Jinsoku to two other
visualization tools; ParaView and Unity. Thus a natural conclusion would be to implement
LoD strategies in order to limit the amount of data that needs to be processed in hopes
of improving render performance. This is increasingly worrying in Jinsoku when there are
multiple large meshes in a scene which is further discussed in chapter 4.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
9
==PAGE:18==
1.3
Problem Statement
LoD is not a new concept and has been tried and tested countless of times. It depends
on a straight forwards thought processes the less data for the engine to render, the faster
the engine will render. However, it is not as simple in practice. Reducing the data in
the scene means that not only the engine will notice but so too will the viewer of the
scene. Engineers are always in a constant battle balancing the amount of detail that can
be perceptible so that it is satisfactory for both the engine and the viewer. There has been
multiple technologies trying to tackle this problem such as tesselation that reverses the
thought processes and tries to start with as little data in the scene and grows the amount
of data as the camera comes closer. What if a better approach is not to focus on the
balancing act but provide a narrower selection of data that is changed between distance
steps?
The triangle render pipeline is an essential rendering method used for introductory pur-
poses. The industry has been developed around the understanding that the computer will
take in vertex data and transform that into visible triangles that are rendered on screen.
This is understood by the developers of render engines to the model artists and to some
extend the end users. Render engines rendering process is usually restricted by a soft
limit on the number of vertices that can be processed in real time. This is considered a
soft limit as the number of vertices nears this limit number, the engine will stutter or slow
to a crawl making real-time applications unfeasible. This soft limit is largely dependant on
the hardware that is being used and with the quick development of dedicated GPU has
been largely ignored. Although, it is common for popular render engines such as Unity
to have both a soft limit, as well as, a hard limit of vertices number that can be used. By
default Unity has a hard limit set of 16-bit indexing so a max of 65 thousand vertices per
mesh [19].
In addition a large goal of modern render engines is to make the user’s workload as
easy as possible. The common way of rendering very detailed meshes is to simplify
the mesh and import it to the engine as multiple lesser detailed meshes of the original
mesh. This along side other mesh optimization alternatives require extra work from the
end user and as such it is important that render engines keep up with rendering large
amount of polygon data without altering what needs to be inputted nor the expected output.
Therefore, this paper looks at how known techniques such as scene clipping and culling
can be used in tandem with the LoD technique in order to output an expected render from
the original mesh without additional work needed. This paper will present the state of the
art techniques of rendering large scenes but will ultimately focus around implementing
a method that uses the meshlet render pipeline. This is because, the meshlet render
pipeline does not alter the way that artists and developers are used to working since the
output is rasterized triangles and the input is standard vertex/index meshes.
1.4
Objectives of the Research
This research is done as a follow up to a VR render engine proposed by the supervisors
of this thesis [20]. In their research the authors focus on presenting a framework for
rendering detailed models in a fast format capable of being applicable for VR use. As an
extension this project will overview how the base engine can implement an LoD aspect to
the engine. In order to achieve this there needs to be a list of objectives for the research
than need to be met. These objectives are both objectives for the thesis and can be seen
as preliminary knowledge that should be known by the reader of this report to gain a full
understanding of what was achieved, although some of the concepts are explored later
the paper.
10
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:19==
1.4.1
Non-Functional Objectives
Non-functional objectives for the research are goals that need to be met in order to achieve
the goal stated in the problem statement. These objective can be abstract and thus do
not have strict ends to them and can be developed throughout the entire period of working
on this thesis. The non-functional objectives of the thesis are following:
• Gain Knowledge of the Meshlet Render Pipeline: This thesis focuses on how the
meshlet pipeline differs from the traditional render pipeline.
• Conceptually Understand Simplification of Meshlets: It is required that we under-
stand how to reduce the complexity of a scene with the use of the meshlet data
structure. This report looks at two approaches of simplifying a meshlet. Where a
meshlet is continuously reduced, and one where the simplified meshlets are taken
from different simplified models.
• Analyze the State of the Art: There are many approaches to rendering geometrically
complex scenes. An analysis of related works provides knowledge on the founda-
tion needed to understand the value presented in this research. Although some
of the presented methods alter the triangle pipeline they are still over-viewed and
compared to a meshlet render pipeline.
• Gain a deeper understanding of the Industry approaches to LoD: One of the primary
objectives of implementing an LoD system is to improve rendering performance by
reducing the number of triangles rendered at a given time. This can help to increase
the frame rate and improve the overall user experience. However, implementing
such a complex system can have unforeseen time sinks. An in-depth look at one of
such systems, Nanite by Unreal Engine, can highlight such time sinks and focus on
the aspects of a system that is sufficient for the other goals of this research.
1.4.2
Functional Objectives
In contrast to the non-functional objectives the functional objectives have a definitive goal.
The self-measure of success of the project can be determined by the completion of the
functional objectives. This is due to the nature of how the thesis was conducted. The
functional objectives are listed below:
• Increase Scalability: Another objective is to increase the scalability of the rendering
system provided. Implementing a LoD system, the engine would be able to render
more complex scenes with larger numbers of triangles without sacrificing perfor-
mance.
• Implement a technique to reduce mesh complexity: The groundwork for most meth-
ods of rendering complex scenes is to reduce the data that is needed to be pro-
cessed by the engine. Developing a method to reduce the amount of data acts as
first milestone in the implementation of this paper.
• Improve rendering Performance: One of the primary objectives of implementing
an LoD system is to improve rendering performance by reducing the number of
triangles rendered at a given time. This can help to increase the frame rate and
improve the overall user experience. This objective is set as a comparison of the
LoD implementation in comparison to the meshlet render engine provided by the
supervisor’s research.
• Meet industry demands for real-time rendering: This goal is a measurement of the
engine and is accomplished by ensuring a smooth and uninterrupted user experi-
ence in VR gaming by rendering scenes at a minimum of 80 FPS.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
11
==PAGE:20==
1.5
Limitations
To achieve the selected objectives of the thesis some of the explored methods have not
been implemented. As such the State of the Art section of the thesis compares the ren-
der times as proposed by their respective authors. This means that they have not been
tested on the same machine and/or hardware. This is a strong limitation when comparing
methodologies but because the stated purpose of looking at other methodologies was to
compare their complexities and get an estimate of the capabilities, I believe that this was
not needed to achieve the objective. Furthermore, the purpose of this thesis is not to
achieve an industry competitive alternative to such techniques nor to popular render en-
gines as a whole. Instead we are focused on exploring the technologies that have made
an engine capable of rendering such large scenes in real-time. Lastly, one of the metrics
of which LoD engines are judged is by perceivable error. Although the implementation
of this thesis uses a Quadratic Error Metric this can differ between implementations and
thus this metric is evaluated subjectively, by how distorted or how noticeable the change
is in LoDs, instead of objectively.
1.6
Structure
This report is broken down into several chapters to demonstrate the work done throughout
the thesis. In addition to the chapters of the thesis there are some appendices that are
referred to within the paper and act as supplementary information. Furthermore this thesis
should be accompanied with the code/repository of the implementation where the the code
is in the ”src” folder and any models that want to be tested need to be placed within the
”models” folder. The code comes with a CMake file which is the standard way of compiling
and linking C++ code which the implementation was done in. As for the text chapters of
the thesis, they are explained below:
1. Introduction: The main purpose of the introduction is to offer a motivation and goals
for the thesis. This chapter has two subsections. One of them is where a short back-
ground section contextualizes to the reader what the paper refers to the traditional
render pipeline. The other subsection focuses on the limitations of the project.
2. Methodology: This chapter focuses on how the goals of the thesis were attempted,
how the theory crafting happened, and how the State of the Art research was con-
ducted.
3. State of the Art: This chapter is a literature review of modern techniques using LoD
and/or rendering of large scenes.
4. Implementation: This chapter focuses on the implementation conducted to prove the
concept goal of the thesis, rendering geometrically complex scenes. This chapter
explores the design approach to the implementation as well as the results of the
implementation.
5. Discussion: The discussion chapter is where the study suggests further areas of
study and explores any ethical implications of the thesis along side an evaluation of
the implementation and State of the Art.
6. Conclusion: The final chapter is responsible for presenting a reader a compacted
summary of the thesis with met goals, summary of design, and outcome of the
project.
12
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:21==
2
Methodology
This chapter covers how conducting a theory crafting literature review was done in this
paper along side with how articles, presentations, or papers were categorized and disre-
garded in order to narrow down the results and thus provide a repeatable research with
similar results. The purpose of the literature review is to find candidate algorithms which
can be evaluated to select one in order to fit the scope and limitations of the master’s
thesis assignment. The selected algorithm should be capable of satisfying the functional
objectives of the research (subsection 1.4.2).
2.1
Theory Crafting
To be capable of discerning what makes a good candidate for an LoD system it is impor-
tant to see what other people are researching when it comes to tackling high poly-count
scenes. Thus a preliminary comparison of studies is conducted such that we can later
compare how the theory presented in this paper compares to such implementations. This
preliminary study also benefits the theory crafting as choosing a method of simplification
and LoD selection was influenced through this step.
2.1.1
Technology Discovery Process
In order to search for LoD technologies and achieve a similar result for the reader this
section breaks down the process used in searching. The first step is a blank discovery
process in where a search for scientific articles and sources on the topic of Level of Detail
for Large Scenes specifically in Computer Graphics was done by using scholar search
engines such as findit.dtu.dk, Google Scholar, WorldWideScience.gov, and Science.gov.
Books and articles are considered and relied upon and with an extent also to computer
graphic conferences such as Siggraph. This initial search resulted in 261,329 different
articles, papers, books, and conferences. These search results are categorized and dis-
tributed by an algorithm into major categories and sub categories as shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Initial Categories of Results
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
13
==PAGE:22==
It is important to note that the search string was applied to title, abstract, and keywords
in the electronic databases and indexing systems that were used for this study.To narrow
down results two major omissions are made fully understanding the implications this could
have on research (see chapter 6 for more). Due to the international nature of the student
and the supervisors conducting this thesis, English is the common language of the team,
all research papers written in other languages are discarded. The second major omis-
sion is omitting results that were not published in the past 30 years (1993-2023). This
omission was done with the reasoning that computer graphics is an extensive field and
limiting papers to such a time frame provides a focus on more recent developments while
not excluding theories presented at the time when computer graphics was majorly being
adopted by entertainment industries [21]. The categorized search results can be narrowed
down by filtering results to specifically ones pertaining to the subject of 3D Graphics and
then furthermore into the subject of Polygon Mesh Rendering. This leaves the front page
of the search engines with results that can be categorized into fewer categories and sub-
categories, the refined search results can be seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Refined Categories of Results
Furthermore, the refined results which are categorized into ”National” are pertaining to
fields outside of Computer Science as such they are also discarded. The results are a
starting set of research papers to read and review if they are relevant to the literature
search. This process further refines the results excluding some. With addition of the two
papers provided by the professor supervising this thesis it establishes the original set of
articles. From this starting set the team used a snowballing technique which essentially
is done by using the reference list of a paper found in order to identify additional papers.
This method is useful when identifying keywords to further search for relevant papers.
In addition sources presented by the search engines would be omitted if they would be
considered on of the following:
• Studies that did not have full-text available either directly or at the request of the
authors.
• Studies that were not written in a direct study format such as this report. (An example
of this exclusion would be papers that were written as tutorials for an implementation
14
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:23==
or for educational purposes as editorials.)
After the selection of technologies to learn about was done instead of reading the entire
source, sources where categorized through a skimming technique, where sources are
categorized into one of the categories shown in Table 2.1. The use of categorizing the
papers is a useful technique to quickly interpret the purpose of the papers and how we
can use the information contained inside of them. The type classification was done by
skimming throughout the report and looking at two main sections of the paper; the con-
clusion and the methodology. This is a preliminary step into the literature review without
evaluating each of the initial results in detail for the sake of time. This classification is a
tool that has been popularized for literature reviews [22]. As stated this review omitted the
opinion papers, however, the rest were looked at for relevance to the paper by redefin-
ing the categories of results that were looked at in the databases. This also states how
breaking down the papers that were glossed over for the next step of categorization can
stick to an empirical approach in their research.
Type
Description
Validation Research
Techniques investigated are novel and have not yet
been implemented in practice. Techniques used are
for example experiments, i.e., work done in the lab or
for a thesis such as this one.
Evaluation Research
Techniques are implemented in practice and an eval-
uation of the technique is conducted. That means, it
is shown how the technique is implemented in prac-
tice (solution implementation) and what are the conse-
quences of the implementation in terms of benefits and
drawbacks (implementation evaluation). This also in-
cludes to identify problems in industry.
Solution Proposal
A solution for a problem is proposed, the solution can
be either novel or a significant extension of an existing
technique. The potential benefits and the applicability
of the solution is shown by a small example or a good
line of argumentation.For example a Siggraph presen-
tation.
Opinion Papers
This type of papers are papers which express the per-
sonal opinion of the author(s) classified as such by the
lack of the paper’s use of a strict methodology or re-
lated work presented/analyzed.
Table 2.1: Comparison of previous literature reviews
The last step in the technology discovery process is that of keyword building. The key-
wording process is so that we could classify the area of focus for the research and take
that into account when drawing a conclusion of the comparison. The key-wording process
was done in a similar manner to the gathering the reports. That is there was an initial set
of keywords that were extracted randomly from the reports then we refined the concepts
by reading the full-text of the studies. For the keyword process even omitted papers by the
afore-mentioned processes could be considered for building the keywords for this paper.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
15
==PAGE:24==
An overview of how the search process was conducted can be see in Figure 2.3 which
shows when articles were added and discarded.
Figure 2.3: Overview of Search Process
2.2
Proof of Theory Implementation
With the completion of the discovery process and a look at other approaches that where
gathered, expanding on the previous work by the supervisors could be completed so that
the benefits of extending the meshlet render engine would be understood. These benefits
are further expanded in chapter 4. Designing and implementing a proof of theory helps
to validate the concepts presented in the theory, demonstrate practical application, and
evaluate performance of such concepts.
2.2.1
Architecture
A side goal of this thesis is to implement the proof of theory on top of the previous work
done. As such the render engine framework ”Jinsoku” was provided by the supervisor.
This render engine is capable of rendering a single high poly mesh and is written in C++
specifically using the graphics API, Vulkan. Vulkan is built around being capable of imple-
menting modern rendering methods such as the meshlet pipeline and as such it was used
for the extension work as well. In addition to the framework provided, the supervisors also
provided a simplification library called ”GEL” [23]. The GEL library however was slightly
modified in order to get the expected output. Specifically, GEL moves the order of vertices
when reducing and that was not desired for the implementation. As such there needed
to be some modifications allowing to check if a vertex was part of a polygon face and if
an edge was part of a face. In addition to the simplification, GEL has data structures and
linear algebra functions helpful for computer graphics, however, the popular GLM library
was used insted. In order to create a window and take in user input the library GLFW is
used. These external libraries are included linked with the help of VCPKG which consoli-
dates libraries for C++ which the include folder and lib files can be pointed all in one place.
Aside from code architecture it is worth noting what IDE and operating system were used
which is the following:
• Windows 10 Pro The specific windows version is 10.0.19044 build 19044.
• Visual Studio Code The IDE used to code the implementation Version 1.78. The
compiler is the Visual Studio 2023 MSBuild version 17.5.1 where the intended C++
version is at least C++ 17 with CMake version 3.19.
The implementation is setup in a manner where the CPU processes what models to load,
creates the simplified LoDs, and will make the distance calculation. While the GPU han-
dles the back-face culling and rasterization in accordance to the meshlet render pipeline.
16
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:25==
2.2.2
Hardware
There is only one strict requirement on hardware and that is that the GPU needs to be
able to work with mesh shaders which for NVIDIA that means Turning architecture (RTX
2000 series or newer) and for AMD it needs to be RDNA2 architecture [24]. Other GPU
manufacturers are assumed to have their own requirements. Table 2.2 shows the system
that was used for the development and testing of the implementation.
Part
Name
Specifications
CPU
Intel i5-10600K
6 Cores with 12 threads at 4.50 GHz
RAM
Corsair Vengeance
DDR4, 32GB, 1330 MHz DRAM frequency
GPU
NVIDIA RTX 2070 Super
8 GB GDDR6, GFX Core Clock of 1815 MHz
and a Memory Clock of 7000 MHz
Table 2.2: System Configuration
2.2.3
Models Used
In order to test the implementation a selection of models was made from the Stanford
scanned models library [25] along side with some common testing models such as the
Utah Teapot provided by a public repository [26]. The models were chosen because they
vary from low poly-count (the lowest being Utah teapot with 6320 triangles) to high-poly
(the highest being Stanford’s Thai Statue scan with 5M triangles) count models. The
break down of the models can be seen in Table 2.3 while Figure 2.4 shows the two low-
est poly-count models that have not been pictured in the report so far and Figure 2.5
shows examples of the highest poly meshes. Using such high poly models was to test
the difference in performance of both the implementation and the functions of interest as
mentioned in section 5.1. Low poly models are mostly used as development tools since
they are small enough they are easy to build and render, however subsection 6.2.2 points
out how they were useful in testing as well. To view all the models see section A.3 in the
Appendix.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Kitten
(b) Stanford Bunny
Figure 2.4: Low Poly Models
Model
Vertex Count
Index Count
Triangle Count
Thai Statue
4,999,996
30,000,000
10,000,000
Dragon
3,609,600
21,657,135
7,219,045
Nefertiti
1,009,118
6,054,696
2,018,232
Happy Buddha
543,446
3,263,148
1,087,716
Armadillo
172,971
1,037,832
345,944
Bunny
34,834
208,353
69,451
Kitten
14,472
86,832
28,944
Bruce
4,725
28,056
9,352
Utah Teapot
3,242
18,960
6,320
Table 2.3: Models Used
18
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:27==
(a) Bust of Nefertiti
(b) Thai Statue
Figure 2.5: High Poly Models
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
19
==PAGE:28==
3
State of the Art
This chapter explores ways that geometrically complex scenes are being tackled across
the academic point of view. This section acts as a preliminary research into the thesis to
acknowledge other breakthrough methods that could act as an alternative to the imple-
mentation done in this project. It also helped in theory crafting the optimal state of the
art LoD system for this thesis by considering concept done in these other methods. The
main bulk of the theory is crafted around Unreal’s Nanite implementation and as such is
the most in-depth looked at technology while sections in this chapter are a glance into how
these alternate techniques work. For discussion of these techniques and a comparison
see section 3.8.
3.1
Voxels
In 2D images we consider points in the image as pixels, these pixels can contain color
information for that specific coordinate. In computer graphics there is a 3D equivalent
of pixels called ”Volume Elements”, or Voxels. In addition to color, voxels can contain
additional information such as; density, or material properties for a point in a 3D volume.
These voxels can be used to render 3D scenes, especially when large amounts of detail
or complex natural phenomena are required, like clouds, fog, fire, etc. Voxels make it
relatively straightforward to create and manipulate complex 3D structures in a way that
would be difficult with traditional polygon-based rendering. Voxel LoD techniques work
in a similar way to polygon LoD in where the voxels can be collapsed so that a larger
voxel takes up the space of multiple voxels. Octrees are a popular manner in which
these scenes are divided by volumes. An octree is a tree data structure in which each
internal node has exactly eight children and allows for a memoy-efficient representation
of a 3D volume. The octree can then be cut to determine which voxels should be used
for rendering of the scene as shown in Figure 3.1. This octree cutting is what makes up
the foundation of Voxel LoD techniques like the popular ”Voxel Farm Prototype” [27] and
”Voxels and Seamless LOD” [28].
Figure 3.1: Voxel Octree LoD [29]
20
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Point Clouds
At the foundation of both voxels and polygons are points making up the data. There is a
practice in where instead of having interlaced and connected points making up a mesh,
rasterization of simple points can be much faster. To prevent the lack of depth when a
drawing is made with just points some rendering methods use a small square instead of a
simple point, this method is called splatting. This type of rendering can be very fast even
for large scenes however, they can still be limited by how many points can be rendered
at once. This brings us back to LoD which in point cloud rendering a typical approach is
Layered Point Clouds (LPC). LPCs are hierarchical spatial structures where points with
varying density are stored in the nodes of the tree similar to the technique we will look at in
the next section. What this technique breaks down to is that higher LoDs will render more
points than those in lower LoDs. This technique, which is similar to the others shown in
this chapter, can be seen in the paper: ”Software Rasterization of 2 Billion Points” [30].
Expanding on the concept of point renderers there are techniques in where the image
is interpolated from the pixel coordinates, such a technique is presented in the paper
”Efficient Point-Based Rendering Using Image Reconstruction” [31]. This paper explores
how after the scattered pixel data from the point clouds, you can have an interpolation of
the points using a higher LoD point cloud to create a continuous image that can later be
shaded resulting in an image shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Point Cloud Rendering [31]
3.3
Batched Rendering
Batched Rendering is similar to the principle behind the meshlets techniques, in that
breaking a mesh into smaller more feasible parts can help with rendering scenes in par-
allel. ”Adaptive Tetrapuzzels” [32] and ”Marching Cubes” [33] present such a method
in where the scene is split into smaller parts. These parts can be generated by a vol-
ume of the scene, creating a spacial partition of the scene (tetrahedrons or bounding box
volumes). Using these partitions we can compare their center to the camera and thus
determine how far these partitions are from the camera. This can be used to swap these
partitions to use the data of the original mesh or to use data from lower pre-calculated
simplified meshes resulting in partition based LoD, the process of which is shown in Fig-
ure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Hierarchy of Spatial Data [32]
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
21
==PAGE:30==
3.4
Meshlet Approaches
As a continuation to batched rendering, meshlets offer the same partitioning based on
the polygons of the mesh as previously stated. However these meshlets still contain the
data of the mesh that was used to generate the meshlets unlike the batched rendering.
This enables the meshlets to change on top of the segmentation. This can be done for the
simplification processes we will discuss in section 3.6, or it can be used for displacing their
vertices according to a pre-computed image in a technique called displacement mapping
[34]. This is the same thought process as simplification but the workflow is the opposite
in where you start with a low-detail mesh and work upwards to a fine-detail mesh. Such
a displacement map approach using meshlets has been implemented in ”Displacement
Patches” [35]. The result of their research can be summarized in Figure 3.4
Figure 3.4: Meshlet Displacement Process [35]
3.5
Machine Learning
Machine Learning (ML) has been gaining popularity through the public releases of lan-
guage models. As such a lot of the results for LoD approaches at the writing of the thesis
were focused around deep learning applications in computer graphics. In fact most of the
discussed techniques have been found to have some expansion into using neural net-
works for their approach like the ”Octree Generating Networks” paper [29], which uses
NN in order to predict possible Octree layers for Voxel rendering. There are particularly
interesting NN approaches that generate a 3D mesh based on an image such as that
proposed in ”Pixel2Mesh” [36]. Since the generation is the deformation of a base mesh in
order to make it look like the inputted image, using such a technique might work for LoD
in where the output are meshes at different levels of details which would be used instead
of edge collapsing simplification. This extends to other LoD creation NN methods such
as, ”DeepSDF” [37] and ”Learning Implicit Fields” [38]. Another approach would be to aid
simplification methods with the use of smart edge collapsing NNs such as ”MeshCNN”
[39]. These approaches are an interesting read but have no practical use for the goal of
this thesis which is to render large scenes in real-time as they can be seen as alternatives
to traditional mesh simplification methods. However, there is an emerging push to inte-
grate such technologies for real-time applications, like that shown in ”Neural Geometric
Level of Detail” [40] which manages to create a real time simplification approximation for
use in different LoD meshes based on sparse sphere tracing.
22
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:31==
3.6
Nanite
Nanite has recently garnered a lot of attention in the field of computer graphics for their
showcased fidelity and ability of their newest version of the Unreal Engine (UE) version
5.0 to render incredibly geometrically detailed environments and assets. According to
Epic Games, Unreal Engine is no longer bound by poly-counts, draw calls, and mesh
memory usage [41]. In addition to such a strong claim Epic continues by suggesting that
the automatically generated LoDs for Nanite have little to no loss in fidelity. These are all
claims that from other technologies we have looked at thus far come short in, whether it
is through a shortcoming by real-time performance and poly-count. So how does Nanite
work? Nanite uses the same technology as other engines have in the past and is a
continuation of specifically the work done by Assassin’s Creed Unity (ACU) engine of
2015 [42] and EA’s Frostbite engine of 2016 [43] (Graham Wihlidal, author of the later,
even being credited as an author). The principle is the adoption of a GPU-driven pipeline
to provide culling, LoD selection, CPU-GPU Data stream requests, and the use of AA to
correct the errors (ACU uses MSAA, while Nanite uses TAA). [44]
Nanite is a meshlet CLoD technology that was unveiled in May of 2020, and later fully
released along side the full Unreal Engine (UE) 5 in April of 2022 [45]. The foundation of
Nanite is the creation of a meshlet LoD hierarchy that is structured in a Directed Acyclical
Graph (DAG) in a bottom up manner (higher LoDs/lower detailed models directed towards
lower LoDs). This allows UE to cut the DAG in a manner to select different meshlet LoDs
on a model thus being CLoD. This DAG is created dynamically with the creation of the
LoDs being done through a meshlet grouping process. Essentially this grouping is done
where Nanite groups a static number of meshlets into what they call ”clusters”. Clustering
in this way is UE’s way to minimize cracks and triangle cruft since adjacent meshlets will all
make the same LoD decision. The process of simplification is taking a mesh, generating
meshlets, then grouping a number of meshlet and merging them into a mesh that would be
used for simplification, this results in a new area of lesser triangles which would result in
a less number of generated meshlets. This processes is best shown in their presentation
figure shown in Figure 3.5. In an ideal number each step of grouping and simplifying
results in half the number of meshlets generated within a grouped area. This would mean
that ideally the mesh can be simplified using this method until there is only a single meshlet
as the root of the DAG. Simplification is done by calculating a Quadric Error Metric (QEM)
then projecting this error on screen for a number of pixel errors for LoD selection (see
section 4.1). All of this is done in a pre-processing step [46].
Figure 3.5: Building of the DAG in Nanite [46]
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
23
==PAGE:32==
Once this DAG is created Nanite groups areas of the scene using a BVH, this BVH is
used for their custom job queue that is placed dynamically on the GPU cache. The GPU
job schedule can then simply pull a node from the BVH check if the node is visible or not.
If it is visible the Node can then check the Projected Screen Error (PSE) for the meshlets
within that BVH meet the error threshold based on distance and projection angle. Since
the meshlets were grouped the meshlets within that group will always make the same
LoD decision. This decision can happen in parallel due to the way the decision is made.
If the parent’s node error is too high but the child error is valid then nothing below the
child needs to be evaluated. This however, will only work if during the building of the DAG
nodes are forced to calculate the error of maximum to be the same as their parent. The
way that Nanite avoids popping when all the nodes are making their own LoD decision at
run time is by making sure that the meshlets are only drawn if they are less than 1 pixel
of error which then relies on TAA to bled the differences [46].
Visibility culling is an important part of any computer graphics technology and Nanite is
no exception. In addition to frustum culling Nanite uses a Two-Pass Occlusion Culling
(2POC). Specifically they use a Hierarchical Depth Buffer (HZB) within the two pass visi-
bility test. The process is that a HZB is built from a depth buffer of geometry within view
of the camera. This HZB is then used for the next frame where the initial task is to test
the HZB with the previous data. Then whatever passes this test is drawn and occluded
geometry is saved. Using the passed geometry an initial HZB is made for this frame
which is then used to see what is really occluded and whatever geometry that did not
previously passed but passes now is drawn. The process can then make a new HZB
with all the passed data for the next frame which starts the entire process again. Frustum
Culling is done before hand so this means that only part of the Nanite pipeline needs to
be processed again. The entire Nanite pipeline can be seen in Figure 3.6 (a full recap
is done at the end of this section), this pipeline differs from the mesh shader pipeline
where Nanite uses a compute shader and they have two forms of rasterization. The first
being the traditional hardware rasterizer and the other being their custom software raster-
izer. The software rasterizer was made due to Nanite seeing an optimization possibility
against Mesh shaders which struggle with shading triangles that are smaller than a pixel
in size. According to their presentation Nanite’s software rasterizer is capable of beating
the traditional hardware rasterizer by a factor of 3. In addition to the [47] [48] [46].
So far the optimizations that have been presented are still similar to what other technolo-
gies that this chapter has looked at are offering, efficient data structures, clustering of
data, and parallelizing the workload. However, Nanite is promoting much higher perfor-
mance. A big part of Nanite is it’s ability to populate the GPU with information dynamically
so that it is always processing information and only information that is relevant to what is
visible on scene. Conceptually, Nanite allows the GPU to request data where it finds that
the quality is insufficient and the CPU will asynchrously fulfill those requests by loading the
data from storage onto GPU memory. To avoid cracks in the geometry it needs to make
sure that loaded and unloaded data have to be a valid cut of the DAG. Going back to
the DAG, the hierarchy done dynamically where a meshlet group is made up of simplified
meshlets means that if a parent is not drawn that means that all of its children need to be
drawn or else there will be holes in the parent area. If one of the children still don’t meet
the error threshold then the next level needs to be loaded but Nanite first needs to check
all nodes at per level loading only the children of nodes that failed. This means that the
GPU needs to be able to traverse the entire hierarchy and as such the DAG is stored in an
ultra compressed format. The way that Nanite achieves this is by loading the hierarchy in
pages. On average Nanite claims that a meshlet (128 triangles) takes up around 2KB of
24
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.6: Nanite Pipeline Overview
memory with their custom paging system, and since the grouping of meshlets can have
somewhere between 8 and 32 groups need to be split and the paging system focuses on
a per meshlet basis. It is important to note that pages are stored consecutively in memory
so that multiple neighboring groups can be retrieved with a single callback to the CPU.
This paging system of Nanite was developed as a continuation of the deferred materials
system that UE 4.0 used. Deferred materials are out of the scope of this thesis but is the
process that UE will wait to apply materials to scene. It essentially waits until all geometry
data has been finalized then does lighting calculation in a per pixel manner using a so
called G-Buffer. Ultimately all of the shading that is done by Nanite is deferred meaning
that it is handled at the per pixel level instead of as a scene [48] [49].
With all the main parts of the Nanite pipeline explained we can define it in steps. Nanite’s
first pass of the two-pass pipeline is the visibiliy pass, including culling and geometry
simplification. This pass is preformed before any shading as it is setting up the visible
geometry and the second’s pass occlusion redrawing. Nanite meshlets are fetched from
the storage then transformed and projected into screen space if they were not already
loaded. Nanite performs frustrum and small-feature culling and generates the first HZB
depth-buffer from the surviving geometry. The main goal of the first pass is to limit the
amount of geometry that needs to be shaded later on in the pipeline. At the start of the
second pass the previously generated HZB is tested again to a newly generated one to
see what geometry should have survived in the previous pass. At this point triangles are
now able to be sent for shading. This shading happens in a per-pixel process almost as
a post-processing step [50].
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
25
==PAGE:34==
3.7
Other Technologies
Through the snowball process as discussed in subsection 2.1.1, there were multiple pa-
pers that would be brought up multiple times in different sources. Their significance in the
research seems to be of establishing fundamental theories that would then be further de-
veloped later on. This section takes a look at these fundamental sources and then review
some of the other related works that were looked at to establish a theory in chapter 4.
Through the discovery process of understanding Nanite as a technology, there were three
sources that would constantly be brought up when snowballing the sources. The fist
of which was of course the NVIDIA mesh shader pipeline [15] which was described in
subsection 1.1.7. Then the hierarchy clustering LoD approach by AMD in their paper
”March of the Froblins” [51] which is a paper showing a GPU compute shader pipeline
for multiple models and crowd simulation. In relation to LoD technologies the biggest
innovation from the paper is the use of a two-pass occlusion based on a previous frame
depth buffer which they refer to as a Hi-Z map. This pipeline is also a strong influence
on Nanite especially with the use of most of the technologies implemented conceptually
similarly. The last re-occurring source focuses on finding a solution to terrain rendering
LoDs imposing a partitioning technique called Chunked LoD. The presentation ”Rendering
Massive Terrains using Chunked LoD” [42] shows how using a hierarchy for LoD selection
on the GPU is useful for smooth vertex morphing and view-dependant LoD rendering. This
paper also mentions an efficient way to page the hierarchy in the GPU for fast loading and
data streaming to save up on memory.
Additional studies were also covered in the research but some of the technologies are
repeats of the concepts that have already been presented in the report and as such will not
be covered individually. In Table 3.1 the read technologies are categorized into different
LoD types used (CLoD, DLoD, View-Dependant (VD)) which were the different LoDs that
have been explained in this report. Furthermore, the primitives that the technologies rely
on are stated, these can be triangles, points, or voxels. Lastly the table goes over what
specifically the usage of the GPU is in the technology, this is to quickly see how much
responsibility the GPU has (LoD in this column indicates that the GPU is responsible to
do the LoD selection) which can affect reported performances which the report looks at
in section 3.8.
Table 3.1: Researched Technologies
Technology
LoD Type
Primitive
GPU Usage
Dong and Peng, 2019 [52]
Discrete
Triangles
Culling, LoD
Mehet Ömer et al., 2017 [53]
Continuous
Triangles
Tessellation, LoD
Hugues Hoppe, 2022 [14]
Continuous
Triangles
Tessellation
Hollander et al., 2011 [54]
HLoD
Triangles
Lighting, LoD
Derzapf et al. 2012 [55]
HLoD
Triangles
LoD, Culling
Shakaev et al., 2017 [56]
HLoD
Triangles
LoD, Simplify, Culling
Silva, et al., 2022[57]
ML
Triangles
Sphere Tracing
Yariv, et al., 2021 [58]
ML
Triangles/Points
Sphere Tracing
Marcus elt al., 2017 [59]
Discrete
Voxels
LoD, Culling, Simplify
Szymon et al., 2016 [60]
Discrete
Voxels
Tessellation, LoD
Markus Schults et al., 2023 [61]
Continuous
Voxels/Points
LoD, Sampling
Leach, 2014 [62]
Discrete
Points
Splatting
Matthias Englert, 2020 [63]
Continuous
Points
Paging, Morph, LoD
26
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:35==
3.8
Results of Theoretical Study
The theory study covered differing approaches to LoD and rendering. Apart from visual fi-
delity, performance is one of the main goals of this thesis as stated in subsection 1.4.2. As
such, Table 3.2 showcases the looked at technologies and their self-reported performance
for comparison. The performance is compared using a calculated metric of triangles per
second calculation. This performance can differ hugely based on the resolution that is be-
ing rendered and the hardware the engine is using so they are provided if they are reported
in the paper or supplement material. This metric is not perfect as it can differ a lot on what
type of materials, shading, and lighting is being done on the rendered scene. However,
such a metric can give an insight into how well the technology can render geometry. The
triangles per second is calculated by taking the paper’s model/scene triangle count (pre-
simplification) and dividing it by the frame-time or reported FPS. Lastly, the frame-times
and resolutions are taken from the most detailed scene they tested with, meaning best
resolution and highest (pre-simplification) triangle count scenes.
Table 3.2: Technology Performance
Technology
Resolution
Drawing Rate
GPU
pixels
in Tris/sec
Nanite, 2022 [46, 48]
2496x1404
750 M
RTX 3090
Livny et al., 2011 [35]
1280x720
356 M
GTX 8800
Derzapf et al. 2012 [55]
1920x1080
140 M
GTX 580
Matthias Englert, 2020 [63]
1920x1080
22 M
RTX 2080-Ti
Silva, et al., 2022[57]
1920x1080
12 M
RTX 3090
Takikawa at al., 2021 [40],
1920x1080
9.77 M
-
Dong and Peng, 2019 [52]
1920x1080
3.91 M
GTX 980-Ti
Hollander et al., 2011 [54]
1024x1024
1.30 M
GTX 480
Marcus elt al., 2017 [59]
1280x720
189.11 k
GTX 1070
Marroquim et al., 2007 [31]
1024x1024
41.67 k
GTX 7800
Szymon et al., 2016 [60]
1280x720
29.05 K
-
Shakaev et al., 2017 [56]
1920x1080
6.26 k
AMD 6950
Scholz et al., 2023 [61]
1920x1080
528.41
GTX 580
Mehet Ömer et al., 2017 [53]
1280x720
678.67
GTX 950M
Leach, 2014 [62]
1024x1024
133.63
GTX 770
The top performing technologies all include some form of a partitioning data structure hi-
erarchy, Nanite using a double hierarchy one for the LoD per model and the other for the
scene (DAG & BVH), Displacement patches uses a meshlet hierarchy [35], and Derzapft
uses a binary tree [55]. In addition 3/5 of the highest performing technologies use mesh-
lets as mesh data structures or use the mesh shading pipeline directly. None the less, the
worst performing technologies researched perform worse due to the scene fidelity they
were attempting to achieve. They include shadows,lighting, and detailed meshes. More-
over, the top performing technologies focus on static meshes or single detailed meshes
for performance and with the exception of Nanite, have no lighting or material calcula-
tions. A notable looked at technology was that of Takikawa’s ”Realtime-SDF” [40] whose
simplification method can preserve more detail than traditional edge-collapsing simplifi-
cation yet have the same memory budgets and perform extremely well with real-time ML
assisted rendering. In addition the technology developed by Dong and Peng [52] sup-
ports animated models and in their test scene had 14 different models that would repeat
to make a total of 300k instances in the scene while boasting a competitive performance.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
27
==PAGE:36==
3.8.1
Discussion of Results
Through an analysis of the different technologies some problems with each of the methods
appeared. In this section we go over such problems and what was considered when
choosing an approach to follow for the implementation done in this report.
From the scenes/models that the voxel engine was trying to render they had good vi-
sual fidelity but poor performance when it came to drawing geometry. As stated multiple
times this report is looking at rendering technologies for high-poly count scenes that voxel
engine cannot be competitive in. While voxels are incredibly versatile, it’s worth noting
that they can be memory intensive. Because they represent a 3D volume, the amount
of memory required to store voxel data increases cubically with the resolution. This can
make working with high-resolution voxel data computationally challenging. Furthermore,
voxels have a distinct art style to them in where models and scene with not enough voxels
can result in blocky looking scenes. The difference in between LoDs experience the same
problems as discussed with polygon simplification in where there can appear gaps and
popping which is normally reduced by morphing which adds additional work for the en-
gine. Additionally researched technologies discussed how getting edge detailing meant
additional time spent on ray-tracing and sampling which would just add additional time for
rendering. Voxel engine also depend heavily on the scene partitioning tactics that we see
with triangle engines since they need to quickly skip checking over large empty regions
something which doesn’t need to be tracked in triangle rendering systems[29, 60]
Point interpolation engines appear to be gaining popularity in academic research espe-
cially with the use of ML to approximate models. As this technology continues to be devel-
oped such approaches could potentially be a strong competitor to the meshlet techniques
that have been discussed. As of this paper technologies are still behind in rendering per-
formance but as previously discussed the fidelity being offered by such systems make it
an appealing approach for rendering detailed scenes. This is especially true since the per-
formance of technologies that have been looked at comparing themselves to the founding
technologies like QSplat [64] and DeepSDF [37], appear to be substantively better in the
short time (4 years) that such research became emergent.
The best performing technologies are both using a hierarchy triangle patch approach,
while one adopts a dynamic simplification and the other a dynamic tessellation. However,
it is worth noting that most of the techniques that both technologies use are very mem-
ory intensive and as such one of the main limitation that they face are memory usage
limitations. Also particularly to Nanite, the scaling of performance is with pixel density
means that for larger resolutions it can be a struggle. If the motivation behind this re-
port is to highlight technologies for VR applications it is worth noting that currently Nanite
does not support VR, it could be that with the release of UE 5.1 this could change though
[65]. Besides performance showcasing such a technology would be showcasing state of
the art LoD practices such as the CLoD and HLoD within the same view-dependant LoD
system. Such a project could differ than the looked at studies in order to detail the advan-
tages/disadvantages that Nanite’s dynamic simplification and a traditional static simplifi-
cation method could be. Furthermore comparing the CLoD of a displacement system and
a meshlet swapping system can be highlighted with the two technologies found. Using
such justifications the Implementation of a HLoD-CLoD theory can now be discussed.
28
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:37==
4
Implementation
The implementation covered is done by using a well known technique, simplification, in
order to create less complex models that reserve enough detail that they can be switched
out as the camera moves away from the model without perceivable loss. LoD is that
principle and specifically this thesis looks at how simplification of a scene with LoD can
be combined with previously mentioned technique of grouping triangles into so called
”meshlets”. Furthermore, allowing different meshlets of the same model to make thier own
LoD decision is the principle of CLoD which for huge models can lower the amount of data
in the scene. Lastly, the structuring of how these meshlets are traversed to assign a LoD
to them, improves the speed at which a scene can be processed. These techniques can
be combined to swap lower LoD meshlets or parts of the mesh and not the entire model
in order to create a fast render engine that in theory is not limited by scene geometric
complexity. The implementation was strongly influenced by the concepts discussed during
the discovery process in chapter 3. In this Chapter the different focus areas that need to
be addressed for a successful implementation are presented.
4.1
Simplification
A finding from the research showed that many of the state of the art technologies would
focus on the simplification optimizing for minimizing perceived SPE. As such one of the
most popular versions of mesh simplification is edge collapsing as discussed in subsec-
tion 1.1.6. For the implementation simplification uses a technique that attempts to pre-
serve as much of the overall model appearance as possible developed by Michael Gar-
land and Paul S. Heckbert, which uses QEM for error calculations [66]. The way that
this method works is by calculating a quadric, a type 4x4 matrix, for every polygon in the
mesh. The quadric represents the distance from any particular point in space to the plane
of the polygon. A quadric for a vertex is calculated as a sum of quadrics of all polygons
that share that vertex. For each pair of vertices that share an edge, an edge contraction
is proposed. This contraction would replace the two vertices with a single one, and the
position of the new vertex is chosen to minimize the sum of the quadrics of the two original
vertices as shown in Figure 4.1. The proposed edge contraction that introduces the least
amount of error (according to the quadrics) is chosen and performed. The polygons that
were only connected to the two original vertices are removed, and the remaining faces
are updated to refer to the new vertex. The quadrics are then updated for the affected
vertices and this process repeats until either an error threshold has been reached or the
model has been reduced to the desired amount.
Figure 4.1: Edge Contraction [66]
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
29
==PAGE:38==
One of the key benefits of the Garland-Heckbert method is that it does not require the new
vertex to be at the midpoint of the collapsed edge or even along the edge at all. Instead,
the optimal position for the new vertex is calculated to minimize the quadric error, which
can lead to simplification models that closer appear to their original model. However, if
the desired approach is to make sure that meshlets with lower detail contain meshlets of
higher detail within them, locking the boundaries of the meshlets is necessary, meaning
the method should not move the vertices. Not moving the vertices can also help with tex-
ture/normals/material mapping and especially with mesh animation. Lastly, making sure
that the vertices are not moved helps mitigate the concept of holes which was discussed
in subsection 1.1.6. This is because since each of the LoDs will be created using the
same original models vertices, we know that when generating the meshlets of the differ-
ent LoDs, there are no vertices of the original model that will not be covered by at least
one meshlet, albeit not perfectly. Additionally, we can remove the concept of cruft from
the implementation so long as the entire model is being used for the simplification pro-
cess as opposed to dynamic simplification where a model generates meshlets then picks
a meshlet simplifies, then re-generates meshlets.
In order to not move the vertices of a QEM simplification approach it is quite simple, you
can either make it so that when the algorithm is calculating the optimal point to move the
vertex to, it will always choose the position of the vertex thus not moving it. Otherwise,
the algorithm could stay the same and post-simplification you create a vertex buffer of the
simplified model using only vertices that were already present in the original model’s vertex
buffer. Either way any of the vertices in the simplified model will be the same vertices
as the original model, although, the simplified model will have less vertices. It is still
useful to use QEM for the simplification as the reduction of detail still keep geometrically
important areas intact. This effect can be seen especially well in the Dragon model as the
simplification method implemented keeps the whiskers, horns, and teeth intact through
all the steps of simplification as shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Dragon QEM Simplification
4.2
Monolithic Vertex Buffer
A benefit of having a series of simplified models that use the same vertices as the original
model is that we can have a single vertex buffer stored in memory, that of the original
model. This is because each of the simplified models will have the same unique vertices
as the original however a different index buffer. Essentially, when a lower LoD model
wants to be drawn it can translate it’s indices from the simplified vertex buffer to the original
model’s vertex buffer. Having such a system in where any LoD model can pick from the
same vertices, helps tremendously with parallelization. In theory, any of the meshlets can
be processed independently on the GPU if the Monolithic Vertex Buffer (MVB) is stored in
memory only having to do the translation from LoD indices to the MVB indices equivalent.
30
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:39==
The MVB is best described in Figure 4.3 where the green square is still made up of the
same vertices as the black cube, and the orange triangle is made up of the same vertices
as the green square, however they do not make up all the vertices of the original object
(the cube). Furthermore, each of the objects have their own local index buffer that requires
to be translated back to the original objects vertex buffer.
Figure 4.3: Monolithic Drawing Process
4.3
Command Buffers and Draw Calls
The storage of a single MVB on GPU memory would mean a reduction of draw calls to
the GPU form the CPU. A draw call is a command that tells the GPU to draw a certain set
of vertices as triangles with a specific set of shaders, materials, and/or lighting. A large
number of draw calls can potentially decrease performance due to overhead that comes
with issuing and processing a draw call. The overhead can be on both the CPU and/or
the GPU. If the CPU setups and issues draw calls faster than the GPU can process them,
and the CPU does not synchronize with the GPU to stop making new draw calls that is
waster CPU time. On the other side of the situation if the CPU is not issuing draw calls
fast enough the GPU will be idling which would be poor utilization. Furthermore, each
draw call typically comes with a set of state changes (like changing the current shader
program, changing textures, etc.). These state changes can be expensive, particularly if
the GPU has to flush its pipeline or cache as a result. By reducing the number of draw
calls, a system can also reduce the number of state changes and improve performance.
Command buffers, on the other hand, are containers for these draw calls and other ren-
dering commands. Creating more command buffers does not inherently decrease per-
formance in the same way that increasing the number of draw calls does. In fact, using
multiple command buffers can sometimes improve performance, because it allows for
better utilization of multi-core CPUs. You can build different command buffers on different
threads in parallel, which can lead to better CPU utilization and less stalling waiting for the
GPU. So, while both increasing the number of draw calls and increasing the number of
command buffers can potentially decrease performance, they do so in different ways and
to different extents. The key in both cases is to find a balance that allows you to minimize
CPU overhead and maximize parallelism without causing excessive overhead from too
many draw calls or command buffer submissions. Having a MVB would allow the engine
to pack the draw calls of multiple meshlets at different LoDs into the same single draw
call.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
31
==PAGE:40==
Lastly, if the MVB can be expanded to multiple models and not just different LoDs then
the multiple objects (potentially the entire scene) can be packed into a single draw call.
An approach where the there is a truly scene-wide MVB is heavily inspired by Nanite,
where only a single draw call is issued per material type instead of mesh[46]. However,
implementing such a system requires that the GPU can fill vertex and index buffers which
are later rendered using indirect draw calls. Indirect draw calls being draw calls made to a
buffer that the GPU can write to. Allowing for more efficient draw call handling. Reducing
CPU usage and potentially improving performance as GPU handles parallel task better.
Something that is easiest done through the use of a compute shader pipeline. However,
the implementation will stick to using the mesh shader pipeline in order to get the benefits
of implementing a parallel meshlet approach.
4.4
Serialization
With a vertex buffer for each of the simplification levels figured out, serialization and stor-
age of the different LoDs is a trivial task. Following an approach to OBJ file types, the
vertices are stored in a binary file where each each line represent a vertex object. The
vertices objects store vertex normals, positions, and color (although vertex color is not
used in the engine). This system allows for the simplification step to be skipped in the
engine, skipping most most of the pre-processing step. It is worth noting that the system
allows for meshlets to be stored since the meshlets are essentially another level of trans-
lation of vertex indices. This is due to all meshlets in a LoD mesh making up that mesh’s
vertices allowing for the meshlet generation step to be skipped as well.
4.5
Meshlet Hierarchy
As for further optimization learned from the discovery process was that of efficient data
structures for traversing LoDs. Such a HLoD approach can be applied to meshlets as
well. The process of creating the DAG starts after the simplification has created all the
different simplified models. In order to create the DAG we first start by placing all the
possible meshlets into lists separated by LoD. Where meshlets from the lowest LoD are
considered the roots of the graph. Ideally, the simplification would create only one root
where the LoD mesh is only made up of one meshlet. At this point the roots of the DAG
are known but no edges (connections between the nodes) are known at this point. This is
because unlike Nanite’s dynamic simplification this static approach does not quite know
the relationship between LoDs and the meshlets inheritance. To get by the problem of
not knowing the relationship, simply use the vertices since they don’t change through
simplification, in this way it is possible to see that the vertex position are the same in the
next LoD. This works because even though the LoD above is bigger (more triangles in the
entire mesh so meshlet take up less of an area if meshlets are always generated to be
somewhere around 127 triangles [20]) the vertices are the same so if they are the same
across LoDs we can just consume them in the meshlet to see which meshlets in the next
level make up the current meshlet. This approach has some overlaps where some of the
meshlets will share the same vertex in the same LoD and if meshlets overlap then they will
be added twice to the DAG. This is not problematic as it can either be discarded here or it
can be discarded when traversing the DAG when rendering. That is when rendering it will
first check if it has already checked that node before drawing it. However, there is a benefit
to having duplicate entries in the DAG. That is there are cases when a meshlet cannot
find any children since the vertices have already been consumed by another vertex in the
same LoD. If a meshlet has no children then it will always be picked to be drawn creating
locked LoD scenarios. Therefore, duplicating the meshlet and allowing it to be added
as a child to multiple nodes will ensure that the traversal can continue, and since before
32
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:41==
rendering the engine checks to see if it has already tried to draw that meshlet there will not
be any meshlet that gets drawn twice. The DAG creation process is shown in Figure 4.4.
For the implementation, a DAG is constructed from the meshlets by iterating over each of
the meshlets of the scene and assigning a hash to its vertices. Using the hash allows for
a quick lookup into an unordered map which when sent a vertex as a look up parameter
it will return all the meshlets that share that vertex are returned. The construction of the
DAG can therefore be a simple process a sample of the code that is responsible for the
DAG creation can be seen in the Appendix Listing A.1.
Figure 4.4: DAG Creation
Alternatively it is also possible to build a BVH from the meshlets by using the min and max
vertex positions of the meshlet to create an Axis-Aligned Bounding Box (AABB) around
the meshlet. The AABB center can then be used in order to check the distance to the
camera or for calculating SPE (further discussed in section 4.6). The hierarchy of a BVH
will result in less meshlets being duplicated since the entire meshlets’ bounding box needs
to be inside the less detailed meshlets’ bounding box for it to count as a child node. It
is also possible that if duplicates are preferred then as long as any part of the boxes
touch then it can be considered a child. The BVH is shown in Figure 4.5. The hierarchy
performances showed to be similar as discussed in subsection 6.2.1. The rendering of
both hierarchies are the same logic which pseudo code can be seen in Algorithm 1 (The
visibility test is done using Frustum Culling only as explained in section 4.7) . However,
distance based thresholds are susceptible to popping if not tediously tweaked to limit the
visible popping. This popping could however be reduced by creating more simplification
steps with less detail being removed between the steps.
Algorithm 1 Rendering of a HLoD
1: procedure ProcessNode(Node, Camera)
2:
if NotV isbile(Node, Camera) then
3:
return
4:
if Node.Children <= 0 OR Distance(Node, Camera) > DistanceThreshold then
5:
RenderNode(Node)
6:
else
7:
for all Node.Children do ProcessNode(Child, Camera)
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
33
==PAGE:42==
It is worth noting that the algorithm shown has two optimizations, that of not drawing
non-visible nodes, and that of drawing nodes that don’t have children. An additional opti-
mization would be as stated before in this section of not processing nodes that have been
processed before. This can be tricky however as in theory not processing a node that
didn’t get drawn should lead to holes developing. However, in practice it is seen that the
meshlets overlap each other often enough to not require this as the hole will get drawn
by another node regardless. This is only possible because of doing the whole model sim-
plification then meshlet generation. Meaning that this setup is sacrificing overdraw for
efficient duplicate traversal, something that if doing the dynamic simplification does not
have to worry about.
Figure 4.5: Bounding Volume Hierarchy
The BVH code is a lot simpler as well where the data structure is a simple 3 float vector
containing the min and max points. The testing can then simply be checking if the min
points of the child are smaller than the parent and vice-versa for the max points if checking
for full containment. The full code for the BVH creation can be seen in Listing 4.1.
basicstyle
basicstyle
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
1
// Create parent child relationships based on which meshlets share
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
vertices
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
2
for (int lod = MAX_LOD; lod > 0; lod--)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
3
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
4
for (int i = 0; i < world.DAG.nodes[lod].size(); i++)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
5
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
6
lod::Graph::Node *parent = &world.DAG.nodes[lod][i];
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
7
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
8
lod::BoundingBox parent_bb = parent->bb;
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
9
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
10
// Check the lower level
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
11
for (int j = 0; j < world.DAG.nodes[lod - 1].size(); j++)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
12
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
13
lod::Graph::Node *child = &world.DAG.nodes[lod - 1][j];
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
14
34
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:43==
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
15
lod::BoundingBox child_bb = child->bb;
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
16
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
17
if (parent_bb.isContained(parent_bb , child_bb) && (parent ->children.
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
count(child->id) == 0))
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
18
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
19
parent->children[child->id] = child;
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
20
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
21
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
22
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
23
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
24
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
25
struct BoundingBox
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
26
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
27
glm::vec3 minPoint = glm::vec3(0.0f);
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
28
glm::vec3 maxPoint = glm::vec3(0.0f);
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
29
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
30
bool isContained(const BoundingBox &parent , const BoundingBox &child)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
31
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
32
// Check if any part of the child's bounding box is inside or
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
touching the parent's bounding box.
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
33
return !(child.maxPoint.x < parent.minPoint.x || child.minPoint.x
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
> parent.maxPoint.x ||
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
34
child.maxPoint.y < parent.minPoint.y || child.minPoint.y
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
> parent.maxPoint.y ||
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
35
child.maxPoint.z < parent.minPoint.z || child.minPoint.z
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
> parent.maxPoint.z);
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
36
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
37
// If the child's bounding box is completely inside the parent's
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
bounding box then return true
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
38
return (parent.minPoint.x <= child.minPoint.x && parent.minPoint.y
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
<= child.minPoint.y && parent.minPoint.z <= child.minPoint.z)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
&&
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
39
(parent.maxPoint.x >= child.maxPoint.x && parent.maxPoint.y
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
>= child.maxPoint.y && parent.maxPoint.z >= child.
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
maxPoint.z);
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
40
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
41
}; // struct BoundingBox
basicstyle
basicstyle
Listing 4.1: BVH Creation in C++
4.6
LoD Selection
Throughout the report the subject of Level-of-Detail (LoD) has been constantly brought
up and although previously only touched on the basis, here we will take a deeper look
into how LoD is used to adjust scene complexity. As stated before LoD is controlled by
some run-time condition of the engine, this can be a simple button press, but most likely it
is done through the meshes’ distance to the camera as shown in Figure 4.6. Each of the
thresholds are a limit to when a certain LoD can be drawn, if it is below the threshold that
LoD can be drawn otherwise not. The swapping of LoD meshes can introduce overhead
to the program and is therefore desired only when an engine is struggling to render the
fully detailed mesh. This criteria also helps in minimizing the popping effect.
Threshold optimizing is a time consuming task with some technologies placing more im-
portance on keeping detail of certain objects, lighting, or focusing on saving performance.
Distance based LoD selection is the simplest form to implement and the least compu-
tationally hard. However, a naive approach is setting constant seen wide thresholds.
Implementing an adaptive threshold such as relative size based thresholds, where the
thresholds are based on the relative size of how much the model takes up in the scene
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.6: Distance Swapping for DLoD and CLoD
change the threshold, can preserve visual fidelity with low computing cost. Out of the
discovered technologies CLoD is especially vulnerable to as many parts of the scene are
constantly changing with multiple distance calculations happening throughout. SPE as
explained before calculates the pixel error that switching LoDs would have and based on
a pixel threshold the LoD will be allowed to change otherwise it would not. The use of a
more sophisticated threshold like SPE will make popping almost a non issue as discussed
in chapter 6. The calculation done for the SPE can be a simple screen error such as the
one shown in (4.1) where the euclidean distance between the object and the camera posi-
tion, d, can be used to find the projected SPE ρ from the world space error δ that an object
projects in comparison to the original object [67]. This δ is simply a measurement of how
much the vertices have moved in comparison to the original mesh (aka. the geometric
error or the world space error). Since the implementation is using a QEM simplification
method it has already calculated this error when choosing the optimal point to move the
vertex. Using the error calculated during the QEM simplification process we can derive
δ. However, since the simplification is compounding, that is the next LoD is created using
the result of the previous, instead of the original mesh. The implementation needs to add
the error from the previous result to the new simplified error to get the δ of each of the
LoDs. Using this and getting the other screen parameters such as the screen resolution
x, the vertical FOV ϕ, and the view frustum width w as shown in Figure 4.7. It is possible
to calculate the projected SPE. Using the SPE the engine now just needs to compare
that when switching to that LoD the SPE will be less than the threshold ensuring that the
scene’s fidelity is not changed.
δ
w = ρ
x, ρ = δ × x
w
(4.1)
This formula is not perfect since it really is assuming that the object is at the center of the
view-port and an angle displacement needs to be calculated if the object is off-centered.
The frustum parameters can also be calculated algebraically as shown in (4.2). Further-
more since SPE adds some overhead for the calculation time the engine decides to strictly
use distance based thresholds instead if the frame time grows beyond a threshold.
36
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.7: The Estimated Screen Space Error
w = 2δ tan ϕ
2 , ρ =
δ × x
2δ tan ϕ
2
(4.2)
An additional problem with thresholds is that of ”fluttering”. Flutter is what is referred to
the action of switching constantly between LoDs, causing abrupt and distracting changes.
There are few techniques to mitigate fluttering, such as adding smooth transition, frame
delay for calculating LoD changes, or adding an additional error metric that takes into
consideration the camera’s velocity and/or direction. There is also a common technique
to mitigate popping and fluttering using a hysteresis for switching LoDs, that is when
switching to a higher LoD the threshold will be different than switching to a lower LoD to
add some buffer state if near the threshold limit. For the purposes of the implementation
adding an error metric based on the velocity of the camera is enough. The error metric
is simply a scale of frame delay where the delay is increased the slower the camera is
travelling, increasing to infinity if the camera is not moving. This will limit the amount of
times that the DAG or BVH will need to be traversed in between frames hopefully boosting
performance. Traditionally the error metric is added to the SPE to adjust when LoD should
change if the camera is moving, however, stopping the HLoD from updating will gain more
performance and stop fluttering due to the expensive part of the code being the creation
of different command buffers. The pseudo-code for the node traversal is now modified to
take the delay into account and now looks like that shown in Algorithm 2.
4.7
Culling Strategies
The implementation is acting as a continuation to the Jinsoku engine as mention in sec-
tion 1.2. As such the GPU pipeline is capable of discarding meshlets that are considered
back-facing or outside of the view-frustum. Due to time constraints the logic of the node
processing was not moved to the GPU (see subsection 6.3.4 for more). However, the vis-
ibility optimization brings a large performance increase. In order to see the performance
increase that the visibility check has on the node traversal a quick frustum check is done.
The viewing frustum refers to the area that is visible by the camera, usually also adding
a limit to how near triangles can be to the camera and how far they can be (a.k.a as the
near and far culling planes). Frustum culling is the act of culling data (triangles) from the
scene so that they do not have to be processed based on if the data is inside the viewing
frustum. This frustum cull (along any other type of culling) can be done on the hierarchy
itself removing, nodes that are not visible in the scene. The implementation simulates that
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
37
==PAGE:46==
Algorithm 2 Rendering of a HLoD
1: procedure ProcessNode(Node, Camera)
2:
if Camera.V elocity > 0 then
3:
Delay = Camera.V elocity ∗factor
4:
Delay = Max(Delay, MinDelay
5:
Camera.Delay = Delay
6:
else
7:
return
8:
if NotV isbile(Node, Camera) OR Camera.Delay > 0 then
9:
return
10:
if Node.Children <= 0 OR Distance(Node, Camera) > DistanceThreshold then
11:
RenderNode(Node)
12:
UpdateTimer(Camera)
13:
else
14:
for all Node.Children do ProcessNode(Child, Camera)
optimization by checking if the AABB of the node is inside the viewing frustum as shown in
Figure 4.8. The implementation has a near and far frustum culling planes of near = 0.01
world units and far = 1, 000, 000, 000.
Figure 4.8: Frustum Check for Visibility
38
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:47==
5
Results
The HLoD strategy developed allows for models to be in multiple LoDs at the same time,
allowing for areas closer to the camera to be rendered in more detail than areas that
are far away. This allows large complex models to be rendered with less overall detail
without having to resort to DLoD tactics and reducing popping effects. Figure 5.1 shows
the difference in detail between three frames of the transition process from LoD 1 down
to LoD 0 using the normals as shading values. Figure 5.2 shows the difference in pixels
between the images.
Figure 5.1: CLoD Transitions
Figure 5.2: CLoD Transitions Pixel Error
Figure 5.3: CLoD Transitions
The CLoD in Figure 5.3 shows the armadillos CLoD transitions from Figure 5.1 where
now the different LoDs of the models are different colors (yellow = LoD 1 and green =
LoD 0). The popping has been reduced almost to a point where it is almost not noticeable
on large models. The popping effect is easier to see in models with less triangles such
as that shown in Figure 5.4 where the third image shows the areas that experience some
noticeable change. Popping is an effect that is hard to describe with static images however
out of the models tested, the ones that experience any kind of meaningful popping are the
Kitten and Bruce where the certain facial features that are made up of very few triangles.
When these facial features change in detail it is noticeable at certain LoDs. Using a
technique as discussed in subsection 1.1.4 where the facial features are offered some
extra importance could remove any of the perceived popping in the engine.
As for fluttering, it is heavily visible when the camera is traversing the scene as the LoD
decisions can be seen in real-time. However, if the velocity of the camera is not very
high then the fluttering will stop completely. A possible explanation for this effect is further
discussed in subsection 6.3.1.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.4: Perceived Error between CLoD transitions
5.1
Test Measurements
In order to gather an estimated frames per second the steady clock of the standard C++
library Chrono [68] was used for timing the execution of the algorithm. Frame time includes
the traversal of the hierarchy (DAG or BVH) the setup of the command buffer and the time
the execution of a draw call. In addition to the per frame render time and FPS counter,
timing was also done for the initialization time required to setup the scene to work with
the LoD system. GPU profiling was done with the use of a 3rd party application Riva
Tuner Statistics [69]. System memory usage was monitored using the enterprise version
of Visual Studio 2022. The resolution of the camera used in the testing is 1920x1080
and vertical FOV is 45◦. A count of the frames rendered was counted after Vulkan’s
presentImage API call returned. As a verification tool, Jinsoku was altered keep track of
average frame times in milliseconds that saves the frame time every second. This has
been expanded to produce a list of frame times, frame triangle count, and frame meshlet
count every second which was used to support the readings from the afore mentioned
tools.
All tests were done with the camera initially positioned the distance needed for threshold
of LoD 10 to be hit with an additional 50 world units. This meant the camera was placed
70 world units or more (depending on the scale of the scene) away from the scene center.
The camera would then move towards the center of the scene at a constant speed of
0.01 units/frame. The test would be done when the cameras position is the same as the
scene center. This test scenario is to ensure that the scene goes through multiple LoD
changes and is a controlled scenario for each of the scenes. Waiting until the camera hits
the center of the scene ensures that LoD 0 is triggered and the scene is rendered in full
detail. As for the center of the scene, in a single-modeled scene the center of the scene
is just the center of the model. When there are multiple models in a scene the algorithm
to find the center is shown in Algorithm (3).
Algorithm 3 Calculating the Center of the Scene
1: procedure CalculateCenter
2:
for all Scene.Meshes do
3:
Center = Center + Mesh.Center
4:
Center = Center/Scene.Meshes.Count
40
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:49==
5.2
Single Model Results
For testing the performance of rendering single models shown in subsection 2.2.3. The
meshes were placed around the origin (0,0,0) of the world and the camera placed at the
threshold distance for LoD 10. The results of the single model tests are shown in Ta-
ble 5.1. From the results it can be concluded that the performance is worse with larger
models and the performance scales with number of meshlets generated and memory us-
age. The highest GPU usage during testing was 100% while the highest CPU usage was
51%. This indicates that the engine is not using the hardware to full efficiency. In higher
triangle count model the CPU never reached above 51% usage. The persistent thread job
queue is populated by the standard library C++ line of std::thread::hardware_concurrency()
at which point tasks are added to a thread pool where each core can take a task (the code
implementation can be seen in section A.5). It is most likely that the command buffer writ-
ing and draw call generation are the bulk of the processing power (this is further discussed
in subsection 6.3.4 with supporting evidence in section 5.4). The pre-processing times for
each of the models are shown in Table 5.2.
Table 5.1: Rendering Performance Per Model Tested
Model
Triangles
Meshlets
Frame-time
name
Min/Max
Min/Max
Min/Max | avg in ms
Thai
75419 / 12975024
8007/ 105932
2.31 / 2500 | 452.63
Dragon
406395 / 7219045
4292 / 74171
1.35 / 2500 | 438.17
Nefertiti
113654 / 2144951
1204 / 226979
1.91 / 1781.0 | 305.75
Happy
61243 / 1302168
647 / 13870
1.02 / 500 | 277.37
Armadillo
4632 / 417139
49 / 4384
1.0 / 220.4 | 57.34
Bunny
919 / 93720
10 / 984
1.3 / 42.7 | 8.06
Kitten
392 / 41520
4 / 436
1.0 / 21.6 | 8.15
Bruce
500 / 18360
6 / 195
1.89 / 6.25 | 5.39
Teapot
325 / 12457
4 / 123
1.06 / 5.05 | 3.46
Table 5.2: Pre-Processing for All Models Tested
Model
CPU
RAM
GPU
GPU Mem
Pre-Processing
name
Min/Max (%)
MB
Min/Max (%)
MB
HH::MM:ss
Thai
11 / 46
1662
0 / 100
5910
02::29:28.47
Dragon
13 / 44
1552
9 / 100
3758
01::27:36.35
Nefertiti
9 / 51
1276
3 / 77
3224
00::45:20.44
Happy
9 / 32
842
3 / 58
2300
00::22:45.96
Armadillo
10 / 43
639
3 / 49
2249
00::10:39.34
Bunny
11 / 37
498
6 / 48
2054
00::01:48.23
Kitten
12 / 44
122
7 / 46
2017
00::00:45.53
Bruce
12 / 40
71
11 / 48
1937
00::00:14.86
Teapot
10 / 36
62
8 / 45
1888
00::00:09.57
SPE performed significantly worse than simple distance based LoD thresholds. This is
best shown in the Armadillo test where the test was ran twice, once with strictly each
type of threshold, to show the difference of performance as shown in Table 5.3. This was
expected as SPE will not reduce the detail of a model until the specified perceived pixel
error is below the set threshold. In the testing the pixel error was set to 1.0 pixel limiting
the times that the model could switch LoDs making the HLoD traversal expensive.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
41
==PAGE:50==
Table 5.3: SPE vs Distance Performance Results
Test Measurement
SPE
Distance
Avg. Frame times (ms)
84.43
57.64
CPU Usage (% Min/Max)
9 / 42
9 / 42
GPU Usage (% Min/Max)
10 / 59
7 / 40
Triangles (Min/Max)
19458 / 438213
19458 / 286762
Meshlets (Min/Max)
1542 / 4609
206 / 3032
GPU Memory (MB)
2201
2175
The low performance of the engine is highly expected to be due to the draw call overhead
that is experienced when writing a command buffer for each meshlet each frame (this is
further discussed in subsection 6.3.4). At the highest end model (Thai Statue) it can be
seen that there were frames where the GPU usage was at 0%. This strictly means that
the implementation is bottle necked by the CPU. The models were tested again with an
additional tracker of how many draw calls were made each frame. The results (Figure 5.5)
of the test show how frame time is lowered significantly with the number of draw calls
made.
Figure 5.5: Frame time and Draw Calls Made
5.3
Multi-Model Scenes
The performance shown for each of the models involved setting up a single model in the
scene, information of the models is shown in subsection 2.2.3. In addition to single model
scenes multi-model scenes where tested to check how the engine handles instancing and
different models in the same scene. The instance scene tested is shown in Figure 5.6.
The instance testing scene consisted of copies of the Utah teapot spread out in a grid
pattern. The scene was tested at 3, 30, 300, and 3000 Utah teapot models. The results
of which are shown in Table 5.4.
The different model scene consisted of one of each of the models spread out in a grid
pattern. This test is meant to verify that the MVB can handle multiple types of meshes
42
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.6: Instance Scene Tested
Table 5.4: Multiple Teapot Test Results
Model
Triangles
Meshlets
Frame-time
repetitions
Min/Max
Min/Max
average in ms
3000
7878000 / 18960000
84000 / 201000
730.02
300
1313000 / 3160000
14000 / 33500
18.37
30
131300 / 460410
1400 / 4884
11.91
3
13130 / 48845
141 / 521
7.48
and index offsetting correctly. The results of this scene are shown in Table 5.5.
Table 5.5: Different Model Scene Results
Test Measurement
Result
Avg. Frame times (ms)
277.14
Triangles (Min/Max)
4227194 / 19583221
Meshlets (Min/Max)
44631 / 206413
GPU Memory
4278
RAM
9932
CPU (Min/Max %)
12 / 58
GPU (Min/Max %)
33 / 100
The instance and different model scenes show that the engine is capable of rendering
multiple meshes using both CLoD and DLoD shown in Figure 5.7. For CLoD each meshlet
independently makes it’s own LoD decision and for DLoD the LoD decision is made as a
per model. The pre-processing stage requires that meshlets be generated for each of the
moodels/instances per LoD which scales the time required for pre-processing per model
or instance. A shortcut can be done where instancing is handled where the meshlets
are only generated for the first instance of the model and subsequent repeat model use
the meshlet from the first with the center of the meshlets calculated with an offset of the
position of the model. This is an important step due to the 300000 instance scene taking
upwards of 22 hours to generate meshlets individually re-using meshlets took 38 min to
pre-process.
5.4
Discrete LoD
The implementation engine has a backup to switching to DLoD based on if all the meshlets
that have been chosen to be drawn are in the same LoD. Discrete LoD allows all the
meshlets that are to be drawn to be sent to the GPU in a single draw call. Due to this
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.7: Multi-Model CLoD (left) and DLoD (right)
the utilization of the GPU is higher since the CPU can write the command buffers faster.
Whenever the engine switches to DLoD the frame-rate skyrockets. Thus making the
performance of DLoD in comparison to CLoD close to 100x better as seen in the average
frame times in Table 5.6. The test was conducted using the Armadillo statue model.
Table 5.6: DLoD vs CLoD Performance Results
Test Measurement
DLoD
CLoD
Avg. Frame times (ms)
2.28
222.67
CPU Usage (% Min/Max)
6 / 46
13 / 44
GPU Usage (% Min/Max)
10 / 100
1 / 100
Draw Calls (Min/Max)
19458 / 345944
24504 / 345944
Meshlets (Min/Max)
207 / 3636
262 / 3636
In addition to DLoD the implementation due to the velocity buffer as stated in section 4.6,
will not traverse the HLoD in order to choose which meshlets to draw. Instead the engine
opts to draw the same meshlets that were selected to be drawn last frame. This effect
also has a huge effect on performance. Figure 5.8, shows the performance profile of the
armadillo of a scenario where the camera moves straight for the center and another where
the camera manually moving to the center where the camera stops for a couple seconds
then continues to the center. The times at which the camera is stopped there are clear
frame-rate increases as well as hardware usage changes shown in Appendix section A.2.
Figure 5.8: Profiler Charts for Camera movements; Direct (left) and Staggered (right)
44
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:53==
6
Discussion
This chapter takes an introspective look at the results and highlights some of the key
findings of the implementation in section 6.2. As well as a comparison of the results to
the popular technologies that were discussed in chapter 3. The comparison shows the
performance of the implementation in comparison to the discovered technologies and
discusses some of the capabilities of the other technologies in comparison, this is all
discussed in section 6.1.
6.1
Comparison of Implementation
The performance of the implementation was not as expected however the technique used
proved to be a successful way to reduce scene complexity and reduce the workload of the
hardware to render the scene. As for visual fidelity the implementation still experiences
some noticeable popping effects especially in important areas like faces. Nanite is a tech-
nology that has figured how to remove this popping entirely. As for performance Nanite is
still the dominating technology in terms of frame times scaled with triangle, however both
Nanite and the implementation stutter (albeit Nanite less noticeable) when a new CLoD
has to be determined. It is expected that Nanite’s stutter might come from the engine’s
paging in new data, however this has not been proven for this report. In terms of best
cases for the top meshlet technologies researched the implementation performed well
with DLoD and was unable to perform using real-time CLoD. The different self reported
best case triangles per second for meshlet HLoD technologies can be seen in Table 6.1
with Nanite being tested on the same machine as the implementation. The best case
triangle per second calculations for Nanite, Jinsoku, and this implementation come from
the average frame time and the 192,972,000 Million triangle scene of the 500 Armadillos.
This implementation could not handle CLoD for that test and resorted to DLoD. Unfortu-
nately, the other technologies were not able to handle the armadillo model for testing and
the authors failed to respond in time for the writing of this report. Therefore, the triangle
per second is still their best self reported on their own model and GPU. Also it is worth
noting that the following results are skewed by Nanites lighting and although the Jinsoku
engine is not struggling to render the 500 armadillos, any more and pre-processing would
fail due to running out of RAM.
Table 6.1: Technology Comparison
Technology
Resolution
Drawing Rate
GPU
pixels
in Tris/sec
Nanite UE5
1920x1080
14708 M
RTX 2070 Super
Implementation (DLoD)
1920x1080
11555M
RTX 2070 Super
MB Jensen et al., 2021 [20]
1920x1080
7227M
RTX 2070 Super
Livny et al., 2011 [35]
1280x720
356 M
GTX 8800
Derzapf et al. 2012 [55]
1920x1080
140 M
GTX 580
Matthias Englert, 2020 [63]
1920x1080
22 M
RTX 2080-Ti
In addition to the implementation, an engine using the traditional pipeline has been devel-
oped which uses a crude meshlet generation. The meshlet generation is clustering 128
adjacent triangles, if there are less than 128 triangles left to cluster then the engine simply
cluster the remaining triangles into a meshlet. The traditional pipeline was also developed
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
45
==PAGE:54==
using Vulkan and C++ (see Appendix section A.4). Table 6.2 shows how Nanite, the mesh
shading pipeline (Jinsoku updated to allow multiple meshes), the implementation, and the
traditional pipeline engines handle a scene with 500 armadillos. The GPU VRAM usage
can be seen in Table 6.3.
Table 6.2: Engine Armadillo Test Comparison
Engine
CPU
GPU
Frame-time
name
Min/Max (%)
Min/Max (%)
Min/Max | Avg. in ms
Nanite
27 / 59
99 / 100
11.1 / 38.5 | 13.2
Jinsoku (LoD)
5 / 11
47 / 100
14.1 / 19.8 | 16.7
Jinsoku (native)
4 / 10
100 / 100
26.0 / 26.9 | 26.7
Traditional
20 / 41
95 / 100
59.7 / 84.6 | 65.8
Table 6.3: Engine Armadillo Test Comparison of VRAM
Engine
GPU VRAM
name
Min/Max in MB
Jinsoku (LoD)
5899 / 5935
Jinsoku (native)
5899 / 5935
Nanite
6532 / 6548
Traditional
7811 / 7955
6.2
Analysis of Results
From the results it is clear that draw call overhead is a key aspect of the implementation
that needs to be reduced it is also clear that the MVB is working as expected and is capa-
ble of rendering different meshes in CLoD at the same time. When the engine is capable
of doing LoD selection without the need of additional draw calls (such as DLoD) the per-
formance is logically better. The performance increase from simple triangle reduction was
still shown especially with DLoD. The engine worked as expected without cracks or holes
from the chosen simplification method. However, this has lead to significant overdraw
in order to compensate (further discussed in subsection 6.3.2). Despite the low perfor-
mance of the CLoD engine, it shows potential for the use of the Mesh shading pipeline, as
it performs in best case scenarios just as fast as the previous implementation of Jinsoku
(see section 6.1 for more).
6.2.1
BVH vs DAG
The type of Hierarchy had little to no effect on the traversal speed of the HLoD, and thus
the frame-times. The effect of the HLoD is simply to structure the data in an efficient way,
the BVH did however, have less duplicate meshlet nodes and had slightly less memory
usage in all models tested (higher difference between higher triangle count models). The
construction of the BVH is faster however, as the construction time of the DAG will scale
with vertex count of all the LoD models. While the BVH only has to loop through the mesh-
lets of each of the LoDs to be constructed. This is a slight difference that can potentially be
mitigated completely if using a different construction method of the hierarchy. For exam-
ple, if using a system like that of Nanite where meshlets are grouped then simplified then
split. The parent-child relationship is known inherently, that is the resulting split meshlets
after the simplification process are the children of the meshlets that were grouped before
the simplification.
46
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:55==
6.2.2
Low Poly Models
Due to the LoDs being generated by the engine when the application is ran (unless they
have already been generated and serialized), small models allowed for fast LoD creations.
Using small models aided development time as all the steps of the pre-processing are
faster in smaller models. As a refresher the pre-processing steps of the implementation
are; LoD creation, serialization, scene placement, meshlet generation, DAG creation, and
MVB unification. Small models aided further in testing as SPE can be significantly higher
between LoDs since there are bigger gaps of mesh data. This helped in seeing how well
SPE is as a suppressant to the popping effect. For example, Figure 6.1 shows the Utah
teapot rendered using the distance threshold (a) and rendered using the SPE threshold
(b). Both at a distance of 10 world units. The render results show how SPE refused to
reduce the detail of the model significantly, instead opting for waiting for a better distance
where the switch results in less SPE. This reduces greatly the effect of popping as the
mesh will not switch to a lower detail until the camera is further away. This can have the
negative effect of not reducing scene complexity however and as such requires tweaking
the threshold. Furthermore, this in theory could be achieved by perfecting the distance
parameter for the specific mesh however SPE allows for that step to not be necessary
and is better suited as a general threshold for all the model that were tested.
Figure 6.1: Distance Threshold (left) and SPE Threshold (right) at a distance of 10 units
6.2.3
SPE vs Distance Based Thresholds
From the technology discovery process it has been reveled that a large part of the CLoD
vulnerability to popping comes from areas of low detail and high detail mixing [46]. Using
a SPE threshold makes the LoD switching more limited, meaning that the CLoD will have
bigger areas where the model is still the same LoD. In comparison CLoD can change
multiple times if the thresholds chosen are not adjusted to for model scale. A scene
where the Dragon model has been scaled by 10x and the distance thresholds not scaled
accordingly show how often the model changed in LoDs is shown in Figure 6.2 (a). This
scenario is troublesome due to the overdrawing performance hit that boundaries between
LoDs have. Ideally a model should switch LoDs only when absolutely needed so that the
engine does not draw more triangles that it should. As such thresholds that allow larger
areas of the model to be low res are preferred as shown in Figure 6.2 (b).
6.3
Future Work
The implementation of the report has a great potential of beating some of the top technolo-
gies that have been researched in terms of performance and visual fidelity. This section
focuses on highlighting some of the important areas in where the engine can be improved
for some greater results.
6.3.1
Fluttering and Popping Improvements
Although SPE calculations helped in improving both fluttering and popping effects of
switching LoDs, tweaking the thresholds for distances and allowed pixel error will have
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.2: Threshold Scale Comparison
the biggest impact on such problems. In addition, using a better tweaked velocity delay
for the camera will reduce the effects of fluttering the most. Instead of checking every
frame that the camera is moving for what LoD decisions to make, the engine could have
an error threshold on the velocity so that the LoD is only updated once enough camera
movement happens that it needs to update the scene. This parameter will also require
a lot of tweaking because although it reduces fluttering and increase performance, it has
the potential to increase the noticeable popping when the update does happen.
6.3.2
Addressing the Overdraw
The engine suffers from overdraw that is quite visible when meshlets are colored by what
LoD they correspond to as seen in Figure 6.3. The border areas where two LoDs meet
are often susceptible to overdrawing. This is because the meshlets that are of a higher
LoD (less detail) have less triangles when generating meshlets. Due to the engine at-
tempting to generate meshlets at around the same triangle count, if an LoD model has
less triangles overall the meshlets will take up a larger area than those made of LoDs with
more triangles. When traversing the HLoD some of the parent nodes will not pass the
thresholds to draw which means that the children must be checked. At this point multiple
children can make the decision to be drawn, at this point is when overdraw occurs. Due
to the way that the children are not confined to just the area that the parents takes up as
shown in Figure 6.4. The choice to not limit children to the area of a parent was due to the
implementation diverging from the dynamic meshlet simplification and in order to have no
cracks in the render product. Due to the short pipeline of the mesh shader it might not be
possible to keep track of which vertices have already been drawn but if such a system was
developed the performance of the renderer is expected to rise while keeping a uniform
mesh with no cracks.
Figure 6.3: The overdraw is occurring where there are patches of two or more colors
mixing, such as as the green and yellow on the elephants on the right.
48
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.4: Overdraw process
6.3.3
Pre-Written Command Buffers
The implementation currently makes the MVB and attempts to match which nodes of the
DAG/BVH need to be drawn. Once the traversal stops the engine has a list of which
nodes should drawn. From this list the CPU creates a command buffer containing the
MVB offsets for each of the nodes. The engine attempts to fit all the subsequent meshlet
offsets into a single draw call. Dynamically creating and managing command buffers can
be expensive, especially if done every frame. The implementation suffers in performance
due to this overhead. It might be better to have a set of pre-built command buffers for
each LoD and select from these based on camera distance, rather than recreating them
dynamically. Having a set of discrete buffers means that not the entire MVB has to be sent
to the GPU each frame. Implementing such a system can also be seen as an alternative
to paging and loading of the HLoD.
An additional optimization for the engine is in the pre-processing. Currently, the engine
will send multiple copies of the same vertex since the translation of local LoD vertex buffer
to MVB is not fully optimized and is not checking for duplicate vertices and instead sends
all of the vertices per LoD separately. This is unnecessary work and storage used in the
GPU as the duplicates are never used.
For faster CPU writing of the command buffers, writing them in parallel for each of the
requested draw calls is optimal. This was a huge time sync during the development of
the implementation as getting all the required variables to be captured by a thread and
then not have race conditions when updating the command buffer was major challenge.
It wasn’t until late in the development that this was abandoned in order to get it working
straight on the GPU since the processing would be faster anyway.
6.3.4
Moving Traversal to the GPU
The main benefit of the mesh shading pipeline is that LoD selection can be done closer
to the hardware and thus shorten the pipeline and processing speed for rendering. This
is due to the pipeline skipping parts of the traditional pipeline that are known bottlenecks
if not used (such as the tessellation stage). Unfortunately, the mesh shading pipeline is
still in it’s early adoption stages and as such graphics API’s such as Vulkan require pretty
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
49
==PAGE:58==
low-level and vendor (NVIDIA, AMD, ARM, etc.) specific tweaks to be optimized [70] and
used to the full extent. Regardless, the benefit of such a pipeline comes with the pre-
processing that the task shader (sometimes referred to as the object shader) can do to
reduce the workload of the GPU in parallel. An example of this is the on GPU culling
that Jinsoku is capable of doing allowing for fast rendering of large meshes. In order to
make the processing faster Jinsoku, it was in the hopes of this thesis to allow for this pre-
processing step to also include the LoD selection. In theory all that was required is the
distance for each of the meshlets to the camera (and SPE if using) and the threshold for
the meshlet to be able to make it’s own LoD decision. This only worked if the entire node
hierarchy was to be processed on the GPU meaning that each frame the GPU will do all
traversing of the hierarchy and the LoD decision and visibility/culling. During development
it hypothesized that splitting the workload between the CPU and GPU could result in better
performance and as such the traversal of the hierarchy was left to the CPU. This came
with it’s own set of problems that were unforeseen. The main problem was handling how
to tell the GPU what vertices in the MVB to look at. At first it was thought that because
the data was all sent to the GPU together it would mean that vertices are contiguous in
GPU memory. Essentially if the CPU wanted to draw part of LoD 1 and part of LoD 0 it
would tell the GPU to start drawing at some meshlet index that corresponds to LoD 0 and
then stop drawing until the index corresponding to LoD 1. This does not work correctly
due to the storage of local index buffers on the GPU. It is imperative that when using a
MVB the index buffers need to be translated before sending them to the GPU. This was
not able to be corrected before the deadline and as such is not taken into consideration
for the report. In order to get the LoD traversal working on the GPU, the following need to
be known, the offsets of into the MVB for indices, vertices, meshlet descriptors, and the
descriptor count of the LoD mesh.
6.4
Ethics and Social Relevance
Real-time render has been historically limited industry-wise, largely sticking to entertain-
ment applications. As rendering techniques continue to be developed the amount of detail
that could be in a scene is limitless. There have been some concerns raised by press that
virtual worlds could replace reality for some [71]. It is important that academia delves into
the subjects of societal impacts that such developments could lead too in the future. It is
with the benefits that were stated in chapter 1 that this thesis was conducted. Such motiva-
tion for this thesis is to help developers of such systems get a head start in understanding
what techniques have shown potential for better systems in real-time rendering. Further
review of world impacts are out-of-scope for this report and thus not delved into. The
system developed for this thesis was strictly intended for research into LoD techniques.
50
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:59==
7
Conclusion
As multi-million triangle scenes become a more common sight in the computer graphic
industries. Technologies need to be developed so that the needs of such industries can
be satisfied. As such, this report looked into some of the state of the art technologies
developed around a specific strategy to reduce the amount of data that a render engine
needs to render, called Level of Detail (LoD). A major strategies that showed promise in
rendering large scenes was that of structuring the LoD data in an efficient manner (HLoD).
With the emergence and acceptance of NVIDIA’s proposed mesh shading pipeline [15]
and it’s fast rendering capabilities, this report looked at the possibility of combining the two
strategies. Due to time constraints, the implementation made for the report did not move
the logic of the traversal of the HLoD to the GPU something that possibly had a strong
impact in the possible performance of the technology developed. However, the imple-
mentation proved that meshlets can be used for creating a HLoD capable of rendering a
model with multiple LoDs reducing the number of triangles that need to be processed by
the GPU. This CLoD being a success can be seen in Figure 7.1, where the LoDs have
been assigned different colors.
Figure 7.1: CLoD Models
The implementation explored different ways that common problems with LoD system can
be mitigated. The most common of which is LoD popping. The implementation showed
how using a technique where the pixel error cost of switching to a different LoD is calcu-
lated and compared to a threshold before switching to reduce visible LoD switching. The
result showed that it was effective but more computationally expensive and less aggres-
sive at reducing the triangle count of the scene. Yet also reduced the fluttering that was
noticeable.
Furthermore, the report looked at some optimization strategies that the HLoD traversal
can have in order to select the meshlets that need to be drawn faster and more mem-
ory efficient. The implementation was tested to be working with not only large models,
but with scenes of multiple models, and instancing. The implementation was strongly in-
fluenced by the technology that showed the fastest render times during the technology
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
51
==PAGE:60==
discovery process, called ”Nanite” as part of UE5 [46]. The implementation diverted from
the poular technologies in the way that the hierarchy of the scene is constructed. In-
stead of choosing a dynamic construction and simplification, it was in the hopes of saving
memory, construction time, and cracks/holes from forming by doing a static simplification.
That is the scene was constructed by following the traditional approach to LoD creation
where the simplification process uses the entire model instead of parts of the model such
as what is done in Nanite. This in combination with a Monolithic Vertex Buffer where
the simplification models are made up of the same vertices as the original model would
reduce significantly the memory usage of the scene. This was tested to be true with a
scene made up of multiple million triangle (or more) models, of which the entire scene
and the hierarchy took a total of 2.2 GB of GPU VRAM. Which is a reduction of 5693 MB
in comparison to the traditional pipeline . This low memory usage allows for the engine to
work without a paging system to dynamically load/unload the HLoD since the entire scene
can fit in memory. The resulting implementation found that the best case performance is
22M triangles rendered per second, while the worst case performance of the engine being
0.9M triangles per second. The worst case scenario is when the HLoD traversal chooses
meshlets from multiple LoDs requiring multiple draw calls . The largest of which is when
the camera is inside the model and the engine overdraws close to twice the number of
meshlets than the original model.
Of the researched technologies when improving the performance of the engine, HLoD
is required regardless if the implementation is based on simplification, displacement, or
Machine Learning techniques. Of the researched techs meshlet LoD is still the best per-
forming however, Signed Distance Function mesh construction shows future promise and
have been ever increasing in their performance in the recent years.
7.1
Objectives of The Research
Of the goals discussed in section 1.4 the following non-functional objectives were met:
• Gain Knowledge of the Meshlet Render Pipeline: This research delved into the mesh
shader pipeline and much learned from the difference in how the pipeline differs to
the traditional pipeline.
• Conceptually Understand Simplification of Meshlets: Meshlet simplification has been
explored in both a dynamic and static format.
• Analyze the State of the Art: Many types of technologies have been compared in the
technology discovery process. Some who stick to traditional LoD strategies while
some are attempting to implement machine learning into the real-time rendering
pipeline. Furthermore, some of the top performing technologies have been identified
and performance compared.
• Gain a deeper understanding of the Industry approaches to LoD: The main time
sinks when developing a Nanite-like technology come with threshold optimizing so
that the model can be simplified within a single pixel error and the HLoD parallel
processing. It is possible that the dynamic simplification process allows Nanite’s
meshlets to switch LoD without so many constraints as the pixel error is calculated
from the simplification error per meshlet.
In addition of the functional-objectives some where met but others can not be justified as
completed in its entirety. The functional-objectives have been considered in the following
manner:
52
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:61==
• Increase Scalability: The objective to increase the scalability of the rendering system
provided (Jinsoku). Has only been partially implemented. The engine is capable of
rendering multiple meshes and single meshes at significantly reduced triangle count
due to the CLoD implementation. However, performance is only acceptable in the
higher model count scenes when the camera is not moving.
• Implement a technique to reduce mesh complexity: The CLoD implementation can
significantly reduce the mesh complexity of the scene while maintaing visual fidelity
through the implementation of a SPE and distance threshold. Thus this goal has
been met.
• Improve rendering Performance: As a comparison of the LoD implementation in
comparison to the meshlet render engine provided by the supervisor’s research.
This goal has not been fully met. The frame-times of the two engines are at best
the same however the triangles per second as defined in chapter 6 is better for the
LoD implementation.
• Meet industry demands for real-time rendering: This goal is again only partially met
as the frame rate is met but not for all scenes. Especially for geometrically complex
scenes which were the objective of the thesis. As such this is not an acceptable
result for meeting this goal.
7.2
Reflection
One of the main concepts of the technology developed was that of the Monolithic Ver-
tex Buffer. This aspect was not fully developed until late in the thesis process. As such,
multiple optimizations of the system were not developed in time. This had the most per-
formance implications and future work must address this. The conclusions of the report
would still be the same with HLoD can be combined with the meshlet pipeline successfully
however, the performance would be much more competitive with researched technolo-
gies. The main form of evidence for this is that hardware (neither GPU nor CPU) usage
ever hit full utilization.
In addition the initial focus of the thesis was on the implementation of an engine without
the use of the Jinsoku framework. This initial implementation was focusing on gather-
ing enough knowledge for the proof of concept that was implemented. However, this
approach setback the development of the full engine later presented in this report.
The biggest setback in the development was however focusing on the parallelization of
the HLoD traversal on the CPU side. This is due to the fundamental difference that the
CPU parallelization has in comparison to the GPU. The CPU traverses the hierarchy in
order to gather a list of nodes that can be sent to the GPU requiring a lot of overhead
when it comes to spawning threads and synchronization before the draw call is made. On
the other side doing the process in parallel on the GPU simply means testing the node
to see if it passes pixel error, distance, and visibility thresholds. If the node passes these
test the node can be sent further down the pipeline without the need of synchronization.
Regardless of the setbacks the research still proved to show state of the art ways that
large scenes can be rendered in real-time, goals of the thesis were met, and challenging
areas were found in order to lay the foundation for future research. In conclusion, while
the performance of the implemented proof-of-concept did not meet the initial expectations,
this research has shed light on several important aspects of real-time HLoD and meshlets.
Despite the limitations in performance, the proof-of-concept validates the feasibility of the
approach and serves as a stepping stone towards more efficient solutions.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
53
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
How Many Gamers Are There? (New 2023 Statistics). en. Oct. 2022. url: https:
//explodingtopics.com/blog/number-of-gamers (visited on 06/07/2023).
[2]
ILM reveals how it used Unreal Engine for ‘The Mandalorian’. en-US. Feb. 2020.
url: https://venturebeat.com/pc-gaming/ilm-reveals-how-it-used-unreal-engine-for-
the-mandalorian/ (visited on 06/07/2023).
[3]
Aernout van de Velde. UPDATED: Horizon: Zero Dawn’s Thunderjaw Consists Of
550k Polygons & Stands 24x9 Meters Tall. en-US. Sept. 2015. url: https://wccftech.
com/horizon- dawns- thunderjaw- consists- 550k- polygons- stands- 24x9- meters- tall/
(visited on 02/22/2023).
[4]
John Papadopoulos. NVIDIA RTX series 3X faster with mesh shading in Vulkan,
RTX2080 handles 20 billion triangles/second. en-US. Nov. 2018. url: https://www.
dsogaming.com/news/nvidia-rtx-series-3x-faster-in-mesh-shading-in-vulkan-rtx2080-
handles-20-billion-triangles-second/ (visited on 06/07/2023).
[5]
Mark Tyson published. Nvidia RTX 3060 Begins its Reign as the Most Popular GPU.
en. Oct. 2022. url: https://www.tomshardware.com/news/nvidia-rtx-3060-begins-its-
reign-as-the-most-popular-gpu (visited on 02/22/2023).
[6]
Forging new paths for filmmakers on The Mandalorian. en-US. url: https://www.
unrealengine.com/en-US/blog/forging-new-paths-for-filmmakers-on-the-mandalorian
(visited on 06/07/2023).
[7]
Demond Cureton. Virtual Reality Statistics to Know in 2023. en-GB. Feb. 2023. url:
https://www.xrtoday.com/virtual-reality/virtual-reality-statistics-to-know-in-2023/
(visited on 06/07/2023).
[8]
Motion Sickness in VR Explained – And Eliminated. en-US. url: https://varjo.com/
learning-hub/motion-sickness/ (visited on 06/07/2023).
[9]
Eunhee Chang, Hyun-Taek Kim, and Byounghyun Yoo. “Virtual Reality Sickness: A
Review of Causes and Measurements”. In: International Journal of Human-Computer
Interaction 36 (July 2020), pp. 1–25. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2020.1778351.
[10]
Chen Zhang. “Investigation on Motion Sickness in Virtual Reality Environment from
the Perspective of User Experience”. In: 2020 IEEE 3rd International Conference
on Information Systems and Computer Aided Education (ICISCAE). Sept. 2020,
pp. 393–396. doi: 10.1109/ICISCAE51034.2020.9236907.
[11]
D. Luebke. Level of detail for 3D graphics. Morgan Kaufmann series in computer
graphics and geometric modeling. tex.lccn: 2002107328. Elsevier Science, 2003.
isbn: 978-1-55860-838-2. url: https://books.google.se/books?id=M-gl4aoxQfIC.
[12]
James H. Clark. “Hierarchical geometric models for visible surface algorithms”. In:
Communications of the ACM 19.10 (Oct. 1976), pp. 547–554. issn: 0001-0782. doi:
10.1145/360349.360354. url: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/360349.360354 (visited
on 05/31/2023).
[13]
Halfedge Data Structures. url: https: // www .ics . uci. edu /~dock / manuals/ cgal _
manual/HalfedgeDS/Chapter_main.html (visited on 05/31/2023).
[14]
Hugues Hoppe et al. “Mesh optimization”. en. In: (). url: https://hhoppe.com/proj/
meshopt/ (visited on 05/31/2023).
[15]
NVIDIA SIGGRAPH 2018. url: https://on-demand.gputechconf.com/siggraph/2018/
video/sig1811-3-christoph-kubisch-mesh-shaders.html (visited on 05/03/2023).
54
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:63==
[16]
O. Ripollés and M. Chover. “Optimizing the management of continuous level of detail
models on GPU”. en. In: Computers & Graphics 32.3 (June 2008), pp. 307–319.
issn: 0097-8493. doi: 10.1016/j.cag.2008.02.003. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0097849308000319 (visited on 06/07/2023).
[17]
Liang Hu, Pedro V. Sander, and Hugues Hoppe. “Parallel View-Dependent Level-of-
Detail Control”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16.5
(Sept. 2010). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, pp. 718–728. issn: 1941-0506. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2009.101.
[18]
Marc Olano, Bob Kuehne, and Maryann Simmons. “Automatic Shader Level of De-
tail”. en. In: ().
[19]
Unity Technologies. Unity - Scripting API: Mesh.indexFormat. en. url: https://docs.
unity3d.com/ScriptReference/Mesh-indexFormat.html (visited on 06/07/2023).
[20]
Mark B. Jensen et al. “Tools for Virtual Reality Visualization of Highly Detailed Meshes”.
en. In: VisGap - The Gap between Visualization Research and Visualization Soft-
ware (2021). Artwork Size: 8 pages ISBN: 9783038681496 Publisher: The Euro-
graphics Association Version Number: 019-026, 8 pages. doi: 10.2312/VISGAP.
20211088. url: https://diglib.eg.org/handle/10.2312/visgap20211088 (visited on
06/06/2023).
[21]
History of computer animation. en. Page Version ID: 1156489304. May 2023. url:
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_computer_animation&oldid=
1156489304 (visited on 06/15/2023).
[22]
Roel Wieringa et al. “Requirements engineering paper classification and evaluation
criteria: a proposal and a discussion”. en. In: Requirements Engineering 11.1 (Mar.
2006), pp. 102–107. issn: 1432-010X. doi: 10.1007/s00766-005-0021-6. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00766-005-0021-6 (visited on 05/09/2023).
[23]
J. Andreas Bærentzen. janba/GEL. original-date: 2014-07-12T22:06:29Z. May 2023.
url: https://github.com/janba/GEL (visited on 06/07/2023).
[24]
Introduction to Mesh Shaders (OpenGL and Vulkan) | Geeks3D. en-US. May 2020.
url: https://www.geeks3d.com/20200519/introduction-to-mesh-shaders-opengl-and-
vulkan/ (visited on 06/07/2023).
[25]
The Stanford 3D Scanning Repository. url: https://graphics.stanford.edu/data/
3Dscanrep/ (visited on 06/07/2023).
[26]
Alec Jacobson. Other lists and repositories of 3D models. original-date: 2020-03-
11T12:28:58Z. June 2023. url: https://github.com/alecjacobson/common-3d-test-
models (visited on 06/07/2023).
[27]
Procedural World: Voxels in Space. Jan. 2014. url: https://procworld.blogspot.com/
2014/01/voxels-in-space.html (visited on 05/19/2023).
[28]
Voxels and Seamless LOD Transitions. en. July 2016. url: https://dexyfex.com/
2016/07/14/voxels-and-seamless-lod-transitions/ (visited on 05/19/2023).
[29]
Maxim Tatarchenko, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Brox. “Octree Generating
Networks: Efficient Convolutional Architectures for High-resolution 3D Outputs”. In:
(Oct. 2017). MAG ID: 2603429625, pp. 2107–2115. doi: 10.1109/iccv.2017.230.
[30]
Markus Schütz, Bernhard Kerbl, and Michael Wimmer. Software Rasterization of 2
Billion Points in Real Time. arXiv:2204.01287 [cs]. Apr. 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2204.01287. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01287 (visited on 02/18/2023).
[31]
Ricardo Marroquim, Martin Kraus, and Paulo Roma Cavalcanti. Efficient Point-Based
Rendering Using Image Reconstruction. en. Accepted: 2014-01-29T16:52:11Z ISSN:
1811-7813. The Eurographics Association, 2007. isbn: 978-3-905673-51-7. doi: 10.
2312/SPBG/SPBG07/101-108. url: https://diglib.eg.org:443/xmlui/handle/10.2312/
SPBG.SPBG07.101-108 (visited on 02/22/2023).
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
55
==PAGE:64==
[32]
Paolo Cignoni et al. “Adaptive tetrapuzzles: efficient out-of-core construction and
visualization of gigantic multiresolution polygonal models”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH
2004 Papers. SIGGRAPH ’04. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, Aug. 2004, pp. 796–803. isbn: 978-1-4503-7823-9. doi: 10.1145/1186562.
1015802. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/1186562.1015802 (visited on 02/22/2023).
[33]
William E. Lorensen and Harvey E. Cline. “Marching cubes: A high resolution 3D
surface construction algorithm”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 21.4 (Aug.
1987), pp. 163–169. issn: 0097-8930. doi: 10.1145/37402.37422. url: https://doi.
org/10.1145/37402.37422 (visited on 02/22/2023).
[34]
Michael Doggett and Johannes Hirche. “Adaptive view dependent tessellation of
displacement maps”. In: (Aug. 2000). MAG ID: 1981896797, pp. 59–66. doi: 10.
1145/346876.348220.
[35]
Yotam Livny, Gilad Bauman, and Jihad El-Sana. “Displacement Patches for GPU-
Oriented View-Dependent Rendering.” In: Jan. 2008, pp. 181–190.
[36]
Nanyang Wang et al. “Pixel2Mesh: Generating 3D Mesh Models from Single RGB
Images”. In: (Sept. 2018). MAG ID: 2962778872, pp. 55–71. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-01252-6_4.
[37]
Jeong Joon Park et al. DeepSDF: Learning Continuous Signed Distance Functions
for Shape Representation. arXiv:1901.05103 [cs]. Jan. 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
1901.05103. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.05103 (visited on 02/22/2023).
[38]
Zhiqin Chen and Hao Zhang. “Learning Implicit Fields for Generative Shape Model-
ing”. In: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). ISSN: 2575-7075. June 2019, pp. 5932–5941. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.
00609.
[39]
Rana Hanocka et al. “MeshCNN: a network with an edge”. In: ACM Transactions on
Graphics 38.4 (2019). MAG ID: 3101228253, p. 90. doi: 10.1145/3306346.3322959.
[40]
Towaki Takikawa et al. “Neural Geometric Level of Detail: Real-time Rendering with
Implicit 3D Shapes”. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2021). ARXIV_ID:
2101.10994 S2ID: 6ca0a80111fed68b8a5b7eac5ecdc3d258f0fea6. doi: 10.1109/
cvpr46437.2021.01120.
[41]
Nanite Virtualized Geometry. en-US. url: https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.0/en-
US/nanite-virtualized-geometry-in-unreal-engine/ (visited on 06/08/2023).
[42]
Haar Ulrich. “SIGGRAPH 2015: Advances in Real-Time Rendering in Games”. In:
GPU-Driven Rendering Pipelines. 2015.
[43]
Graham Wihlidal. “GDC: Optimizing the Graphics Pipeline with Compute”. English.
In: Optimizing the Graphics Pipeline with Compute. Mar. 2016.
[44]
Daniel Rose. Diving into the Depths of Unreal Engine 5: Early Access. en. Aug.
2022. url: https://blog.gametextures.com/diving-into-the-depths-of-unreal-engine-5-
early-access-b7e93a956afb (visited on 02/18/2023).
[45]
Epic Games Releases Unreal Engine 5 for All Creators. en-US. url: https://www.
epicgames.com/site/en-US/news/epic-games-releases-unreal-engine-5-for-all-creators
(visited on 06/08/2023).
[46]
SIGGRAPH Advances in Real-Time Rendering. A Deep Dive into Nanite Virtualized
Geometry. Oct. 2021. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eviSykqSUUw (visited
on 02/18/2023).
[47]
Bringing Nanite to Fortnite Battle Royale in Chapter 4. en-US. url: https://www.
unrealengine.com/en- US/tech- blog/bringing- nanite- to- fortnite- battle- royale- in-
chapter-4 (visited on 02/18/2023).
56
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:65==
[48]
High-Performance Graphics. HPG 2022 Keynote: The Journey to Nanite - Brian
Karis, Epic Games. Aug. 2022. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NRnj_
lnpORU (visited on 06/11/2023).
[49]
Brian Karis, Rune Stubbe, and Graham Wihlidal. “Nanite: A Deep Dive”. In: Oct.
2021. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eviSykqSUUw.
[50]
Download the new Nanite Teacher’s Guide. en-US. url: https://www.unrealengine.
com/en-US/blog/download-the-new-nanite-teacher-s-guide (visited on 06/11/2023).
[51]
Jeremy Shopf et al. “March of the Froblins: simulation and rendering massive crowds
of intelligent and detailed creatures on GPU”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 Games.
SIGGRAPH ’08. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Aug.
2008, pp. 52–101. isbn: 978-1-4503-7849-9. doi: 10.1145/1404435.1404439. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1404435.1404439 (visited on 02/18/2023).
[52]
Yangzi Dong and Chao Peng. “Real-Time Large Crowd Rendering with Efficient
Character and Instance Management on GPU”. In: International Journal of Com-
puter Games Technology 2019 (Mar. 2019). Ed. by Ali Arya. Publisher: Hindawi,
p. 1792304. issn: 1687-7047. doi: 10.1155/2019/1792304. url: https://doi.org/10.
1155/2019/1792304.
[53]
Mehmet Ömer Özek and Engin Demir. “Pixel-based level of detail on hardware tes-
sellated terrain rendering”. In: SIGGRAPH Posters (July 2017). MAG ID: 2738856966
S2ID: dec8f7e9cfb526822935f369c2a1aee9441d99a0, p. 44. doi: 10.1145/3102163.
3102218.
[54]
Matthias Hollander et al. “ManyLoDs: Parallel Many-View Level-of-Detail Selection
for Real-Time Global Illumination”. en. In: Computer Graphics Forum 30.4 (2011).
_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01982.x, pp. 1233–
1240. issn: 1467-8659. doi: 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8659 . 2011 . 01982 . x. url: https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467- 8659.2011.01982.x (visited on
06/12/2023).
[55]
E. Derzapf and M. Guthe. “Dependency-Free Parallel Progressive Meshes”. en. In:
Computer Graphics Forum 31.8 (2012). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.146
8659.2012.03154.x, pp. 2288–2302. issn: 1467-8659. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.
2012 . 03154 . x. url: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 -
8659.2012.03154.x (visited on 06/12/2023).
[56]
Vyacheslav Shakaev, Natalia Sadovnikova, and Danila Parygin. “View-Dependent
Level of Detail for Real-Time Rendering of Large Isosurfaces”. en. In: Creativity in
Intelligent Technologies and Data Science. Ed. by Alla Kravets et al. Communica-
tions in Computer and Information Science. Cham: Springer International Publish-
ing, 2017, pp. 501–516. isbn: 978-3-319-65551-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-65551-
2_37.
[57]
V. Silva et al. “MIP-plicits: Level of Detail Factorization of Neural Implicits Sphere
Tracing”. In: arXiv.org (2022). S2ID: 56b73d5c150bd7c5489b0ef151954696b31a665d.
[58]
Lior Yariv et al. Volume Rendering of Neural Implicit Surfaces. arXiv:2106.12052
[cs]. Dec. 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2106.12052. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.12052
(visited on 06/12/2023).
[59]
R. C. Marcus. “Level-of-Detail Independent Voxel-Based Surface Approximations”.
en. Accepted: 2017-04-24T17:03:24Z. MA thesis. 2017. url: https://studenttheses.
uu.nl/handle/20.500.12932/25769 (visited on 06/12/2023).
[60]
Szymon Jabłoński and Tomasz Martyn. Real-time rendering of continuous levels of
detail for sparse voxel octrees. en. Accepted: 2018-05-18T06:57:39Z ISSN: 2464-
4617. Václav Skala - UNION Agency, 2016. isbn: 978-80-86943-58-9. url: http :
//dspace5.zcu.cz/handle/11025/29690 (visited on 06/12/2023).
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
57
==PAGE:66==
[61]
GPU-Accelerated LOD Generation for Point Clouds | TU Wien – Research Unit of
Computer Graphics. url: https://www.cg.tuwien.ac.at/research/publications/2023/
SCHUETZ-2023-LOD/ (visited on 06/12/2023).
[62]
Craig Leach. “A GPU-Based Level of Detail System for the Real-Time Simula-
tion and Rendering of Large-Scale Granular Terrain”. In: (Jan. 2014). MAG ID:
2286217581.
[63]
Matthias Englert. “Using Mesh Shaders for Continuous Level-of-Detail Terrain Ren-
dering”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2020 Talks. SIGGRAPH ’20. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, Aug. 2020, pp. 1–2. isbn: 978-1-4503-7971-
7. doi: 10.1145/3388767.3407391. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3388767.3407391
(visited on 06/12/2023).
[64]
Szymon Rusinkiewicz and Marc Levoy. “QSplat: a multiresolution point rendering
system for large meshes”. In: (July 2000). MAG ID: 2113634802, pp. 343–352. doi:
10.1145/344779.344940.
[65]
Alex Coulombe @ a bunch of NYC events [@iBrews]. Lumen and Nanite running
in VR w/ Unreal Engine 5.1 at 90 fps and no crashing. https://t.co/Sz49QcPAmw.
en. Tweet. Sept. 2022. url: https://twitter.com/iBrews/status/1570844710155190275
(visited on 06/14/2023).
[66]
Michael Garland and Paul Heckbert. “Surface simplification using quadric error met-
rics”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Computer Graphics
1997 (July 1997). doi: 10.1145/258734.258849.
[67]
Patrick Cozzi and Kevin Ring. 3D engine design for virtual globes. An A K Pe-
ters book. OCLC: ocn676726981. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2011. isbn: 978-
1-56881-711-8.
[68]
Date and time utilities - cppreference.com. url: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/
chrono (visited on 06/07/2023).
[69]
Hilbert Hagedoorn. Guru3D RTSS Rivatuner Statistics Server Download 7.3.4 build
27560. en-us. Publisher: Guru3D.com. url: https://www.guru3d.com/files-details/
rtss-rivatuner-statistics-server-download.html (visited on 06/07/2023).
[70]
Khronos Finalizes Vulkan Video Extensions for Accelerated H.264 and H.265 De-
code. en. Section: Blogs. Dec. 2022. url: https://www.khronos.org/blog/khronos-
finalizes-vulkan-video-extensions-for-accelerated-h.264-and-h.265-decode (visited on
06/20/2023).
[71]
Sandee LaMotte. The very real health dangers of virtual reality. en. Dec. 2017. url:
https://www.cnn.com/2017/12/13/health/virtual-reality-vr-dangers-safety/index.
html (visited on 06/15/2023).
58
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix
A.1
Implementation Controls
The implementation has some simple camera movement that is normally referred to as
tank controls. It is able to zoom in by changing the FOV and is has the LoD controls
such as locking the camera position, forcing the models to make a specific LoD choice,
changing from SPE to distance thresholds, and lastly able to switch to using DLoD. All
keyboard input is handled by the GLFW window handling library. The application controls
are shown below:
• Change Shader: Key ‘P‘ is used to change what type of shading to use. The options
are LoD shading, normals shading, or meshlet shading.
• Reload Pipeline: Reload the pipeline as it was created during pre-processing (dep-
recated use but is still available).
• Increase/Decrease FOV: The keys ‘+/-‘ are used to increase/decrease respectively
the FOV of the camera.
• Reset FOV: The ‘ENTER‘ key is used to reset the FOV to the default value of 65.
• Camera: Movement is mapped to the ‘WASD‘ keys while look is mapped to the
arrow keys. In addition the camera can be moved up with the ‘SPACE‘ key and
down with the ‘L-SHIFT‘ key.
• Camera: Movement can be further altered by either speeding up the camera or
slowing it down by holding down the ‘ALT‘ and ‘CTRL‘ keys respectively.
• Toggle Auto-Move: To move the camera each frame towards the center of the
scene press the ‘M‘ key, which will toggle auto movement on/off.
• Lock Camera Position: Locking the camera position is useful to asses the CLoD
of the model which can be done by pressing the ‘L‘ keyS.
• Toggle Threshold Type: The LoD threshold can be switched from SPE or distance
based by pressing the ‘T‘ key.
• LoD Type: Discrete LoD can be toggled by pressing the ‘T‘ key.
A.2
Benchmark and Testing
If the benchmark parameter in the C++ code inside the ‘config.h‘ file is set to true, the
program will automatically collect the statistics of the render. The testing can be concluded
by either of the following; reaching the specified limit of frames drawn or by the camera
reaching the center of the scene. One te testing is finished the implementation will store
the results to a ‘benchmark‘ folder inside the program directory. Such an output of the
benchmark output can be seen in Figure A.1.
The tests were profiled using the Riva Tuner profiler as stated in chapter 2. A sample of a
chart produced during the testing can be seen in Figure A.2. This particular chart shows
the staggered camera movement for the Armadillo test.
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.1: Sample Benchmark Output
A.3
Models Used
All the models not shown in the report are shown below while models that have been used
in the report are also indexed below. It is worth noting that the pictures are screenshots of
the render result made by the implementation engine using the normals rendering pipeline
to color the normals in relation to the camera.
• That Statue: Shown in the report subsection 2.2.3.
• Dragon: Shown in chapter 6.
• Nefertiti: Shown in the report subsection 2.2.3.
• Happy: Not shown in the report.
• Armadillo: Shown in chapter 5.
• Bunny: Shown in the report subsection 2.2.3.
• Kitten: Shown in the report subsection 2.2.3
• Bruce: Shown in the report subsection 1.1.3.
• Utah Teapot: Shown in the report subsection 1.1.7.
A.4
Traditional Vertex Shader Engine
Initially, a traditional vertex shader engine was developed in order to test key concepts
before porting them to Jinsoku. This engine is capable of the same QEM simplification
(due to the GEL library) as the implementation, however, it must be done in steps at
run-time by the press of a button. The meshlet creation in this engine is clustering by
proximity. Any 128 triangles that are adjacent are consumed from the model (the same
triangles cannot be reused for multiple clusters) and grouped. The engine also acts as a
60
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.2: Sample Profiler Output
test ground for the dynamic simplification where meshlets can be groups and simplified.
This process had problems with gaps due to the LoD system being a distance threshold
only. As such this engine was not developed further and development focus shifted to
Jinsoku only. This engine uses a Phong shading similar to that of Jinsoku except the light
position is stationary. The 500 armadillo scene as rendered by this engine can be seen in
Figure A.4. Each of the rows are 50 armadillos. Nanite’s scene can be seen in Figure A.5
and lastly, Jinsoku render can be seen in Figure A.6.
A.5
Code Samples
basicstyle
basicstyle
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
1
struct vec3_hash
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
2
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
3
std::size_t operator()(const glm::vec3 &v) const
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
4
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
5
std::hash<float> hash_fn;
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
6
return ((hash_fn(v.x) ^ (hash_fn(v.y) << 1)) >> 1) ^ (hash_fn(v.z)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
<< 1);
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
7
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
8
};
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
9
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
10
// This map stores the vertices of each of the LoD meshlets then stores
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
which meshlets have the same vertex
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
11
std::unordered_map <glm::vec3, std::vector <lod::Graph::Node>, lod::
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
vec3_hash > vertex_to_nodes;
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basic
12
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
61
==PAGE:70==
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
13
// A map of all the
nodes in the graph <lod, Node>
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
14
std::unordered_map <int, std::vector <lod::Graph::Node>> nodes;
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
15
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
16
for (auto &mesh : world.meshes)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
17
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
18
// Create the DAG
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
19
for (auto &meshlet : mesh.meshlets)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
20
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
21
for (const auto &vert : node.vertices)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
22
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
23
vertex_to_nodes[vert.pos].push_back(node);
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
24
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
25
world.DAG.nodes[node.lod].push_back(node);
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
26
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
27
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
28
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
29
// Create parent child relationships based on which meshlets share
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
vertices
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
30
for (int lod = MAX_LOD; lod > 0; lod--)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
31
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
32
for (int i = 0; i < world.DAG.nodes[lod].size(); i++)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
33
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
34
lod::Graph::Node *parent = &world.DAG.nodes[lod][i];
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
35
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
36
for (auto &vert : parent->vertices)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
37
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
38
auto &potential_children = vertex_to_nodes[vert.pos];
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
39
for (auto &kid : potential_children)
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
40
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
41
// Check if potential_child is already a child of the parent
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
42
if ((kid.lod == lod - 1) && (parent ->children.count(kid.id) ==
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
0))
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
43
{
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
44
parent ->children[kid.id] = kid;
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
45
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
46
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
47
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
48
}
basicstylebasicstyle
basicstyle
basicstyle b
49
}
basicstyle
basicstyle
Listing A.1: DAG Creation in C++
62
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.3: Different Models Tested
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.4: 500 Armadillo Scene as rendered by the Traditional Pipeline
Figure A.5: 500 Armadillo Scene as rendered by Nanite
64
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.6: 500 Armadillo Scene as rendered by Jinsoku
Rendering of Very Large Scenes
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
