==PAGE:1==
Data Density Watermarking for Membership
Inference Attacks
By Malthe Andreas Lejbølle Jelstrup, s184291
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Data Density Watermarking for Membership Inference Attacks
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Malthe Andreas Lejbølle Jelstrup
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
Abstract
The performance and inference capabilities of neural networks rely heavily on the training
data they are exposed to. Generally, larger dataset yield more powerful models. This
incentive to continuously extend the training sets of models can lead to data exploitation,
where data is being used against the owner’s wishes to train neural networks. Even if such
misuse of data is suspected, it is currently next to impossible to determine its veracity.
This research explores the utilization of adversarial noise to manipulate the performance
of neural networks, investigating how those findings can be used to infer whether a
collection of data is a member of a training set. It proposes a novel approach to generate
"deepmarked" images containing adversarial noise that maximizes its detectability as a
training set member, while remaining visually indistinguishable from the original data.
The findings of this study demonstrate the feasibility of detecting and inferring the
membership status of a data collection within a neural network’s training set using the
proposed technique, in a restricted black-box setting where the model output only contains
the single highest likelihood class.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, under supervision
from Associate Professor Siavash Arjomand Bigdeli and in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning.
Malthe Andreas Lejbølle Jelstrup - s184291
Signature
iii
==PAGE:6==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank:
Siavash
For being a tremendous advisor on this project helping me push the idea further than I
ever could have alone. Thank you.
Åse
For helpful discussions surrounding the research topic. Thank you.
Lucie
For always believing in me and supporting me throughout the entirety of my studies, I
would not be where I am or who I am today without you. Thank you.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
Contents
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Adversarial examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
White-box and black-box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Triplet Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Overfitting to Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Related Work
7
3.1
Membership Inference Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Model Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Training Data Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Data
14
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.1
MNIST
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.2
CIFAR10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.3
DigiFace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Data Subsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Methodology
18
5.1
Evaluation Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Experiments
24
6.1
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
Deepmark Hostility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
Deepmark Generalizability Across Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4
Multi-hostility Deepmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.5
Constraining Image Perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.7
Robustness of Deepmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.9
Deepmark Generalizability Across Task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Future Work
58
8
Conclusion
60
v
==PAGE:8==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
Contents
References
62
vi
==PAGE:9==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
1
Introduction
Neural networks gain their inference capabilities through training on data. Generally
the larger the amount of data, the more capable the model. This introduces an unfortunate
incentive for model developers to make efforts to increase the amount of data available
to them in order to increase the performance of their models. The incentive may not
be an issue in itself, but coupled with the lack of regulation, oversight and transparency
in the sector there is little stopping bad actors from harvesting data available online to
bolster their datasets without consent from the data owners. Individuals and the data they
themselves upload to the internet as well as corporations and the data they or their users
generate and host online can be subjected to this exploitation.
Datasets for training neural network remain closely guarded secrets, even if smaller
subsets at times are made available either publically or to specific research labs. This
leaves the original data owner in a problematic situation. Firstly, as previously mentioned,
there is nothing stopping an adversary from training a neural network on a dataset, if that
dataset is either made available for other purposes or can be scraped online. Secondly,
even if the data owner has a suspicion that an adversary may have trained a neural
network on their data, there is no recourse for verifying this suspicion. This second point
in particular is what this research attempts to provide a solution for.
This paper introduces a novel approach to inferring membership of a data collection,
meaning identifying whether a neural network has trained on a specific collection of
data. It differentiates itself from previous research by targeting collections of data, rather
than individual data samples. Additionally, it aims to be able to infer membership on
training data even for neural networks only available in a restricted black-box setting,
with no knowledge of the network architecture and with the model outputting only the
single highest likelihood class. To accomplish this, the data owner preemptively and
intentionally alters their "private" data samples prior to making them available to any
external parties, a process hereon referred to as "deepmarking". As a result, the data
owner possesses two distinct versions of each data sample, one pristine, strictly private
variant that remains inaccessibly to any entity, and a slightly altered twin resulting from
the deepmarking process. This altered version is then made available to whomever would
have otherwise had access to the original. The intention being that each twin pair of
samples are visually similar to the human eye, but produces predictably distinguishable
outcomes when supplied to a neural network.
It is generally understood that neural networks perform their task better on the data
they were trained on as opposed to new previously unseen data. Given the fact that
the private samples are kept hidden, they can not possibly be present in an adversary’s
training data. The deepmarked samples, however, could be in an adversary’s training
data and has been modified to maximally alter their model’s behavior on deepmarked
samples, depending on the presence of those samples in the training data. Utilizing this
Page 1 of 63
==PAGE:10==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
knowledge, the comparative performance of the adversary’s model when tested on private
and deepmarked samples will indicate whether the deepmarked samples were present in
the neural networks training data.
Previous research on this topic includes the development of "membership-inference"
by Shokri et al.. An attack which aims to determine whether a given data sample was
in a models training data or not [1].
Other attempts at "seeing behind the veil" of
neural networks to develop insights about their training data include "model-inversion"
by Fredrikson et al. and techniques for "reconstruction training data" by Haim et al., both
of which in their own way aim to reconstruct either class features, representatives or full
training data samples [2] [3]. All of which will be discussed in greater detail.
The approach developed through this research most closely resembles "membership-
inference" as it does not reconstruct samples, but rather evaluates the outcome of supplying
a model inputs similar to "membership-inference". One stark difference, however, is the
necessity for preemptive action when utilizing deepmarking. Misuse of any private data
samples currently available to or already used by an adversary, will never be able to
be detected, as the technique hinges on the guarantee that a private sample is strictly
unavailable to the adversary.
Page 2 of 63
==PAGE:11==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
2
Background
2.1
Adversarial examples
Adversarial examples as explained in "Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Ex-
amples" by Goodfellow et al. are "[...] inputs formed by applying small but intentional
worst-case perturbations to examples from the dataset, such that the perturbed inputs
results in the model outputting an incorrect answer with high confidence" [4]. In other
words adversarial examples are inputs, for the case of this research images, to which a
small amount of intentional noise is added to maximally alter the model’s prediction while
minimally altering the image. The paper introduces the "Fast Gradient Sign Method"
(FGSM), a quick method for generating such adversarial examples [4]. This method
utilizes the gradients of the model itself with respect to the input in order to generate a
perturbation of the input that "[...] reliably causes a wide variety of models to misclassify
their input" [4].
FGSM generates adversarial noise in the following way, as shown in Equation 1
where θ is the model parameters, x is the model input, y is the targets output associated
with x and J(θ, x, y) is the cost used to train the neural network. Here ε denotes the
magnitude of adversarial noise.
η = εsign(∇xJ(θ, x, y))
(1)
Using FGSM with ε = .25 the authors "[...] cause a shallow softmax classifier to
have an error rate of 99.9% with an average confidence of 79.3% on the MNIST test
set" [4]. Goodfellow et al. reasons that the existence of adversarial examples and their
capability of fooling neural networks while at times remaining indistinguishable to the
human eye "[...] suggests that classifiers based on modern machine learning techniques,
even those that obtain excellent performance on the test set, are not learning the true
underlying concepts that determine the correct output label. Instead, these algorithms
have built a Potemkin village that works well on naturally occurring data, but is exposed
as a fake when one visits points in space that do not have high probability in the data
distribution" [4]. The claim made here is that adversarial examples exist in an unnatural
place within the high-dimensional image space that constitutes the inputs. Consequently,
machine learning models trained solely on natural data using modern techniques are
unable to learn to correctly classify the adversarial examples.
Goodfellow et al. note that "An intriguing aspect of adversarial examples is that an
example generated for one model is often misclassified by other models, even when they
have different architectures or were trained on disjoint training sets" [4]. They reason
that different neural networks trained to perform the same task all resemble the linear
classifier learned on the same training set. And given that neural networks are able to
Page 3 of 63
==PAGE:12==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
2.2
White-box and black-box
generalize, this reference classifier is able to learn approximately the same classification
weights regardless of which subset of training data it uses. Summarizing these points,
neural networks will approximate the same linear classifier, regardless of architecture and
subset of training data, therefore adversarial examples generated for one network often
generalizes to other models.
An adversarial example generated using Equation 1 results in a sample altered in
such a way that it is more challenging to classify and is therefore referred to as a malicious
adversarial example. Alternatively, one could generate a benign adversarial example by
using Equation 2, which simply multiplies Equation 1 by –1 in order to reverse the
direction of the added noise.
Such a sample is denoted benign, because instead of
changing the image in the direction that maximizes the classification loss, as is the case
with the malicious adversarial example, it is changing in the direction that minimizes said
loss, thereby making the sample easier to classify.
η = –1 · εsign(∇xJ(θ, x, y))
(2)
Both of these types of adversarial examples are referred to as sign-based adversarial
examples, due to the fact that they are generated using the sign of the gradient. Another
way to generate adversarial examples is called gradient-based. Instead of perturbing the
input image with a step-size of ε in the direction of the sign of the gradient, gradient-based
adversarial examples uses the gradient information itself as both step-size and direction.
It is possible to generate both malicious gradient-based adversarial examples, using
Equation 3 and benign gradient-based adversarial examples using Equation 4. Moving
forward, the terminology used to describe adversarial examples generated in the process
of deepmarking will include malicious and benign, referred to as deepmarking hostility,
as well as both sign-based and gradient-based approaches.
η = ∇xJ(θ, x, y)
(3)
η = –1 · ∇xJ(θ, x, y)
(4)
2.2
White-box and black-box
A white-box attack generally refers to an attack where the attacker has complete
knowledge of the model inputs, outputs, architecture, parameters and training procedure.
Assuming white-box access for an attack is extremely limiting for its number of use cases,
as it necessarily implies that the attacker has deep access to both network architecture
and parameters, something that would rarely be the case in real world scenarios outside
exclusive arrangements.
A black-box attack generally refers to an attack where the attacker only has access
to the inputs supplied to the model and the outputs returned by the model. In its most
Page 4 of 63
==PAGE:13==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
2.3
Triplet Loss
restrictive form the output would be a single highest likelihood class for classification
models, as opposed to the full range of confidence scores when less restrictive. Assuming
only restricted black-box access to a model is essentially equivalent to assuming the
model is accessible only as a queryable "oracle", given that the input as well as the
highest likelihood class is required to be available for the model to remain useful, in a
classification setting.
2.3
Triplet Loss
Triplet loss is a method for training neural networks to directly learn an embedding
from images into a Euclidean space [5] and is therefore great for training facial recognition
models.
Other methods of training neural networks for facial recognition optimize
for another task, such as classification, and then uses a bottleneck layer to provide a
latent space representation of the images/faces. Triple Loss sets itself apart by directly
optimizing a loss relevant to the models task. It does so by using pairs of three images
an anchor with class A, a positive sample also with class A and a negative sample with
a class different from A. Triplet Loss then minimizes the Euclidean distance between
the anchor and the positive sample while maximizing the distance between the anchor
and the negative sample. This incentivizes clustering of images belonging to the same
class and distance between these clusters in Euclidean space. This research will utilize
Triplet Loss when training neural networks for facial recognition. An illustration of this
procedure can be found in Figure 1.
Figure 1: The Triplet Loss minimizes the distance between an anchor and a positive, both
of which have the same identity, and maximizes the distance between the anchor and a
negative of a different identity [5].
2.4
Overfitting to Training Data
Overfitting is a term for the well known phenomenon that neural networks outperform
on the data it is trained on and underperform on unseen test data. Figure 2 showcases
the generalization gap for a ResNet18 model trained on 20% of CIFAR10 and validated
on 15% of CIFAR10 with no use of dropout or data augmentation. On the left, in Figure
Page 5 of 63
==PAGE:14==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
2.4
Overfitting to Training Data
2, it can be seen that the training loss is decreasing and reaches a tangent point near 0
[6] [7]. Meanwhile, the validation loss is increasing over time. This pattern suggests
that the model is improving at classifying its training data, while its performance on the
validation set is deteriorating. The classification accuracy on the training and validation
data can be observed on the right, in Figure 2, showing the model converging at 98% and
60% accuracy of the training and validation set respectively.
Figure 2: ResNet18 model overfitting on training data from CIFAR10 compared to the
validationdata. Left: Thetraininglossdecreasingovertimeandvalidationlossfluctuating
and increasing over time. Right: The training and validation accuracy increasing over
time, converging at 98% and 58% respectively.
This research, along with the related works by Shokri et al., leverages the concept of
overfitting to extract insights into a neural network’s training data. Taking advantage of
the consistent differences in model output depending on whether the input data was part
of the training set or not.
Page 6 of 63
==PAGE:15==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
3
Related Work
3.1
Membership Inference Attack
Membership inference attack is a term denoting the process of determining whether
a given data record was part of a target models training data. Shokri et al. propose in
2017 a shadow model training technique for membership inference attack [1]. This "[...]
membership inference attack exploits the observation that machine learning models often
behave differently on the data that they were trained on versus the data that they ’see’ for
the first time." This process is outlined below, however, firstly a few terms are introduced
and explained in order to ease the understanding of the approach.
Target Model
Target model in this context refers to the model trained on data from which the
membership inference of a data record is being attempted. The training data for the target
model is denoted private training set.
Shadow Model
The training process and utilization of so-called shadow models is the major con-
tribution of the previously mentioned paper [1]. A shadow model is a model created by
the attacker to resemble the target model as closely as possible. The approach utilizes
multiple shadow models, these are each trained on their own individual shadow training
set, and efforts are again made in order for the shadow training set to closely resemble
the private training set.
Attack Model
The details of how the attack model works will follow below. At present, it suffices
to understand that the attack model is a binary classifier trained on the prediction output
from the shadow models, with the record label being whether said record was part of the
shadow models training data. This dataset of output predictions and "in" or "out" labels
is referred to as the attack training set.
The process of training the shadow models is outlined in Figure 3. The shadow
models are trained on a shadow training set in the same way that the target model is
trained on the private training set. The figure indicates that this training is done with
"ML API", which is how the authors argued their shadow models resembled the training
model, an assumption that will be discussed later.
Page 7 of 63
==PAGE:16==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
3.1
Membership Inference Attack
Figure 3: Shadow model training technique [1].
After training this range of shadow models they each classify samples from their
training set and an equally sized test set. The resulting confidence scores and labels
determining whether the original datapoint was "in" or "out" of the training set is combined
to form the attack data set as illustrated in Figure 4. With this the authors argue that
they "... convert the problem of recognizing the complex relationship between members
of the training dataset and the model’s output into a binary classification problem." and
that "Our results show that learning how to infer membership in show models’ training
datasets ... produces an attack model that successfully infers membership in the target
model’s training dataset, too." [1]
Page 8 of 63
==PAGE:17==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
3.1
Membership Inference Attack
Figure 4: Attack model training technique [1].
Assumptions
The attack data set that the attack model is trained on is, as previously mentioned,
the output from the shadow models. During test time, however, the samples the attack
model will be classifying, are outputs originating from the target model. Hence, it is
exceedingly important that the target model and the shadow models produce outputs that
are similar, and therefore it is important that the two model architectures are similar. This
is not a difficult requirement in a white-box setting, where an attacker would assume full
knowledge of the target model architecture, but in a black-box setting the assumption that
the shadow models resemble the target model closely enough to learn a relevant mapping
from output to "in" or "out" label is not easily satisfied. The authors skirt around this
issue by focusing their research on machine learning as a service, where "... the type
and structure of the target model is not known, but the attacker can use exactly the same
service ... to train the shadow model as was used to train the target model" [1]. However,
this arguably breaks the restrictions of the black-box setting. The attacker may not know
the exact architecture that the ML API service uses, but having access to the same service
and thereby same architecture is equivalent to knowing the architecture and being able to
construct an identical model to the target model. For any neural network not accessible in
a white-box fashion and not trained using a known ML API, the construction of reliable
shadow models seems impossible. Therefore, the argument that membership inference
using this approach is possible in a true black-box setting seems inaccurate.
Another requirement for having the shadow models output be comparable to the
target model is the shadow training data. In order for the shadow training technique to
be effective "the attacker needs training data that is distributed similarly to the target
model’s training data" [1].
The authors develop and introduce several methods for
generating shadow training data. However, in two of three cases the generation method
requires some level of information about the private training data such as "[...] statistical
information about the population from which the target model’s training data was drawn"
Page 9 of 63
==PAGE:18==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
3.2
Model Inversion
or "[...] access to some data that is similar to the target model’s training data and can
be considered a "noisy" version thereof." The third method revolves around generating
synthetic data by querying the target model and using "the intuition [...] that records that
are classified by the target model with high confidence should be statistically similar to
the target’s training dataset[...]" and thus sampling synthetic data from records that are
classified with high confidence should suffice. However, the synthetic data generation
approach by Shokri et al.
can only be applied to datasets of binary features due to
efficiency reasons. Therefore, when it comes to image data, the attacker would need
some knowledge about the training data of the target model to perform the attack.
Results
The authors test their technique on multiple datasets two of which are MNIST and
CIFAR. The number of shadow models used for each dataset is 50 and 100 for MNIST
and CIFAR respectively. On the MNIST dataset "the overall precision of the membership
inference attack is 0.517, which is just slightly above random guessing", which they
attribute to the lack of randomness in the training data and the limited number of classes.
The CIFAR-10 dataset was tested with varying sizes of the training data, 2500, 5000,
10,000 and 15,000 training samples, and the median precision across classes "(from the
smallest dataset size to largest) is 0.78, 0.74, 0.72, 0.71." which is significantly better
than random guessing 0.5. However, as can be seen, as the size of the dataset increased
the precision of the attack drops. The largest dataset tested being 15,000 samples.
3.2
Model Inversion
In 2015 Fredrikson et al. introduced a method for extracting class representatives
from classifiers [2]. They achieved this by repeatedly querying a model and each time
using gradient descent to tweak the input until they got a desired output from the model.
The desired output in this case would be confidence scores with 1 for the desired class
and 0 for all remaining classes. By doing so they generate a synthetic class representative
for the desired class. However, this synthetic sample is not an actual member of the
training data, it is simply an average feature input that results in the desired output.
For very specific cases, such as facial recognition, where each class is only associated
with a single person or subject, this technique constructs and average image for that
subject, which can lead to synthetic samples that resemble that person and is therefore
recognizable.
Limitations
Model inversion constructs a class representative and naturally can therefore only
construct a single representative per class. Additionally, the generation of said samples
is achieved a single sample at a time. Lastly, Fredrikson et al. state in the paper that "Of
Page 10 of 63
==PAGE:19==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
3.3
Training Data Reconstruction
course this would seem impossible in the black-box setting if the API returns answers to
queries that are just a class label" [2]. Later arguing that "it is common to give floating-
point confidence measures along with the class label", but that rounding these confidence
scores in a black-box setting produces outputs that are resistant to model inversion [2].
Results
Figure 5 shows the class representatives generated using model inversion and a
few different approaches. Their Softmax approach achieves a recognizable result, while
the other two, MLP and DAE, fails to do so. The impact of the previously mentioned
confidence score rounding can be seen in Figure 6, where even limited rounding leads to
entirely unrecognizable results at r = 0.05 or an empty image at r = 0.1.
Figure 5: Reconstruction of the individual on the left by Softmax, MLP and DAE [2].
Figure 6: Black-box face reconstruction attack with rounding level r. The attack fails to
produce a non-empty image at r = 0.1, thus showing that rounding yields a simple-but-
effective countermeasure [2].
3.3
Training Data Reconstruction
A more recent attempt at extracting information about the training data of a trained
model involves the reconstruction of the training samples from the parameters of a trained
neural network classifier. Haim et al. proposes a novel scheme for reconstructing these
samples and show the results of applying said scheme for a binary MLP classifier on
Page 11 of 63
==PAGE:20==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
3.3
Training Data Reconstruction
small subsets of MNIST and CIFAR [3]. They build on previous work, a theorem by Lyu
and Li, Ji and Telgarsky, that Haim et al. state "[...] guarantees directional convergence to
a first order stationary point (of the optimization problem), which is also called Karush-
Kuhn-Turcker point or KKT point for short. [...] The great virtue of [the theorem] is that
it characterizes the implicit bias of gradient flow with the logistic loss for homogeneous
networks. Namely, even though there are many possible directions of
θ
∥θ∥that classify
the dataset correctly, gradient flow converges only to directions that are KKT points of
the problem." [8] [9] [3]. They argue that for a model with parameters θ, "if the trajectory
θ(t) of gradient flow under the regime of [the theorem] converges in direction to a KKT
point ˜θ, then we have the following: There exists λ1, ..., λn ∈R such that [Equation 5
holds]", where φ(θ; ·) is a homogeneous ReLU neural network, and (xi, yi) is a dataset
[3]. In essence, they describe the implication, that under the given assumptions, the model
parameters ˜θ can be represented as a linear combination of the derivatives of the network
evaluated at each training data point ∇θφ(˜θ; xi), with the coefficients λ1, ..., λn ∈R.
˜θ =
m
∑︁
i=1
λiyi∇θφ(˜θ; xi)
(5)
Through the definition of three losses constraining x1, ...xm and λ1, ..., λm they
define Lreconstruct as seen in Equation 6 with α1, α2, α3 ∈R as tuneable hyperparameters
and "Lstationary represents the stationary condition that the parameters of the network
satisfy. And Lλ represents the dual feasibility condition [λ1, ..., λn ≥0]. We additionally
define Lprior which represents some prior knowledge we might have about the dataset.
For example, if we know that the dataset contains images, prior knowledge would be that
each input coordinate (i.e. each pixel) is between 0 and 1. Given no prior knowledge on the
data, we can define Lprior ≡0" Minimizing Equation 6 in turn necessarily reconstructs
data points x1, ..., xm that given model parameters θ and yi, ...ym best minimize the
equation.
Lreconstruct({xi}m
i=1, {λi}m
i=1) = α1Lstationary + α2Lλ + α3Lprior
(6)
Assumptions
For the theoretical assumptions, that parameters θ satisfies Equation 5 after an
infinite number of training iterations, it is assumed that after a finite number of iterations
θ approximately satisfies the equation as well. Additionally, Haim et al. note that the
theorem by Lyu and Li, Ji and Telgarsky also covers convolutional neural networks.
However, they state that: "Solving out optimization problem for convolutional neural
networks turned out to be more challenging and is therefore a subject of future research"
[3]. More practically their approach has only been shown to work on classifiers trained on
Page 12 of 63
==PAGE:21==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
3.3
Training Data Reconstruction
at most 500 samples and currently only works for binary classification problem, though the
authors believe it could perhaps be extended to multi-class classifiers using an extension
to the theorem. Lastly, the process requires the network parameters and therefore only
works in a white-box setting with very deep access and knowledge about the network. In
a black-box setting, without access to the network parameters, reconstruction of training
samples using this method is impossible. As it stands, the only scenario in which this
technique has managed to reconstruct a subset of training samples is for a small MLP
binary classifier, trained for 1,000,000 epochs on 500 training samples, in a white-box
setting with full access to the network parameters.
Results
Figure 7 shows the top 45 reconstructed samples (rows 1,3,5).
They are noisy,
but visually resemble their corresponding nearest-neighbors from the training-set of the
model (rows 2,4,6). However, it is important to keep in mind the small scale of the model,
training-set and deep access needed to achieve these results.
Figure 7: Top 45 reconstructed training samples from a binary classifier trained on
500 images with labels animals/vehicles (CIFAR). Train error is zero, test accuracy is
77.6%. Rows 1,3,5 contain the reconstructed training samples, rows 2,4,6 contain the
corresponding nearest-neighbors from the training-set of the model. [3].
Page 13 of 63
==PAGE:22==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
4
Data
4.1
Datasets
This research utilizes three different datasets of increasing complexity as it initially
attempts to understand and introduce the basic concept on a simple dataset, MNIST,
before moving to a more complex understanding on a relatively more complex dataset,
CIFAR10, and then finally the research analyses the technique on a database of syntheti-
cally generated faces; DigiFace [10] [7] [11].
4.1.1
MNIST
The MNIST dataset is a well known and widely used database of 70,000, single
channel 28x28 pixel, images of hand drawn digits and thereby 10 different classes [10].
Figure 8 illustrate 9 randomly selected samples from MNIST.
Figure 8: Randomly selected samples from the MNIST database.
4.1.2
CIFAR10
The CIFAR10 dataset is a well known and widely used database of 60,000, three
channel 32x32 pixel, images of 10 different classes including airplanes, birds, trucks and
deer [7]. Figure 9 depict 9 randomly selected samples from CIFAR10.
Page 14 of 63
==PAGE:23==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
4.1
Datasets
Figure 9: Randomly selected samples from the CIFAR10 database.
4.1.3
DigiFace
The DigiFace dataset is newly developed database from 2023 of computer generated
faces [11]. It consists of 1.2 million, three channel 112x112 pixel images of faces. The
database is split in two; the first being 720,000 images and 10,000 identities, resulting in
72 images per identity, and the second being 500,000 images of 100,000 identities with
5 images per identity. This research utilizes the first part with 72 images per identity, due
to it being more suited for facial recognition. It is also limited to a smaller subset of the
total 720,000 images due to computational limitations.
"Only 511 face scans, obtained with consent, were used to build a parametric model
of face geometry and texture library. From this limited source data, [they] can generate
infinite number of identities" [11]. This is in contrast to popular face datasets, where
images oftentimes are obtained without consent from the subject by crawling webpages.
Something that projects like MegaPixels attempt to inform the public about [12]. For
the scope of this research there is little reason to exacerbate the use of such ethically
questionable datasets. Figure 10 show 9 randomly selected samples from DigiFace.
Page 15 of 63
==PAGE:24==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
4.2
Data Subsets
Figure 10: Randomly selected samples from the DigiFace database.
4.2
Data Subsets
This section introduces some terminology regarding different subsets of data. The
terminology differs slightly from that used in "Membership Inference Attack Against
Machine Learning Models" by Shokri et al., and will be utilized for the remainder of the
research. An illustration of these subsets can be found in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Data subsets used in this research. The proportional sizes of each subset as
depicted in the figure is not indicative of the proportional sizes of each subset during
experiments.
"Private" data is to be understood as the data that is being protected by deepmarking.
This data is only available to the party conducting the deepmarking process and will never
be made available to any other entity. From this follows naturally that "deepmarked"
data is the resulting data from deepmarking the private data. This generated data is
intended to be made available to whomever would have otherwise had access to the
original private samples.
"Independent" data is data that is not available to the party performing the deep-
marking, but for the sake of this research is assumed to be the data, an adversary would
Page 16 of 63
==PAGE:25==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
4.2
Data Subsets
use, potentially in combination with deepmarked data, to train their neural network.
Lastly "control" data is in a similar space to private and independent data, but
never used to train any neural networks. For this research it is used as a validation set to
understand how the trained model generalizes to unseen regular data.
The proportional sizes of each subset as depicted in Figure 11 is not indicative of
the proportional sizes of each subset during experiments. Every experiment conducted
will utilize an equal amount of private, and thereby deepmarked, samples as independent
samples, unless specifically stated otherwise.
Page 17 of 63
==PAGE:26==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
5
Methodology
The purpose of this research is to be able to detect misuse of data for training machine
learning models. Some data owner may for one reason or another want to make their
private data available either publically or to a specific outside party. The current way of
doing so follows the top half of Figure 12, where the private data is simply uploaded as
is and is unprotected against data exploitation. The proposed solution follows the bottom
half of the same figure. The data owner has some private data that they wish to make
available (1. in Figure 12). The data owner deepmarks their data, transforming it into a
new, but visually similar dataset. Deepmarking applies intentional noise to the private
data that specifically makes the data appear differently "in the eyes of" a neural network
(2. in Figure 12). Instead of making the original private data available online or to some
other entity, the data owner uploads the newly generated deepmarked data (3. in Figure
12). Now an adversary would only have access to the deepmarked version, but not the
private version of the data, and may decide to train a neural network on the deepmarked
data (4. in Figure 12). Lastly, in order to test whether the adversary has trained a neural
network on the deepmarked data, the data owner gives both the private and deepmarked
data as input to the model. Comparing the results reveals whether the deepmarked data
was present in the adversary model’s training data (5. in Figure 12). In broad strokes that
is the expected procedure of deepmarking for membership inference.
Page 18 of 63
==PAGE:27==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
Figure 12: Overview of deepmarking process and data exploitation case from original
data owner to inference of membership.
Deepmarked data exists in an unnatural and adversarial place in the multidimensional
space that make up images. This space is not one that neural networks trained on regular
data can easily generalize to. For that reason, a model that has not trained on deepmarked
data will perform comparatively worse at classifying those samples than the private
counterparts. Conversely, a model trained on these deepmarked samples will easily overfit
to them, due to the specifics of the added noise, and thereby outperform on classifying
deepmarked samples compared to its private twin. Therefore, a neural network will
perform predictably different when tested on the original private and newly generated
deepmarked data, depending on whether the deepmarked samples were included in the
training set. The data owner needs nothing more than query access to the adversary’s
Page 19 of 63
==PAGE:28==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
5.1
Evaluation Criteria
model in a restricted black-box setting in order to detect whether it has trained on their
data. Deepmarking as proposed here is therefore, to the best of my knowledge, the first
technique for membership inference on a neural networks training set that aims to function
in a true black-box setting where the target model output does not include posteriors, but
only the single highest likelihood class.
5.1
Evaluation Criteria
The impact and success of deepmarking will be evaluated on the basis of visual
perception of the resulting deepmarked images as well as a comparison of model per-
formance in two possible situations. The first scenario is an adversary having trained a
neural network to perform some task and having used only independent data, meaning
no deepmarked data was used to train the model. Given this scenario the expectation
would be that when queried the trained model will perform better on private data than
on deepmarked data, given that private data should be most similar to the independent
training data.
The second scenario is an adversary having trained a neural network to perform some
task and has used independent data as well as all deepmarked data to train their model. In
this case, when the adversary’s model has trained on deepmarked data and independent
data, it is generally expected to overfit on its training data, including deepmarked samples.
Consequently, the model should therefore perform better on deepmarked data than the
unseen private data when queried.
Figure 13 and 14 show fictitious performance graphs to illustrate outcomes showing
deepmarking working correctly and not working. Figure 13 shows an ideal outcome
for deepmarking. It can be seen that, in the case of the first scenario being true, and
deepmarked data not being part of the training data, the model performs significantly
better on private data than deepmarked data as anticipated. Diagonal lines indicate the
intended accuracy delta between the performance of the model on deepmarked data and
its performance on private data. This scenario is illustrated as the top half of the graph.
Similarly, when the model has trained on both independent and deepmarked data, it shows
better performance on deepmarked data than private data, again indicated by diagonal
lines. The second scenario is shown as the bottom half of the graph. In both scenarios the
accuracy of the model performance on the private data is indicated by a dashed vertical
line. This vertical line indicates the threshold that the accuracy on deepmarked data is
intended to stay to the left of on the top half, and to the right of on the bottom half.
Page 20 of 63
==PAGE:29==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
5.1
Evaluation Criteria
Figure 13: Fictitious performance graph for illustrative purpose showing an ideal outcome
for deepmarking working. Test accuracy given training and test data.
In contrast, Figure 14 exemplifies an instance of deepmarking failing to cause the
expected outcome. In both training scenarios, either using solely independent data or
a combination of independent and deepmarked data, the model performs better on the
deepmarked data compared to the private data. Were the reverse to occur, with both cases
showcasing the model’s superior performance on private data rather than deepmarked
data, the deepmarking process would also prove ineffective. In the top half, the scenario
where the model has not trained on deepmarked samples, the neural network performs
better on deepmarked samples than private samples. This is not the intended behavior
and is therefore indicated by a lack of diagonal lines.
Page 21 of 63
==PAGE:30==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
5.1
Evaluation Criteria
Figure 14: Fictitious performance graph for illustrative purpose showing an outcome for
deepmarking not working. Test accuracy given training and test data.
The detection of deepmarked samples in the training data relies on the target model’s
contrasting under and overperformance on deepmarked samples compared to private sam-
ples in the two scenarios. Therefore, when this behavior is not present, the deepmarking
process has failed. In a real world use case an entity employing the deepmarking proce-
dure would only have access to the results of test on the real scenario, and would need to
deduce the true scenario from the under or overperformance of deepmarked samples.
Going forward additional information will be included in these graphs, showing the
accuracy on both the independent and control data subsets. This provides insights into
the models overall performance on training data (independent) and ability to generalize
to unseen regular data (control). An example of such a graph can be found in Figure 15
Page 22 of 63
==PAGE:31==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
5.1
Evaluation Criteria
Figure 15: Fictitious performance graph for illustrative purpose showing an outcome for
deepmarking working. Test accuracy given training and test data. Including data for
independent and control subsets.
Page 23 of 63
==PAGE:32==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6
Experiments
6.1
Baseline
The intended baseline for this research was an adapted version of the membership
inference attack by Shokri et al. and utilizing the CIFAR10 dataset [1] [7]. Instead
of identifying membership of a single data sample, the idea was to implement their
membership inference attack on small data collections. A collection of data would for
this baseline be understood as 500 data samples. Shadow models would be trained in
the same fashion as the original paper, however, the resulting confidence scores would
be concatenated into collections of 500 samples all sharing either being "in" or "out" of
the training data. The attack model would then be trained to classify "in" and "out" data
collections, rather than individual samples, and tested on combined outputs from the target
model. The goal was in part try to improve the performance of the original membership
inference attack, but also create a baseline detecting data collections rather than data
points in order for it to be somewhat comparable with the deepmarking approach.
Unfortunately, neither the original single data sample membership inference attack
nor the aforementioned adapted version was able to achieve performance much better
than random guessing. Reproducing the reported 71% precision when the size of the
shadow training set is 15,000 did not succeed. It is a binary classification problem, "in"
or "out", yet all attempts at achieving a precision above 53% was unsuccessful.
6.2
Deepmark Hostility
This section explores the initial concept of adding intentional noise to images with
the express purpose of altering the prediction output for a neural network to differen-
tiate between original and noisy data, deepmarking. The neural network in question
attempts to classify images from the MNIST dataset, this simple dataset was chosen to
clearly illustrate varied impact of different adversarial noise, malicious, benign, sign-
and gradient-based, used for deepmarking. Sign-based deepmarked images are generated
using the "Fast Gradient Sign Method" hereon referred to as "FGSM" with ε = 1/255,
it is not originally intended to be used iteratively, but will be used in that fashion for this
research. This way of using FGSM is very similar to the "Iterative Fast Gradient Sign
Method (I-FGSM)" by Kurakin et al. [13]. At each noise iteration every pixel in the
image is changed one pixel value in the direction of the sign of the gradient. As discussed
in Section 2.1, gradient-based adversarial examples uses the gradient directly instead of
the sign of the gradient, this can result in changes in the image that are smaller or greater
than one pixel value. This approach resembles the "Iterative Fast Gradient Value Method
(I-FGVM)" by Rozsa et al. [14].
The equations used to generate the deepmarked samples can be found in Equation 7 -
10 in the following order: benign sign-based, malicious sign-based, benign gradient-based
Page 24 of 63
==PAGE:33==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.2
Deepmark Hostility
and malicious gradient-based. Where θ is the model parameters, x′
i is the deepmarked
samples at iteration i with x′
0 = x. In other words x′
0 is the original private samples, y
is the targets associated with x′
i and J(·, ·, ·) is the cost used to train the neural network.
Here ε denotes the magnitude of adversarial noise and Clip[0,1](·) clips any values outside
the image range [0, 1]
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i – εsign(∇x′
i J(θ, x′
i, y)))
(7)
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i + εsign(∇x′
i J(θ, x′
i, y)))
(8)
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i – ∇x′
i J(θ, x′
i, y))
(9)
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i + ∇x′
i J(θ, x′
i, y))
(10)
The deepmarking process, as it is done in this section, is depicted in Figure 16
and in this most basic form it is simply iterative generation of adversarial examples. A
small four-layer convolutional neural network with a fully connected final layer, is used as
classifier for these experiments. It is trained once on private data in order for its gradients
to be used to generate the first set of deepmarked data. Subsequently, the model undergoes
ten consecutive retraining iterations on the deepmarked data, with each iteration utilizing
the permuted data from the previous iteration as training set.
Figure 16: Basic deepmarking process as done in this section.
All four different versions of noise generation were tested, varying the generation
approach and adversarial hostility. Figure 17 shows the classification performance when
a subset of MNIST has undergone benign sign-based deepmarking. Deepmarking is here
simplifying the classification problem, as is evident by the positive performance delta,
when comparing the classification results between the deepmarked data and private data.
This holds true for the scenario where deepmarked data is part of the training data, as
well as when it is absent.
Page 25 of 63
==PAGE:34==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.2
Deepmark Hostility
Figure 17: Classification performance on benign sign-based deepmarked MNIST.
Contrary, Figure 18 depicts the classification performance when using malicious
sign-based deepmarking. This approach, in turn makes the classification problem more
challenging, which is what can be seen in the figure. In both training scenarios, the model
performs better on private data than on deepmarked data.
Figure 18: Classification performance on malicious sign-based deepmarked MNIST.
For a more qualitative evaluation of the deepmarked images Figure 19 demonstrates
a few samples.
The leftmost image in both Figure 19.a and 19.b is original private
Page 26 of 63
==PAGE:35==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.2
Deepmark Hostility
data samples, the central images are generated from a benign deepmarking process and
the leftmost images are the result of a malicious deepmarking process.
In order to
better illustrate the minor alterations made to the images, they are shown in a blue-
yellow color scale as opposed to grayscale. Figure 19.a contains images showing visible
artifacts. These were generated using sign-based deepmarking technique. In contrast,
Figure 19.b, featuring images generated using the gradient-based approach, does not
display any such artifacts. When using the sign-based approach, the sign of the gradient
is multiplied by an ε = 1/255, resulting in the image being altered by exactly one
pixel-value in the direction of the gradient for each pixel. When both approaches apply
the same number of deepmarking iterations, it appears that this uniform, but direction
varied, step size causes larger more perceptible perturbations compared with its gradient-
based counterpart, which generates deepmarked samples indistinguishable from private
samples.
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: Private and deepmarked versions of three MNIST sample images for different
deepmarking implementations. For each subfigure the leftmost images are the private
samples, central images benign deepmarked samples and rightmost images and malicious
deepmarked samples. a) Sign-based deepmarking. b) Gradient-based deepmarking.
The performance of these gradient-based deepmarked images is shown in Figure 20
and 21. Here it is apparent that they exhibit the same characteristics as the sign-based
approach, with relation to over- and underfitting of deepmarked data. Additionally, the
performance closely matches the sign-based approach.
Page 27 of 63
==PAGE:36==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.2
Deepmark Hostility
Figure 20: Classification performance on benign gradient-based deepmarked MNIST.
Figure 21: Classification performance on malicious gradient-based deepmarked MNIST.
It is important to note that none of these approaches truly demonstrate the intended
behavior as outlined in Section 5.1. Across all four conducted experiments, regardless of
the training data, the target model consistently demonstrates either improved or diminished
performance on the deepmarked data in comparison to the private data, depending on the
hostility of the adversarial noise. However, as previously explained, the desired scenario
would involve the model consistently overfitting on deepmarked data, when it has been
trained on it, while underfitting on deepmarked data, when it has not.
Page 28 of 63
==PAGE:37==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.3
Deepmark Generalizability Across Models
Furthermore, given that deepmarking artificially inflates or deflates a model’s perfor-
mance, by decreasing or increasing the challenge of the classification problem, it is vital
for the success of the technique that the model does not generalize perfectly to unseen
data. The small classifier used for these experiments already generalizes very well to
unseen MNIST samples, as is evident by each model’s performance on control data in
Figures 17, 18, 20 and 21. This leaves few wrongly classified samples left for benign
deepmarking to perturb and thereby positively influence the model’s performance in a no-
ticeable way. Therefore, subsequent sections will conduct experiments on comparatively
more challenging databases starting with CIFAR10 [7].
6.3
Deepmark Generalizability Across Models
The following section explores the generalizability of adversarial examples and deep-
marking by repeating the previous experiments and generating deepmarked images for
one model, but testing the performance impact on another. The deepmarking procedure
for this section remains the same as outlined in Figure 16.
As discussed in Section 2.1 prior research indicates that adversarial examples gen-
erated for one model often generalize to other networks. Given that deepmarked images
are generated for one model with the explicit intention of influencing the predictions of a
different one, this capacity to generalize would have tremendous importance. Therefore,
the model for which the deepmarked images are generated in these experiments is a small
network of two convolutional layers with maxpooling between them followed by three
fully connected layers. A separate off-the-shelf non-pretrained ResNet18 will be used
for testing the performance impact of the generated deepmarked data. Additionally, the
experiments will utilize a relatively more complex database, CIFAR10, for the reasons
previously stated.
Figure 22 shows a remarkable and generalizing impact of the deepmarked images,
here generated with benign sign-based deepmarking. As mentioned, the deepmarked data
was generated for a small classifier and generalized so well to the ResNet18 architecture
that after training on the deepmarked data it flawlessly classified all samples, while
only achieving 70% classification accuracy on the corresponding private data. As will
be discussed later, this does come at a visual cost, but it is nonetheless a noteworthy
achievement with a significant effect.
Page 29 of 63
==PAGE:38==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.3
Deepmark Generalizability Across Models
Figure 22: Classification performance on benign sign-based deepmarked CIFAR10.
Malicious sign-based deepmarking similarly manages to increase the challenge of
the classification problem, especially when the model has not trained on the deepmarked
data, as is evident in Figure 23. When the ResNet18 model has not trained on deepmarked
images, it exhibits an accuracy delta of about 15 percentage points and performs best on
the private data. However, when the ResNet18 model is trained on the deepmarked data,
the performance difference becomes negligible, with just a slight one-percentage-point
variation.
Interestingly the two different hostilities of deepmarking primarily affects
differing training scenarios, and both are achieving the desired result on the scenario they
affect.
Page 30 of 63
==PAGE:39==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.3
Deepmark Generalizability Across Models
Figure 23: Classification performance on malicious sign-based deepmarked CIFAR10.
Figure 24 and 25 depict the experiments conducted with the gradient-based deep-
marking technique.
A similar pattern and relationship as the previous tests emerge,
although the performance differences are less pronounced. Notably, when using the ma-
licious gradient-based approach, making the classification problem harder, the previously
observed drop in classification accuracy delta of 15 is instead a reduction of 5 percentage
points.
Figure 24: Classification performance on benign gradient-based deepmarked CIFAR10.
Page 31 of 63
==PAGE:40==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.3
Deepmark Generalizability Across Models
Figure 25: Classification performance on malicious gradient-based deepmarked CI-
FAR10.
However, when analyzing the visual appearance of the images, as seen in Figure 26,
it becomes apparent that the increased test performance impact of the sign-based approach
comes at a significant visual deficit. In Figure 26.a, visual artifacts are clearly visible
regardless of deepmarking hostility. Figure 26.b exhibit minor artifacts, but mainly in
the central image column containing benign deepmarked images. When comparing the
two approaches it is important to keep in mind that the test performance and images
displayed is the result of 20 iterations of deepmarking in both cases.
As has been
established, the sign of the gradient approach uniformly increases or decreases pixel-
values by ε = 1/255 in the direction of the gradient, regardless of the magnitude of
the gradient. For the gradient approach to cause equally large changes to the image in
one iteration, the absolute gradient with respect to every pixel must be greater than one.
From these experiments it is visually clear that, using the sign-based approach resulted in
more significant changes to the image as compared to the gradient-based approach given
the same number of deepmarking iterations. The experiments also seem to suggest that
gradient-based deepmarking, with a pixel wise change equal to the gradient, results in
more fine-grained and therefore more visually indistinguishable deepmarked images.
Page 32 of 63
==PAGE:41==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.4
Multi-hostility Deepmarking
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: Private and deepmarked versions of three CIFAR10 sample images for different
deepmarking implementations. For each subfigure the leftmost images are the private
samples, central images benign deepmarked samples and rightmost images are malicious
deepmarked samples. a) Sign-based deepmarking. b) Gradient-based deepmarking.
This section emphasizes the key point that an adversarial example can be generated
for a specific model with a particular architecture, and the perturbations applied to the
image will impact a different model with a distinct architecture. This is an exceedingly
important observation for the success of the deepmarking technique, as it involves specifi-
cally generating adversarial images designed to influence the performance of an unknown
model.
6.4
Multi-hostility Deepmarking
As is evident from Figure 24 and 25, both deepmarking hostilities each have their
advantages. When benign deepmarking is performed, hence making the classification
problem easier, training on the deepmarked data allows a model to quickly overfit to
the samples and in turn classify the deepmarked samples with higher accuracy than the
corresponding private samples. Reversely, maliciously deepmarking samples, increasing
the challenge of the classification problem, causes a model not trained on deepmarked data
to underfit to those samples to a higher degree than the corresponding private samples.
This leads to the following section, where instead of making the choice between these
two hostility approaches, adversarial noise is added simultaneously in the direction of and
opposite the gradient. In order for this to not simply lead to net-zero noise two different
classifiers are trained, as depicted in Figure 27.
Page 33 of 63
==PAGE:42==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.4
Multi-hostility Deepmarking
Figure 27: Multi-directional deepmarking process as done in this section.
Classifier A is trained once on private data and continues to provide gradients to
the deepmarking procedure from its frozen state. Classifier B is trained once on private
data and subsequently at each iteration trained on the previous set of deepmarked data.
In this setup, Classifier A serves as a substitute that approximates an adversary’s model
in the scenario in which said model has not trained on deepmarked images. Therefore,
Classifier A is trained on the private data as these samples should be closer related to
independent data than the adversarial images generated through deepmarking are. In
that scenario, the ideal outcome would be a model that underfits to deepmarked data.
Therefore, the adversarial noise generated for this model is malicious and in the direction
of the gradient. To clarify, in the scenario where an adversary’s model has not trained
on deepmarked data, this noise maximizes the classification loss, hence minimizing the
model’s classification performance on specifically deepmarked data.
Conversely, Classifier B approximates an adversary’s model in the scenario in which
said model has trained on deepmarked images. Optimally, the model in this scenario
overfits on deepmarked data and Classifier B is therefore trained on deepmarked data.
Consequently, noise generated for this model is benign, and against the gradient, min-
imizing the classification loss in the scenario, and in doing so increasing the model’s
classification performance on deepmarked images. Iteratively retraining Classifier B and
combining the adversarial noise generated for Classifier A and B in order to generate new
deepmarked data, should help maximize the impact of said deepmarked data and thereby
its detectability. Note that this approach only utilizes data available to the data owner
and only assumes that private samples are closer related to independent samples, than
deepmarked samples are to independent samples, a relation that is part of the intention
with the process. Although formulated a little differently, this approach is somewhat
similar to the "Face Friend-Safe" method for generating adversarial examples by Kwon
et al. [15].
The Equations 13 and 14 are used to generate multi-hostility sign- and gradient-
based deepmarked samples respectively. Here θA is the model parameters for Classifier
A, θB the model parameters for Classifier B, x′
i is the deepmarked samples at iteration i
Page 34 of 63
==PAGE:43==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.4
Multi-hostility Deepmarking
with x′
0 = x. In other words x′
0 is the original private samples, y is the targets associated
with x′
i and J(·, ·, ·) is the cost used to train the neural networks. Here ε denotes the
magnitude of adversarial noise and Clip[0,1](·) clips any values outside the image range
[0, 1].
Li
b = J(θA, x′
i, y)
(11)
Lim = J(θB, x′
i, y)
(12)
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i + εsign(∇x′
i (Lim – Li
b)))
(13)
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i + ∇x′
i (Lim – Li
b))
(14)
Figure 28 and 29 demonstrate the effect of this more developed multi-hostility
deepmarking of CIFAR10 using sign- and gradient-based approaches respectively. The
architecture of the classifiers, used for generation and test of the performance impact of
the deepmarked data, is the same as explained in Section 6.3. Sign-based deepmarking
has the exact intended effect, as can be seen in Figure 28. The ResNet18 model exhibits
underfitting to deepmarked samples when they are absent from the training set and
overfitting when they are included in the training set, and with a significant margin. The
gradient-based deepmarking approach has a similar but lesser effect on the performance
when deepmarked images is absent from the training set. However, Figure 29 reveals that
it fails to significantly increase the classification performance on deepmarked samples,
when they are present in the training data.
Figure 28: Classification performance on multi-hostility sign-based deepmarked CI-
FAR10.
Page 35 of 63
==PAGE:44==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.4
Multi-hostility Deepmarking
Figure 29: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10.
Visually the sign-based approach has again perturbed the image considerably more
than the gradient-based one, as is evident from Figure 30. To reiterate, the number of
deepmarking alterations remains the same between the two approaches, so the sign-based
approach is simply perturbing the image more per step. However, there does appear to
be some, perhaps natural, relationship between the severity of the perturbation of the
deepmarked data and its ability to effectively affect the model performance.
Figure 30: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three CIFAR10 sample
images for different deepmarking implementations. The leftmost images are the private
samples, central images are sign-based deepmarked samples and rightmost images are
gradient-based deepmarked samples.
Page 36 of 63
==PAGE:45==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.5
Constraining Image Perturbations
Importantly, this section shows that it is possible to perturb images in such a way that,
depending on the presence of the data samples in a training set, the model either under-
or overperforms on the deepmarked samples compared to the private twins. Something
that is very important to the success of this technique.
6.5
Constraining Image Perturbations
The deepmarking process as it has been carried out so far has some issues that needs
to be addressed. The first of which is the fact that there is no notion of convergence. If
allowed, the process continues perturbing the data further and further from its private
counterpart leading to catastrophic visual results. In order to mitigate this, the L2 loss
between the private and deepmarked data is added to the loss from which the model
gradients are backpropagated. This technique is similar to the "Penalized Fast Gradient
value Method (P-FGVM) by Chatzikyriakidis et al. [16], although their approach does
not use the Euclidean distance, but just the distance itself.
Equation 18 and 19 show these new losses, where θA and θB are the model pa-
rameters, x′
i is the deepmarked samples at iteration i with x′
0 = x. In other words x′
0 is
the original private samples, y is the targets associated with x′
i and J(·, ·, ·) is the cost
used to train the neural networks. Additionally, ε = 1/255 determines the step-size for
adversarial noise added in the sign-based approach, Clip[0,1](·) clips any values outside
the image range [0, 1] and λ is a hyperparameter controlling the allowed magnitude of
perturbation, for this experiment λ = 1e4.
Li
b = J(θA, x′
i, y)
(15)
Lim = J(θB, x′
i, y)
(16)
Li
2 = ∥x′
0 – x′
i ∥2
(17)
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i + εsign(∇x′
i (–Li
b + Lim + λLi
2)))
(18)
x′
(i+1) = Clip[0,1](x′
i + ∇x′
i (–Li
b + Lim + λLi
2))
(19)
This penalizes deepmarked data that strays too far from its original private samples
and should allow the process to converge. Additionally, previously the deepmarking
process involved training a new neural network for every single iteration of adversarial
noise added. That is extremely inefficient and time-consuming. The implementation
of L2 loss as a solution to the previous problem, however, now allows more frequent
changes to the image without risking catastrophic results. Instead of a single iteration of
adversarial noise added per model trained, the process in the following section allows an
arbitrary number of noise iterations per model trained. The deepmarking process utilized
in this section can be found in Figure 31.
Page 37 of 63
==PAGE:46==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.5
Constraining Image Perturbations
Figure 31: Multi-directional deepmarking process, using L2 loss, as done in this section.
Figure 32 and 33 illustrates the model’s performance when the deepmarked images
are generated using the aforementioned approach, with sign- and gradient-based adver-
sarial noise, respectively. Notably, the incorporation of L2 loss resulted in the sign- and
gradient-based approaches showing relatively equal performance. The gradient-based
approach has a slightly stronger overall impact in either hostility direction. In compari-
son to the previous experiment, that did not utilize L2 loss, the results found here both
have a significantly reduced malicious effect, but a benign effect similar to that of the
sign-based approach in the previous experiment.
Figure 32: Classification performance on multi-hostility sign-based deepmarked CI-
FAR10 utilizing L2 loss.
Page 38 of 63
==PAGE:47==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.5
Constraining Image Perturbations
Figure 33: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss.
Upon visually inspecting the deepmarked images portrayed in Figure 34, it becomes
evident that they are completely indistinguishable from their private twins, regardless of
the deepmarking approach utilized. While these deepmarked images may appear similar
to those generated using the gradient-based technique in the previous experiment, it is
important to note that the new deepmarking process converges to these images and will
not eventually perturb the images into catastrophe if the process continues. Additionally,
the extent of permitted perturbations is controllable through the parameter λ, meaning
that the trade-off between visual representation and detectable impact of the deepmarked
images is in the users control. There may be situations where deepmarked images with
noticeable artifacts, but higher detectability is preferable, and other situations where the
opposite is the case.
Page 39 of 63
==PAGE:48==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples
Figure 34: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three CIFAR10 sample
images for different deepmarking implementations all generated utilizing L2 loss. The
leftmost images are the private samples, central images are sign-based deepmarked sam-
ples and rightmost images are gradient-based deepmarked samples.
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples
The following experiments replicate the previous one, but exclusively utilizes the
gradient-based approach for deepmarking. The sole differences lie in the varying propor-
tions of deepmarked compared to independent data used. In the previous experiments,
an equal amount of deepmarked and independent data was assumed, which served as
a suitable assumption for testing purposes. However, in real-world scenarios, it may
not be realistic to have such extensive influence on an adversary’s database. Therefore,
examining different relative proportions of deepmarked and independent data provides
insight into potentially more realistic scenarios.
Figures 33 and 35-38 convey the performance of the adversary’s neural network,
given the portion of deepmarked data available varying from 50% in Figure 33 to 10%
in Figure 38. It is evident from Figure 33 - 37 that deepmarking retains an arguably
detectable impact, even down to a scenario in which the deepmarked data only make up
20% of the adversary’s database.
Page 40 of 63
==PAGE:49==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples
Figure 35: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss and with deepmarked data making up 40% of the adversary’s
database if it is present in the database.
Figure 36: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss and with deepmarked data making up 30% of the adversary’s
database if it is present in the database.
Page 41 of 63
==PAGE:50==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples
Figure 37: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss and with deepmarked data making up 20% of the adversary’s
database if it is present in the database.
Figure 38 indicate that in its current implementation deepmarking does not cause a
detectable performance difference when the adversary’s database consists of only 10%
deepmarked samples. However, it is important to note that these experiments were done
using λ = 1e4 and the process yielded deepmarked samples visually indistinguishable
from their private twins as can be seen in Figure 39. Were it the case that the particular
situation did not require the deepmarked samples be visually identical to the private
samples, it would be possible to perturb the images more aggressively and thereby
generate more easily detectable deepmarked samples. This could lead to the generation
of detectable deepmarked samples, even at lower proportional distribution.
Page 42 of 63
==PAGE:51==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples
Figure 38: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss and with deepmarked data making up 10% of the adversary’s
database if it is present in the database.
Figure 39: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three CIFAR10 sample
images for different possible proportions of deepmarked to independent data in an adver-
sary’s training data and λ = 1e4. The text above each column indicates the percentage
of deepmarked images in the training set.
Page 43 of 63
==PAGE:52==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples
Such a situation could be a company supplying their database, or a core subset of
their database, for independent research to verify a lack of bias. Were the company to
deepmark their images before handing them to the research lab, it would not be vital
that these images are visually identical to the private twins, as long as the image quality
has not significantly deteriorated to the point of being unrecognizable. In order to test
this further similar experiments to the previous are conducted with λ = 1e3 instead, this
will allow the deepmarking process to perturb the data further than previously. Figure
40 depicts the resulting images and show significantly more noise when the deepmarked
images make up 10% and 5% of the database. The generated images in the last case, with
deepmarked samples making up 1% of the overall training set for the adversary, show
barely any noise. This is due to the fact that the models for which the noise is generated
is only trained on protected and deepmarked data respectively. Therefore, when the total
amount of data in those subsets becomes drastically low, the training set for those models
used for generating adversarial noise becomes very small. It appears that this leads to the
models not being useful for generating deepmarked images.
Figure 40: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three CIFAR10 sample
images for different possible proportions of deepmarked to independent data in an adver-
sary’s training data and λ = 1e3. The text above each column indicates the percentage
of deepmarked images in the training set.
The performance impact of these tests can be found in Figures 41, 42 and 43, with the
respective portion of deepmarked samples being 10%, 5% and 1%. It is clear from Figure
41 and 42, that the visibly deepmarked samples have a detectable impact on the ResNet18
tested even with a portion of deepmarked samples as low as 5%. Figure 43 shows that
1% of deepmarked samples generated using λ = 1e3 is, in its current implementation,
not enough to have a detectable impact on the model’s performance. As discussed likely
due to the lack of adversarial noise in the images.
Page 44 of 63
==PAGE:53==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.6
Proportion of deepmarked Samples
Figure 41: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss and with deepmarked data making up 10% of the adversary’s
database if it is present in the database. The deepmarked images were generated with
λ = 1e3.
Figure 42: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss and with deepmarked data making up 5% of the adversary’s
database if it is present in the database. The deepmarked images were generated with
λ = 1e3.
Page 45 of 63
==PAGE:54==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.7
Robustness of Deepmarking
Figure 43: Classification performance on multi-hostility gradient-based deepmarked
CIFAR10 utilizing L2 loss and with deepmarked data making up 1% of the adversary’s
database if it is present in the database. The deepmarked images were generated with
λ = 1e3.
The implementation for containing the perturbation of the deepmarked images is
quite simplistic, relying solely on the calculation of the L2 loss. It is plausible that there
exists more effective or suitable method for constraining the perturbation. One might
be able to use a GAN to generate images containing more adversarial noise, without it
being visible. Regardless of approach, if such a method exists, it has the potential to
significantly amplify the performance impact of deepmarked samples as a whole.
6.7
Robustness of Deepmarking
In order to test whether deepmarking is sensitive to weight initialization or variations
in data splits the same test has been run 5 times. Each test has a new random seed for
data split and new initialization of model parameters. The experiment is conducted on
CIFAR10 with an equal amount of independent and deepmarked data [7]. For all 5
experiments λ is set to 1e4 and the results are illustrated in Figure 44. The left side
of the figure shows an adversary model’s performance given that it has not trained on
deepmarked data. Conversely, the right side shows the performance if the deepmarked
data was present in the adversary model’s training data.
The performance delta is
highlighted by hatching. The graph displays some variation in the performance across
different runs, however, none of these variations led to a change in which dataset the model
performed the best. In each case, there remained at least a small margin, ensuring that the
desired dataset maintained its superiority. Those are the requirement for detectability and
Page 46 of 63
==PAGE:55==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification
meaning that the deepmarking approach is robust to variations in both data and weight
initialization, when tested on CIFAR10.
Figure 44: Five repeated experiments with randomized data splits and parameter initial-
ization. Left: An adversary model’s accuracy on private and deepmarked data when
deepmarked data is absent from the training data. Right: An adversary model’s accuracy
on private and deepmarked data when deepmarked data is present in the training data.
The deepmarked images were generated with λ = 1e4.
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification
So far the impact of deepmarking has been tested on neural network classifiers
trained with cross entropy loss. However, the concept should be applicable to other
neural network tasks as well.
One such task is facial verification.
In the following
section deepmarked samples will be generated for and tested on neural networks trained
with triplet loss for facial verification. Except the neural networks being different the
procedure will resemble that discussed in Section 6.5 and visualized in Figure 31. The
deepmarked data is generated for a 4 layer convolutional neural network with a single
fully connected layer of size 512 and a final output with 10 latent dimensions. Similar
to the previous experiments the model used for testing is a ResNet18 with the last layer
removed and replaced with the same fully connected layer of size 512 and in this case a
final output with 10 latent dimensions.
Due to the privacy concerns and ethical reasons associated with many state-of-the-art
facial recognition datasets outlined in Section 4.1.3, the experiments will be conducted
on the synthetic dataset for facial recognition DigiFace [11]. For this research, the use of
photo-realistic digital face images provides a good enough basis for drawing meaningful
conclusions. However, considering computational constraints and the pipeline compli-
Page 47 of 63
==PAGE:56==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification
cations of utilizing Triplet Loss, a subset of DigiFace was used for the experiments. This
subset comprised 60 individuals in the control set, 60 individuals in the independent set,
and 60 individuals in the private set, resulting in 60 individuals in the deepmarked set
as well. As mentioned in Section 4.1.3, each individual is associated with 72 samples.
This is a smaller data size than originally intended, but implementing deepmarking for
this alternate pipeline proved significantly more challenging than anticipated.
In order to calculate the accuracy of the facial verification network, the Euclidean
distance between the latent representation of all pairs of samples for each subset of data
is calculated and a threshold applied. Any two samples with a distance less than the
threshold are considered as recognized as the same face. By adding the true positive and
true negative rate and dividing by two, the balanced accuracy is calculated, which is the
metric used to determine model performance. Balanced accuracy is used here due to the
uneven number of true positive and true negative matching pairs, given that each sample
has only 71 true matches, but 72∗(60–1) = 4248 true negative matches. Equation 20 and
21 shows the calculation of the true positive and true negative rate and Equation 22 the
calculation of balanced accuracy, where yi is the label and zi is the latent representation
of sample xi for i = [1, n] where n is the number of samples, t is the threshold for the
Euclidean distance, and the notation [·] represents the Iverson bracket, which evaluates
the truth value of the condition inside. It yields 1 if the condition is true and 0 otherwise.
TPR =
Í
ij[yi = yj][∥zi – zj ∥< t]
Í
ij[yi = yj]
(20)
TNR =
Í
ij[yi ≠yj][∥zi – zj ∥≥t]
Í
ij[yi ≠yj]
(21)
BA = TPR + TNR
2
(22)
The equations used to generate deepmarked images is the same as explained in
Equation 18 and 19.
The experiments show, that neither the sign-based approach, as seen in Figure 45,
nor the gradient-based approach illustrated in Figure 46, have a significant malicious
effect and that the benign effect is very similar between the two. The deepmarking impact
is arguably still detectable here, but not by a large margin.
Page 48 of 63
==PAGE:57==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification
Figure 45: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility sign-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated using λ = 1e4.
Figure 46: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility gradient-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated using λ = 1e4.
Visual inspection of the generated deepmarked samples indicates a problem. As is
clear from Figure 47, either approach produces slightly noisy images with λ = 1e4 and the
gradient-based approach lead to one image in particular having very severe perturbations,
seen on the right. In order to attempt to constrain the perturbations further λ is creased
by a factor of 5 to λ = 5e4
Page 49 of 63
==PAGE:58==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification
Figure 47: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three DigiFace sample
images for different deepmarking implementations all generated utilizing L2 loss and with
λ = 1e4. For each side the leftmost images are the private samples, and the rightmost
images are the sign-based and gradient-based deepmarked samples respectively.
To verify the intended reduction in perturbation severity examples of the deepmarked
images generated using λ = 5e4 can be found in Figure 48. Neither the sign-based
deepmarked images depicted on the left nor the gradient-based deepmarked images on the
right show any signs of perturbations. There are no visible artifacts and no discolorations
to be found. Indeed, increasing λ lead to the expected outcome of less noisy deepmarked
images.
Page 50 of 63
==PAGE:59==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification
Figure 48: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three DigiFace sample
images for different deepmarking implementations all generated utilizing L2 loss and with
λ = 5e4. For each side the leftmost images are the private samples, and the rightmost
images are the sign-based and gradient-based deepmarked samples respectively.
However, the following question is then how large a reduction on performance
impact these indistinguishable deepmarked images suffer from in comparison. While
Figure 49 and 50, depicting the adversary model’s performance given sign-based and
gradient-based deepmarked data respectively, both show a significant reduction in benign
impact. The accuracy delta on private and deepmarked data when the adversary’s model
has trained on deepmarked images is still present, especially for the sign-based approach.
Additionally, comparing the malicious performance impact with the previous experiment,
both approaches exhibit a slight increase in malicious impact. Importantly, the malicious
impact when λ = 1e4 was very small, so expending some benign impact in exchange for
malicious impact is preferable.
Page 51 of 63
==PAGE:60==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.8
Deepmark for Facial Verification
Figure 49: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility sign-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated using λ = 5e4.
Figure 50: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility gradient-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated using λ = 5e4.
These experiments walked a fine line between deepmark detectability and visual
perception.
A method for generating truly indistinguishable deepmarked images for
facial recognition of DigiFace data was discovered, but the performance deltas utilized
for detectability were not as large as preferred.
The sign-based and gradient-based
Page 52 of 63
==PAGE:61==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.9
Deepmark Generalizability Across Task
approaches performed relatively evenly in performance impact, but at lower values of λ
the gradient-based approach appeared to generate some severely perturbed samples.
6.9
Deepmark Generalizability Across Task
Cross-task deepmarking is the subject of this section. With that is meant the process
of generating noise for a neural network trained to perform one task, but testing the
detectability of the deepmarked samples on a completely different model trained to
perform a different task. A data owner utilizing deepmarking would be interested in
their deepmarked samples being detectable in an adversary’s training set regardless of
their model task. The deepmark generation process for this experiment follows the same
procedure as mentioned in Section 6.5 and Figure 31.
It also uses the same neural
network classifier for which to generate the deepmarked samples, but tests them on the
same ResNet18 with the last layer removed and replaced with the same fully connected
layer of size 512 and a final output with 10 latent dimensions as in the previous experiment.
Similar to the previous experiment, there will be 60 unique individuals in each data subset
and the accuracy of the test model will be calculated in the same way as outlined in Section
6.8.
For these experiments λ is set to 1e4 initially, as it is hard to judge how λ-levels
will transfer across model architecture and training criteria.
Remarkably, Figure 51
and 52 both demonstrate that deepmarked samples generated for a classification model
generalizes to a model trained for facial recognition. Both the malicious and benign
impact is relatively similar in the two approaches, with the sign-based deepmarked
samples showing slightly larger effect. The magnitude of the delta, between tests on
private and deepmarked samples in the scenario that the adversary’s model has trained
on deepmarked data indicate, that the images may be severely perturbed.
Page 53 of 63
==PAGE:62==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.9
Deepmark Generalizability Across Task
Figure 51: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility sign-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated for a CNN Classifier using λ = 1e4.
Figure 52: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility gradient-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated for a CNN Classifier using λ = 1e4.
As the accuracy bar graph already alluded to, Figure 53 makes it clear that the
deepmarked samples generated using λ = 1e4 are severely and noticeably perturbed.
Interestingly, the deepmarked images generated for a CNN classifier with λ = 1e4 are
significantly more distorted than using the exact same hyperparameters, but generating
the adversarial noise for a facial recognition model as depicted in Figure 48.
Page 54 of 63
==PAGE:63==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.9
Deepmark Generalizability Across Task
Figure 53: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three DigiFace sample
images for different deepmarking implementations all generated for a CNN Classifier
utilizing L2 loss and with λ = 1e4. For each side the leftmost images are the private
samples, and the rightmost images are the sign-based and gradient-based deepmarked
samples respectively.
In an attempt to generate more visually indistinguishable deepmarked samples using
the same procedure, λ is increased to 5e4.
Figure 54 illustrate a minor malicious
performance impact of the sign-based deepmarked samples in the top, and a larger
benign impact in the bottom. Similarly, Figure 55 depict the performance impact of the
gradient-base deepmarked samples. This indicates a comparatively larger benign impact,
and an equal malicious one. Both approaches see a significant reduction in both hostility
directions compared to those previously generated using λ = 1e4.
Page 55 of 63
==PAGE:64==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.9
Deepmark Generalizability Across Task
Figure 54: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility sign-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated for a CNN Classifier using λ = 5e4.
Figure 55: Facial verification balanced accuracy on multi-hostility gradient-based deep-
marked DigiFace utilizing L2 loss and generated for a CNN Classifier using λ = 5e4.
On the left of Figure 56 the sign-based deepmarked samples are illustrated. These
examples show no noise and are completely indistinguishable from their private counter-
parts. Conversely, the gradient-based deepmarked samples are shown on the right side
of the figure. The first two images show no noise, but the third and bottom image has a
green hue inside the mouth of the person depicted.
Page 56 of 63
==PAGE:65==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
6.9
Deepmark Generalizability Across Task
Figure 56: Private and multi-hostility deepmarked versions of three DigiFace sample
images for different deepmarking implementations all generated for a CNN Classifier
utilizing L2 loss and with λ = 5e4. For each side the leftmost images are the private
samples, and the rightmost images are the sign-based and gradient-based deepmarked
samples respectively.
This section shows that deepmarking indeed generalizes across task. It is possible
to generate deepmarked samples for one model trained to perform one task, and it will
have an impact on a different model trained to perform a different task. Using the sign-
based approach in this case results in the most visually indistinguishable images without
any noticeable noise. Notably, the results for the sign-based approach in both this and
the previous experiment are equivalent. Meaning regardless of the neural network task,
the generated deepmarked images had the same performance impact on the adversary’s
model, as seen in Figure 49 and 54. This is essential for the usability of the technique
as the data owner cannot preemptively know the task an adversary’s model is trained to
perform.
Page 57 of 63
==PAGE:66==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
7
Future Work
Deepmarking relies on increasing the performance delta between private and deep-
marked samples, either positively or negatively depending on the training set scenario.
The method developed through this research achieves this goal by perturbing the data
with adversarial noise originally using the FGSM technique, but later evolving to closer
match with other techniques as noted. Constraining the magnitude of perturbations by
utilizing L2 loss between the private and deepmarked sample is a simple, but effective
approach. Considerations could be made to incorporate an alpha parameter to control
the weighting of malicious and benign noise. Many of the experiments exhibited a larger
delta in the case where deepmarked data was part of the adversary’s training data and
caused by benign adversarial noise, than the opposite accuracy delta caused by malicious
noise. It may be possible to achieve a more evenly distributed performance impact across
both malicious and benign noise with such a parameter.
Additionally, exploring the
options for generating adversarial noise may lead to another method more suitable for the
purpose or with some advantage that would strengthen the deepmarking process.
A large pretrained model fine-tuned on deepmarked samples would be a great way
to test the limits of deepmarking. This would have been the next step of this research
and would have been included here, had there been more time. The pretrained model by
itself would be a great approximation of an adversary’s model when it has not trained
on deepmarked images, and fine-tuning the model on only deepmarked images would
approximate an adversary’s model given it had trained on deepmarked images. It would
give insights into how well a large pretrained network generalizes to deepmarked images
on its own, something that could be an issue. And it would shed light on the potential
performance differences to expect when deepmarking is present in the training set for
such a large model.
The current technique deepmarks a dataset as a collection, meaning that after the
process starts no new samples are introduced. That is reasonable for the purpose of this
research. However, needing to redo the entire pipeline for all images if only a single
new one is introduced is not efficient nor reasonable. Perhaps one suitable approach is to
utilize online learning. Incrementally train the neural networks used for the generation of
deepmarked images on a new batch of data as it flows through the deepmarking pipeline,
after each step adding more and more noise to it. This is certainly a topic of research that
should be explored.
This research has shown that the technique is robust through empirical tests. How-
ever, conducting additional research to determine the probabilistic assurance of achieving
the desired impact of deepmarking would be greatly beneficial. It would help to solidify
the approach and potentially provide some quantification of expected outcome.
It is assumed for the purpose of this research that any data that has not actively
Page 58 of 63
==PAGE:67==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
been deepmarked is clean data. If this method were to be used by multiple parties this
assumption no longer holds. That begs the question; how well does a neural network
trained partially on deepmarked data generalize to unseen deepmarked samples? Further
research into this area would be important for understanding the real world usability of
this technique.
Another valid topic of research is defenses against this type of attack. What can
be done to prevent deepmarking from having the intended effect? There is already vast
research on defensive measures against adversarial attacks, some of these may be able to
prevent deepmarking as well. Or perhaps some type of data augmentation or smoothing
of the image would guard the model against overfitting to deepmarked samples.
Page 59 of 63
==PAGE:68==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
8
Conclusion
One of the limitations of the technique is the fact that it relies on the adversary’s
model overfitting on deepmarked samples, if they are in the training data, to the point
that it performs better on deepmarked data than private data. The assumption that this
would happen is generally not unreasonable, but as discovered in Section 6.2 it will not be
possible for the model to overperform on deepmarked samples, if the adversary’s model
already generalizes perfectly to the unseen private data.
Section 6.3 highlights a critical point for the success of the deepmarking technique.
Specifically, it finds that a deepmarked sample can be generated for one model with a
particular architecture, and the perturbations applied to the image can significantly impact
the performance of another model with a different architecture. Section 6.9 expands upon
this by showing the ability for the impact of deepmarked images to generalize, not only
across neural network architecture, but also model task. It does so by showing deepmarked
images generated for a CNN Classifier cause a detectable impact on the performance of
a neural network trained for facial recognition.
For deepmarking to function properly, the adversary’s model must underfit to deep-
marked samples if they are not in the training data, and overfit to them if they are present
in the training set. The discovery presented in Section 6.4 highlight the effectiveness
of perturbing an image with combined adversarial noise in both a malicious and be-
nign direction. This approach enables the intentional manipulation of underfitting and
overfitting behavior in an adversary’s model, depending on the presence of deepmarked
samples in its training data. By comparing the altered performance of the manipulated
model across private and deepmarked samples, it becomes possible to infer whether the
deepmarked data was present in the models training set. Additionally, Section 6.7 demon-
strates that the deepmarking technique is robust to variations in data and initialization of
parameter weights. It does so by showing that across 5 different runs with varying data
splits and initialized weights, even though there are variations in the adversary model’s
performance, the criteria for determining the membership status of deepmarked data in
the training set remains fulfilled.
The inclusion of Euclidean distance between the private and deepmarked data in
the loss used to generate deepmarked samples in Section 6.5, acts as a constraint on
the perturbation. The addition of λ as a parameter controlling the extent of permitted
perturbations, gives the user control over the trade-off between visual representation and
detectable impact of the deepmarked images.
Section 6.6 explores the proportion of deepmarked data in a database necessary to
cause a detectable performance impact. It finds that on CIFAR10, if the deepmarked
samples have to be visually indistinguishable from their private twins, at least 20% of
the database must be made up of deepmarked samples on order for the difference in
Page 60 of 63
==PAGE:69==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
model performance to be large enough to infer whether deepmarked data was in the
models training set. However, in a situation where it is not required for the deepmarked
images to be indistinguishable, but allowed to have some visible artifacts, the performance
difference remains detectable down to a proportion of deepmarked samples of 5%. There
are definite situations where the importance of detecting data exploitation outweighs the
ideal of visually imperceptible deepmarked samples.
When testing deepmarking on a database of synthetic photo-realistic face images in
Section 6.8, there was a clear and observable negative correlation between how closely
the deepmarked images resembled their private twins and the performance impact on an
adversary’s model. It was possible to construct deepmarked images that were indistin-
guishable from their private counterparts. Those images did cause the adversary’s model
to perform differently in the intended way and arguably with a detectable magnitude.
However, the delta between the model’s performance on private and deepmarked samples
in the case where the model has not trained on deepmarked data, would preferably have
been larger.
This research presents a novel approach to inferring membership of a data collection,
by preemptively applying intentional invisible noise to the data. It shows that the approach
generalizes across neural network architecture and model task, that the proportion of
deepmarked data required in a database in order to be detectable depends on the severity
of the applied perturbations and that the technique is robust to changes in data and weight
initialization.
Page 61 of 63
==PAGE:70==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
References
References
[1] R. Shokri, M. Stronati, C. Song, and V. Shmatikov, “Membership inference attacks
against machine learning models,” in 2017 IEEE SYMPOSIUM ON SECURITY
AND PRIVACY (SP), IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 3–18, 2017.
38th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Jose, CA, MAY 22-26,
2017.
[2] M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart, “Model inversion attacks that exploit
confidence information and basic countermeasures,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’15,
(New York, NY, USA), pp. 1322–1333, Association for Computing Machinery,
2015.
[3] N. Haim, G. Vardi, G. Yehudai, O. Shamir, and M. Irani, “Reconstructing training
data from trained neural networks,” 2022.
[4] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing adversarial
examples,” 2015.
[5] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “Facenet: A unified embedding for face
recognition and clustering,” CoRR, vol. abs/1503.03832, 2015.
[6] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1512.03385, 2015.
[7] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,” tech. rep.,
2009.
[8] K. Lyu and J. Li, “Gradient descent maximizes the margin of homogeneous neural
networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1906.05890, 2019.
[9] Z. Ji and M. Telgarsky, “Directional convergence and alignment in deep learning,”
CoRR, vol. abs/2006.06657, 2020.
[10] L. Deng, “The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning
research,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 141–142, 2012.
[11] G. Bae, M. de La Gorce, T. Baltrušaitis, C. Hewitt, D. Chen, J. Valentin, R. Cipolla,
and J. Shen, “Digiface-1m: 1 million digital face images for face recognition,” in
2023 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), IEEE,
2023.
[12] “Megapixels:
Glassroom.”
https://adam.harvey.studio/
megapixels-glassroom/. Accessed: 2023-23-05.
Page 62 of 63
==PAGE:71==
Data Density Watermarking
for Membership Inference Attacks
References
[13] A. Kurakin, I. J. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio, “Adversarial examples in the physical
world,” CoRR, vol. abs/1607.02533, 2016.
[14] A. Rozsa, E. M. Rudd, and T. E. Boult, “Adversarial diversity and hard positive
generation,” CoRR, vol. abs/1605.01775, 2016.
[15] H. Kwon, O. Kwon, H. Yoon, and K.-W. Park, “Face friend-safe adversarial ex-
ample on face recognition system,” in 2019 Eleventh International Conference on
Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), pp. 547–551, 2019.
[16] E. Chatzikyriakidis, C. Papaioannidis, and I. Pitas, “Adversarial face de-
identification,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP),
pp. 684–688, 2019.
Page 63 of 63
