==PAGE:1==
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in
Copenhagen
Analysis and Recommendations for LB For-
sikring
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
Analysis and Recommendations for LB Forsikring
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Nicola Ghislotti
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Luca Barth from Pexels:
https://www.pexels.com/photo/people-riding-
bikes-on-city-street-on-sunset-12998234/
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Building
358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Business Analytics, De-
partment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, in fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
Signature
Date
01.07.2023
ii
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Biking is an old but increasingly important mode of transport, especially in large
metropolises, mainly driven by health benefits, and environmental concerns.
Most bike accident analyses rely on police or hospital reports, which tend to have a
serious bias and may exclude less serious accidents and specific demographics. This
study uses a new approach to identify unreported bike accidents or dangerous events,
improving our understanding of the causes of bike accidents.
In the study, FINDRS Copenhagen’s bike trip database have been used. The data include
axis accelerations for accident identification and have been complemented with weather
and traffic information. The data were processed using machine learning methods to
identify the most relevant variables in bike accident identification.
The results indicate that location and street smoothness are the main causes connected
to unreported accidents, followed by Speed, Traffic and Time reference, while major
weather conditions do not appear relevant, mostly agreeing with the existing literature
on the matter.
As one of the first studies of its kind in this field, there is still room for improvement.
Future works can use this research as a base to tackle bike accidents, deepening into
localized elements and characteristics that can affect ride smoothness.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Kathrin, for her diligence
and availability in helping me throughout this project. I would also like to extend my
heartfelt thanks to the companies that were involved in this research: LB Forsikring for
proposing this project and demonstrating a keen interest in the research, and FINDRS
for sharing their data and actively contributing to its preparation and treatment
specifically for this thesis.
Lastly, I would like to express my appreciation to my family, friends, and all those close
to me, who I rely on every day. Without their support, I would not have been able to
achieve my goals and complete my academic journey.
iv
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Information on the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Bike accidents and safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Data Source: The use of sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Prediciton Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Use of open and protected data in Transport analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
Social and Economical impact of cycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Interest and roles in bike safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Methodology
27
3.1
Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Exploration: The data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Exploration: Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Finalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Results
45
4.1
Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Exploration: The Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Exploration: Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Finalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Analysis and Discussion
61
5.1
Bike data and Crash Detection Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Models scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Feature importance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Conclusions
77
6.1
Recommendations for the stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Bibliography
83
A Preliminary Meeting 14.12.2022
87
A.1
Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.2
Expected Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.3
Other information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B List of ad-hoc Python functions
89
C Test Rides Code
92
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
v
==PAGE:8==
D Rides Analysis Code
100
E Loop Ride Code
106
F
Weather Code
111
G Traffic Data Preparation
113
H Traffic Code
114
I
Data Preparation
116
J
Machine Learning Models Code
122
K Features Analysis Code
129
L
Features Analysis Additional Results
137
L.1
Without R3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
L.2
Without GPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
M Visualizations Code
138
N Evaluations Code
151
vi
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Cycling in Copenhagen has experienced growing popularity in the last three decades,
increasing around 30% between 1990 and 2000, 20% between 2000 and 2011 [1]
(Figure 1.1) and 15% between 2010 and 2020 [2].
Figure 1.1: Cycling trend in Copenhagen
Investing in cycling infrastructure and promoting cycling as a mode of transportation
can improve public health, the environment, and the economy.
Bike usage is expected to increase further around the world, especially in big cities.
According to a report by the European Cyclists’ Federation, cycling has been steadily
growing in popularity across Europe, with many cities investing in bike infrastructure
and implementing policies to promote cycling as a mode of transportation. In
Amsterdam and Copenhagen, two well-known bike friendly cities, over 30% of daily
trips are made by bike [2] [3]. »In Oslo, cycling increased by 77% between 2014 and
2020, the result of significant investments in bicycle infrastructure «[4]. Similarly, in
Paris, the city has recently implemented a plan to create 1,400km of bike lanes by 2024
in order to reduce car traffic and improve air quality [5]. These plans are not restricted
to Europe, many cities in the US have implemented bike-friendly policies such as
protected bike lanes, bike sharing programs, and bike parking facilities. Some examples
are New York City, with more than 1,300 miles (2,100 Km) of bike lanes, over 100 of
which protected [6] and Portland, which has a bike mode share of 6.3% and has
implemented a range of bike-friendly policies, including the implementation of bike
boulevards and a bike sharing program [7].
This popularity is putting existing infrastructure under pressure and Copenhageners can
experience lanes at full capacity during rush hours [8, pp. 21, 25].
Adequate bike lanes are related to safer and more comfortable rides [9, p. 10] while
busier routes can cause more accidents and disincentive bike use. Even though bike
accidents have decreased around 50% between 1990 and 2021, they have remained
essentially unchanged in the last ten years, following similar patterns in all major Danish
cities as seen in Figure 1.2.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
1
==PAGE:10==
Copenhagen’s town hall has implemented a plan to improve safety on its roads [10,
p. 12], specifically targeting the widening of the most busy streets and even considering
tunnels and bridges for the realization of high-capacity PLUS lanes [9, p. 10], [2], [8].
Figure 1.2: Accidents in major danish cities
Although some areas may eventually need an upgrade, these practices are the same that
have failed in preventing accidents during the last ten years and the resilience of bike
crashes is now a matter of discussion for insurances too. The growth and diversification
of this mean of transport, at least in the capital, has urged LB Forsikring in seeking a
better product structure to improve its services for riders in Copenhagen.
So far, most of the existing researches in the field have relied on reports or surveys but
despite the numerous advantages, they also come with limitations such due to report
design or bad memory.
These limitations can now be overcome thanks to advancements in technology and new
sensor based data may complement the existing literature. For example, it is now
possible to fit an accelerometer into a pair of lights and connect them via Bluetooth to a
smartphone. FINDRS, a Danish company, has done precisely this, and has been able to
collect anonymized data from hundreds of riders in Copenhagen.
In this project, I will try to leverage these data to detect bike crashes and relate them
with their causes, using suitable machine learning methods. This approach could lead to
several improvements, such as:
• Detecting previously unnoticed accidents.
• Providing a more accurate indication of unsafe cycling paths.
• Offering a statistically reliable source of data to avoid ineffective interventions that
may not actually address safety issues.
• Identifying unnoticed threats that appear safe but are, in fact, risky.
• Prioritizing necessary interventions.
The request for this project comes from LB Forsikring, a Danish insurance company that
primarily aims to provide reliable indications to its customers for safer bike commutes,
whether they confirm or challenge conventional wisdom. Insurance companies can also
2
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:11==
use this analysis for their economic benefit, such as reducing payouts for bike accidents
and damages to people and property. More specifically, the advantages related to the
sectors include:
• Bike accident statistics can help better assess risk and set premiums for
bike-related policies.
• Knowing the most common causes and types of bike accidents can help design
policies with targeted coverage and improve safety education for customers.
• Insurance companies can collaborate with other stakeholders, such as
transportation planners and bike advocacy groups, to promote safer biking
infrastructure and reduce the risk of accidents.
• By supporting bike safety initiatives and promoting cycling as a healthy,
low-impact mode of transportation, insurance companies can enhance their brand
reputation and appeal to environmentally conscious customers.
Similarly, public entities could benefit from the research by reducing the number of risky
situations and, thus, accidents of varying degrees of severity. This can lead to:
• Identifying high-risk areas for bike accidents, allowing for targeted improvements
to infrastructure and traffic management in those areas.
• Evaluating the effectiveness of existing safety measures and interventions, and
making informed decisions about where to allocate resources for future safety
initiatives.
• Demonstrating a commitment to bike safety, which can increase public trust in
local government and encourage more people to choose biking as a mode of
transportation.
• Creating a baseline for monitoring changes in bike accident rates over time, which
can help to evaluate the impact of new policies or infrastructure improvements.
• Potentially reducing the financial burden of bike accidents on the city through
lower healthcare costs and insurance payouts, as well as decreased need for repairs
to damaged infrastructure.
Denmark is an ideal location to conduct this research, as thousands of people commute
daily to work, school, or other locations by bike. and thanks to FINDRS, we have access
to a considerable number of bike trips for the city of Copenhagen.
In 2021 alone there have been more than 800 bike accidents in Denmark, of which,
more than 200 in the capital region [11]. This has both human and economical impact
and improving the current situation could:
• Directly reduce the number of accidents and their costs, both direct and indirect.
• Incentives more people to use bikes.
• Encourage cities to take smarter actions and allocate resources towards
sustainable infrastructure such as bike lanes.
• Foster a virtuous cycle where more people using bikes leads to increased demand,
investment, and further promotion of cycling as a mode of transportation.
This is particularly important in a country as Denmark where the share of bikers is
already high and bike popularity outside Copenhagen has seen a stall in the last few
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
3
==PAGE:12==
years (Figures 1.3 and 1.1) and where the adopted policies, such as dedicated bike lanes
and signals, even though have been effective in maintaining accidents low, are failing in
reducing them further (Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.3: Cycling trends in major danish cities
Figures 1.1 and 1.3 have been obtained using data from [11, p. 44].
1.1
Purpose Statement
Following what has been said so far, the scope of this project can be summarized in the
statement:
The purpose of this thesis is to develop a method for detecting bike falls or dangers, and
to explain their primary causes, defining statistics that can be used for better ride
safety recommendations.
1.1.1
Research Questions
To effectively accomplish the purpose of the project, the following research questions are
going to be answered:
• Can we develop an algorithm to detect unreported accidents, falls, or dangerous
situations based on the available data from FINDS bike lights and mobile phone
app? What specific features or patterns in the data can be used to reliably identify
these events?
• Can we use the results of our algorithm to develop data-based statistics on bike
falls or journey dangers, such as frequency, severity, or location?
• How does our approach differ from existing studies on bike accidents, particularly
in terms of data collection and analysis methods? How can our findings
complement or challenge the current understanding of bike safety?
• What machine learning techniques are best suited for this analysis, and how can
we optimize the performance and interpretability of our model? How can we
balance the trade-off between model accuracy and practical implementation?
• Based on the analysis results, what recommendations can be given to LB
Forsikring and FINDRS? What are the potential implications of our research for
other stakeholders?
4
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:13==
1.1.2
Project objectives
To effectively answer the research questions and provide useful tools for application of
the purpose, here is a list of expected objectives of the project:
• Develop a method for detecting bike falls or dangers using available data.
• Identify the primary causes of bike falls or dangers.
• Define data-based statistics on bike falls or journey dangers.
• Compare and contrast this research with current studies on bike accidents.
• Evaluate the best methods for analysis, including machine learning techniques, to
improve the accuracy of results.
• Provide recommendations based on the analysis results and examine the
implications of the research.
1.1.3
Hypotheses
Finally, to give boundaries to the project, the following hypotheses have been made:
1. A machine learning algorithm can detect bike falls or dangers using the available
data.
2. The primary causes of bike falls or dangers are related to measurable elements
(road smoothness, weather, traffic, period, time,...).
3. The bike data base is a fair representation of reality, allowing predictions, made the
necessary assumptions.
4. The proposed methods can be applied to the bike data considering they can be seen
as a normal set of data.
1.2
Information on the Data
Bike data for this research comes from a set of lights equipped with a motion sensor (an
ST model LIS2DH [12]) that is capable of detecting three-axis accelerations at a
frequency of 50 Hz. The motion sensor data is complemented by GPS location, speed,
time, and data accuracy, which is captured using a mobile phone app.
Compared to other motion data sources, such as phones or fitness watches, our sensor is
securely installed on the bike using a screw system. This method provides a more
reliable source of data for this study because the sensor has limited possibility to vibrate,
which reduces the error margin. Furthermore, the bike itself is a more rigid structure
compared to the human body and is subjected to less movement than a wrist, leg, or
pocket resulting in precise data. Additionally, this mounting method allows for
establishing a normal status. In normal conditions, the sensor will tend to remain
around the same values, making it easier to identify significant deviations.
The main aim of this data collection is establishing bike falls. Falls detection is common,
for example for motorbikes’ airbags and sport activities’ smartwatches and relies on
similar data sources as it will be argued in Section 2.2, Data Source: The use of sensors.
More specific and technical information on all the datasets and their treatment is
available at Sections 3.3.1 - FINDRS bike rides and 4 - Results.
The method cannot be considered error proof, for this reason we are going to use the
combination of different values to establish accidents or hazardous situations:
• Magnitude: it combines the three axis accelerations to a single value, representing
the combined axial acceleration of the sensor.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
5
==PAGE:14==
• Vector angle: it is the angle between X, Y and Z axis. If the bikes fall this should
translate in a lower than normal angle.
• Speed: it is reasonable to assume that if a fall happens, the biker stops even for a
few seconds.
6
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
In this Section, research grounds and existing studies will be presented, answering how
small accidents and dangerous situations for bike trips around Copenhagen can be
detected and why it can be useful. Accident is a recurrent term used in the research, with
this term I will intend the involuntary fall of the rider from their bike and dangerous (or
risky or hazardous) situation as a sudden change in motion data (X, Y, and Z
accelerations and speed).
This Section is divided in 4 blocks:
• Bike accidents and safety, contains grounding of the current status of biking trends
safety.
• Data Source: The use of sensors, contains literature regarding similar sensors data
and their application.
• Data Analysis, explores existing and viable techniques for this context.
• Prediciton Models, presents different methods and techniques that have been
applied in this research.
• Use of open and protected data in Transport analysis, explores the field
opportunities and best practices.
• Social and Economical impact of cycling, argues why cycling can be a relevant
resource and how small accidents can undermine it.
• Interest and roles in bike safety, analyses why insurance companies and
government can be interested in this matter and how they can act.
2.1
Bike accidents and safety
The trends for bike accidents in Denmark has decreased 50% between 1998 and 2021
but, as shown in Figure 2.1 and 2.2, has been unchanged in the last 10 years [11].
Figure 2.1: Bike Accidents in Denmark
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Bike Accidents per Km in Denmark
Statbank’s website (Central authority on Danish statistics) [11], data source for Figures
2.1 and 2.2, reports the following message for the Section regarding bike accidents:
The statistics only include injuries reported by the police. In order to
examine the so-called under-reporting of Figures Statistics Denmark has
since 1996 conducted a study where data on persons treated by casualty
wards have been included. The studies have shown that the total number of
injuries is much higher than the number registered by the police. However,
the coverage with respect to persons killed is almost 100 per cent. As from
2001 the results are published in the table MOERKE.
Thus, we can consider these data to be very reliable for fatalities, but they may not be a
good representation of reality for other less severe type of accidents. This poses a big
lack in information as currently there is no clear statistic on how often and how severe
bike accidents are.
To generally evaluate the causes of bicycle accidents and the medical consequences, a
research team from the University Hospital of Munster (Germany) has analyzed data
collected from the police and the emergency units of six hospitals in Munster between
February 2009 and January 2010. The study found that 2250 patients suffered from an
injury caused by a bicycle accident during the study period, and the most common
injuries were fractures and injuries to the extremities. Head and skull injuries were also
common, but traumatic brain injuries were relatively rare. The study also found that
helmets were rarely used, and there was no reliable conclusion regarding their protective
effect. Most accidents occurred in the spring and early summer, and during the night
hours, especially for accidents and falls where the rider lost control of the bike. Alcohol
was also found to be a frequent cause of accidents and while Cycling is one of the
healthiest means of transportation, it is far more dangerous than assumed.
Understanding the causes of bicycle accidents and their medical consequences,
policymakers and cyclists alike can work together to make cycling a safer mode of
transportation in Munster and beyond [13].
A different point of view is presented by a French survey-based study. This argues that
unreported accidents can lead to an incorrect impression that 90% of cycling accidents
result in serious injury and involve collision with another vehicle. Most of the injured
surveyed cyclists had lost control of the bike and collided with an obstacle or fallen and
using a Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA), bad weather, nighttime, road status,
speed and drunken drive were found as the most common causes of accidents. Cycling
as a mean of transport has many benefits for individuals and society and it is
increasingly popular due to its efficiency in terms of journey time and cost. But too-high
8
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:17==
accident rates could undermine those benefits, making the study calling more
comprehensive studies [14].
Evidence supporting that most accidents happens due to control loss or bad street
quality and infrastructure issues ending with non-severe injuries, has been found in
several other studies. An in-depth descriptive crash study on 100 injured cyclists
conducted in Melbourne, Australia, has highlighted the importance of these elements.
58% of bicycle crashes happened due to the cyclists losing control of their bike and
another 18% were crashes between cyclists. Road surface defects contributed to nearly
half (48%) of the 100 accidents. Bad infrastructure can worsen this problem, indeed 57%
of all crashes has been found to happen at an intersection [15]. These results are
supported by another Australian study which claims cyclists loosing control of their bike
are often experienced riders and road imperfections such as tram tracks, and striking
potholes are the major blamed cause [16].
The two papers agrees that better roads would reduce most severe injuries and this could
be achieved with regular road surface maintenance.
The previous papers calls for more work in this sense to validate their findings and
extend the results, but gathering information can be challenging. For this reason, in a
recent paper jointly published by DTU (Danmarks Tekniske Universitet) and ITU (IT
University of Copenhagen) - two of the major danish technical universities active in the
capital - a group of researchers has sought new methods to exploit additional data
sources, such as textual data to identify factors contributing to accidents. The study uses
machine learning techniques on perceived safety and cyclists’ crashes data to identify
relevant associations between infrastructure characteristics and perceived safety and
whether the level of perceived safety predicts crash severity. The study used three data
sources: self-reports, ambulance, and cycle network data. Using Natural Language
Processing (NLP) to transform natural language text into machine-understandable
representations, they have build a prediction model that associates ERL (Emergency
Response Location) with information about the cycle network and self-report content.
Unstructured data such as open-ended self-reports is found to provide acceptable
prediction performance identifying three less dominating topics: streets where cycle
paths are next to city buses, parked cars, and school zones with heavy traffic. School
zones and heavy traffic, together with intersections and interactions with vehicles, have
the highest impact on the injury severity of cyclist crashes. This is the first example of
combined used of self-report data and ambulance data, which is different from most
previous research that relied on police, hospital, insurance, or video-recorded data to
identify factors that impact the frequency or severity of cyclist crashes [17].
Safety is a major concern also because cyclists are vulnerable and often share the same
infrastructure with motorized vehicles. In a new conceptual risk analysis approach, a
team of Liverpool John Moores University, used a Bayesian network (BN) to analyze and
predict cycling accident severity based on data from six years of transport accident
reports in Liverpool. The risk factors influencing cycling accidents are identified and
categorized, and statistical analysis is conducted to determine their interdependence and
joint effect on accident severity. The BN model is used to provide safety suggestions for
both transport authorities and cyclists to reduce the severity of possible cycling
accidents. The novelty of the approach, lies in the use of advanced uncertainty modelling
and the collection and processing of big data for a data-driven risk model concluding that
high speed, traffic and infrastructure are consistently the principal cause of incident [18].
In the last decade, new light transport methods have surged, allowing more people to
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
9
==PAGE:18==
extend their daily journeys, the most popular being probably e-bikes. These new vehicles
are closing the gap between normal bikes and motor vehicles, possibly affecting the way
accidents happens and their severity. A research study conducted in Switzerland aimed
to compare e-bike and bicycle accidents in the country. The study analyzed various
parameters such as age distribution, type of accident, helmet usage, and injury severity
to determine the areas that require intervention to improve safety. The study found that
e-bikers were not involved in more accidents than bicyclists but were at a higher risk of
more severe consequences from an accident. E-bikers were more likely to be involved in
single accidents in rural areas, while bicyclists were more likely to be involved in
crossing accidents. The study also found that e-bikers wore helmets more frequently
than bicyclists in the rural areas, but usage was comparably low for both groups in urban
environments. Additionally, the study found no significant differences in the
distributions of injury severity between e-bikers and bicyclists, with over half of
accident-involved individuals being slightly injured in both groups. Overall, the study
highlights the need for targeted interventions to improve the safety of e-bikers and
bicyclists, especially in urban areas, where accidents occur more frequently. The study
also emphasizes the importance of wearing helmets while biking, regardless of whether
one is riding an e-bike or a bicycle [19].
2.2
Data Source: The use of sensors
In addition to the scope of this research, it is relevant to explore the methods that will be
used. There are numerous examples of similar techniques and their use in the field to
achieve similar results.
FINDRS phone app, collects speed and GPS location and communicates with the lights
sensors, responsible for the axis accelerations tracking. The sensor consists of an
accelerometer, a device able to measure changes in linear motion and acceleration in
three different directions: X, Y, and Z exploiting a micro-electromechanical systems
(MEMS) to detect changes in forces acting on a small mass [20].
Another similar element is the gyroscope, a sensor that detects and measures the rate of
rotation and angular orientation of an object in space. It works by using a spinning rotor
to maintain its orientation, which allows it to sense these changes [21].
GPS (Global Positioning System) data refers to location and time information collected
by GPS receivers. GPS is a network of satellites that orbit the Earth, transmitting signals
that can be used by GPS receivers to determine their location, speed, and direction. They
typically include latitude and longitude coordinates, as well as information about the
time and date of the location measurement. This data can be used for a variety of
applications, such as navigation, tracking, and mapping [22].
The combination of GPS motion and weather data is often referred to as GIS -
Geographic Information System.
A way GIS data can be used to improve bike safety is the realization of Safety Maps, a
visual representation of potential hazards and safety measures in a particular area or
location. It is a tool used to identify and communicate potential dangers and ways to
avoid them. A South Korean study, developed an innovative bicycle safety map system
that is constantly updated using data collected from sensor-equipped bicycles on the
road and GPS information gathered from smartphones. This data is then transmitted to
the safety map system server through smartphones. The system then analyzes this
information to determine the road surface, bicycle trajectories, and crash locations,
which are then used to update the map providing safety level of a given road Section to
10
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:19==
the bicycle user with an one minute frequency or when an abnormal riding state is
detected.
The system was successfully tested on a segregated bicycle track and demonstrated its
usefulness providing valuable safety information to cyclists and has the potential to
make cycling safer by identifying high-risk areas and allowing cyclists to avoid them [23].
The use of accelerometers is not a new thing as they are between the easiest and most
reliable tools of this kind. They are used for example in Airbags. Both cars and newer
motorbikes’ airbags are triggered by a set of sensors’ parameters that are able to detect
when an accident is about to happen and fires the bag with sufficient advance. Another
notable real-life application is its use in detecting workers falls in constructions’ sites
[23].
To see how the convention from raw acceleration data to Crash Detection is possible, we
can look at a Swedish article that has developed an in-house application to monitor
movements of the cyclist, recording data such as acceleration, rotation, position, and
speed with a sampling rate of 100 Hz. The study starts collecting data during regular
commuting and specific cycling tests on different surfaces and smartphone placements.
They have also conducted simplified crash tests using a crash test dummy, equipped
with a smartphone, mounted on a bicycle. A proprietary CDA (Crash Detector
Algorithm) was used to differentiate between normal cycling data and crash data.
The acceleration data was merged into a total factor using formula 2.1, known as
Magnitude [24].
Magnitude =
p
AccX2 + AccY 2 + AccZ2
(2.1)
This is particularly useful to see how 3-axis acceleration specifically can be used to detect
a fall.
The study applies a Threshold Algorithm to trigger their CDA, a data mining technique
used for binary classification problems. It is a simple rule-based algorithm that works by
setting a threshold value for a particular feature or combination of them and compares
the values of the features to the threshold. Once the threshold is exceeded, a Flag is
activated. Flag is a common term to identify a binary variable (1 or 0) that is activated
(value changed to 1 from initial state 0) under a certain rule. This algorithm is useful in
situations where there is a clear separation between the two classes in the feature space.
It can be used for both continuous and discrete variables and can handle missing data by
ignoring the missing values during the comparison. The threshold value can be set
manually or learned from the data using various optimization techniques.
The study points out that acceleration may not be accurate enough for a CDA but
combining acceleration and rotation (gyroscope) could detect all crashes.[24].
Gyroscopes data may not always be available. These devices are more expensive and
delicate compared to accelerometers, making their use more complex. To compensate
their lack, axes acceleration can also be used to estimate the real time inclination of a
body over the three axes. Pitch, roll, and yaw are three rotational angles used to describe
the orientation of an object in three-dimensional space [25] as shown in Figure 2.3.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.3: Pitch, Roll and Yaw [26]
Pitch is the rotation of an object around its X-axis. It can be described as the movement
of the nose of an object up or down relative to its horizontal plane (Equation 2.2).
Pitch = atan2(Accy,
p
Acc2x + Acc2z) · 180/π
(2.2)
Roll is the rotation of an object around its Y-axis. It can be described as the movement of
an object’s wings or sides up or down relative to its horizontal plane (Equation 2.3).
Roll = atan2(−Accx,
q
Acc2y + Acc2z) · 180/π
(2.3)
Yaw is the rotation of an object around its Z-axis. It can be described as the movement
of an object’s nose or tail left or right relative to its vertical plane (Equation 2.4).
Y aw = atan2(Accx,
q
Acc2y + Acc2z) · 180/π
(2.4)
where atan2(x, y) is the angle between x and y [25].
2.3
Data Analysis
The previously quoted paper [27] offers a good base on how to deal with the technical
challenges of applying prediction models to transport data. It describes a new risk
analysis method based on Bayesian networks (BN) to predict the severity of cycling
accidents. The study analyzed 2,269 cycling accident reports from a UK city region,
including data on associated risk factors such as location, time of day, weather, and rider
characteristics. Using a Bayesian hierarchical model, the researchers estimated the risk
12
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:21==
of bicycle accidents for different scenarios, incorporating prior knowledge to provide a
more robust analysis. They also conducted sensitivity analyses to evaluate the impact of
different modeling assumptions and data inputs on the results.
The researchers used an advanced data training method, called Tree Augmented Naïve
Bayes (TAN), to investigate the correlation between risk factors and their individual and
combined contributions to cycling accident severity.
Their process consisted of the following steps:
• Data Acquisition and Analysis.
• Prediciton Models:
◦Features Selection.
◦Structure learning.
◦Model validation.
Each of these points can be further explored thanks to numerous research in this sense.
2.3.1
Data Acquisition and Analysis
Collecting and preparing data from multiple sources for analysis is known as data
acquisition. It includes identifying the relevant data sources, gathering, cleaning and
transforming them in a usable format, verifying quality and consistency. Data
acquisition methods can be either manual or automated, depending on the type and
amount of data being collected. The data acquisition process is the initial step in data
analysis and is crucial in ensuring the accuracy and dependability of the results [28,
pp. 39–61].
Imbalanced datasets and Resampling techniques
The resulting data can present different problems. one of the most common is an
imbalanced dataset, in which the number of observations in one class is significantly
higher or lower than the other class. For example, in a dataset of credit card
transactions, the number of fraudulent transactions is often much lower than the
number of legitimate transactions. An imbalanced dataset can be a problem for a
machine learning model because it can lead to biased or inaccurate predictions. Machine
learning algorithms trained on such data tend to favor the majority class, as it has more
examples to learn from, while often ignoring or misclassifying the minority class. This
can lead to poor performance, making the model less effective in real-world applications
where both classes are equally important [29]. Possible solutions are:
Anomaly detection
Specific machine learning models are used to identify anomalies in a dataset. This kind
of solution is for example widely used in financial frauds detections. This kind of models
works assigning a score to each reading of a dataset set of columns that we decide and
signaling when a suspicious action has happened [30].
Cost sensitive learning
This kind of model assign different costs or weights to the results. It is commonly used
for example in cancer detection to assign a preference to false positive over false negative
(better to diagnose cancer when it is not true than the other way around) [30].
Resampling methods
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
13
==PAGE:22==
Resampling techniques aim to balance the class distribution in the training data using
probabilistic inference. Resampling is a good alternative to classical procedures when
the population is ill-defined, and the sample size is small [31].
It includes a different set of techniques, all with the aim of changing the initial dataset
composition in order to achieve a less skewed distribution. They are:
• Under sampling, deletes false observations to achieve balance (randomly or
following established rules such as K-neighbors clustering). Its main drawback is
the loss of potential information.
• Oversampling methods, increases the number of positive observations, for
example by randomly duplicate the ones available. It is used especially when the
number of observations is not huge. A common problem is an over-fitting model.
• Mixed methods, a combination of the two above.
The problem of skewed dataset is still open and different solutions may be applied for
different kind of problems but their use is often combined with Machine Learning
models to improve the prediction capacity of the model [30] and [29].
2.4
Prediciton Models
Prediction Models are the piece that allows to identify the most important features in a
dataset, combining different effect to identify the desired target with great precision.
Machine Learning are a popular choice between these methods and include a wide range
of processes and algorithms, suited to different kind of fields and can be adapted to a
great variety of situations, they are powerful methods that allows to spot combinations
that goes beyond simple correlation.
2.4.1
Features Selection
Many variables are not indication of a good database, nor it assure a good prediction.
Features selection (also Variables Identification) is applied to a model to identify the
most important variables or features that are relevant for predicting the outcome of the
variables. When building a model, it’s important to select only the most relevant ones, as
using irrelevant or redundant features can result in overfitting, poor model performance,
and increased computational complexity. Selecting only the most relevant features, we
can reduce the dimensionality of the model, making it easier to interpret and analyze.
Additionally, by reducing the number of features, we can also reduce the risk of
multicollinearity (correlation between independent variables), which can lead to
unstable model coefficients and inaccurate predictions [32, pp. 267–288] and [33].
Recursive Feature Elimination Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) is a feature
selection technique that helps identify the most important features in a dataset. It works
by following a simple and iterative process:
• Choose a machine learning model that can provide information about feature
importance or coefficients. This model will be used to evaluate the importance of
each feature.
• Rank the features: RFE starts by training the chosen model on the entire set of
features and ranks the features based on their importance or coefficients. The
importance of each feature is determined by how much it contributes to the
model’s performance.
• Eliminate the least important feature: RFE eliminates the least important feature
from the current set of features.
14
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:23==
• Repeat the process: The model is then retrained on the reduced set of features, and
the feature ranking is updated. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated until a desired number
of features is reached.
• Select the important features: Once the desired number of features is selected,
RFE returns the final set of important features based on their ranking.
The idea behind RFE is that by recursively eliminating less important features, it focuses
on a subset of features that have the greatest impact on the model’s performance. By
doing so, it helps simplify the model, improve interpretability, and potentially enhance
predictive accuracy.
It’s important to note that the choice of the machine learning model as the estimator is
crucial in RFE. Different models may have varying capabilities in determining feature
importance, so it’s essential to choose a model that suits the specific problem and
dataset. [32, pp. 267–288] and [33].
2.4.2
Structure learning
Structure learning is a Machine Learning method used to discover connections between
different variables in a dataset. Using different algorithm, it is possible to identify the
best model for reflecting the real data.
Exploring, pre-processing, engineering the features and choosing the right model to
accurately represent the relationships between the variables are the most important
steps of this technique.
Logistic Regression
The logistic regression model uses a logistic function to model the relationship between
the predictor variables and the binary outcome. The logistic function maps any input to
an output value between 0 and 1, representing the binary outcome probability. This is a
very simple and basic model, but very often can result in satisfying outcomes [34, p. 113].
Neural Networks
Neural Networks (also Artificial Neural Networks - ANN) are a type of Machine
Learning method used to identify patterns and relationships in data and can be used for
both regression and classification tasks. Neural Networks are composed of layers of
interconnected neurons that process and transmit information to the next layer. This
unique structure sets them apart from other Machine Learning algorithms. [34, p. 386]
A joint research effort between Austria and Harvard Universities compared logistic
regression and artificial neural networks, investigating methods to determine the best
parameters for the neural network, important inputs identification and evaluation.
Analyzing 72 other research papers, they concluded that neural networks generally
outperform logistic regression when distinguishing between two groups of data [35].
Decision Trees
Prediction models using data where the event is rare can be challenging but classes of
more advanced methods can be used to overcome these problems and Decisions Trees
based models are one of them. Decision Trees are a type of tree-like model and decision
support tool that are commonly used in machine learning for data classification and
prediction. They work by dividing a dataset into separate areas based on rows or specific
values, which can handle complicated relations and provide accurate predictions.
Decision trees have numerous advantages over other methods, including easy
interpretation of outcomes based on various criteria and the ability to generate both
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
15
==PAGE:24==
categorized and continuous variables. On the other hand, they can be computationally
costly for large datasets with multiple continuous variables and optimizing their function
can be difficult. Decision trees are a powerful tool for making complex decisions and
providing accurate predictions based on data [36, p. 239], and [34, pp. 350–370].
Gradient Boost
A type of Decision Tree based model are Gradient Boosters (Figure 2.4), ensemble of
classifiers that combines multiple weak learners to create a strong learner. It creates a
sequence of decision trees that are built one after the other, each trying to correct the
errors of the previous tree. The algorithm is called gradient boosting because it uses
gradient descent to minimize the loss function while adding new trees. Gradient
Boosting can be used for both regression and classification problems and there are
several variants which can be more effective for different kind of problems. A common
problem of these models is rare events bias but it can be removed using binomial loss,
sub-sampling with large shrinkage, and an appropriate number of boosting iterations
[37] and [34, pp. 350–370].
Figure 2.4: Example of a Gradient Boost [38]
Gradient Boosters are a common choice when it comes to skewed datasets as it has been
applied in [38] for early prediction of neonatal jaundice with genetic features.
Random Forest
Random Forests (Figure 2.5) are another type of decision tree used to make predictions.
They work by creating many decision trees and then combining their results to make the
final prediction. The trees are constructed using a technique called bootstrap
aggregating (or bagging), which ensures that they are not too like each other. Random
Forests are especially good for large datasets with many features and can be used for
both predicting numerical values (regression) and classifying data into categories
(classification). China Life Insurance Company used a combination of under-sampling
and the random forest algorithm to classify their data. This approach was tested using
customer purchase behaviour and was found to be more efficient and accurate than most
other classification algorithms, especially when dealing with imbalanced datasets [39].
16
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: Example of a Random Forest [40]
Compared to other types of Decision Trees or Gradient Booster, Random Forests are
better suited for spotting outliers, this case has been presented in [39].
2.4.3
Model validation
Being so flexible and powerful Machine Learning models requires an adequate Model
validation. Model validation involves assessing a model’s performance using an
independent dataset that was not used during training. The aim of this process is to
verify that the model generalizes well to new, unseen data and is not simply overfitting to
the training data. Various techniques can be used for model validation, and the choice of
technique will depend on factors such as the size and characteristics of the dataset and
the objectives of the analysis. Model validation may include using different performance
metrics such as Confusion Matrices, Accuracy (equation 2.5), Precision (2.6), Recall
(2.7), and F1 score, depending on the specific problem and analysis objectives. F1-score
and Confusion Matrices are better suited than accuracy when dealing with imbalanced
sets because the latter only measures the proportion of correct answers. In datasets
where one class is significantly more prevalent than the other (e.g., 80%), accuracy can
be misleading because a model that always predicts the majority class can achieve a high
accuracy but be of no practical use (accuracy would be 80% by just predicting the
majority class all the time) [34].
Developing a model includes Hyperparameter tuning, consisting of selecting the optimal
values for the model’s parameters. Hyperparameters settings are not learned from the
data but set by the user before training. Examples include the learning rate, the number
of hidden layers in a neural network, or the regularization parameter [41, p. 241].
This tuning requires a validation set (Figure 2.6) for unbiased evaluation of the model’s
performance. During the tuning process, different combinations of hyperparameters are
tested, and their impact on the model’s performance is assessed using the validation set.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
17
==PAGE:26==
By comparing the performance of different hyperparameter configurations on the
validation set, one can identify the set of hyperparameters that yield the best results.
Model evaluation on a separate set of data provides an estimate of how well the model
will generalize to unseen data. It allows for the selection of hyperparameters that result
in the best performance on new, unseen data [41, p. 241].
Figure 2.6: Train, Validation and Test split [42]
Cross-Validation
Cross Validation can be used as an alternative when the dataset dimension does not
allow for a dedicated Validation Set with a process known as Holdout Method (Figure
2.7).
Figure 2.7: Holdout Method [42]
Cross-validation helps preventing overfitting, where a model is too closely tailored to the
training data and performs poorly on new data. It works similarly to a normal Validation
process, dividing the data into tow sets: a test and a training set. The difference is that
this process is repeated several times as shown in Figure 2.8, with different partitions of
the data, and the results are average [41, p. 241].
Confusion Matrix
A confusion matrix (Figure 2.9) is a table commonly used to evaluate the performance of
a classification model. It allows for the comparison of predicted values with actual
values, revealing the number of true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false
negatives. The confusion matrix is used to calculate several metrics, including accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score. [34, p. 301].
F1-score
F1-score, as shown in equation 2.8 considers both precision and recall, which are
important metrics in such cases. Precision is the ratio of true positives to the sum of true
18
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.8: Cross Validation Process [42]
positives and false positives, while recall is the ratio of true positives to the sum of true
positives and false negatives [43].
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN = CorrectPredictions
Totalcases
(2.5)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP =
TP
Totalpredictedpositive
(2.6)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN =
TP
TotalActualpositive
(2.7)
F1score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(2.8)
where:
TP = TruePositive
FP = FalsePositve
FN = FalseNegative
TN = TrueNegative
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.9: Confusion Matrix
Features Impact
Once the best model has been evaluated, it is interesting to evaluate the features. This
can be done by evaluating their impact and explore their patterns.
Feature impact refers to identify which input variables, or features, have the greatest
influence on the output variable. It is a way to measure the contribution of each feature
to the model’s predictions. By identifying which features are most important, we can
gain insights into the underlying patterns in the data and potentially improve the
performance of the model.
There are different methods to calculate this, such as weights or feature importance
scores based on decision trees.
Weights are associated with individual variables or features in a model and are used to
assign relative importance or influence to each feature. These weights indicate how
much each feature contributes to the overall prediction made by the model. In some
models, such as linear regression or logistic regression, weights are explicitly assigned to
features to determine their impact on the output. The weights are learned during the
training process and can be positive or negative, indicating the direction and strength of
the relationship between the feature and the predicted outcome.
In equation 2.9, we can see a greater weight consists of a greater effect to a unit change
of that variable [18].
20
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:29==
Targetn =
X
X
x=1
(Weightx · V aluex,n)
(2.9)
Where:
x ∈X = Features
n ∈N = Observations
Importance, on the other hand, refers to the measure of the significance or relevance of
features in a model. It quantifies how much each feature contributes to the overall
predictive performance of the model. Importance is typically calculated after training
the model using techniques specific to the algorithm employed. For example, in decision
tree-based models like random forests or gradient boosting, feature importance is often
determined by measuring the decrease in model performance when a particular feature
is excluded or its values are randomly shuffled. The higher the decrease in performance,
the more important the feature is considered to be.
In summary, weights are used to determine the relative influence of features within a
model, while importance measures the contribution of features to the overall predictive
performance. Weights are directly assigned to features during model training, whereas
importance is typically calculated as a post-training analysis to assess the significance of
features.
Feature Exploration
Feature exploration can be conducted using exploratory data analysis (EDA) tools or
data visualization method. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is a process of analysing
and understanding data sets to extract insights and identify patterns that may inform
subsequent hypotheses and statistical models. The main goal of EDA is to summarize
the main characteristics of a dataset, often using visual and numerical techniques. The
process usually starts by examining the distributions of the variables, the relationships
between them, and the presence of any missing or erroneous values. The results of EDA
can be used to guide further statistical analysis and modelling, and to communicate
findings to stakeholders. EDA is an important step in the data science process and is
used in a wide range of fields, including finance, marketing, health, and social sciences
[18]
2.5
Use of open and protected data in Transport analysis
Big Data and analytics have great potential in improving transportation systems,
particularly in terms of safety and sustainability. Traffic data can reveal meaningful
patterns, identify congestion, and assist in understanding the causes of collisions or near
misses. Advantages are even greater if combined with edge computing (processing and
analyzing data at or near the source of the data, reducing latency and network
congestion) improving privacy and connecting less reachable locations - to process the
enormous amount of traffic data in real-time. Insights derived from Big Data and
analytics can also be used to develop more efficient and sustainable transportation
systems [44]. Big Data can improve transportation systems by:
• Sharing real-time traffic information.
• Using traffic data for urban planning.
• Analyzing near misses and collisions to improve traffic safety.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
21
==PAGE:30==
• Developing predictive models
Seen the great potential of this technology, it is natural to be concerned about privacy
and security of the information. For this reason, there are data protection mechanisms
for each stage of the big data life cycle: from the generation generation, thought the
storage, until the processing. Data protection’s laws, strictly over watches these
processes and new techniques are explored to match with their requirements [45].
2.6
Social and Economical impact of cycling
Cycling benefits have been analyzed in numerous studies
In a 2016 Chinese study conducted in Shanghai using a large-scale dataset from Mobike
- a bike sharing company, a team has evaluated the potential effect of introducing bikes
in the inner city to reduce pollution and peaks demands for energy. Analyzing spatial
distribution of the bike sharing trips, which accounts for around 56% of all city’s bike
trips, and combining them with fuel consumption and energy demands, they have
obtained the potential saves in polluting gasses (CO2 and NOx). Besides the reduction
in these gasses production, they were also able to show that bikes are a great resource for
urban planning, being of great support for public transports, particularly when it comes
to short trips, helping in reducing peak demands for different resources including space.
[46].
A Spanish study conducted in Barcelona, has analyzed the health benefits of replacing
car trips with bikes pr public transportation. The group has created 8 different scenarios
on the replacement of short and long car trips, estimating the relative risk of mortality
for the different modes of transportation. The study found that reducing car trips could
significantly reduce the number of deaths, with a reduction between 26.88 to 98.35 per
year, depending on the scenario but mainly traceable to reduced pollution and accidents
in the city. [47].
Similar positive results have also been achieved by another Spanish article, based on
surveys and record data of 2000 bikes from twelve different European BSS (Bike
Sharing System) This second study also explored the economic aspect, estimating
annual savings of 18 million euros for the twelve cities. [48].
More recent studies are also analysing and showing how bicycles are able to generate
economic profits for town halls, contributing in the appreciation of the interested areas,
being in fact a profitable investment.
A North American study focused on Toronto’s Bloor Street pilot project finding that bike
lanes have a positive impact on local economic activity, despite concerns from local
merchants about potential loss of customers due to loss of parking. The results were
achieved using a regression analysis to determine the bike lane’s effect on spending and
visit frequency and found an increase in monthly spending per customer, confirming the
economic suitability of bike lane installations in vibrant downtown retail streets and
encouraging the design and implementation of similar bike lane interventions in other
merchant-lined urban streets with similar visitor profiles [49].
Another North-American study focused in Pittsburgh examined the impact of
bike-sharing systems on the property market using the difference-in-differences method.
Difference-in-difference is a statistical technique used in econometrics that attempts to
mimic an experimental research design using observational study data, by studying the
differential effect of a treatment on a treatment group versus a control group’.
The study found that the presence of shared bike stations adds an average of $3,000 to
property values and increases rental prices. The increased property taxes also provide
22
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:31==
additional income for local governments concluding that shared bike systems can be a
potential solution to the negative impacts of urbanization and private automobiles [43].
While biking is generally considered safer than driving, small accidents are often
under-reported and can have a cumulative effect on the economy through decreased
productivity. A study conducted in Belgium aimed to estimate the costs of these minor
bicycle accidents and found that they are significantly underestimated. Minor bicycle
accidents are ones not involving death or heavily injured people,implying that possible
hospital visits last less than 24 hour. The average cost of these type of accidents is
estimated to be 841 euros, with productivity loss being the main component of the total
cost followed by potential healthcare costs and damages to objects. The authors
complains about the lack of these kind of data, highlighting the need for better data
sources and providing strong economical support [50].
2.7
Interest and roles in bike safety
To summarize the previous points, better health, positive environmental impact, and
economic benefits are all interest drivers that are changing people’s commutes in major
cities, particularly in Copenhagen. While biking may be still a better and safer option
than other means, an increase in traffic can translate in an increase in accidents, at least
in absolute terms, preventing new bikers to take the road and at the same time reducing
its positive impact. These factors combined are good driver for action but how can this
be implemented?
2.7.1
The case of an Insurance company
An insurance company provides financial protection to individuals or businesses against
risks such as accidents, theft, or damages. Their revenues comes from premiums paid
from their customers and using that money to pay for claims. As bike use grows, there
are two possible scenarios: either the number of customers matches or not the growth.
By analyzing changes in cycling patterns and insurance behavior of their customers,
insurance companies can adjust their products and pricing to better meet the needs of
their customers and improve profitability in either case. For example, they can develop
new products tailored to specific groups of cyclists or offer incentives for safe cycling.
Studying unreported bike crashes can provide valuable insights into the risk factors for
bike accidents and help insurance companies improve their underwriting and risk
assessment.
The new products could be designed, besides matching the needs, to persuade customers
in pursuing safer behaviors, putting in place a series of well-established actions. Some
common actions of the field that suits particularly well this kind of problems are:
Financial incentives
It is an economic incentive on personal health behavior. The effectiveness of these
practices in promoting healthy behaviors such as exercising, smoking cessation, and
weight loss has been largely proven. Targeted financial incentives can be an effective tool
for motivating individuals to engage in healthy behaviors, although the impact may vary
depending on the specific behavior being targeted and the characteristics of the
individuals involved [51].
Gamification
It is the application of game design elements in non-game settings to motivate and
engage people in desired behaviors. These game design elements can vary and be used to
influence health behavior changes in various ways. The theoretical frameworks that
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
23
==PAGE:32==
underpin gamification in health behavior change, such as self-determination theory,
social cognitive theory, and the trans-theoretical model, have been analyzed in a
theory-review article by Karlsruhe University. The review highlights the potential
benefits of gamification in promoting health behavior change, such as increased
engagement, motivation, and sustained behavior change [52].
Education and awareness
It means providing individuals with information and resources to increase their
knowledge and understanding of a specific behavior or issue. The purpose is to motivate
them to change their behavior by sharing necessary knowledge and skills to make
informed decisions and take action. This approach can be applied in various contexts
but healthy behaviors, environmental sustainability and social justice are between the
most common field of application. There are many educational approaches that can be
used to promote behavior change, such as workshops, seminars, online courses, and
educational campaigns [53].
2.7.2
Actions from governmental entities
Urban development and transportation planning are crucial aspects of sustainable urban
transport systems. Denmark has been successful in increasing bike traffic, with
Copenhagen being a prime example of an effective combination of strategies. This
success can be attributed to significant investment in dedicated infrastructure, soft
policy campaigns promoting cycling positive aspects, and actions to reduce hostile
elements. Reports on market-based strategies and policies that have been successful in
promoting bicycling in urban environments, particularly in Copenhagen. The city has
implemented physical infrastructure, comfort, and service-related measures to create
comfortable biking conditions for citizens. The history of cycling in Copenhagen
highlights the importance of integrative and multilevel governance, based on
consensus-guiding visions, to shape and foster development processes that transition a
city’s transport system. Copenhagen’s success in becoming the world’s best city for
bicycling can be attributed to clear political vision, infrastructure changes, the revival of
a historical bicycle culture, and the emergence of a common bicyclist identity [54].
Summary: Literature on bike accidents identifies common source elements.
Infrastructure related issues are between the most relevant features in most of the
research results with intersections and shared lanes being the most quoted root cause.
The rider profile is also in general a good determinant, with age and state being two
important factors quoted by most articles. Moreover, the papers agree in finding alone
falls as more common accounting for almost half of the falls. Dark hours and Speed are
also a common cause and traffic may also have a role as around 20% of crashes
involves more vehicles.
New type of sensors allows for different types of studies and accelerometers,
gyroscopes and GPS are between the most promising when comes to crash detection
and can be used monitoring systems or safety maps.
When using these devices, the formed database is no different from many other data
analysis cases. Data cleaning and variable reduction steps are always necessary to
improve the training phase of any Machine Learning methods. The multiple available
models are suited to different cases but their base functioning is similar and based on
statistics. There is no magic behind it and slight errors or changes in their parameters
can affect the final results. To avoid possible problems, testing and an adequate
validation is always necessary.
In the end, whether the results are, different existing practices can be applied to
24
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:33==
convert recommendations into practical actions. Particularly, an insurance company
can implement financial incentives and gamification as well as educate or aware its
customers toward best practices.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:35==
3
Methodology
3.1
Research Design
A case study design will be employed to investigate the effectiveness of fall detection
using observed data sources for bike, weather, and traffic conditions. This project
methodology can be divided in three phases:
• Discovery: A first series of tests and analysis of the bike data.
• Exploration: Data collection and experiment on different ML methods.
• Finalization: Selection of the definitive model and presentation techniques.
3.2
Discovery
This phase is the early stage of the project. The bike database has never been used before
for fall detection so during this phase I have conducted physical tests and analyzed the
resulting data to evaluate how they could be used for this purpose.
3.2.1
Testing and first data gathering
To understand how the data looked like and how I could use them to identify falls I
conducted a series of physical tests myself. Using a couple of lights, I have used an old
bike (Figure 3.1) to simulate falls. These simulations have been of three different types:
• Bike falls: letting the bike falling from a standing position or while in movement.
This has been done to see the different changes in X, Y and Z accelerations during a
fall.The main problem with this approach is the mismatch between data coming
from the sensors (detecting the bike fall) and phone data (detecting my
movements).
• Sensor falls: With a different approach, I let the sensor falling while being careful
of stopping, trying to replicate a fall stop speed. This data provides a less reliable
acceleration base.
• Normal journeys: a series of normal commutes to work / leisure to provide a
baseline of normal trips data.
Comparing crash test with normal journeys data (gathered using bike in Figure 3.2), I
explored possible methods to un-tangle the interesting features and detect the falls. I
could also get a real verified accident from FINDRS, to test my hypothesis.
In Figure 3.3 are presented the distribution of the axis accelerations as they appear from
the downloaded dataset. For a normal trip, the values follow a Normal distribution with
a mean value of 0 for Z and X axis and -1 for Y as it accounts for gravity. In case the light
is mounted in a different position, the gravity value gets split between the axis or is
accounted by another axis alone if the tilt is 90 degrees.
Magnitude
As presented in Data Source: The use of sensors, Magnitude is a useful formula used to
make Axis Accelerations data more understandable and useful for the CDA. To apply this
concept I created a specific function (Function 3.1) in using pandas and numpy libraries.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.1: Bike for Falls simulations
1
df['magnitude'] = np.power(np.power(df['x'],p)+np.power(df['y'],p)+np.power
(df['z'],p), 1/p)
Listing 3.1: Magnitude code
Function 2.1 is an extraction of D - Rides Analysis Code where it is applied.
Angles
Together, the three angles presented in Data Source: The use of sensors, provides a
complete description of an object’s orientation in space. They are commonly used in
applications such as aerospace, robotics, and virtual reality to track and control the
movement of objects.
This method cannot completely replace gyroscopes’ information but offer a good
representation of the body position at any given moment and it has been possible as the
data source (the lights) are firmly fixed to a rigid body (the bike), make the instant
variations far smaller than the ones coming from other sources (such as a phone in a
pocket or fixed on the biker) [25].
28
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.2: Bike for normal rides
1
2
def angles(db, group_col = 'rideid',window = 30, axis = ['x','y','z']):
3
pitch = np.arctan2(db['y'], np.sqrt(db['x']**2 + db['z']**2)) * 180 / np.pi
4
roll = np.arctan2(-db['x'], np.sqrt(db['y']**2 + db['z']**2)) * 180 / np.pi
5
yaw = np.arctan2(np.sqrt(db['x']**2 + db['y']**2), db['z']) * 180 / np.pi
6
7
# Add the angles to the dataframe
8
db['pitch'] = pitch.rolling(window).mean()
9
db['roll'] = roll.rolling(window).mean()
10
db['yaw'] = yaw.rolling(window).mean()
11
12
#Centering the angles to avoid errors for different mountings
13
db[['pitch','roll','yaw']] = db.groupby(group_col)[['pitch','roll','yaw']].
transform(lambda l: l - l.mean())
14
15
#Final Angle
16
db['angle'] = abs(db['pitch']) + abs(db['roll']) + abs(db['yaw'])
17
db['angle'] = db.groupby(group_col)['angle'].transform(lambda l: l - l.mean
())
18
19
return db[['pitch','roll','yaw', 'angle']]
20
21
df[['pitch','roll','yaw', 'angle']] = angles(df)
Listing 3.2: Angles code
Function 3.2 summarizes how they have been applied. The function is defined in
Appendix B - List of ad-hoc Python functions, and is applied in Appendix D - Rides
Analysis Code.
Road smoothness: R3
The existing theory presented in Section 2.1 -Bike accidents and safety supports that
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.3: Axis Accelerations distributions
street smoothness can be a defining factor in bike safety. During summer 2022, a
preliminary study using the same data of this research, was conducted by a DTU
researcher for LB Forsikring. The scope of this research was to analyze road smoothness
or quality from X, Y and Z accelerations. This analysis can be done with a revised version
of magnitude formula 2.1, presented in equation 3.1.
R3 =
1
q
0.02 · Pn=50
n=1 (Accx2 + Accy2 + Accz2)
(3.1)
Equation 3.1 calculates a one second average magnitude (summing the square values of
the acceleration for the 50 Hz readings) and divides the results by 50 (multiplying by
0.02) matching the original time frequency. This mean magnitude is then squared and
used as a dividend. Having one as numerator, allows for three possible results:
• R3 > 1: The bike is in a Stop position.
• R3->1: Smooth surface.
• R3 < 1: Rough surface.
Function 3.3, extracted from Appendix B - List of ad-hoc Python functions has been used
to apply it to the data.
1
def R3func(d):
2
rolling_window = 50
3
x = (d['x']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
4
y = (d['y']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
5
z = (d['z']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
6
d['R3'] = 1/np.sqrt(0.02*((x)+(y)+(z)))
7
return d
Listing 3.3: R3 function code
As it uses a 50 readings average, Function B is then applied on each ride group
singularly, to avoid using values from different rides as seen in Function 3.4, taken from
Appendix D - Rides Analysis Code.
30
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:39==
1
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
2
3
for name, group in grouped:
4
df.loc[group.index, 'R3'] = R3func(group)['R3']
Listing 3.4: R3 application code
3.2.2
Crash Detection Algorithm
As presented in- 2.2 - Data Source: The use of sensors, I have relied on a Crash
Detection Algorithm (CDA, also Fall Algorithm) to identify accidents.
The CDA I used is based on a series of flags, activated by different Threshold Algorithms
(presented in Data Source: The use of sensors as well), that together could spot a
dangerous event.
1
# Magnitude and Angle Trigger
2
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
3
4
for name, group in grouped:
5
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_mag'] = magnitude_fall(group, threshold=group['
magnitude'].mean()+df['magnitude'].std()*3)['fall_mag']
6
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_ang'] = np.where(group['angle'].abs() > 20, 1, 0)
7
8
#Speed and Magnitude Delta trigger
9
for i in df['rideid'].unique():
10
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_speed'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['speed'].
rolling(30).mean().shift(-30)
11
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_diff'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['magnitude'
].diff()
12
13
df['fall_speed'] = np.where(df['fall_speed']<=10 ,1, 0)
14
df['fall_diff'] = np.where((df['fall_diff']<1) & (df['fall_diff']>-1), 1,
0)
Listing 3.5: CDA triggers code
As shown in Function 3.5, I set a total of four different thresholds on four different
variables, that are activated independently when that element is triggered. The used
methods are:
• Speed: the speed value average of 30 sec must be below 5 km/h, not 0 as someone
could fall and move the bike. This will also be triggered whenever there is a stop.
• Magnitude: this value threshold has been set to 3 · σ(Magnitude) as this has been
proven to be the best on a series of tests. The specific magnitude_fall function is in
Appendix B.
• Angle: threshold of 20 degrees set after trial sessions.
• Difference: delta between two subsequent magnitude values must be 0 as there
should be no difference when the bike is still. This flag is a simple if statement, as
when delta is 0 the flag is 1.
One of the advantages of the threshold algorithm is its interpretability. The algorithm
produces a simple set of rules that can be easily understood and explained, making it
useful for applications where model interpretability is important.
1
#Fall flag
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
31
==PAGE:40==
2
df['fall_indicator'] = np.where((df['fall_ang'] == 1) & (df['fall_mag'] ==
1) & (df['fall_speed'] == 1) & (df['fall_diff'] == 1), 1, 0)
Listing 3.6: CDA code
When all four flags are triggered at the same time, a master flag is activated as shown in
Function 3.6.
3.3
Exploration: The data
In this phase I analyzed a 1-week bike trip data from FINDRS to test and improve my fall
algorithm as well as start testing the different Machine Learning techniques for variables
identification. I also gathered additional data for weather and traffic, following the
evidence from the literature review, suggesting these parameters can be related to
reported bike falls.
3.3.1
FINDRS bike rides
Starting from 2022, FINDRS has collected over 11,000 rides in Copenhagen and its
surroundings. Its gathering comes from the combination of its bike lights with a
smartphone app that together can provide location, speed, and axis acceleration with a
frequency of 50Hz of each ride. After a first contact with the company (Appendix A), I
was given a couple of lights for testing and through their website I could already
download and analyze my own trips. The downloaded data appears as in Table 3.1.
Variable
Description
Time
Starting Time of the Ride
Offset
Offset time to be added to the Time Variable to obtain the absolute time
Parked
If it is 1, it means that the bike is parked - still in testing
Lat
Latitude
Lon
Longitude
Altitude
Altitude
Speed
Speed
Accuracy
Accuracy of the GPS data
SpeedAccuracy
Reliability of the speed data
X
X Acceleration
Y
Y Acceleration
Z
Z Acceleration
DataID
Unique ID Value
Table 3.1: Bike Variables
After a first round with real case data, composed by 1 week of rides, Altitude was
removed to reduce the dataset dimension.
As there are 50 readings per seconds, there are approximately 50 · 60 = 300 readings per
minute. In a CSV file, each readings appear as a row, so every hour of rides takes around
300 · 60 = 18000 rows, equal to approximately 1MB. To facilitate the coming analysis of
several hours of rides, the file format has been changed to .parquet, a more space
efficient file format.
These data have been reduced to be treated in the Machine Learning model. For each
ride we are interested in some key values and not the specific second by second changes.
32
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:41==
Variable
Exported Value
RideID
Unique Ride ID number
Latitude
(
FallLatitude
if CDA assumes value 1
Avg.Latitude
otherwise
Longitude
(
FallLongitude
if CDA assumes value 1
Avg.Longitude
otherwise
Speed
→Average Speed of the ride.
R3
→Average R3 value of the ride.
Max Speed
→Maximum Speed reached during the ride.
Max R3
→Maximum R3 value of the ride.
Time
→Start time of the trip.
Table 3.2: Exported Variables
Rides with an excessive standard deviation in acceleration values (two times the average
standard deviation), excessive speeds (over 50 Km/h) or too slow average speed (below
6 Km/h) have been removed from the set. Also rides missing data for more than 30% of
the total ride time or excessively short rides (less than 10 GPS points) have been dropped
to avoid polluting data with incomplete information or ones referring to other situations
(such as pulling the bike or taking a train). Moreover, the data from FINDRS have been
removed of the first and last 200m of ride to guarantee anonymity. Table 3.2 contains
the extracted values for the Machine Learning Model, more on the treatment of these
data can be found in Appendix D - Rides Analysis Code.
3.3.2
DMI Weather historical Data
The source I have used, DMI - Danmarks Meteorologiske Institute (Danish
Meteorological Institute) [55], offers free access to their weather historical dataset
through an API. With this API it is possible to select the desired data. I have opted for
Klimadata for all Denmark and filtering them in a second moment through commune
codes [56]. Every request has a limit of 30.000, equivalent to roughly 2 years. I have
opted for keeping only Copenhagen data even if there are more communes involved in
the capital region as the weather differences to the interest of this project can be
neglected. The dataset variables after request are in Table 3.3.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
33
==PAGE:42==
Variable
New name
Description
calculatedAt
Time
Time of observation
temp_grass
Ground Temp
Temperature at Ground level
min_temp
Min Temp
Minimum daily Temperature
mean_temp
Avg Temp
Average Daily Temperature
max_temp__date
Max Temp
Maximum Daily Temperature
no_frost_days
Freezing days
Number of days without frost
acc_precip
Acc Rain
Accumulated precipitation on the ground
max_precip_30m
Max prec last 30m
Maximum precipitation in the last 30 min
no_days_acc_precip_01
Rainy days
Number of Days of rain
leaf_moisture
Ground Moisture
Ground moisture
mean_cloud_cover
Cloudiness
Sky cloud cover
snow_depth
Snow
Snowfall level
mean_wind_dir
Wind Dir
Average wind direction
mean_wind_speed
Avg Wind Speed
Average wind speed
Table 3.3: DMI Variables
Some days have an hour by hour observation but on average DMI reports just 5 readings
per day. A one hour time frequency, is a reasonable time frame trade-off for the three
datasets between precision and storage. of reported bike rides and traffic, I have
restructured the weather data using a built in Pandas feature. Pandas is a Python library
commonly use to handle databases, it comes with data cleaning and pre-processing
functions to handle missing data. More specifically I relied on .fillna() that allows to fill
empty values. There are different filling options, I opted for the front-fill method that
fills by propagating the last valid observation forward to the next missing value.
Figure 3.4: Weather Data Fill
Figures 3.4 summarizes the steps of this process, its application is available in Appendix
J - Machine Learning Models Code.
More on the specifics of extractions and data cleaning is available in Appendix F -
Weather Code.
34
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:43==
3.3.3
Traffic Information
As seen in Bike accidents and safety, traffic could be one of the factors leading to
accidents and LB Forsikring has shown particular interest in exploring this aspect
(Appendix A).
This kind of data is rare and not easy to access for bikes. For this study I decided to
examine existing information to evaluate a preliminary influence of traffic.
Specifically, I used two different datasets, one containing traffic for the different days
over the years and another containing hour by hour traffic.
Annual and Weekly Data
In the report [1], Vejedirektoratet summarizes their readings on traffic across the
country and cities of motor vehicles and bicycles. From their website website[57] is also
available a weekly traffic index, reporting the following indications:
• The congestion index is a simple method for calculating the development of
congestion on the Strategic Road Network (level 1), which consists of 1,130 km of
roads (915 km of motorway and 215 km of country road).
• The congestion index is calculated from measured travel speeds and calculates
the number of km that have critical congestion (travel speed less than 40% of the
free speed) in a 15-minute period.
• In the statements at daily level, a typical weekday in 2019 is set to index=100 and
for the weekly statement, a typical week in 2019 (without holidays) is set to
index=100.
• Due to gaps in the data, some days will be indicated with ”-”. For the weeks that
have days without data, the weekly index for the missing days is set equal to the
average of comparable days in the same week.
Regarding the last point, gaps have been filled using front fill method seen before, using
then the following day value.
This traffic index is not optimal as it is based on motor vehicles road traffic but follows
similar patterns to bicycles’ ones in Copenhagen as observed in [58, pp. 33, 86]and [1,
p. 26].
In Figures 3.5 and 3.6 are presented the annual and weekly patterns obtained using
these data.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.5: Annual traffic distribution
Figure 3.6: Weekly bike traffic
Daily Data
The source for hourly patterns in Copenhagen has been taken from a town hall report [9,
p. 41]. The pattern is shown in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Daily bike traffic
Traffic Data Merge
36
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:45==
These two datasets have been merged as shown in Table 3.4 using MS Excel.
Time
00 AM - 01 AM
...
11 PM - 00 AM
Day
Value
0.5%
...
1%
Monday
16%
=Time % ·Day % ·Week Avg. Index
...
= 0.001 ·0.16 ·Week Avg. Index
...
...
...
...
...
Sunday
7%
”
...
”
Table 3.4: Hourly Traffic Index
3.4
Exploration: Data Analysis
To analyze the data, I have followed a series of common best practices for data analysis,
according to what shown in 2.3.1. The complete code with all steps is in Appendix J -
Machine Learning Models Code.
To improve the location detail, I created two new features from the combination of
latitude and longitude data.
GPS: is the combination of latitude and longitude in a single coordinates value. This
value contains a high precision.
Area: each GPS location is assigned a value depending on its macro-area. These areas
are either Copenhagen’s neighbourhoods or Denmark’s communes (for city’ s
surroundings and Frederiksberg). Copenhagen’s city hall offers a map layer for its
official neighbourhood, freely accessible on Opendata archive website [59]. For the
commune’s map I haven’t found any government resource but a json file layer was
available in a private GitHub repository with free access [60]. Following the steps
applied in Appendix I - Data Preparation, I then created this new variable containing the
names of these locations.
3.4.1
Categorization
The first step I applied is to convert some variables from continues to categorical.
Categories are more relevant in different scenarios, particularly when we do not expect
the unit change of the variable to have the same impact on the target variable. Taking for
example the temperature, a change in 1 Celsius between 0 and +1 is much more relevant
than the same unit change between 20 and 21 Celsius.
GPS and areas values are also categorized using sklearn .preprocessing.LabelEncoder
command that assigns a different value to each different element as shown in Tables 3.6
and 3.7.
Coordinates
new value
(55.6823, 12.5717)
1
(55.7038, 12.5325)
2
(55.6696, 12.5891)
3
(55.6823, 12.5717)
1
Table 3.6: Encoded Coordinates
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
37
==PAGE:46==
Max Speed











1
if max_speed ≤max_speed.quantile(0.33)
2
if max_sp.quantile(0.33) < max_sp ≤max_sp.quantile(0.66)
3
if max_speed > max_speed.quantile(0.66)
0
otherwise
Speed











1
if speed ≤speed.quantile(0.33)
2
if speed.quantile(0.33) < speed ≤speed.quantile(0.66)
3
if speed > speed.quantile(0.66)
0
otherwise
Day
(
0
if day ∈[0, 1, 2, 3]
1
otherwise
Hour





















1
if hour < 6 and hour > 22
2
if 6 ≤hour ≤10
3
if 10 < hour ≤15
4
if 15 < hour ≤18
5
if 18 < hour ≤22
0
otherwise
Week















1
if 8 ≤week ≤21
2
if 21 < week < 34
3
if 34 ≤week < 47
4
if week ≤8 or week ≥47
0
otherwise
Min Temp











1
if Min Temp ≤−5
2
if −5 < Min Temp ≤5
3
if Min Temp > 5
0
otherwise
Snow
(
1
if Snow > 0
0
otherwise
Max prec last 30m
(
1
if Max prec last 30m > 0
0
otherwise
Freezing days
(
1
if Freezing days > 0
0
otherwise
Ground Moisture















1
if Ground Moist ≤quantile(Ground Moist, 0.25)
2
if quantile(Gr Moist, 0.25) < Gr Moist ≤quantile(Gr Moist, 0.50)
3
if quantile(Gr Moist, 0.50) < Gr Moist ≤quantile(Gr Moist, 0.75)
4
if Ground Moist > quantile(Ground Moist, 0.75)
0
otherwise
Table 3.5: Variables Categorization
38
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:47==
Coordinates
new value
(Frederiksberg)
1
(Faste Batteri)
2
(Amagerbro Vest)
3
(Frederiksberg)
1
Table 3.7: Encoded areas
Table 3.5 reports the different created categories and their rules.
The variables kept as continuous are then:
• R3 and R3Max: for the road smoothness.
These features are measured with high precision and contains many unique values. In
these cases it make sense to treat them as continuous variable as this could allow the
model to capture subtle relationships between them and the target variable.
Figure 3.8: Data Preparation Methodology scheme
Figure 3.8 summarizes this first steps of the methodology.
3.4.2
Imbalanced Datasets
As the final dataset will not have an equal number of rides with and without falls, I have
decided to use a Resampling Method. Between the options presented in Section 2.3.1 -
Data Acquisition and Analysis, it is the most suited. Anomaly detectionmay not be a
good alternative as falls may just be rare and not abnormal. Also Cost sensitive learning
may be inadequate as in this case there is no preference between false positives and false
negatives. Thus, I choose Resampling, and specifically Oversampling, as this research
does not benefit from a vast dataset and removing observations (as done by using
Undersampling) may cause a poorer classification model. The data have been
resampled to reach a proportion of 1.2% True cases (Falls) from the initial 0.6% using a
specific Python Library called imblearn [61].The process is applied in Appendix J -
Machine Learning Models Code.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
39
==PAGE:48==
3.4.3
Features Selection
After resampling, I applied a Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) to select the most
relevant features for each model. As presented in the literature, it is crucial to select the
correct model when applying RFE. Common Feature Selection models such as Lasso and
Ridge are not suited for skewed datasets and thus I have opted for different selection
methods for each different model applied. Particularly I decided to use the same
decision model as the Machine Learning method applied afterwards. As the final aim is
to select the most relevant features, this seemed the most straightforward process.
The application has been done using sklearn package feature_selection.MSE [62] with
a desired number of features of 8. I choose this number arbitrarily after a series of
selection as it reached a good trade off between model performance and selection.
The complete procedure can be found in Appendix J - Machine Learning Models Code.
3.4.4
Prediction Model
To correctly evaluate the different models I have divided between a train and a test set
with a proportion of 70 - 30. As the dataset was relatively small, I skipped the creation of
a validation set and relied on Cross - Validation for the hyperparameter tuning.
I have compared four different Machine Learning models to the reduced dataset to
evaluate the best classificator for this analysis.
• Logistic Regression: for simplicity, interpretability and benchmarking.
• Gradient Booster: as one type of Decision Tree.
• Random Forest: as an alternative to Gradient Boost.
• Neural Network: to explore a not-oversampled model.
Logistic Regression, Gradient Booster and Random Forest have been applied using
sklearn Python library with a random_state = 42. This value does not carry any
peculiarity but using the same between all models and all their different changes allows
to set the seed for the random number generator and ensure reproducibility and
consistency of results across multiple runs. Both Random Forest and Gradient Boost has
been applied with nestimators = 30 and maxdepth = 10 after a series of test and to limit
possible overfitting. For Gradient Boosting, n_estimators refers to the number of
boosting stages while for Random Forest specifies the number of decision trees that will
be used in the ensemble. max_depth defines for both the maximum depth or level of
each decision tree in the ensemble.
In an attempt to avoid oversampling, I have developed a simple Neural Network using
the keras [63] Python library with the following structure:
• Input Layer with relu activation function and 32 nodes.
• Dropout of 0.2 to reduce overfit.
• 1st Layer with relu function and 16 nodes.
• Second Dropout Layer.
• Output Layer with sigmoid function.
More info on the Neural Network structure and the other Models application can be
found in the relative code in J - Machine Learning Models Code.
40
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:49==
The combination of Oversampling with a Machine Learning model is also supported by
[31] Imbalanced learn presented in 2.3 - Data Analysis.
Figure 3.9: Prediction Model Methodology scheme
Figure 3.9 shows schematically the steps followed in this Section to carry out the
different Machine Learning Methods.
3.5
Finalization
In this final part I got the comprehensive dataset of all bike trips, tested the different
models to select the best one for the research.
3.5.1
Validation
Following the procedures presented in 2.4.3 - Model validation, I tuned the different
models using Cross Validation. Once the tuning was done I used the test set for the final
evaluation and the comparison with the other models.
The used test set has a size of 30% the initial dataset (achieved with the sklearn function
.model_selection.train_test_split).
The available dataset does not have a sufficient number of true observations (falls) to
allow for a dedicated Validation Set. This ulterior split could indeed result in one of the
set not having any true observation or single digit ones, making them unreliable.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
41
==PAGE:50==
I then preferred to rely on Cross Validation using 10 splits (or ten groups) on the training
set, thorough the s_val_score function of .model_selection.train_test_split package.
3.5.2
Features importance
As explained in the 2.4.2 - Structure learning, all models calculate weights to make
predictions. All methods offers a built in command to see these weights. Using the
libraries and resources presented in this project, for Gradient Boost and Random Forest
this is .feature_importances_, for Logistic Regression .coeff_ and for the Neural
Network .get_weights(). This built in functions already takes into account differences
connected to the scale of the variable and normalize the results to one, allowing direct
comparison of the variables using this single value. This process is found in Appendix J -
Machine Learning Models Code.
Figure 3.10: Finalization Methodology scheme
Figure 3.10 shows schematically the steps followed in this Section to conclude the
methodology part.
3.5.3
Visualization
To analyze, edit and present the data I have relied on MS Excel and Python. The first for
presenting initial sets and existing findings, such as the traffic, that could be organized
in simple tables.
For bike trips, Axes Accelerations and all visualizations of elaborated data I have used
Python. This has been necessary firstly due to the amount of data that could not be
manipulated in Excel but also to provide better and more advanced graphics. Python
comes with a vast variety of library for data visualization. For charts I used Matplotlib
[64] and seaborn [65] while for visualization that needed maps I have used Folium [66].
To treat DataFrames I used Pandas[67] and Numpy [68] for mathematical calculations.
Map of the city relies on towns and neighbourhoods of Copenhagen areas. The first has
been retrieved from a GitHub Repository [60] while the second is available in the Danish
national archive OpenData, directly uploaded by the Copenhagen townhall [59].
The Charts presented in this Chapter, comes from the codes in Appendixes C - Test
Rides Code, D - Rides Analysis Code and H - Traffic Code.
42
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:51==
3.5.4
Validity and Reliability
The selected methods are widely used and accepted in the literature and the reliability of
the methods has been established in various studies.
It is important to note that no methodology is entirely fool-proof, and there may be
sources of error. For instance, the sensor used to collect the data could introduce errors,
and the algorithms used to identify safety issues may sometimes misclassify incidents.
To mitigate such errors, I have taken measures such as performing data cleaning and
using multiple algorithms to cross-check the results.
Data analysis methods are subject to their own limitations and biases. Therefore, I have
employed a rigorous and transparent analysis process to ensure the validity and
reliability of our findings. Additionally, I have used established statistical methods to
test the significance of our results.
While there may be limitations to the methodology, I am confident in its validity and
reliability, and believe that it provides a sound basis for the findings presented in this
thesis.
Summary: According to the existing theory, the data have been complemented with
what is often found to be correlated with bike falls. These elements are principally bad
meteorological conditions, darkness, traffic and rider status. Besides the different
data, also the tools applied to this research have been presented, from the treatment of
data source as the sensors and the specific websites. After preparing the data four
different prediction methods have been used: three methods (Logistic Regression,
Gradient Boosting and Random Forests) have been applied in parallel using RFE to
select 8 best features and define their importance afterwards. A Neural Network has
also been applied on a clean set for comparison.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:53==
4
Results
Here are presented the results for each step of the project. The Sections are the same of
the Methodology: Discovery, Exploration and Finalization.
4.1
Discovery
Following the series of personal tests and Data cleaning on these gathered data, I have
finalized a first round of visualization to have a first look at the different selected
parameters.
Figure 4.1: Axis Accelerations and Magnitude
In Figure 4.1, the differences between accelerations and magnitude during a ride and a
fall are presented. In the chart, values by seconds are in a column form while an one
minute average for each of them is plotted as a line
Figure 4.2: Angles
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
45
==PAGE:54==
In Figure 4.2 the same concept has been applied to Angles. Here is highlighted how this
new variable is particularly useful to spot falls.
Figure 4.3: R3 vs. Magnitude
Figure 4.3 shows the differences between Magnitude and R3. It is clear how the first
enhances instantaneous changes, particularly the ones during a fall while the second is
more constant, being a better representation of the general smoothness of the street.
The main take-away from this stage is that there are significant changes in X, Y and Z
values during a fall.
4.2
Exploration: The Data
The results of the changes on the datasets follows.
4.2.1
FINDRS Bike rides
Some available variables have been identified as not interesting from the beginning.
These are:
• Altitude: the research is based in Copenhagen; small geographic area flatness
makes this data unnecessary.
• Accuracy and Speedaccuracy: they refer to GPS and speed data accuracy. This
information is gathered from the phone; therefore, their accuracy is mainly
undermined by bad GPS connection. The data with the best accuracy for this study
must be the axes accelerations. Speed and location are also useful but secondary
and I prefer to keep bad quality instead of creating lacks in the dataset.
At this point it is possible to analyze the distribution of rides over time.
46
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.4: Daily rides pattern
Figure 4.4 shows the evolution of the rides in the dataset on a daily base and compares
them with traffic trends from national reports presented in the literature and used for
the congestion index. The two behaviours are very similar.
Figure 4.5: Weekly rides pattern
Similarly, Figure 4.5 shows the evolution of the rides in the dataset on a weekly base and
compares them with the traffic trends, again the two behaviours are very similar.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.6: Yearly rides pattern
Figure 4.6 does the same with a yearly base and compares them with the traffic trends,
but this time there are significant differences.
4.2.2
Crash Detection Algorithm
The result is a total of 11,829 rides and 78,403 ridden Km. The fall flag has been
activated 82 times but this can be connected to 70 different falls. This translates to a
share of 0.6% accidents per thousand Km and has remained pretty stable across the
project, within a small interval (0.59% - 0.62%) on different periods analysis.
Each trigger of the Algorithm is activated in:
• Difference: 11,829 rides.
• Speed: 10,244 rides.
• Magnitude: 6,862 rides.
• Angle: 6,020 rides.
Difference appears to be the most triggered threshold. Indeed FINDRS app stops
recording once the bike appears to be still, thus this value is triggered whenever the bike
stops for more than a second. Also the speed trigger is activated over 10,000 times,
almost twice the triggers for the last two parameters as of course its value is one
whenever there is no speed change. Even if these first two values seems to be triggered
whenever, their presence is still relevant to assure that the more specific triggers are
related to a potential fall or highly risky situation and not to, for example, a sudden fall
of the bike light.
Magnitude and Angle are then activated just over 6,000 times, with angle being the most
strict of all flags, giving the necessary precision to the CDA.
4.2.3
Final Traffic Set
Following the steps presented in Chapter 3.3.3 - Traffic Information I obtained a traffic
index value for every hour of every day- of the year. More on the results of the single
steps can be found in Appendix G - Traffic Data Preparation.
For better usability, I have divided the indexes into 4 categories presented in Table 4.1.
48
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:57==
Value
Description
Rule
1
Not Congested
Index <= 20
2
Slightly congested
20 < Index <= 55
3
Congested
55 < Index <= 100
4
Extremely Congested
Index > 100
Table 4.1: Congestion Level
These index values have been chosen as they are close to the weekly dataset quantile
distributions obtaining the traffic Index distribution of Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Count of moments by Traffic Index
As we would expect, most of the hours of the day are not busy at all or little busy
(categories 1 and 2).
4.2.4
Complete Dataset
The three datasets have been merged into one for the prediction case. Every bike ride
observation will then have the information in 4.2.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
49
==PAGE:58==
Feature
Source
Description
GPS
Elaborated from Bike Data
Location
Area
Elaborated from Bike Data
Neighbourhoods or city value
R3
Bike Data
Street Smoothness
speed
Bike Data
congestion
Traffic Data
Traffic Level
day
All
hour
All
week
All
Min Temp
Weather Data
Minimum Temperature
Snow
Weather Data
Snowfall
Max prec last 30 min
Weather Data
Recent precipitation
Freezing Days
Weather Data
Days below 0 degrees
Ground Moisture
Weather Data
Fall
Bike Data
Table 4.2: Final Dataset Features
Compared to the initial different sets there are also some differences, For example the
congestion index has now a different distribution presented in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Count of rides by Traffic Index
Indeed, as the congestion is a reflex of how many people transits in a place, we expect
more rides to happen during busy hours.
4.3
Exploration: Data Analysis
In Figure 4.9 are summarized distribution of selected variables.
50
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.9: Selected Variables Distributions
The Correlations between variables before categorization is presented in Figure 4.10
Figure 4.10: Initial Correlations
As it can be seen there are not major correlations, particularly not on with the target
variable (Falls).
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
51
==PAGE:60==
In Table 4.3 are available some initial variables’ statistics.
Variable
Mean
Std
Min
25%
75%
Max
R3
1.006
0.064
0.523
0.986
1.024
4.926
speed
13.411
4.017
0.07
10.597
16.06
43.285
congestion
2.932
0.952
1
2
4
4
day
2.475
1.79
0
1
4
6
hour
13.348
4.798
1
8
17
24
week
30.417
15.145
1
15
42
52
Min Temp
2.995
5.56
-10
0
5
26
Snow
0.006
0.11
0
0
0
4
Max prec last 30m
0.027
0.32
0
0
0
18
Freezing days
0.024
0.335
0
0
0
12
Ground Moisture
6.212
76.097
-61
0
1
5116
Table 4.3: Dataset General Information
4.3.1
Categorization
After the application of the categories as presented in the methodology section, the
distributions appears as in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Categories Distributions
Looking at the location features, GPS and area it can be noticed how GPS, even if allows
for repeated values, has a relatively similar number of rides for all locations. On the other
hand, area has significant differences between the different neighbourhoods or cities.
We can have some more insights on these two different variables, starting with Figure
4.12 showing on the map the GPS locations in the database.
52
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.12: Rides Locations map
Figure 4.13 offers a closer look to the city area.
Figure 4.13: Rides Locations in Copenhagen
Figures 4.14 and 4.15 show the density of rides in each different area.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.14: Rides map
Figure 4.15: Copenhagen Rides map
Table 4.4, reporting areas with the highest and lowest numbers of rides.
54
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:63==
Area
Rides
Hvidovre
602
Guldbergskvarteret/Panum/Ravnsborggade
487
Stefansgade/Nørrebroparken/Lundtoftegade
484
Frederiksberg
461
Valby syd
447
...
...
Helsingør
9
Egedal
2
Køge
1
Furesø
1
Tingbjerg
1
Table 4.4: Rides by area
As it can be seen in Figure 4.14, there are also rides outside the city and its surroundings
even if the majority of these is concentrated within this limit. In both pictures there is
also a single white dot with red circle, this is a normal ride that has no area attribute due
to low precision of its coordinates. The identified falls are reported with a black and
white dot. These last one are much more frequent in the city area, as enhanced by the
heat map in Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16: Falls Heatmap
The new correlation matrix after categorization is in Figure 4.17a
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Categories Correlations
(b) Correlations Post Oversampling
Figure 4.17: Comparison of Correlations
Again, there is no special correlation with the target variable. The same happens in 4.17b
which has been done on the dataset after applying oversampling, in this case, particularly
correlations with the target variable have changed but the magnitude is negligible.
Other than that, has emerged a pretty strong correlation between Min Temp and Ground
Moisture.Slighter ones have also appeared between day and congestion and between
Min Temp and week, suggesting that categorization has helped in highlighting patterns
in the data.
4.3.2
Imbalanced Dataset
The skewed nature of the datasets, with 1 true value of the target variable every 200
observations (0.6%), poses a significant challenge. Following the methodology, I have
then pursued the Oversampling application, noticing that even a small over sampling
and an adequate model could achieve good results. After evaluating different options, I
opted for an Oversample to artificially increase the number of positives to 1.2% (or two
times the real ones).
4.3.3
Features Selection
As said in the methodology, this step has been carried individually between the three
methods, possibly selecting different relevant features for the final mode. The 8
variables selected by the three processes are presented in 4.5
56
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:65==
Variable
Gradient Boost
Random Forest
Logistic Reg.
GPS
✓
✓
✓
Area
✓
✓
✓
R3
✓
✓
✓
speed
✓
✓
✓
congestion
✓
✓
✓
day
✓
✓
hour
✓
✓
✓
week
✓
✓
✓
Min Temp
Snow
Max prec last 30min
Freezing Days
Ground Moisture
✓
Table 4.5: Features Selection
As it can be observed, there is a strong similarity between the models when it comes to
relevant variables. Particularly, Location (GPS and Area), R3, Speed and congestion are
selected by all models. Time and weather also have similar patterns, for the exception of
day and ground moisture variables in the Random Forest selection, time reference is
preferred to the weather information.
4.3.4
Prediction Model
In Table 4.6 is shown the different Models scores for different metrics.
Metric
Logistic Reg.
Random Forest
Gradient Boost
Neural Net.
Accuracy
0.987
0.990
0.990
0.995
Precision
0
1.0
0.576
0
Recall
0
0.235
0.745
0
F1 Score
0
0.381
0.650
0
Table 4.6: Models Scores
From the results is clear Accuracy is not a valid parameter for this research as it had
been argued in the previous Chapters. It even evaluates the best model as the worst as it
attempts to actually predict the values, making more total mistakes than the other
models. I decided to still report it to better appreciate the results differences between the
models.
Logistic Regression
With an f1-score of 0.0. This method requires significantly higher level of oversampling
to obtain even slight result (in a test I could reach an f1-score of 0.3 using a 50-50
positive to negative distribution of falls). As it is my intent to avoid problems that may
surge abusing oversampling, I have avoided this path and opted for other models. This
result is anyway useful for benchmark and to appreciate the benefits of using a mode
adapt model to the case.
Neural Network
Also, the test using a NN without oversampling has not been successful. This model has
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
57
==PAGE:66==
an f1-score of 0.0 too. Disposing of a rather limited set of data, I cannot fully appreciate
NN capabilities. It may be that more sophisticated network than the one I tried to apply
may reach interesting results. On the other hand, this may imply significantly higher
processing learning time and computational power, moreover, NN are more difficult to
interpret than classic ML learning method.
Decisions Trees
Both Gradient Boost and Random Forest are able to achieve some results using a very
small over sample, Gradient Boost ones particularly are very good and do not appear
overfitting under all circumstances.
Gradient Boost achieves better scores for both F1-score and cross validation. An
interesting aspect is that at the increase of the rides base, Gradient Boosting scores have
improved, while Random Forests’ have worsened. Another slight difference between the
two model is the false positive vs false negative ratio. Random Forest has an overall
worse performance. It is also relevant to note that its precision is exactly 1.0. When such
score is reached it could mean that the model is overfitting or not performing correctly
anyway.
4.4
Finalization
In this final part I examined the best model on the complete dataset and evaluated the
results.
4.4.1
Validation
One last validation parameter to evaluate between Gradient Boost and Random Forest is
Cross-Validation as a better overall score may be the result of overfitting.
Cross-Validated F1 score for the Gradient Boost is 0.737 versus 0.372 for the Random
Forest. even if this parameter is much better for the random forest, the Gradient Boost is
confirmed to be the best method once again. Also, the coherence between normal and
cross validations, is a good indication of a good model and unlikely overfit. The best
model is the Gradient Booster in combination with the oversample presented before.
Figure 4.18: Gradient Boost Confusion Matrix
Figure 4.18, presents the complete results of the model, in particular we can see that
58
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:67==
there are:
• True Negatives: 2933
• True Positives: 27
• False Positives: 13
• False Negatives: 9
4.4.2
Features Importance
Each model has elaborated its own weights for the features. For the final evaluations I
only considered the scores of the best performing model, the Gradient Boost, which
results are shown in Table 4.7.
Variable
Value
R3
0.487
GPS
0.401
area
0.036
speed
0.031
hour
0.023
congestion
0.01
week
0.007
day
0.005
Table 4.7: Features Importance
GPS and Area has already been partially analyzed in the Section regarding categorization
in this Chapter.
R3 can be explored further using Figure 4.19. This map has been obtained using the
average value of R3 of rides in each area.
Figure 4.19: R3 map
Figure 4.19 colors goes from brown (roughest surfaces) to blue (smoothest). From the
map we can see that the areas have similar smoothness behaviours ranging from a light
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
59
==PAGE:68==
brown to orange for most zones.
Figure 4.20: R3 map for all towns
Zooming out with figure 4.20, the city surroundings present values that are closer to the
extremities (brown and yellow). This can be the reflection of the rides for each area,
where most rides in the city center can diminish the effect of singular streets or riders
while in the peripheries, values are more subjected to isolated events.
60
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:69==
5
Analysis and Discussion
Following the results, a series of in depth analysis and discussion for each part can be
made. This chapter is structured to explore the main component with the following
order:
• Bike data and Crash Detection Algorithm, explores the results of the falls in the
dataset.
• Models scores, argues pros and cons of the used methods and how alternatives
have been evaluated.
• Feature importance, discusses the different features and their importance
meaning.
• Limitations, explores the project boundaries and how they can be improved for
future works.
5.1
Bike data and Crash Detection Algorithm
This part of the study is the at the root of the project as mis-detection can direct to false
representation of reality.
The designed algorithm aims to generally spot accidents and risky situations while
maintaining a conservative detection thanks to the type of flags and their thresholds and
appears to be successful. There is no parameter to establish if this is a conservative or
generous representation of the falls but we can compare it with the currently reported
ones and some existing theory.
Following the Accident Triangle [69] developed by Herbert William Heinrich in 1931, we
assume that every 300 accidents with no injuries (un-reported for this case) there will be
29 injuries (reported accidents) and 1 major injury or death (still reported). An updated
version of this theory [70], assumes instead that every 600 near misses there are 30
minor injury (damage is involved), 10 serious injuries (requires first aid) and one death.
Official numbers for Copenhagen from [11] introduced in Chapters 1 - Introduction and
2.1 - Bike accidents and safety can be divided by seriousness.
The results, shown in Figure 5.1, do not follow patterns expected from the theory and it
is also interesting to note how in recent years, the number of severe accidents exceeds
the number of non severe one. This difference may be caused by choices on how to
categorize Minor and Severe injuries, but the trend from the past and the warning from
2.1 - Bike accidents and safety, signalling a lack of minor crashes, leads to think that
these numbers are missing a consistent share of less severe crashes.
Converting year 2019 in numbers, we have Table 5.1.
All
All
Minor
Severe
Death
Number
412
154
254
4
Share (per 1000 Km)
0.28
0.105
0.173
0.003
Table 5.1: Reported Accidents Proportion
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.1: Accidents by Type
In this research, 70 falls have been identified on a total of 78’403 ridden Km, translating
to a ratio of 0.89 falls per 1000 Km. This number would convert to 1 death (from the
reported numbers) every 327 falls, a ratio very close to the one proposed by Heinrich of 1
major injury and eventually death every 300 accidents with no injury.
These results are thus a good base for future projects as they offer a solid ground for
more specific studies, significantly improving the current situation on less severe
accidents. In coming research it will be possible to test different scenarios using
appropriate crash tests to stress an make more sensible the algorithm and differentiate
between different level of severity.
5.2
Models scores
What the results of the different methods tell us about their choice, the case and the
results.
The results of the different models are in line with the related literature with Decision
Trees methods being the most suitable kind of model for this classification problem. As
seen before, a Logistic Regression, using the same resample method only achieves an
f1-score of 0. However, the major role of Linear Regression in this project, was to offer a
benchmark and as a check on the effect of oversampling. As it has been structured, the
model was unlikely to reach good results (if any) using Linear Regression. Thus, a
positive outcome would have raised an alarm on the process and, most likely, reported
Oversampling abuse. This method indeed requires a much larger oversample (True
cases = 30% of the datasets or roughly 60 times the initial observations) to reach any
result (f1-score greater than 0).
The designed Neural Networks results are also not successful, a more advanced structure
62
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:71==
could have improved the results but creating an ad-hoc network can be an extensive
work and the results are not secured. Another approach could have been applying the
Neural Network to the oversampled dataset as the other models, but I both techniques
brings high risks of overfitting.
Decisions Trees, already achieved good results from the early stages and are of easier
interpretation compared to Neural Networks, making this strategy tempting. Both
implemented Decision Tree based model achieve good results with a low oversample.
Their results can be affected by different size of train and test splits, supporting the
choice for cross-validations, and suggesting that oversampling may be needed mainly to
reach a minimum number of true observations in each set.
This idea is supported by a series of tests using Under sampling. As explained in the
Literature review, this technique removes false observations instead of duplicating true
ones, with the same objective of reaching a new true-false observation share.
Undersampling is less likely to overfit the model but at the expense of information
coming from the false observations. A resample reduction to reach a truth share of 1.2%
(as the one using oversampling) managed to reach some results, even if less promising
but reducing the set further, pursuing higher shares of true observations, ended in worse
predictions (contrary to what happens using oversampling), being the exact
manifestation of information loss.
Metric
Value
Cross Validation
0.475
Precision
0.321
Recall
0.360
F1-score
0.340
Table 5.2: Undersampling Results
In Table 5.2 are reported results using Undersampling in combination with Gradient
Boost. Another positive outcome of the test, is features importance results shown in
Table 5.3, that are similar to the ones obtained using Oversampling.
Variable
Value
GPS
0.341
R3
0.336
area
0.071
speed
0.048
congestion
0.02
day
0.125
hour
0.035
week
0.025
Table 5.3: Undersampling Features Importance
Good cross-validation and consistent results along the project are other two signs
supporting Decision Trees are good performers in this classification. Between the two
models, Gradient Boost ends up being a better choice compared to Random Forest. In
general, Gradient Boosters outperforms Random Forests when dealing with imbalanced
detests but Random Forest are better at outliers’ detection, making both interesting for
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
63
==PAGE:72==
this preliminary research. Gradient Booster better performance, may then be an
indication that falls are rare but not abnormal. This may also lead to think that, as seen
in the results, the falls are more likely to be the rare effect of a series of common
situations, such as bad roads, instead of being the effect of a sudden exceptional event,
such as heavy rain.
The used models have avoided a series of common practices for data preparation,
particularly Normalization and Categories variables conversion to binaries. This choice
is directly connected to the initial idea that the most reliable models would have been the
Decision Trees. These algorithms, can handle categorical variables directly without
explicit encoding. These algorithms can naturally learn splits on categorical features
during tree construction, so creating dummies is not necessary.
Interpenetration of the Variables and their importance
The model scores are an indication of how much of the model is explained by the single
variable. This is useful to compare the results and the features but do not give a direct
idea of how a feature change impacts the model, meaning that in the results is not shown
how variables’ change impacts the model.
As explained in the literature, classic Decision Trees methods such as Random Forest
and Gradient Boost, are based on simple splitting criteria. These criteria, such as Gini
impurity or information gain, evaluate the purity or the amount of information provided
by each variable independently. The decision tree algorithm recursively splits the data
based on these criteria, without explicitly considering the relative importance or weight
of each variable.
The idea behind decision trees is to find the most informative variables that effectively
partition the data and create distinct subsets with homogeneous outcomes. By
recursively splitting the data based on these variables, the decision tree can learn
complex decision boundaries and make predictions.
Variation and extensions of decision tree algorithms, can provide ways to incorporate
variable weights but for the matter of this study other problems would have surged.
Particularly, even if weights were available it would have been difficult to relate them to
GPS and area, where their encoded number do not reflect a specific change in the reality.
Moreover, weighting variables in a decision tree could also potentially introduce bias or
distort the learning process.
Ultimately, the goal of this project was to find out which variables are best at predicting
bike crashes and classic decision tree splitting based on the intrinsic properties of the
variables, is a better fit for this purpose.
5.3
Feature importance
As seen in the previous sections 3 - Methodology and 4 - Results, a preliminary step has
been categorization. Different category groups or treating a variable as continuous can
make a difference in importance and affect model’s score. As there are many different
inputs, it is impossible to test all possible differences, but we can see changes leading to
better or worse model performances when going in a direction or another. The final
classification is the result of many tests and different variables classes. It is also
interesting to note again that also the variables maintained their prediction importance
when using under sampling.
As seen in the results we can divide the input features in three categories based on their
importance: Relevant, Less relevant and Non relevant features.
64
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:73==
5.3.1
Relevant Features
From all performed tests two variables consistently results as the most relevant: location
and smoothness. Location as seen in the previous Chapters has been included in the
model in two different ways, GPS and area variables. The first one is essentially a
continuous variable as it has a different value for each location point (latitude and
longitude combination) while the second is closer to be a class, grouping these locations
in 96 groups. As emerged from the theory, infrastructure is often found as being a strong
determinant for bike crashes suggesting that certain locations may be connected to far
more crashes than others.
Both GPS and R3 offer a high level of precision, which can be advantageous in
identifying areas with a higher frequency of accidents caused by factors such as poor
local planning, complex intersections, or missing lanes. This precision enables the
model to pinpoint specific regions where accidents occur more frequently but an
excessive level of precision can lead to a potential drawback. When the model connects
each individual fall to a distinct location or R3 level, it may result in a falsely inflated
accuracy. This overfitting of the data makes it more challenging to use the model
effectively for predicting new crashes. Thus, I conducted a series of tests to evaluate this
factor and mitigate the possible overfitting of these two variables.
During these tests, alternative variables were also considered, including R3max
(representing the smoothest value of the ride). Although this feature has the same
precision level as the normal R3, it turned out to be less significant for the model and
was consequently excluded. This is logical as the smoothest value of the ride would likely
be represented by a stop moment and be either the same or very close for all rides.
The impact of these two variables on the model was further evaluated through additional
models, in which they were removed to assess changes in the model’s ability to spot
accidents.
Removing either R3 or GPS resulted in similar F1-scores, Precision, and Recall. The
importance of the remaining most significant variable increased to 0.7, while the other
features exhibited minimal changes compared to the current model (complete results
can be found in Appendix L - Features Analysis Additional Results). This suggests that
the model is able to compensate for the absence of one variable by relying on the
remaining one. Consequently, it is likely that the patterns identified by the model are
supported by both features, which consistently contribute to the detection of accidents.
The similarity in Precision and Recall scores also indicates comparable performance in
detecting false positives and negatives.
Overall the findings are supported by the literature review, suggesting that
infrastructure is a good predictor for un-reported accidents. Another aspect that emerge
is that localized problems seems more relevant than broader areas ones but, at least for
Copenhagen, certain zones seems to contain more of these sensible spots.
Considerations on R3
As explained above, R3 importance value do not reflect a weight of its change. As a
consequence, this model cannot tell us if a smaller (rougher) R3 is connected to an
increased danger. To partially cover this lack, I explored further this variable, evaluating
R3 ranking position of falls as shown in Figure 5.2 where lower ranking values
correspond to a lower average R3 during the ride.
Falls are quite spread but with a prevalence in the lower values, suggesting rougher rides
are more likely to cause a fall. As R3 is directly affected by a fall (see Figure 4.3) it is
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 5.2: R3 Ranking
natural to expect a certain effect of falls on R3. On the other hand, peaks in Magnitude
values (which follows patterns similar to R3 and is used as a CDA trigger), are much
more frequent than falls. As presented in Chapter 4 - Results, The Magnitude flag
(connected to a peak in this value) is activated in 6’862 rides, almost half of the total
rides in the Dataset and it cannot be excluded that some rides may have more than one
moment with this value peaking.
Combining these information, we can conclude:
1. R3 is not directly correlated to the falls, avoiding a cross-correlation issue, as
confirmed by the correlations matrices in Figure 4.17a.
2. There are other elements contributing to the R3 value of a ride that can affect it
more than a singular fall.
3. A rough ride may contribute to falls but the combination of R3 with other features
is probably more relevant.
For point 2, we can divide R3 in elements that can potentially affect this value:
• Bike status or biker behaviour. It can be further divided in:
◦Speed.
◦Maintenance and bike type.
◦Riding style and actions.
• Street Smoothness.
Unfortunately it is not possible this aspect to explore with more detail using the available
data. A broader verified set targeted on this elements would be needed to evaluate all
different aspects. An upgraded version of FINDRS set with information on riders, bike
and potentially gyroscope information from the phone to track the riders movements
may allow to better track these changes and, combined with a larger test set, spot the
influence of each single parameter.
Considerations on GPS
Also GPS is an important feature for the model but its importance number does not
reveal where the falls are happening but rather that they are more frequent in certain
66
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:75==
points. A large scale view of this aspect has been presented in Chapter 4 - Results
(Figure 4.16) where it is already clear that most of accidents happens in the central area
of the city. Comparing it with Figures 4.14 and 4.15 though, it also appears that it is
where most rides happens. Nonetheless, other areas appears to contain more rides but
less falls than the city center, as highlighted by Tables 4.4 and 5.6.
(a) City Heatmap
(b) City Center Heatmap
Figure 5.3: Falls in the City
With the help of Figure 5.3, it is possible to have a closer look at the zones of major risk
and through a simple count, around 20 (of the total 70) falls happened around the lakes.
Zooming in (Figure 5.3b), it can be seen that there are clusters of accidents inside the
city, containing small groups of 3-5 falls. This behaviour of a few very close falls is
present also in the suburbs even if less frequent. It also appears that these clusters are
often grouped around an intersection, connecting to the literature findings.
This brief analysis suggests once again that the crashes are more likely to be caused by
specific elements in certain zones. As for R3, it is not possible to determine the specific
elements using this dataset and more data is needed to avoid speculation but following
paper [17] presented in Chapter 2.1 - Bike accidents and safety, also based on bicycles
crashes in Copenhagen, shared lanes and intersections appears to be the two most
dangerous single piece of danger.
Area
Area feature aims to reduce the possible GPS overfit by merging locations in groups,
keeping the potential information of small areas in the city where the above-mentioned
parameters may have a strong influence in causing accidents but limiting the model in
having a one-to-one connection between falls and crash. Remaining a relevant feature
even if with a lower score, may indicate that even though local problems are more
connected to falls, these elements may be more frequent or severe in certain areas than
others as confirmed by the analyses above.
Similarly to the previous Section, a similar test where both GPS and R3 variables were
removed has been preformed. The model experienced a significant drop in F1-score to
0.392 (0.438 with cross-validation) while Precision and Recall both drops to 0.392,
suggesting what it has been supposed before, that certain location are cause of most
accidents and these are more frequent in some areas than others. New feature
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
67
==PAGE:76==
importance of this model is presented in Table 5.4.
Variable
Value
area
0.374
speed
0.097
congestion
0.082
day
0.052
hour
0.136
week
0.166
Min Temp
0.041
Ground Moisture
0.051
Table 5.4: Features Importance without R3 and GPS
Area importance significantly increases, confirming the initial idea that this variable is
useful in identifying more risky zones but with a lower precision that reduces the model
ability in detecting patterns.
In Table 5.5 are reported the streets with identified falls, and how many falls happened
in each of them, but it appears that the falls are quite spread in the streets and that this is
not a good level of precision for clustering falls.
Streets
Number
of Falls
Pile Allé, Suomisvej, Sjæleboderne, Almevej, Folkvarsvej,
Ole Borchs Vej,
Kristianiagade,
Augustagade,
Solrød
Strandvej,
Gyldenløvesgade,
Dannebrogsgade,
Bleg-
damsvej,
Brøndbyøstervej,
Borgergade,
Mågestien,
Sofievej,
Kapelvej,
Svendborggade,
Stakhaven,
Nørre
Farimagsgade,
Haveforeningen
Selandia,
Bispebjerg
Bakke, Strandgade, Gillesager, Vester Voldgade, Tagensvej,
Amagerbrogade,
Apollovej,
Eckersbergsgade,
Emiliek-
ildevej,
Hulgårdsvej,
Karsestien,
Lyngby Rosenvænge,
Webersgade, Sølvgade, Hollænderdybet, Gustav Adolfs
Gade, Tårnvej, Korsdalsvej, Allégade, Reventlowsgade,
Holmbladsgade, Mimersgade, Fælledvej, Rovsingsgade,
Gernersgade, Livjægergade, Vesterbrogade, Gasværksvej,
Mynstersvej, Linnésgade, Julius Bloms Gade, Ole Suhrs
Gade
1
Nørre Allé, Kålagervej, Øster Voldgade, Lyngbyvej, Avedøre
Havnevej, Strandboulevarden, Roskildevej, Øster Søgade,
C.F. Richs Vej, Færøvej, Allersgade, Rantzausgade, Em-
drupvej
2
Table 5.5: Street Falls
This may be the effect of many different causes, for example in intersections, one or
more streets may be involved or an unsuitable infrastructure, construction or similar
may spread across different streets and become particularly dangerous thanks to
additional elements (like traffic or school exits).
68
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:77==
A deeper analysis at the area level instead, is in In Table 5.6, where are reported all areas
with at least one fall, including the number of rides and falls to rides ratio in an
ascending order. There are in total 39 areas with at least one fall, less than half the total
areas with at least a ride (96).
Area
Rides
Falls
Frequency
Middelalderbyen
427
1
0.002342
Nordvest
340
1
0.002941
Fælled
293
1
0.003413
Solrød
222
1
0.004505
Vesterbro central
443
2
0.004515
Jernbane Allé Kvarter
211
1
0.004739
Hvidovre
602
3
0.004983
Valby syd
447
3
0.006711
Villakvartererne
146
1
0.006849
Valby sydvest
144
1
0.006944
Vesterbro øst
411
3
0.007299
Sundbyvester
265
2
0.007547
Christianshavn Oven Vandet
130
1
0.007692
Metropolzonen
384
3
0.007812
Gentofte
252
2
0.007937
Tårnby
123
1
0.00813
Haraldsgade-kvarteret
122
1
0.008197
Guldbergskvarteret/Panum/Ravnsborggade
487
4
0.008214
Stefansgade/Nørrebroparken/Lundtoftegade
484
4
0.008264
Lyngby-Taarbæk
354
3
0.008475
Vesterbro vest
233
2
0.008584
Nansensgade-Kvarteret
289
3
0.010381
Østerbro Nord
93
1
0.010753
Brøndby
274
3
0.010949
Sundbyøster
91
1
0.010989
Bispebjerg
87
1
0.011494
Svanemøllen Syd/Øst
74
1
0.013514
Blågårdskvarteret/Assistens/Rantzausgade
220
3
0.013636
Østerport
134
2
0.014925
Lyngbyvej Vest
128
2
0.015625
Amagerbro øst
126
2
0.015873
Sallingvej Kvarter
114
2
0.017544
Mimersgade-kvarteret
170
3
0.017647
Frederiksstaden
225
4
0.017778
Øster Farimagsgade-kvarteret
332
6
0.018072
Amagerbro vest
55
1
0.018182
Århusgade Syd
142
3
0.021127
Husum
45
1
0.022222
Emdrup
55
2
0.036364
Table 5.6: Falls Report
Relying on just 70 falls and a rather limited set, doesn’t allow to confirm patterns or
more risky areas but more analyses using intermediate size between the areas and the
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
69
==PAGE:78==
streets with a larger ride base, could be interesting to spot local clusters containing more
dangerous spots.
5.3.2
Low Relevance Features
There is a group of variables that, even if it is not marked as irrelevant by the selection,
has a low prediction importance. This group includes speed, traffic (congestion variable)
and time reference (day, hour and week). Traffic level, week, day and hour can be
indirectly linked to other findings claiming a good share of reported accidents (around
20%) happens between more bicycles or vehicles and hour again can be connected to an
increased danger during dark hours. There may be different reasons why these features
are less important and one reason could be a bias in the base group of users. Data comes
from good quality bike lights, that may be bought mostly by careful bikers that may
avoid or be extra conscious when riding in the dark, avoid congested areas or simply not
riding at excessive speeds.
One additional model without GPS, R3 and area has been run, obtaining an F1-score of
0.038, this model cannot be considered accountable. We can then conclude that
whereas containing some relevant characteristics that may help the overall model,
traffic, speed and time alone are not enough to predict falls.
Speed
In Table 5.7, speed is analyzed to evaluate the effect of speed level on falls.
Speed Index
Speed Quantile
Speed (Km/h
Rides
Falls
Share (Falls/Rides)
1
<=0.33
<=11.5
3945
37
0.9%
2
0.33 ÷0.66
11.5 ÷15
3812
17
0.4%
3
>0.66
>15
3800
16
0.4%
Table 5.7: Falls by Speed Level
Contrary to what it may be expected, most falls happen at lower speeds but there may be
some reason, based on how the variable has been defined, that led to this result.
Speed categories have been created on speed quantiles and these groups are relatively
close together. Rides at 15 Km/h may still be relatively slow, not representing correctly
the initial intention of the variable. But, other than that, the share of falls per ride is
double for the slow category compared with the other two, meaning it is much more
common to have a fall at these speeds. This may be caused by the way the original speed
value is obtained, by averaging the whole trip speed, where many factors can drive down
this value. For example after a fall, someone could ride slower than normal. Another
aspect to keep in consideration is that the average speed may not reflect correctly the
danger as a rider could ride at different speeds in different areas.
But to connect this variable with the elements analyzed so far, it should be also
considered that the speed effect can vary depending on where we are riding and at the
external conditions. Relative speed to the situation should be than considered more
than absolute average.
In Figures 5.4 is shown Copenhagen map with average speed by area. The city center
(Fig. 5.4b) and particularly the areas at higher traffic and rides, presents mostly yellow
regions, belonging to category 1 (slow rides).
Traffic
As seen in Traffic in Copenhagen report [2], traffic for bikes around the lakes has
increased until overcoming car traffic on the bridges. This location is also one of the
70
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:79==
(a) Map of Speeds
(b) Map of Speeds in the city center
Figure 5.4: Speeds in the different Areas
main spots when coming to city trends estimates and from this research, is also a hot
spot for bike falls.
Congestion Level
Rides
Falls
Share (Falls/Rides)
1
1045
8
0.8%
2
2714
16
0.6%
3
3999
21
0.5%
4
3799
25
0.7%
Table 5.8: Falls by Congestion Level
Table 5.8 reports the distribution of falls by congestion level. In absolute numbers, more
traffic translates to more accidents but by share of rides there is a prevalence of falls in
low traffic moments. This could suggest that more traffic doesn’t make it more likely to
fall.
This result is also in partial agreement with the literature where there hasn’t been
specific indication of traffic effect and accidents with more vehicles accounting for 20%
of crashes, compared with 50% of the alone falls. This effect may then be enhanced with
high level of traffic but not for moderate ones. If confirmed, these data may also
highlight a prevalence of self accidents in less busy hours, possibly due to other causes.
Reducing traffic to the ride moment can be an excessive simplification though, as the
patterns may differ between the areas and locations. The fact that this feature and the
time reference still have some relevance, leads to assume that there may be some
interesting correlations between the traffic and the crashes that may be meaningful to
explore further using better data sources. In the future, a more detailed variable that
considers the real traffic by position and time would then be the definitive way to
evaluate this aspect in bike falls.
Time Reference
As mentioned in the Introduction, cycling in Copenhagen and other international big
cities is increasing and current systems may require an upgrade to make front a surge in
this type of accidents. From Copenhagen’s numbers moreover, we can see that there has
been a stale in accidents per km that could be improved through a series of key actions.
Figures 5.5 shows the behaviour of falls over the day and compares it with the traffic
pattern (not in scale) while in 5.9 are reported the falls and rides per each category.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 5.5: Daily Fall Pattern
Hour Category
Description
Rides
Falls
Share (Falls/Rides)
1
Night (22-6)
336
3
0.9%
2
Morning (6-10)
3794
22
0.6%
3
Midday (10-15)
3287
23
0.7%
4
Afternoon (15-18)
2781
15
0.5%
5
Evening (18-22)
1359
7
0.5%
Table 5.9: Falls by Hour Category
Figure 5.6: Weekly Fall Pattern
Figure5.6 shows the behaviour of falls over the week and compares it with the traffic
pattern (not in scale) while in 5.10 are reported the falls and rides per each category.
72
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:81==
Day Category
Description
Rides
Falls
Share (Falls/Rides)
0
Weekdays
8107
52
0.6%
1
Weekends
3450
18
0.5%
Table 5.10: Falls by Day Category
Day and hour variables follows very similar patterns to the falls frequency. This may be a
simple absolute number effect (more rides = more falls, see Figures 4.4 and 4.5) but is
definitely a parameter to take into account.
Looking at the share of falls per category, we can see that the only outlier is the night
category with a share of 0.9%. All other groups (day times, weekday and weekends) have
a pretty close share of falls per ride between 0.5 and 0.7% with weekends, afternoon and
evening being the lowest (0.5%) and weekdays morning being the highest.
Comparing these data with the overall dataset Fall/Ride ratio of 0.6, Lunch time and
Night are the two only periods exceeding. In particular, the Night trend agrees with the
Literature that points at Darkness as one frequent factor of falls.
Figure 5.7: Yearly Fall Pattern
Figure5.7 shows the behaviour of falls over the year and compares it with the traffic
pattern (not in scale) while in 5.11 are reported the falls and rides per each category.
Week Category
Description
Rides
Falls
Share (Falls/Rides)
1
Winter
3547
17
0.5%
2
Spring
1925
14
0.7%
3
Summer
2069
15
0.7%
4
Autumn
4016
24
0.6%
Table 5.11: Falls by Week Category
Weekly pattern in Figure do not follow official traffic patterns in the same way seen in
Chapter 4 - Results, where ride distributions do not follow this pattern either (Figure
4.6). This divergence may be an effect of either a poor representation of the yearly traffic
or a lack of data over the year.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
73
==PAGE:82==
Despite being relatively close, the share point at summer and spring as being the most
dangerous periods for riders. Due to mismatch with traffic, suggesting the sample is not
sufficiently large, and the significant differences between the four categories reporting a
trend opposite to the reality (Winter has double the rides of Spring), this part cannot be
considered conclusive.
5.3.3
Irrelevant Features
All the weather-related features are found to be irrelevant by the feature selection and
consequently, keeping them in the prediction worsen the results, without any notable
difference using them as continuous or categories variables. This is very interesting also
because compared to the other datasets there is less ground of bias or error and only
minor approximations have been made. The fact that weather does not have an
influence on falls may go against popular belief, where we may be led to think that rain
or frost may increase them but agrees with the existing literature and can be explained
by the following considerations:
• We are used to ride in different condition since we are children, adapting our styles
and being more careful, if necessary, to reduce risk.
• We know it is riskier and act consequently or even deciding not to ride. Compared
to other type of hazards also is more predictable. If it is freezing cold or raining, we
tend to be aware of it in contrast with traffic, smoothness and infrastructure that
may be sudden unexpected events.
• Weather conditions is also often tackled by communes already. Town halls spreads
salt to avoid frozen streets and new types of asphalts are better at draining water.
• The effect may be present in other variable. As seen from the Correlation Matrices
in Figure 4.17, the minimum temperature has a slight correlation with the week.
The Yearly pattern (which has a week unit) is also the only time variable that is
relevant despite not following the traffic levels.
• Low incidence of weather may be the effect of past education and awareness in this
sense combined with tackling practice as also supported by the Literature Section
2.7.1 - The case of an Insurance company.
5.4
Limitations
Some concerns have already been raised through the last Chapter, specifically when
discussing the different features effect and results. Here is a summary with more general
limitations of the project as well as a recap of already mentioned feature related issues.
Population Sample and Source
To begin with, there are some limitations directly connected to the data sources. For the
bike data, I have already explained how some results may be affected by the source being
in some way selected. For example in Risiko i Traffiken 2017-2022 they say:
DA - [...] mørke-tallet må det derfor forventes, at egenrisikoen for især de bløde
trafikanter, fx cyklister, er større, end hvad disse tal indikerer. -
ENG - [...] Due to the underreporting, it is therefore expected that the self-risk for
particularly vulnerable road users, such as cyclists, is higher than what these numbers
indicate.
The fact that the data comes from bike lights may already reduce this threat. Also, the
number of analysed rides is rather limited, and even if the results have been consistent
74
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:83==
through the research and in line with the existing literature, there may be differences
when analysing a larger and more diverse dataset.
Moreover, coming from a good quality bike light, the sample may contain more careful
riders that already takes actions to reduce their daily risks or avoid personal distress.
This could be avoid riding with adverse contusions or using lights during the night.
The population base may also be limited in terms of age, income, job type or other
characteristics specific to FINDRS lights target group.
While the approach of using sensors does not contain personal differences, omissions,
mistakes, or other common divergences that can happen in reports and surveys, it
misses some other relevant information found in other studies.
We cannot connect accidents to an altered state of the driver such as being sick or
drunk, the latter being found to be connected to 5% of the accidents in [14]. It is also
difficult to determine if the accident involved more than one driver or if this was caused
by another’s hazardous manoeuvre, animals, or similar. Also, it has not been possible to
analyse age, a common discriminant for accidents quoted by at least one study [19].
The used sensor misses a gyroscope that has been identified as essential by a similar
study from which I took inspiration for the Crash Detection Algorithm [24]. Having a
solid sensor with the bike allows to explore accelerometer data more in depth, as done
with the angles variables, but including a gyroscope would provide a more accurate
representation of reality and a more solid CDA.
There are also issues connected to the other data sources. The congestion index
particularly comes from different reports and strongly relies on time patterns. In the
end, the feature remains relevant and appears to support the Literature findings but
future studies may explore different approaches. Particularly, being the location a very
important aspect, the traffic could be related not to the time alone but in combination
with the position on the ride.
The CDA
The developed fall algorithm (CDA) has also some other limitations. It cannot spot
differences in severity and its process strongly relies on tests conducted using a rather
limited sample. Particularly, not disposing of a proper crash site, bike and system, the
fall test may be somewhat different from the real-world ones. The use of a real accident
helps in improving reliability on this Section but a larger sample using different kind of
bikes and on different terrains may be a good way to consolidate this algorithm. Missing
information on the bike type may also be a potential downside as different bikes may
behave differently data-wise. For example, mountain bikes may have smoother data
thanks to shock absorbers, altering the datasets distributions and covering dangers.
Features
The defined model, despite ending in good results may still be significantly improved
with the two most relevant aspects of the model, location and smoothness are somewhat
general. GPS and R3 are both very precise information coming from the same dataset
and both can be the combination of different factors, merging different effects but failing
in identifying specific causes. This could be improved using different source bases and
changing the dimension of the variables.
Area variable goes in this direction, reducing location precision and showing how this
aspects remains relevant in the study. It could be further improved by analyzing the
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
75
==PAGE:84==
most susceptible areas and identifying specific source of fall, such as intersections or
potholes. Such information could come from surveys and reports for a very precise
definition of elements causing accidents and their location in Copenhagen.
R3 is also a highly precise value and can be affected by more factors. Assuming the
lights are well mounted, this value will reflect the effect of speed (increased vibrations
and more turbulent acceleration data due to bike instability), road smoothness and bike
type or state.
Moreover, from the current value is difficult, if not impossible, to separate the effect of
bumps, road imperfections or similar from a complete fall or, in other words, separate
data detecting the cause of the fall with the effect (the fall itself).
Last but not the least, the representation of this value is inconclusive to some extent.
If R3 or a similar value can be a good parameter to reflect a bike journey smoothness, it
may not be the best parameters to summarize entire areas or even street level average
smoothness.
As seen, all results seem to lead to the conclusion that specific and rather local aspect are
the main cause of accidents, and that other events or situations can still play a role in
making them more dangerous but fails in specifically identifying which are the root
causes to blame.
The Tables in this Chapter are obtained using code in Appendix N - Evaluations Code as
well as Figure 5.2. The rest of Figures and maps comes from code in Appendix M -
Visualizations Code.
76
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:85==
6
Conclusions
In conclusion, this project provides a good base for exploring unreported bike crashes.
As there is a strong connection between the root causes found by existing studies based
on reports and this data-based results, we can assume that generally, report based
studies are a fair representation of reality at least for what regards the considered
features in this research.
Following Section 5 - Analysis and Discussion, the Cash Detection Algorithm has been
successful and the Gradient Boost combined with Oversampling is a valid choice for this
purpose. Further studies can then rely on these methods and modify them based on the
specific project requirements.
It is important to note that the final set has a total of 70 falls and a single year of rides
with the previous mentioned limitations. Despite the promising and satisfying results of
the different methods and models, these numbers are not enough to safely establish
patterns and rules. Despite this, the project can be defined successful according to the
Purpose Statement and the research questions initially defined but the conclusions must
be taken as recommendations and suggestions and more work needs to be done to
validate the outcomes. Nonetheless, the strong agreement with the Literature is
promising and can be used to set the direction for new studies on the areas.
The key points achievable from the study are:
• FINDRS data can be successfully used to monitor bike rides and identify falls.
• It is possible to use these results to create maps and falls statistics.
• Bike motion data analyses can complement the existing report based literature.
• The agreement between literature and this analysis suggest that reports are a good
approximation of the reality.
6.0.1
Variables and Outcome
Figure 6.1 summarizes the results of the study and compares them with the Literature
ones.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure 6.1: Findings summary
As it can be seen, they point to the same direction even if using different recorded
features with the main elements to be aware of being:
• Speed.
• Infrastructure.
• Traffic.
• Time.
Speed
This factor can be affected by multiple elements and, as argued in Chapter 5 - Analysis
and Discussion, is more meaningful riding at an adequate speed rather than at a low
speed.
A method improvement could be monitoring speed at moment of impact instead of the
whole ride. These setbacks (and a greater importance of the other variables) are likely
reasons of the low relevance of speed in this study (even if not null) but the literature
outcome suggests it may be worthy trying improving its definition.
Infrastructure
The most relevant features between the one analysed are the ones connected to the
infrastructure and many different studies have identified in this element a main cause of
accidents. These elements are often difficult to spot such as potholes and their effect can
be reduced with frequent and effective maintenance [15], [16].
Infrastructure may be explored with a greater detail and features than the one used in
this study. It could be useful to experiment what type of condition affects the
smoothness the most and what kind of urban infrastructure affects riders the most. In
connection with these points, the joint research between DTU and ITU published in late
2022 [17], goes in the right direction and pointing to intersections and shared lines as
major cause of risk. Using Natural Language Processor to better analyse the reports is a
great strategy as we find them to be a good representation of the accidents factors.
Particularly, infrastructures problems may be temporary (such as a construction site),
78
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:87==
difficult to spot from data-based information or not available / tracked by the commune
or together entities.
Traffic
This is generally a second level class of variable, despite being quoted in some research,
it is never accounted as the principal cause of accident. In [9, p. 10] increased traffic is
directly reported to be a cause of risk and in [15] the researcher found 18% of crashes
involving more than one cyclist. This variable is quoted as a risk factor also by [18],
generally being not the most influential but still between the major causes of crashes for
most researches.
This research agrees with the literature but for the future, a better variable is needed to
correctly define traffic and falls behaviour, defining traffic by time and location of the
ride.
Another important aspect is that bikes are not the only vehicle with growing popularity.
A greater source base can expand the study by dividing the type of vehicle: bike, e-bike,
scooters, monopods, lad bike and compare if there are differences in these vehicles
patterns, dangers and behaviours following one of the findings in Risiko i Traffiken
2017-2022 saying:
DA - Det skyldes, at der i de senere år er kommet flere ulykker med elcyklister samt, at
der er foretaget flere interviews med personer der benytter elcykel.
ENG - That is because in recent years, there have been more accidents involving
e-bikers, and there have been more interviews conducted with people who use e-bikes.
A greater and more diverse source could be used also to validate these findings and
evaluate, with the necessary changes, if some aspects that have not been considered this
research but that finds support in the literature, are influent or not.
Time
Day and Hour of rides in this dataset, closely follows traffic patterns and busiest times
are also the ones where most accidents have happened. Looking closely, it appears Night
time and consequently darkness is connected to more frequent falls. Despite this strong
relation, Time variables are relatively unimportant for the model.
As argued in the previous Chapter, Week variable, despite not following the traffic
pattern, remains relevant as it may bring more information than the just moment of the
day.
The foreseeable improvements in this aspect are a larger ride base to validate yearly
patterns and a different categorization particularly for the weekdays, as the
categorization weekday-weekend may be too reductive.
6.1
Recommendations for the stakeholders
To conclude this work I have elaborated a series of recommendations for the
stakeholders of this project, particularly trying to define how the involved companies can
exploit these results to obtain economic benefits..
6.1.1
LB Forsikring
As discussed in the Literature Review, LB is interested in reducing premiums cash outs
or adapting the charged fees to more risky customers. Using the results, LB can then
adapt its strategy, adopting a series of steps to improve its services in the coming years.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
79
==PAGE:88==
Some results can be directly implemented also thanks to the Literature support while
others may require more future work to become valuable, thus, the proposed steps are
divided in three time frames.
In the short term, results can be used to increase awareness and educate the
customers against the more dangerous identified elements while gaining specific
knowledge.
The communication could aware the customers against the major found cause of risks
and offer alternatives (see Section 2.7.1 - The case of an Insurance company).
For example, the recommendations could be:
• Avoid elements that can affect the location variable in this model. Combined with
the literature on Copenhagen, they can be:
◦Intersections.
◦Shared lanes.
◦School zones.
• Avoid elements that can increase the smoothness variable in this model, thus:
◦Do regular bike maintenance.
◦Avoid rough paths.
◦Avoid changes in traffic that may affect these factors (such as road
constructions site).
• Ride at adequate speeds.
• Avoid Night time or equip your bike with good lights while being extra careful.
Moreover, always from [17], it has been found that perceived safety is a good predictor
for accidents. Thus, different situations may be perceived differently and personal
considerations of danger may be useful to avoid distress and possible more personal
dangers. In this sense, even if the weather has not been found as a major cause of risk, it
is still recommendable to take it into considerations when biking as discussed in Chapter
5 - Analysis and Discussion.
As these are assumptions, they should be monitored, possibly using questionnaires.
These could be helpful in defining different profiles of LB customers and help to better
design the products on what people want, need but also to relate them to different kind
of risks (see Section 2.7.1 - The case of an Insurance company).
If available, age or riders characteristics can be used by LB to identify different level of
risks. In agreement with the customers, FINDRS lights could be offered for data
gathering, improving and extending reports result.
In the mid term, the results from the data gathering could start offering profiles and
patterns to define new and better products besides improving and targeting the
awareness information.
These data could then be used for completing and expanding the study, confirming or
evaluating the evolution of risk zones, smoothness and potentially identifying the root
causes of crashes.
80
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:89==
At this stage a monitoring system could be implemented to overview the process,
implementing changes in the source when needed, analyzing the new and offering
recommendations.
In the long run, The system could be adapted to the necessities over time, becoming a
fully integrated part of the company. After the assessment period of the mid term, it
should become a department able to study and maintain the data periodically, changing
its products at need.
FINDRS lights are an interesting tool to obtain bike data while offering riders a benefit.
Specifically for the insurance sector, they may go beyond the current design and become
a more advanced data device.
Following what has been developed for cars (and other motor vehicles), LB could aim in
offering black boxes [71] to its customers for a complete and reliable data overview. Such
device could be perfected thanks the development in the previous stages to get the most
important parameters, combining bike and rider status and with the current light - app
setup.
These devices implemented for cars aim two things, persuading drivers against
misbehaviour, reducing accidents likelihood for everyone’s benefit and adapting
premiums in case a crash is caused by an unsafe attitude, for the insurer benefit.
These polices can be adapted to bikes and the case of FINDRS offers a precedent in
considering them reliable for bikes, pursuing this direction.
6.1.2
FINDRS
After this project, FINDRS data appears to have a high value for detecting unreported
bike crashes. The precision and type of information has been adequate for the study,
reaching a good level of precision. While there is space for further and more precise
analyses of the data, there may be some improvements that could be applied to make the
data and the resulting set more desirable.
A first simple step, could be adding gyroscope information coming from the connected
smartphone. Being generally with the rider, this could allow for more sensible Crash
Algorithm and potentially reach a severity distinction.
The app could also benefit from some personal data on the user that have been found to
be connected with falls in reported crashes. Age is particularly interesting as different
studies diverges in this sense but also bike characteristics are likely to be meaningful.
Besides personal data, FINDRS could also ask for users’ help, offering the possibility of
reporting a fall through their app, or eventually asking for a confirmation when one is
detected. This would be a definitive improvement on the Crash Algorithm and a
competitive advantage to other companies. FINDRS could then differentiate its strategy
compared to other companies in possess of such data with possibly larger sources, by
offering a more precise and tested set for crash detection.
6.1.3
Future works
A more extended set or a real monitoring system in these sense could be able to indicate
where in the city these imperfections appear over time and being used to communicate
timely to the commune where fixings are needed.
As analyzed in the previous section, these works could get access to larger bike trip
sources, improving the overall validity of the study, getting more specific information
also on the type of bike and, being independent to evaluate localized traffic.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
81
==PAGE:90==
Such studies could then specialize on the most important features here identified and
reach a high localized definition of information such as smoothness, improving also its
understanding (what causes worse smoothness?). Also traffic could then be better
monitored, spotting potentially highly busy intersections and areas and defining if the
causes of accidents is more connected to the number of riders of the bad original design
(or both).
Some conclusive suggestions regards the most relevant variables that, as said, may be
separated to reveal different effect of different aspects now bonded together.
R3 can be maintained to test and compare behaviours in similar situations, thanks to the
high level of precision. This strength though can limit its usability and limit the
reliability when it comes to broader studies, at least without a large test base to track
behaviours, in particular a test base to evaluate the singular effect of bike maintenance,
presence of shock absorbers, speed and road smoothness.
Similarly, the location can be evaluated clustering areas with a definition larger than the
GPS location but smaller than the current areas and connecting them to external
elements.
Both scenarios lead to the suggestion of using these data based elements in combination
with surveys, reports or external datasets able to confirm and appropriately evaluate the
effects.
As some variables used in the research can complement each other (like time, weather
and traffic) they can be combined in set of fewer variables using PCA (Principal
Component Analysis). In this way their contribution may increase and allow for a deeper
understanding of the correlation between falls and the simultaneous realization of
different events.
82
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Danmark Vejdirektoratet. Cykeltrafiktaellinger metoder, tjeklister og
inspiration. Vejdirektoratet, 2019. ISBN: 9788793674318.
[2]
Copenhagen Kommune. Copenhagen city of bikers. Tech. rep. 2022.
[3]
Lucas Harms and Maarten Kansen. Cycling Facts Netherlands Institute for
Transport Policy Analysis | KiM. Tech. rep. 2018.
[4]
ECF. ECF gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European
Commission ECF gratefully acknowledges financial support from the cycling
industry via Cycling Industries Europe. Tech. rep. 2022. URL: www.ecf.com.
[5]
France 24. Paris plans to become ‘world cycling capital’. URL:
https://www.france24.com/en/20150405-paris-cycling-world-capital-pollution.
[6]
NYC town hall. 2020-Present Protected Bicycle Lanes 2 3 Protected Bicycle Lane
Implementation by Calendar Year 2007-2021. Tech. rep. 2020. URL:
www.nyc.gov/html/dot/html/bicyclists/bikestats.shtml.
[7]
Portland city hall. Bicycles in Portland Fact Sheet. 2019. URL:
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/transportation/article/407660.
[8]
Copenhagen Kommune. Bicycle reporting. Tech. rep. 2016.
[9]
Copenhagen Kommune. “Traffic in Copenhagen 2009-2013”. In: (2014).
[10]
Copenhagen Kommune. Traffic Safety Plan 2013-2020. Tech. rep. 2013.
[11]
Denmark Statistics. Denmark Statistics - Bike accidents. 2021. URL:
https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/transport/trafikulykker.
[12]
ST microelectrics. “lis2dh”. In: ().
[13]
C. Juhra et al. “Bicycle accidents - Do we only see the tip of the iceberg?: A
prospective multi-centre study in a large German city combining medical and
police data”. In: Injury 43.12 (2012), pp. 2026–2034. ISSN: 18790267. DOI:
10.1016/j.injury.2011.10.016.
[14]
Alice Billot-Grasset, Emmanuelle Amoros, and Martine Hours. “How cyclist
behavior affects bicycle accident configurations?” In: Transportation Research
Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 41 (Aug. 2016), pp. 261–276. ISSN:
13698478. DOI: 10.1016/j.trf.2015.10.007.
[15]
Lynn B. Meuleners et al. “Characteristics of the road infrastructure and injurious
cyclist crashes resulting in a hospitalisation”. In: Accident Analysis and
Prevention 136 (Mar. 2020). ISSN: 00014575. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2019.105407.
[16]
Ben Beck et al. “Crash characteristics of on-road single-bicycle crashes: An
under-recognised problem”. In: Injury Prevention 25.5 (Oct. 2019), pp. 448–452.
ISSN: 14755785. DOI: 10.1136/injuryprev-2018-043014.
[17]
Kira Hyldekær Janstrup et al. “Predicting injury severity for cyclist crashes using
natural language processing and neural network modelling”. In: Safety Science
164 (Aug. 2023), p. 106153. ISSN: 09257535. DOI: 10.1016/j.ssci.2023.106153.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0925753523000954.
[18]
Zaili Yang et al. “Risk analysis of bicycle accidents: A Bayesian approach”. In:
Reliability Engineering and System Safety 209 (May 2021). ISSN: 09518320.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ress.2021.107460.
[19]
T. Weber, G. Scaramuzza, and K. U. Schmitt. “Evaluation of e-bike accidents in
Switzerland”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention 73 (2014), pp. 47–52. ISSN:
00014575. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2014.07.020.
[20]
Matej Andrejašič. MEMS ACCELEROMETERS. Tech. rep. 2008.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
83
==PAGE:92==
[21]
Crabtree H. Davidson M. “An Elementary Treatment Of The Theory Of Spinning
Tops And Gyroscopic Motion”. In: Scientia 11 (1971).
[22]
US Department of Defense. GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM STANDARD
POSITIONING SERVICE PERFORMANCE STANDARD 4 th Edition. Tech. rep.
2008.
[23]
Dongwook Lee and Minsoo Hahn. “Bicycle Safety Map System Based on
Smartphone Aided Sensor Network”. In: Advanced Science and Technology
Letters. Science & Engineering Research Support soCiety, Dec. 2013, pp. 38–43.
DOI: 10.14257/astl.2013.42.09. URL:
http://onlinepresent.org/proceedings/vol42_2013/9.pdf.
[24]
S Candefjord et al. Using Smartphones to Monitor Cycling and Automatically
Detect Accidents-Towards eCall Functionality for Cyclists. Tech. rep. 2014.
[25]
James A. Klein. Yaw Axis Control as a Means of Improving V/STOL Aircraft
Performance. COLLINS RADIO CO CEDAR RAPIDS IOWA, 1972.
[26]
Angles_image. URL:
By%20Horia%20Ionescu%20-%20I%20(Horia%20Ionescu)%20created%20this%
20work%20entirely%20by%20myself.,%20Public%20Domain,%20https:
//commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=10878582.
[27]
Zaili Yang et al. “Risk analysis of bicycle accidents: A Bayesian approach”. In:
Reliability Engineering and System Safety 209 (May 2021). ISSN: 09518320.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ress.2021.107460.
[28]
José María Cavanillas, · Edward Curry, and Wolfgang Wahlster. New Horizons
for a Data-Driven Economy A Roadmap for Usage and Exploitation of Big Data
in Europe. Tech. rep. 2015.
[29]
Victoria López et al. “An insight into classification with imbalanced data:
Empirical results and current trends on using data intrinsic characteristics”. In:
Information Sciences 250 (Nov. 2013), pp. 113–141. ISSN: 00200255. DOI:
10.1016/j.ins.2013.07.007.
[30]
Bartosz Krawczyk. Learning from imbalanced data: open challenges and future
directions. Nov. 2016. DOI: 10.1007/s13748-016-0094-0.
[31]
Chong Ho Yu and Chong Ho. “Resampling methods: Concepts, Applications, and
Justification”. In: Practical Assessment, Research, and Evaluation 8.19 (2002).
DOI: 10.7275/9cms-my97.
[32]
Peng Zhao and Binyu@stat Berkeley Edu. On Model Selection Consistency of
Lasso Bin Yu. Tech. rep. 2006, pp. 2541–2563.
[33]
B. D. Ripley. “Neural Networks and Related Methods for Classification”. In:
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 56.3 (Sept.
1994), pp. 409–437. DOI: 10.1111/j.2517-6161.1994.tb01990.x.
[34]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. Springer Series in
Statistics The Elements of Statistical Learning Data Mining, Inference, and
Prediction. Tech. rep. 2017.
[35]
Stephan Dreiseitl and Lucila Ohno-Machado. “Logistic regression and artificial
neural network classification models: A methodology review”. In: Journal of
Biomedical Informatics 35.5-6 (2002), pp. 352–359. ISSN: 15320464. DOI:
10.1016/S1532-0464(03)00034-0.
[36]
Panayiotis Vlamos. GeNeDis. Ed. by Panayiotis Vlamos. Vol. 1194. Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2020. ISBN: 978-3-030-32621-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-32622-7. URL:
https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-32622-7.
84
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:93==
[37]
Rok Blagus and Lara Lusa. “Gradient boosting for high-dimensional prediction of
rare events”. In: Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 113 (Sept. 2017),
pp. 19–37. ISSN: 01679473. DOI: 10.1016/j.csda.2016.07.016.
[38]
Haowen Deng et al. “Ensemble learning for the early prediction of neonatal
jaundice with genetic features”. In: BMC Medical Informatics and Decision
Making 21.1 (Dec. 2021). ISSN: 14726947. DOI: 10.1186/s12911-021-01701-9.
[39]
Weiwei Lin et al. “An ensemble random forest algorithm for insurance big data
analysis”. In: IEEE Access 5 (Aug. 2017), pp. 16568–16575. ISSN: 21693536. DOI:
10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2738069.
[40]
Muhammad Yaseen Khan et al. “Automated Prediction of Good Dictionary
EXamples (GDEX): A Comprehensive Experiment with Distant Supervision,
Machine Learning, and Word Embedding-Based Deep Learning Techniques”. In:
Complexity 2021 (2021). ISSN: 10990526. DOI: 10.1155/2021/2553199.
[41]
M Jordan, J Kleinberg, and B Schölkopf. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning. Tech. rep. 2006.
[42]
Validation Explained. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/train-test-split-and-
cross-validation-in-python-80b61beca4b6.
[43]
Konstantinos Pelechrinis et al. “Economic impact and policy implications from
urban shared transportation: The case of Pittsburgh’s shared bike system”. In:
PLoS ONE 12.8 (Aug. 2017). ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184092.
[44]
Alex Neilson et al. Systematic Review of the Literature on Big Data in the
Transportation Domain: Concepts and Applications. Sept. 2019. DOI:
10.1016/j.bdr.2019.03.001.
[45]
Priyank Jain, Manasi Gyanchandani, and Nilay Khare. “Big data privacy: a
technological perspective and review”. In: Journal of Big Data 3.1 (Dec. 2016).
ISSN: 21961115. DOI: 10.1186/s40537-016-0059-y.
[46]
Yongping Zhang and Zhifu Mi. “Environmental benefits of bike sharing: A big
data-based analysis”. In: Applied Energy 220 (June 2018), pp. 296–301. ISSN:
03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.03.101.
[47]
D. Rojas-Rueda et al. “Replacing car trips by increasing bike and public transport
in the greater Barcelona metropolitan area: A health impact assessment study”.
In: Environment International 49 (Nov. 2012), pp. 100–109. ISSN: 18736750.
DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2012.08.009.
[48]
I. Otero, M. J. Nieuwenhuijsen, and D. Rojas-Rueda. “Health impacts of bike
sharing systems in Europe”. In: Environment International 115 (June 2018),
pp. 387–394. ISSN: 18736750. DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.04.014.
[49]
Daniel Arancibia et al. “Measuring the Local Economic Impacts of Replacing
On-Street Parking With Bike Lanes: A Toronto (Canada) Case Study”. In: Journal
of the American Planning Association 85.4 (Oct. 2019), pp. 463–481. ISSN:
01944363. DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2019.1638816.
[50]
Joris Aertsens et al. “Commuting by bike in Belgium, the costs of minor
accidents”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention 42.6 (2010), pp. 2149–2157.
ISSN: 00014575. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2010.07.008.
[51]
Kim Sutherland, Jon B. Christianson, and Sheila Leatherman. Impact of targeted
financial incentives on personal health behavior: A review of the literature. Dec.
2008. DOI: 10.1177/1077558708324235.
[52]
Manuel Schmidt-Kraepelin et al. The role of gamification. 2020. ISBN:
9780998133133.
[53]
Katherine R. Arlinghaus and Craig A. Johnston. Advocating for Behavior Change
With Education. Mar. 2018. DOI: 10.1177/1559827617745479.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
85
==PAGE:94==
[54]
Stefan Gössling. “Urban transport transitions: Copenhagen, city of cyclists”. In:
Journal of Transport Geography 33 (Dec. 2013), pp. 196–206. ISSN: 09666923.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.10.013.
[55]
DMI. About DMI. URL: https://www.dmi.dk/om-dmi/.
[56]
DMI. DMI Klimadata. URL: https://www.dmi.dk/friedata/klimadata/.
[57]
Danmark Vejedirektoratet. Vejedirektoratet. URL:
https://www.vejdirektoratet.dk/side/trafikkens-udvikling-i-tal.
[58]
Danmarks Vejedirektoratet. Statistik om cykeltrafik. Tech. rep. 2016.
[59]
Opendata. URL: https://www.opendata.dk/city-of-copenhagen/kvarter.
[60]
Denmark communes github. URL:
https://github.com/magnuslarsen/geoJSON-Danish-municipalities.
[61]
imblearn. URL: https://imbalanced-learn.org/stable/.
[62]
“sklearn”. In: (). URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/.
[63]
“keras”. In: (). URL: https://keras.io/.
[64]
“Matplotlib”. In: (). URL: https://matplotlib.org/.
[65]
“seaborn”. In: (). URL: https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial/aesthetics.html.
[66]
Folium. URL: https://python-visualization.github.io/folium/.
[67]
Pandas. URL: https://pandas.pydata.org/.
[68]
NumPy. URL: https://numpy.org/.
[69]
Martin Anderson and Michael Denkl. “The Heinrich Accident Triangle—Too
Simplistic A Model for HSE Management in the 21st Century?” In: (2010).
[70]
Aleksandrs Bitinš et al. “Using Adverse Event Pyramids to Assess Probabilities in
Airline Safety Management”. In: Transactions on Aerospace Research 2021.2
(June 2021), pp. 71–83. DOI: 10.2478/tar-2021-0012.
[71]
Black Boxes. URL: https://road-safety.transport.ec.europa.eu/statistics-and-
analysis/statistics-and-analysis-archive/esafety/black-boxes-vehicle-data-recorders_en.
86
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:95==
A
Preliminary Meeting 14.12.2022
This is the report of a preliminary meeting between the two involved companies (LB
Forsikring, requester for the research and FINDRS, owner of the bike data), the thesis
supervisor Kathrin Kirchner and me.
LB Forsikring is a Danish insurance company while FINDRS is (an also Danish)
producer of smart bike’s lights. These lights contain a device which allows to
communicate with an app and store information regarding bike trips. LB Forsikring
aims to use this information to better inform, advice and target their bike-insured
customers. This project is a follow-up from a summer project conducted by and adviser
from DTU. In this project they managed the data that is possible to get from the device
to achieve accurate information of road status mainly.
A.1
Inputs
The information we can get from the device in combination with the proprietary app are:
• X, Y, and Z Accelerations (frequency of 50 movements per second).
• Speed (same frequency).
• GPS location (frequency of 1 position per second).
Other inputs that can be gathered from their parties are:
• Meteorological information.
• Information on Construction sites.
• Other possible alterations, sporadically or not.
Other information can then be calculated from the ones gathererd:
• R3” which is a number used to have an estimation of road smoothness.
• Accidents.
The main foreseeable challenges for the project are are:
• Determination of an accident. Since we have no “flag” saying whether an accident
has happened we cannot train or determine hot spots right away. We may need to
establish some common rules to determine it. Most likely this happens when:
[-] There is a sudden deceleration.
[-] The x, y and z values point to a fall.
[-] Some situations may be false positives or false negatives, so the personal
experiments should also provide valuable information over that.
• Dealing with the large amount of data
[-] A 7km ca. tour use approximately 5mb. One possible solution is “compress”
the info, for example by using the R3 value stated above and reduce each tour of
approx. 1/50.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
87
==PAGE:96==
[-] In any case it is not possible to deal with the full set on a laptop, the project
will likely evolve step by step starting from my personal data, scaling up to small
samples for POC and validity oversimplifications made above (like the R3 method
and the accident evaluation) and finally using larger portions of it for, e.g. seasonal
maps.
A.2
Expected Outcome
From both companies and my side, it is at this point more interesting exploring the
dataset to establish common rules and models that can be applied to larger sets or new
data. The defined model should be able to indicate or help to define some between the
following:
• Frequency and distribution of accidents
• Time and Period of the accidents.
• Other Highly correlated events.
• List of advice for the bikers.
• List of advice for the city administration
A.3
Other information
There are approximately 2.000 users for around 600 trips/day.
For this project we will not dig into a systematic data-cleaning, a map matching and
precise geographical location (GPS imperfections).
88
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:97==
B
List of ad-hoc Python functions
This is a Python file containing a series of specific functions I designed for this thesis.
1
# %%
2
import numpy as np
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import math
5
import os
6
7
# %%
8
# Get names of folders in a specific directory
9
def get_folder_names(directory):
10
folder_names = []
11
for item in os.listdir(directory):
12
if os.path.isdir(os.path.join(directory , item)):
13
folder_names.append(item)
14
15
if 'old' in folder_names:
16
folder_names.remove('old')
17
18
return folder_names
19
20
# %%
21
# Check on standard deviation of the rides
22
def std_check(db, col_name , group_col='rideid'):
23
threshold = db[col_name].std()*2
24
std = db.groupby(group_col)[col_name].std()
25
el_above_threshold = std > threshold
26
rideids_to_remove = set(std.index[el_above_threshold])
27
db = db[~db[group_col].isin(rideids_to_remove)]
28
29
return db
30
31
# %%
32
# Resample each ride by time
33
def resample_by_time(group, col='time', timeframe='0.02S', met = 'ffill', how='
max', lim=250, completeness_rate=0.7):
34
group.set_index(col, inplace=True)
35
if how=='max':
36
group = group.resample(timeframe).max()
37
elif how=='mean':
38
group = group.resample(timeframe).mean()
39
if int(group.isnull().any(axis=1).sum()) < int(len(group))*
completeness_rate: #keep only if at least (1-completeness_rate)% is non
null
40
group = group.fillna(method=met, limit=lim)
41
group = group.reset_index()
42
else:
43
group = group[0:0]
44
group = group.reset_index()
45
return group
46
47
# %%
48
# Smoothness Paramenter Funciton
49
def R3func(d):
50
rolling_window = 50
51
x = (d['x']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
89
==PAGE:98==
52
y = (d['y']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
53
z = (d['z']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
54
d['R3'] = 1/np.sqrt(0.02*((x)+(y)+(z)))
55
return d
56
57
# %%
58
# Calculate the Angles
59
def angles(db, group_col = 'rideid',window = 30, axis = ['x','y','z']):
60
pitch = np.arctan2(db['y'], np.sqrt(db['x']**2 + db['z']**2)) * 180 / np.pi
61
roll = np.arctan2(-db['x'], np.sqrt(db['y']**2 + db['z']**2)) * 180 / np.pi
62
yaw = np.arctan2(np.sqrt(db['x']**2 + db['y']**2), db['z']) * 180 / np.pi
63
64
# Add the angles to the dataframe
65
db['pitch'] = pitch.rolling(window).mean()
66
db['roll'] = roll.rolling(window).mean()
67
db['yaw'] = yaw.rolling(window).mean()
68
69
#Centering the angles to avoid errors for different mountings
70
db[['pitch','roll','yaw']] = db.groupby(group_col)[['pitch','roll','yaw']].
transform(lambda l: l - l.mean())
71
72
#Final Angle
73
db['angle'] = abs(db['pitch']) + abs(db['roll']) + abs(db['yaw'])
74
db['angle'] = db.groupby(group_col)['angle'].transform(lambda l: l - l.mean
())
75
76
return db[['pitch','roll','yaw', 'angle']]
77
78
# %%
79
# calculate the Magnitude
80
def magnitude_fall(db, threshold , column = 'magnitude', new_column = 'fall_mag'
):
81
db[new_column] = np.where(db[column] > threshold , 1, 0)
82
db[new_column] = np.where(db[column] >= db[column].max(), db[new_column],
0)
83
return db
84
85
# %%
86
# Define a function to calculate lat/long mean values for each ride
87
def get_lat_long_means(group):
88
has_fall = group['fall_indicator'].eq(1).any()
89
if has_fall:
90
lat_mean = group.loc[group['fall_indicator'].eq(1), 'lat'].mean()
91
long_mean = group.loc[group['fall_indicator'].eq(1), 'lon'].mean()
92
else:
93
lat_mean = group['lat'].mean()
94
long_mean = group['lon'].mean()
95
96
return pd.Series({'lat_mean': lat_mean , 'long_mean': long_mean})
97
98
# %%
99
# Quick plots for loop purpose
100
def fall_plots(el, x_ax='time'):
101
102
el = el.reset_index()
103
fall = el[el['fall_indicator']==1][x_ax]
104
105
#Magnitude
106
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['magnitude'])
107
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['x'])
108
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['y'])
109
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['z'])
90
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:99==
110
plt.legend(['magnitude', 'x', 'y', 'z'])
111
plt.ylabel('Value')
112
plt.xlabel('Time')
113
plt.title('Axis Accelerations & Magnitude')
114
for i in fall:
115
plt.axvline(i, c='black', linewidth=2, alpha=0.6)
116
plt.show()
117
118
#Angles
119
plt.title('Angles')
120
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['pitch'])
121
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['roll'])
122
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['yaw'])
123
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['angle'])
124
plt.legend(['ptch', 'roll', 'yaw', 'angle'])
125
for i in fall:
126
plt.axvline(i, c='black', linewidth=2, alpha=0.6)
127
plt.show()
128
129
#Speed
130
plt.plot(el[x_ax], el['speed'])
131
for i in fall:
132
plt.axvline(i, c='black', linewidth=2, alpha=0.6)
133
plt.ylabel('Km/h')
134
plt.xlabel('Time')
135
plt.title('Speed')
136
plt.show()
Code/Functions.py
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
91
==PAGE:100==
C
Test Rides Code
This is a Python file containing the preliminary studies made on the Test Rides. It
include chart codes used for some of the visualizations in 4 - Results.
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
import math
9
import os
10
11
import folium
12
13
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
14
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
15
from matplotlib import cm
16
from IPython.display import clear_output
17
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
18
19
import seaborn as sns
20
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
21
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
22
23
import matplotlib as mpl
24
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
25
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
26
27
import plotly.express as px
28
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
29
30
# %% [markdown]
31
# ### This code uses old verison of the functions
32
# They are not updated to run on multiple rides identified by a rideid
33
34
# %%
35
# Define a function to resample each group by time
36
def resample_by_time(group, col='time', timeframe='0.02S', met = 'ffill', how='
max', lim=250):
37
group.set_index(col, inplace=True)
38
if how=='max':
39
group = group.resample(timeframe).max()
40
elif how=='mean':
41
group = group.resample(timeframe).mean()
42
if int(group.isnull().any(axis=1).sum()) < int(len(group))*100:
43
group = group.fillna(method=met, limit=lim)
44
group = group.reset_index()
45
else:
46
group = group[0:0]
47
return group
48
49
# %%
50
def fall_detection(df, column , new_column , threshold):
51
if column == 'magnitude':
52
df[new_column] = np.where(df[column] > threshold , 1, 0)
92
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:101==
53
54
return df
55
56
# %%
57
def R3func(d):
58
rolling_window = 50
59
x = (d['x']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
60
y = (d['y']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
61
z = (d['z']**2).rolling(rolling_window).sum()
62
d['R3'] = 1/np.sqrt(0.02*((x)+(y)+(z)))
63
return d
64
65
# %%
66
# Set the directory path and extension
67
dir_path = 'C:/Users/NNGhisloNi/OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis
/FINDRS/Tests/myrides'
68
extension = '.CSV'
69
70
# Create an empty list to store dataframes
71
dfs = []
72
73
# Loop over all files in the directory with the specified extension
74
n=0
75
for filename in os.listdir(dir_path):
76
if filename.endswith(extension):
77
# Read the file into a dataframe and append it to the list
78
df = pd.read_csv(os.path.join(dir_path , filename), sep=';')
79
df['rideid'] = n
80
n+=1
81
dfs.append(df)
82
83
# Concatenate all dataframes into a single dataframe
84
df_combined = pd.concat(dfs, ignore_index=True)
85
86
# %%
87
plt.bar(df_combined[' x'].value_counts().keys(), df_combined[' x'].value_counts
().values)
88
plt.bar(df_combined[' y'].value_counts().keys(), df_combined[' y'].value_counts
().values)
89
plt.bar(df_combined[' z'].value_counts().keys(), df_combined[' z'].value_counts
().values)
90
plt.legend(['x','y','z'])
91
plt.title('Accelerations Distributions')
92
plt.show()
93
94
# %%
95
df = df_combined.copy()
96
97
# %%
98
#df = df[df[' accuracy']<15] #Removing values with too low accuracy
99
#Making use of trusting accuracy values
100
if df[' speedaccuracy'].max()> (5* 1000/3.6):
101
df[' speedaccuracy'] = np.where(df[' speedaccuracy'] < (5* 1000/3.6) , df['
speedaccuracy'], 0)
102
103
# %%
104
# Restructuring
105
df['time'] = pd.to_datetime(df['time'])
106
df['time'] = pd.to_timedelta(df[' offset'], unit='ms') + df['time'] #
composition of absolute time
107
#df[' speed'] = df[' speed'] - df[' speedaccuracy']
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
93
==PAGE:102==
108
df[' speed'] = np.where((df[' speed']- df[' speedaccuracy'])<=0, 0, df[' speed'
])
109
df[' speed'] = df[' speed'] * 3.6 / 1000
# speed in km/h
110
df.drop([' offset', ' accuracy', ' speedaccuracy', ' altitude', 'Unnamed: 13',
' dataid'], axis=1, inplace=True) #removing no more useful columns
111
112
#removing columns' name space
113
df= df.rename(columns={' lat':'lat', ' lon':'lon', ' speed':'speed', " x": "x",
" y": "y", ' z':'z'})
114
115
df['lon'] = df['lon']/1000000
116
df['lat'] = df['lat']/1000000
117
118
# %%
119
# Example data
120
x_data = df['x']
121
y_data = df['y']
122
z_data = df['z']
123
124
# Plotting KDE plots
125
sns.kdeplot(x_data , color='c', label='x')
126
sns.kdeplot(y_data , color='orange', label='y')
127
sns.kdeplot(z_data , color='lime', label='z')
128
129
# Adding labels and legend
130
plt.xlabel('Values')
131
plt.ylabel('Density')
132
plt.legend()
133
134
plt.show()
135
136
# %%
137
#Initial journeys
138
initial_journeys = len(df['rideid'].unique())
139
initial_journeys
140
141
# %%
142
#Removing out of scale speeds
143
df = df[df['speed']<50]
144
145
#Removing rides with too low average speed
146
averages = df.groupby('rideid')['speed'].mean()
147
speed_above_threshold = averages < 8
148
df = df[~df['rideid'].isin(averages.index[speed_above_threshold])]
149
150
# %%
151
#remaining journeys
152
journeys1 = len(df['rideid'].unique())
153
print('remaining journeys:',journeys1 , '\n'
154
'lost journeys for speed:', initial_journeys - journeys1)
155
156
# %%
157
# Set variance threshold values for accelerations
158
x_threshold = df['x'].std()*2
159
y_threshold = df['y'].std()*2
160
z_threshold = df['z'].std()*2
161
speed_threshold = df['speed'].std()*2
162
163
# Group by rideid and calculate variances for each column
164
variances = df.groupby('rideid')[['x', 'y', 'z', 'speed']].std()
165
166
# Identify rides that exceed the variance thresholds for each column
94
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:103==
167
x_above_threshold = variances['x'] > x_threshold
168
y_above_threshold = variances['y'] > y_threshold
169
z_above_threshold = variances['z'] > z_threshold
170
speed_above_threshold = variances['speed'] > speed_threshold
171
172
# Combine the three sets of rideids to remove into a single set
173
rideids_to_remove = set.union(set(variances.index[x_above_threshold]),
174
set(variances.index[y_above_threshold]),
175
set(variances.index[z_above_threshold]),
176
set(variances.index[speed_above_threshold]))
177
178
# Remove the identified rideids from the original DataFrame
179
df_filtered = df[~df['rideid'].isin(rideids_to_remove)]
180
df = df_filtered.copy()
181
182
# %%
183
#remaining journeys
184
journeys2 = len(df_filtered['rideid'].unique())
185
print('remaining journeys:',journeys2 , '\n'
186
'lost journeys for variance:', journeys1 - journeys2)
187
188
# %%
189
# Group the DataFrame by 'rideid' and apply the resampling function to each
group
190
df = df.groupby('rideid').apply(resample_by_time).reset_index(drop=True)
191
192
# %%
193
#remaining journeys
194
journeys3 = len(df['rideid'].unique())
195
print('remaining journeys:',journeys3 , '\n'
196
'lost journeys for nans:', journeys3 - journeys2)
197
198
# %%
199
#grouping values by location
200
df = df.groupby(['rideid', 'lat', 'lon']).agg({'time': 'mean', 'speed': 'min',
'x': 'mean', 'y': 'mean', 'z': 'mean'}).reset_index()
201
#reorder rides cronologically
202
df = df.sort_values(['time', 'rideid']).reset_index(drop=True)
203
204
# %%
205
df['time'] = df['time'].dt.tz_localize('utc').dt.tz_convert('Europe/Copenhagen'
) #correcting time from UTC to CET time
206
df['time'] = df['time'].dt.strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S') #change time format
207
df['time'] = pd.to_datetime(df['time'])
208
209
# %%
210
#smoothness and magnitude values
211
df['R3'] = 0
212
213
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
214
215
for name, group in grouped:
216
df.loc[group.index, 'R3'] = R3func(group)['R3']
217
218
# %%
219
# Group the DataFrame by 'rideid' and apply the resampling function to each
group
220
df = df.groupby('rideid').apply(resample_by_time , timeframe='1S', how='mean').
reset_index(drop=True)
221
df = df.sort_values(['time', 'rideid']).reset_index(drop=True) #reorder rides
cronologically
222
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
95
==PAGE:104==
223
# %%
224
# Removing too short rides
225
rideid_counts = df.groupby('rideid').size()
226
rideids_to_keep = rideid_counts[rideid_counts > 10].index
227
df_filtered1 = df[df['rideid'].isin(rideids_to_keep)]
228
df = df_filtered1.copy()
229
230
# %%
231
#remaining journeys
232
journeys4 = len(df_filtered1['rideid'].unique())
233
print('remaining journeys:',journeys4 , '\n'
234
'lost journeys for short distance:', journeys3 - journeys4) #they are
also the ones with very few obs
235
236
# %%
237
#calculating bike acc and angle
238
p = 2
239
df['magnitude'] = np.power(np.power(df['x'],p)+np.power(df['y'],p)+np.power(df[
'z'],p), 1/p) #main value to detect falls from acc for each detection
240
241
# %%
242
#Calculating the angles
243
pitch = np.arctan2(df['y'], np.sqrt(df['x']**2 + df['z']**2)) * 180 / np.pi
244
roll = np.arctan2(-df['x'], np.sqrt(df['y']**2 + df['z']**2)) * 180 / np.pi
245
yaw = np.arctan2(np.sqrt(df['x']**2 + df['y']**2), df['z']) * 180 / np.pi
246
247
# Add the angles to the dataframe
248
df['pitch'] = pitch.rolling(30).mean()
249
df['roll'] = roll.rolling(30).mean()
250
df['yaw'] = yaw.rolling(30).mean()
251
252
#Recalibrating the angles to avoid errors for different mountings
253
df[['pitch','roll','yaw']] = df.groupby('rideid')[['pitch','roll','yaw']].
transform(lambda l: l - l.mean())
254
255
#Angle
256
df['angle'] = abs(df['pitch']) + abs(df['roll']) + abs(df['yaw'])
257
df['angle'] = df.groupby('rideid')['angle'].transform(lambda l: l - l.mean())
258
259
# %%
260
# Apply fall detection to the df
261
df['fall_ang'] = 0
262
df['fall_mag'] = 0
263
264
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
265
266
for name, group in grouped:
267
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_mag'] = fall_detection(group, 'magnitude', '
fall_mag', threshold=group['magnitude'].mean()+df['magnitude'].std()*3)
['fall_mag']
268
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_mag'] = np.where(group['magnitude'] >= group['
magnitude'].max(), group['fall_mag'], 0)
269
#df.loc[group.index, 'fall_ang'] = np.where(group['angle'].abs() > group['
angle'].mean()+df['angle'].std()*2, 1, 0)
270
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_ang'] = np.where(group['angle'].abs() > 40, 1, 0)
271
272
# %%
273
#Setting a fall flag for speed equal to 0
274
for i in df['rideid'].unique():
275
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_speed'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['speed'].
rolling(30).mean().shift(-30)
96
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:105==
276
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_diff'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['magnitude'].
diff()
277
278
df['fall_speed'] = np.where(df['fall_speed']<=5 ,1, 0)
279
df['fall_diff'] = np.where((df['fall_diff']<1) & (df['fall_diff']>-1), 1, 0)
280
281
# %%
282
print(
283
'Falls for difference',len(df[df['fall_diff']==1].rideid.unique()), '\n',
284
'Falls for speed',len(df[df['fall_speed']==1].rideid.unique()), '\n',
285
'Falls for magnitude',len(df[df['fall_mag']==1].rideid.unique()), '\n',
286
'Falls for angle',len(df[df['fall_ang']==1].rideid.unique()))
287
288
# %%
289
df[df['fall_ang']==1].rideid.unique()
290
291
# %%
292
df['fall_indicator'] = np.where((df['fall_ang'] == 1) & (df['fall_mag'] == 1) &
(df['fall_speed'] == 1) & (df['fall_diff'] == 1), 1, 0)
293
294
# %% [markdown]
295
# # Potential Falls Visualization
296
297
# %%
298
print('Identified rides with a potential fall:', len(df[df['fall_indicator'
]==1]['rideid'].unique()))
299
falls = df[df['fall_indicator']==1]
300
301
# %%
302
df1 = df.copy()
303
df = df[df['rideid']==18]
304
305
# %%
306
# Seconds bars
307
plt.bar(df.index, df['magnitude'], color='red', alpha=0.6, label = 'Magnitude')
308
plt.bar(df.index, df['x'], color='c', alpha=0.6, label = 'X')
309
plt.bar(df.index, df['y'], color='orange', alpha=0.6, label = 'Y')
310
plt.bar(df.index, df['z'], color='lime', alpha=0.6, label = 'Z')
311
312
# 15 seconds averages lines
313
plt.plot(df.index, df['magnitude'].rolling(15).mean(), c='darkred', label = '
Magnitude 1min Avg')
314
plt.plot(df.index, df['x'].rolling(15).mean(), c='b', label = 'X 1min Avg')
315
plt.plot(df.index, df['y'].rolling(15).mean(), c='darkorange', label = 'Y 1min
Avg')
316
plt.plot(df.index, df['z'].rolling(15).mean(), c='g', label = 'Z 1min Avg')
317
318
# Fall line
319
plt.axvline(df[df['fall_indicator']==1].index[0], c='yellow', linewidth=15,
alpha=0.6)
320
321
# Get the current axes
322
ax = plt.gca()
323
324
# Remove vertical gridlines
325
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
326
327
# Change X Axis
328
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, df.time.count(), 60), range(len((df['time'].dt.minute.
unique()[:-1]))))
329
330
plt.legend()
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
97
==PAGE:106==
331
plt.xlabel('Minutes')
332
plt.ylabel('Value')
333
plt.title('Axis Accelerations & Magnitude')
334
plt.show()
335
336
# %%
337
# Seconds bars
338
plt.bar(df.index, df['magnitude'], color='red', alpha=0.6, label = 'Magnitude')
339
plt.bar(df.index, df['R3'], color='c', alpha=0.6, label = 'R3')
340
341
# 15 seconds averages lines
342
plt.plot(df.index, df['magnitude'].rolling(15).mean(), c='darkred', label = '
Magnitude 1min Avg')
343
plt.plot(df.index, df['R3'].rolling(15).mean(), c='b', label = 'R3 1min Avg')
344
345
346
# Fall line
347
plt.axvline(df[df['fall_indicator']==1].index[0], c='yellow', linewidth=15,
alpha=0.6, label = 'Fall')
348
349
# Get the current axes
350
ax = plt.gca()
351
352
# Remove vertical gridlines
353
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
354
355
# Change X Axis
356
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, df.time.count(), 60), range(len((df['time'].dt.minute.
unique()[:-1]))))
357
358
plt.legend()
359
plt.xlabel('Minutes')
360
plt.ylabel('Value')
361
plt.title('Axis Accelerations & Magnitude')
362
plt.show()
363
364
# %%
365
# Seconds bars
366
plt.bar(df.index, df['angle'], color='red', alpha=0.6, label = 'Angle')
367
plt.bar(df.index, df['pitch'], color='c', alpha=0.6, label = 'Pitch')
368
plt.bar(df.index, df['roll'], color='orange', alpha=0.6, label = 'Roll')
369
plt.bar(df.index, df['yaw'], color='lime', alpha=0.6, label = 'Yaw')
370
371
# 15 seconds averages lines
372
plt.plot(df.index, df['angle'].rolling(15).mean(), c='darkred', label = 'Angle
1min Avg')
373
plt.plot(df.index, df['pitch'].rolling(15).mean(), c='b', label = 'Pitch 1min
Avg')
374
plt.plot(df.index, df['roll'].rolling(15).mean(), c='darkorange', label = 'Roll
1min Avg')
375
plt.plot(df.index, df['yaw'].rolling(15).mean(), c='g', label = 'Yaw 1min Avg')
376
377
# Fall line
378
plt.axvline(df[df['fall_indicator']==1].index[0], c='yellow', linewidth=15,
alpha=0.6, label='Fall')
379
380
# Get the current axes
381
ax = plt.gca()
382
383
# Remove vertical gridlines
384
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
385
98
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:107==
386
# Change X Axis
387
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, df.time.count(), 60), range(len((df['time'].dt.minute.
unique()[:-1]))))
388
389
plt.legend(['Angle', 'Ptch', 'Roll', 'Yaw', 'Fall'])
390
plt.xlabel('Minutes')
391
plt.ylabel('Degrees')
392
plt.title('Angles')
393
plt.show()
394
395
# %%
396
map = folium.Map(location=[falls['lat'].mean(), falls['lon'].mean()],
zoom_start=12)
397
for index, row in falls.iterrows():
398
folium.Marker([row['lat'], row['lon']]).add_to(map)
399
map
400
401
# %%
Code/Test_Rides.py
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
99
==PAGE:108==
D
Rides Analysis Code
This is the code used for most of the analysis conducted on the rides.
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
import math
9
import os
10
11
import folium
12
13
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
14
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
15
from matplotlib import cm
16
from IPython.display import clear_output
17
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
18
19
import seaborn as sns
20
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
21
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
22
23
import matplotlib as mpl
24
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
25
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
26
27
import plotly.express as px
28
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
29
30
from fitter import Fitter , get_common_distributions , get_distributions
31
32
# %%
33
from ipynb.fs.full.Functions import*
34
35
# %%
36
# Set the directory path and extension
37
dir_path = 'C:/Users/NNGhisloNi/OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis
/FINDRS/ServerData/22_11/'
38
extension = '.parquet'#'.csv'
39
40
# Create an empty list to store dataframes
41
dfs = []
42
43
col_name = ['time', 'offset', 'lat', 'lon', 'altitude', 'speed', 'accuracy', '
speedaccuracy', 'x', 'y', 'z', 'rideid']
44
cols = ['time', ' offset', ' lat', ' lon', ' speed', ' x', ' y', ' z', ' rideid
']
45
46
# Loop over all files in the directory with the specified extension
47
for filename in os.listdir(dir_path):
48
if filename.endswith(extension):
49
# Read the file into a dataframe and append it to the list
50
#df = pd.read_csv(os.path.join(dir_path , filename), header=0, names=
col_name , usecols=cols)
100
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:109==
51
df = pd.read_parquet(os.path.join(dir_path , filename), columns=cols)
52
dfs.append(df)
53
54
# Concatenate all dataframes into a single dataframe
55
df_combined = pd.concat(dfs, ignore_index=True)
56
# Removing name spaces
57
df_combined = df_combined.rename(columns={' offset':'offset', ' lat':'lat', '
lon':'lon', ' speed':'speed', ' x':'x', ' y':'y', ' z':'z', ' rideid':'
rideid'})
58
59
# %%
60
df_combined
61
62
# %% [markdown]
63
# ## Find Distributions
64
65
# %%
66
f = Fitter(df_combined['x'].values , distributions=["norm"])
67
f.fit()
68
f.summary()
69
70
# %%
71
f = Fitter(df_combined['y'].values , distributions=["norm"])
72
f.fit()
73
f.summary()
74
75
# %%
76
f = Fitter(df_combined['z'].values , distributions=["norm"])
77
f.fit()
78
f.summary()
79
80
# %%
81
# Example data
82
x_counts = df_combined['x'].value_counts()
83
y_counts = df_combined['y'].value_counts()
84
z_counts = df_combined['z'].value_counts()
85
86
# Calculate percentage values
87
x_percentages = x_counts * 100 / x_counts.sum()
88
y_percentages = y_counts * 100 / y_counts.sum()
89
z_percentages = z_counts * 100 / z_counts.sum()
90
91
# %%
92
# Plotting the bar chart
93
plt.bar( x_percentages.keys(), x_percentages.values , width=0.1, color='c',
alpha=0.6, label='X')
94
plt.bar(y_percentages.keys(), y_percentages.values , width=0.1, color='orange',
alpha=0.6, label='Y')
95
plt.bar(z_percentages.keys(), z_percentages.values , width=0.1, color='lime',
alpha=0.4, label='Z')
96
97
# Get the current axes
98
ax = plt.gca()
99
100
# Remove vertical gridlines
101
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
102
103
plt.xlabel('Values')
104
plt.ylabel('% of Values')
105
plt.legend()
106
plt.title('Axis Accelerations Distributions')
107
plt.show()
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
101
==PAGE:110==
108
109
# %%
110
df = df_combined.copy().dropna()
111
112
# %%
113
#Initial journeys
114
initial_journeys = len(df['rideid'].unique())
115
initial_journeys
116
117
# %%
118
# Restructuring
119
120
#Creating absolute time
121
df['time'] = pd.to_datetime(df['time'])
122
df['time'] = pd.to_timedelta(df['offset'], unit='ms') + df['time']
123
124
#Dropping irrelevant columns
125
df.drop(['offset'], axis=1, inplace=True)
126
127
df['speed'] = df['speed'] * 3.6 / 1000
128
129
#Removing out of scale speeds
130
df = df[df['speed']<50]
131
df = df[df['speed']>-1]
132
133
# %%
134
#Removing rides with too low average speed
135
averages = df.groupby('rideid')['speed'].mean()
136
speed_above_threshold = averages < 6
137
df = df[~df['rideid'].isin(averages.index[speed_above_threshold])]
138
139
# %%
140
#remaining journeys
141
journeys1 = len(df['rideid'].unique())
142
print('remaining journeys:',journeys1 , '\n'
143
'lost journeys for speed:', initial_journeys - journeys1)
144
145
# %%
146
df = std_check(df, 'x')
147
df = std_check(df, 'y')
148
df = std_check(df, 'z')
149
df = std_check(df, 'speed')
150
151
# %%
152
#remaining journeys
153
journeys2 = len(df['rideid'].unique())
154
print('remaining journeys:',journeys2 , '\n'
155
'lost journeys for variance:', journeys1 - journeys2)
156
157
# %%
158
# Group the DataFrame by 'rideid' and apply the resampling function to each
group
159
df = df.groupby('rideid').apply(resample_by_time).reset_index(drop=True)
160
161
# %%
162
#remaining journeys
163
journeys3 = len(df['rideid'].unique())
164
print('remaining journeys:',journeys3 , '\n'
165
'lost journeys for nans:', journeys2 - journeys3)
166
167
# %%
168
#grouping values by location
102
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:111==
169
df = df.groupby(['rideid', 'lat', 'lon']).agg({'time': 'mean', 'speed': 'min',
'x': 'mean', 'y': 'mean', 'z': 'mean'}).reset_index()
170
#reorder rides cronologically
171
df = df.sort_values(['time', 'rideid']).reset_index(drop=True)
172
173
# %%
174
df['time'] = df['time'].dt.tz_localize('utc').dt.tz_convert('Europe/Copenhagen'
) #correcting time from UTC to CET time
175
df['time'] = df['time'].dt.strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S') #change time format
176
df['time'] = pd.to_datetime(df['time'])
177
178
# %%
179
# Group the DataFrame by 'rideid' and apply the resampling function to each
group
180
df = df.groupby('rideid').apply(resample_by_time , timeframe='1S', how='mean',
completeness_rate=80).reset_index(drop=True)
181
df = df.sort_values(['time', 'rideid']).reset_index(drop=True) #reorder rides
cronologically
182
183
# %%
184
# Removing too short rides
185
rideid_counts = df.groupby('rideid').size()
186
rideids_to_keep = rideid_counts[rideid_counts > 10].index
187
df_filtered1 = df[df['rideid'].isin(rideids_to_keep)]
188
df = df_filtered1.copy()
189
190
# %%
191
#remaining journeys
192
journeys4 = len(df_filtered1['rideid'].unique())
193
print('remaining journeys:',journeys4 , '\n'
194
'lost journeys for short distance:', journeys3 - journeys4) #they are
also the ones with very few obs
195
196
# %%
197
#Angles
198
df[['pitch','roll','yaw', 'angle']] = angles(df)
199
200
# %%
201
#calculating bike acc and angle
202
p = 2
203
df['magnitude'] = np.power(np.power(df['x'],p)+np.power(df['y'],p)+np.power(df[
'z'],p), 1/p) #main value to detect falls from acc for each detection
204
205
# %%
206
#smoothness and magnitude values
207
df['R3'] = 0
208
209
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
210
211
for name, group in grouped:
212
df.loc[group.index, 'R3'] = R3func(group)['R3']
213
214
# %%
215
# Magnitude and Angle Trigger
216
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
217
218
for name, group in grouped:
219
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_mag'] = magnitude_fall(group, threshold=group['
magnitude'].mean()+df['magnitude'].std()*3)['fall_mag']
220
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_ang'] = np.where(group['angle'].abs() > 20, 1, 0)
221
222
# %%
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
103
==PAGE:112==
223
#Speed and Magnitude Delta trigger
224
for i in df['rideid'].unique():
225
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_speed'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['speed'].
rolling(30).mean().shift(-30)
226
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_diff'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['magnitude'].
diff()
227
228
df['fall_speed'] = np.where(df['fall_speed']<=10 ,1, 0)
229
df['fall_diff'] = np.where((df['fall_diff']<1) & (df['fall_diff']>-1), 1, 0)
230
231
# %%
232
#Fall flag
233
df['fall_indicator'] = np.where((df['fall_ang'] == 1) & (df['fall_mag'] == 1) &
(df['fall_speed'] == 1) & (df['fall_diff'] == 1), 1, 0)
234
235
# %%
236
#Fall flag
237
#df['fall_indicator'] = np.where((df['fall_ang'] == 1) & (df['fall_mag'] == 1)
& (df['fall_speed'] == 1) & (df['fall_diff'] == 1), 1, 0)
238
239
# %%
240
#Some info on the database
241
df.describe()
242
243
# %%
244
#Plots of interesting data
245
fall_plots(df, x_ax='index')
246
247
# %%
248
#changing GPS values for export
249
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
250
251
for name, group in grouped:
252
if group['fall_indicator'].max()==1:
253
group = group[group['fall_indicator']==1]
254
df.loc[group.index,'lat'] = group['lat'].mean()
255
df.loc[group.index,'lon'] = group['lon'].mean()
256
257
# %%
258
#Creating a dataframe for the Classificator
259
exp = df[['rideid','lat', 'lon', 'speed','R3',]].groupby('rideid').mean()
260
exp_sums = df.groupby('rideid').agg(max_speed=('speed', 'max'), max_R3 = ('
speed', 'max'), fall = ('fall_indicator', 'max'), time = ('time', 'min'))
261
export = pd.concat([exp, exp_sums], axis=1)
262
#export.to_csv('summary.csv')
263
264
# %% [markdown]
265
# # Potential Falls Visualization
266
267
# %%
268
falls = df[df['fall_indicator']==1]
269
print('Identified rides with a potential fall:', len(falls['rideid'].unique()))
270
271
# %%
272
#Plotting interestinf data of the rides with a potential fall
273
for i in range(len(falls.rideid.unique())):
274
element =
df[df['rideid'] ==df[df['fall_indicator']==1]['rideid'].unique()
[i]].sort_values('time')
275
fall_plots(element)
276
277
# %%
104
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:113==
278
map = folium.Map(location=[falls['lat'].mean(), falls['lon'].mean()],
zoom_start=12)
279
for index, row in falls.iterrows():
280
folium.Marker([row['lat'], row['lon']]).add_to(map)
281
map
282
283
# %%
Code/Rides_in_Depth.py
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
105
==PAGE:114==
E
Loop Ride Code
This is a modified version of D - Rides Analysis Code to repeat the same function in a
loop on the different input files.
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
9
# %%
10
from ipynb.fs.full.Functions import*
11
12
# %%
13
# Example usage
14
directory_path = 'C:/Users/NNGhisloNi/OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/
Thesis/FINDRS/ServerData/'
15
folders = get_folder_names(directory_path)
16
print(folders)
17
18
# %%
19
# Set the directory path and extension
20
directory = 'C:/Users/NNGhisloNi/OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/
Thesis/FINDRS/ServerData/'
21
path_end = folders
22
extension = '.parquet'#'.csv'
23
names = ['time', 'offset', 'lat', 'lon', 'altitude', 'speed', 'accuracy', '
speedaccuracy', 'x', 'y', 'z', 'rideid']
24
columns = ['time', ' offset', ' lat', ' lon', ' speed', ' x', ' y', ' z', '
rideid']
25
rename = {' offset':'offset', ' lat':'lat', ' lon':'lon', ' speed':'speed', ' x
':'x', ' y':'y', ' z':'z', ' rideid':'rideid'}
26
27
# %% [markdown]
28
# ## Define a function to loop the actions
29
30
# %%
31
def repetition(n):
32
33
# Set the directory path and extension
34
dir_path = directory + path_end[n]
35
36
# Create an empty list to store dataframes
37
dfs = []
38
39
col_name = names
40
cols = columns
41
42
# Loop over all files in the directory with the specified extension
43
for filename in os.listdir(dir_path):
44
if filename.endswith(extension):
45
# Read the file into a dataframe and append it to the list
46
#df = pd.read_csv(os.path.join(dir_path , filename), header=0, names
=col_name , usecols=cols)
106
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:115==
47
df = pd.read_parquet(os.path.join(dir_path , filename), columns=cols
)
48
dfs.append(df)
49
50
# Concatenate all dataframes into a single dataframe
51
df_combined = pd.concat(dfs, ignore_index=True)
52
# Removing name spaces
53
df_combined = df_combined.rename(columns=rename)
54
df = df_combined.copy().dropna()
55
56
# Restructuring
57
58
#Creating absolute time
59
df['time'] = pd.to_datetime(df['time'])
60
df['time'] = pd.to_timedelta(df['offset'], unit='ms') + df['time']
61
62
#Dropping irrelevant columns
63
df.drop(['offset'], axis=1, inplace=True)
64
65
df['speed'] = df['speed'] * 3.6 / 1000
66
67
#Removing out of scale speeds
68
df = df[df['speed']<50]
69
df = df[df['speed']>-1]
70
71
#Removing rides with too low average speed
72
averages = df.groupby('rideid')['speed'].mean()
73
speed_above_threshold = averages < 6
74
df = df[~df['rideid'].isin(averages.index[speed_above_threshold])]
75
76
df = std_check(df, 'x')
77
df = std_check(df, 'y')
78
df = std_check(df, 'z')
79
df = std_check(df, 'speed')
80
81
# Group the DataFrame by 'rideid' and apply the resampling function to each
group
82
df = df.groupby('rideid').apply(resample_by_time).reset_index(drop=True)
83
84
#grouping values by location
85
df = df.groupby(['rideid', 'lat', 'lon']).agg({'time': 'mean', 'speed': '
min', 'x': 'mean', 'y': 'mean', 'z': 'mean'}).reset_index()
86
#reorder rides cronologically
87
df = df.sort_values(['time', 'rideid']).reset_index(drop=True)
88
89
df['time'] = df['time'].dt.tz_localize('utc').dt.tz_convert('Europe/
Copenhagen') #correcting time from UTC to CET time
90
df['time'] = df['time'].dt.strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S') #change time
format
91
df['time'] = pd.to_datetime(df['time'])
92
93
# Group the DataFrame by 'rideid' and apply the resampling function to each
group
94
df = df.groupby('rideid').apply(resample_by_time , timeframe='1S', how='mean
', completeness_rate=80).reset_index(drop=True)
95
df = df.sort_values(['time', 'rideid']).reset_index(drop=True) #reorder
rides cronologically
96
97
# Removing too short rides
98
rideid_counts = df.groupby('rideid').size()
99
rideids_to_keep = rideid_counts[rideid_counts > 10].index
100
df_filtered1 = df[df['rideid'].isin(rideids_to_keep)]
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
107
==PAGE:116==
101
df = df_filtered1.copy()
102
103
#Angles
104
df[['pitch','roll','yaw', 'angle']] = angles(df)
105
106
#calculating bike acc and angle
107
p = 2
108
df['magnitude'] = np.power(np.power(df['x'],p)+np.power(df['y'],p)+np.power
(df['z'],p), 1/p) #main value to detect falls from acc for each
detection
109
110
# Smoothness coefficient + Magnitude and Angle Trigger
111
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
112
113
for name, group in grouped:
114
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_mag'] = magnitude_fall(group, threshold=group
['magnitude'].mean()+df['magnitude'].std()*3)['fall_mag']
115
df.loc[group.index, 'fall_ang'] = np.where(group['angle'].abs() > 20,
1, 0)
116
df.loc[group.index, 'R3'] = R3func(group)['R3']
117
118
#Speed and Magnitude Delta trigger
119
for i in df['rideid'].unique():
120
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_speed'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['speed'].
rolling(30).mean().shift(-30)
121
df.loc[df['rideid']==i, 'fall_diff'] = df[df['rideid']==i]['magnitude'
].diff()
122
123
df['fall_speed'] = np.where(df['fall_speed']<=10 ,1, 0)
124
df['fall_diff'] = np.where((df['fall_diff']<1) & (df['fall_diff']>-1), 1,
0)
125
126
#Fall flag
127
df['fall_indicator'] = np.where((df['fall_ang'] == 1) & (df['fall_mag'] ==
1) & (df['fall_speed'] == 1) & (df['fall_diff'] == 1), 1, 0)
128
129
#changing GPS values for esport
130
grouped = df.groupby('rideid')
131
132
for name, group in grouped:
133
if group['fall_indicator'].max()==1:
134
group = group[group['fall_indicator']==1]
135
df.loc[group.index,'lat'] = group['lat'].mean()
136
df.loc[group.index,'lon'] = group['lon'].mean()
137
138
#Creating a dataframe for the Classificator
139
#exp = df[['rideid','lat', 'lon', 'speed','R3']].groupby('rideid').mean()
140
export = df.groupby('rideid').agg(max_speed=('speed', 'max'), max_R3 = ('
speed', 'max'), fall = ('fall_indicator', 'max'), time = ('time', 'min'
),
141
rideid=('rideid', 'mean'),lat = ('lat', '
mean'),lon =
('lon', 'mean'), speed
= ('speed', 'mean'),R3 = ('R3', 'mean
'))
142
#export = pd.concat([exp, exp_sums], axis=1)
143
144
# Count of rides and falls
145
rides_in = len(grouped)
146
falls_in = len(df[df['fall_indicator']==1]['rideid'].unique())
147
duration = (df.groupby('rideid')['time'].transform(lambda x: (x.max() - x.
min()).total_seconds())).mean()
148
108
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:117==
149
150
speed_trigger = len(df[df['fall_speed']==1].rideid.unique())
151
magnitude_trigger = len(df[df['fall_mag']==1].rideid.unique())
152
difference_trigger = len(df[df['fall_diff']==1].rideid.unique())
153
angle_trigger = len(df[df['fall_ang']==1].rideid.unique())
154
155
return export , rides_in , falls_in , duration , speed_trigger ,
magnitude_trigger , difference_trigger , angle_trigger
156
157
# %% [markdown]
158
# ## Run the code and export the files
159
160
# %%
161
rides_n = 0
162
falls_n = 0
163
durations = []
164
speeds = []
165
166
speed_trigger = 0
167
magnitude_trigger =
0
168
difference_trigger = 0
169
angle_trigger = 0
170
171
# %%
172
exp_dir = 'C:/Users/NNGhisloNi/OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/
ML/rides/'
173
174
for i in range(len(path_end)):
175
try:
176
month,rin, fin, dur, s, m, d, a = repetition(n=i)
177
rides_n += rin
178
falls_n += fin
179
180
speed_trigger += s
181
magnitude_trigger += m
182
difference_trigger += d
183
angle_trigger += a
184
185
durations.append(dur)
186
speeds.append(month['speed'].mean())
187
month.to_csv(exp_dir+str(i)+'.csv')
188
except:
189
ValueError
190
191
# %%
192
print('Triggers activation: \n'
193
'speed',speed_trigger ,
194
'magnitude', magnitude_trigger ,
195
'difference', difference_trigger ,
196
'angle', angle_trigger)
197
198
# %%
199
avg_dur = sum(durations) / len(durations)
200
avg_speed = sum(speeds) / len(speeds)
201
202
# %%
203
avg_km = (float(avg_dur) * float(avg_speed))/3600
204
tot_km = avg_km * rides_n
205
206
# %%
207
rides_n
208
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
109
==PAGE:118==
209
# %%
210
print('In the dataset there are a total of', tot_km , 'km for a total of',
falls_n , 'falls \n transalting to a ratio of', falls_n/(tot_km/1000), '
falls per million km')
211
212
# %%
Code/Rides_Loop.py
110
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:119==
F
Weather Code
Code including the API for weather historical data.
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import requests
7
import pandas as pd
8
9
# %%
10
#Request info
11
12
max_limit = '300000'
13
end_date = '2023-06-01T00:00:00%2B02:00'
14
limit = '2000'
15
kbh = '0101' #note only 1 request per municipality at a time
16
frd = '0147'
17
api_key = '5a599cac -616f-419e-931e-412a029c95f1'
18
19
limit = max_limit
20
21
# %%
22
# Define the API endpoint URL
23
url_kbh= "https://dmigw.govcloud.dk/v2/climateData/collections/
municipalityValue/items?datetime=../"+end_date+"&municipalityId="+kbh+"&
limit="+limit+"&api-key="+api_key
24
25
#url_frd = "https://dmigw.govcloud.dk/v2/climateData/collections/
municipalityValue/items?datetime=../"+end_date+"&municipalityId="+frd+"&
limit="+limit+"&api-key="+api_key
26
27
# %%
28
# Define a function to get data
29
30
def get_data(url):
31
# Make the API request using the requests library
32
response = requests.get(url, verify=False)
33
dictr = response.json()
34
recs = dictr['features']
35
db = pd.json_normalize(recs)
36
db.columns = db.columns.str.replace('properties.', '').str.replace('
geometry.', '')
37
city = db['municipalityName'].unique()[0]
38
location = str(db['coordinates'][0]).replace('[', '').replace(']', '')
39
db = db.drop_duplicates(subset=['calculatedAt', 'parameterId'], keep='first
')
40
db = db.pivot(index='calculatedAt', columns='parameterId', values='value').
reset_index()
41
db['calculatedAt'] = db['calculatedAt'].astype('datetime64[h]')
42
db = db.groupby('calculatedAt').mean().sort_index()
43
db['Municipality'] = city
44
db['Coordinates'] = location
45
db = db[[#'Municipality', 'Coordinates',
46
#temperature
47
'temp_grass',
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
111
==PAGE:120==
48
'min_temp',
49
'mean_temp',
50
'max_temp_w_date',
51
'no_frost_days',
52
#rain
53
'acc_precip', #accumulated precipitation on the ground
54
'max_precip_30m', #max_precipitation in the last 30 min
55
'no_days_acc_precip_01', #days of rain
56
'leaf_moisture', #ground moisture
57
'mean_cloud_cover', #cloud cover
58
#snow
59
'snow_depth',
60
#wind
61
'mean_wind_dir',
62
'mean_wind_speed'
63
]].reset_index()
64
65
db = db.rename(columns={'calculatedAt':'Time',
66
'temp_grass':'Ground Temp',
67
'min_temp':'Min Temp',
68
'mean_temp':'Avg Temp',
69
'max_temp_w_date':'Max Temp',
70
'no_frost_days':'Freezing days',
71
'acc_precip':'Acc Rain',
72
'max_precip_30m':'Max prec last 30m',
73
'no_days_acc_precip_01':'Rainy days',
74
'leaf_moisture':'Ground Moisture',
75
'mean_cloud_cover':'Cloudness',
76
'snow_depth':'Snow',
77
'mean_wind_dir':'Wind Dir',
78
'mean_wind_speed':'Avg Wind Speed',
79
})
80
81
db = db.dropna(how='all').fillna(0)
82
db = db.applymap(lambda x: int(round(x, 0)) if isinstance(x, (int, float))
else x)
83
84
return db
85
86
# %%
87
#Generate a dataframe
88
df = get_data(url_kbh)
89
90
# %%
91
days = pd.to_datetime(df['Time']).dt.date
92
print('Average daily readings:',days.value_counts().values.mean())
93
94
# %%
95
display(df.Time.min())
96
display(df.Time.max())
97
98
# %%
99
df.Time.min().date()
100
101
# %%
102
name = 'Data ' + str(df.Time.min().date()) + '-' + str(df.Time.max().date()) +
'.csv'
103
104
# %%
105
df.to_csv(name)
Code/Weather_Data.py
112
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:121==
G
Traffic Data Preparation
Differently from the other sets, the traffic data has been prepared manually using
different sources.
¨The input data for the code shown in Appendix H is the presented in Figures G.1 and
G.2.
Figure G.1: Weekly averages by year
Figure G.2: Daily hour distribution
Particularly, Figure G.1 is the average of the weeks, while Figure G.2 is the result of the
city report patterns.
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
113
==PAGE:122==
H
Traffic Code
Code code for the treatment and the analysis of Traffic Data, including the creation of
the new index scale.
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
import os
9
10
# %%
11
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
12
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
13
from matplotlib import cm
14
from IPython.display import clear_output
15
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
16
17
import seaborn as sns
18
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
19
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
20
21
import matplotlib as mpl
22
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
23
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
24
25
import plotly.express as px
26
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
27
28
# %%
29
filename = 'Weekly_traffic_index.xlsx'
30
31
# %%
32
weekly_value = pd.read_excel(filename , sheet_name='Weekly_value')
33
34
# %%
35
weekly_value = weekly_value.rename(columns={'År / Uge': 'Year'})
36
37
# %%
38
daily_value = pd.read_excel(filename , sheet_name='Daily_value')
39
40
# %%
41
d = {'Date': ['01-01-2019', '06-06-2023']}
42
df = pd.DataFrame(data=d)
43
df['Date'] = pd.to_datetime(df['Date'])
44
df = df.set_index('Date').resample('1H').mean()
45
46
# %%
47
df = df.reset_index()
48
df['day'] = df['Date'].dt.dayofweek
49
df['hour'] = df['Date'].dt.hour
50
df['year'] = df['Date'].dt.year
51
df['week'] = df['Date'].dt.isocalendar().week
52
df.loc[df['week']==53,'week'] = 52
53
df.loc[df['hour']==0,'hour'] = 24
114
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:123==
54
55
# %%
56
weekly_value = weekly_value.set_index('Year')
57
daily_value = daily_value.set_index('Dag')
58
59
# %%
60
weekly_value = weekly_value.fillna(method='bfill')
61
daily_value = daily_value.fillna(method='bfill')
62
63
# %%
64
df['traffic'] = 0
65
for i, row in df.iterrows():
66
df.loc[i, 'traffic'] = weekly_value.at[row['year'], row['week']] *
daily_value.at[row['day'], row['hour']]
67
68
# %%
69
# Checking yearly patterns
70
for i in df['year'].unique():
71
plt.plot(df[df['year']==i].groupby('week').sum()['traffic'], label = str(i)
)
72
plt.legend()
73
plt.title('Yearly trend')
74
plt.show()
75
76
# %%
77
df.traffic.describe()
78
79
# %%
80
#Converting the traffic index found into four classes 1-Completely free to 4-
Very congested
81
df['congestion'] = np.where(df['traffic']<=20, 1, np.where((df['traffic']>20) &
(df['traffic']<=55), 2,
82
np.where((df['
traffic']>55) &
(df['traffic'
]<=100), 3, np.
where(df['
traffic']>100,
4, 1))))
83
84
# %%
85
df.congestion.value_counts().keys()
86
87
# %%
88
plt.bar(df.congestion.value_counts().keys(), df.congestion.value_counts().
values , color = 'c')
89
# Get the current axes
90
ax = plt.gca()
91
92
# Remove vertical gridlines
93
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
94
95
ax.set_xticks([1,2,3,4])
96
97
plt.xlabel('Index')
98
plt.ylabel('Count')
99
plt.title('Traffic Index Distribution')
100
plt.show()
101
102
# %%
103
df.to_csv('0_traffic.csv')
Code/Traffic_Data.py
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
115
==PAGE:124==
I
Data Preparation
In this file are contained all steps for data merging, cleaning and preparation
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
import os
9
10
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
11
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
12
from matplotlib import cm
13
from IPython.display import clear_output
14
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
15
16
import seaborn as sns
17
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
18
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
19
20
import matplotlib as mpl
21
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
22
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
23
24
# %%
25
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
26
from sklearn.preprocessing import LabelEncoder
27
28
import requests
29
30
from shapely.geometry import Point, shape, MultiPolygon
31
import geopandas as gpd
32
from geopandas import GeoDataFrame as gdf
33
from shapely.wkt import loads
34
35
# %%
36
# Set the directory path and extension
37
dir_path = 'C:/Users/NNGhisloNi/OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis
/ML/rides/'
38
extension = '.csv'
39
40
# Create an empty list to store dataframes
41
dfs = []
42
43
# Loop over all files in the directory with the specified extension
44
for filename in os.listdir(dir_path):
45
if filename.endswith(extension):
46
# Read the file into a dataframe and append it to the list
47
df = pd.read_csv(os.path.join(dir_path , filename), header=0)#, names=
col_name , usecols=cols)
48
dfs.append(df)
49
50
# Concatenate all dataframes into a single dataframe
51
df_combined = pd.concat(dfs, ignore_index=True)
52
116
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:125==
53
# %%
54
bike = df_combined
55
weather = pd.read_csv('0_weather.csv')
56
traffic = pd.read_csv('0_traffic.csv')
57
58
# %%
59
len(bike[bike['fall']==1]['rideid'].unique())
60
61
# %%
62
bike['time'] = pd.to_datetime(bike['time'])
63
weather['Time'] = pd.to_datetime(weather['Time'])
64
weather = weather.drop('Unnamed: 0', axis=1)
65
traffic = traffic.drop('Unnamed: 0', axis=1)
66
67
# %%
68
bike['day'] = bike['time'].dt.dayofweek
69
bike['hour'] = bike['time'].dt.hour
70
bike['year'] = bike['time'].dt.year
71
bike['week'] = bike['time'].dt.isocalendar().week
72
bike.loc[bike['week']==53,'week'] = 52
73
bike.loc[bike['hour']==0,'hour'] = 24
74
75
# %%
76
weather['day'] = weather['Time'].dt.dayofweek
77
weather['hour'] = weather['Time'].dt.hour
78
weather['year'] = weather['Time'].dt.year
79
weather['week'] = weather['Time'].dt.isocalendar().week
80
weather.loc[weather['week']==53,'week'] = 52
81
weather.loc[weather['hour']==0,'hour'] = 24
82
83
# %%
84
df = pd.merge(bike, weather , on=['year', 'week', 'day', 'hour']).merge(traffic ,
on=['year', 'week', 'day', 'hour'])
85
86
# %%
87
print('In the dataset there are:',len(bike.rideid.unique()), 'rides')
88
89
# %%
90
len(df[df['fall']==1])
91
92
# %% [markdown]
93
# # Creating a variable for the areas
94
95
# %%
96
# Download the GeoJSON file for danish communes
97
url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Neogeografen/dagi/master/geojson/
kommuner.geojson'
98
response = requests.get(url)
99
geojson_data = response.json()
100
101
# %%
102
save = 0 # 0 does nothing , 1 saves the geojson file, 2 imports the geojson file
. 2 is used in case internet access is not available.
103
104
if save ==1:
105
106
# Specify the file path to save the GeoJSON file
107
file_path = "0_area_data.geojson"
108
109
# Save the geojson_data to a file
110
with open(file_path , "w") as file:
111
json.dump(geojson_data , file)
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
117
==PAGE:126==
112
113
elif save==2:
114
115
# Provide the path to your GeoJSON file
116
file_path = "0_area_data.geojson"
117
118
# Read the GeoJSON file using geopandas
119
gdf = gpd.read_file(file_path)
120
121
# %%
122
# imporve Copenhagen informaiton with quarters
123
kvarter = gpd.read_file('0_kvarter.csv')
124
csv_gdf = gdf(kvarter)
125
csv_gdf['geometry'] = csv_gdf['wkb_geometry']
126
# either all at once :
127
csv_gdf['geometry'] = csv_gdf['geometry'].apply(loads)
128
129
# %% [markdown]
130
# ### Adding Areas
131
132
# %%
133
# create new column for GPS location
134
df['GPS'] = df['lat'].astype(str) + ', ' + df['lon'].astype(str)
135
df['geometry'] = df['GPS'].apply(lambda x: Point(float(x.split(',')[1]), float(
x.split(',')[0])))
136
137
# Convert the DataFrame to a GeoDataFrame
138
gdf_points = gpd.GeoDataFrame(df, geometry='geometry')
139
140
# %%
141
# Connect locations to CPH quarters
142
for _, row in csv_gdf.iterrows():
143
geometry = row['geometry']
144
kvarternavn = row['kvarternavn']
145
146
if isinstance(geometry , MultiPolygon):
147
# Check if each point is within the buffered polygon
148
within_geometry = gdf_points['geometry'].within(geometry)
149
150
# Assign the kvarternavn to the corresponding points within the
buffered polygon
151
gdf_points.loc[within_geometry , 'hood'] = kvarternavn
152
153
# %%
154
# Reduce precision for CPH quarters
155
for _, row in csv_gdf.iterrows():
156
geometry = row['geometry']
157
kvarternavn = row['kvarternavn']
158
159
if isinstance(geometry , MultiPolygon):
160
# Create a buffered polygon around the MultiPolygon with a tolerance -
needed for canal area particularly
161
buffered_geometry = geometry.buffer(0.001)
162
163
# Check if each point is within the buffered polygon
164
within_buffer = gdf_points['geometry'].within(buffered_geometry)
165
166
# Assign the kvarternavn to the corresponding points within the
buffered polygon
167
gdf_points.loc[within_buffer , 'hood_1'] = kvarternavn
168
169
# %%
118
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:127==
170
# Reduce precisionfurther for CPH quarters
171
for _, row in csv_gdf.iterrows():
172
geometry = row['geometry']
173
kvarternavn = row['kvarternavn']
174
175
if isinstance(geometry , MultiPolygon):
176
# Create a buffered polygon around the MultiPolygon with a tolerance -
needed for canal area particularly
177
buffered_geometry = geometry.buffer(0.01)
178
179
# Check if each point is within the buffered polygon
180
within_buffer = gdf_points['geometry'].within(buffered_geometry)
181
182
# Assign the kvarternavn to the corresponding points within the
buffered polygon
183
gdf_points.loc[within_buffer , 'hood_2'] = kvarternavn
184
185
# %%
186
# Assign quarters with priority
187
df['area'] = gdf_points['hood']
188
df['area'] = df['area'].fillna(gdf_points['hood_1'])
189
df['area'] = df['area'].fillna(gdf_points['hood_2'])
190
191
# %%
192
# Assign city name for locations outside CPH kommune
193
for feature in geojson_data['features']:
194
# Get the polygon coordinates
195
geometry = shape(feature['geometry'])
196
navn = feature['properties']['KOMNAVN']
197
198
# Check if each point is within the MultiPolygon
199
gdf_points.loc[gdf_points['geometry'].within(geometry), 'kommune'] = navn
200
201
df['area'] = df['area'].fillna(gdf_points['kommune'])
202
203
# %%
204
# Checking no location is left out
205
if len(df[df['area'].isna()]) < 5:
206
df[~df['area'].isna()]
207
else:
208
print('WARNING! There are ', len(df[df['area'].isna()]), 'unspecified
locaitons')
209
210
# %%
211
print('The rides extends between',len(df['area'].unique()), 'different
identified ares')
212
213
# %%
214
df.columns
215
216
# %%
217
# create new column for GPS location
218
df['GPS'] = df['lat'].astype(str) + ', ' + df['lon'].astype(str)
219
220
# %%
221
df.to_csv('2_data_for_visual.csv')
222
223
# %% [markdown]
224
# ### Removing redundant information
225
226
# %%
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
119
==PAGE:128==
227
df = df[['GPS', 'area', 'R3', 'speed', 'congestion', 'day', 'hour', 'week', '
Min Temp',
228
'Snow', 'Max prec last 30m', 'Freezing days', 'Ground Moisture', 'fall']]
229
230
# %%
231
# Showing the continuous values
232
df.drop(['area', 'fall'], axis=1).hist();
233
plt.tight_layout()
234
235
# %% [markdown]
236
# ### Making Categories
237
238
# %%
239
# Compute correlation matrix
240
corr_matrix = df.corr()
241
242
# Create plot
243
plt.figure(figsize=(20,16))
244
sns.heatmap(corr_matrix , annot=True, annot_kws={"size": 18}, cmap='coolwarm')
245
plt.title('Correlation Matrix')
246
plt.show()
247
248
# %%
249
df.describe()
250
251
# %%
252
#df.describe().to_csv('info.csv')
253
254
# %%
255
df['speed'].quantile(0.33)
256
257
# %%
258
# Dividing the speed in categories
259
df['speed'] = np.where(df['speed']<=df['speed'].quantile(0.33) , 1, np.where((
df['speed']>df['speed'].quantile(0.33)) & (df['speed']<=df['speed'].
quantile(0.66)), 2,
260
np.where(df['speed']>df['speed'].quantile(0.66), 3, 0)))
261
262
# Divinging weekday and weekend
263
df['day'] = np.where(df['day'].isin([0,1,2,3]), 0, 1)
264
265
# Dividing day hours into Night (22-6), Morning (6-10), Midday (10-15),
Afternoon (15-18), Evening (18-22)
266
df['hour'] = np.where((df['hour']<6), 1, np.where((df['hour']>=6) & (df['hour'
]<=10), 2,
267
np.where((df['hour']>10) & (df['hour']<=15), 3, np.where((df['hour']>15) &
(df['hour']<=18), 4, np.where((df['hour']>18) & (df['hour']<=22), 5, 1)
) ) ) )
268
269
# Year is already a category
270
271
# Winter, spring, summer, autumn
272
df['week'] = np.where((df['week']<=8), 1, np.where((df['week']>8) & (df['week'
]<=21), 2,
273
np.where((df['week']>21) & (df['week']<34), 3, np.where((df['week']>=34) &
(df['week']<47), 4, 1) ) ) )
274
275
# Treating temperature in the same way: #Frost, Cold and warm
276
df['Min Temp'] = np.where(df['Min Temp']<=-5, 1, np.where((df['Min Temp']>-5) &
(df['Min Temp']<=5), 2, np.where(df['Min Temp']>5, 3, 0)))
277
278
# Trerating precipitations the same way: 1 precipitation , 0 no prec.
120
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:129==
279
df['Snow'] = np.where(df['Snow']>0, 1, 0)
280
df['Max prec last 30m'] = np.where(df['Max prec last 30m']>0, 1, 0)
281
df['Freezing days'] = np.where(df['Freezing days']>0, 1, 0)
282
283
284
#No, little, medium, and High moisture
285
df['Ground Moisture'] = np.where(df['Ground Moisture']<=df['Ground Moisture'].
quantile(0.25), 1,
286
np.where((df['Ground Moisture']>df['Ground Moisture'].quantile(0.25)) & (df
['Ground Moisture']<=df['Ground Moisture'].quantile(0.50)), 2,
287
np.where((df['Ground Moisture']>df['Ground Moisture'].quantile(0.50)) & (df
['Ground Moisture']<=df['Ground Moisture'].quantile(0.75)),3,
288
np.where(df['Ground Moisture']>df['Ground Moisture'].quantile(0.75), 4, 0))
))
289
290
#Converting GPS
291
df['GPS'] = LabelEncoder().fit_transform(df['GPS'])
292
293
#Converting area
294
df['area'] = LabelEncoder().fit_transform(df['area'])
295
296
# %%
297
# Compute correlation matrix
298
corr_matrix = df.corr()
299
300
# Create plot
301
plt.figure(figsize=(20,16))
302
sns.heatmap(corr_matrix , annot=True, annot_kws={"size": 18}, cmap='coolwarm')
303
plt.title('Correlation Matrix')
304
plt.show()
305
306
# %%
307
# Showing the continuous values
308
df.drop(['fall'], axis=1).hist();
309
plt.tight_layout()
310
311
# %%
312
#df.to_csv('1_data_for_model.csv')
313
314
# %%
Code/Data_preparation.py
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
121
==PAGE:130==
J
Machine Learning Models Code
In this file are contained all steps for all models and their comparisons.
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
9
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
10
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
11
from matplotlib import cm
12
from IPython.display import clear_output
13
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
14
15
import seaborn as sns
16
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
17
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
18
19
import matplotlib as mpl
20
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
21
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
22
23
# %%
24
from imblearn.over_sampling import RandomOverSampler
25
from imblearn.under_sampling import RandomUnderSampler
26
27
from sklearn.feature_selection import RFE
28
29
from sklearn.model_selection import ShuffleSplit
30
from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
31
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
32
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
33
34
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
35
from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier , RandomForestClassifier
36
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , precision_score , recall_score ,
f1_score , confusion_matrix
37
38
import tensorflow
39
from keras.models import Sequential
40
from keras.layers import Dense
41
42
# %%
43
# Import the cleaned data
44
df = pd.read_csv('1_data_for_model.csv', index_col = 0)
45
46
# %%
47
# Make a copy for the models that do not need dummies
48
df = df.dropna().reset_index(drop='True')
49
df1 = df.copy()
50
51
# %%
52
# Separate features and target
53
X = df.drop('fall', axis=1)
122
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:131==
54
y = df['fall']
55
56
# %%
57
# Instantiate the RandomOverSampler class
58
threshold = 0.012
59
threshold_rus = 0.02
60
truth_share = int(len(df[df['fall']==1]))/int(len(df))*1
61
#threshold = truth_share
62
size_0 = len(df[df['fall']==0])
63
size_1 = len(df[df['fall']==1])
64
65
ros = RandomOverSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0), 1: int(len(df)*
threshold)},random_state=42)
66
#rus = RandomUnderSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0)/threshold_rus , 1:
int(len(df))}, random_state=42)
67
68
# Resample the dataset
69
X_resampled , y_resampled = ros.fit_resample(X, y)
70
#X_resampled , y_resampled = rus.fit_resample(X, y)
71
72
X = X_resampled
73
y = y_resampled
74
75
# %%
76
# Specify the columns to encode
77
columns_to_encode = ['speed', 'congestion', 'day', 'hour', 'week',
78
'Min Temp', 'Snow', 'Max prec last 30m', 'Freezing days',
79
'Ground Moisture']
80
81
# Perform one-hot encoding with get_dummies()
82
X_encoded = pd.get_dummies(data = X,columns = columns_to_encode , drop_first=
True)
83
84
# %%
85
# Continuous variables
86
cont_var = ['GPS', 'R3', 'area']
87
88
# Standardize the continuous variables
89
X_cont = X[cont_var]
90
scaler = StandardScaler()
91
scaler.fit(X_cont)
92
X[cont_var] = pd.DataFrame(scaler.transform(X_cont), columns = X_cont.columns)
93
94
# %%
95
# split the data into training , validation , and test sets
96
X_train_val , X_test , y_train_val , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size
=0.2, random_state=42)
97
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(X_train_val , y_train_val ,
test_size=0.25, random_state=42)
98
99
# %%
100
print('True ratio share is:', truth_share , '. Oversampling brings it to:',
threshold , '\n or:', (threshold/truth_share), 'times')
101
102
# %% [markdown]
103
# ## Oversampling + ML method
104
105
# %%
106
#Spli into Train and set
107
X = df1.drop('fall', axis=1)
108
y = df1['fall']
109
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
123
==PAGE:132==
110
#Training to test ratio
111
size_test = 0.3
112
113
# %%
114
# Instantiate the RandomOverSampler class
115
116
# Calculate the number of samples needed for a 25:100 ratio
117
ros = RandomOverSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0), 1: int(len(df1)*
threshold)},random_state=42)
118
#rus = RandomUnderSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0)/threshold_rus , 1:
int(len(df))}, random_state=42)
119
120
# Resample the dataset
121
X_resampled , y_resampled = ros.fit_resample(X, y)
122
#X_resampled , y_resampled = rus.fit_resample(X, y)
123
124
X = X_resampled
125
y = y_resampled
126
127
# %%
128
d_corr = X.copy()
129
d_corr['fall'] = y
130
131
# Compute correlation matrix
132
corr_matrix = d_corr.corr()
133
134
# Create plot
135
plt.figure(figsize=(20,16))
136
sns.heatmap(corr_matrix , annot=True, annot_kws={"size": 18}, cmap='coolwarm')
137
plt.title('Correlation Matrix')
138
plt.show()
139
140
# %% [markdown]
141
# ### ML
142
143
# %% [markdown]
144
# #### Random Forest
145
146
# %%
147
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
148
estimator = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=42)
149
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
150
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
151
152
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
153
feature_mask = rfe.support_
154
155
# Get the indices of selected features
156
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
157
158
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
159
160
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42)
161
162
# %%
163
# Create a Random Forest classifier with default hyperparameters
164
# low number of estimators for a start, shallow depth to avoid overfitting ,
fixed random state for reproducibility
165
rf = RandomForestClassifier(n_estimators=30, max_depth=10,random_state=42)
166
167
# Train the model on the training set
124
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:133==
168
rf.fit(X_train , y_train)
169
170
# Make predictions on the test set
171
y_pred = rf.predict(X_test)
172
173
# %%
174
# Define your evaluation procedure
175
cv = ShuffleSplit(n_splits=10)
176
177
# Evaluate your model
178
scores = cross_val_score(rf, X, y, scoring='f1', cv=cv, n_jobs=-1)
179
180
# Report performance
181
print('Cross Validation: %.3f (%.3f)' % (np.mean(scores), np.std(scores)))
182
183
# %%
184
# Evaluate the model's performance using precision , recall , and F1 score
185
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
186
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
187
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
188
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
189
190
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
191
192
# %%
193
# Assuming y_true and y_pred are the true and predicted labels , respectively
194
cm = confusion_matrix(y_test , y_pred)
195
196
# Create a heatmap of the confusion matrix using seaborn
197
sns.heatmap(cm, annot=True, cmap='Blues', fmt='g')
198
199
# Add axis labels and a title
200
plt.xlabel('Predicted labels')
201
plt.ylabel('True labels')
202
plt.title('Confusion Matrix - Random Forest')
203
204
# %%
205
#Features importance
206
rf_feature_importance = rf.feature_importances_
207
208
print("\nRandom Forest Feature Importance:")
209
for feature , importance in zip(X.columns , rf_feature_importance):
210
print(feature , ": ", round(importance , 3))
211
212
# %% [markdown]
213
# #### GradientBoostingClassifier
214
# Selection application and validation
215
216
# %%
217
X = X_resampled
218
y = y_resampled
219
220
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
221
estimator = GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=42)
222
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
223
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
224
225
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
226
feature_mask = rfe.support_
227
228
# Get the indices of selected features
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
125
==PAGE:134==
229
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
230
231
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
232
233
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42)
234
235
# %%
236
#Train
237
gbc = GradientBoostingClassifier(n_estimators=30, max_depth=10,random_state=42)
238
gbc.fit(X_train , y_train)
239
240
#Make prediction
241
y_pred = gbc.predict(X_test)
242
243
# %%
244
# Define your evaluation procedure
245
cv = ShuffleSplit(n_splits=10)
246
247
# Evaluate your model
248
scores = cross_val_score(gbc, X, y, scoring='f1', cv=cv, n_jobs=-1)
249
250
# Report performance
251
print('Cross Validation: %.3f (%.3f)' % (np.mean(scores), np.std(scores)))
252
253
# %%
254
#Performance
255
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
256
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
257
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
258
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
259
260
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
261
262
# %%
263
# Assuming y_true and y_pred are the true and predicted labels , respectively
264
cm = confusion_matrix(y_test , y_pred)
265
266
# Create a heatmap of the confusion matrix using seaborn
267
sns.heatmap(cm, annot=True, cmap='Blues', fmt='g')
268
269
# Add axis labels and a title
270
plt.xlabel('Predicted labels')
271
plt.ylabel('True labels')
272
plt.title('Confusion Matrix - Gradient Boost')
273
274
# %%
275
# Get the feature importance for each model
276
gb_feature_importance = gbc.feature_importances_
277
278
# Print the feature importance scores
279
print("Gradient Boosting Classifier Feature Importance:")
280
for feature , importance in zip(X.columns , gb_feature_importance):
281
print(feature , ": ", round(importance , 3))
282
283
# %% [markdown]
284
# ### Logistic
285
286
# %%
287
X = X_resampled
288
y = y_resampled
126
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:135==
289
290
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
291
estimator = LogisticRegression(random_state=42)
292
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
293
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
294
295
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
296
feature_mask = rfe.support_
297
298
# Get the indices of selected features
299
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
300
301
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
302
303
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42);
304
305
# %%
306
# Create a Random Forest classifier with default hyperparameters
307
# low number of estimators for a start, shallow depth to avoid overfitting ,
fixed random state for reproducibility
308
lr = LogisticRegression(random_state=42)
309
310
# Train the model on the training set
311
lr.fit(X_train , y_train)
312
313
# Make predictions on the test set
314
y_pred = lr.predict(X_test)
315
316
# Evaluate the model's performance using precision , recall , and F1 score
317
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
318
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
319
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
320
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
321
322
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
323
324
# %%
325
# Get the coefficients (feature importances)
326
feature_importances = lr.coef_[0]
327
328
# Print feature importances
329
for feature_name , importance in zip(X.columns , feature_importances):
330
print(f"{feature_name}: {importance}")
331
332
# %% [markdown]
333
# ## NN
334
# Data are standardized but no Oversampling is applied
335
336
# %%
337
# Separate features and target
338
X = df1.drop('fall', axis=1)
339
y = df1['fall']# Instantiate the RandomOverSampler class
340
341
# Standardize the continuous variables
342
X_cont = X[cont_var]
343
scaler = StandardScaler()
344
scaler.fit(X_cont)
345
346
X[cont_var] = pd.DataFrame(scaler.transform(X_cont), columns = X_cont.columns)
347
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
127
==PAGE:136==
348
# split data into training and test sets (80/20 split)
349
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.2,
random_state=42)
350
351
# split training data into training and validation sets (75/25 split)
352
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(X_train , y_train , test_size
=0.25, random_state=42)
353
354
# %%
355
# define input shape
356
input_shape = (X_train.shape[1],)
357
358
# define the model
359
NN = Sequential([
360
Dense(32, input_shape=input_shape , activation='relu'),
361
tensorflow.keras.layers.Dropout(0.2),
# add a dropout layer
362
Dense(16, activation='relu'),
363
tensorflow.keras.layers.Dropout(0.2),
# add a dropout layer
364
Dense(1, activation='sigmoid')
365
])
366
367
# compile the model
368
NN.compile(optimizer='adam',
369
loss='binary_crossentropy',
370
metrics=['accuracy'])
371
372
# fit the model
373
history = NN.fit(X_train , y_train , epochs=100, batch_size=32, validation_split
=0.2);
374
375
# %%
376
# Get the weights of the neural network
377
weights = NN.get_weights()
378
379
# Compute the feature importance
380
nn_importance = np.abs(weights[0]).sum(axis=1) / np.abs(weights[0]).sum()
381
382
# %%
383
# Make predictions on test data
384
y_pred = NN.predict(X_test)
385
386
# Convert predicted probabilities to binary class labels
387
y_pred = (y_pred > 0.5).astype(int)
388
389
# Calculate precision , recall, and f1-score
390
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
391
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
392
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
393
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
394
395
# Print the results
396
print('Accuracy:', accuracy)
397
print('Precision:', precision)
398
print('Recall:', recall)
399
print('F1-score:', f1)
Code/ML_Models_Comparison.py
128
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:137==
K
Features Analysis Code
Code containing different variables exclusion for importance analysis
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
9
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
10
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
11
from matplotlib import cm
12
from IPython.display import clear_output
13
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
14
15
import seaborn as sns
16
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
17
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
18
19
import matplotlib as mpl
20
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
21
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
22
23
# %%
24
from imblearn.over_sampling import RandomOverSampler
25
from imblearn.under_sampling import RandomUnderSampler
26
27
from sklearn.feature_selection import RFE
28
29
from sklearn.model_selection import ShuffleSplit
30
from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
31
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
32
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
33
34
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
35
from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier , RandomForestClassifier
36
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , precision_score , recall_score ,
f1_score , confusion_matrix
37
38
import tensorflow
39
from keras.models import Sequential
40
from keras.layers import Dense
41
42
# %%
43
# Import the cleaned data
44
df = pd.read_csv('1_data_for_model.csv', index_col = 0)
45
46
# %%
47
# Make a copy for the models that do not need dummies
48
df = df.dropna().reset_index(drop='True')
49
df1 = df.copy()
50
51
# %%
52
# Separate features and target
53
X = df.drop('fall', axis=1)
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
129
==PAGE:138==
54
y = df['fall']
55
56
# %%
57
# Instantiate the RandomOverSampler class
58
threshold = 0.012
59
threshold_rus = 0.012
60
truth_share = int(len(df[df['fall']==1]))/int(len(df))*1
61
#threshold = truth_share
62
size_0 = len(df[df['fall']==0])
63
size_1 = len(df[df['fall']==1])
64
65
#ros = RandomOverSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0), 1: int(len(df)*
threshold)},random_state=42)
66
rus = RandomUnderSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0*threshold_rus), 1:
int(size_1)}, random_state=42)
67
68
# Resample the dataset
69
#X_resampled , y_resampled = ros.fit_resample(X, y)
70
X_resampled , y_resampled = rus.fit_resample(X, y)
71
72
X = X_resampled
73
y = y_resampled
74
75
# %%
76
# Specify the columns to encode
77
columns_to_encode = ['speed', 'congestion', 'day', 'hour', 'week',
78
'Min Temp', 'Snow', 'Max prec last 30m', 'Freezing days',
79
'Ground Moisture']
80
81
# Perform one-hot encoding with get_dummies()
82
X_encoded = pd.get_dummies(data = X,columns = columns_to_encode , drop_first=
True)
83
84
# %%
85
# Continuous variables
86
cont_var = ['GPS', 'R3', 'area']
87
88
# Standardize the continuous variables
89
X_cont = X[cont_var]
90
scaler = StandardScaler()
91
scaler.fit(X_cont)
92
X[cont_var] = pd.DataFrame(scaler.transform(X_cont), columns = X_cont.columns)
93
94
# %%
95
# split the data into training , validation , and test sets
96
X_train_val , X_test , y_train_val , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size
=0.2, random_state=42)
97
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(X_train_val , y_train_val ,
test_size=0.25, random_state=42)
98
99
# %%
100
print('True ratio share is:', truth_share , '. Oversampling brings it to:',
threshold , '\n or:', (threshold/truth_share), 'times')
101
102
# %% [markdown]
103
# ## Oversampling + ML method
104
105
# %%
106
#Spli into Train and set
107
X = df1.drop('fall', axis=1)
108
y = df1['fall']
109
130
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:139==
110
#Training to test ratio
111
size_test = 0.3
112
113
# %%
114
# Instantiate the RandomOverSampler class
115
116
# Calculate the number of samples needed for a 25:100 ratio
117
#ros = RandomOverSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0), 1: int(len(df1)*
threshold)},random_state=42)
118
rus = RandomUnderSampler(sampling_strategy={0: int(size_0)/threshold_rus , 1:
int(len(df))}, random_state=42)
119
120
# Resample the dataset
121
#X_resampled , y_resampled = ros.fit_resample(X, y)
122
X_resampled , y_resampled = rus.fit_resample(X, y)
123
124
X = X_resampled
125
y = y_resampled
126
127
# %%
128
d_corr = X.copy()
129
d_corr['fall'] = y
130
131
# Compute correlation matrix
132
corr_matrix = d_corr.corr()
133
134
# Create plot
135
plt.figure(figsize=(20,16))
136
sns.heatmap(corr_matrix , annot=True, annot_kws={"size": 18}, cmap='coolwarm')
137
plt.title('Correlation Matrix')
138
plt.show()
139
140
# %% [markdown]
141
# #### GradientBoostingClassifier
142
# Selection application and validation
143
144
# %%
145
X = X_resampled
146
y = y_resampled
147
148
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
149
estimator = GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=42)
150
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
151
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
152
153
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
154
feature_mask = rfe.support_
155
156
# Get the indices of selected features
157
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
158
159
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
160
161
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42)
162
163
# %%
164
#Train
165
gbc = GradientBoostingClassifier(n_estimators=30, max_depth=10,random_state=42)
166
gbc.fit(X_train , y_train)
167
168
#Make prediction
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
131
==PAGE:140==
169
y_pred = gbc.predict(X_test)
170
171
# %%
172
# Define your evaluation procedure
173
cv = ShuffleSplit(n_splits=10)
174
175
# Evaluate your model
176
scores = cross_val_score(gbc, X, y, scoring='f1', cv=cv, n_jobs=-1)
177
178
# Report performance
179
print('Cross Validation: %.3f (%.3f)' % (np.mean(scores), np.std(scores)))
180
181
# %%
182
#Performance
183
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
184
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
185
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
186
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
187
188
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
189
190
# %%
191
# Get the feature importance for each model
192
gb_feature_importance = gbc.feature_importances_
193
194
# Print the feature importance scores
195
print("Gradient Boosting Classifier Feature Importance:")
196
for feature , importance in zip(X.columns , gb_feature_importance):
197
print(feature , ": ", round(importance , 3))
198
199
# %% [markdown]
200
# # Features Exploration
201
202
# %% [markdown]
203
# ### Without R3
204
205
# %%
206
X = X_resampled.drop('R3', axis=1)
207
y = y_resampled
208
209
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
210
estimator = GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=42)
211
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
212
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
213
214
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
215
feature_mask = rfe.support_
216
217
# Get the indices of selected features
218
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
219
220
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
221
222
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42)
223
224
# %%
225
#Train
226
gbc.fit(X_train , y_train)
227
228
#Make prediction
132
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:141==
229
y_pred = gbc.predict(X_test)
230
231
# %%
232
# Evaluate your model
233
scores = cross_val_score(gbc, X, y, scoring='f1', cv=cv, n_jobs=-1)
234
235
# Report performance
236
print('Cross Validation: %.3f (%.3f)' % (np.mean(scores), np.std(scores)))
237
238
# %%
239
#Performance
240
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
241
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
242
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
243
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
244
245
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
246
247
# %%
248
# Get the feature importance for each model
249
gb_feature_importance = gbc.feature_importances_
250
251
# Print the feature importance scores
252
print("Gradient Boosting Classifier Feature Importance:")
253
for feature , importance in zip(X.columns , gb_feature_importance):
254
print(feature , ": ", round(importance , 3))
255
256
# %% [markdown]
257
# ### Without GPS
258
259
# %%
260
X = X_resampled.drop('GPS', axis=1)
261
y = y_resampled
262
263
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
264
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
265
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
266
267
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
268
feature_mask = rfe.support_
269
270
# Get the indices of selected features
271
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
272
273
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
274
275
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42)
276
277
# %%
278
#Train
279
gbc.fit(X_train , y_train)
280
281
#Make prediction
282
y_pred = gbc.predict(X_test)
283
284
# %%
285
# Evaluate your model
286
scores = cross_val_score(gbc, X, y, scoring='f1', cv=cv, n_jobs=-1)
287
288
# Report performance
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
133
==PAGE:142==
289
print('Cross Validation: %.3f (%.3f)' % (np.mean(scores), np.std(scores)))
290
291
# %%
292
#Performance
293
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
294
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
295
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
296
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
297
298
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
299
300
# %%
301
# Get the feature importance for each model
302
gb_feature_importance = gbc.feature_importances_
303
304
# Print the feature importance scores
305
print("Gradient Boosting Classifier Feature Importance:")
306
for feature , importance in zip(X.columns , gb_feature_importance):
307
print(feature , ": ", round(importance , 3))
308
309
# %% [markdown]
310
# ### Without Both
311
312
# %%
313
X = X_resampled.drop(['R3', 'GPS'], axis=1)
314
y = y_resampled
315
316
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
317
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
318
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
319
320
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
321
feature_mask = rfe.support_
322
323
# Get the indices of selected features
324
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
325
326
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
327
328
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42)
329
330
# %%
331
#Train
332
gbc.fit(X_train , y_train)
333
334
#Make prediction
335
y_pred = gbc.predict(X_test)
336
337
# %%
338
# Evaluate your model
339
scores = cross_val_score(gbc, X, y, scoring='f1', cv=cv, n_jobs=-1)
340
341
# Report performance
342
print('Cross Validation: %.3f (%.3f)' % (np.mean(scores), np.std(scores)))
343
344
# %%
345
#Performance
346
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
347
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
348
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
134
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:143==
349
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
350
351
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
352
353
# %%
354
# Get the feature importance for each model
355
gb_feature_importance = gbc.feature_importances_
356
357
# Print the feature importance scores
358
print("Gradient Boosting Classifier Feature Importance:")
359
for feature , importance in zip(X.columns , gb_feature_importance):
360
print(feature , ": ", round(importance , 3))
361
362
# %% [markdown]
363
# ### Without Area
364
365
# %%
366
X = X_resampled.drop(['R3', 'GPS', 'area'], axis=1)
367
y = y_resampled
368
369
# Assume you have X as your feature matrix and y as the target variable
370
rfe = RFE(estimator , n_features_to_select=8)
# Select top 8 features
371
selected_features = rfe.fit_transform(X, y)
372
373
# Get the Boolean mask indicating selected features
374
feature_mask = rfe.support_
375
376
# Get the indices of selected features
377
selected_feature_indices = np.where(feature_mask)[0]
378
379
X = X[list((feature_mask*X.columns).drop(""))]
380
381
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=size_test ,
random_state=42)
382
383
# %%
384
#Train
385
gbc.fit(X_train , y_train)
386
387
#Make prediction
388
y_pred = gbc.predict(X_test)
389
390
# %%
391
# Evaluate your model
392
scores = cross_val_score(gbc, X, y, scoring='f1', cv=cv, n_jobs=-1)
393
394
# Report performance
395
print('Cross Validation: %.3f (%.3f)' % (np.mean(scores), np.std(scores)))
396
397
# %%
398
#Performance
399
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_test , y_pred)
400
precision = precision_score(y_test , y_pred)
401
recall = recall_score(y_test , y_pred)
402
f1 = f1_score(y_test , y_pred)
403
404
print("Accuracy: {:.3f}, Precision: {:.3f}, Recall: {:.3f}, F1 score: {:.3f}".
format(accuracy , precision , recall , f1))
405
406
# %%
407
# Get the feature importance for each model
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
135
==PAGE:144==
408
gb_feature_importance = gbc.feature_importances_
409
410
# Print the feature importance scores
411
print("Gradient Boosting Classifier Feature Importance:")
412
for feature , importance in zip(X.columns , gb_feature_importance):
413
print(feature , ": ", round(importance , 3))
414
415
# %%
Code/Features_Analysis.py
136
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:145==
L
Features Analysis Additional Results
Additional results of the models without either R3 or GPS variables
L.1
Without R3
Cross Validation: 0.724
Precision: 0.644, Recall: 0.745, F1 score: 0.691
Variable
Value
GPS
0.784
area
0.052
speed
0.016
congestion
0.027
day
0.02
hour
0.037
week
0.048
Ground Moisture
0.017
Table L.1: Features Importance without R3
L.2
Without GPS
Cross Validation: 0.801
Precision: 0.585, Recall: 0.745, F1 score: 0.655
Variable
Value
area
0.084
R3
0.72
speed
0.047
congestion
0.029
hour
0.061
week
0.032
Min Temp
0.004
Ground Moisture
0.024
Table L.2: Features Importance without GPS
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
137
==PAGE:146==
M
Visualizations Code
Code containing the main visualizations and maps
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
9
import seaborn as sns
10
import matplotlib as mpl
11
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
12
13
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
14
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
15
from matplotlib import cm
16
from IPython.display import clear_output
17
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
18
19
import seaborn as sns
20
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
21
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
22
23
import matplotlib as mpl
24
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
25
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
26
27
# %%
28
import folium
29
from folium.plugins import HeatMap
30
31
from shapely.geometry import Point, shape, MultiPolygon
32
33
import requests
34
35
import geopy
36
from geopy.geocoders import Nominatim
37
import geopandas as gpd
38
from geopandas import GeoDataFrame as gdf
39
from shapely.wkt import loads
40
41
import json
42
43
# %%
44
df = pd.read_csv('2_data_for_visual.csv', index_col=0)
45
df_categorized = pd.read_csv('1_data_for_model.csv', index_col=0)
46
47
# %%
48
df.time.min()
49
50
# %%
51
df.time.max()
52
53
# %%
54
# Download the GeoJSON file for danish communes
138
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:147==
55
url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Neogeografen/dagi/master/geojson/
kommuner.geojson'
56
response = requests.get(url)
57
geojson_data = response.json()
58
59
# %%
60
save = 0 # 0 does nothing , 1 saves the geojson file, 2 imports the geojson file
. 2 is used in case internet access is not available.
61
62
if save ==1:
63
64
# Specify the file path to save the GeoJSON file
65
file_path = "geojson_data.geojson"
66
67
# Save the geojson_data to a file
68
with open(file_path , "w") as file:
69
json.dump(geojson_data , file)
70
71
elif save==2:
72
73
# Provide the path to your GeoJSON file
74
file_path = "geojson_data.geojson"
75
76
# Read the GeoJSON file using geopandas
77
gdf = gpd.read_file(file_path)
78
79
80
# %%
81
# imporve Copenhagen informaiton with quarters
82
kvarter = gpd.read_file('0_kvarter.csv')
83
csv_gdf = gpd.GeoDataFrame(kvarter)
84
csv_gdf['geometry'] = csv_gdf['wkb_geometry']
85
# either all at once :
86
csv_gdf['geometry'] = csv_gdf['geometry'].apply(loads)
87
88
# %%
89
plt.bar(df.congestion.value_counts().keys(), df.congestion.value_counts().
values , color = 'c')
90
# Get the current axes
91
ax = plt.gca()
92
93
# Remove vertical gridlines
94
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
95
96
ax.set_xticks([1,2,3,4])
97
98
plt.xlabel('Index')
99
plt.ylabel('Count')
100
plt.title('Traffic Index Distribution')
101
plt.show()
102
103
# %%
104
# Creating the map on Copenhagen
105
rides_map = folium.Map(location=[55.6761, 12.5683], zoom_start=12)
106
#folium.TileLayer('stamentoner').add_to(rides_map) alternative style
107
108
# %%
109
loc = df[['lat', 'lon']].values
110
111
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map for falls
112
for lat, lon in zip(loc[:, 0], loc[:, 1]):
113
folium.CircleMarker(
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
139
==PAGE:148==
114
location=[lat, lon],
115
radius=2,
116
#color='white',
117
#fill=True,
118
fill_color='white',
119
fill_opacity=1
120
).add_to(rides_map)
121
122
# %%
123
rides_map
124
125
# %% [markdown]
126
# # Map with towns and CPH quarters
127
128
# %% [markdown]
129
# ## Creating the Maps color based on number of rides in that area
130
131
# %%
132
# Creating the map on Copenhagen
133
rides_map = folium.Map(location=[55.6761, 12.5683], zoom_start=12)
134
#folium.TileLayer('stamentoner').add_to(rides_map) alternative style
135
136
# %%
137
# Get the frequency of each value in df['area']
138
value_counts = df['area'].value_counts()
139
140
# Define a colormap based on the frequency of values
141
colormap = folium.LinearColormap(colors=['white', 'yellow', 'orange', 'red'],
vmin=value_counts.min(), vmax=value_counts.max())
142
143
# %%
144
colormap
145
146
# %%
147
value_counts
148
149
# %%
150
# Add the GeoJSON layer to the map with dynamic fill colors based on value
frequency
151
folium.GeoJson(
152
geojson_data ,
153
style_function=lambda feature: {
154
'fillColor': colormap(value_counts.get(feature['properties']['KOMNAVN'
], 0)),
155
'color': 'black',
156
'weight': 1,
157
'fillOpacity': 0.6
158
}
159
).add_to(rides_map)
160
161
# Iterate over the features in csv_gdf
162
for _, r in csv_gdf.iterrows():
163
# Without simplifying the representation of each borough ,
164
# the map might not be displayed
165
sim_geo = gpd.GeoSeries(r["geometry"]).simplify(tolerance=0.001)
166
geo_j = sim_geo.to_json()
167
168
# Create GeoJson layer with dynamic fill color
169
geo_j = folium.GeoJson(
170
data=geo_j,
171
style_function=lambda x, kvarternavn=r["kvarternavn"]: {
172
"fillColor": colormap(value_counts.get(kvarternavn , 0)),
140
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:149==
173
"color": "black",
174
"weight": 1,
175
"fillOpacity": 0.6
176
}
177
)
178
179
# Add popup with kvarternavn
180
folium.Popup(r["kvarternavn"]).add_to(geo_j)
181
182
# Add GeoJson layer to the map
183
geo_j.add_to(rides_map)
184
185
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map for not identified rides
186
187
missing = df[df['area'].isna()][['lat', 'lon']].values
188
189
if len(missing) != 0:
190
for lat, lon in zip(missing[:, 0], missing[:, 1]):
191
folium.CircleMarker(
192
location=[lat, lon],
193
radius=7,
194
color='red',
195
fill=True,
196
fill_color='white',
197
fill_opacity=1
198
).add_to(rides_map)
199
200
# %%
201
falls = df[df['fall']==1][['lat', 'lon']].values
202
203
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map for falls
204
for lat, lon in zip(falls[:, 0], falls[:, 1]):
205
folium.CircleMarker(
206
location=[lat, lon],
207
radius=3,
208
color='white',
209
fill=True,
210
fill_color='black',
211
fill_opacity=1
212
).add_to(rides_map)
213
214
# %%
215
# Add the colormap scale to the map
216
colormap.caption = 'Area Colormap'
217
rides_map.add_child(colormap)
218
219
# Add the layer control to the map
220
folium.LayerControl().add_to(rides_map)
221
222
# %%
223
# Add the colormap scale to the map
224
colormap.caption = 'Colormap'
225
rides_map.add_child(colormap)
226
227
# Add the layer control to the map
228
folium.LayerControl().add_to(rides_map)
229
230
# %%
231
rides_map
232
233
# %%
234
rides_map.save("rides_map.html")
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
141
==PAGE:150==
235
236
# %% [markdown]
237
# ## Colored based on average R3
238
239
# %%
240
# Creating the map on Copenhagen
241
R3_map = folium.Map(location=[55.6761, 12.5683], zoom_start=12)
242
243
# %%
244
mean = df.groupby('area').mean()
245
mean['R3_norm'] = (mean['R3'] - mean['R3'].min())/(mean['R3'].max()- mean['R3'
].min())
246
mean['R3_norm'].hist()
247
248
# %%
249
mean_info = df.groupby('area').mean()
250
mean_info['R3_norm'] = (mean_info['R3'] - mean_info['R3'].min())/(mean_info['R3
'].max()- mean_info['R3'].min())
251
252
# Define a colormap based on the frequency of values
253
colormap = folium.LinearColormap(colors=['white', 'brown', 'orange', 'yellow',
'blue'], vmin=mean_info['R3_norm'].min(), vmax=mean_info['R3_norm'].max(),
index = [0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 1])
254
255
mean_info = mean_info['R3_norm'].to_dict() #convert to dictionary to get
correspondence name - value
256
257
# %%
258
colormap
259
260
# %%
261
# Add the GeoJSON layer to the map with dynamic fill colors based on R3
262
folium.GeoJson(
263
geojson_data ,
264
style_function=lambda feature: {
265
'fillColor': colormap(mean_info.get(feature['properties']['KOMNAVN'],0)
),
266
'color': 'black',
267
'weight': 1,
268
'fillOpacity': 0.6
269
}
270
).add_to(R3_map)
271
272
# Iterate over the features in csv_gdf
273
for _, r in csv_gdf.iterrows():
274
# Without simplifying the representation of each borough ,
275
# the map might not be displayed
276
sim_geo = gpd.GeoSeries(r["geometry"]).simplify(tolerance=0.001)
277
geo_j = sim_geo.to_json()
278
279
# Create GeoJson layer with dynamic fill color
280
geo_j = folium.GeoJson(
281
data=geo_j,
282
style_function=lambda x, kvarternavn=r["kvarternavn"]: {
283
"fillColor": colormap(mean_info.get(kvarternavn , 0)),
284
"color": "black",
285
"weight": 1,
286
"fillOpacity": 0.6
287
}
288
)
289
290
# Add popup with kvarternavn
142
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:151==
291
folium.Popup(r["kvarternavn"]).add_to(geo_j)
292
293
# Add GeoJson layer to the map
294
geo_j.add_to(R3_map)
295
296
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map for not identified rides
297
298
missing = df[df['area'].isna()][['lat', 'lon']].values
299
300
if len(missing) != 0:
301
for lat, lon in zip(missing[:, 0], missing[:, 1]):
302
folium.CircleMarker(
303
location=[lat, lon],
304
radius=7,
305
color='red',
306
fill=True,
307
fill_color='white',
308
fill_opacity=1
309
).add_to(R3_map)
310
311
falls = df[df['fall']==1][['lat', 'lon']].values
312
313
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map for falls
314
for lat, lon in zip(falls[:, 0], falls[:, 1]):
315
folium.CircleMarker(
316
location=[lat, lon],
317
radius=3,
318
color='white',
319
fill=True,
320
fill_color='black',
321
fill_opacity=1
322
).add_to(R3_map)
323
324
# %%
325
# Add the colormap scale to the map
326
colormap.caption = 'R3 Colormap'
327
R3_map.add_child(colormap)
328
329
# Add the layer control to the map
330
folium.LayerControl().add_to(R3_map)
331
332
# %%
333
R3_map
334
335
# %%
336
R3_map.save("R3_map.html")
337
338
# %% [markdown]
339
# # Falls Heatmap
340
341
# %%
342
coords = df[df['fall']==1][['lat', 'lon']].values
343
344
# %%
345
# create a map of Copenhagen
346
heatmap_map = folium.Map(location=[55.6761, 12.5683], zoom_start=12)
347
348
# create a heatmap layer using the coordinates
349
heatmap_layer = HeatMap(coords.tolist())
350
heatmap_map.add_child(heatmap_layer)
351
352
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
143
==PAGE:152==
353
for lat, lon in zip(coords[:, 0], coords[:, 1]):
354
folium.CircleMarker(
355
location=[lat, lon],
356
radius=5,
357
color=None,
358
fill=True,
359
fill_color='black',
360
fill_opacity=0.5
361
).add_to(heatmap_map)
362
363
# %%
364
heatmap_map
365
366
# %%
367
heatmap_map.save("falls_heatmap.html")
368
369
# %% [markdown]
370
# ### Falls by area
371
372
# %%
373
crashes = df[df['fall']==1]
374
n_crashes = crashes['area'].value_counts()
375
combined_info = pd.DataFrame({'rides': value_counts , 'falls': n_crashes})
376
combined_info['freq'] = combined_info['falls'] / combined_info['rides']
377
combined_info[~combined_info['freq'].isna()].sort_values(by='freq')
378
379
# %%
380
locations = df[df['fall']==1][['lat', 'lon']]
381
382
# %%
383
geolocator = Nominatim(user_agent="my_app")
384
addresses = []
385
streetname = []
386
387
for index, row in locations.iterrows():
388
location = geolocator.reverse(f"{row['lat']}, {row['lon']}")
389
addresses.append(location.address)
390
try:
391
streetname.append(location.raw['address']['road'])
392
except:
393
KeyError: 'road'
394
395
locations['address'] = addresses
396
397
# %%
398
# Number of falls detected in each street
399
street = {}
400
for i in set(streetname):
401
street.update({i: streetname.count(i)})
402
403
# %%
404
street
405
406
# %%
407
# Iterate over the dictionary items
408
for key, value in street.items():
409
if value == 2:
410
print(key)
411
412
# %%
413
set(street.values())
414
144
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:153==
415
# %%
416
print('There are ', len(df[df['fall']==1]), 'falls in the dataset , in \n',
417
len(locations['address'].unique()), 'different rides, happened in \n',
418
len(set(streetname)), 'different streets')
419
420
# %% [markdown]
421
# # When falls happen
422
423
# %%
424
# Creating sets for falls in different time frames
425
rides_day = df.groupby('day').size()
426
rides_hour = df.groupby('hour').size()
427
rides_week22 = df[df['year']==2022].groupby('week').size()
428
rides_week23 = df[df['year']==2023].groupby('week').size()
429
430
# Creating sets for falls in different time frames
431
falls_day = df[df['fall']==1].groupby('day').size()
432
433
falls_hour = df[df['fall']==1].groupby('hour').size()
434
falls_hour = falls_hour.reindex(range(1, 25), fill_value=0) # Reshape for
missing hours
435
436
# %%
437
Weekly_traffic = pd.DataFrame()
438
Weekly_traffic['Day'] = ['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday'
, 'Saturday', 'Sunday']
439
Weekly_traffic['Share'] = [16, 17.5, 17.5, 17.5, 15.5 ,9, 7]
440
Weekly_traffic['amount'] = (Weekly_traffic['Share']/100)*len(df[df['fall']==1])
441
Weekly_traffic['amount_rides'] = (Weekly_traffic['Share']/100)*len(df.rideid.
unique())
442
443
# %%
444
# Create a bar chart of falls by day of week
445
plt.bar(falls_day.keys(), falls_day.values , color='c', label='Falls')
446
plt.plot(Weekly_traffic['amount'], c='r', label='Traffic')
447
# Get the current axes
448
ax = plt.gca()
449
450
# Remove vertical gridlines
451
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
452
453
plt.xlabel('Day of week')
454
plt.xticks(range(7),['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday', '
Saturday', 'Sunday'])
455
plt.ylabel('Number of falls')
456
plt.title('Falls Weekly Distribution')
457
458
plt.legend()
459
plt.show()
460
461
# %%
462
# Create a bar chart of falls by day of week
463
plt.bar(rides_day.keys(), rides_day.values , color='lightgreen', label='Rides')
464
plt.plot(Weekly_traffic['amount_rides'], c='r', label='Traffic')
465
# Get the current axes
466
ax = plt.gca()
467
468
# Remove vertical gridlines
469
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
470
471
plt.xlabel('Day of week')
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
145
==PAGE:154==
472
plt.xticks(range(7),['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday', '
Saturday', 'Sunday'])
473
plt.ylabel('Number of rides')
474
plt.title('Rides Weekly Distribution')
475
476
plt.legend()
477
plt.show()
478
479
# %%
480
Daily_traffic = pd.DataFrame()
481
Daily_traffic['Hour'] = [i for i in range(1, 25)]
482
Daily_traffic['Share'] = [0.50, 0.50, 0.50, 0.25, 0.25, 1.00, 4.00, 12.00,
10.00,
5.00, 3.00, 4.00, 4.00, 5.00, 6.00, 9.00, 11.00,
7.00, 5.00, 4.00,
3.00, 2.00, 2.00, 1.00]
483
Daily_traffic['amount'] = (Daily_traffic['Share']/100)*len(df[df['fall']==1])
484
Daily_traffic['amount_rides'] = (Daily_traffic['Share']/100)*len(df.rideid.
unique())
485
Daily_traffic = Daily_traffic.set_index('Hour')
486
487
# %%
488
# Create a bar chart of falls by day of week
489
plt.bar(falls_hour.keys(), falls_hour.values , color='c', label = 'Falls')
490
plt.plot(Daily_traffic['amount'], c='r', label='Traffic')
491
# Get the current axes
492
ax = plt.gca()
493
494
# Remove vertical gridlines
495
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
496
497
plt.xlabel('Hour of the Day')
498
plt.xticks([i for i in range(1, 25)])
499
plt.ylabel('Number of falls')
500
plt.title('Falls Daily Distribution')
501
502
plt.legend()
503
plt.show()
504
505
# %%
506
# Create a bar chart of falls by day of week
507
plt.bar(rides_hour.keys(), rides_hour.values , color='lightgreen', label = '
Rides')
508
plt.plot(Daily_traffic['amount_rides'], c='r', label='Traffic')
509
# Get the current axes
510
ax = plt.gca()
511
512
# Remove vertical gridlines
513
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
514
515
plt.xlabel('Hour of the Day')
516
plt.xticks([i for i in range(1, 25)])
517
plt.ylabel('Number of rides')
518
plt.title('Rides Daily Distribution')
519
520
plt.legend()
521
plt.show()
522
523
# %%
524
falls2022 = df[(df['fall']==1) & (df['year']==2022)].groupby(['week']).size()
525
falls2023 = df[(df['fall']==1) & (df['year']==2023)].groupby(['week']).size()
526
527
# %%
528
Yearly_traffic22 = pd.DataFrame()
146
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:155==
529
Yearly_traffic22['Week'] = [i for i in range(1, 52)]
530
# Filter the DataFrame based on the specified conditions
531
Yearly_traffic22 = Yearly_traffic22[Yearly_traffic22['Week'] >= 12]
532
Yearly_traffic22['Share'] = [94.2288347826087,
124.357426086957,
29.5663304347826, 72.9998086956522, 115.409895652174, 118.228,
113.616034782609, 92.8868695652174, 97.7348695652174, 120.696313043478,
95.5656173913043, 90.3905739130435, 121.482817391304, 86.7872,
45.3410260869565, 53.0262956521739, 47.8368,
49.0662782608696,
95.8846956521739, 77.2657565217391, 104.973913043478, 102.198052173913,
117.786834782609, 111.348626086957, 108.668973913043, 89.3114086956522,
95.491252173913,
89.1222260869565, 106.526417391304, 39.9592869565218,
101.124713043478, 102.794452173913, 106.885095652174, 85.3184173913043,
104.587147826087, 85.9873739130435, 109.844643478261, 105.310486956522,
49.4376521739131, 16.6749217391304]
533
Yearly_traffic22['Share'] = (Yearly_traffic22['Share'] - Yearly_traffic22['
Share'].min()) / (Yearly_traffic22['Share'].max() - Yearly_traffic22['Share
'].min())
534
Yearly_traffic22['amount'] = (Yearly_traffic22['Share'])*len(falls2022)
535
Yearly_traffic22['amount_rides'] = (Yearly_traffic22['Share']/10)*len(df.rideid
.unique())
536
Yearly_traffic22 = Yearly_traffic22.set_index('Week')
537
538
# %%
539
Yearly_traffic23 = pd.DataFrame()
540
Yearly_traffic23['Week'] = [i for i in range(1, 52)]
541
# Filter the DataFrame based on the specified conditions
542
Yearly_traffic23 = Yearly_traffic23[Yearly_traffic23['Week'] <= 22]
543
Yearly_traffic23['Share'] = [36.4550956521739,
75.3708695652174,
97.2433391304348, 61.5515130434783, 67.8625739130435, 78.8685043478261,
21.5748695652174, 51.4054608695652, 97.7996695652174, 98.1721217391305,
76.4066260869565, 76.7978782608696, 103.9232, 28.6517043478261,
75.3928173913043, 104.18787826087,
103.168573913044, 103.836052173913,
118.333060869565, 95.077947826087,
127.823043478261, 135.575860869565]
544
Yearly_traffic23['Share'] = (Yearly_traffic23['Share'] - Yearly_traffic23['
Share'].min()) / (Yearly_traffic23['Share'].max() - Yearly_traffic23['Share
'].min())
545
Yearly_traffic23['amount'] = (Yearly_traffic23['Share'])*len(falls2023)
546
Yearly_traffic23['amount_rides'] = (Yearly_traffic23['Share']/10)*len(df.rideid
.unique())
547
Yearly_traffic23 = Yearly_traffic23.set_index('Week')
548
549
# %%
550
# Create a bar chart of falls by day of week
551
plt.bar(falls2022.keys(), falls2022.values , color='r', label = 'Falls 2022')
552
plt.plot(Yearly_traffic22['amount'], c='c', label='Traffic 2022')
553
554
plt.bar(falls2023.keys(), falls2023.values , color='y', label = 'Falls 2023')
555
plt.plot(Yearly_traffic23['amount'], c='g', label='Traffic 2023')
556
557
# Get the current axes
558
ax = plt.gca()
559
560
# Remove vertical gridlines
561
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
562
563
plt.xlabel('Week of the Year')
564
plt.xticks([i for i in range(1, 52)])
565
plt.ylabel('Number of falls')
566
plt.title('Falls Yearly Distribution')
567
568
plt.legend()
569
plt.show()
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
147
==PAGE:156==
570
571
# %%
572
# Create a bar chart of falls by day of week
573
plt.bar(rides_week22.keys(), rides_week22.values , color='violet', label = '
Rides 2022')
574
plt.plot(Yearly_traffic22['amount_rides'], c='c', label='Traffic 2022')
575
576
plt.bar(rides_week23.keys(), rides_week23.values , color='lightgreen', label = '
Rides 2023')
577
plt.plot(Yearly_traffic23['amount_rides'], c='g', label='Traffic 2023')
578
579
# Get the current axes
580
ax = plt.gca()
581
582
# Remove vertical gridlines
583
ax.xaxis.grid(False)
584
585
plt.xlabel('Week of the Year')
586
plt.xticks([i for i in range(1, 52)])
587
plt.ylabel('Number of rides')
588
plt.title('Rides Yearly Distribution')
589
590
plt.legend()
591
plt.show()
592
593
# %%
594
#Add Code for distributions of falls woth different weather
595
596
# %% [markdown]
597
# ## Colored based on average Speed
598
599
# %%
600
# Creating the map on Copenhagen
601
speed_map = folium.Map(location=[55.6761, 12.5683], zoom_start=12)
602
603
# %%
604
mean = df.groupby('area').mean()
605
606
# %%
607
mean_info = df.groupby('area').mean()
608
609
# Define a colormap based on the frequency of values
610
colormap = folium.LinearColormap(colors=['white', 'blue', 'yellow', 'orange', '
red'], vmin=mean_info['speed'].min(), vmax=mean_info['speed'].max())
611
612
mean_info = mean_info['speed'].to_dict() #convert to dictionary to get
correspondence name - value
613
614
# %%
615
colormap
616
617
# %%
618
# Add the GeoJSON layer to the map with dynamic fill colors based on speed
619
folium.GeoJson(
620
geojson_data ,
621
style_function=lambda feature: {
622
'fillColor': colormap(mean_info.get(feature['properties']['KOMNAVN'],0)
),
623
'color': 'black',
624
'weight': 1,
625
'fillOpacity': 0.6
626
}
148
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:157==
627
).add_to(speed_map)
628
629
# Iterate over the features in csv_gdf
630
for _, r in csv_gdf.iterrows():
631
# Without simplifying the representation of each borough ,
632
# the map might not be displayed
633
sim_geo = gpd.GeoSeries(r["geometry"]).simplify(tolerance=0.001)
634
geo_j = sim_geo.to_json()
635
636
# Create GeoJson layer with dynamic fill color
637
geo_j = folium.GeoJson(
638
data=geo_j,
639
style_function=lambda x, kvarternavn=r["kvarternavn"]: {
640
"fillColor": colormap(mean_info.get(kvarternavn , 0)),
641
"color": "black",
642
"weight": 1,
643
"fillOpacity": 0.6
644
}
645
)
646
647
# Add popup with kvarternavn
648
folium.Popup(r["kvarternavn"]).add_to(geo_j)
649
650
# Add GeoJson layer to the map
651
geo_j.add_to(speed_map)
652
653
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map for not identified rides
654
655
missing = df[df['area'].isna()][['lat', 'lon']].values
656
657
if len(missing) != 0:
658
for lat, lon in zip(missing[:, 0], missing[:, 1]):
659
folium.CircleMarker(
660
location=[lat, lon],
661
radius=7,
662
color='red',
663
fill=True,
664
fill_color='white',
665
fill_opacity=1
666
).add_to(speed_map)
667
668
falls = df[df['fall']==1][['lat', 'lon']].values
669
670
# create a scatter plot overlay on the map for falls
671
for lat, lon in zip(falls[:, 0], falls[:, 1]):
672
folium.CircleMarker(
673
location=[lat, lon],
674
radius=3,
675
color='white',
676
fill=True,
677
fill_color='black',
678
fill_opacity=1
679
).add_to(speed_map)
680
681
# %%
682
# Add the colormap scale to the map
683
colormap.caption = 'Speed Colormap'
684
speed_map.add_child(colormap)
685
686
# Add the layer control to the map
687
folium.LayerControl().add_to(speed_map)
688
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
149
==PAGE:158==
689
# %%
690
speed_map
691
692
# %%
693
speed_map.save("speed_map.html")
694
695
# %%
Code/Visualization.py
150
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:159==
N
Evaluations Code
Code containing the main final features evaluations
1
# %% [markdown]
2
# # M.Sc. in Business Analytics - Thesis Project
3
# Nicola Ghislotti - s216376
4
5
# %%
6
import pandas as pd
7
import numpy as np
8
9
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
10
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
11
from matplotlib import cm
12
from IPython.display import clear_output
13
plt.rcParams['figure.facecolor'] = 'white' #force white backgorund
14
15
import seaborn as sns
16
sns.set(rc={'figure.figsize':(20,8)}) #Seaborn style
17
sns.set(style='darkgrid', context='talk')
18
19
import matplotlib as mpl
20
mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'Georgia'
21
from matplotlib.pyplot import figure
22
23
# %%
24
df = pd.read_csv('1_data_for_model.csv', index_col=0).dropna()
25
df = df.drop_duplicates()
26
27
# %%
28
#Assign order based on R3 value
29
df = df.sort_values('R3')
30
df['order'] = np.linspace(1.0, len(df), len(df))
31
32
# %%
33
print('Median:',np.median(df[df['fall'] == 1]['order']), 'Mean:', np.mean(df[df
['fall'] == 1]['order']))
34
35
# %% [markdown]
36
# ## R3 of falls distribution
37
38
# %%
39
df[df['fall'] == 1].order.hist(bins=50)
40
41
# %% [markdown]
42
# ## Falls Speed category
43
44
# %%
45
# Number of falls per speed category
46
df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('speed').count()
47
48
# %%
49
# Number of ride per speed category
50
df.groupby('speed').count()
51
52
# %%
53
# Share of falls per speed category
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
151
==PAGE:160==
54
round(df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('speed').count()['fall'] / df.groupby('speed'
).count()['fall'], 3)*100
55
56
# %% [markdown]
57
# ## Falls Congestion category
58
59
# %%
60
df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('congestion').count()
61
62
# %%
63
# Number of ride per speed category
64
df.groupby('congestion').count()
65
66
# %%
67
# Share of falls per speed category
68
round(df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('congestion').count()['fall'] / df.groupby('
congestion').count()['fall'], 3)*100
69
70
# %% [markdown]
71
# ## Falls Time category
72
73
# %%
74
df.hour.unique()
75
76
# %% [markdown]
77
# Hour
78
79
# %%
80
# Falls
81
df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('hour').count()
82
83
# %%
84
# Rides
85
df.groupby('hour').count()
86
87
# %%
88
# Share
89
round(df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('hour').count()['fall'] / df.groupby('hour').
count()['fall'], 3)*100
90
91
# %% [markdown]
92
# Day
93
94
# %%
95
df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('day').count()
96
97
# %%
98
# Number of ride per speed category
99
df.groupby('day').count()
100
101
# %%
102
# Share of falls per speed category
103
round(df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('day').count()['fall'] / df.groupby('day').
count()['fall'], 3)*100
104
105
# %% [markdown]
106
# Week
107
108
# %%
109
df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('week').count()
110
111
# %%
152
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
==PAGE:161==
112
# Number of ride per speed category
113
df.groupby('week').count()
114
115
# %%
116
# Share of falls per speed category
117
round(df[df['fall'] == 1].groupby('week').count()['fall'] / df.groupby('week').
count()['fall'], 3)*100
118
119
# %%
Code/Evaluations.py
Identifying Unreported Bike Crashes in Copenhagen
153
==PAGE:162==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 45 25 25 25
www.man.dtu.dk
