==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
CO2-brine properties for geological CO2
storage
Author:
Robin Shibu Baby
Supervisor:
Wei Yan
Co-supervisors:
Marc Cassiede
Sonja Smith
Student Number:
s212404
July – 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
1
Abstract
In the efforts to mitigate the climate change caused by greenhouse gas accumulation, reducing CO2
emissions has become crucial for all industries in order to meet the climate goals set by various coun-
tries. One effective method for achieving this is Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage (CCUS),
which involves capturing CO2 and storing it underground, typically in saline aquifers or depleted oil
and gas reservoirs.
For the evaluation and operation of a CO2 storage project, it is critical to have accurate CO2+brine
properties for the relevant storage site. In addition, there is always a need for thermodynamic data
on CO2+brine mixtures to cover the wide temperature, pressure, and composition range encountered
in CO2 storage.
The main purpose of this study is to measure CO2 solubility in brine and CO2
loaded brine density for a candidate storage site along with viscosity-related measurements for pure
water and pure brine. The solubility measurements were performed using a gravimetric technique
at 60 and 30°C in the pressure range from 5 to 40 MPa. Based on the solubility measurement, sev-
eral undersaturated brines were prepared with different CO2 concentrations. Brine densities were
then measured using a vibrating tube densimeter at temperature and pressure conditions similar to
those in the solubility measurement.
The measured densities were used to determine the partial
molar volume of CO2. Finally, the measured data together with data gathered from the literature
were compared with the predictions from various engineering models. Viscosity measurements of the
single-phase reservoir fluid (pure water and brine in our case) were later performed using the capil-
lary method at 200 bar and 60°C. It was found that the density of CO2-loaded brine varies linearly
with pressure and it increases with high concentrations of CO2. Samples of CO2 were prepared at
0.2, 0.43, 0.66 and 0.78 molal of CO2 dissolved in brine for the density and solubility measurements.
The density data were then used to investigate the molar volume of CO2 in the brine solution as a
function of temperature and pressure at 30 and 60°C with a pressure range of 5-40 MPa (based on
the change in critical point due to change in concentration of CO2). While, the viscosity results were
not quite good as expected even after repeated calibrations, which will be explained in further sections.
The solubility data were then finally modeled to check the linearity with the literature. We found the
results were qualitatively good at 60°C compared to 30°C assuming, the brine consists of pure NaCl.
==PAGE:3==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
2
Acknowledgement
I want to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Associate Professor Wei Yan for providing
constant support and guidance throughout the journey.
My journey in the lab, working with high-pressure vessels, has been truly incredible and it wouldn’t
have been possible without the invaluable support and guidance of Marc Cassiede. He patiently taught
me to operate all the equipment from scratch. As someone who had never worked with pressure valves
before, his expertise and mentorship were instrumental in enabling me to navigate the complexities
of the lab work successfully.
I extend my heartfelt thanks to Sonja Smith for her assistance in guiding me through the modeling
analysis and providing me access to the simulator. Her insights and expertise significantly contributed
to the analytical aspect of my research.
I want to express my sincere appreciation to Tran Thuong Dang, a dedicated lab technician. His
assistance played a crucial role in the smooth functioning of our experiments.
Lastly, I would like to thank my parents and friends for their unwavering support throughout this
journey. Their encouragement and belief in me, motivated me to persist even during challenging times,
making it possible for me to complete this thesis.
==PAGE:4==
Table of contents
1
Abstract
2
Acknowledgement
3
Introduction
1
3.1
Recent gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4
Literature Review
3
4.1
World energy demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.1.1
CO2 emissions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.1.2
Probable Implementations to reduce CO2 emissions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2.1
Storage mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2.2
Thermophysical Properties of CO2 loaded brine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2.3
Measurements methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Experimental Methods
16
5.1
Synthetic brine preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
Density Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2.1
Vibrating U-tube densimeter mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.2
Experimental procedure for density measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Solubility analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3.1
PVT DBR Cell mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.2
Experimental procedure for solubility measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Viscosity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.1
Capillary-based viscometer mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.2
Experimental procedure for viscosity measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Modeling Methods
33
7
Results
36
7.1
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.1.1
Density Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.1.2
Solubility Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.1.3
Viscosity Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.2
Modeling results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Conclusion
46
A Appendices
A.1 Sample Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1.1
Concentration of each salt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1.2
Molality of each salt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1.3
Density of studied mixture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1.4
Mass of CO2 dissolved into brine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1.5
Molar volume of CO2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1.6
Solubility of CO2 in brine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1.7
Viscosity calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
==PAGE:5==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
3
Introduction
According to the full analysis report by IEA, Global energy-related CO2 emissions grew by 0.9% or
321 Mt in 2022, reaching a new high of over 36.8 Gt. Emissions from the industry have shown a
decline of 1.7 to 9.2 Gt last year. While the European Union saw a 2.5 or 70 Mt decrease in CO2
emissions, despite of the fluctuations in the oil and gas industry[1]. Even though the EU regulations
have been persistent enough to reduce the dependence on fossil fuels over the years but the global
energy dependence on oil and gas is still 80%. They aim to bring down this number to 75% by 2030
and even below 60% by 2050. As the world will see a decline in the use of oil and gas resources over a
couple of decades and the adaptation of renewable energies will rise to prominence. Though the share
of renewables in the global world is only 2.8% for power consumption. It is vital for us to prolong the
use of oil and gas reservoirs in order to curb CO2 emissions [2].
The Danish government agreed to ban all new exploration contracts in late 2020 or early December
and end its oil and gas production from the North Sea by 2050 in order to become "climate neutral"
in the coming decades. Denmark has been the third largest oil and gas producer in Western Europe
behind Norway and the UK reducing Denmark’s revenue by $2.1 billion after this move. After this
move, in order to use the abandoned oil and gas wells, the only thing that could be done is to cap-
ture CO2 and store it underground to combat climate change. This led to the formation of "Project
Greensand" involving 23 Danish and international partners with the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) as one of the research partners [3].
The idea was turned into reality within 3 years of time by the main partners Ineos and Wintershall
Dea along with other consortiums. The project is supported by the Danish state through the Energy
Technology Development and Demonstration Program (EUDP). It was able to fetch a total funding
of 26 million euros from the Danish government. The project is currently in its 2nd phase and is
being developed and demonstrated. The first CO2 has been stored successfully on 8th March 2023
in the Nini well platform situated in the North Sea. The goal is to store 8 MTPA of CO2 by 2030
thereby establishing a value chain for transport and geological CO2 storage offshore in Denmark in
2025/2026. CO2 storage has been in place for over 40 years across the world so there are no such
casualties involved with all the expertise on board [3].
CCS in short involves capturing CO2 from the emitters such as industry, transported in liquid form
via ships to the storage sites (Nini well for Greensand), stored into the reservoir, and later monitored
throughout the years with developed and enhanced simulators. So far, we have observed the depleted
oil and gas reserves as well as saline aquifers as the potential sites for CO2 storage. The first ever
large-scale CO2 storage took place at the Sleipner field beneath the North Sea implemented by Equinor
in 1996 with a total capacity of more than 20 Mt of CO2. According to IEA, high-level geological
analysts predict a total global storage capacity between 8000 Gt and 55000 Gt. While not all of
them will be commercially feasible and viable that requires further characterization of the site. As
the global CO2 emissions rose to 36.8 Gt annually as of 2022, which clearly shows the storage poten-
tial. IEA highlights that billions of tonnes of CO2 have to be stored to achieve the net zero pathway [4].
1
==PAGE:6==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
3.1
Recent gaps
A thorough examination is required to assess the progress made in accurately measuring CO2 solubility
in brine under reservoir conditions. Recent studies have focused on refining experimental procedures
and equipment to achieve more precise measurements. These advancements aim to enhance the reli-
ability of CO2 solubility data. Additionally, the impact of selecting the appropriate equation of state
(EOS) in geochemical modeling software has not been adequately addressed in previous literature.
The incorporation of the correct EOS, coupled with suitable geochemical modeling software, can be
utilized to validate published experimental findings and determine the extent of improvement in the
accuracy of CO2 solubility measurements achieved in recent years [5].
During the CO2 injection, CO2 gets dissolved in brine leading to density difference, thereby, creating
a negative buoyant force caused by natural convection (Pruess and Spycher, 2007). This force pulls
the CO2-loaded brine towards the bottom of the reservoir at a rate that is influenced by other factors
such as viscosity. Therefore, a proper study of the viscosity and density of the CO2-brine system
is essential in reservoir flow simulations used to model the injection and long-term fate of CO2 in a
storage project. From the literature search, it yields a very limited amount of experimental data for
the viscosity and density of CO2-loaded brine systems specifically for higher pressure and temperature
conditions. Even though there are some density measurements done for the CO2-brine system but
the database is still limited as most of them are restricted to CO2-water systems in a sparse pressure
range [5].
3.2
Objectives
This project is aimed to measure some critical equilibrium and thermophysical properties (density and
viscosity specifically) for CO2-brine mixtures and model these mixtures using relevant thermodynamic
models. More specifically, the project will involve the following tasks:
1) To conduct a literature survey of CO2-brine properties relevant to CO2 storage. In particular, we
will focus on CO2 solubilities in different brine types and the densities and viscosities of brine with
dissolved CO2. Through the literature survey, we will expand the relevant databases and identify the
gaps in the current data.
2) To perform experimental measurement of CO2 solubilities in brines and the densities and viscosities
of brines with dissolved CO2. The CO2 solubility will be measured with an analytical method, the
density with a vibrating tube method, and the viscosity with a capillary method.
2
==PAGE:7==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
4
Literature Review
This chapter highlights the need for CO2 storage in order to combat climate change and on a mission
to achieve a carbon-neutral target. It focuses mainly on the background study done to support the
research area and objectives.
4.1
World energy demand
The current economic climate, characterized by a negative outlook, has resulted in reduced expecta-
tions for energy demand growth compared to last year. Factors such as high energy prices, increased
concerns about energy security, and strengthened climate policies have significantly impacted the nat-
ural gas industry, leading to a substantial decline in its annual demand growth rate. In contrast,
coal experiences a temporary surge in demand in specific regions due to higher natural gas prices,
but efforts to reduce emissions quickly reverse this trend, causing coal demand to decline and end
the decade at a level 9% lower than the present.
On the other hand, renewable energy sources,
particularly solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind power show significant progress and are projected to
account for a substantial share of global electricity generation by 2030. In fact, they are expected to
contribute 43% of electricity generation worldwide, up from the current 28%. Lastly, oil demand is
anticipated to increase by 0.8% annually until 2030 but is projected to reach its peak soon after at
approximately 103 million barrels per day due to the growing adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) and
improvements in energy efficiency, which pose challenges to the future prospects of the oil industry [4].
Energy-related emissions are projected to continue increasing in the STEPS scenario for the next
two years before undergoing a decline in the mid-2020s. By 2030, these emissions are anticipated to
be slightly lower than current levels, reaching 36.2 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide (Gt CO2). In the
Announced Pledges Scenario (APS) scenario, which emphasizes early and ambitious actions by govern-
ments to achieve substantial emission reductions and improve air quality, emissions further decrease
to 31.5 Gt CO2 by 2030. The APS scenario also highlights the significant involvement of the private
sector, with nearly 800 companies committing to achieving net-zero emissions. Notably, collaborative
initiatives within industries such as steel, cement, aviation, and shipping are contributing to these
efforts. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the actions outlined in the APS scenario fall short of
the requirements outlined in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE) scenario [6].
4.1.1
CO2 emissions
According to the “BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2021” the proven reserves of oil, natural
gas and coal are at present 1,732.4 thousand million barrels, 188.1 trillion cubic meters and 1074.108
thousand million tonnes, respectively. Looking at the statistics, it’s clear that coal’s gonna exhaust
for another 100 years or so, whereas the oil and gas reserves for another 50 years. As the world is
now adapting to increase the production of renewables, in midst of that CCUS has turned out to be
an effective solution to reduce CO2 emissions. The stored CO2 also has an important role in EOR, as
it improves sweep efficiency and increases oil displacement. Though, fracking (shale deposits) is done
in large scale in US to increase the fossil fuel reserves but due to environmental concerns, it is being
banned in EU [2].
As we talked about the reserves getting exhausted, fossil fuels have a significant impact on the climate
due to the emissions of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide (CO2). When fossil fuels such
as coal, oil, and natural gas are burned for energy production, they release CO2 into the atmosphere.
CO2 acts as a greenhouse gas, trapping heat and contributing to global warming.
3
==PAGE:8==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Coal is the most carbon-intensive fuel, emitting the largest amount of CO2 when burned. It is a
major contributor to global CO2 emissions, especially in countries like China and India. Oil, used for
transportation and industrial purposes, is another significant source of CO2 emissions. Natural gas,
although cleaner than coal and oil, still releases CO2 when combusted [7].
The increased concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere leads to various climate impacts, including
rising temperatures, altered precipitation patterns, sea-level rise, and more frequent extreme weather
events. These changes have adverse effects on ecosystems, wildlife, and human societies, threatening
biodiversity, food security, and water resources.
4.1.2
Probable Implementations to reduce CO2 emissions
To reduce CO2 emissions and decrease reliance on fossil fuels, several strategies can be implemented.
One approach is transitioning to renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydropower. The
growth has been substantial, as the global energy consumption as of 2019 (by IEA) is around 3.7%
for renewables as compared with 0.8% a decade ago. This has been possible due to technology ad-
vancements and increased investments by the governments. These clean energy technologies generate
electricity without emitting CO2, offering a sustainable alternative to fossil fuel-based power genera-
tion [5].
Another strategy involves promoting energy efficiency across various sectors. Improving the energy ef-
ficiency of buildings, appliances, and industrial processes can significantly reduce energy consumption
and, subsequently, CO2 emissions. This can be achieved through measures like upgrading insulation,
using energy-efficient lighting and appliances, and adopting energy management systems.
Transportation is a major contributor to CO2 emissions amounting to 37% of it, reported by IEA
in 2021. Encouraging the adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) and improving public transportation
systems can help reduce carbon emissions from the transportation sector. Additionally, investing in
alternative transportation modes like biking and walking can further decrease reliance on fossil fuel-
powered vehicles [5].
Policies and regulations play a crucial role in driving the transition to low-carbon alternatives. Gov-
ernments can implement carbon pricing mechanisms, such as carbon taxes or cap-and-trade systems,
to incentivize the reduction of CO2 emissions. Subsidies and financial incentives can also support the
deployment of renewable energy projects and encourage energy efficiency measures.
Furthermore, research and development efforts should be directed toward advancing clean energy tech-
nologies and developing innovative solutions to reduce CO2 emissions. This includes advancements in
energy storage systems, smart grids, and carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies, which can
capture and store CO2 emissions from fossil fuel power plants.
Lastly, raising awareness and promoting sustainable practices among individuals, businesses, and
communities is essential. Educating the public about the impacts of CO2 emissions and encouraging
sustainable lifestyle choices, such as reducing energy consumption and adopting renewable energy
sources, can contribute to a broader societal shift towards a low-carbon future.
Overall, a combination of transitioning to renewable energy sources, improving energy efficiency,
promoting sustainable transportation, implementing supportive policies, fostering technological ad-
vancements, and raising awareness can effectively reduce CO2 emissions and reduce dependence on
fossil fuels.
4
==PAGE:9==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
For instance, in the current scenario, India still being a prominent player in coal-produced electric-
ity, is being transitioned into the major producer of solar-powered nation thereby, reducing the coal
dependency. This has been possible due to effective strategic policies by the government along with
subsidies on the road to achieving net zero.
To address the climate impact of fossil fuels, transitioning to cleaner and renewable energy sources
is crucial. Investing in renewable energy technologies like solar, wind, and hydropower, along with
promoting energy efficiency measures, can help reduce CO2 emissions and mitigate climate change.
Additionally, efforts to capture and store CO2 emissions through carbon capture and storage tech-
nologies can play a role in reducing the impact of fossil fuels on the climate which will be the highlight
of my research in the later sections. The value of the CCS chain has been looked over in reducing
the costs of the electricity sector as per the 2016 reports of Heuberger et. al. For example, a normal
wind-powered plant can reduce CO2 emissions from 0.78-0.38 tonnes of CO2/MWh while, with a CCS
installed can bring it down to 0.1 tonnes of CO2/MWh.According to the rough estimates by the Low
Carbon Innovation Coordination Group (LCICG), UK energy systems without CCS technology can
incur a total cost of additional 100-500 billion pounds in the year 2010-2050. So, a pre-installed CCS
technology proves to be an efficient solution to de-carbonize the energy sector [8].
4.2
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
Carbon storage, also known as carbon capture and storage (CCS), is a process that involves captur-
ing carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from industrial sources or power plants and permanently storing
them to prevent their release into the atmosphere. This approach aims to mitigate climate change by
reducing CO2 emissions, as CO2 is a major greenhouse gas responsible for global warming.
The concept of carbon storage has been around for several decades, with early discussions dating
back to the 1970s. However, it gained more attention in the 1990s as concerns about climate change
increased. The idea of capturing CO2 emissions before they are released into the atmosphere gained
traction as a potential solution to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The carbon storage process typically involves three main steps: capture, transportation, and storage.
In the capture phase, CO2 is separated from other flue gases produced during industrial processes or
power generation. Various technologies, such as post-combustion capture, pre-combustion capture,
and oxyfuel combustion, are employed for this purpose. These methods aim to capture CO2 efficiently
and at a large scale [5].
Once the CO2 is captured, it needs to be transported to a suitable storage site. This is often achieved
through pipelines or ships, depending on the distance between the capture point and the storage lo-
cation. Transportation infrastructure plays a crucial role in ensuring safe and efficient transfer of CO2.
In the storage phase, the captured CO2 is injected deep underground into geological formations for
long-term storage. These formations can include depleted oil and gas reservoirs, saline aquifers, or
unmineable coal seams. The CO2 is stored securely in these formations, isolated from the atmosphere,
preventing its release and subsequent impact on climate change.
Different mechanisms ensure the permanent storage of CO2. These include structural trapping, where
the CO2 is trapped within porous rock formations by caprocks or impermeable layers above them,
and solubility trapping, where the CO2 dissolves in the underground water and remains trapped in
solution. Over time, the CO2 can mineralize, turning into stable carbonate minerals, contributing to
a more permanent storage solution.
5
==PAGE:10==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
The history of carbon storage has seen several milestones and advancements. In 1996, the Sleipner
gas field in the North Sea became the first commercial-scale project to implement carbon storage, in-
jecting CO2 into a deep saline aquifer. Since then, numerous projects have been developed worldwide
to explore and implement carbon storage technologies [5].
However, the adoption of carbon storage has faced challenges, including high costs, limited storage
capacity, and public acceptance concerns. Nevertheless, research and development efforts continue to
improve the efficiency, safety, and economic viability of carbon storage technologies.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in carbon capture utilization and storage (CCUS),
which involves capturing CO2 emissions for beneficial use, such as enhanced oil recovery or the pro-
duction of synthetic fuels. This approach aims to create economic incentives for carbon storage while
reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Overall, carbon storage has emerged as a potential solution to mitigate CO2 emissions and combat
climate change. Ongoing advancements in technology, supportive policies, and international collabo-
rations are vital to further develop and deploy carbon storage projects on a larger scale to help achieve
global emission reduction targets.
For our Project ’Greensand’, the liquid CO2 was shipped from an Ineos Oxide plant (where it was
captured) in Antwerp, Belgium to the Nini platform in the North Sea and later sent underground.
The reservoir is composed of sandstone, which is 1.8 km below the seabed. It lies under a series of
shale layers that act as a cap of the reservoir for the CO2 to be contained in the porous sandstone
cavities. The basic principle for Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) is shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Basic outline of CCS
6
==PAGE:11==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
4.2.1
Storage mechanisms
Long-term storage of CO2 in saline aquifers relies on 4 different mechanisms-
1. Structural Trapping
This mechanism relies on the physical properties of the geological formation itself to trap CO2.
It involves the presence of impermeable layers, such as cap rocks or sealing formations, that
act as barriers and prevent the upward migration of CO2. The impermeable layers create a
structural trap, effectively confining the CO2 within the storage reservoir.
2. Residual Trapping
Residual trapping occurs when a portion of the injected CO2 becomes trapped in the small pores
and pore throats of the storage reservoir. The CO2 is held in place by capillary forces, preventing
it from flowing freely. Residual trapping enhances long-term storage security by immobilizing
CO2 and reducing the potential for leakage.
3. Solubility Trapping
Solubility trapping occurs when CO2 dissolves in the pore fluids within the storage reservoir.
When CO2 dissolves in water or pure brine, it forms a carbonic acid solution, which increases
the density and viscosity of the fluid while becoming a single-phase fluid. This dense and viscous
CO2-rich fluid tends to stay within the storage reservoir, minimizing the risk of migration.
4. Mineral Trapping
Mineral trapping, also known as mineralization or carbon mineral sequestration, involves the
chemical reaction of CO2 with certain minerals present in the storage reservoir. Over time,
the CO2 reacts with minerals, such as calcium, magnesium, or iron, forming stable carbonates.
This process permanently converts CO2 into solid mineral compounds, reducing the potential
for CO2 leakage.
These trapping mechanisms work synergistically to ensure the long-term storage of CO2 in geological
formations as shown in Figure 4.2. By combining multiple trapping mechanisms, the stored CO2 is
effectively immobilized and secured within the reservoir, minimizing the potential for release into the
atmosphere. It’s important to note that the relative contribution of each trapping mechanism can
vary depending on the specific characteristics of the storage site and the geology of the formation [5].
7
==PAGE:12==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 4.2: Trapping mechanisms over time [Source: IPCC, 2008]
These mechanisms are also duly possible if the injected CO2 is in a supercritical state. We have to
ensure specifically, the temperature and pressure conditions must be regulated in order to stay above
the critical points which we will see through the experiment in the later sections. It has the following
benefits from the perspective of long-term storage:
Injecting carbon dioxide (CO2) in a supercritical state offers several benefits for efficient CO2 stor-
age. When CO2 is in a supercritical state, it exhibits properties that make it well-suited for storage
purposes. Here are some of the benefits of injecting CO2 in a supercritical state for efficient CO2
storage:
1. Enhanced Solubility
Supercritical CO2 has significantly higher solubility in brine or water compared to gaseous or
liquid CO2. This increased solubility allows for a more efficient dissolution and trapping of CO2
in the storage formation. The higher solubility ensures that a larger amount of CO2 can be
stored within the available pore spaces, increasing the storage capacity of the formation.
2. Improved Displacement Efficiency
Supercritical CO2 has better fluid mobility compared to gaseous CO2. It can flow more easily
through the storage formation, displacing the existing fluids and ensuring effective contact with
the rock surfaces. This improved displacement efficiency enables better sweep efficiency, mean-
ing a larger fraction of the CO2 can come into contact with the rock and contribute to storage
rather than bypassing potential storage zones.
3. Lower Density and Viscosity
Supercritical CO2 has a lower density and viscosity compared to liquid CO2. This property
allows for easier injection into the storage formation, reducing the injection pressures required
and simplifying the overall storage operation. Lower viscosity also facilitates CO2 movement
within the storage formation, improving the spreading and distribution of CO2 within the pore
spaces.
4. Reduced Risk of Caprock Damage
Caprocks are impermeable layers that seal the storage formation and prevent the upward mi-
gration of CO2. Supercritical CO2, with its enhanced solubility and improved mobility, reduces
8
==PAGE:13==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
the risk of caprock damage. The higher solubility minimizes the potential for CO2 leakage along
caprock interfaces, while improved fluid mobility reduces the likelihood of fracturing or displac-
ing the caprock.
5. Increased Storage Efficiency
The combination of higher solubility, better displacement efficiency, and improved spreading
characteristics of supercritical CO2 contributes to overall storage efficiency. More CO2 can be
stored within the storage formation, and the captured CO2 can be effectively distributed and
trapped, optimizing the utilization of available storage capacity.
It’s important to note that the use of supercritical CO2 for storage depends on specific geological
conditions and the characteristics of the storage site. Different storage formations may require differ-
ent operational parameters and considerations. However, in general, injecting CO2 in a supercritical
state offers several advantages for efficient CO2 storage and can enhance the effectiveness and long-
term stability of carbon capture and storage (CCS) projects. The phase envelope showing the critical
properties of CO2 can be clearly understood from Figure 4.3. So, the critical conditions of CO2 are
nearing 31°C and 73.8 bar.
Figure 4.3: CO2 phase envelope with density as a function of temperature and pressure
[Source: Bachu, 2003]
9
==PAGE:14==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
4.2.2
Thermophysical Properties of CO2 loaded brine
The thermophysical properties play a vital role in the long-term storage of carbon dioxide (CO2).
Here are the key reasons why these properties are important for efficient and effective CO2 storage
over the long term:
1. Storage Capacity
Properties such as density, solubility, and phase behavior determine the amount of CO2 that
can be stored within a given volume of the storage formation. Understanding these properties
helps estimate the maximum storage capacity and optimize the injection and storage operations
accordingly.
2. CO2 Distribution
The viscosity and diffusivity of CO2 impact its movement and spreading within the storage
formation. Efficient distribution of CO2 is crucial for maximizing storage efficiency and avoid-
ing localized accumulation or channeling, which could result in reduced storage capacity and
increased risks of leakage.
3. Trapping Mechanisms
The thermophysical properties influence the effectiveness of the trapping mechanisms that im-
mobilize CO2 within the storage formation. Solubility, mineralization, and capillary pressure
are key trapping mechanisms. Proper characterization of these properties ensures that the CO2
remains securely trapped over the long term, reducing the risk of leakage or migration.
4. Stability and Integrity
Understanding the thermophysical properties helps assess the stability and integrity of the stor-
age formation. Knowledge of rock permeability and capillary pressure assists in identifying suit-
able locations for injection and storage, as well as areas where CO2 can be effectively trapped
and immobilized. This knowledge helps ensure the long-term containment and stability of the
stored CO2.
5. Monitoring and Verification
Monitoring the behavior and movement of CO2 during storage is essential for ensuring the
long-term effectiveness of storage operations. Thermophysical properties, such as density and
diffusivity, affect the behavior of CO2, and monitoring these properties provides valuable infor-
mation on the integrity of the storage site and the effectiveness of containment.
6. Risk Mitigation
Accurate knowledge of the thermophysical properties helps assess and mitigate potential risks
associated with CO2 storage, such as leakage or unintended migration. By understanding the
behavior and characteristics of CO2, storage operators can implement appropriate measures to
minimize the risks and ensure the long-term safety and environmental integrity of the storage
site [5].
Overall, a comprehensive understanding of the thermophysical properties of CO2 and the storage
formation is crucial for optimizing storage capacity, distribution, trapping mechanisms, stability, and
10
==PAGE:15==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
risk management. This knowledge enhances the effectiveness and long-term viability of CO2 storage,
contributing to the successful mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions and climate change.
For our research work, we investigated mainly on 3 main thermophysical properties of CO2-loaded
brine for the long-term safety of candidate storage site as shown below-
1. Density parameter
Density is considered to be one of the critical properties to be estimated as it affects the amount
of CO2 that can be stored within a given volume.
This, in general, gives an overview of how the density of the solution increases as, we inject CO2
over time at higher pressures and at a constant temperature, which we will see in detail in the
further sections by varying the concentrations of CO2 loaded into the brine.
Higher CO2 density allows for greater storage capacity. Pressure and temperature conditions at
the storage site influence CO2 density, and understanding the density variations with changing
conditions is important for efficient storage design.
2. Solubility parameter
Solubility refers to the ability of CO2 to dissolve in fluids, particularly water or brine present in
the storage formation. Understanding the solubility of CO2 in water helps assess its potential
for dissolution, which can enhance storage capacity and improve the long-term stability of CO2
storage.
The solubility of CO2 in water or brine is influenced by various factors, including temperature,
pressure, and the composition of the fluid. At high pressures and low temperatures, the solu-
bility of CO2 in water or brine increases. This is why, storage sites with deep saline aquifers,
which often exhibit higher pressures and lower temperatures, are suitable for solubility-based
CO2 storage.
To examine the solubility parameter, phase equilibrium data for CO2 are looked over to con-
duct the experiments and measure the solubility of CO2 in pure brine under varying conditions.
Later, we select the suitable EOS and perform modeling in order to fit the solubility data points.
3. Viscosity parameter
Viscosity is a measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow. CO2 viscosity affects its ability to displace
fluids in the storage formation during injection and the subsequent spreading and migration of
CO2 within the pore spaces. Lower viscosity allows for better mobility and distribution, facili-
tating efficient storage.
Viscosity is also a crucial parameter for assessing the efficiency of CO2 injection and migration
within the reservoir. As explained before, CO2 exists in a supercritical (SC) state under high
pressure and temperature conditions (in a reservoir) so, it exhibits unique properties of both a
gas and a liquid thereby, inducing a higher viscosity as compared to its gaseous state.
The viscosity of SC-CO2 being affected of factors like temperature, pressure, and the presence
of impurities. An increase in temperature and pressure may generally decrease the viscosity of
SC-CO2, resulting in a more fluid-like behavior. Whereas, at the same time, it might increase
11
==PAGE:16==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
the viscosity of SC-CO2 in the presence of impurities such as water or other gases.
Moreover, the viscosity of SC-CO2 also affects the overall storage capacity and pressure buildup
within the reservoir. Higher viscosities can impede the flow of CO2 and reduce the overall storage
capacity of the site. Therefore, a thorough understanding of viscosity is necessary to optimize
storage operations and estimate the long-term behavior of stored CO2.
4.2.3
Measurements methodology
• Density measurements
Density measurements were performed in order to understand the properties of CO2-loaded brine
in a varied range of pressure and temperatures for an efficient storage system. This chapter will
focus on the literature of different methods used for an efficient storage in the past and what
current changes had to be employed in order to expand our CCS research database.
Several studies have been conducted on the density measurement and modeling of CO2 aque-
ous solutions. In early investigations, Drange and Haugan proposed a straightforward model
based on a modified version of Henry’s law for injecting CO2 into shallow water at ocean depths
ranging from 200 to 400 meters. Ohsumi et al. conducted preliminary density measurements
of liquid CO2-H2O solutions at a temperature of 276.15 K and pressure of 34.3 MPa using a
vibrating-tube-type density meter. Their results indicated that a deposit of CO2 would form
a "CO2 lake" within seawater at a depth of 3000 meters. Building upon this work, Teng et
al. expanded the density measurements of liquid CO2-H2O solutions at 293 K and pressures
ranging from 6.44 to 29.49 MPa, corresponding to ocean depths of 500 to 3000 meters.
Previous studies have focused on investigating the impact of saline content on CO2 saline water
solutions by directly measuring changes in density. Nighswander et al. conducted experiments,
reporting data on density changes at temperatures ranging from 353.15 to 473.15 K and pres-
sures up to 10 MPa for a NaCl mass fraction of 0.001. Similarly, Song et al. measured density
variations at temperatures from 333.15 to 413.15 K and 10 MPa for mass fractions of 0.055 to
0.189. Yan et al. measured the density of saturated CO2-brine systems at temperatures of 323
K, 373 K, and 413 K, and pressures ranging from 5 to 40 MPa. Schmidt et al. investigated
high-temperature and -pressure states, measuring the PVT (pressure-volume-temperature) prop-
erties of CO2-H2O-NaCl solutions with a NaCl mass fraction of 0.4, simulating metamorphic
rock conditions at temperatures from 623.15 to 973.15 K and pressures from 200 to 400 MPa in
a cold-seal pressure vessel.
Regarding CO2 seawater and brine solutions, Li et al. provided data on the solubility and den-
sity of CO2 in Weyburn formation at a temperature of 332.15 K and pressures up to 29 MPa.
Song et al. measured the density of CO2-seawater solutions at low temperatures from 276.15
to 283.15 K and high pressures from 4 to 12 MPa, simulating deep ocean conditions. Zhang et
al. conducted density measurements of CO2-brine solutions from the Tianjin Tanggu Reservoir
and supercritical CO2-Dagang brine solutions under sequestration conditions, covering pressures
from 10 to 18 MPa and temperatures from 313 to 353 K [9].
However, there is inconsistency in the available data from the literature, especially for CO2-
brine solutions.
Duan et al.
discussed the need for additional data from field brine, which
would greatly benefit both academic research and engineering applications in the field of carbon
12
==PAGE:17==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
capture and storage (CCS).
As one of the important thermophysical properties for CO2 storage as discussed earlier, com-
prehensive data on the density of CO2-brine solutions are needed to expand our research area,
especially at higher pressure and temperature conditions. In this work, we first report the new
data on densities of synthetic brine similar to the theoretical composition to the one taken from
the Nini West field, situated in the Danish North Sea. These were performed at a varied pressure
ranging from 5-40 MPa at a temperature of 30 and 60 °C. Later, brine was loaded with CO2
with varying concentrations at 0.2, 0.43, 0.66 and 0.78 molal of CO2 dissolved in brine solution.
• Solubility measurements
A significant amount of data exists regarding the solubility of carbon dioxide (CO2) in brine, es-
pecially at low pressures. In a comprehensive review conducted by Carroll et al., they examined
low-pressure solubility data of CO2 in water and developed an equation for Henry’s constant
based on their database derived from previous studies. However, when it comes to studying CO2
sequestration, high-pressure data becomes essential as CO2 is injected as a supercritical fluid.
One of the early studies on high-pressure solubility data was carried out by Wiebe and Gaddy,
who determined the solubility of CO2 in water at temperatures up to 100 °C and pressures
up to 71 MPa. Subsequently, similar measurement methods have been used to investigate the
solubility of CO2 in water under various pressure and temperature conditions. In more recent
research, Hou et al. presented highly accurate experimental data on the solubility of CO2 in
water at pressures of approximately 18 MPa using gas chromatography [10].
The solubility of carbon dioxide (CO2) in single-salt solutions has been extensively studied at dif-
ferent temperatures, pressures, and molalities [11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21]. However,
there is a scarcity of research on the measurement of CO2 solubility in Na-Ca-K-Cl solutions.
Only a few experimental studies have investigated the CO2-H2O-NaCl-CaCl2 and CO2-H2O-
NaCl-CaCl2-KCl systems within the temperature range of 323 to 423 K and pressures up to
20 MPa. In 2004, Li et al. [22] measured the solubility of CO2 in the Weyburn formation at
332 K and pressures ranging from 1.76 to 20.87 MPa. The formation water in this study had a
complex composition, but the main species were sodium ion (Na+) at 1.2 mol/kgw, calcium ion
(Ca2+) at 0.05 mol/kgw, and chloride ion (Cl−) at 1.4 mol/kgw.
Another study published in 2011 by Liu et al. [23] presented CO2 solubility results in solu-
tions containing NaCl, CaCl2, and KCl. For the CO2-H2O-NaCl-CaCl2 system, measurements
were conducted at 318 K and pressures ranging from 2.46 to 16.02 MPa, with NaCl and CaCl2
concentrations of 0.95 and 0.5 mol/kgw, respectively. As for the CO2-H2O-NaCl-CaCl2-KCl
system, data were obtained at three temperatures from 308 to 328 K and pressures up to 15
MPa. Three systems with different compositions were studied.
More recently, Zhao et al. [24] obtained new solubility data for CO2 in two synthetic brines
between 323 and 423 K at pressures from 10 to 17.5 MPa. The first synthetic brine consisted
of multiple salts, primarily NaCl and CaCl2 at concentrations of 1.1 and 0.14 mol/kgw, respec-
tively. The second synthetic brine contained only NaCl at 1.06 and CaCl2 at 0.22 mol/kgw.
These solubility measurements in synthetic water were compared to data obtained from natural
water in Mt Simon, which mainly comprised 0.96 mol/kgw NaCl and 0.16 mol/kgw CaCl2. The
measurements for this comparison were carried out at 328 K between 5 and 20 MPa. In addition,
recent work by Ahmadi and Chapoy [25] has also contributed to the generation of CO2 solubility
data in mixed salt aqueous solutions. Their study encompassed various isotherms within the
13
==PAGE:18==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
temperature range of 300 to 424 K, and they explored pressures up to 41 MPa [26].
Over the past century, researchers have extensively studied the solubility of non-polar solutes
in brines in the field of literature (Shoor and Gubbins, 1968). For instance, the solubility of
CO2 in brine solutions containing single salts (Yasunishi and Yoshida, 1979) or multiple salts
(Yasunishi et al., 1979) has been thoroughly investigated and documented. A recent publication
by Duan and Sun (2003) specifically examines the solubility of CO2 in NaCl solution across a
wide range of temperatures (273 to 533 K) and pressures (0 to 2000 bar). However, when it
comes to studying the solubility of gases, such as CO2, experimental data is primarily available
for common salt solutions like NaCl, CaCl2, and LiCl. As a result, it can be challenging to
find experimental data on gas solubility in other salts relevant to oil and gas production, such
as CaCO3 and BaCl2. Moreover, the existing data for these systems at high temperatures and
pressures is relatively limited. Consequently, it is crucial to develop predictive models that can
estimate the solubility of CO2 and other gases in brine solutions, allowing for the investigation of
water chemistry effects under different pressure, temperature, salinity, and salt type conditions.
One method employed to model gas solubility in brine solutions for oil and gas applications
is to relate it with total dissolved solids (TDS) according to Ratnakar et.al, assuming a single
salt of NaCl. In general, an increase in salts concentration decreases the gas solubility in water
phase referred to as the "salting-out" process. The decrease in solubility of CO2 is impacted
by the type of salt present in the brine mixture. Different salts have varying effects on the
solubility of gases, including CO2. For example, the salting-out effect caused by sodium chloride
(NaCl) differs from that of calcium chloride (CaCl2) or magnesium sulfate (MgSO4). These
salts can affect the solubility of CO2 in brine to different extents, leading to variations in CO2
trapping mechanisms and storage capacities. The method used by Ratnakar et. al 2020 based
on strength-based mixing rule and extends the well-known Setschenow relation to anlayse the
impact of mixture of salts containing mono or multi-valent ions.
The literature offers various modeling studies based on the equation of state (EOS) approach
for estimating the solubility of gases in brine solutions. Previous publications, such as Ratnakar
et al. (2016, 2017), have discussed the solubility of Dimethyl Ether (DME) in brine using this
approach. Similarly, studies by Duan et al. (2006) and Spycher and Pruess (2010) have explored
the solubility of CO2. However, most of these studies have focused on systems with NaCl as the
sole salt component. While the EOS-based approach is generally applicable to different aqueous
fluid systems, it requires the characterization of water-salt and gas-salt interactions for other
salt systems. Furthermore, in the case of multiple salts, accurate estimation of gas solubility ne-
cessitates considering the interactions between each salt system, at least in a predictive manner.
Alternative methods, such as machine learning, can also be employed for such studies.
For
instance, Li and Zhang (2018) utilized a neural network approach to estimate CO2 solubility in
brine solutions containing various salts and solvents, which showed good agreement with exper-
imental data. However, the effectiveness of such methods relies on the availability of abundant
data, which is limited due to the sparse availability of solubility data for various gases in brine
solutions consisting of a mixture of different salts. Furthermore, extrapolating results from a
single salt solution to a multi-component salt solution becomes challenging, particularly when
considering the diverse range of salts and their combinations.
Among the commonly used salts in brine, calcium chloride (CaCl2) generally achieves the high-
est solubility of CO2. Compared to other salts such as sodium chloride (NaCl) or potassium
chloride (KCl), calcium chloride has a higher solubility for CO2. The increased solubility of CO2
14
==PAGE:19==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
in calcium chloride brine can be attributed to the higher charge density and stronger interac-
tion between calcium ions (Ca2+) and CO2 molecules. This stronger interaction facilitates the
dissolution of CO2 in the brine, resulting in higher solubility. Therefore, if you are looking to
achieve the highest CO2 solubility in brine, using calcium chloride brine would be the preferred
choice.
According to the findings of Koschel et- al., the existing literature contains approximately 1000
data points on solubility, with nearly 50% of these data falling within the temperature range
relevant to sequestration (T < 150°C). However, a majority of these data points are obtained
at relatively low pressures. Only about 20% of the data extend beyond 50 bar, and there is an
extreme scarcity of data points above 200 bar, which accounts for just 2% of the total dataset [27].
In our project, we tried to perform solubility experiments for different concentrations of CO2
loaded into brine containing multiple salts at a wide range of pressure from 5-40 MPa at 30 and
60°C to widen our research prospects.
• Viscosity measurements
As seen above, we can see a considerable amount of data points for solubility as well as density
data’s for CO2 loaded with brine solution. Whereas, for viscosity, data available are sparse and
could find only a few sources that are restricted to low temperatures and pressures.
Kumagai et al.
[28] performed the viscosity measurements for aqueous CO2 solution from
pressures varying from 0.1-30 MPa at 273-278 K using the falling capillary method. Whereas,
Uchida et al.
[29] performed within the range of 0.7-5 MPa at 273-282 K using a different
dynamic light scattering method.
15
==PAGE:20==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
5
Experimental Methods
This chapter focuses on a detailed description of the experimental procedure used for the measurement
of the thermophysical properties of CO2 loaded with brine solution.
5.1
Synthetic brine preparation
This section provides the detailed preparation of theoretical composition of synthetic Nini brine for
the Greensand Project using different analytical techniques.
The composition of Nini brine is taken from (INSERT THE NAME) database.
It has multiple
salts constituting NaCl+ NaHCO3+ Na2SO4+ KCl+ MgCl2.6H2O+ CaCl2.2H2O+ SrCl2.6H2O+
BaCl2.2H2O. The table 1 shows the detailed composition along with its properties.
Element
Conc.
Compound
Gram compound per
Conc.
mg/L
1 liter
3 liter
5 liter
mol/l
Na+
29293
NaCl
74.467
223.401
372.334
1.274184856
Na+
4
NaHCO3
0.014
0.041
0.069
0.000163889
Na+
3
Na2SO4
0.019
0.056
0.093
0.000131164
K+
211
KCl
0.402
1.207
2.012
0.005396654
Mg++
1027
MgCl2.6H2O
8.590
25.771
42.952
0.042254680
Ca++
4800
CaCl2.2H2O
17.607
52.822
88.037
0.119766455
Sr++
602
SrCl2.6H2O
1.832
5.495
9.159
0.006870577
Ba++
20
BaCl2.2H2O
0.036
0.107
0.178
0.000145638
Cl−
57351
1.617656212
Table 1: Nini Brine theoretical composition
As per the ion concentrations shown above, brine is prepared along with de-gassed water. Millipore-Q
water is being kept for de-gassing in an ultrasonic extractor for like 30 mins. After weighing and
balancing all the salts, it is poured into a conical flask. We make the solution up to 1 liter(just below
the lower meniscus) using de-gassed water. Later, the solution is mixed properly using a magnetic
stirrer for a considerable amount of time, just for the salt particles to get dissolved with no suspected
precipitation. After mixing, the solution is transferred to a 1-liter glass beaker and properly tightened
for a uniform composition (the solution could get vaporized with time if kept open).
To prepare brine, the salts are to be measured in gram compound per liter for the lab scale measure-
ments. So, the concentration of each salt is calculated as shown below, if we take NaCl for example
in Equation 5.1
c, g/L = M.W.ofNaCl
M.W.ofNa+ × c(Na+), mg/L ×
1g
1000L
(5.1)
Where, c = concentration of NaCl in g/L
c(Na+) = target ion concentration of Na+ in mg/L
M.W. = Molecular weight in g/mol
16
==PAGE:21==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
As per the above Equation 5.1, we get the value of the concentration of NaCl for a 1-liter solution as
74.467 g/L.
In the same way, the molarity of NaCl is founded by dividing the concentration of NaCl in g/L by the
molecular weight of NaCl in g/mol.
Hereby, we find the molality of the salts as shown in Equation 5.2
b, mol/kg =
c, mol/L × 1000
ρb, g/mL × 1000 −(P c, mol/L × M.W., g/mol)
(5.2)
Where, b = molality of salt in mol/kg
c = molarity of salt in mol/L
ρb = density of brine at room temperature in g/mL
M.W. = molecular weight of salt in g/mol
The molality values of each salt in the brine are formulated in Table 2
Compound
Symbol
M, g/mol
Gram compound/ 1 L
c, mol/l
b, mol/kgw
Sodium chloride
NaCl
58.4428
74.467
1.274184856
1.31413859
Sodium bicarbonate
NaHCO3
84.0066
0.014
0.000163889
0.00018169
Sodium sulfate
Na2SO4
142.04
0.019
0.000131164
0.000167
Potassium chloride
KCl
74.5513
0.402
0.005396654
0.00574927
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
MgCl2.6H2O
203.303
8.590
0.042254680
0.04362928
Calcium chloride dihydrate
CaCl2.2H2O
147.015
17.607
0.119766455
0.12352977
Strontium chloride hexahydrate
SrCl2.6H2O
266.618
1.832
0.006870577
0.00709303
Barium chloride dihydrate
BaCl2.2H2O
244.261
0.036
0.000145638
0.00015918
Magnesium chloride
MgCl2
95.211
-
-
-
Calcium chloride
CaCl2
110.98
-
-
-
Strontium chloride
SrCl2
158.53
-
-
-
Barium chloride
BaCl2
208.23
-
-
-
Table 2: Molality values of each salt of Nini Brine
17
==PAGE:22==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
5.2
Density Analysis
This section provides a detailed explanation of the method used for the density measurement analysis
of pure brine and CO2 loaded with brine along with the calculations.
For measuring the density of the solution, a high-pressure vibrating tube density meter was used.
An Anton-Paar DMA 512 u-tube density meter was used to determine the density of fluids for this
work. This instrument offers precise density and isothermal compressibility data across a wide range
of temperatures and pressures. It is capable of studying various types of samples, including both
synthetic fluids and real reservoir fluids.
The density meter can operate within a temperature range of up to 200°C and a pressure range of up
to 140 MPa.
Density is determined by measuring the frequency of vibration of an excited U-shaped tube. The
period of vibration is displayed with high accuracy, featuring seven significant figures.
To measure pressure, the density meter is connected to a pressure line consisting of a manual pressure
generator (HiP 37-6-30) and a pressure transducer of SIKA type P, which can accurately measure
pressures up to 150 MPa.
To maintain a constant temperature, the measuring cell of the density meter is thermostated using a
liquid circulator bath, specifically the Julabo PRESTO A30.
Source: The above information on the high-pressure density meter is extracted from the official web-
site of CERE under the Laboratories tab.
Figure 5.1: Schematics of the experimental setup for density measurement
For this work, our pressure ranges varied from 0.1-40 MPa, and performed our experiments at fixed
temperatures of 30 and 60°C.
Calibration is performed to find the unknown density of the fluid using the density of the known fluid.
The method used here was developed by Lagourette et al. [30]. and later modified by Comunas et al.
[31]. The density of the solution is related to the period of vibration by the Equation 5.3.
ρ(T, p) = A(T, p)τ 2 −B(T, p)
(5.3)
18
==PAGE:23==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
where A(T,p) and B(T,p) are characteristic parameters that are found during the calibration process
from the well-known densities of two fluids across the T and p range. Lagourette et al. In their study,
Lagourette et al. [30] suggested a calibration approach that involves using a single reference fluid for
determining the period of vibration under vacuum (τ)0. This method was proposed because it can
be challenging to obtain two reference fluids with accurately known densities across a wide range of
temperatures (T) and pressures (p).
For example, if we take the reference fluid as water at ambient conditions and the other at vacuum
conditions, our Equation 5.3, becomes:
ρ1(T, p) = Aτ 2
1 (T, p) −B(T, p)
(5.4)
ρ2(T, p) = Aτ 2
2 (T, p) −B(T, p)
(5.5)
where subscripts 1 and 2 in the Equations 5.4 and 5.5 refer to water at ambient conditions and water
at vacuum conditions.
Subtracting both the equations and substituting ρ(vacuum) = 0 kg/m3 gives us,
A(T, p) =
ρw(T, 1bar)
τ 2w(T, 1bar) −τ 2
0 (T, 0bar)
(5.6)
For the density measurements of CO2 loaded with brine solution, we take the reference fluids as
CO2+brine and water.
Similarly, we get the characterization parameter, A as:
A(T, p) = ρ1(T, 50bar) −ρw(T, 50bar)
τ 2
1 (T, 50bar) −τ 2w(T, 50bar)
(5.7)
where subscripts 1 and 2 denote CO2+brine and water at a particular pressure (p) and temperature
(T). For this case, we take the starting pressure as 50 bar.
Substituting the value of A from Equation 5.6 in Equation 5.7, we get:
ρ1(T, 50bar) = ρw(T, 50bar) + ρw(T, 1bar) × τ 2
1 (T, 50bar) −τ 2
w(T, 50bar)
τ 2w(T, 1bar) −τ 2
0 (T, 0bar)
(5.8)
The above Equation 5.8 gives us the density of the unknown fluid i.e. CO2+brine for our work. It
also gives us the density of Nini brine using the same method.
We took the density of water values at different temperatures and pressure from the NIST(National
Institute of Standards and Technology) Chemistry WebBook, SRD69 database.
The first batch of experiments was performed with pure millipore Q water for calibration and the
same was repeated for pure Nini brine. The calibrations were performed at a fixed temperature of 30
and 60°C but later on, we also performed them at 23°C for a better analysis at lower temperature.
But this research area was more focused only at 30 and 60°C for the ’Greensand’ project.
19
==PAGE:24==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
An example of the brine density calibration is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Brine density calibration at 30°C
5.2.1
Vibrating U-tube densimeter mechanism
The U-tube densimeter operates by exciting a U-shaped glass tube with a high-frequency vibration
and measuring its resonant frequency. The longer arm of the U-tube contains the fluid to be measured
for density. By detecting the vibrations using sensors and converting them into electrical signals, the
densimeter determines the frequency of the U-tube.
Through calibration using reference fluids of
known densities, a relationship is established between the measured frequency and the corresponding
density. When testing an unknown fluid sample, the densimeter measures its frequency and calculates
the density using the calibration curve or equation. The U-tube densimeter provides accurate density
measurements based on the resonant frequency of the tube, enabling precise density determination
for various fluids [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37].
5.2.2
Experimental procedure for density measurements
We followed the procedure as described in Marc’s Ph.D. thesis paper, 2014 [38]. Before starting the
injection of fluid, the equipment has to be checked for any leakage and any leftover liquid by passing
compressed air. From our experience, we found the densimeter to be quite sensitive in terms of the
period of vibration. So, the ideal way of performing experiments is to keep the whole apparatus under
vacuum for a whole day for better calibration. We inject the fluid through the inlet valve using a
conical flask as long as it fills the cell. Later, we close the inlet valve and use the mechanical syringe
pump to fully extend the piston out to fill the fluid into the pump. As soon as we inject the fluid
into the system, we have to ensure that the fluid is flowing into the U-tube properly so, we let the
fluid pass through the outlet valve. After checking the flow, the outlet valve is closed and we wait
for the temperature to stabilize. As soon as the outlet valve is closed, try exerting pressure using the
pump to check for any suspected leakage. The temperature is controlled using a cooling bath. As
soon it reaches the desired temperature, wait for like 10 mins until there is no increment in the period
of vibration and revolves in the same range. As seen before, the period of vibration is a function of
temperature so, it is quite sensitive to temperature as compared to pressure variations. There are two
pressure inducers used, one is attached along the mechanical pump i.e. SIKA sensor, while the other
is connected to the U-tube i.e. WIKA sensor that is connected to the interface which displays the
pressure. Throughout the whole process, middle valve was always kept open. Just when the period
of vibration stabilizes, start recording the values for each pressure. In between the measurements,
20
==PAGE:25==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
ensure the temperature is constant.
The above-mentioned process was used for the reference fluids like water and pure brine. For the
measurements of CO2 loaded with brine, we used a buffer solution at the outlet valve to maintain the
pressure as same as the inlet. Nitrogen is introduced alongside the mixture to ensure a controlled and
consistent pressure at the outlet valve. By using nitrogen as a buffer gas, the pressure can be regu-
lated, allowing for accurate and reliable density measurements of the CO2+brine mixtures. This use
of nitrogen helps maintain stability and control throughout the injection and measurement process,
contributing to the overall understanding and monitoring of the storage system. Buffer’s main purpose
is to maintain the CO2 loaded with brine mixture into a single-phase system for efficient measurements.
Sample preparation of CO2 loaded with brine:
First, the sample cylinder had to be vacuumed to remove the excess air weight and later checked with
the previously recorded vacuum readings in order to validate the weight. Then, it was connected to
the CO2 cylinder using appropriate tubings and fittings. Open the valve on the CO2 cylinder to allow
the gas to flow into the system eventually. The inlet valve of the sample cylinder was a bit loosened
to check for the proper flow of gas into the cylinder. After a proper inspection, CO2 was diffused into
the sample cylinder by maintaining an optimal flow rate to avoid excess CO2 infused. The mass of
CO2 diffused was calculated based on the concentration of CO2 to be dissolved into brine. As soon
as the cylinder was filled with CO2, we proceeded further for the brine injection. For the diffusion of
brine, two pumps were used. One of them was connected to the water side of the brine cylinder for
injection and the other was fixed to the water side of the CO2+brine cylinder to maintain the back
pressure for faster dissolution of CO2 into brine which will be done at the last after diffusing brine.
The injection of brine was performed at 50 bar ensuring both the inlet and outlet valves are fully
open. Later, the inlet valve of the CO2+brine cylinder was partially opened to check for the proper
flow and then started the injection. For all of our experiments, 90 ml of brine was injected as per stan-
dard procedure. After a proper injection, the back pressure was regulated based on the concentration
of CO2 injected into brine which will be shown in the further calculations. Thereafter, as soon as
the data were recorded, the apparatus was thoroughly cleaned with water twice. Later, ethanol was
passed to dissolve all the fluids and a stream of compressed air was rolled at the end to eject all the
fluids for a couple of minutes. The whole apparatus was vacuumed for better calibration as said earlier.
b1 = n1
m2
(5.9)
Where 1 denotes CO2 and 2 for water n = moles of CO2 dissolved m = mass of water in kg
n1 = m1
M1
(5.10)
m = mass of CO2 M = molecular weight of CO2
Therefore, molality becomes
b1 =
m1
M1 × m2
(5.11)
ms = ρs × Vs = m1 + m2 + m3
(5.12)
21
==PAGE:26==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
where ms = mass of brine solution and 3 denotes salts present in brine solution.
Multiply the whole Equation 5.11 by ms on top and bottom, we get:
b1 = m1(m1 + m2 + m3)
M1 × m2 × ρb × Vb
(5.13)
m1 + m2 + m3 = b1M1 × m2 + m2 + b3M3 × m2
(5.14)
After putting the molality of salts data from Table 2, we get:
m1 + m2 + m3 = m2(1.097 + b1M1)
(5.15)
Substitute Equation 5.15 in Equation 5.13,
b1 = m1(1.097 + b1M1)
M1 × ρb × Vb
(5.16)
m1 = b1 × M1 × ρb × Vb
(1.097 + b1M1)
(5.17)
The subscript ’b’ in the above equation denotes the brine solution.
Equation 5.17 gives us the mass of CO2 dissolved into a brine solution for the injection into the cell.
Molar volume calculation:
Molar volume is a necessary parameter to investigate the properties of gas (CO2 in our case) in order
to validate our experiment results for the density measurements. It gives a better understanding of
the physical and chemical properties of substances and systems, and to make predictions about their
behavior under different conditions.
For our case, we have to investigate the volume occupied by 1 mole of CO2 at a given temperature
and pressure.
Vϕ = V1
n1
(5.18)
Vϕ = Vs −Vb
b1m2
(5.19)
Vϕ =
( ms
ρs −mb
ρb )
b1m2
(5.20)
22
==PAGE:27==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Substituting Equation 5.15 in Equation 5.20, we get:
Vϕ = (1.097 + b1M1
ρs
−1 + b3M3
ρb
) × 106
b1
(5.21)
Equation 5.21 gives us the molar volume of CO2 dissolved into brine solution in the unit of cm3/mol.
5.3
Solubility analysis
This section covers the methodology used for the solubility measurements of CO2 loaded with brine
along with the calculations.
For solubility measurements, a high-pressure DBR Jefri PVT cell was used. The setup was man-
ufactured by D.B. Robinson Design & Manufacturing Ltd.
(Edmonton, Alberta, Canada).
The
DBR-JEFRI Cell is a versatile apparatus designed for conducting supercritical extraction, VLLE,
VLS, and conventional PVT analyses of gas condensates and black oils. It operates at a maximum
pressure of 700 bar and a temperature of 150°C. The apparatus includes a phase equilibrium view cell
with a piston driven by hydraulic fluid from the ISCO pump, an air bath for temperature control, an
ISCO displacement pump for generating high pressures, high-pressure pycnometers for density mea-
surements, a rocking mechanism for sample mixing, filling, cleaning, and sampling lines. The air bath
has a temperature stability of ± 0.01 K and a display resolution of 0.1 K. Additionally, a gasometer
is utilized for sample separation. The sampling cylinder of 80 ml in volume, where the lower end
receives liquid at high pressure for sampling, while the upper end is used for dispensing gas released
from the samples. This comprehensive setup enables the measurement of solubilities, phase equilibria,
and other relevant properties of the samples under extreme pressure and temperature conditions.
CO2 used in this work was supplied by Air Liquide (Denmark) with a purity of more than 99.5%.
Source: CERE webpage and Yan et al., 2011, GHG Control Journal
23
==PAGE:28==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 5.3: DBR PVT cell apparatus
For this work, we run the solubility measurements at a pressure range of 5-40 MPa and a temperature
of 30 and 60°C.
5.3.1
PVT DBR Cell mechanism
The DBR-JEFRI (Differential Backflow Recombination - Jefri) cell is a specialized apparatus used for
PVT (Pressure-Volume-Temperature) analysis of fluids, particularly for studying the phase behavior
of oil and gas samples. It allows for the determination of important properties such as density, com-
pressibility, phase equilibrium, and fluid behavior under varying pressure and temperature conditions.
The DBR-JEFRI cell operates based on the principle of differential backflow recombination, which
involves flowing a known volume of sample fluid through a capillary tube and then recollecting the
fluid downstream. By carefully controlling the pressure and temperature conditions, the cell enables
the measurement of the sample’s properties.
The mechanism of the DBR-JEFRI cell involves several key components. These typically include
a sample chamber or cell, a high-pressure pump or pressure control system, a temperature control
system, a capillary tube for fluid flow, and sensors or detectors to measure pressure, temperature, and
fluid properties. The cell is designed to withstand the high pressures and temperatures encountered
during PVT analysis.
To perform PVT analysis using the DBR-JEFRI cell, a sample of the fluid under investigation is
introduced into the sample chamber. The pressure and temperature conditions are controlled using
the pump and temperature control system, respectively. The fluid is then flowed through the capillary
tube, allowing for measurement and analysis of its properties.
24
==PAGE:29==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
The DBR-JEFRI cell provides valuable data for understanding fluid behavior, phase behavior, and
other important parameters for oil and gas reservoir characterization and production optimization.
5.3.2
Experimental procedure for solubility measurements
For the solubility measurements, the procedure used was followed by Yan et.al [14]. At first, separate
sample cylinders of CO2 and pure brine were taken for the injection. As seen in the schematics shown
in Figure 5.4, there are 3 valves at the entry, V4 for the injection that connects the sample cylinder,
V5 for bypassing fluid to the measuring cylinder for cleaning and draining out the fluids and V6 is the
main micro-valve used mainly to control flow rate for the injection, that connects to the main DBR
cell. The amount of brine and CO2 were not crucial for the experiment but we fixed it based on the
concentration of CO2. The amount of brine injected was 90 ml, so we could take out at least two sam-
ples. CO2 was dissolved as long as the equilibrium was maintained (around 30 ml). The temperature
was set based on the experiment by adhering to the set point in the air bath. After regulating the
temperature in the oven bath and the cell, the injection was started. The inlet valve inside the cell
was purged to ensure a proper flow of brine. As solubility is a function of temperature and pressure,
the temperature has to be constant and looked over throughout the whole process. Two ISCO pumps
were used for the measurement, one was to maintain pressure inside the cell, and the other one was for
injection of brine and CO2. Thereafter, the sample inside the cell was rocked for 10 mins at first, and
then more CO2 was injected to maintain the equilibrium. Later, the sample cell was again rocked for
almost 2 hrs. It was left overnight in the same tilted position for an efficient dissolution of CO2 into
brine. The air bath ’set point’ was increased by 0.2°C to regulate the temperature (on the pretext of
a drop in outside temperature at midnight) along with an adjusted experimental back cell pressure.
The next day, two cylinders were set ready for sampling by cleaning them with water and ethanol. It
was later passed with compressed air for 10 mins to drain off the fluids. As the DBR cell was looked
over, a single phase has been attained. Then, the cylinder was properly weighed and vacuumed before
connecting to the setup. The weights were measured using an analytical balance with an accuracy of
0.001 g. The lower bottom of the cylinder was connected to the injection line for sampling as said
earlier. Before sampling, we purged 10 ml of the solution from valve V13 to ensure a proper flow of
solution into the cylinder. Even the valve V4 was purged to remove the excess air from the tubing.
Two samples were taken out eventually, 30 and 35 ml each. Most precautions should be taken while
sampling to maintain a constant flow rate to keep the mixture in a single phase. After the sampling,
the single-phased high-pressure brine solution is brought out in ambient conditions to cool down. The
high-pressure brine solution separates into two phases at room conditions. The cylinder was then
weighed and kept for discharging CO2 eventually. Henceforth, we recorded the weights of cylinder
before and after sampling, eventually diffusing CO2 along with the recorded volume of CO2. Even,
proper discharging should be done at an optimal flow rate. There were acute problems encountered
in discharging done for samples kept at higher pressures as for 30 MPa, the discharging rate was
not constant, and had to adjust the valve multiple times which shouldn’t be the case ideally. This
could be due to an inefficient sampling or a temperature change at higher pressure. But at 40 MPa,
the sampling went quite well so it really depends on the temperature and pressure changes as the
apparatus is quite sensitive to temperature. Keeping in mind, the negative effect of temperature on
solubility can disturb the CO2+brine equilibrium.
25
==PAGE:30==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 5.4: Schematics of a classical DBR PVT cell apparatus
Solubility calculations
Weight of the cylinder before sampling at vacuum conditions was denoted by W0
Weight of the cylinder after sampling at ambient conditions was denoted by W1
Weight of the cylinder after discharging all the CO2 at 1 atm was denoted by W2
For the solubility estimation, the volume of CO2 discharged was divided into three parts as V1, V2
and V3:
V1 refers to the volume of CO2 released from the cylinder, V2 as volume of CO2 in the gas phase(in
the cylinder) and V3 as volume of CO2 dissolved in the brine phase at the Troom.
V1 = W1 −W2
44.01
× 22, 414
(5.22)
V2 = V2 × 273.15
Troom
(5.23)
V3 = mCO2Wwater × 22, 414
(5.24)
The volume determination of each cylinder, V was performed prior to experiments by measuring the
volume/mass of water that the cylinder can contain at ambient conditions.
26
==PAGE:31==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Wbrine = (W2 −W0) −ρCO2 × V
(1 −
ρCO2
ρb )
(5.25)
Where Wbrine refers to the mass of the brine phase in gram, g.
V refers to the volume of the sample cylinder in ml.
ρCO2 refers to the density of CO2 at room temperature in g/ml.
ln HCO2 = (192.876 + 0.024125mNaCl −0.00752m2
NaCl) + (−9624.4 + 0.000199mNaCl)/(T + 273.15)
(0.01441 −0.002111mNaCl)(T + 273.15) + (−28.749 + 0.1446mNaCl)ln(T + 273.15)
(5.26)
Where HCO2 refers to the henry constant in Nacl brine, MPa.mol−1 kg.
mNaCl refers to the molality of NaCl in brine solution,mol/kg taken from Table 2.
T refers to the room temperature in degree celsius, °C.
Pw = 220.64×exp(647.096/(T +273.15)×(−7.85951783×(1−(T +273.15)/647.096)+1.84408259×
(1 −(T + 273.15)/647.096)1.5 −11.7866497 × (1 −(T + 273.15)/647.096)3 + 22.6807411 × (1 −
(T + 273.15)/647.096)3.5 −15.9618719 × (1 −(T + 273.15)/647.096)4 + 1.80122502 × (1 −(T +
273.15)/647.096)7.5))
(5.27)
Where Pw refers to the vapor pressure of water at room temperature in bar.
T refers to the room temperature in K.
mCO2 = Patm −Pw
HCO2
(5.28)
Where mCO2 refers to the CO2 solubility at room temperature in mol/kg.
Patm refers to the atmospheric pressure in MPa.
Pw refers to the water vapor pressure in MPa.
Wwater =
Wbrine
(1 +
(mCO2MCO2+ΣbsMs)
1000
)
(5.29)
Where Wwater refers to the mass of water in brine phase, g.
MCO2 refers to the molar mass of CO2 in g/mol.
27
==PAGE:32==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
The subscript ’s’ refers to the salts present in the brine and molality values taken from Table 2.
n1 = W1 −W2
MCO2
(5.30)
Where nCO2 refers to the mole of CO2.
(W1 - W2) refers to the mass of released CO2.
n2 = mCO2
MCO2
(5.31)
Where mCO2 denotes mass of CO2 in the gas phase inside the cylinder, gram.
mCO2 = VCO2 × ρCO2
(5.32)
VCO2 = V −Wbrine
ρb
(5.33)
ρCO2 = 44.01
22414 ×
273.15
(273.15 + Troom)
(5.34)
Substituting Equation 5.33 and Equation 5.34 in Equation 5.32 gives us the value of mCO2 dissolved
in the brine phase. This will help us find the moles of CO2 in the gaseous phase.
n3 = mCO2
1000 × Wwater
(5.35)
At last, solubility (mol/kg) was found by taking the sum of moles of CO2 for the 3 processes as shown
above divided by the mass of water in brine phase.
mCO2total = n1 + n2 + n3
Wwater
× 1000
(5.36)
Where n1, n2 and n3 refers to the moles of CO2 found at different stages.
28
==PAGE:33==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
5.4
Viscosity analysis
This section focuses on the procedure used for the viscosity analysis of water and pure brine along
with the calculations.
The analysis was carried out at 200 bar and 60°C.
For the viscosity measurements, a high-pressure capillary viscometer was used. CVL-1000 model was
used, specifically manufactured by Sanchez Technologies, France. The described apparatus is designed
for determining the viscosity of single-phase reservoir fluids and related systems. Viscosity measure-
ments can be conducted within a temperature range of up to 200°C and a pressure range of up to
150 MPa. The capillary viscometer is the fundamental tool utilized, employing the Hagen-Poiseuille
law. This law relates the flow rate to the pressure drop across the capillary. To measure viscosity,
a specific flow rate is established for the fluid being tested, and the resulting pressure drop across
the capillary is measured. The viscometer incorporates multiple capillaries with varying dimensions,
covering a broad viscosity range from 0.2 to 12000 mPas. This allows for the characterization of fluids
with a wide spectrum of viscosities.
Source: CERE webpage
In summary, this apparatus serves as a valuable instrument for viscosity determination in single-phase
reservoir fluids and related systems. By employing the Hagen-Poiseuille law and employing capillary
viscometry, precise viscosity measurements can be obtained for fluids across a wide range of viscosities.
5.4.1
Capillary-based viscometer mechanism
The CVL-1000 viscometer is an advanced instrument that utilizes a capillary-based mechanism for
precise measurement of fluid viscosity. Operating on the principle of capillary viscometry, it allows
for the characterization of fluids across a wide range of viscosities. The viscometer features a capillary
tube, which acts as a flow channel for the fluid under investigation. By carefully controlling the flow
rate of the fluid through the capillary and monitoring the resulting pressure drop, the viscometer
accurately captures the fluid’s resistance to flow, which is directly related to its viscosity.
The CVL-1000 viscometer incorporates a sophisticated measurement system that applies the Hagen-
Poiseuille equation, a fundamental equation in fluid mechanics. This equation relates the flow rate,
pressure drop, viscosity, and dimensions of the capillary tube. By precisely measuring the pressure
drop and incorporating the known capillary dimensions, the viscometer effectively calculates the vis-
cosity of the fluid under test.
The instrument includes additional features to enhance its functionality and accuracy. These include
temperature control mechanisms to ensure stable experimental conditions, automated flow control sys-
tems for consistent flow rate regulation, data logging capabilities for record-keeping, and a FALCON
software pre-installed for calibrations and measurements. The results and calculations are displayed
in EXCEL. The rest of the apparatus specifications are mentioned in Table 3. Whereas, the Falcon
display interface is shown in Figure 5.5.
29
==PAGE:34==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Specifications
CVL-1000 viscometer
Working Temperature
Ambient to 200° C
Volume
10 ml
Range
0.1 to 10000 cP
Working Pressure
Up to 1000 bar
∆P range for viscosity measurement
0.1 to 15 bar
Flow Rate
8× 10−3 ml to 5 cc/min
Accuracy on Temperature Regulation
0.5° C
Accuracy on Pressure Display
0.1 bar
Table 3: Viscometer Specifications
Figure 5.5: Display interface [Core Lab website- Sanchez]
30
==PAGE:35==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
5.4.2
Experimental procedure for viscosity measurements
The procedure followed for the viscosity measurements are pretty straightforward as the apparatus is
fully automated. The apparatus was fully controlled through the FALCON software. First, the piston
is pushed down to the zero position for the fluid to inject. So, the start button in the software system
was clicked to bring down the piston at maximum capacity i.e. 5 cc/min. As soon as the piston
reached the bottom, the compressed air line was attached to the valve EV2 as shown in Figure 5.5 to
check for any fluid influx or suspected leakage. The valves, ’EV2’ and ’EV4’ are operated in PC mode
and are usually known as ’one-shot’ valves as shown in Figure 5.6 and kindly refer to the Figure 5.5
for a better schematics of the valves. The compressed air is passed through both valves for a proper
flow. One should check if the pressure is building up inside the cell cause if there’s any leakage then
u could see a steady drop in the pressure curve over time. After making sure the pressure drop is low
and constant, the fluid was injected at a steady rate. Protocols have to be followed before starting the
injection. All the valves should be closed. Set the ISCO pump pressure at 49 bar for the injection.
Now, open EV2 first followed by EV22 and EV44. Set the volume to 9.65 ml and the flow rate to 5
cc/min to fill the chamber. As soon as the chamber is filled, open EV4. Place a measuring cylinder
below and check if the fluid is coming out of the EV4 valve in a steady state. After the inspection,
close EV4 valve and bring down the piston to the zero position. Now, set the experimental pressure
and fill the chamber again following the same procedure. Set the set point temperature. EV44 de-
notes the pressure in the valve, P1 whereas P2 for valve EV22. Open the Pressure over time curves
for P1 and P2. The calibration was started when the desired experimental pressure is reached and the
pressure drop i.e. (P1-P2) is low and constant over time. After analyzing properly, the calibration
was started. Ensure the valves EV4 and EV2 are always closed during the calibration. For performing
calibration, one thing to be noted is to set the offset pressure before the measurement starts. It takes
approximately 30 mins for the calibration and the output is displayed in the EXCEL file.
For our work, the set point for the temperature was set at 60.15°C and the pressure for the ISCO
pump was around 19 MPa. Capillary No. 107 by Sanchez was used for the first few batch experiments
done for calibrating water. Even after continuous calibrations, the slope was not linear. There were
fluctuations in the values of pressure and a suspected blockage in the capillary. Capillary was replaced
with No. 5 by Dang and ’O’ rings were changed as well. The calibration results were better from pre-
vious capillary but still, there was some variance in the slope. Later, we injected pure brine to check
for the measurements. As the brine composition might change in 48 hrs so, the calibration had to be
done in 2 days repeatedly for better results. But, again the slope wasn’t getting stabilized even after
continuous measurements. Therefore, the equipment was found to be non-ideal for fluids at 200 bar
and 60°C for our work. The whole analysis was carried out for almost a month with unexpected results.
31
==PAGE:36==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 5.6: CVL-1000 Viscometer[Source: CERE research paper]
Viscosity Calculations
CVL-1000 viscometer was corporated based on the Hagen-Poiseuille equation, which was used for the
viscosity measurements.
∆P
Q
= 8µL
πR4
(5.37)
Where dimensions of the capillary, i.e. length and diameter are known.
∆P/Q gives us the slope of the Equation 5.37 represented by m.
Equation 5.37 becomes:
k = µ
m
(5.38)
Where k is referred to as the calibration constant i.e.
πR4
8L .
For calculating the viscosity of pure brine, the calibration constant, k has to be known, which was
found from the calibration of water.
As for example, for the calibration of water, using Equation 5.38, k was found and used to find the
viscosity of the pure brine. Viscosity was found using the same Equation 5.38, by substituting the
value of k from water calibration and slope from the brine calibration.
32
==PAGE:37==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
6
Modeling Methods
This section will put light on the modeling methods used for the experimental data points collected
to improve the accuracy by collecting the deviation values.
For our work, we performed modeling for the solubility measurements assuming, pure brine consisting
of mainly NaCl. The EOS that suits best for this work is modified Peng Robinson suggested by the
Søreide-Whitson model. They proposed it to accurately describe the phase equilibrium between light
components in reservoir fluids and NaCl brine. The Søreide–Whitson model introduces two signif-
icant modifications to the original Peng–Robinson EOS. One is an α term been developed for the
water/brine component as a function of NaCl brine salinity and pure water reduced temperature, Tr
whereas, the other are sets of binary interaction parameters (BIP) dependent on accentric factor, tem-
perature, and salinity. Conventional EOS like PR and SRK are not suitable for Soave-Redlich-Kwong
EOS (Soave, 1972), and are not adequate for representing the special interaction of water molecules
that determines the phase behavior of the aqueous phase in hydrocarbon-water binary mixtures. Typ-
ically, the aqueous phase gas solubility may be predicted orders of magnitude in error, while predicted
compositions of the hydrocarbon-rich phase(s) are reasonably accurate. Several modifications to cubic
EOSs have been proposed to achieve a better representation of mixtures including pure water. Using
this procedure offers a clear empirical advantage; however, it introduces a potential thermodynamic
inconsistency due to the use of two different constant "a" values (Robinson et al., 1985). Nevertheless,
this approach remains valid for conditions away from critical points, which are typically not encoun-
tered in hydrocarbon-water mixtures.
Salting effect
There have been few mentions of EOS predictions at solubilities with an effect of salts in the aqueous
phase. The salting effect, also known as the salting-out effect, influences the solubility of CO2 in
brine solutions. When dissolved salts are present in the solution, they compete with CO2 molecules
for interaction with water molecules. As a result, the solubility of CO2 in brine decreases compared
to pure water. This effect becomes more pronounced with higher salt concentrations, affecting the
efficiency of carbon capture and storage or enhanced oil recovery processes, where CO2 is injected into
brine-saturated reservoirs. Understanding and considering the salting effect is crucial in designing and
optimizing such projects. Harvey and Prausnitz (1989) proposed a complex equation of state (EOS)
for high-pressure conditions that consider intermolecular forces resulting from ionic effects, along with
conventional forces for non-electrolytes. The model utilizes two binary interaction parameters (BIPS)
derived from osmotic coefficients and Sechenov constants measured at room temperature. The EOS
performs well in predicting systems containing pure water or brine with low salt content (< 1 molal).
However, it underestimates the salting-out effect in systems with moderate to high salt content.
33
==PAGE:38==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
EOS Modifications
1. Vapour Pressure
As said earlier, the constant "a" of the Peng-Robinson (PR) equation of state (EOS) was adjusted to
accommodate water/brine data, leading to an expression for the "α" term as a function of the reduced
temperature of pure water, Tr, and salinity, csw:
α1/2 = 1 + 0.453[1 −Tr(1 −0.0103c1.1
sw)] + 0.0034(T −3
r
−1)
(6.1)
2. Aqueous and Non-aqueous phase BIPs
Now, the composition has to be expressed correctly in both the aqueous as well as the hydrocarbon
phase, so the interaction parameter kij for the water and hydrocarbon phases are expressed as follows:
aAQ
ij
=
X
i=i
X
i=j
xixj(aiaj)1/2(1 −kAQ
ij )
(6.2)
aNA
ij
=
X
i=i
X
i=j
yiyj(aiaj)1/2(1 −kNA
ij )
(6.3)
Where aAQ
ij
and aNA
ij
in the above equations are the energy parameters for the aqueous and non-
aqueous phase that corresponds to the interaction parameters, kAQ
ij
and kNA
ij .
As for kAQ
ij , Søreide-Whitson provided us with the below equation for hydrocarbons:
kAQ
iw = (1.112 −1.7369ω−0.1
i
)(1 + 0.017407cs) + (1.1001 + 0.836ωi)Tri(1 + 0.033516cs)
+(−0.15742 −1.0988ωi)T 2
ri(1 + 0.011478cs)
(6.4)
kAQ
CO2w = −0.31092(1+0.15587c0.7505
s
)+0.2358(1+0.17837c0.979
s
)TrCO2−21.2566exp(−6.7222TrCO2−cs)
(6.5)
Where in the above equations 6.4 and 6.5, cs refers to a variable for the salting-out effects, ωi refers
to the accentric factor of component I, Tri is the reduced temperature of component I, kNA
ij
refers to
be constant for each light hydrocarbon or CO2.
34
==PAGE:39==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
The Søreide-Whitson model offers several advantages over more complex thermodynamic models for
electrolytes. Firstly, it is relatively simple to use. Secondly, it provides a comprehensive parameter
table for describing the equilibrium between NaCl brine and various components commonly encoun-
tered in reservoir simulations, such as N2, CO2, H2S, C1 to nC4, and C5+. Additionally, the model
can be simplified to the Peng-Robinson equation of state (PR EoS), a widely used engineering model
in reservoir simulators.
These advantages make it easy to implement the Søreide-Whitson(SW) model in an EoS-based reser-
voir simulator. It effectively describes most solubilities in reservoir applications, and PVT models
created for the PR EoS can still be applied. The simple modifications proposed by Søreide and Whit-
son provide accurate descriptions of mutual solubility between light hydrocarbons and water, as well
as CO2 and water. Compared to the previous models, Garcia’s correlation assumes the molar volume
to be dependent only on temperature but after a proper analysis by ePC-SAFT [Garcia et. al, 2001], it
was made out that it depends on the CO2 solubility, pressure, and brine salinity too. That concludes
the SW model to be more fit for our analysis.
However, it is essential to acknowledge some limitations of the model. The use of two different sets of
interaction parameters makes it an inconsistent thermodynamic model, requiring caution for both the-
oretical and practical applications. Moreover, the model necessitates the identification of the aqueous
phase during calculations, as interaction parameters differ between aqueous and non-aqueous phases.
Furthermore, the data used to fit CO2-brine parameters were relatively limited due to availability at
the time of model development. As a result, the model may not satisfactorily describe CO2 solubility
in high-salinity brines.
35
==PAGE:40==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
7
Results
7.1
Experimental results
This section showcases the experimental results for the different thermophysical properties. The anal-
yses were performed for both pure brine and CO2 loaded with brine mixture.
7.1.1
Density Measurements
For our work, the reference fluid chosen was water. Measurements were conducted for water at different
pressure ranges from 0.1-40 MPa while keeping temperatures at 30.01°C and 60.01°C for calibration.
Density data for water at different pressures and temperatures were extracted from the NIST Chem-
istry WebBook, SRD 69 database.
Fig 7.2 shows the linear relation of a period of vibration over pressure suggesting a positive effect of
pressure on the period of vibration. Thereby, affecting the density of the solution which will be seen
in the brine mixture. The accuracy in the experimental data points collected is around ±0.1%.
Figure 7.1: Water calibration at a pressure range of 0.1-40 MPa and at 30°C and 60°C
After recording the water measurements, the density measurements were done for the brine mixture
which will validate the results for calibration as shown in Figure7.2.
36
==PAGE:41==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 7.2: Density of synthetic brine solution at a pressure range of 0.1-40 MPa kept at 30°C and
60°C
Figure 7.2 clearly shows the linearity of density over pressure. It also shows us the dependence of
temperature on the period of vibration. In general, as the temperature rises, the period of vibration
tends to decrease because the expansion of materials results in increased stiffness and reduced compli-
ance, leading to faster oscillation cycles. Conversely, as temperature decreases, the period of vibration
tends to increase. Henceforth, from Equation 5.3, as density is directly proportional to the period of
vibration so, the density increases with the decrease in temperature.
As long as the brine measurements were done, the CO2 saturated brine mixture sample was injected
for further density analysis. Buffer was used to maintain the pressure at the outlet valve as talked
earlier. The measurements were performed for the CO2 saturated with brine mixture at different
pressures and concentrations kept at 30.01°C and 60.01°C.
Figure 7.3: Density of synthetic brine solutions loaded with different amounts of CO2 at different
pressures and 30°C
37
==PAGE:42==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 7.4: Density of synthetic brine solutions loaded with different amounts of CO2 at different
pressures and 60°C
From the above figure7.3 and Figure7.4, it is in compliance with the concept that the density increases
as we increase the concentration of CO2. Also, a negative effect of temperature can be seen on the
period of vibration which is directly proportional to the density. This is the probable reason of getting
low values of density at higher temperatures for 60.01°C as compared to 30.01°C.
The molar volume of CO2 in the solution was investigated to analyze the effect of pressure and tem-
perature for different concentrations of CO2 loaded with brine. Equation 5.21 was used to calculate
the molar volume and plotted against concentration and pressure in order to investigate the influence
of such factors.
Figure 7.5: Apparent molar volume of CO2 in brine solution as a function of CO2 concentration and
pressure at 30°C
38
==PAGE:43==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 7.6: Apparent molar volume of CO2 in brine solution as a function of CO2 concentration and
pressure at 60°C
From 7.5 and 7.6, a small effect of pressure on the molar volume of CO2 can be seen. There is also a
negative effect of temperature on the apparent molar volume of CO2 in the synthetic brine solution
which validates the decreasing solubility with the increase in temperature. This concludes that it can
accommodate fewer moles of CO2 with the increase in temperature of the mixture.
7.1.2
Solubility Measurements
This section displays the results of the measurements of solubility analysis performed for the CO2
loaded with synthetic brine mixture at different concentrations of CO2 and at different pressure
ranges kept constant at 30.01°C and 60.01°C.
Figure 7.7: Solubility of CO2 in synthetic brine for a pressure range of 5-40 MPa at 30°C and 60°C
Figure 7.7 clearly shows us the dependence of temperature on the solubility alongside pressure. The
data points for measurements at 60°C were quite good as compared to 30°C. This was probably due
39
==PAGE:44==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
to the measurements done quite close to the critical conditions of CO2 i.e. critical temperature of
31°C which could cause the invariance.
7.1.3
Viscosity Measurements
This section showcases the viscosity calibrations carried out for the water and later continued with
the measurements of synthetic brine done at 20 MPa and 60°C. For the "Greensand Project", the
capillary temperature was fixed at 60°C and 20 MPa in accordance with the reservoir specifications.
Figure 7.9 shows the slope of the various calibrations carried out repeatedly in order for the slope to
stabilize. But, after 3 continuous days of calibration, there was no improvement in the results. This
could be due to a change in the dimensions of the capillary as the CVL-1000 was found to be very
sensitive with regards to changes in temperature and pressure drop. There were many complexities
faced during the measurements like linear pressure drop in the cell while operating at experimental
pressure indicating some leakage in the valves. As the results weren’t improving even after continuous
calibrations, the capillary had to be changed from Sanchez-107 to Dang-105, and the O-rings were
also changed as to improve the fragility in the valves. Both the results shown are performed with the
new capillary i.e. Dang-105 and the results by the Sanchez-107 has been shown in the ??.
Later, the measurements were started for a more viscous liquid like synthetic brine in order to get
better results at same pressure and temperature conditions. From Figure 7.10, a deteriorating trend
for the slope was observed indicating irregularities in the apparatus, even after changing the capillary.
As the measurements didn’t improve, a more highly viscous Toulene was taken. This again showed
no further improvements. After spending an ample amount of time calibrating with the apparatus,
another method could be improvised for the viscosity analysis.
While performing the calculations for the viscosity analysis for the synthetic brine using Equation
5.37. The final viscosity of brine was found using the calibration constant, k of water as explained
in the 5.4.2. The viscosity was recorded to be 0.633 cP for a certain slope value which was close to
the expected value found by "GEUS, Denmark" i.e. 0.65 cP. Thereafter, the slope didn’t stabilize
and started decreasing which eventually increased the viscosity value of the brine thereby, causing
inaccuracy in the results.
40
==PAGE:45==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 7.8: Slope values for different tests or calibrations performed for water at 20 MPa and 60°C
using Sanchez-107
Figure 7.9: Slope values for different tests or calibrations performed for water at 20 MPa and 60°C
using Dang-105
41
==PAGE:46==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 7.10: Slope values for different tests or calibrations performed for synthetic brine at 20 MPa
and 60°C using Dang-105
42
==PAGE:47==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
7.2
Modeling results
This section covers the modeling results extracted from a Søreide-Whitson executable which is based
on the Peng-Robinson equation of state(EOS). This was performed for the solubility analysis of CO2
loaded with brine at different concentrations of CO2 and different pressures kept constant at 30.01°C
and 60.01°C.
Figure 7.11 shows the executed output found using the SW executable by inputting the solubility
points which are expressed in mole fraction of CO2 along with different pressure range from 5-40 MPa
and 30.01°C. The same procedure was followed for data execution at 60.01°C. The output file displays
the number of phases the model iterates (calculates) i.e. 2 along with the composition of the liquid
and gas phase components as calculated by the SW model.
The solubility value in mol/kg was converted to mole fraction using the Equation 7.1.
m =
XA × 1000
(1 −XA)mB
(7.1)
Where A and B refer to CO2 and water,
m = solubility of CO2 in mol/kg,
mB = molar mass of water in kg/mol.
Figure 7.11: Test output file at 30°C
43
==PAGE:48==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 7.12: Test output file at 60°C
Figure 7.13 and Figure 7.14 clearly shows the graphical plot of solubility points expressed in mole
fraction of CO2 dissolved in brine over pressure at 30.01°C and 60.01°C. As we can see, the mole
fraction increases with the pressure, validating the increase in solubility due to higher pressure.
Figure 7.13: XCO2 along different pressures and 30°C
44
==PAGE:49==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Figure 7.14: XCO2 along different pressures and 60°C
Figure 7.15 shows clearly the comparison of the solubility points expressed in mole fraction of CO2
performed for the CO2 loaded with brine at different pressure ranges and kept at 30.01°C and 60.01°C.
Through the plot comparison, the solubility points for CO2 at 60°C are qualitatively very good as
compared to 30.01°C as working close to the critical temperature around 31°C can affect the solubility
analysis. From the output files as shown in Figure 7.11 and Figure 7.12, the average relative devia-
tions(%ARD) are 9.484 and 3.515 indicating more deviation towards the analysis at 30°C. Thereby,
validates the good qualitative results for 60.01°C. This model assumes the salt to be containing of
pure NaCl.
Figure 7.15: Solubility plots comparison
45
==PAGE:50==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
8
Conclusion
The main aim of this project was to investigate the effects of different thermophysical properties
on the CO2 loaded with brine mixtures at a wide pressure range and temperature by varying the
concentration of CO2 in the brine mixture. This was mainly achieved through experimental work
and modeling done specifically for the solubility part. The real-time brine data from North Sea Nini
wells was used to produce synthetic brines. The temperature and pressure conditions were based on
the reservoir specifications. Modeling was performed using the experimental solubility data points in
order to fit the data properly for an efficient storage system.
The density and solubility measurements were performed for the CO2 loaded with brine mixtures at
a pressure range of 5-40 MPa as well as keeping the temperature constant at 30°C and 60°C. For
the density analysis using a U-tube density meter, temperature was more sensitive as compared to
pressure so we had to wait an ample amount of time for the temperature to stabilize. The density of
the mixture increased with the amount of CO2 dissolved into the brine mixture. It increased with the
increment of pressure and decreased with the temperature. As the temperature increases, the material
expands resulting in stiffness. This leads to faster oscillation cycles thereby, reducing the period of
vibration. Later, the solubility analysis was carried out for different concentrations of CO2 injected
into the brine mixture at different pressure and temperature. The solubility data points increased
with pressure as expected whereas reduced with an increase in temperature. The data points were
relatively quite linear for 60°C as compared to 30°C due to the measurements done in close proximity
to the critical temperature of 31°C. It has been made that the effect of dissolved CO2 is independent
of salt type and molality[concluded from the research of Marc McBride-Wright Ph.D. thesis, 2014]
[38]. For the viscosity analysis using capillary-based CVL-1000, the data points were not good due
to the non-equilibrium of slope calibrated multiple times. This was probably due to the complexities
in the apparatus and highly sensitive with regard to changes in temperature and pressure subsequently.
Finally, modeling was carried out for the solubility analysis using the SW executable based on PR-
EOS. The results were qualitatively very good for 60°C but got poorer for 30°C (close to the critical
point), also in good agreement with high %ARD for 30°C as compared to 60°C. Hence validates our
experimental data points to be the best fit for the SW model. The salt is assumed to be of pure
NaCl.
46
==PAGE:51==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
References
[1] 2023
IEA.
Co2
emissions
in
2022,
.
URL
https://www.iea.org/reports/
co2-emissions-in-2022. Accessed on 1st of July 2023.
[2] 2022 BP.
Bp statistical review of world energy june 2022.
URL https://www.bp.
com/content/dam/bp/business-sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/energy-economics/
statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2022-full-report.pdf.
Accessed on 1st of July
2023.
[3] 2023 Project Greensand. Hvad er co2-lagring (2023). URL https://www.projectgreensand.
com/copy-of-hvad-er-co2-lagring. Accessed on 1st of July 2023.
[4] 2022
IEA.
World
energy
outlook
2022,
.
URL
https://www.iea.org/reports/
world-energy-outlook-2022. Accessed on 1st of July 2023.
[5] Luc Thomas Steel. An investigation of CO2-brine interactions using North Sea oil well data with
respect to Geological Storage of CO2 and EOR. PhD thesis, Heriot-Watt University, April, 2017.
[6] 2021
IEA.
The
world
has
vast
capacity
to
store
co2:
Net
zero
means
we’ll
need
it,
.
URL
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/
the-world-has-vast-capacity-to-store-co2-net-zero-means-we-ll-need-it.
Accessed
on 2nd of July 2023.
[7] 2021
Global
Data.
Top
five
coal
producing
countries
(million
tonnes,
2021).
URL
https://www.globaldata.com/data-insights/mining/
the-top-five-coal-producing-countries-million-tonnes2021/#:~:text=China%20is%
20the%20largest%20coal,4.1%20billion%20tonnes%20in%202025. Accessed on 5th of July
2023.
[8] Staffell I-Heuberger C.et al. Mac Dowell N, Shah N. Quantifying the value of ccs for the future
electricity system. Energy & Environmental Science, 2016.
[9] Baixin Chen Masahiro Nishio Yi Zhang, Tongtong Li and Yongchen Song. Density measurement
and modeling of co2brine system at temperature and pressure corresponding to storage conditions.
Journal of Chemical Engineering Data, 2016.
[10] Mohammad Asadullah Amin Azdarpour Shervin Motamedi Erfan Mohammadian,
Hos-
sein Hamidi and Radzuan Junin. Measurement of co2 solubility in nacl brine solutions at different
temperatures and pressures using the potentiometric titration method. Journal of Chemical &
Engineering Data, 2015.
[11] G. C.; Trusler J. P. M Hou, S.-X.; Maitland. Measurement and modeling of the phase behavior
of the (carbon dioxide+water) mixture at temperatures from 298.15 k to 448.15 k. J. Supercrit.
Fluids, 2013.
[12] J. P. M.; Vega-Maza D.J. Tong, D.; Trusler. Solubility of co2 in aqueous solutions of cacl2 or
mgcl2 and in a synthetic formation brine at temperatures up to 423 k and pressures up to 40
mpa. Chem. Eng. Data, 2013.
[13] M. V.; Dilmore R. M.; Lvov S. N. Zhao, H.; Fedkin. Carbon dioxide solubility in aqueous solutions
of sodium chloride at geological conditions: Experimental results at 323.15, 373.15, and 423.15 k
and 150 bar and modeling up to 573.15 k and 2000 bar. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2015.
[14] F.; Cezac P.; Serin J. P.; Gaucher E. C. Messabeb, H.; Contamine. Experimental measurement
of co2 solubility in aqueous nacl solution at temperature from 323.15 to 423.15 k and pressure of
up to 20 mpa. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2016.
47
==PAGE:52==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
[15] F.; Nishio M.; Hihara E.; Akai M. Bando, S.; Takemura. Solubility of co2 in aqueous solutions
of nacl at (30 to 60) °c and (10 to 20) mpa. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2003.
[16] S.; Stenby E. H. Yan, W.; Huang. Measurement and modeling of co2 solubility in nacl brine and
co2saturated nacl brine density. Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2011.
[17] Y.; Chen Y.; Zhou Q. Guo, H.; Huang. Quantitative raman spectroscopic measurements of co2
solubility in nacl solution from (273.15 to 473.15) k at p = (10.0, 20.0, 30.0, and 40.0) mpa. J.
Chem. Eng. Data, 2016.
[18] M.; Pourafshary P. Bastami, A.; Allahgholi. Experimental and modeling study of the solubility
of co2 in various cacl2 solutions at different temperatures and pressures. Pet. Sci., 2014.
[19] R. M.; Lvov S. N. Zhao, H.; Dilmore. Experimental studies and modeling of co2 solubility in high
temperature aqueous cacl2, mgcl2, na2 so4, and kcl solutions. AIChE J., 2015.
[20] F.; Cezac P.; Serin J. P.; Pouget C.; Gaucher E. C. Messabeb, H.; Contamine. Experimental
measurement of co 2 solubility in aqueous cacl 2 solution at temperature from 323.15 to 423.15
k and pressure up to 20 mpa using the conductometric titration. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2017.
[21] E.; Rumpf B.; Maurer G. Perez-Salado Kamps, A .; Meyer. Solubility of co2 in aqueous solutions
of kcl and in aqueous solutions of k2co3. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2007.
[22] M.; Li S.; Dai L. Li, Z.; Dong. Densities and solubilities for binary systems of carbon dioxide +
water and carbon dioxide + brine at 59 °c and pressures to 29 mpa. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2004.
[23] M.; Yang G.; Han B Liu, Y.; Hou. Solubility of co2 in aqueous solutions of nacl, kcl, cacl2 and
their mixed salts at different temperatures and pressures. J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2011.
[24] P. Y.; Johnson W. K. Wong, C. S.; Tishchenko. Solubility of carbon dioxide in aqueous hcl and
nahco3 solutions from 278 to 298 k. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2005.
[25] P. Ahmadi and A. Chapoy. Co2 solubility in formation water under sequestration conditions.
Fluid Phase Equilib., 2018.
[26] Adeline Lach François Contamine Pierre Cézac et al. Marie Poulain, Hamdi Messabeb. Experi-
mental measurements of carbon dioxide solubility in na–ca–k–cl solutions at high temperatures
and pressures up to 20 mpa. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, 2019.
[27] L. Rodier D. Koschel, J. Coxam and V. Majer. Enthalpy and solubility data of co2 in water and
nacl ( aq ) at conditions of interest for geological sequestration. Fluid Phase Equilibria, 2006.
[28] A. Kumagai and C. Yokoyama. Viscosity of aqueous solutions of co2 at high pressures. Int. J.
Thermophys, 19:1315–1323, 1998.
[29] T. Uchida, R. Ohmura, J. Nagao, S. Takeya, T. Ebinuma, and H. Narita. Viscosity of aqueous
co2 solutions measured by dynamic light scattering. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 48:1225–1229, 2003.
[30] B. Lagourette, C. Boned, H. Saintguirons, P. Xans, and H. Zhou. Densimeter calibration method
versus temperature and pressure. Measurement Science Technology, 3(8):699–703, 1992.
[31] M.J.P. Comuñas, J.P. Bazile, A. Baylaucq, and C. Boned. Density of diethyl adipate using a
new vibrating tube densimeter from (293.15 to 403.15) k and up to 140 mpa. calibration and
measurements. Journal of Chemical Engineering Data, 53(4):986–994, 2008.
[32] Oscillation-type density meters – part 1: Laboratory instruments, 1999.
48
==PAGE:53==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
[33] et al. Fritz. Applications of densitometry, ultrasonic seed measurements, and ultra-low shear
viscosimetry to aqueous fluids. J. of Phys. Chem. B, 104(15):3463–3470, 2000.
[34] Peltier effect in semiconductors.
URL www.researchgate.net/publication/262179901_
Peltier_Effect_in_Semiconductors.
[35] At 516420 (b1). Patent.
[36] Anton Paar DMA™4100 M, 4500 M, 5000 M Reference Guide. Anton Paar, 2018. Instrument
software version: from 2.93 (XDLIB016EN-B).
[37] H. Fehlauer and H. Wolf. Density reference liquids certified by the physikalisch-techische bunde-
sanstalt. Meas. Sci. Technol., 17:2588–2592, 2006.
[38] Mark McBride-Wright. Viscosity and Density of aqueous fluids with dissolved CO2. PhD thesis,
Imperial College London, Jan 2014.
[39] Venkatraman A. Kalra A. & Dindoruk B. Ratnakar, R. R. On the prediction of gas solubility in
brine solutions with single or mixed salts: Applications to gas injection and co2 capture/seques-
tration. Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering, 2020.
[40] Bahloul S. Monteau J.Y. Le-Bail A. Aissa, M.F.B. Effect of temperature on the solubility of co2
in bread dough. Int. J. Food Prop., 2015.
[41] R. Baldwin. How hofmeister ion interactions affect protein stability. Biophys. J., 1996.
[42] K. Collins. Charge density-dependent strength of hydration and biological structure. Biophys.
J., 1997.
[43] Sun R. Duan, Z. An improved model calculating co2 solubility in pure water and aqueous nacl
solutions from 273 to 533 k and from 0 to 2000 bar. Chem. Geol., 2003.
[44] Sun R. Zhu C. Chou-I.M. Duan, Z. An improved model for the calculation of co2 solubility in
aqueous solutions containing naþ, kþ, ca2þ, mg2þ, cl, and so42. Mar. Chem., 2006.
[45] Smith N.O. Nagy B. Duffy, J.R. Solubility of natural gases in aqueous salt solutions—i: liquidus
surfaces in the system ch4-h2o-nacl2-cacl2 at room temperatures and at pressures below 1000
psia. Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta, 1961.
[46] Kalra A. Garde S. Ghosh, T. On the salt-induced stabilization of pair and many body hydrophobic
interactions. J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005.
[47] Vidic R.D. Dzombak D.A. Gregory, K.B.
Water management challenges associated with the
production of shale gas by hydraulic fracturing. Elements, 2011.
[48] Dewes I. Schumpe A. Hermann, C. The estimation of gas solubility in salt solutions. Chem. Eng.
Sci., 1995.
[49] D.D. Jackson. Computation of gas-liquid equilibria in high-saline geothermal fluids. SPE Inter-
national Conference on Oilfield Chemistry, 1977.
[50] Tugcu N. Cramer S. Garde-S. Kalra, A. Salting-in and salting-out of hydrophobic solutes in
aqueous salt solutions. J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001.
[51] Verbeek P. Khatib, Z. Water to value-produced water management for sustainable field develop-
ment of mature and green fields. J. Petrol. Technol., 2003.
[52] Zhang Z. Li, H. Mining the intrinsic trends of co2 solubility in blended solutions. J. CO2 Util,
2018.
49
==PAGE:54==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
[53] Y. Marcus. Thermodynamics of solvation of ions. J. CHEM. SOC. FARADAY TRANS, 1991.
[54] Kobe K.A. Markham, A.E. The solubility of carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide in aqueous salt
solutions. J. Am. Chem. Soc, 1941.
[55] Sada E. Kobayashi T. Kito-S. Ito K. Onda, K. Salting-out parameters of gas solubility in aqueous
salt solutions. J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 1970a.
[56] Dindoruk B. Wilson L. Ratnakar, R.R. Experimental investigation of dme–water–crude oil phase
behavior and pvt modeling for the application of dmeenhanced waterflooding. Fuel, 2016.
[57] Dindoruk B. Wilson L. Ratnakar, R.R. Phase behavior experiments and pvt modeling of dme-
brine-crude oil mixtures based on huron-vidal mixing rules for eor applications.
Fluid Phase
Equil., 2017.
[58] Sada E. Kobayashi T. Kito-S. Ito K. Onda, K. Solubility of gases in aqueous solutions of mixed
salts. J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 1970b.
[59] A. Schumpe. The estimation of gas solubility in salt solutions. Chem. Eng. Sci., 1993.
[60] Kito S. Ito Y. Sada, E. Solubilities of gases in aqueous solutions of weak acids. J. Chem. Eng.
Jpn., 1974.
[61] J. Setschenow. Concerning the constitution of salt solutions on the basis of their behavior to
carbonic acid. Z. Phys. Chem., 4:117–125, 1889.
[62] S.K. Shoor and K.E. Gubbins. Solubility of non-polar gases in concentrated electrolyte solutions.
J. Phys. Chem., pages 498–505, 1968.
[63] N. Spycher and K. Pruess. A phase-partitioning model for co2–brine mixtures at elevated temper-
atures and pressures: application to co2-enhanced geothermal systems. Transport Porous Media,
82(1):173–196, 2010.
[64] R.K. Stoessell and P.A. Byrne. Salting-out of methane in single-salt solutions at 25 c and below
800 psia. Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta, 46:1327–1332, 1982.
[65] K. Ueyama and J. Hatanaka. Salt effect on solubility of nonelectrolyte gases and liquids. Chem.
Eng. Sci., 37(5):790–792, 1982.
[66] W.E. Wasburn. International Critical Tables of Numerical Data, Physics, Chemistry and Tech-
nology. Knovel, Norwich, NY, 1st electronic edition edition, 2003.
[67] A. Yasunishi. Solubilities of sparingly soluble gases in aqueous sodium sulfate and sulfite solutions.
1977.
50
==PAGE:55==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
A
Appendices
A.1
Sample Calculations
A.1.1
Concentration of each salt
For all the sample calculations, we consider the salt to be NaCl.
Using Equation 5.1 and Table 1, we get:
c, g/L = 58.4428
22.98
× c(29293), mg/L ×
1g
1000L
(A.1)
From Equation A.1, we get the concentration of NaCl as 74.467 g/l.
A.1.2
Molality of each salt
Using Equation 5.2 and Table 2, we get:
b, mol/kg =
1.2742mol/L × 1000
1.063g/mL × 1000 −(P 1.2742mol/L × 58.4428g/mol)
(A.2)
Where, ρbrine = 1.063 g/ml
From Equation A.2, we get the molality of NaCl as 1.314 mol/kgw.
A.1.3
Density of studied mixture
If we assume the studied mixture as pure brine, then for our case, the value of τ at 60.01°C is
2688.705 µs. The density values of water at different pressure and temperature are taken from the
NIST database as mentioned before and the empirical period of vibration value of water is 2683.536 µs.
Using Equation 5.8, we get:
ρb(60.01, 50bar) = 985.32 + 983.2 × 2688.705 −2683.768
2683.536 −2605.818
(A.3)
Hence, from Equation A.3, we get the density value of brine as 1048.759 kg/m3.
==PAGE:56==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
A.1.4
Mass of CO2 dissolved into brine
For the sample preparation of 0.66 molal of CO2, assume that we inject 50 cc of brine for the mixture.
Using Equation 5.17, we get:
m1 = 0.66 × 44.01 × 1063 × 50 × 10( −6)
(1.097 + 0.66(0.044009)
(A.4)
From Equation A.4, we get the final mass of CO2 injected as 1.3716 g.
A.1.5
Molar volume of CO2
Using Equation 5.21, we get:
Vϕ = (1.097 + 0.66(0.044009)
1067.931
−1 + 0.0969
1049.888 ) × 106
0.66
(A.5)
We get the molar volume of CO2 as 35.1423 cm3/mol.
A.1.6
Solubility of CO2 in brine
For sample calculations, we take the cell conditions to be 400 bar and 30°C.
W0 = 683.205 g, W1 = 721.571 g and W2 = 719.891 g.
Using Equation A.6, we get:
Wbrine = (719.891 −683.205) −0.0018 × 71.3536
(1 −0.0018
1.063 )
(A.6)
We get the mass of brine phase as 36.62 g.
Using Equation 5.29, we get:
ln HCO2 = (192.876 + 0.024125(1.3141) −0.00752(1.3141)2) + (−9624.4 + 0.000199(1.3141))/(21.9 +
273.15)
(0.01441 −0.002111(1.3141))(21.9 + 273.15) + (−28.749 + 0.1446(1.3141))ln(21.9 + 273.15)
(A.7)
We get the value of Henry’s constant as 3.6302 MPa.kg/mol.
==PAGE:57==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Using Equation A.8, we get:
Pw = 220.64 × exp(647.096/(21.9 + 273.15) × (−7.85951783 × (1 −(21.9 + 273.15)/647.096) +
1.84408259 × (1 −(21.9 + 273.15)/647.096)1.5 −11.7866497 × (1 −(21.9 + 273.15)/647.096)3 +
22.6807411 × (1 −(21.9 + 273.15)/647.096)3.5 −15.9618719 × (1 −(21.9 + 273.15)/647.096)4 +
1.80122502 × (1 −(21.9 + 273.15)/647.096)7.5))
(A.8)
We get the value of vapor pressure of water as 0.0263 bar.
From Equation 5.28, we get:
mCO2 = Patm −Pw
HCO2
(A.9)
We get the value of solubility as 0.0277 mol/kg.
From Equation 5.29, we get:
Wwater =
36.6189
(1 + (0.277(44.01)+96.2904)
1000
)
(A.10)
We get the weight of water phase as 33.3654 g.
Using Equation 5.30, we get:
n1 = 1.68
44.01
(A.11)
We get n1 as 0.0382 mol.
Using Equation 5.33, we get:
VCO2 = 71.3536 −36.6189
1.063
(A.12)
We get the value of volume of CO2 as 36.905 ml.
==PAGE:58==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
Using Equation 5.34, we get:
ρCO2 = 44.01
22414 ×
273.15
(273.15 + 21.9)
(A.13)
We get the density value as 0.0018 g/ml.
Using Equation 5.32, we get:
mCO2 = 36.905 × 0.0018
(A.14)
We get the value of solubility for n2 as 0.0671 g.
From Equation 5.31, we get:
n2 = 0.0671
44.01
(A.15)
We get the value of n2 as 0.0015 mol.
Using Equation 5.35, we get:
n3 = 0.0277
1000 × 33.3654
(A.16)
We get the value of n3 as 0.00092481 mol.
Finally, using Equation 5.36, we get:
mCO2total = n1 + n2 + n3
Wwater
× 1000
(A.17)
We get the final solubility of CO2 as 1.2175 mol/kg.
==PAGE:59==
DTU Chemistry
July 2023
Master Thesis
A.1.7
Viscosity calculations
All the below equations are based on Hagen-Poiseuille equation.
From Equation 5.38, we get:
k = 0.471
0.3988
(A.18)
We get the calibration constant, k as 1.181043.
