==PAGE:1==
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data
Authentication Protocols
Master Thesis
Mário Gažo, Kongens Lyngby, June 2023
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
Analyse og Sammenligning af Kortlivede Data Autentificering Protokoller
Master Thesis
June, 2023
Author: Bc. Mário Gažo
Supervisor:
• Luisa Siniscalchi, PhD.
• Nicola Dragoni, PhD.
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, 322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months period at the Section for Cybersecurity
Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Com­
puter Science and Engineering, MSc. Eng. and the specialist program in Cybersecurity.
The work represents 30 ECTS points.
Bc. Mário Gažo ­ s212687
Signature
Date
ii
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
21. 06. 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
It is often needed for a recipient of a message, which gets sent over a network, to be
able to verify that the message originates from the sender and that it was not tampered
with during the process of transit, that the authenticity and the integrity of the message
were kept. In these cases, the sender can prove so using the digital signature scheme
by creating a signature for the message. After doing so, the recipient can confirm that
the sender is associated with the message and that the message had not been modified
by verifying the signature for the message. The sender is bound to the message and
cannot deny it retrospectively. This property of undeniability can be problematic in case
the sender wants to be held accountable for the sent data only for a certain period of time.
In these scenarios, the sender can consider using an expirable digital signature scheme
instead of a regular one. These schemes give the sender an option to set a signature
validity period after which the expirable digital signature will get declined, making the
receiver unable to verify the authenticity of the message, this way the sender can not be
linked to the data anymore. The receiver can verify whether the expirable digital signature
is valid for a message and for a timestamp. There are multiple ways of implementing a
scheme that takes into consideration the possibility that the sender of the data would like to
deny being the originator and the one that guarantees the message’s trustworthiness after
some time. In this work, two such schemes will be investigated, those being the epochal
signature scheme and the time­deniable signature scheme. A definition and analysis of
both schemes, their underlying schemes, and their internal workings will be performed,
including the determination of their space complexity and time complexity. Furthermore,
the schemes will be compared in terms of their security properties.
Keywords: Security · Signatures · Time­Deniability
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Luisa Siniscalchi for her patience with me
and valuable advice, I would not have had such a good time working on this project as I
did, was it not for your welcoming approach. Next to mention are my family, friends, and
colleagues at work, who have always been there for me in my time of need. Also, I would
like to recognize the fact, of how lucky I am to have been born in the most prosperous
parts of the world, none of this would be possible otherwise. Lastly, I would like to express
my gratitude towards everybody that fought for my rights and freedom.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Sections’ Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Preliminary Knowledge
4
2.1
Digital Signature Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Time­Lock Puzzle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Epochal Signature Scheme
10
3.1
Epochal Signature Scheme Underlying Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Epochal Signature Scheme Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Epochal Signature Scheme Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Epochal Signature Scheme Bottlenecks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme
20
4.1
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Underlying Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.4
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Bottlenecks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Implementation
34
5.1
Time­Lock Puzzle Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Digital Signature Scheme Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Epochal Signature Scheme Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.6
Project Dockerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Comparison
39
6.1
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Performance Comparison
. . . . . . . 39
6.2
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Property Comparison . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Conclusion
55
7.1
Performance Comparison Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.2
Properties Comparison Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Bibliography
58
A Project Folder Description
60
B Lewko’s Prime Order HIBE scheme
61
B.1 Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
B.2 Key­Indistinguishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
B.3 Adaptive Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
iv
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:6==
C Delegatable Functional Signature Scheme
64
C.1 Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
C.2 Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
C.3 Key Indistinguishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Pretty much every device connected to the internet is at some point in need of proving that
the data that the device is sending to another device, is created by the given device and
that the device is accountable for it, and that the data was not tampered with during the
transit throughout the network topology. As in real life, it is possible for the device to sign
the data, in this case not to do so physically, but to digitally sign it. By doing so, the data
integrity and authenticity properties are guaranteed. Digitally signed data is permanently
linked to the signing device. Any other device can verify the signature to prove so and it
is undeniable by the signing device. There are scenarios where the sender might want to
be eligible for the data just for a certain period of time, not forever. The sender can use
the expirable digital signature scheme to do so. In this way, the created signature will be
valid only for a certain period of time after which it will not be possible to verify that the
data was signed by the original device anymore. This is achieved by releasing the signing
key to the general public. This can be done by some sort of trusted authority, it is also
possible to append the signature with a piece of data from which the signing key can be
recreated. It is essential to make sure, that it is not possible to achieve this before the
validity period passes. If the signing key is made public in either of the ways, the original
sender can claim that the signature could have been created by anybody and that the
data can not be linked to the sender. This way the signature authenticity property does
not hold anymore.
A fine example of a scenario where employing a timely digital signature would be beneficial
is the Domain Keys Identified Mail (DKIM) protocol applied in the context of the Simple
Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) used for email messaging. It utilizes the digital signature
to sign all the messages which are being sent from the domain with a single key. This way
the protocol prevents the messages from being spoofed, thus preserving their authenticity
and filtering out the spam mail. Since the signatures don’t expire, they provide authenticity
to the old messages, even the ones that have been leaked in data breaches. Those can
then be resent by an attacker, effectively pretending to be the original sender. Since it is
only needed for the signature to be valid until the SMTP servers verify the messages, it
would be beneficial for the signature to expire afterward not to violate the principle of the
least privilege. Unlike the regular digital signature which will always be valid, the expirable
signature here only needs to be valid for a couple of minutes.
1.1
Sections’ Content
Firstly, we will define some preliminary primitives that will be used in all the studied ex­
pirable digital signature schemes. These include the digital signature scheme [1] used to
create signatures that prove the authenticity and integrity of the message that the signa­
ture is made for. We will define a time­release cryptographical primitive used to encode a
message in a way that is only possible to obtain it after performing a particular operation
for some time and no sooner, the time­lock puzzle [2]. Also, we will define a expirable
digital signature scheme, how is it different from the digital signature scheme, how it en­
sures the time­deniability property, what methods it defines, and what properties it has to
fulfill.
We will explore some methods that are used to create expirable digital signatures. We will
focus on methods that are decentralized, they will not need a trusted third party to operate
and perform the key release when the signature should lose its authenticity property. We
2
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:8==
will define the principles on which the schemes work, we will list the set of methods by
which they are specific, will analyze their meaning in the scheme, how they work internally,
and what is their complexity, we will also look into the scheme key sizes, the signing key
sizes, since the schemes rely on underlying schemes to create the signatures themselves,
and signature sizes, whether they change based on the input parameters. Also, it will be
important to look into the properties that these schemes fulfill. We will create a list of
bottlenecks for each scheme, to define which parts of them are problematic in regard to
security and performance.
The first scheme that we will look into is the epochal signature scheme [3]. The scheme is
based on splitting the timeline into discrete time periods, the epochs. During each epoch,
a different secret key is used to sign all the messages. After the epoch passes the secret
key is updated and after the preset amount of epochs, for which the signatures should
be valid, passes, the information from which it is possible to recreate the secret key is
released to the public so that the signatures made with it can be forged by anybody, this
way the signatures are invalidated and the authenticity property they provide, linking them
to the original signer, is denied. It is possible to derive a secret key for any older epoch
than the epoch for which the released key was used.
The next scheme we will look into is the time­deniable signature scheme [4]. It uses the
time­lock puzzle to encapsulate the signing key that was used to sign the message for
a certain timestamp. This puzzle is released together with the signature itself, meaning
that after the puzzle is solved, the solver is able to recreate the signature, denying the
original signature its authenticity property. It is also possible to derive signing keys for
older timestamps from the key that is retrieved from the time­lock puzzle.
We will implement the schemes using an appropriate technology, we have chosen to go
with the Python3.7 language. Then the schemes can be put to the performance test by
creating a set of parameterized use cases. These use cases’ execution times will be
measured, and the ones that are common for both schemes will be compared, as well as
the overall execution times and the trends that the times obtained by altering the method
parameters. We will compare how the size of the scheme keys, the signing keys, and the
signatures change, and how the execution time of the key generation, signature creation,
signature verification, and signature forgery creation reacts to different parameters. Also,
the key evolution will be examined in the case of the epochal signature scheme. The
considered parameters are the security parameter, the length of the message, the epoch
to sign for and the timestamp to sign for, and the number of epochs and the maximum
supported timestamp.
Lastly, we will observe the overall security definitions of the schemes. They employ se­
curity in different ways, it has to be possible to compare their security definitions and to
say, which satisfies a stronger security notion.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Preliminary Knowledge
Before we start with the definition, analysis, and comparison of the chosen expirable digital
signature schemes, we need to define some preliminaries that will be needed to under­
stand the work as a whole. First, we will define a digital signature scheme 2.1 without
any time­deniability property, upon which the other schemes are built. We will introduce
a time­lock puzzle scheme 2.2, a time­release crypto scheme that is used in all the listed
expirable digital signature schemes to encapsulate certain information which can only
be read after a certain amount of time. We will also define a expirable digital signature
scheme 2.3, define the interface using which they are generally used, how they work, and
how they ensure the property of time­deniability.
2.1
Digital Signature Scheme
A digital signature [1], just like a regular signature, is used to ensure the integrity and
authenticity of data. A digital signature scheme is based on asymmetric cryptography,
which uses a pair of keys (pk, sk), the public (verification) key, and the secret (signing)
key respectively. The public key pk is generally known by anyone and serves as a long­
term identity of the user, the secret key sk is to be kept private by the user.
The secret key sk is used by the signer to create a signature σ for a message m from
the message space M. A signature σ can be verified by the verifier using the public key
pk. A verifier can be any user who knows the public key pk, so generally anyone. The
message is then linked to the signer’s identity and is to be considered unaltered from
the one that the signer originally sent, keeping the message’s authenticity property, and
integrity property.
Once the electronic data has been digitally signed, there is no way for the signer to deny
being the originator of the data. This creates a possibility of replay attacks if the attacker
gets a hold of the signature and the original message, they can act as if they were the one
who created the message because the data will always be linked to the original sender.
We see that the general signature scheme’s authenticity property is undeniable.
The scheme is defined as a tuple of probabilistic polynomial­time algorithms, those being
the Σ.Gen, Σ.Sign, and Σ.V erify, their definitions are listed below.
Σ.Gen The key generation algorithm takes as an input a security parameter 1λ and out­
puts a tuple (pk, sk), the public (verification) key and the private (signing) key re­
spectively, these keys have a length of at least λ bits. It is possible to obtain the
security parameter 1λ from the keys.
(pk, sk) ←Σ.Gen(1λ)
Σ.Sign The signing algorithm takes as an input the secret key sk and a message m from
the message space M to create a signature σ for. It uses the secret key sk to create
a signature σ for the message m and returns it.
σ ←Σ.Signsk(m)
Σ.Verify The deterministic signature verification algorithm takes as an input the public
key pk, a message m from the message space M, and a signature σ. It outputs a
4
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:10==
binary value b, which indicates whether the signature σ is a valid (1) or an invalid (0)
signature for the provided message m.
b ←Σ.V erifypk(m, σ)
Digital Signature Scheme Correctness Property
For the digital signature scheme correctness property [1] to hold, it is required that for each
security parameter 1λ, each key pair (pk, sk) outputted by the digital signature scheme key
generation method Σ.Gen and every message m from the message space M to hold that
there exists a signature σ, that will be accepted by the digital signature scheme signature
verification method.
Pr[(pk, sk) ←Σ.Gen(1λ) : Σ.V erifypk(m, Σ.Signsk(m)) = 1] = 1
Digital Signature Scheme Unforgeability Property
For the digital signature scheme’s unforgeability [1] property to hold, it is required that the
probability of creating a valid signature forgery without having access to the secret key sk
or any hint is negligible.
Here we will introduce the general digital signature forgery experiment Sig−forgecma
A,Π(1λ)
[1]. For each security parameter 1λ and for each adversary A:
1. Generate the digital signature scheme key pair (pk, sk), the public key and the secret
key respectively by running the digital signature scheme key generation method
Σ.Gen.
2. Adversary A is given the public key pk and the access to the digital signature scheme
signing oracle OSign(·), which is used to create a signature σ for an inputted mes­
sage m from the message space M. The adversary outputs (m, σ) tuple containing
a message m from the message space M and a signature for it σ.
3. Let Q denote a set of messages whose signatures were requested by the adver­
sary A during the execution.
The output of the experiment is 1 if m /∈Q and
Σ.V erifypk(m, σ) = 1.
The digital signature scheme is existentially unforgeable under an adaptive chosen mes­
sage attack if all probabilistic polynomial­time adversaries A, there exists a negligible
function negl such that:
Pr[Sig −forgecma
A,Π(1λ) = 1] ≤negl(1λ)
2.2
Time­Lock Puzzle
To make sure that after the expiration time of the expirable signature passes anybody can
create a forgery of it making it lose its authenticity property, it is needed to find a way to
release the needed data to do so. It is possible to create some sort of infrastructure, a
trusted third party that would release the original signature creation signing key after the
expiration period had passed.
The other option is to use a time­release cryptographical scheme, the time­lock puzzle [2,
5]. Similarly to time capsules, their point is to store a piece of information inside of them
and recover it in the future after a certain period of time passes. Here it is ensured that it is
only possible to recover the information from it after doing a certain action continuously for
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
5
==PAGE:11==
a certain preset period of time, in the implementation that is considered in this work, the
operation will be the repeated squaring of a certain set base. Without any additional hints,
even the creator of the puzzle is not able to retrieve the data sooner than the set period
of time passes. It needs to be made sure that the process of the time­lock puzzle solving
can not be parallelized, which would make it possible to retrieve the data encapsulated in
the puzzle before the set time period passes.
In the expirable signature schemes described in this work, it is the information needed
to recreate the original signature creation signing key that is placed inside the time­lock
puzzle and the time to release it is set in a way, that it is made sure that it is not possible
to obtain it before the signature validity expires.
The time­lock puzzle scheme is defined as a tuple of methods, those being the TLP.Gen,
and TLP.Sol, their definitions are listed below.
TLP.Gen The time­lock puzzle generation algorithm takes as an input the security param­
eter 1λ, the number of squaring operations that can be performed per second S, the
number of seconds after which the puzzle should be solved T, and the message m
from the message space M to encapsulate in the time­lock puzzle. It creates and
outputs a time­lock puzzle tlp.
tlp ←TLP.Gen(1λ, S, T, m)
The method uses modular exponentiation to calculate the puzzle, this algorithm
has logarithmic time complexity dependent on the multiplication of the number of
squares per second S and the number of seconds to solve the puzzle T, the number
S · T.
TLP.Sol The time­lock puzzle solving algorithm takes as an input a time­lock puzzle tlp.
It solves the puzzle and returns the encapsulated message m from the message
space M. This is only possible to do by continuously performing S · T squaring
operations.
m ←TLP.Sol(tlp)
The method uses regular exponentiation to solve the answer to the puzzle, this
method is linearly dependent on the multiplication of the number of squares per
second S and the number of seconds to solve the puzzle T, the number S · T.
We see that the time complexity of the time­lock puzzle generation algorithm TLP.Gen is
lower then the time­lock puzzle solving algorithm TLP.Sol. Also, the number of squaring
operations per second parameter S is different for each device that the time­lock puzzle
might be generated or solved on. It is very important to set the parameter correctly to
make sure that it is not possible to solve the puzzle before the intended time passes. This
can be very complicated since we never know who exactly will be solving the puzzle. If the
device that generates it sets the parameter to fit its hardware capabilities, and the solving
device is stronger, it could solve it sooner than desired. Then the number of seconds for
which the puzzle should hold T is set according to the needs of the scheme.
Time­Lock Puzzle Correctness Property
For the time­lock puzzle scheme correctness property [2] to hold it is required that for
each possible security parameter 1λ, the number of squares per second S, the number
of seconds T, and a message m from the message space M there is a time­lock puzzle
tlp than can be solved by performing S · T squaring operations to retrieve the message
6
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:12==
m from the message space M.
Pr[tlp ←TLP.Gen(1λ, S, T, m) : m′ ←TLP.Sol(tlp) : m = m′] = 1
Time­Lock Puzzle Soundness Property
For the time­lock puzzle scheme soundness property [5] to hold it is required that for
each possible security parameter 1λ, the number of spares per second S, the number of
seconds T, and a message m from the message space M, there is no such adversary A
that takes as an input a time­lock puzzle tlp and does not perform S·T squaring operations,
for which it would hold, that the probability of retrieving the message m encapsulated in
the time­lock puzzle tlp is not negligible.
Pr[tlp ←TLP.Gen(1λ, S, T, m) : m′ ←A(tlp) : m = m′] ≤negl(1λ)
2.3
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme
To allow the digital signature scheme to create signatures that expire after a certain pe­
riod of time, the scheme has to be extended, this means that the methods that define the
protocol are altered and some are added. The property of signature deniability is based
on the fact, that after a certain period of time, all the information needed to create an indis­
tinguishable forgery of the signature is available to anybody, this information is released
together with the original signature in the first place. The process of signature forgery
takes more time than the original signature creation which is done with the knowledge
of the secret key. After the validity period passes and anybody can create a signature
forgery, the original signer can deny being linked to the data. We see that even though
the data integrity property still holds, the authenticity property is negated. It’s the way the
scheme releases this information that makes it distinct from the other ones.
In general, any of the described expirable digital signature schemes is defined as a tuple
of polynomial­time algorithms Exp.Gen, Exp.Sign, Exp.V erify, and Exp.AltSign, their
definitions are listed below. The list of methods can be longer and the parameters of them
can vary.
Exp.Gen The key generation algorithm takes as an input the security parameter 1λ. It
generates and returns a tuple of keys (pk, sk), the public (verification) key, and the
secret (signing) key respectively.
(pk, sk) ←Exp.Gen(1λ, . . . )
Exp.Sign The signature creation algorithm takes as an input a message m from the mes­
sage space M to create a signature for. It uses the secret key sk to create an ex­
pirable signature σ on message m and for time t, which is provided as a parameter
or is encoded in the secret key sk and returns it.
σ ←Exp.Signsk(m, . . . )
Exp.Verify The deterministic verification takes as an input the message m from the mes­
sage space M to verify the signature for, the timestamp to verify the signature for t,
and the expirable signature σ to verify. It uses the public key pk to verify whether the
expirable signature σ is a valid signature. It outputs a binary value b which indicates
whether the signature is a valid (1) or an invalid (0) signature for message m and
for time t.
b ←Exp.V erifypk(m, t, σ, . . . )
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
7
==PAGE:13==
Exp.AltSign The signature forgery creation algorithm takes as an input an expirable dig­
ital signature scheme public key pk, a valid expirable signature σ for a message m
from the message space M and for a timestamp t, a message m′ from the message
space M to create a signature forgery for and a timestamp t′ to create a signature
forgery for. It uses the public key pk and a valid expirable signature σ on a message
m from the message space M and for time t to create an indistinguishable expirable
signature forgery σ′ on message m′ from the message space M for any t′, where
t′ ≤t. It is important that the forgery creation execution time is larger or equal to
the desired expiration period of the original expirable signature σ, letting anybody
create a forgery only after the validity of the expirable signature σ has expired.
σ′ ←Exp.AltSignpk((σ, m, t), m′, t′, . . . )
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Properties
Here we will look into the properties of the general expirable digital signature scheme that
each individual scheme has to fulfill to be a complete expirable digital signature scheme.
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Completeness Property
For the expirable digital signature scheme completeness property to hold it is required
that for each security parameter 1λ, for each key pair (pk, sk) outputted by the expirable
digital signature scheme key generation method Exp.Gen, for every message m from
the message space M, and for every possible timestamp t, there is an expirable digital
signature σ, that is accepted by the expirable digital signature scheme signature verifica­
tion method Exp.V erify. This holds for signatures created using the signature creation
method Exp.Sign and the signature forgery creation method Exp.AltSign.
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Unforgeability Property
For the expirable digital signature scheme unforgeability property hold it is required that
the probability of creating a valid signature forgery σ′ of a valid originally made signature
σ before the validity period of the originally made signature σ passes is negligible.
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Deniability Property
For the expirable digital signature scheme deniability property to hold it is required that it
is possible to create indistinguishable signature forgery σ′ of an originally made signature
σ such that it is not possible to tell, which signature is the originally made signature and
which is the forgery of the originally made signature. The forgery creation is only possible
after the validity of the originally made signature σ passes.
Chosen Expirable Digital Signature Schemes
In this work, the chosen short­lived data authentication protocols will be described. We
will talk about the way they release the data to the public so that anybody is able to create
signature forgeries after the original signatures validity period has passed, making their
authenticity property disappear. We will look into the methods that define them, analyze
how they work, and establish their time complexity, also, we will look into how the keys
and the signatures are used in the scheme, and what is their size. Also, the properties of
the individual schemes shall be analyzed.
The first scheme to consider is the epochal signature scheme 3 which is based on splitting
the timeline into discrete time periods called epochs, during which signatures can be cre­
ated and verified. These signatures are considered valid for a certain amount of epochs
and after which the data to create a forgery is released, making it possible to forge a sig­
nature, thus making the originally made signature expire and lose its authenticity property.
The next scheme to consider is the time­deniable signature scheme 4. It is based on
creating an identity out of a concatenation of the desired timestamp and the message
8
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:14==
and generating a unique signing key for it. Later this key will serve as a signature, we will
check whether the key is valid and whether it was generated for the desired concatenation.
This signature will be released with a time­lock puzzle with the signing key, from which
any other key for a timestamp lower than the original timestamp can be derived and used
to create a signature for any message.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
9
==PAGE:15==
3
Epochal Signature Scheme
An epochal signature [3] becomes deniable after a certain period of time, but provides un­
forgeability equivalent to the standard signatures. The main difference from the standard
signature scheme is the use of epochs, those being discrete partitions of the timeline and
the addition of per­epoch public information tuple pinfoe.
Knowing the per­epoch public information tuple pinfoe should be enough to create arbi­
trary expired signatures, it must be made public in such a way that everyone has easy
access to it. It is possible to forge a signature with the old secret keys, allowing the orig­
inal signer to deny being linked to the messages signed with the old secret keys, since
anyone can do so.
The timeline below is split into seven discrete non­overlapping epochs, during each of
them it is possible to create signatures that are valid for the next V epochs. By having
access to epoch e public information tuple pinfoe, it is feasible to create any signature
for epoch e′, where e′ + V ≤e. This way the originally created signatures lose their
authenticity property since anybody can create an indistinguishable forgery of them.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
The epochal signature scheme is defined as a tuple of algorithms ES.Gen, ES.Sign,
ES.V erify, ES.AltSign, and ES.Evolve, their definitions are listed below.
ES.Gen The key generation algorithm takes as an input a security parameter 1λ, an
epoch duration ∆t, the maximum number of supported epochs E and the number
of epochs for which signatures are valid V . It returns the epochal signature scheme
key pair (pk, sk), the public key, and the secret key respectively.
(pk, sk) ←ES.Gen(1λ, ∆t, E, V )
ES.Sign The signing algorithm takes as an input the epochal signature scheme private
key sk and a message m from the message space M to create a signature σ for.
It creates and returns an expirable signature σ on a message m from the message
space M. The epoch number e is part of the secret key sk.
σ ←ES.Signsk(m)
ES.Verify The signature verification algorithm takes as an input the epochal signature
scheme public key pk, an epoch number to verify for e, a signature to verify σ, and
a message m from the message space M to verify the signature for. It returns
a boolean value b which indicates whether signature σ on a message m from the
message space M and for epoch e is valid (1) or an invalid (0).
b ←ES.V erifypk(e, σ, m)
ES.AltSign The signature forgery algorithm takes as input the epochal signature scheme
public key pk, the epoch e public information tuple pinfoe, an epoch to forge a sig­
nature for e′, where e′ + V ≤e, and a message m from the message space M to
10
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:16==
create a signature forgery σ for. It derives the secret key for epoch e′, the secret key
ske′, uses it to create a signature σ for a message m for epoch e′, and returns it.
σ ←ES.AltSignpk(pinfoe, e′, m)
ES.Evolve The epoch evolution algorithm is run on each epoch change, it takes as an
input the epochal signature scheme secret key sk. It returns the new epoch public
information tuple pinfoenew and an updated epochal signature scheme secret key
sk′ or ⊥if the epochal signature scheme secret key sk had been evolved E times
already.
pinfoenew, sk′ ←ES.Evolve(sk)
3.1
Epochal Signature Scheme Underlying Schemes
The epochal signature scheme is built upon two underlying signature schemes, those
being the static signature scheme (ˆΣ) and the dynamic signature scheme (¯Σ).
The static signature scheme ˆΣ generates a static key pair ( ˆpk, ˆsk), the public static key,
and the secret static key respectively. The pair is used to sign the current public infor­
mation tuple pinfoe on each epoch change and to verify the signature on each epochal
signature scheme signature verification. The static public key ˆpk serves as a long­term
identity, it is possible to verify any static signature ˆσ with it. On the other hand, the static
secret key ˆsk gets updated on each epoch change using the static scheme key update
method ˆΣ.Evolve.
The dynamic signature ¯Σ generates a dynamic key pair for epoch e, the pair ( ¯pke, ¯ske),
the public dynamic key, and the secret dynamic key respectively. It is used to create a
signature σ on a given message m from the message space M and to verify the signature
σ on the message m from the message space M. On each epoch change, a new pair is
generated based on some seed value re.
To allow the creation of a signature forgery of a signature σ which was created for a
message m from the message space M and for an epoch e, it is needed to release all the
information required to forge the dynamic signature scheme key pair and the static secret
key for epoch e, the key ˆske together with the signature itself. To access such information
has to be possible to do only after the validity of such a signature had expired, no sooner
than after the duration of V epochs after the epoch during which the signature had been
created, that being epoch e′ for which it holds that e′ + V ≤e.
Reverse Forward­Secure Signatures
We need to be sure, that from any epochal signature σ for a message m from the message
space M for an epoch e, it is possible to construct an epochal signature forgery σ′ for
any message m′ from the message space M and for any other past epoch e′, where
e′ + V ≤e. For this, it is needed to make sure, that the information released together
with the signature itself is enough to derive the static secret key for epoch e′, the key
ˆske′ and the seed value for epoch e′, the value re′, from which it is possible to derive
the dynamic signature scheme key pair for epoch e′, the pair ( ¯pke′, ¯ske′), to create the
signature forgery with. This has to hold while also making sure that it is not possible to do
so for future epochs, to keep the signatures unforgeable until it is desired for them not to
be so.
Since both the epoch static secret key for epoch e, the key ske, and the seed value for
epoch e, the value re can be used to get the key and the seed value of the previous epoch
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
11
==PAGE:17==
e −1, the key ske−1 and the seed re−1, it is possible to create a chain of values where
each older one can be derived from the newer one, these values are then released in
the reverse order so that the desired property is reached. This means that at the start of
the epochal signature scheme run, we need to generate the appropriate values so that
they are ready to be used later on, to be released sequentially. Each epoch requires such
value, so a list of these values’ length would be equal to the sum of the maximum number
of supported epochs E and the number of epochs for which the signatures are valid V ,
the number E + V . This method requires the values and keys to be stored in memory for
the whole run of the scheme, this can be demanding and wasteful of space on the used
memory storage media.
Pebbling
To have all the needed values ready to use when needed, it is also possible to use a
pebbler structure [6]. It is a scheme that creates a value chain, it doesn’t store all the
values of the chain, but only the logarithmic amount of them, then it generates the values
that create the chain and returns them one by one in reverse order, so instead of the
array of all the values only the pebbler has to be stored. It is still required to go through
the whole chain at the beginning of the scheme, but the requirement of storing all the
values falls away.
We see that we need to use a value twice, when it is used in the current epoch e and when
it is released to the public after the number of epochs for which the signature is valid V
epochs later, for this we need to have a spacing between the values that the pebbler
returns. To achieve spacing between the released values and the values that are used by
the scheme, we initialize two pebblers for each value we need to create the chain from,
one that generates the fresh new values to use and one that generates older values that
have been invalidated to release to the general public. The pebblers both start with the
same initial value and the update value function, the second one will be initialized to be
V values behind. This way the scheme can get the values needed to run properly while
making sure that the released values are of the invalidated epochs.
The pebbler is defined as a tuple of algorithms PebblePrep, and Pebble, their definitions
are listed below.
PebblePrep The pebbler initialization algorithm takes as a parameter the number of valid
pebblings N, the initial value V0, and a function that takes the current value and
returns the next one f, it returns an initial state of the pebbling Sn−1.
Sn−1 = PebblePrep(N, V0, f)
The method has to go through the whole value chain, for this, it has to run the
provided update function f N times. The space complexity of such a pebbler state
is logarithmic to the number of pebblings N.
Pebble Takes the pebbling state Si, it returns the next chain value Vi+1, which is fi(V0)
and the updated pebbling state Si−1 for i ∈{0, ..., n −1}.
Si−1, Vi+1 = Pebble(Si)
The method executes the update function once on the current state value, it is com­
pletely dependent on the time complexity of the provided update function f.
12
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Epochal Signature Scheme Properties
As in the original work in the epochal signature scheme [3], here the properties that define
the epochal signature scheme’s correct use and the overall security will be listed and
described.
Epochal Signature Scheme Completeness Property
The epochal signature scheme fulfills the completeness property if all honestly generated,
unexpired signatures are accepted by the verification algorithm.
For each security parameter 1λ ∈N, number of epochs E ∈poly(λ), number of epochs
for which the signature is valid V ∈{1, . . . , E −1}, an epochal signature scheme key pair
(pk, sk) generated by the epochal signature scheme key generation algorithm ES.Gen, for
an epoch number e ∈{1, . . . , E−1}, for another epoch number e′ ∈{e, . . . , min(e+V, E)},
and for an epochal signature scheme secret key ske, which is returned from e’th execution
of the epochal signature scheme secret key evolution method ES.Evolve, it holds that:
Pr[ES.V erify(pk, e′, ES.Sign(ske, m), m) = 1] = 1
Epochal Signature Scheme Unforgeability Property
The epochal signature scheme fulfills the unforgeability property if it is not possible to cre­
ate a signature forgery before the validity period of the originally made signature passes.
The security of the underlying signature schemes assures this.
Here we will introduce the unforgeability game (“Epochal Existential UnForge­ability un­
der Chosen Message Attacks” (EEUF­CMA)) ExpEEUF−CMA
ES,F
(1λ, ∆t, E, V ) of the epochal
signature scheme.
1
pk,sk := ES.Gen(1λ, ∆t, E, V)
2
t0 := now()
3
e := 0
4
queries := [∅, . . . , ∅]
5
fun ES.Evolve '():
6
abort_if(t = E)
7
abort_if(now() < t0 + e · ∆t)
8
e += 1
9
pinfoe, sk := ES.Evolve(sk)
10
return pinfoe
11
fun ES.Sign'(m):
12
abort_if(now() ￿t0 + e · ∆t)
13
σ := ES.Sign(sk, m)
14
queries[e] ∪= {m}
15
return σ
16
σ, m := F ES.Evolve′,ES.Sign′(pk)
17
ret := ES.Verify(pk, e, σ, m)
18
for e' ∈{max(0, e −V),. . ., e}:
19
abort_if((m, e') ∈queries[e'])
20
return ret
For each forger F ∈QPT, for each security parameter 1λ ∈N, each number of epochs
E ∈poly(λ), and for each number of epochs for which the signatures are valid V ∈
{1, . . . , E −1}, there exists a negligible function negl such that:
Pr[ExpEEUF−CMA
ES,F
(1λ, ∆t, E, V ) = 1] =: AdvEEUF−CMA
ES,E,V F
(1λ, ∆t) ≤negl(1λ)
Epochal Signature Scheme Deniability Property
The epochal signature scheme fulfills the deniability property if it holds that the epochal
signature scheme has a simulator S which is able to create a signature forgery σ′ of an
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
13
==PAGE:19==
originally made signature σ in such a way, that it is impossible to tell which is the originally
made signature and which is the signature forgery, the presence of such a simulator is
assured with the existence of the epochal signature scheme signature forgery method
ES.AltSign. It obtains the expired secret key sk using which it is possible to create an
exact signature forgery σ′, it has to be possible to obtain the key only after the validity of
the original signature σ had expired.
Here we will introduce the deniability game ExpDeniability
ES,S,J
(1λ, ∆t, E, V ) of the epochal sig­
nature scheme.
1
pk, sk := ES.Gen(1λ, ∆t, E, V )
2
b
$
←−{0, 1}
3
m, e0, e1 := J (pk,sk)
4
σ := ⊥
5
abort_if(∨e0 + e1 ≥E ∨e0 < 0 ∨e1 < V )
6
for e ∈{1, . . . , e0}:
7
pinfoe, sk := ES.Evolve(sk)
8
if b = 0:
9
σ := ES.Sign(sk, m)
10
for e ∈{e0 + 1, . . . , e0 + e1}:
11
pinfoe, sk := ES.Evolve(sk)
12
if b = 1:
13
σ := S(m, e, pinfoe0+e1)
14
b' := J (σ, sk)
15
return b = b'
An epochal signature scheme is deniable if the exists an efficient simulator S ∈PPT so
that no judge J can win the deniability game ExpDeniability
ES,S,J
(1λ, ∆t, E, V ) with a probability
higher then 1
2.
For each security parameter λ ∈N, for each number of epochs E ∈poly(λ), and for
each number of epochs for which the signature is valid V ∈{1, . . . , E −1}, there exists a
simulator S ∈PPT such that:
∀J ∈TM : Pr[ExpDeniability
ES,S,J
(1λ, ∆t, E, V ) = 1] ≤1
2
3.3
Epochal Signature Scheme Analysis
Here the features that define the epochal signature scheme will be listed, their meaning in
the scheme will be described and their internal operations will be analyzed. The scheme
implements all the methods of the general expirable digital signature scheme with the
addition of the key evolution algorithm, which runs on each epoch change, all the methods
are described below. We will also look into the structure of the scheme key pair, the signing
key, and the signature.
Epochal Signature Scheme Key Pair
The epochal signature scheme key pair (pk, sk) consists of the public key pk and the
secret key sk, where each of them is a tuple of different values.
The pk consists of the long­term static public key ˆpk serving as a long­term identity, the
scheme start­time t0, an epoch duration ∆t, the maximum number of supported epochs
E and the number of epochs for which the signatures are valid V .
1
pk = ( ˆpk, t0, ∆t, E, V)
14
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:20==
The epochal signature scheme secret key sk consists of the epochal signature scheme
public key pk, four pebblers Srnew, Srexp, S ˆ
sknew and S ˆ
skexp, the epoch number e, the dy­
namic secret key ¯ske and the epoch e public information tuple pinfoe.
The epoch e public information tuple pinfoe also consists of different values, those being
the epoch e dynamic public key ¯pke, the epoch number e, expired seed value rexp, expired
static secret key ˆskexp, a time­lock puzzle tl with the values characteristic for the epoch e,
the epoch e seed value, the value re and the epoch e static secret key, the key ˆske, and a
static signature ˆσ which verifies the pinfoe tuple as a whole, its size is linearly dependent
on the security parameter 1λ.
We see that the size of the epochal signature scheme public key pk is constant, except
for the public static key which is dependent on the security parameter 1λ. When it comes
to the epochal signature scheme secret key sk, its size is also logarithmically dependent
on the sum of the maximum number of supported epochs E and the number of epochs for
which the signatures are valid V multiplied by the size of the initial values of the pebblers
both of which are linearly dependent on the security parameter 1λ.
1
pinfoe = ( ¯
pke, e, rexp,
ˆskexp, tl, ˆσ)
2
sk = (pk, (Srnew , Srexp), (S ˆ
sknew , S ˆ
skexp), e,
¯
ske, pinfoe)
Epochal Signature Scheme Signature Creation Key
In the epochal signature scheme, the key used for the signature creation itself is the
dynamic scheme secret key ¯sk. The key is obtained together with the public dynamic key
¯pk using the underlying dynamic signature schemes key generation function ¯Σ.gen.
Its size is linearly dependent on the security parameter 1λ.
1
¯pknew,
¯sknew = ¯Σ.gen(1λ)
Epochal Signature Scheme Signature
With the epochal signature scheme signature, it has to be made sure, that from a signature
for epoch e, it is possible to create a signature forgery for epoch e′, where e′ + V ≤e. To
achieve this, the signature itself is concatenated with the epoch e public information tuple
pinfoe, from which the values needed to create the desired signature forgeries can be
extracted.
Since the dynamic signature ¯σ size is linearly dependent on the security parameter 1λ as
well as the epoch e public information tuple pinfoe, we see that the size of the signature
is linearly dependent on the security parameter 1λ.
1
¯σ = ¯Σ.Sign( ¯sk, pinfoe||m)
2
σ = (¯σ, pinfoe)
Epochal Signature Scheme Key Generation
The epochal signature scheme key generation method composes the epochal signa­
ture scheme key pair (pk, sk), the public key and the secret key respectively. Firstly,
the method generates the static key pair ( ˆpk, ˆskE), the static public key, and the initial
static secret key respectively, it uses the static signature scheme key generation method
ˆΣ.gen. Then it samples a random value rE which is λ bits long and will be used as an
initial seed value, this process is linearly dependent on 1λ. Then it initializes four pebblers,
two of which are set to generate E values, that being the number of maximum supported
epochs E, and the other two are set to generate E + V values, that being the sum of
the maximum supported epochs E and the number of epochs for which the signatures
are valid V . The two of them are initialized with the initial seed value rE, the other two
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
15
==PAGE:21==
with the just generated initial static secret key ˆskE. The next seed value is obtained by
applying a one­way pseudo­random function H on the seed value of the next epoch, the
method is linearly dependent on the security parameter 1λ, and the next static secret key
is obtained by applying the static signature scheme key update method ˆΣ.update.
1
ES.Gen(1λ, ∆t, E, V):
2
( ˆpk,
ˆ
skE) = ˆΣ.gen(1λ)
3
rE
$
←−{0, 1}λ
4
S ˆ
sknew = PebblePrep(E,
ˆskE, ˆΣ.update)
5
S ˆ
skexp = PebblePrep(E + V,
ˆskE, ˆΣ.update)
6
Srnew = PebblePrep(E, (rE, E),
7
(r, e) →(H(re+1,
ˆpk||e + 1||0), e - 1)
8
)
9
Srexp = PebblePrep(E + V, (rE, E),
10
(r, e) →(H(re+1,
ˆpk||e + 1||0), e - 1)
11
)
12
t0 = now()
13
pk = ( ˆpk, t0, ∆t, E, V)
14
sk = (pk, (Srnew , Srexp), (S ˆ
sknew , S ˆ
skexp), 0, ⊥, ⊥)
15
return (pk, sk)
Epochal Signature Scheme Signature Creation
Here the epoch e public information tuple pinfoe is concatenated with the message m
from the message space M to create a signature for, this data concatenation is simply
signed using the epoch e dynamic scheme secret key for epoch e, the key ¯ske.
The execution time of the method depends on the underlying dynamic signature scheme
signature creation method ¯Σ.sign.
1
ES.Sign(sk, m):
2
_, _, _, _,
¯ske, pinfoe = sk
3
¯σ = ¯Σ.sign( ¯ske, pinfoe||m)
4
σ = (¯σ, pinfoe)
5
6
return σ
Epochal Signature Scheme Signature Verification
The method checks whether the epochal signature scheme signature σ is valid for the
epoch e. It validates the static signature ˆσ and dynamic signature ¯σ created with the
underlying static signature scheme and dynamic signature scheme respectively.
The execution time of the method depends on the execution times of the two underly­
ing signature verification algorithms, the static signature scheme signature verification
algorithm ˆΣ.verify and the dynamic signature scheme signature verification algorithm
¯Σ.verify.
1
ES.Verify(pk, e, σ, m):
2
ˆpk, t0, ∆t, E, V = pk
3
¯σ, pinfoe′ = σ
4
¯pke′ , e', re′−V ,
ˆske′−V , tle′ , ˆσ = pinfoe′
5
6
if e ≤0 ∨e' ≤0 ∨e' + V ≤e ∨e' > e ∨e > E:
7
return 0
8
9
b0 = ˆΣ.verify( ˆpk, ˆσ,
¯pke′ ||e'||re′−V || ˆske′−V ||tle′)
10
b1 = ¯Σ.verify( ¯pk, ¯σ, pinfoe′ ||m)
11
12
return b0 ∧b1
16
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:22==
Epochal Signature Scheme Signature Forgery
The method is used to create a signature forgery σ′ for a message m′ from the message
space M and for epoch e′. For this it is needed to get the epochal signature scheme
signing key for epoch e′, the key ske′, this is done using the extract_key method, which
uses the expired value for epoch e where it holds that e′ +V ≤e, the seed value for epoch
e, the value re, and the expired static secret key for epoch e, the key ˆske, these values
can be retrieved from the epoch e public information tuple pinfoe. From these values, all
the past epochal signature scheme secret keys are derived, then the key that is correct
for the epoch that is desired to forge a signature for is chosen.
The execution time of this method is linearly dependent on the epoch number e multiplied
by the sum of complexities of the one­way pseudo­random algorithm H which is linearly
dependent on the security parameter 1λ, and the static signature scheme secret key up­
date method ˆΣ.update.
From the lists of past values, the ones appropriate for the desired epoch e′ are found and
used to create the signature forgery, for this, the evolve function has to be run e−e′ times.
We need to keep in mind that we already have the lists of the values, so the evolution
method is not pebbling the values. To simplify the method even more, we construct the
desired signing key directly in our implementation. Afterward, the given message m′ is
simply signed for the epoch e′ using the epochal signature scheme secret key for epoch e′,
with the key ske′ using the epochal signature scheme signature creation method ES.Sign.
1
ES.AltSign(pk, pinfoe, e', m'):
2
e, re,
ˆske = pinfoe
3
sk∗= extract_key(re,
ˆske, e)
4
e −e′ times: sk∗= ES.Evolve(sk∗)
5
σ = ES.sign(sk′, m)
6
7
return σ
Epochal Signature Scheme Key Evolution
The method updates the four pebblers and gets the new values from them, the seed
value update function is based on a one­way pseudo­random method H which is linearly
dependent on the security parameter 1λ, and it also uses the static signature scheme
secret key update function ˆΣ.Update. It runs two one­way pseudo­random functions that
are linearly dependent on 1λ. It also runs the dynamic scheme key pair generation method
¯Σ.gen, the time­lock puzzle generation method TLP.Gen, and the static signature scheme
signature creation method ˆΣ.sign.
1
ES.Evolve(sk):
2
pk, (Srnew , Srexp), (S ˆ
sknew , S ˆ
skexp), e, _, _ = sk
3
ˆpk, t0, ∆t, E, V = pk
4
enew = e + 1
5
sleep_until(t0 + enew * ∆t)
6
7
S′
rnew , rnew = Pebble(Srnew )
8
S′
rexp , rexp = Pebble(Srexp)
9
S′
ˆ
sknew ,
ˆ
sknew = Pebble(Ssknew )
10
S′
ˆ
skexp ,
ˆ
skexp = Pebble(Sskexp)
11
12
r ¯
pk = H(rnew,
ˆpk||enew||1)
13
¯pknew,
¯sknew = ¯Σ.gen(1λ; r ¯
pk)
14
rtl = H(rnew,
ˆpk||enew||2)
15
tl = TLP.Gen(1λ, V · ∆t, rnew|| ˆsknew; rtl)
16
ˆ
sk′, ˆσ = ˆΣ.sign( ˆsk,
ˆpknew||enew||rexp|| ˆskexp||tl)
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
17
==PAGE:23==
17
18
pinfoenew = ( ¯pknew, enew, rexp,
ˆskexp, tl, ˆσ)
19
sk' = (pk, (S′
rnew , S′
rexp), (S′
sknew , S′
skexp), enew,
¯sknew, pinfoenew )
20
21
return pinfoenew , sk'
Time­lock Puzzle Parameter Choice
We need to make sure, that each signature σ created on a message m from the message
space M, and for epoch e, also holds the data from which the epochal signature scheme
secret key for epoch e, the key ske with which the signature had been created can be
obtained. Using the key ske the signature forgeries of expired signatures can be created.
It is necessary that the key ske is only obtainable after the original signature has lost its
authenticity property, that being after V epochs following the signature creation at epoch e.
To make sure this holds, the provided time­lock puzzle has to take the time of V epochs to
solve and reveal these values. We see that the number of seconds after which it should
be possible to solve the time­lock puzzle is simply the number of epochs for which the
signature is valid V multiplied by the epoch duration ∆t, that being the number V · ∆t.
The difficulty parameter S is the number of square operations per second.
1
tl = TLP.Gen(1λ, S, V · ∆t, re|| ˆske)
3.4
Epochal Signature Scheme Bottlenecks
Here we will list the problematic parts of the scheme, it is a group of features of the scheme
that cause the run of it to face issues that have to be resolved and thought of by the user.
We will name them and analyze them.
Need for an Infrastructure
The first problematic part of the scheme usage we would like to address is the need for
an infrastructure that runs the whole scheme. It is needed to run the epochal signature
scheme key generation method ES.Gen at the start of the scheme to generate all the
values so that they are ready for later use, even with the pebbling used, with an incorrectly
chosen underlying signature schemes, this can take a lot of time, it needs to be said, that
this has to be done only once. Also, it is always necessary to save the values as part of the
secret key which makes it grow in size in logarithmic relation to the sum of the maximum
number of supported epochs E and the number of epochs for which the signatures are
valid V . It is also important to make sure that the epochal signature scheme key evolution
method ES.Evolve is run at the start of each epoch, also it is needed to make sure that
the epoch e public information tuple pinfoe is made public in such a way that anybody
has easy access to it so that the deniability property is secured.
Bounded Use
Since the pebbler is used to generate a chain of values in reverse with the initial value
being the one from which all the others can be derived, it is needed to know exactly how
many values are going to be needed to generate, hence how many epochs should the
scheme run support and how many epochs should the signature validity period cover.
This number must be known at the time when the epochal signature scheme key pair
generation method ES.Gen is run so at the very start of the scheme. The choice of the
maximum number of supported epochs E and the number of epochs for which the signa­
tures are valid V has to be well thought through to match the scenario that the scheme
will be needed, the sum of these values E +V is an input parameter for two out of the four
used pebbler structures. Using larger epoch duration values ∆t can be used to extend
the spanning of individual epochs, making the scheme run longer with the same amount
of epochs.
18
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:24==
Clock Synchronisation
As for the need for a perfect clock synchronization problem mentioned in [4], it is pointed
out that if the clocks are out of sync, the attacker can gain access to the information using
which the signatures can be forged earlier than they should be, allowing the attacker to
gain the current epoch values and give them the ability to forge a signature for a future
epoch. This imposes a potential security problem since perfect clock synchronization is
very hard to achieve and maintain throughout the run of the scheme. The inconsistency
that I see is that they omit the use of the signature validity parameter V , which sets the
number of epochs for which a signature is valid, as well as the difficulty of the time­lock
puzzle itself. It seems to me that if the V parameter was incremented, this problem would
fall off, since then a slight clock inaccuracy would not lead to being able to obtain the
values for forging too early. On the other hand, this approach would lead to the authenticity
property holding longer than it should, which for larger epoch duration (e.g.: days, weeks)
could lead to situations, where the signature is again valid for too long, yet again not
respecting the least privilege principle.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
19
==PAGE:25==
4
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme
A time­deniable signature [4] is designed to be non­repudiable and secure for some time
period after the signature is created, when this period passes, the signature loses its
authenticity property. This is done by revealing the signing key using which the signature
had been created. Once that happens, it is possible for anybody to create a forgery of the
signature which will be indistinguishable from the original one, this way the original signer
can deny being linked to the data.
It must hold that any party that receives a signature σ for a message m from the message
space M and for a timestamp t, signed with a time­deniable signature scheme signing key
for time t, the key skt, is able to create a signature forgery σ′ for a message m′ from the
message space M and for a timestamp t′, signed with a time­deniable signature scheme
signing key for time t′, the key skt′, where it has to hold that t′ ≤t. This is achieved by
concatenating a time­lock puzzle to the actual signature, this time­lock puzzle is initialized
to be only solvable after the validity of the signature expires and no sooner, it holds the
signing key skt, which was used to create the signature itself.
The time­deniable signature scheme is defined as a tuple of algorithms, those being
TDS.Gen, TDS.Sign, TDS.V erify, and TDS.AltSign, their definitions are listed below.
TDS.Gen The key pair generation algorithm takes as an input the security parameter
1λ and the time­lock puzzle difficulty parameter T. It creates and returns the key
pair (pk, sk), the time­deniable signature scheme public key, and the time­deniable
signature scheme secret key respectively.
(pk, sk) ←TDS.Gen(1λ, T)
TDS.Sign The signing algorithm takes as an input the time­deniable signature scheme
secret key sk, a message m from the message space M to create a signature for,
and a timestamp t to create a signature for. It creates and returns an expirable
signature σ for a message m and for a timestamp t.
σ ←TDS.Signsk(m, t)
TDS.Verify The verification algorithm takes as input the time­deniable signature scheme
public key pk, a signature to verify σ, a message m from the message space M for
which to verify the signature, and a timestamp t for which to verify the signature.
It returns a boolean value b which indicates the validity of the signature σ for a
message m and for a timestamp t, whether the signature is valid (1) or invalid (0).
b ←TDS.V erifypk(σ, m, t)
TDS.AltSign The signature forgery algorithm takes as an input the time­deniable signa­
ture scheme public key pk, a valid signature σ for a message m from the message
space M and for time t, a message m′ from the message space M to create a sig­
nature forgery for and a timestamp t′ to create a signature forgery for, where t′ ≤t.
It creates and returns an indistinguishable expirable signature forgery σ′.
σ′ ←TDS.AltSignpk((σ, m, t), m′, t′)
20
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:26==
4.1
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Underlying Schemes
Below we describe the schemes which are used to create such a signature scheme, where
each key that represents a timestamp t, can be used to derive another key for timestamp
t′, where t′ ≤t.
Hierarchy Identity Based Encryption
Identity­based encryption (IBE) [7] system is a public key system where the public key
can be an arbitrary array of values such as an email address. A central authority uses a
master key to issue private keys to match the identities.
The hierarchical identity­based encryption (HIBE) [8] is a generalization of IBE that mir­
rors an organizational hierarchy, here the users, which are connected to an identity, are
assigned keys by the master authority. It is possible to encrypt any message knowing
only the public parameters and the desired identity, where only the user associated with
the identity, who owns the key for this identity, is able to decrypt this message.
The identities can be organized into a hierarchy, where any superior identity at level k
is able to issue private keys to the inferior identities, but can not decrypt the messages
intended for the other identities. The hierarchy is achieved by prefixing the inferior identity
with the superior one in the list of values by which the identity is defined. Having the
superior identity key, it is possible to derive any key of an inferior identity.
The HIBE scheme is defined as a tuple of algorithms HIBE.Setup, HIBE.KeyGen,
HIBE.Delegate, HIBE.Encrypt, and HIBE.Decrypt, their definitions are listed below.
HIBE.Setup The setup algorithm takes as an input a security parameter 1λ. It returns the
HIBE scheme master secret key msk and the HIBE scheme public parameters pp.
(msk, pp) ←Setup(1λ)
HIBE.KeyGen The key generation algorithm takes as an input the HIBE scheme master
secret key msk and a HIBE identity to generate a key for I. It creates and returns a
secret key for the HIBE identity I, the key skI.
skI ←HIBE.KeyGenmsk(I)
HIBE.Delegate The key delegation algorithm takes as an input the HIBE scheme public
parameters pp, the secret key for the HIBE identity I, the key skI, and a HIBE identity
I′ which is inferior to the identity I in the hierarchy. It creates and returns a secret
key for the HIBE identity, given by the concatenation of the HIBE identity I and the
HIBE identity I′, the HIBE identity I||I′, the key skI||I′.
skI||I′ ←HIBE.Delegatepp(skI, I′)
HIBE.Encrypt The encryption algorithm takes as an input the HIBE scheme public pa­
rameters pp, a message m from the message space M to encrypt, and a HIBE
identity to encrypt for I. It creates and returns the corresponding cyphertext ct.
ct ←HIBE.Encryptpp(m, I)
HIBE.Decrypt The decryption algorithm takes as an input the secret key for the HIBE
identity I, the key skI, and a cyphertext ct. It resolves and returns the original
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
21
==PAGE:27==
message m from the message space M if it is possible to decrypt it, otherwise
returns ⊥. The decryption is not possible if the provided identity key is not valid.
m/⊥←HIBE.DecryptskI(ct)
There are multiple implementations of the HIBE scheme to choose from, in this work, we
have decided to go with the Lewko­Waters’ variant [9, 10], with the prime order translation
by Lewko [11]. This variant is correct, is adaptively secure, and supports indistinguishable
HIBE identity key delegation. More information regarding the implementation and the
properties of this variant are listed in the appendix B.
Delegatable Functional Signatures
The delegatable functional signature scheme uses a delegatable functional key skf to
create a signature for a message m from the message space M, one has to first apply
the function f and only then sign the output of it f(m). In this work, the scheme will be
used to manage the keys for timestamps that represent individual HIBE identities, we see
that the delegatable functional signature scheme will be built upon the HIBE scheme.
The function that will be used is a prefix function that pre­appends a timestamp t to the
message on which the signature is meant to be created m from the message space M.
If such a function is connected to the HIBE scheme, the timestamp t and the message
m concatenation t||m can serve as a HIBE identity, for which it is possible to create a
key, the key skt||m. This key will later serve as a signature for the message m from the
message space M and for the time t, only a valid key for such an identity is able to decrypt
a ciphertext created for the identity.
fT (t, m) =
!
t||m
for t ≤T
⊥
The delegatable functional signing key for timestamp t, the key skft, is not just the key
given by the HIBE identity of the timestamp t HIBE tree leaf node, the key skt, but also
all the left neighbors of it and all its parent nodes in the HIBE identity tree. From the
delegatable functional signing key for time t, the key skft, it is possible to derive any other
delegatable functional signing key for time t′, the key skft′, while it holds that t′ ≤t. This
property will be very useful since we need to make sure that it is possible to derive a
delegatable functional signing key for lower timestamps than the timestamp for which the
originally made signatures were made. Also, it is possible to derive HIBE identity key for
a given timestamp t′, the key skt′, while it holds that t′ ≤t, these keys can be then used
to derive a key for the HIBE identity given by the concatenation of the chosen timestamp t
and a message m from the message space M, proving that such a key is valid is enough
to prove the authenticity of the signature.
The delegatable functional signature scheme uses the delegatable functional singing key
to derive an appropriate HIBE identity key given by the timestamp t, then it delegates it
into a HIBE identity, which is given by the concatenation of the chosen timestamp t and the
chosen message m from the message space M, the identity t||m, the key skt||m. Since
only an agent with access to the delegatable signing key from which it is possible to obtain
the HIBE identity key for time t could have created the key, if the key is valid it serves as a
signature and a proof of authenticity. If the delegatable functional signing key used in the
process of the signature creation would have been released to the public, anybody would
be able to create such a HIBE identity key, not only the original genuine agent, making
the signature lose the authenticity it had, when only the genuine agent was able to do so.
22
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:28==
In the previous work on the time­deniable signatures [4] the HIBE scheme is used to
create an N­ary tree in which leaf nodes represent timestamps which are encoded in a
numbering system defined by the number N (N = 2 is binary, N = 10 is decimal, etc.), this
is to optimize the scheme, since with larger numbering systems, the timestamp shortens.
On the other hand, if N gets too large, the number of keys that have to be saved per
layer will outgrow the savings, it is needed to choose the parameter carefully. We can
see that by changing the N­arity of the HIBE identity tree from N = 2 to N = 4, we are
able to create a delegatable functional signing key for time t = (5)10 in the same amount
of keys, it is important to notice that for the 4­ary tree, the keys are shorter, this will be
very important as the speed of the underlying HIBE key generation method depends on
the length of the identity for which the key is generated. We see that the number of the
tree layers is logarithmically dependent on the timestamp and the amount of identities
per layer depends linearly on the tree N­arity, a balance between these two complexity
factors has to be found.
∅
0
00
000
001
01
010
011
1
10
100
101
11
110
111
Figure 4.1: Binary HIBE tree (N = 2). To get a key for time t = (101)2 = (5)10, we need to
compose a list of all the left neighbors and the parent left neighbors. skf101 = (sk101, sk100,
sk0). Red = identity keys are held. Green = keys can be derived.
∅
0
00
01
02
03
1
10
11
12
13
2
20
21
22
23
3
30
31
32
33
Figure 4.2: Here we see a 4­ary HIBE tree (N = 4). To get a key for time t = (11)4 = (5)10,
we need to compose a list of all the left neighbors and the parent left neighbors. skf11 =
(sk11, sk10, sk0). Red nodes = identity keys are held. Green nodes = keys can be derived.
The delegatable functional signature scheme is defined as a tuple of methods DFS.Setup,
DFS.KeyGen, DFS.Sign, DFS.V erify and DFS.Delegate, their definitions are listed
below.
DFS.Setup The setup function takes as a parameter the security parameter 1λ. It creates
and returns the delegatable functional signature scheme key pair (mvk, msk), the
delegatable functional signature scheme master verification key, and the delegat­
able functional signature scheme master secret key respectively.
(mvk, msk) ←DFS.Setup(1λ)
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
23
==PAGE:29==
DFS.KeyGen The key generation function takes as a parameter the delegatable func­
tional signature scheme master secret key msk and a function f. It creates and
returns a delegatable functional signing key skf.
skf ←DFS.KeyGenmsk(f)
DFS.Sign The signature creation function takes as a parameter a delegatable functional
signing key skf, a function f, and a message m from the message space M to
create a signature for. It returns a tuple consisting of a function f applied on the
message m, the value f(m), and a signature σ that it had created using the provided
delegatable functional signing key skf.
(f(m), σ) ←DFS.Signskf (f, m)
DFS.Verify The verification function takes as input the delegatable functional signature
scheme master verification key mvk, a function f evaluated on a message m, the
value f(m), and a signature σ. It returns a boolean value b, which indicates, whether
the signature is valid (1) or invalid (0).
b ←DFS.V erifymvk(f(m), σ)
DFS.Delegate The delegation algorithm takes as an input the delegatable functional sig­
nature scheme master verification key mvk, a function f, a delegatable functional
signing key skf, and a restricted function f′. It outputs a delegatable functional
signing key skf′. This function is used to delegate from a key that creates signa­
tures on messages for timestamp t, to one that creates signatures on messages for
timestamp t′, where t′ ≤t.
skf′ ←DFS.Delegatemvk(f, skf, f′)
The delegatable functional signature scheme has a set of properties that it has to fulfill,
those being the correctness property, the security property, and the key indistinguishability
property, they are described closer in the appendix C. Below, the delegatable functional
signature schemes methods will be listed, their internal processes will be analyzed and
described.
Delegatable Signature Scheme Setup
The setup method uses the underlying HIBE scheme to generate the delegatable func­
tional signature scheme master key pair (mvk, msk), the delegatable functional signature
master verification key, and the delegatable functional signature master secret key re­
spectively.
The time complexity is entirely dependent on the setup method of the underlying HIBE
scheme HIBE.Setup.
1
DFS.Setup(1λ):
2
(msk', pk) = HIBE.Setup(1λ)
3
return pk, (pk, msk')
24
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:30==
Delegatable Signature Scheme Key Generation
The key generation algorithm uses the delegatable functional signature scheme mas­
ter secret key msk to generate a delegatable functional signing key skfT for a provided
timestamp T. This is done by tracing the HIBE tree to identify HIBE identities given by
the desired timestamp T, this process is represented as a subroutine that returns the list
of identities that represent all the left neighbors of the desired node and its parents, this
process takes into account the N­arity of the HIBE tree. Then the keys that they represent
are generated and returned.
The time complexity depends on the number of HIBE identities that are returned by the
HIBE tree tracing method Trace and the complexity of the HIBE scheme key generation
method HIBE.KeyGen, each of the identities returned by the trace method has to have
its own identity key generated.
1
DFS.KeyGen(msk = (pk, msk'), T):
2
listskT
= []
3
trace = Trace(msk, T)
4
for node ∈trace:
5
listskT .append(HIBE.KeyGen(msk', node))
6
7
return pk, listskT
Delegatable Signature Scheme Signature Creation
The signature creation method uses the underlying HIBE scheme to obtain a key for an
identity that represents a concatenation of an identity of a timestamp t for which to create
a signature and a message m from the message space M for which to create a signature,
the identity t||m, the key skt||m. The key from which to delegate is found by identifying the
length of the common prefix of the maximum timestamp T and the timestamp to create a
signature for t.
Since the run­time is linearly dependent on the length of the HIBE identity towards which
to delegate to obtain the desired signature identity, it depends linearly on the number of
common prefix digits j of the timestamps T and t, the length of the message to create a
signature for m, and the underlying HIBE delegation method HIBE.Delegate.
1
DFS.Sign(skT , T, (t, m)):
2
if t > T:
3
return ⊥
4
t1, ... ,tℓ= parse(t)
5
pk, listskT
= parse(skT )
6
skt′ , j = findPrefix(listskT , t)
7
skt||m = HIBE.Delegate(pk, skt′ , tj+1, ... ,tℓ||m)
8
9
return t||m, skt||m
Delegatable Signature Scheme Verification
The verification method samples a random message of a length n and uses the HIBE
scheme to verify that the signature, which is, in reality, a HIBE identity key, which identity
is given by the concatenation of the desired timestamp t and a message m from the
message space M, the identity t||m, the key skt||m, is a valid key for the desired identity.
It returns a binary value b indicating whether the signature is valid (1) or invalid (0).
The time complexity of the method depends on the time complexities of the HIBE scheme
encryption HIBE.Encrypt and the HIBE scheme decryption HIBE.Decrypt methods.
1
DFS.Verify(mvk = pk, m', σ = skt||m):
2
msg = {0, 1}n
3
c = HIBE.Encrypt(pk, msg, t||m)
4
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
25
==PAGE:31==
5
return HIBE.Decrypt(skt||m, c) == msg ∧t||m == m′
Delegatable Signature Scheme Delegation
The delegation function reduces the number of timestamps for which it is possible to
create a signature with a delegatable functional signing key, by delegating to an inferior
timestamp delegatable functional signing key. This is done by calculating a common prefix
of the timestamp towards which to reduce T ′ and the timestamp from which to reduce T,
by re­randomizing the common HIBE identity keys, and by delegating towards the specific
ones.
Since we need to run the HIBE delegation method for each of the HIBE identity keys that
are part of the delegatable functional signature key for time T ′, the key skT ′, nevertheless
of if it is used for re­randomization or a specific HIBE identity key generation, the time­
complexity depends on the number of keys returned by the tracing method Trace and the
time­complexity of the HIBE scheme key delegation method HIBE.Delegate.
1
DFS.Delegate(mvk = pk, T, skT
= (pk', listskT ), T'):
2
if T' > T:
3
return ⊥
4
5
T ′
1, . . ., T ′
ℓ= parse(T')
6
sk, j = findPrefix(listskT , T')
7
listskT ′
= []
8
for in ∈0 . . . j-1:
9
listskT ′ .append(HIBE.Delegate(pk, listskT [i], nil))
10
11
trace = Trace(T ′
1, . . ., T ′
j , T ′
l )
12
for node ∈trace:
13
listskT ′ .append(HIBE.Delegate(pk, sk, node))
14
return pk, listskT ′
4.2
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Properties
As in the previous work on the time­deniable signature scheme [4] we will discuss the
properties that have to be fulfilled by the time­deniable signature scheme. They are im­
portant for the correct run of the scheme and also for the overall security.
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Correctness Property
For the time­deniable signature scheme to fulfill the correctness property it must hold that
for each possible security parameter 1λ, a message m from the message space M, and
timestamp t, there exists a signature σ that is accepted by the verification method. Also,
it has to hold, that a forgery of an original signature or of another forgery has to satisfy the
same property.
A time­deniable signature scheme for a message space M satisfies the correctness prop­
erty if it satisfies:
1. ∀m ∈M it holds that:
Pr
" (pk, sk) ←TDS.Gen(1λ, T)
σ ←TDS.Sign(sk, m, t)
: TDS.V erify(pk, σ, m, t) = 1
#
= 1
2. Let TDS.AltSignk(pk, (m0, t0, σ0), {(mj, tj)}j∈[k]) be shorthand for a recursively de­
fined function:
TDS.AltSigni(pk, (m0, t0, σ0), {(mj, tj)}j∈[k]) =
TDS.AltSign(
pk, (mi−1, ti−1, TDS.AltSigni−1(pk, (m0, t0, σ0), {(mj, tj)}j∈[i−1])), mi, ti
26
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:32==
)
where TDS.AltSign0(pk, (m0, t0, σ0), {}) = σ0.
∀k ∈N, for all sets of ordered tuples {(mj, tj)}j∈[k], and ∀m0, t0 that satisfy tj ≤tj−1
where j ∈[k]:
Pr


(pk, sk) ←TDS.Gen(1λ, T)
σ0 ←TDS.Sign(sk, m0, t0)
σ ←TDS.AltSignk(
pk, (m0, t0, σ0), {(mj, tj)}j∈[k]
)
: TDS.V erify(pk, σ, mk, tk) = 1


= 1
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Unforgeability
It must hold that it is not possible to create a valid forgery of a signature before the validity
period of the original signature passes. This is assured by setting the parameters of the
time­lock puzzle in such a way, that it is not possible to obtain its content before the
expiration period passes, otherwise, the probability of obtaining the signature without the
encapsulated signing key or any hint is negligible.
Here we will introduce the (ϵ, T)­Unforgeability notion via a security game.
Setup. The challenger C generates a time­deniable signature scheme key pair (pk, sk),
the public key and the secret key respectively, using the time­deniable signature scheme
key generation method TDS.Gen. It gives the public key pk to the adversary A.
Phase 1. The adversary A is a tuple of algorithm A0, A1. In this phase, A0 is allowed to
adaptively query singing oracle OSign(sk, ·, ·) which takes a message m from the message
space M and a timestamp t and returns a signature σ ←TDS.Sign(sk, m, t).
Transfer. The adversary A0 gives an advice string z to the adversary A1.
Phase 2. The adversary A1 has to respond to the challenger with a forgery while also
being allowed to adaptively query the oracle OSign.
Forgery. The adversary A = (A0, A1) wins if A1 can produce a valid forgery (m′, t′, σ′)
under the following constraints:
1. ∀i, t′ > ti for queries (mi, ti) made by A0
2. ∀i, (mi, ti) ̸= (m′, t′) where (mi, ti) are queries made to OSign by A1
A time­deniable signature scheme satisfies the ϵ­Unforgeability property if ∀ϵ­admissible
poly size adversaries A = {Aλ}λ∈N = {(Aλ,0, Aλ,1)}λ∈N, ∀T(λ) for which it holds that they
satisfy the ϵ­admissibility requirement for A, there exists a negligible function negl such
that for all λ ∈N:
Pr


(pk, sk) ←TDS.Gen(1λ, T)
(z) ←A
OSign(sk,·,·)
λ,0
(pk)
(m′, t′, σ′) ←A
OSign(sk,·,·)
λ,1
(z)
: TDS.V erify(pk, m′, t′, σ′) = 1

≤negl(1λ)
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Deniability
Time­deniable signature comes with the information needed to create an indistinguishable
forgery of thyself, the information is encapsulated in a time­lock puzzle that comes as a
part of the signature. It holds that after the execution of the sequential steps needed
to solve the time­lock puzzle, the signing key is recovered. By using it, it is possible to
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
27
==PAGE:33==
create an indistinguishable signature forgery, making the original one lose its authenticity
property.
Here we introduce the time­deniable signature scheme indistinguishability game ExpIND
TDS.
Setup. The challenger C generates the time­deniable signature scheme key pair (pk, sk),
the public key and the secret key respectively, using the time­deniable signature scheme
key generation method TDS.Gen, it gives both keys to an adversary A. They also initialize
an empty table T = ∅and sample a binary value b
$←−{0, 1}.
Query Phase. In this phase, the adversary A is allowed to adaptively query a singing
oracle OSign(sk, ·, ·) and a challenger oracle OCh(·, ·, ·).
OSign(sk, ·, ·) takes as an input a message m from the message space M and a times­
tamp t to produce a signature σ ←TDS.Sign(sk, m, t). It randomly chooses an
identifier id (not equal to previously defined identifiers), records (id, m, t, σ) in the
table T , and returns (id, σ).
OCh(·, ·, ·) takes as an input an identifier id, challenge message m, and a timestamp t.
It checks the table T for the identifier id. If it is not present, the output is ⊥. Let
m′, t′, σ′ be values associated with the identifier id. If t > t′ the output is also ⊥.
Compute σ0 ←TDS.Sign(sk, m, t) and σ1 ←TDS.AltSign(pk, (m′, t′, σ′), m, t).
Finally, it responds with σb.
Guess. The adversary outputs its guess b′ for b. The advantage of the adversary A is
defined as AdvA(1λ) = Pr[b′ = b] −1
2. The adversary A wins is b′ = b.
A time­deniable signature scheme holds the deniability property of ∀poly size adversaries
A = {Aλ}λ∈N their advantage AdvA(1λ) in the time­deniable signature scheme deniability
game ExpIND
TDS is negligible.
k­hop Deniability: We refer to the definition defined above as 1­hop deniability. It is
reasonable to ask if indistinguishability still holds when comparing the output of TDS.Sign
with applying the TDS.AltSign algorithm k times instead of just once. Intuitively, this
notion could be stronger and offer more deniability via a larger pool of indistinguishable
forgeries.
A formal definition of the k­hop indistinguishability game Expkhop
TDS is given below:
Setup. This is the same as the (1­hop) key­indistinguishability game ExpIND
TDS.
Query Phase. The adversary A has access to the signing oracle OSign(sk, ·, ·) and the
challenge oracle OCh(·, ·, ·, ·)
OSign is the same as in ExpIND
TDS.
OCh(·, ·, ·, ·) takes as an input a challenge identifier id, one ordered set of messages and
a timestamp tuples {(mi, ti)}i∈[k−1], and a message and a timestamp pair m′, t′. It
checks that there exists a row in the table T with a row (id, ·, ·, ·). Let m0, t0, σ0 be the
values associated with that row. It ensures that ∀i ∈[k −1], ti−1 ≥ti and tk−1 ≥t′.
If any of these conditions holds, the output is ⊥. Compute:
σ0 ←TDS.Sign(sk, m′, t′)
σ1 ←TDS.AltSign(pk, (m0, t0, σ0), {(m1, t1), . . . , (mk−1, tk−1), (m′, t′)})
σb is returned as an output.
28
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:34==
Guess. This is again the same as the ExpIND
TDS game.
A signature scheme achieves k­hop deniability property if poly size adversaries A =
{Aλ}λ∈N their advantage in the Expkhop
TDS game is negligible.
4.3
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Analysis
Having defined all the primitives and all the underlying schemes needed to build the time­
deniable signature scheme, we can go on and finally define the methods associated with
the scheme, describe them, and analyze them. The scheme implements all the methods
of a general expirable digital signature scheme, all of them are described below. We will
also look into the scheme key pair, the key used for the signature creation itself, and the
signature structure.
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Key Pair
The time­deniable signature scheme key pair (pk, sk) consists of the time­deniable signa­
ture scheme public key and the time­deniable signature scheme secret key respectively.
Each of them holds values important for the scheme, and some of them are common for
both keys. The time­deniable signature scheme public key pk consists of the underlying
delegatable functional signature scheme master verification key mvk, the time­lock puzzle
difficulty parameter T, and the security parameter λ. The time­deniable signature scheme
secret key sk consists of the underlying delegatable functional signature scheme master
secret key msk, the time­lock puzzle difficulty parameter T, and the security parameter λ.
Since the sizes of the master verification key mvk and the master secret key msk are
dependent on the security parameter 1λ, the time­deniable signature scheme key pair
inherits this dependence.
1
pk = (mvk, T, λ)
2
sk = (msk, T, λ)
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Signature Creation Key
The time­deniable signature scheme signing key is a delegatable functional signing key
for timestamp t, the key skft. It is a list of HIBE tree HIBE identity keys, which represent
HIBE identities that are all the left neighbors of all the nodes spanning from the leaf node
which represents the HIBE identity given by the timestamp t to the root node. The list of
such identities is obtained using the Trace method.
The size of the key depends on the number of nodes that the method returns, the number
is linearly dependent on the N­arity of the HIBE tree and the logarithmically on the times­
tamp t for which the signature is created, for each of these HIBE identities we need to
generate an appropriate key, each individuals’ keys size is dependent on the implemen­
tation of the HIBE scheme key generation method HIBE.KeyGen.
1
Trace(t):
2
trace = []
3
4
digits = '0123456789ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ '
5
for i, c in enumerate(t, start=1):
6
trace.append([t[:i - 1] + d for d in digits[:digits.find(c)]])
7
8
trace[-1].append(t)
9
10
return trace
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
29
==PAGE:35==
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Signature
The signature of the time­deniable signature scheme has to be created in such a way, that
after the validity of it expires, it is possible to forge it, alongside any other signature with
an older timestamp. This is guaranteed by concatenating a time­lock puzzle containing
the signing key alongside the signature itself.
The message m from the message space M is signed by providing a delegatable func­
tional signing key skft representing a timestamp t for which we want to create a signature
and using the underlying HIBE scheme to delegate the identity key to another key, which
HIBE identity comes by prefixing the message m with the timestamp t, creating a HIBE
identity key for an identity t||m.
The size of the HIBE identity key depends on the implementation of the HIBE scheme
key generation method HIBE.KeyGen, it can be said that it depends on the security
parameter 1λ and it linearly depends on the length of the HIBE identity for which the key
is generated, here it depends linearly on the number of digits in the timestamp t and the
number of characters in the message m, the size of the HIBE identity key, serving as
a signature, grows in the same way. Part of the signature is also the time­lock puzzle
containing the delegatable functional signing key which can be used by the time­deniable
signature scheme to create a forgery of this signature, the size of the time­lock puzzle
grows by the security parameter 1λ.
1
σ′ = DFS.Sign(skft , ft, t, m)
2
tlp = TLP.Gen(1λ, T · z(1λ), skft)
3
σ = (tlp, σ′)
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Key Generation
The time­deniable signature scheme setup function generates time­deniable signature
scheme key pair (pk, sk), the time­deniable signature scheme public key, and the time­
deniable signature scheme secret key respectively. Both are obtained from the underlying
delegatable functional signature scheme which relies on the underlying HIBE scheme
which generates the keys on setup. It also sets the time­lock puzzle difficulty parameter
T.
The execution time is entirely dependent on the underlying delegatable functional signa­
ture scheme setup method DFS.Setup.
1
TDS.Gen(1λ, T):
2
(mvk, msk) = DFS.Setup(1λ)
3
return ((mvk, T, λ),(msk, T, λ))
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Signature Creation
The time­deniable signature scheme signature creation function uses the underlying del­
egatable functional signature scheme to create a signature σ for a message m from the
message space M and for timestamp t. For this purpose, the delegatable functional
singing key skft is generated. This key is used again by the delegatable functional sig­
nature scheme to create a signature for the message m from the message space M.
Later this key is encapsulated in a time­lock puzzle and concatenated with the original
signature, creating the time­deniable signature scheme signature itself.
The execution time depends on the underlying delegatable functional signature scheme
key generation method DFS.KeyGen, the underlying delegatable functional signature
scheme signature creation method DFS.Sign, and the time­lock puzzle generation algo­
rithm TLP.Gen.
1
TDS.Sign(sk = (mvk, T, λ), m, t):
30
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:36==
2
skft = DFS.KeyGen(msk, ft)
3
v, s = DFS.Sign(skft , ft, (t, m))
4
c = TLP.Gen(1λ, T · z(λ), skft)
5
return (c, s)
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Signature Verification
The verification function validates a signature σ for a message m from the message space
M and for timestamp t using the underlying delegatable functional signature scheme
signature verification algorithm.
The execution time of the method is entirely dependent on the underlying delegatable
functional signature scheme signature verification algorithm DFS.V erify.
1
TDS.Verify(pk, σ, m, t):
2
c, s = parse(σ)
3
return DFS.Verify(pk, t||m, s)
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Signature Forgery
The time­deniable signature scheme signature forgery creation function is used to create
a signature forgery σ′ for a message m′ from the message space M and for timestamp
t′. For this, it is needed to provide a valid signature σ on a message m from the message
space M and for a timestamp t, where t′ ≤t. First, the time­lock puzzle encapsulated
with the original valid signature σ has to be obtained and solved using the time­lock puzzle
solving method TLP.Sol. After that happens, the signing key skft is obtained and can be
used to create a signing key for time t′, the key skft′, using the delegatable functional
signature scheme key delegation method DFS.Delegate. With this restricted key, the
new signature s for the message m′ from the message space M, and for the timestamp t′
is created using the delegatable functional signature scheme signature creation method
DFS.Sign, and the key is encapsulated in a time­lock puzzle c using the time­lock puzzle
generation method TLP.Gen. This puzzle is concatenated with the signature itself and is
returned as a valid signature forgery σ′.
The execution time of the method depends on the time­lock puzzle solution TLP.Sol,
the delegatable functional signature scheme key delegation method DFS.Delegate, the
delegatable functional signature scheme signature creation method DFS.Sign, and the
time­lock puzzle generation algorithm TLP.Gen.
1
TDS.AltSign(pk, (σ, m, t), m', t'):
2
mvk, T, λ = parse(pk)
3
c, s = parse(σ)
4
skft = TLP.Sol(c)
5
skft′
= DFS.Delegate(mvk, ft, skft , ft′)
6
v, s = DFS.Sign(skft′ , ft′ , (t', m))
7
c = TLP.Gen(1λ, T · z(λ), skft′ )
8
9
return (c, s)
Time­Lock Puzzle Parameter Choice
To make sure that the information in the time­lock puzzle will not be revealed until the
validity of the signature is needed to hold, we need to choose an appropriate number of
squares per second parameter S and the number of seconds until the solution can be
obtained T, or simply their multiplication S · T. This is set to be T · z(λ), where T is the
time­lock puzzle difficulty parameter and z(λ) is the time it takes to run the other methods
needed to forge a signature, it holds that z(λ) = |DFS.V erify| + 2 + 1 + |DFS.Sign| +
|DFS.KeyGen| + |TLP.Gen|, where |A.B| is a depth of a circuit that computes algorithm
B of a cryptographic primitive A.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
31
==PAGE:37==
In the previous work on the time­deniable signatures [4] they simply measure the number
of squares that their machine can perform in a second, then they multiply this number by
the number of seconds that their timestamps have a granularity of and use the result of
this operation as a difficulty parameter of the time­lock puzzle. This way it is made sure
that the user is not able to gain access to the data encapsulated in the puzzle earlier than
the signature validity period passes.
4.4
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Bottlenecks
Here we will look into the issues that might occur during the use of the scheme. These
problems mostly cause the scheme to run more slowly than it could, making it less useful
than it could be.
HIBE Scheme Implementation
We see that the methods of the underlying delegatable functional signature scheme are
using the methods of the underlying HIBE scheme. Since there are multiple implemen­
tations of the HIBE scheme, the one that will be used has to be chosen carefully so that
ultimately the time­deniable signature scheme works as it should. It is important that the
HIBE supports adaptive security and that it generates keys that are indistinguishable,
otherwise, the forgery could be recognized and the whole concept of signature expiration
would vanish.
Also, the delegatable functional signature methods’ execution time depends largely on
the HIBE scheme. Some implementations can be slow on their own and adding security
bits can make the execution time grow in a very disproportional manner.
Time­Lock Puzzle Parameters
As every device has different hardware parameters, it can be very hard to estimate the
time­lock puzzle parameters, since we need to make sure that it is not possible to solve a
puzzle earlier than the expiration of the validity period of the signature. Different devices
take different times to solve the same puzzle, so coming up with a single way to determine
the parameters is not possible. It has to be done in a way that the puzzle is unsolvable
sooner than desired by the current best computer on the market, or we need to carefully
consider the scenario in which the scheme will be used and choose fitting parameters
regarding that.
Bounded Use
In the previous work on the time­deniable signatures [4] it is mentioned that the time­
deniable signature scheme is unbounded unlike the epochal signature scheme, which
has to have the number of epochs predefined, while the time­deniable signature scheme
doesn’t need any predefined values. It is important to say that the number of digits of the
timestamp has to be set beforehand, otherwise, the delegated timestamp and message
concatenation HIBE identity key, serving as a signature, would be recognized as a forgery
if the number of digits of the timestamp of the original signature and the forgery would
differ, the other one would have a trail of zeros as a prefix, this would break the property
of key indistinguishability which is crucial in the notion of deniability.
Taking this into consideration, the time­deniable signature scheme should also be con­
sidered bounded, since the predefined number of digits also defines the max supported
timestamp value, that being the time ND, where N is the base of the numbering system
and D is the number of digits. The number of digits and the base have to be chosen
carefully since the size of the key is dependent on these values, also the signing and the
forgery methods are dependent on these parameters.
32
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:38==
Signature Creation Execution Depends on the Length of the Message
Another problem that could cause the scheme to run slowly is the fact, that to obtain
a signature, it is needed to delegate a key for the timestamp and the message. The
timestamp has a set size as we have defined in the previous point, the message does not.
The message could potentially be many characters long, making the scheme delegate to
find the appropriate key for a very long time.
A potential solution to this problem could be not using the message as part of the identity
towards which we delegate. It would work if a hash digest of the message was used,
that way we would operate with a set amount of digits of the timestamp and also a set
number of characters of the message, then their concatenation would have a constant size
throughout the use of the scheme, making the signature creation method run in constant
time. This way the messages which are shorter than the proposed hash digest function
output would be disadvantaged since they would take longer to create a signature, than in
the usual scenario, the messages that are much larger than the digest size would benefit
from this change. Overall, we could count on the method execution time to be more
consistent.
Signature is a HIBE Identity Key
Also worth mentioning is the fact, that contrary to most schemes, the signature here is not
a byte stream that can be verified through simple operations, but a secret key of an HIBE
identity in the HIBE tree. This means that its size is not constant but rather depends on
the timestamp and the message, also the execution time of the signature creation process
is dependent on these values.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
33
==PAGE:39==
5
Implementation
Part of this work is also the implementation of the schemes and executing a comparison
by running benchmarking tests on them. The code base is located in a GitHub repository
[12]. For this, it is needed to choose a fitting technology. All the schemes have been
implemented using the language Python3.71. The reference device is MacBook Pro 2017
with Dual­Core Intel Core i5 2.3GHz, 8GB of RAM memory with 128GB SSD disk as
memory.
Multiple external libraries were used to implement the schemes, as they require a variety
of underlying schemes and primitives to run. Since some of the libraries that we will use
have parts, that are written in the C language, we need a library that will make the function­
ality available for us, for this purpose we will use the Cython library2. For HIBE scheme
implementation, it is needed to be able to perform group operations, for this, a framework
for prototyping of advanced cryptosystems, the Charm3, was used. For symmetric en­
cryption, asymmetric encryption, and hash digest creation the package pycryptodome4
was used. As we need to generate prime numbers that have certain bit lengths to cre­
ate a time­lock puzzle so that the puzzle itself has a variable security level based on the
security parameter, the libnum5 package was used. To change the base representation
of a timestamp we used the numpy6 library. As we need to create plots of the results of
the conducted benchmarking results, we have used the plotting library matplotlib7. Also,
we need to measure how the sizes of the keys and the signatures change with a variety
of different arguments, for this the Pympler 8 package was used. Finally, to make sure
that the code works as desired, a set of unit tests is part of the repository for each bigger
module, these tests are run using the pytest9 testing framework.
Package
Version
Comment
Cython
0.29.35
C functionality
charm­crypto
0.50
group operations
pycryptodome
3.17
encryption, hashing
libnum
1.7.1
prime number generation
numpy
1.21.6
change number base
matplotlib
3.5.3
plotting benchmark results
Pympler
1.0.1
measure size of an object
pytest
7.3.1
unit testing
Table 5.1: Used Python packages and their versions
1Python
2Cython
3Charm
4PyCryptodome
5libnum
6NumPy
7Matplotlib
8Pympler
9pytest
34
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:40==
5.1
Time­Lock Puzzle Implementation
A time­lock puzzle is a static tuple containing five values, those being the composite modu­
lus N, a squaring base A, the square amount T, the encrypted key CK, and the encrypted
message CM.
On creation, two prime numbers, the P and Q, are generated and the composite modulus
N is calculated. Thanks to the knowledge of the primes, it is possible to perform the T
squares in logarithmic time and use the result of this operation to encrypt a symmetric
key, which is used to encrypt the message M from the message space M. For this, the
Salsa20 symmetric encryption scheme was chosen. Afterward, the primes are thrown
away and only the composite modulus N is left to be known. In our implementation, it is
possible to create a deterministic time­lock puzzle using a seed value, so two puzzles with
the same message M from the message space M and the same seed value produce two
puzzles that are indistinguishable.
To solve the puzzle, the solver has to perform the squaring operations on the base A T
times, the result of this operation is used to decrypt the symmetric key K with which the
message M itself is decrypted and can be read.
What is very important is the choice of parameters for the time­lock puzzle. We see that
the number of squaring operations is just the multiplication of the expected squares per
second S and the number of seconds that we want the puzzle to hold T until it is solved.
The question is, how does one estimate, how many squares is it possible to do in a single
second if every device has different specifications? Without an optimized implementation
of the squaring and the device that the puzzle will be solved on, it is not really possible, we
conducted tests on our reference device, testing how many would be the correct amount,
and the measurements led us to a number close to 100 000 so this will be the value, that
this work will operate with, it will be different for each device, so this needs to be adjusted
if other tests are conducted. For this, we have created a simple Python script tlp.py
which creates time­lock puzzles with a different number of square operations to perform,
measures the time it takes to solve them, and estimates how many squares leads to a
solving time of a single second.
Also, the time­lock puzzles in this work will be secured with 2048 bits of security, so to
generate them it is needed to generate a pair of unique secure primes of 1024 bits, after
multiplying them, we get a composite modulus of 2048 bits, this translates to security bits.
5.2
Digital Signature Scheme Implementation
One of the underlying schemes used by the expirable digital signature schemes is the gen­
eral digital signature scheme. It is the simple asymmetric cryptography primitive, where
the key pair (pk, sk), the public key, and the secret key respectively, are generated. The
secret key sk is used to create signatures σ for a message m from the message space
M and the public key, serving as a long­term identity, is used to verify such signatures.
This is done through the use of the key pair generation method, the signature creation
method, and the signature verification method. In this work, this scheme is implemented
using the RSA keys with 2048 bits of security. It is also possible to generate the key pair
deterministically by providing a seed value. It is used as a dynamic signature scheme ¯Σ
in the epochal signature scheme.
5.3
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Implementation
Each expirable signature scheme has a set of methods that it has to implement, we
have created an interface of such methods, to indicate that the main logic behind all
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
35
==PAGE:41==
the schemes is the same. The interface consists of the same methods as the general
signature scheme, those being the key pair generation method, the signature creation
method, and the signature verification method. What is added is the signature forgery
function, which is able to forge any signature after its validity has expired, making it lose
its authenticity property, and allowing deniability to occur.
The internal workings of these methods are different and are what is specific for each
scheme. The parameter lists of these methods can vary, also extra methods can be
added to support the scheme if needed.
5.4
Epochal Signature Scheme Implementation
It can be seen that the scheme public key pk, the secret key sk, and the epoch e public
information tuple pinfoe are tuples of different data. We have created named tuple struc­
tures (dataclasses) to encapsulate them. The pinfoe one also has an option of turning all
its attributes into bytes, so that they can be used as input for a signature creation signing
function, also it is able to turn all its attributes including the aforementioned signature into
bytes and concatenate when with a message m from the message space M to create a
signature for, this is useful for epochal signature scheme signature creation.
As for the pebbling, it is also implemented as a dataclass that encapsulates the pebbler,
it takes the initial value val, the update function update, the number of epochs E, and
the number of epochs for which the signature is valid V . First, it uses the aforementioned
values to initialize the reverse value chain, then it performs V updates, this way the expired
values will be behind during the key evolve function call. Then the class uses the update
function, which updates the state and returns the next value in the chain until the limit of
E + V updates is reached. For the reverse value chain, we used the in­place optimal
binary pebbler [13].
PebbleStart
Pebble / value
LimitReached
< V / update
≥V
< E + V / update
≥E + V
Figure 5.1: Pebbling as a finite state machine
For the dynamic signature scheme (¯Σ) we have used the RSA­based general digital sig­
nature scheme that is described in the section above. We will set the security parameter
to 2048 bits. We have used the pycryptodome RSA implementation.
As for the static signature scheme (ˆΣ), we went with the extended Merkle signature
scheme (XMSS) [14]. We used a public Python implementation available on GitHub [15].
It is a tree­based signature scheme that supports key updating. The scheme can be im­
plemented in multiple variants where each provides a different level of security, for testing
we have chosen two of them, one providing 256 bits of security and the other providing
36
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:42==
512 bits, they are both based on the SHA family hashing. In case we are using the vari­
ants in the quantum­based setting, their security level is halved. The variants and their
parameters are listed below.
Variant
Security
XMSS­SHA2_10_256
256 bits
XMSS­SHA2_10_512
512 bits
Table 5.2: XMSS variants
Also, for the key evolution, we need to implement the sleep_until method. It is used to
make the method idle until the next epoch is about to start, then the key update itself is
executed after which the method waits until the next epoch comes. We use a subroutine
from a public repository on GitHub [16].
5.5
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Implementation
In the scheme, the public key, the secret key, and the signature are a tuple of different
data. We have created named tuple structures (dataclasses) for each.
As the main underlying scheme, that the time­deniable signature scheme is based on is
the HIBE scheme, it is very important to choose the fitting implementation. The previous
paper uses the Gentry­Silverberg variant [17]. We have decided to go with the Lewko­
Waters’ variant [9, 10], with the prime order translation by Lewko [11]. This variant is
correct, supports indistinguishable identity delegation, and is also adaptively secure. We
used a public Python implementation that is available on GitHub and in the Charm library
itself [18]. It is based on super­singular pairing groups and operations with them. The
Charm library includes two such groups for testing a type a SS512 pairing group and the
type a1 SS1024 pairing group [19, 20]. These groups provide different levels of security,
we can use both to compare the scheme performance. The groups and their security
parameters are listed below.
Group
Security
SS512
80 bits
SS1024
112 bits
Table 5.3: Group variants
The next point to mention is the formatting of the timestamps into their string represen­
tations. Since the timestamps are represented as numbers, we need to have a way of
formatting them into strings, since we want to be able to find their common prefix and
also we need to be sure, that when we delegate towards a timestamp, that would have a
lower amount of digits without any prefixed zeros, their count will not decrease. For this
purpose, we have implemented a simple timestamp formatting module. It gets initialized
with the set number of digits of the timestamp D, also it needs the parameter N which
represents the base of the formatted timestamp (e.g.: N = 2 is a binary, N = 16 is a hex­
adecimal). Then we simply call a function that takes a timestamp T and returns the string
representation. The predefined values are 2 for N, so to use a binary representation, and
16 for D, so all the timestamps should be 16 digits long. This way it is possible to create
65536 (= 216) timestamps.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
37
==PAGE:43==
What is also needed to describe is the trace method. It is used to turn a formatted times­
tamp into a list of HIBE tree identities. That is done by iterating over the digits of the times­
tamp and composing a list of lists of identities from which it is possible to delegate towards
any lower timestamp identity. Each list contains identities that are the left neighbors of
each of the trace nodes from the root node toward the node given by the timestamp, so
each list represents a layer of the HIBE tree identities, which share their length.
Lastly, we need to include a time­lock puzzle with the signing key of the timestamp for
which the signature was created. For this, we need to encode the key from an object to a
stream of bytes, so that it can be encapsulated in the puzzle, later after solving the puzzle,
it is needed to retrieve the original object from the bytes. Luckily the Charm library has a
set of methods just for this purpose. We used the object­to­bytes and the bytes­to­object
methods to do just this.
5.6
Project Dockerization
Since the project includes multiple libraries, some of them being written in the C language,
and to obtain them, to make sure that the project runs as it should, can be quite compli­
cated we have decided to create a virtual environment with all the dependencies of the
project, here the whole project folder will get copied and it will be possible to run it easily.
For this, we have used the Docker tool10 which is used to create virtual environment im­
ages that can be run as containers. The image that we use installs all the needed tools,
then it downloads the libraries that are used to install the Charm library, with them we are
able to install the Charm library itself.
With the Charm library installed and ready to use, we copy our project into the container.
There we will install the rest of the libraries that are needed to run the project, those being
the ones, that are based on Python. After that is done, we can run the tests on the project,
if they all pass, the container is valid and can be used for further utilization. The project
is stored in the /app directory in the root folder of the container.
10Docker
38
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:44==
6
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme
Comparison
In the previous sections, we have defined all the expirable signature schemes that will be
considered in this work, now we can go ahead and conduct a comparison of them. The
comparison will focus on the performance of the schemes, as well as the properties that
they fulfill.
As for the performance, we will use the experimental use cases to measure the execution
times of the individual schemes’ methods and the sizes of the scheme keys, signature
creation keys, and the signatures themselves, we will analyze the factors that influence
the execution times and the sizes of the aforementioned schemes’ features. Since the
methods that the schemes implement are the ones, that are specific for a general expirable
signature scheme, we can compare them side­by­side to see how the change of the input
parameters changes the features that will be measured. We will also be able to see how
the space complexity or the time complexity of the feature behaves in regard to a certain
parameter. Each of the features is dependent on one or more input parameters that
change the behavior of the feature in a certain way, we will see what are the differences
in the inputs for all the analyzed schemes.
Each of the schemes has a set of properties that it holds. Those are important for a proper
run of the scheme. We will examine them and compare them, which do they share and
in which do they differ. Also, we will look into the security aspects of the schemes, where
the security comes from, and how strong the notion of security they employ is. We will
see which one has the strongest security definition.
6.1
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Performance
Comparison
To get an estimation of how the schemes compare to each other in regard to their execu­
tion times and the keys’ and signature sizes, we have created an inventory of experimental
scenarios. We try out different security parameters, the lengths of the message for which
the signatures are created, the epoch numbers and the timestamp values, maximum sup­
ported timestamps, epoch numbers for which the signatures are created, and the max­
imum number of epochs and the maximum timestamp value to test the performance of
the key generation algorithm, the signature creation algorithm, the signature verification
algorithm, and the signature forgery creation algorithm. We also include the key evolution
algorithm when testing the epochal signature scheme. The time­lock puzzle­solving time
is omitted in the experiments so that the measurement focuses on the actually important
parts of the scheme.
The experiments have predefined lists of parameters to test the schemes with. For the
epochal signature scheme, it is the security parameter list, the number of epochs list, the
epoch number list, and the message lengths list. The values used are depicted in the table
below 6.1. Similarly, for the time­deniable signature scheme, we have a predefined list of
parameters, the security parameter list, the maximum timestamp list, the timestamp list,
and the message lengths list. The values used are depicted in the table below 6.2. Also,
we will set the N­arity of the HIBE tree based on an experiment with a list of different
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
39
==PAGE:45==
numbering bases, these will be taken over from the original work on the time­deniable
signature scheme [4].
Abbr.
Parameter
Values
SEC
Security parameter
[256, 512]
E
Number of epochs
[254, 510, 1022]
e
Epoch number
[1, 10, 100, 200]
m
Message length
[1, 10, 100, 200]
Table 6.1: Epochal signature scheme experiments parameters and the possible values
Abbr.
Parameter
Values
SEC
Security parameter
[80, 112]
T
Maximum timestamp
[254, 510, 1022]
t
Timestamp
[1, 10, 100, 200]
m
Message length
[1, 10, 100, 200]
N
Base
[2, 5, 7, 10, 12, 14, 16, 19]
Table 6.2: Time­deniable signature scheme experiment parameters and the possible val­
ues
Each experiment takes a different feature of the scheme and chooses a parameter that will
be variable in the experiment, for the others the first in the lists will be chosen. Each exper­
iment is named in a way, that it is simply possible to identify which feature will be measured
and which parameter will be variable. The experiments come in a format measure_F_P,
where F is a feature to measure, and the P is a parameter that will be variable in the
experiment. The measured features and the list of parameters for which they will be mea­
sured are listed below 6.3. For the features and parameters that occur in both schemes,
we will compare the results side by side, in all cases we will be able to observe the over­
all results and how they change with different parameters changing for certain values.
We see that the experiments map together nicely since the security parameters have the
same meaning, the message lengths as well, the number of epochs is a bound of the
scheme as well as the maximum timestamp value, and the epoch number is a distinct
time information linked to the signature, as well as the timestamp.
Feature
Params
SchemeKey
SEC, E
SigningKey
SEC, e
Signature
SEC, m, e
Gen
SEC, E
Sign
SEC, m, e
Verify
SEC, m, e
AltSign
SEC, m, e
Evolve
SEC
Feature
Params
SchemeKey
SEC, T
SigningKey
SEC, t
Signature
SEC, m, t
Gen
SEC, T
Sign
SEC, m, t, N
Verify
SEC, m, t
AltSign
SEC, m, t
Table 6.3: Expirable digital schemes’ measured features
The output of each experiment is a figure with a plot that depicts how the result (x­axis)
changes by modifying the variable parameter (y­axis). In the case of the experiments in
40
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:46==
which results depend on time measurement, it is possible to flatten out external factors
that might cause the experiments to deliver results that are off, it is possible to set the
parameter N, which represents the number of measurements to execute, then the aver­
age of these measurements is shown in the figure. It is also possible to set the precision
of the resulting times by setting the P parameter, which is the number of decimal points
towards which to round the resulting execution time. Both these values can be set in the
provided experiment configuration file config.py.
HIBE Tree N­arity
As mentioned in the sections before, it is very important to set the arity of the HIBE tree
for the time­deniable signature scheme correctly, to be sure that the maximum efficiency
in encoding the timestamps into HIBE identities, from which the keys are generated, is
reached. We will need to set this value for all the other experiments of the time­deniable
signature scheme. The value will be derived by executing a separate experiment on the
time­deniable signature scheme signature creation method. We will create 50 random
timestamps, each of which shall be used to create a signature for a message m from the
message space M, this we will do for each possible base that we have defined in the
previous section. The number of experiments to conduct per signature and to take the
average run­time to even out the external factors is 20.
What we need is a base, for which the number of identities for a timestamp t will be as low
as possible while also keeping the number of digits as low as possible. The maximum
possible timestamp has to be preset, we will set it to 65_535, allowing the use of 216
timestamp values. With a larger base, the number of layers of the HIBE tree gets smaller,
but with a higher N­arity of the tree, we may need up to the N­arity amount of identities
per layer to compose the signing key.
Figure 6.1: measure_Sign_N
We see that the arity of 2 has the worst performance of all the possible values. Then the
performance gets better pretty much steadily, except for base 10 and base 14. With the
higher base, the number of identities per key gets lower which leads to shorter execution
times. If the base gets too large, the outcome will be the opposite, the number of identity
keys needed to compose the functional key will start growing, making the execution time
larger and larger.
From the experiment, the best base is the largest base, which is 19, but since the previous
work uses 16 and their resulting execution times are very similar, we will use it as well, all
the other experiments operate with this value. The output of the measurement is largely
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
41
==PAGE:47==
dependent on the random timestamps that are used for measurement, each run gives
slightly different results, generally, we see that the base 16 is always among the most
efficient ones.
Scheme Key Size Comparison
First, we will compare the size of the schemes’ keys based on the security parameter 1λ.
As part of the epochal signature scheme key is the pebbler that uses the static signature
scheme secret key, the size of the key gets significantly larger with more security bits.
The XMSS scheme generates an underlying Merkle tree structure based on the security
parameter 1λ and saves information about it as part of the key. As for the time­deniable
signature scheme key, the size of the key is dependent on 1λ, in this implementation and
with the provided parameters, the size is the same.
Figure 6.2: measure_SchemeKey_SEC
Below we see a comparison of the schemes’ key sizes based on the number of epochs
for which the epochal signature scheme key is supposed to be used and the maximum
possible timestamp that the time­deniable signature scheme key can be used to sign.
The epochal signature scheme key size grows logarithmically since the pebbler is a binary
pebbler and has to save values, which amount is logarithmically dependent on the number
of epochs. As for the time­deniable signature scheme key, the size is not dependent on
the maximum possible timestamp.
Figure 6.3: measure_SchemeKey_E
Figure 6.4: measure_SchemeKey_T
42
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:48==
Signing Key Size Comparison
We see that since the epochal signature schemes’ underlying dynamic signature scheme
security parameter, 1λ is set to 2048 bits, the size of the signing key is set to be constant,
even with the change of the schemes’ security parameter 1λ, since these two security
parameters are each used for the different underlying signature scheme. Also, in the case
of the time­deniable signature scheme signing key, its size is dependent on the security
parameter 1λ, in this implementation and with the provided parameters, the size stays the
same.
Figure 6.5: measure_SigningKey_SEC
Since the epochal signature schemes’ underlying dynamic signature scheme secret key
has a set number of bits, there is no dependency on the epoch number for which the
signature is created, the signing key will always have the same size. In the case of the
time­deniable signature scheme signing key, it is based on the delegatable functional
signing key for time t of the underlying DFS scheme. It is a collection of HIBE identity
keys that span from the HIBE identity given by the timestamp t and all its left neighbors
and its parents’ left neighbors. The size of the key then grows logarithmically by the
timestamp t and linearly by the HIBE tree N­arity.
Figure 6.6: measure_SigningKey_e
Figure 6.7: measure_SigningKey_t
Signature Size Comparison
As the epochal signature scheme signature includes the public information tuple pinfoe,
the size of the signature grows by the security parameter 1λ. As for the time­deniable
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
43
==PAGE:49==
signature scheme, the size of the signature is larger, since the time­lock puzzle containing
the delegatable functional signing key gets larger with the security parameter 1λ, also the
size of the individual HIBE identity keys gets larger by the security parameter 1λ.
Figure 6.8: measure_Signature_SEC
For the epochal signature scheme, the signature is created using the underlying dynamic
signature scheme which creates a digest from the message and uses it to create the
signature, the size of the signature is then independent of the message on which it is
created. As for the time­deniable signature scheme signature, which is, in reality, a key
for a HIBE identity which is a concatenation of the timestamp and the message, its size
grows linearly by the number of characters of the identity, thus also it grows linearly by
the number of characters of the message on which the signature is created.
Figure 6.9: measure_Signature_m
Here we will see how the size of the signature changes for different epochs and times­
tamps. As for the epochal signature scheme, the scheme doesn’t use timestamps per
se, it discretizes them into epochs. We see that the signature size is not dependent on
the epoch number and is constant. As for the time­deniable signature scheme, the size
of the signature gets larger with the growing timestamp since part of the signature is the
time­lock puzzle with the signing key which grows larger in relation to the timestamp, as
the number of HIBE tree identity keys gets larger.
44
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.10: measure_Signature_e
Figure 6.11: measure_Signature_t
Key Pair Generation Execution Time Comparison
We see that for the epochal signature scheme, the method is pretty time­consuming, and
adding security bits is demanding, it is also true that the method has to be run only once
at the start of the scheme. As for the time­deniable signature scheme, the method runs
much more quickly then its counterpart, although the rise in execution time on enlarging
the security parameter is relatively large.
Figure 6.12: measure_Gen_SEC
It is important to note, that the epochal signature scheme also requires the number of
epochs to be specified before the key generation, as it is a crucial parameter of the peb­
bling initialization process, while also the time­deniable signature scheme needs the num­
ber of digits of the timestamp and through it the maximum supported timestamp value.
We see that the execution time of the epochal signature scheme’s key generation method
is rather inconsistent as some of the underlying methods’ execution times, like the static
key pair generation method, are based on randomness and pseudo­randomness. In the
case of the time­deniable signature scheme, the key generation method’s execution time
does not depend on the maximum timestamp value.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
45
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.13: measure_Gen_E
Figure 6.14: measure_Gen_T
Signature Creation Execution Time Comparison
We see that the epochal signature scheme signature creation time is very small for both
possible security parameters, the difference comes from the fact, that to create the signa­
ture, it is needed to hash the epoch e public information tuple pinfoe, which takes more
time if the tuple is larger, which it is if the security parameter grows larger. Signing is
done by a dynamic scheme secret key, which has constant security. On the other hand,
in the case of the time­deniable signature scheme, we see that the change in security
parameter has a large influence on the execution time of the signature creation method.
Figure 6.15: measure_Sign_SEC
The next parameter to consider is the length of the message that the signature is created
on. In the case of the epochal signature scheme, the signature creation method execution
time is linearly dependent on the message’s length, but since it is only used to create a
hash digest based on which the signature is created, the dependency is negligible to a
point of indistinguishability. When it comes to the time­deniable signature scheme, we
see that the signing time is linearly dependent on the message’s length since to obtain
the signature, we need to delegate from the timestamp identity towards an identity given
by the timestamp and the message concatenation, the delegation is done per character
one by one by the HIBE scheme.
46
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.16: measure_Sign_m
Regarding the timestamp, in the case of the epochal signature scheme, it is not a pa­
rameter of the signature creation method so it can not be measured, but we can deduce,
that the execution time is independent of the epoch during which it is created. The time­
deniable signature scheme signature creation method is dependent on the time for which
the signature is created. The dependency is related to the delegatable functional key cre­
ation, which includes getting the delegatable functional key for a timestamp, in a way, that
it is possible to get all the older timestamp delegatable functional keys.
Figure 6.17: measure_Sign_e
Figure 6.18: measure_Sign_t
Signature Verification Execution Time Comparison
We see that in the case of the epochal signature scheme, the larger security parameter
leads to a slightly larger execution time since we need to get a digest of the epoch e public
information tuple pinfoe, which size is linearly dependent on the security parameter. In
the case of the time­deniable signature scheme, the verification takes a much larger time
period to perform the verification as the security parameter grows.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
47
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.19: measure_Verify_SEC
We can notice that in the case of the epochal signature scheme, the signature verification
method is independent of the message length, theoretically, it is linearly dependent, but
since it is only used to create a hash digest, the difference is immeasurable. In the case
of the time­deniable signature scheme, the method’s execution time grows linearly by the
message length, since the key of a HIBE identity which represents the signature size gets
larger by the length of the identity string, which is linearly dependent on the message
length. We need to encrypt a random message and decrypt it once again using the HIBE
identity key, to prove the validity of the signature, which is, in reality, a HIBE identity key.
Figure 6.20: measure_Verify_m
The execution time of the epochal signature scheme’s signature verification method is
not dependent on the epoch for which the signature had been created. In the case of the
time­deniable signature scheme, we can observe that the time for which the signature was
created is not changing the execution time of the method. That is because the number
of digits of the timestamp is set beforehand, so the timestamp part of the identity has a
constant number of characters (digits), this way, the influence on the verification methods’
execution time is eliminated.
48
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.21: measure_Verify_e
Figure 6.22: measure_Verify_t
Signature Forgery Creation Execution Time Comparison
We see that both of the schemes take a relatively long time to create a signature forgery.
In the case of the epochal signature scheme, it is needed to run the key extraction method
and the key evolution method to obtain the correct singing key. As for the time­deniable
signature scheme, it is needed to solve the time­lock puzzle with the original singing key
and delegate it to the desired one. With the growing security parameter, the execution
time gets even larger.
Figure 6.23: measure_AltSign_SEC
For the message length, the epochal signature scheme signature forgery method seems
to have an inconsistent execution time, this is due to some of the underlying methods,
like the dynamic key pair generation method, being dependent on randomness or pseudo­
randomness, formally the message is only used to create a digest from which the signature
is created, so the dependency should be negligible to a point of indistinguishability. For the
time­deniable signature scheme, similar to the original signature creation, the message
is part of the HIBE tree identity string, the longer it gets, the longer the method runs, we
see that the method’s execution time is linearly dependent on the message on which the
signature is created.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
49
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.24: measure_AltSign_m
We see that in the case of the epochal signature scheme, the execution time is inconsis­
tent, and the dependency on the epoch number for which the signature was created is
linear since we need to gather the data for all the previous keys. We need to keep in mind
that the time­deniable signature scheme has to get the appropriate delegatable functional
signature key for the desired timestamp to create the signature with and to encapsulate
it in the time­lock puzzle, so similarly to the signing function, the method is dependent
on the timestamp since the HIBE tree needs to delegate all the needed keys so that it is
possible to derive any other key for older timestamp values.
Figure 6.25: measure_AltSign_e
Figure 6.26: measure_AltSign_t
Key Evolution Execution Time
We see that the epochal signature scheme key evolution method is rather time­consuming
and grows even more with the enlarged security parameter. It needs to be stated that the
method has multiple underlying routines that need to be run. In this implementation the
execution time of the method is rather large, this needs to be thought of when choosing
the epoch duration.
50
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.27: measure_Evolve_SEC
6.2
Expirable Digital Signature Scheme Property Comparison
Here we will compare the previously defined expirable digital signature schemes’ prop­
erties including the individual security notions to see which of them is a more secure
scheme.
Correctness Property
For both schemes, it holds that for each possible security parameter 1λ, a message m
from the message space M, and a timestamp t from the set of possible timestamps or an
epoch number e, there exists an expirable signature σ that is accepted by the verification
method. Also, it holds that a forgery of an original signature or of another forgery has the
same property.
Unforgeability Property
For both schemes, it holds that the probability of creating a signature forgery that would
get accepted by the verification method without the knowledge of the signing key sk or
any hint is negligible. The notion comes from the unforgeability property of the underly­
ing schemes, the HIBE scheme variant we have chosen, that being the Lewko­Waters’
HIBE with the prime order translation by Lewko, in the case of the time­deniable signature
scheme. In the case of the epochal signature scheme, it comes from the underlying static
signature scheme and the dynamic signature scheme, in our implementation the XMSS
scheme and the RSA scheme.
Deniability Property
For both schemes, it holds that after the validity of the signature σ that they had created
passes, it is possible to create an indistinguishable forgery σ′ of the original signature,
making it impossible to tell which one is the forgery and which is the original one, making
the originally made one lose its authenticity property. In the case of the epochal signature
scheme, this is done by obtaining the epoch expired signing key skexp from the per­epoch
public information tuple pinfoe and by creating an exact copy of the original signature.
In the case of the time­deniable signature scheme, the key is obtained by solving the
provided time­lock puzzle with the delegatable functional signing key for timestamp t, the
key skft, using the key a signature is created, in the previous sections we have seen, that
the signature is not an exact copy of the originally made one, both of them are distinct in
their randomness. In both cases, it is possible to create a signature for older timestamps
than the original one was made for. Also, in both cases, it is not possible to obtain the
desired signing key before the validity of the original signature passes.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
51
==PAGE:57==
Time­Deniable Signature Scheme as Epochal Signature Scheme
In the previous work on the time­deniable signatures [4] it is mentioned and proven that
any secure time­deniable signature scheme can generally be transformed into an equally
secure epochal signature scheme. To do so we need to interpret the signing time t as the
signing epoch e, then we take over the time­deniable signature scheme signature creation
method and the time­deniable signature scheme signature verification method. Also, we
need to make sure that the key evolution algorithm keeps track of the current epoch. The
pinfoe object would simply be transformed into a signature σ on a dummy message on
a timestamp that corresponds to the current epoch e. This signature can be verified to
verify the epoch key ske.
1
ES.Gen(1λ, ∆t, E, V):
2
# ϵ(λ) is the admissibility parameter of the TDS
3
pk, sk = TDS.Gen(1λ, ϵ(λ) · V · ∆t · d∗)
4
return (vk, (sk, 0))
5
6
ES.Sign(ske, m):
7
sk, e = parse(ske)
8
return TDS.Sign(sk, m, e)
9
10
ES.Verify(pk, e, σ, m):
11
return TDS.Verify(pk, σ, m, e)
12
13
ES.Evolve(sk'):
14
sk, e = parse(sk')
15
e = e + 1
16
σ = TDS.Sign(sk, 0, e)
17
return (σ, (sk, e))
By performing the aforementioned transformation, the need for pebbling is gone, as well
as the need for hashing, the need for the underlying dynamic signature scheme, and also
the static signature scheme. The methods now take over the time complexities and the
execution times of the time­deniable signature scheme. The signature creation method,
the signature verification, and the signature forgery methods will now be dependent on the
timestamp for which it will create the signatures and the message on which it will create
the signatures. Since the time­deniable signature scheme needs to have the number
of timestamp digits predefined, the scheme transformation process does not solve the
bounded use issue and is still bound by this predefined number.
Most importantly, the need for the epochal signature scheme’s strong clock synchroniza­
tion falls off, since now the key distribution is performed purely using the time­lock puzzles
that are attached to the signature itself. We see that since this is possible, the time­
deniable signature scheme satisfies at least the same security definition as the epochal
signature scheme, the other way around this claim does not hold. We see that the time­
deniable signature scheme introduces a stronger notion of security than the epochal sig­
nature scheme.
Previous Signing Key Retrieval
Another property to compare the schemes on is the way, that they work with the singing
keys that they generate, and use for signature creation. Each scheme’s signature holds
the information from which it is possible to derive the signing key used for the original
signature creation, it is important that it has to be possible to derive any older signing
key from the aforementioned information, each of the schemes handles this scenario
differently.
In the case of the epochal signature scheme, the signature contains the epoch e public
52
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:58==
information tuple pinfoe, which holds the expired seed value rexp, from which the dynamic
signature scheme key pair ( ¯skexp, ¯pkexp) is derived, and the expired static secret key ˆskexp,
these values are bound to epoch e −V , during which they were used when they were not
expired. We are able to derive these values for any other epoch e′, where e′ + V ≤e by
applying the appropriate functions, those being the one­way pseudo­random function H
and the static signature scheme key update function ˆΣ.update. By applying these func­
tions to the values from epoch e −V , we are able to obtain the values for epoch e′, that
being the seed value for epoch e′, the seed value re′ and the static secret key for epoch
e′, the key ˆske′. From them, we can construct the epochal signature scheme secret key
for epoch e′, the key ske′, this requires us to reconstruct the time­lock puzzle of epoch e′,
the epoch e′ public information tuple pinfoe′, and the static signature ˆσ on the tuple.
1
extract_sk(pk, pinfoe, e'):
2
ˆpk, _, _, _, _ = pk
3
_, e, re,
ˆske, _, _ = pinfoe
4
5
for i ∈{e - 1,. . ., e'}:
6
ˆski = ˆΣ.update( ˆski+1)
7
ri = H(ri+1,
ˆpk || i + 1 || 0)
8
9
return re′ ,
ˆske′
On the other hand, the time­deniable signature scheme key holds a time­lock puzzle with
the delegatable functional signature key for time t, the key skft. From this key, we are
able to get any key for time t′, the key skft′, where t′ ≤t by using the DFS delegate
method. The method finds the common prefix of the two timestamps, using the length
of the prefix, the list of common HIBE tree HIBE identity keys is found, and these keys
are then taken, re­randomized, and saved as part of the new key. The HIBE identity keys
that are unique for the timestamp t′ are delegated from the original delegatable functional
signing key, these keys are added to the new key and returned, creating the delegatable
functional signing key for the desired timestamp t′.
In the example below we have two delegatable functional keys, one for time t = 6 and
one for time t′ = 4, we want to delegate from a key for time t to a key for time t′. We see
that the delegatable functional signature key for time t, the key skft consists of three HIBE
identity keys, the keys sk110, sk10, sk0. In the case of the key skft′, it consists of just two
HIBE identity keys, the keys sk100, sk0. The timestamps have a common prefix of length
one, meaning that they have a single common key, that being the key sk0, this key will be
re­randomized and saved in the new key list. The other HIBE identity key, the key sk100,
will be delegated from the key sk10 and added to the new key list.
∅
0
00
000
001
01
010
011
1
10
100
101
11
110
111
Figure 6.28: Delegatable functional signing key for time t = (110)2 = (6)10.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
53
==PAGE:59==
∅
0
00
000
001
01
010
011
1
10
100
101
11
110
111
Figure 6.29: Delegatable functional signing key from time t′ = (100)2 = (4)10.
54
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:60==
7
Conclusion
In this work, we have compared the chosen expirable digital signature schemes. To do
so, we first defined the preliminary knowledge, that being the general digital signature
scheme with no deniability property. To encapsulate data that can only be accessed
after the validity period passes, we have introduced a notion, of time­release crypto prim­
itive, the time­lock puzzles. Also, we have defined a general expirable digital signature
scheme, which introduces the possibility to create a signature forgery of a genuinely cre­
ated signature after its validity period had passed, making the originally made one lose
its authenticity property since anybody is able to recreate it.
We went forward to the definitions of the expirable signature schemes, that we have de­
cided to use in this work, those being the epochal signature scheme and the time­deniable
signature scheme. While both fulfill the requirements of the general signature scheme,
and both use the time­lock puzzle to encrypt data for future access, there are multiple
nuances that differentiate the schemes.
The epochal signature scheme discretizes the timeline into non­overlapping time periods
of equal length, into epochs. During each epoch, a new signing key is introduced, and after
the validity of the signatures created by it passes, the key is released to the public to forge
signatures with, making the originally made signatures lose their authenticity property.
The time­deniable signature scheme uses the underlying delegatable functional signature
scheme, which uses the underlying HIBE scheme to manage hierarchical keys, those be­
ing secret keys that are bound to an identity where it is possible to delegate from a supe­
rior identity towards an inferior one. The identities here represent timestamps in a chosen
number base, they are used in such a way, that it is possible to derive a key for any older
timestamp from a given timestamp key. The key is encapsulated in a time­lock puzzle
and is sent over with the signature itself, making it possible to forge the signature after
the puzzle had been solved, making the originally made signatures lose their authenticity
property.
We have chosen a fitting technology to implement both schemes, that being the Python3.7
language. Also, we have created a set of experimental scenarios using which it is possible
to compare the execution times of the schemes’ individual methods and the size of the
keys they use, as well as the size of the signatures that they are able to create. Also, we
compared the schemes on the properties that they employ, including the notion of security
that they are able to provide.
7.1
Performance Comparison Results
First, we compared the schemes on the size of the scheme key they use to manage the
scheme. We see that the epochal signature scheme key is much larger since it holds
all the pebbler structures and the XMSS secret key, its size depends on the security pa­
rameter and logarithmically on the sum of the overall number of epochs and the number
of epochs for which the signatures are valid. The time­deniable signature scheme key
size is generally smaller and depends on the security parameter, it is independent of the
maximum supported timestamp.
We have also compared the individual schemes’ signature creation keys, those are the
ones directly responsible for the signature creation itself. In the case of the epochal signa­
ture scheme, the key is an underlying dynamic signature scheme secret key, which size
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
55
==PAGE:61==
is given by the security parameter and does not change based on the message for which
the signature is created or the epoch for which the signature is created. In the case of the
time­deniable signature scheme, the signing key is dependent on the security parameter,
it is logarithmically dependent on the timestamp, and linearly on the N­arity of the used
HIBE tree, as it consists of multiple HIBE identity keys, which size depends on the HIBE
identity lengths.
The epochal signature scheme signature is also much larger since it holds the epoch
public information tuple pinfoe, its size is dependent on the security parameter, it is inde­
pendent of the length of the message for which the signature is created and the epoch for
which the signature is created. In the case of the time­deniable signature scheme signa­
ture, it is generally much smaller, its size is dependent on the security parameter, linearly
on the message length, logarithmically on the timestamp, and linearly on the N­arity of
the HIBE tree.
The epochal signature scheme key generation is much slower since it has to generate
the XMSS static scheme key pair, it only grows slower with the security parameter and
the sum of the number of epochs and the number of epochs for which the signatures are
valid since it has to initialize the pebblers to create that many values. Also, the execution
time is based on randomness, so the run time is not consistent and is hard to measure
exactly. In the case of the time­deniable signature scheme, the method runs much more
quickly and is only dependent on the security parameter. We need to keep in mind, that
this method has to be only executed once and at any time before the run of the scheme,
so even if the execution time is large, the problems it imposes are not that vast.
The main advantage of the epochal signature scheme is the signature creation and the
signature verification methods. Their execution time is very quick, it runs in order of hun­
dredths of a second, its execution time is dependent on the security parameter, and most
importantly, it is not dependent on the timestamp and only barely on the message length.
In the case of the time­deniable signature scheme, the methods are dependent on the se­
curity parameter, also linearly on the message length, logarithmically on the timestamp,
and linearly on the HIBE tree N­arity. Overall, the epochal signature scheme has much
shorter execution times here.
Also, there are the schemes’ signature forgery methods. We see that both of them have
very large execution times. For the epochal signature scheme, the method is dependent
on the security parameter but runs in an inconsistent time since its execution time depends
on randomness. In the case of the time­deniable signature scheme, the method depends
on the security parameter, linearly on the length of the message, logarithmically on the
timestamp, and linearly on the N­arity of the HIBE tree. The fact that these methods are
time demanding might not impose an issue to the scheme run, what is important is, that
the original creator of a signature can state, that the signature could have been possibly
forged so that the genuinely made signature loses the authenticity property, the execution
time of such a forgery process would not play a role.
The epochal signature scheme has to update the secret key on each epoch change so that
in each epoch a signature on a message would not be the same. The method is dependent
on the security parameter, also it runs in an inconsistent time since its execution time
depends on randomness, mainly the RSA scheme key pair generation method. In this
implementation it is pretty costly to run the method, which could cause some problems if
the epochs are too short, so this has to be taken into consideration.
56
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:62==
7.2
Properties Comparison Results
As for the properties, we see that both schemes are complete and create unforgeable, and
deniable signatures. From the last section, we saw that the epochal signature scheme can
be translated into a time­deniable signature scheme with a stronger notion of security. We
can report, that the time­deniable signature scheme is more secure in this sense, although
this comes at a high cost of execution time. The difference in security is mainly caused
by the epochal signature schemes’ need for clock synchronization, but by translating the
scheme into the time­deniable signature scheme setting, this property is omitted.
The need for knowledge of the number of epochs needed to run the epochal signature
scheme binds it to this number, after the given number of epochs passes the scheme
has to be reset and set up anew. On the other hand, we need to know the maximum
supported timestamp of the time­deniable signature scheme, we see that it is also bound
to a predefined number. We see that despite the previous work saying otherwise, both
schemes are bound to predefined values that have to be well thought through before the
use of the scheme, to match the desired use case.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
57
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Jonathan Katz and Yehuda Lindell. Introduction to Modern Cryptography. Chapman
and Hall/CRC Press, 2007. ISBN: 978­1­58488­551­1.
[2]
Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and David A. Wagner. Time­lock puzzles and timed­
release crypto. Tech. rep. Technical memo MIT/LCS/TR­684. (Revision 3/10/96).
MIT Laboratory for Computer Science, Feb. 1996.
[3]
Andreas Hülsing and Florian Weber. Epochal Signatures for Deniable Group Chats.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2020/1138. 2020. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/
2020/1138.
[4]
Gabrielle Beck et al. Time­Deniable Signatures. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2022/1018. 2022. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1018.
[5]
Mohammad Mahmoody, Tal Moran, and Salil Vadhan. “Time­Lock Puzzles in the
Random Oracle Model”. In: Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2011. Ed. by Phillip
Rogaway. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. ISBN: 978­3­642­
22792­9.
[6]
Berry Schoenmakers. Explicit Optimal Binary Pebbling for One­Way Hash Chain
Reversal. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2014/329. 2014. URL: https://eprint.
iacr.org/2014/329.
[7]
Dan Boneh and Matthew Franklin. Identity Based Encryption From the Weil Pairing.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2001/090. 2001. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/
2001/090.
[8]
Dan Boneh, Xavier Boyen, and Eu­Jin Goh. Hierarchical Identity Based Encryption
with Constant Size Ciphertext. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2005/015. 2005.
URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2005/015.
[9]
A. Lewko and B. Waters. Unbounded HIBE and Attribute­Based Encryption. Cryp­
tology ePrint Archive, Paper 2011/049. 2011. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2011/049.
[10]
A. Lewko and B. Waters. New Techniques for Dual System Encryption and Fully
Secure HIBE with Short Ciphertexts. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2009/482.
2009. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2009/482.
[11]
Allison Lewko. “Tools for Simulating Features of Composite Order Bilinear Groups
in the Prime Order Setting”. In: Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2012. Ed.
by David Pointcheval and Thomas Johansson. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 318–335. ISBN: 978­3­642­29011­4.
[12]
M. Gažo. This Master Thesis Implementation. URL: https://github.com/MarioGazo/
MasterThesis.
[13]
Berry Schoenmakers. Explicit Optimal Binary Pebbling for One­Way Hash Chain
Reversal. Accessed: 2023­05­25. URL: https://www.win.tue.nl/~berry/pebbling/.
[14]
Andreas Huelsing et al. XMSS: eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme. RFC 8391.
May 2018. DOI: 10.17487/RFC8391. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8391.
[15]
J. Burghardt et al. XMSS Tree. Accessed: 2023­05­28. URL: https://github.com/
lothar1998/XMSS-tree.
[16]
J. Gillick. Python Pause. URL: https://github.com/jgillick/python-pause.
[17]
Craig Gentry and Alice Silverberg. Hierarchical ID­Based Cryptography. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Paper 2002/056. 2002. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2002/056.
[18]
N. Fotiou. Unbounded HIBE and Attribute­Based Encryption. URL: https://github.
com/JHUISI/charm/blob/dev/charm/schemes/hibenc/hibenc_lew11.py.
58
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:64==
[19]
Xianping Mao et al. “Generic and Efficient Constructions of Attribute­Based Encryp­
tion with Verifiable Outsourced Decryption”. In: IEEE Transactions on Dependable
and Secure Computing 13 (Apr. 2015), pp. 1–1. DOI: 10.1109/TDSC.2015.2423669.
[20]
Hui Cui et al. “Attribute­Based Encryption with Expressive and Authorized Keyword
Search”. In: May 2017, pp. 106–126. ISBN: 978­3­319­60054­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-319-60055-0_6.
[21]
Allison Lewko and Brent Waters. Why Proving HIBE Systems Secure is Difficult.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2013/068. 2013. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/
2013/068.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
59
==PAGE:65==
A
Project Folder Description
/out Experiments’ Output Figures
/src Source Files
/TLP Time­Lock Puzzle Implementation
/schemes Expireable Signature Schemes’ Implementation
/ES Epochal Signature Scheme Implementation
/TDS Time­Deniable Signature Scheme Implementation
/experiments Experimental Use­Cases
Dockerfile Docker Image Prescription
README.md General Information
Makefile Execute Commands to run the Project
requirements.txt Python Libraries
main.py Main script of the project
60
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:66==
B
Lewko’s Prime Order HIBE scheme
Here we will describe the prime order translation of the Lewko­Waters’ unbounded HIBE
scheme by Lewko. The translation creates a 10­dimensional vector space [4, 11, 21].
PP, MSK ←HIBE.Setup(1λ) The scheme setup method takes in the security param­
eter 1λ and chooses a bilinear group G of sufficiently large prime order p. We let
e : G × G →GT denote the bilinear map. We set n = 10. The algorithm samples
random dual orthonormal bases, (D, D∗)
R
←−Dual(Zn
p). We let ⃗d1, . . . , ⃗dn denote the
elements of D and ⃗d∗
1, . . . , ⃗d∗n denote the elements of D∗. It also chooses random
exponents α1, α2, θ, σ, γ, ξ ∈Zp. The public parameters are
PP := {G, p, e(g, g)α1 ⃗d1·⃗d∗
1, e(g, g)α2 ⃗d2·⃗d∗
2, g
⃗d1, . . . , g
⃗d6},
and the master secret key is
MSK := {G, p, α1, α2, g
⃗d∗
1, g
⃗d∗
2, gγ ⃗d∗
1, gξ⃗d∗
2, gθ⃗d∗
3, gθ⃗d∗
4, gσ⃗d∗
5, gσ⃗d∗
6}.
SKID ←HIBE.KeyGen(MSK, (ID1, . . . , IDj)) The key generation algorithm chooses
random values ri
1, ri
2 ∈Zp for each i from 1 to j. It also chooses random values
y1, . . . , yj ∈Zp and w1, . . . , wj ∈Zp up to the constraints that y1 + y2 + · · · + yj = 1
and w1 + w2 + · · · + wj = α2. For each i from 1 to j, it computes:
Ki := gyi ⃗d∗
1+wi ⃗d∗
2+ri
1IDiθ⃗d∗
3−ri
1θ⃗d∗
4+ri
2IDiσ⃗d∗
5−ri
2σ⃗d∗
6.
The secret key is formed as:
SKID := {gγ ⃗d∗
1, gξ⃗d∗
2, gθ⃗d∗
3, gθ⃗d∗
4, gσ⃗d∗
5, gσ⃗d∗
6, K1, . . . , Kj}.
SKID|IDj+1 ←HIBE.Delegate(SKID, IDj+1) The delegation method chooses random
values ωi
1, ωi
2 ∈Zp for each i from 1 to j + 1.
It also chooses random values
y′
1, . . . , y′
j+1, w′
1, . . . , w′
j+1 ∈Zp subject to the constraint that y′
1 + · · · + y′
j+1 = 0
and that w′
1 + · · · + w′
j+1 = 0. Letting gγ ⃗d∗
1, gξ⃗d∗
2, gθ⃗d∗
3, gθ⃗d∗
4, gσ⃗d∗
5, gσ⃗d∗
6, K1, . . . , Kj de­
note the elements of SKID, the secret key SKID|IDj+1 is formed as:
SKID|IDj+1 := {gγ ⃗d∗
1, gξ⃗d∗
2, gθ⃗d∗
3, gθ⃗d∗
4, gσ⃗d∗
5, gσ⃗d∗
6,
K1 · gy′
1γ ⃗d∗
1+w′
1ξ⃗d∗
2+ω1
1ID1θ⃗d∗
3−ω1
1θ⃗d∗
4+ω1
2ID1σ⃗d∗
5−ω1
2σ⃗d∗
6,
. . . , Kj · gy′
jγ ⃗d∗
1+w′
jξ⃗d∗
2+ωj
1IDjθ⃗d∗
3−ωj
1θ⃗d∗
4+ωj
2IDjσ⃗d∗
5−ωj
2σ⃗d∗
6,
gy′
j+1γ ⃗d∗
1+w′
j+1ξ⃗d∗
2+ωj+1
1
IDj+1θ⃗d∗
3−ωj+1
1
θ⃗d∗
4+ωj+1
2
IDj+1σ⃗d∗
5−ωj+1
2
σ⃗d∗
6}
.
We note that y1 + γy′
1, . . . , yj + γy′
j, γy′
j+1 are randomly distributed up to the con­
straint that their sum is α1, and similarly w1 +ξw′
1, . . . , wj +ξw′
j, ξw′
j+1 are randomly
distributed up to the constraint that their sum is α2. Also, ri
1 + ωi
1 and ri
2 + ωi
2 are
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
61
==PAGE:67==
uniformly random for each i. The delegation process therefore produces a secret
key which is identically distributed to one obtained from calling the key generation
algorithm directly.
CT ←HIBE.Encrypt(PP, M, (ID1, . . . , IDj)) The encryption algorithm chooses ran­
dom values s1, s2 ∈Zp, as well as random values ti
1, ti
2 for each i from 1 to j. It
computes
C0 := Me(g, g)α1s1 ⃗d1·⃗d∗
1e(g, g)α2s2 ⃗d2·⃗d∗
2,
as well as
Ci := gs1 ⃗d1+s2 ⃗d2+ti
1 ⃗d3+IDiti
1 ⃗d4+ti
2 ⃗d5+IDiti
2 ⃗d6
for each i from 1 to j. The ciphertext is CT := {C0, C1, ..., Cj}.
M ←HIBE.Decrypt(CT, SKID) When the identity vector (ID1, . . . , IDj) correspond­
ing to the secret key is a prefix of the identity vector corresponding to the ciphertext,
the decryption algorithm computes
B :=
j*
i=1
en(Ci, Ki)
and computes the message as:
M = C0/B.
B.1
Correctness
We observe that when the HIBE identity vector (ID1, . . . , IDj) corresponding to the secret
key is a prefix of the identity vector corresponding to the ciphertext CT:
j*
i=1
en(Ci, Ki) =
j*
i=1
e(g, g)(s1y1+s2wi+ti
1ri
1IDi−ti
1ri
1+IDi+ti
2ri
2IDi−ti
2ri
2IDi)ψ
= e(g, g)(s1(y1+···+yj)+s2(w1+···+wj)) = e(g, g)(α1s1+α2s2)ψ.
Here, ψ denotes ⃗di · ⃗d∗
i , which is the same for all i.
B.2
Key­Indistinguishability
The delegation algorithm re­randomizes each exponent in the secret key. Each group
element (the ones which are unique for an identity) in the key generated HIBE.KeyGen,
is of the form:
Ki := gyi ⃗d∗
1+wi ⃗d∗
2+ri
1IDiθ⃗d∗
3−ri
1θ⃗d∗
4+ri
2IDiσ⃗d∗
5−ri
2σ⃗d∗
6.
Where the values yi
$←−Zp and wi
$←−Zp for i ∈[j + 1] are under the constrains that
y1 + y2 + · · · + yj+1 = α1 and w1 + w2 + . . . wj+1 = α2.
Whereas, in the key generated by HIBE.Delegate, each group element (the ones which
are unique for an identity) is of a form:
K′
i = K∗
i · gy′
iγ ⃗d∗
1+w′
iξ⃗d∗
2+ωi
1IDiθ⃗d∗
3−ωi
1θ⃗d∗
4+ωi
2IDiσ⃗d∗
5−ωi
2σ⃗d∗
6,
62
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:68==
Where K∗
i is the i’th group element of the key of the identity which was used as an input for
HIBE.Delegate. The following variables are sampled uniformly at random wi
1, wi
2
$←−Zp
for each i ∈[j + 1]. It also samples random values y′
i, w′
i
$←−Zp for each i ∈[j + 1] subject
to the constraint that y′
1 + · · · + y′
j+1 = w′
1 + · · · + w′
j+1 = 0.
Exponent of g in K′
i the variables y∗
1 + γy′
1, . . . , y∗
j + γy′
j, γy′
j+1 are randomly distributed
making sure that their sum us α1, and similarly w1+ξw′
1, . . . , wj +ξw′
j, ξw′
j+1 are randomly
distributed making sure that their sum is α2. Also, ri
1 + ωi
1 and ri
2 + ωi
2 are uniformly ran­
dom for each i. The keys generated via HIBE.KeyGen are also sampled from the same
distributions with the exact same constraints. This gives us the fact that the distribution
of the secret key obtained through any sequence of delegations is the same as the distri­
bution of a secret key for the same identity generated via HIBE.KeyGen making them
statistically indistinguishable. Moreover, the fact that the adversary has the master secret
key msk, doesn’t give it any advantage because the two keys generated only differ in the
randomness used to generate them.
B.3
Adaptive Security
As in the previous work by Lewko and Waters [21], we will define the following game
between a challenger and an adversary.
Setup Phase The challenger runs (PP, MSK) ←HIBE.Setup(1λ), it gives PP to the
adversary A. The challenger C also initializes a set S = ∅to hold the secret keys.
Key Query Phase I The adversary adaptively makes three kinds of queries: Create,
Delegate, and Reveal. In a Create query, the adversary supplies an identity vector ⃗I. The
challenger creates a key for ⃗I by running the HIBE.KeyGen algorithm with MSK and
⃗I as input. It places the resulting key in the set S and gives the adversary a reference
to it (note that it does not give the key itself to the adversary). In a Delegate query, the
adversary specifies a reference to a key in S and an identity component I′. The challenger
takes the key in S, which corresponds to some identity vector ⃗I and runs the delegation
algorithm on it to create a new key for the identity ⃗I : I′ (this denotes the vector created by
appending I′ to ⃗I). The new key is placed in S, and the adversary is given a reference to
it. In a Reveal query, the adversary supplies a reference to a key in S and the challenger
gives the corresponding key to the adversary and removes it from S.
Challenge Phase The adversary declares two equal length messages M0, M1, and an
identity vector ⃗I∗. It is required that none of the revealed keys in the previous phase have
identity vectors that are prefixes of ⃗I∗. The challenger chooses a uniformly random bit
b
$←−{0, 1} and creates a ciphertext CT by running HIBE.Encrypt(⃗I∗, Mb, PP). It gives
CT to the adversary.
Key Query Phase II This is the same as the first key query phase, except that any re­
vealed key must not be a prefix of the challenge vector ⃗I∗.
Guess The adversary submits a guess b′ for the bit b.
The adversary wins if it holds that b′ = b and that the identity vector ⃗I∗satisfies that no
revealed keys, in either of the query phases, belonging to ⃗I∗’s parent identity and the ⃗I∗’s
keys should not have been revealed.
The advantage of such an adversary A is defined as AdvA(1λ) = Pr[b′ = b] ≤1
2.
A HIBE scheme is adaptively­secure if ∀poly size adversaries A = {Aλ}λ∈N their advan­
tage AdvA(1λ) in the HIBE security game is not higher then 1
2.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
63
==PAGE:69==
C
Delegatable Functional Signature
Scheme
Here we will describe the delegatable functional signature scheme’s properties [4].
C.1
Correctness
For the correctness property to hold, it is required that any signature σ that is outputted by
the DFS.Sign function on a valid functional key skf, for a supported function f, and for a
message m from the message space M will get accepted by the DFS.V erify function.
Pr


mvk, msk ←DFS.Setup(1λ)
skf ←DFS.KeyGen(msk, f)
m∗, σ ←DFS.Sign(skf, f, m)
: DFS.V erify(mvk, m∗, σ) = 1

= 1
It must also hold for a valid delegatable functional signing key skf′ for a supported func­
tion f′ which is outputted by the DFS.Delegate function as a restricted key of another
delegatable functional signing key skf for a supported function f which is superior to the
function f′.
Pr


mvk, msk ←DFS.Setup(1λ)
skf ←DFS.KeyGen(msk, f)
skf′ ←DFS.Delegate(mvk, f, skf, f′)
m∗, σ ←DFS.Sign(skf′, f′, m)
: DFS.V erify(mvk, m∗, σ) = 1

= 1
C.2
Security
Here we will see the signature unforgeability game, it is a security game between a chal­
lenger and an adversary A.
Setup The challenger generates the delegatable functional signature scheme key pair
(mvk, msk) ←DFS.Setup(1λ), the master verification key and the master secret key
respectively, they give the master verification key mvk to the adversary A. They also
initialize an empty table T = ∅.
Query Phase In this phase the adversary A gets access to the key creation oracle OKey
and a signing oracle OSign.
OKey(msk, ·, ·) takes as an input a function f and an identifier i. If there is not a row in T
corresponding to (i, f, ·) generate skf ←DFS.KeyGen(msk, f) record (i, f, skf) in
table T and return skf, otherwise corresponding secret key ski
f.
OSign(msk, ·, ·, ·) takes as input a function f, an identifier i, and a message m from the
message space M. If there is not a row in the table T corresponding to (i, f, ·),
generate skf ←DFS.KeyGen(msk, f) and record (i, f, skf) in the table T , oth­
erwise, use the secret key skf specified in that row. Let f(m), σ be the output of
DFS.Sign(skf, f, m). Return σ to the adversary A.
Challenger Phase The adversary A must return m∗, σ∗to the challenger. An adversary
is considered to be admissible if the following conditions are met:
64
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
==PAGE:70==
1. ∀values (mi, σi) returned by OSign, mi ̸= m∗
2. there is no key skf queried from OKey such that ∃m where f(m) = m∗
A delegatable functional signature scheme is said to be secure if all admissible poly size
adversaries A = {Aλ}λ∈N if for such an adversary A, the probability of creating a signa­
ture, that will get accepted by the signature verification method DFS.V erify is negligible.
Pr
+
(mvk, msk) ←DFS.KeyGen(1λ)
m∗, σ∗←AOKey,OSign
λ
(mvk)
: DFS.V erify(mvk, m∗, σ∗) = 1
,
≤negl(1λ)
C.3
Key Indistinguishability
For the key indistinguishability property to hold, it is required for the keys that are outputted
by the DFS.KeyGen method and the DFS.Delegate method to appear the same to the
adversary A, even if they have access to the master signing key msk and can perform
adaptive queries.
Setup The challenger C generates the delegatable functional signature scheme key pair
(mvk, msk) ←DFS.Setup(1λ), the master verification key and the master secret key,
they give both to the adversary A. Let T = ∅be a table kept by the challenger. The
challenger also samples a binary value b
$←−{0, 1}.
Query Phase The adversary A gets access to the key creation oracle OKey and the
challenge oracle OCh.
OKey(·) takes as an input a function f. The oracle checks the table T for keys for a
function f. Let i be the largest value associated with a row containing f. Run skf ←
DFS.KeyGen(msk, f) and record (i + 1, f, skf) in the table T . Output (i + 1, skf).
OCh(·, ·, ·) takes as an input an identifier i, a function f0 and a function f1, where f1 is
a restriction of f0. The oracle checks the table T for row (i, f0, ·) that has the key
skf0. If such a key does not exist, the output is ⊥. Otherwise, the oracle computer
sk0 = DFS.Delegate(mvk, f0, skf0, f1), sk1 = DFS.KeyGen(msk, f1) and returns
skb.
Guess The adversary A outputs its guess b′ for b and wins if b′ = b.
The advantage of the adversary A is defined as AdvA(1λ) = Pr[b = b′] ≤1
2
A delegatable functional signature scheme is considered key­indistinguishable if ∀poly­
size adversaries A = {Aλ}λ∈N their advantage AdvA(1λ) is not higher then 1
2.
Analyzing and Comparing Short­Lived Data Authentication Protocols
65
==PAGE:71==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, 322
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.compute.dtu.dk
