==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy 
storage systems in energy and reserve 
markets
Laurena BГ©rangГЁre Eliard
DTU Wind-M-0661
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0661 
June 2023
Project period: 
January - June 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Panagiotis Andrianesis
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Laurena BГ©rangГЁre Eliard
Title:
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy 
storage systems in energy and reserve 
markets
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Gridscale electricity storage systems (ESS) are today considered major components to
support power grid flexilibity. Hybrid electricity storage systems (HESS) combines difВӯ
ferent ESS technologies to improve revenues and lifetime. This research focuses on
operational strategies for gridВӯscale hybrid energy storage systems (HESS) operating on
both energy and reserve markets in DK2. First, opportunities for three ESS technologies
in various DK2 power markets are presented. Those three technologies are: LithiumВӯ
ion batteries (LiВӯion), Vanadium Redox Flow Batteries (VRFB) and supercapacitors (SC).
Two linear optimization models are then developed to assess dayВӯahead and realВӯtime
strategies, providing insights into the optimization of HESS operations. The implications
of different risk and degradation management strategies are illustrated in a case study of
a LiВӯion / SC hybrid operating on energy and frequency regulation markets in DK2 in 2022.
The HESS appears to bid mostly on the reserve market to maximize its revenue and bid
on energy market for losses compensation. Energy arbitrage is only performed when enВӯ
ergy prices are significantly high. Interdependencies between risk strategy, degradation
costs and penalties are also discussed by conducting sensitivity analysis.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
iii
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Day ahead optimization problem Вӯ Parameters
SHESS Performance score of the HESS
[Вӯ]
ОӣE
h
Market price for energy at at hour h
[DKK/MWh]
ОӣR
h
Market price for reserve at at hour h
[DKK/MW]
Оӣdeg
Degradation cost for power production
[DKK/MW]
Day ahead optimization problem Вӯ Variables
pB,c
i,h
Basepoint for energy consumption from energy market at hour h for system i. [MW]
pB,d
i,h
Basepoint for energy production from energy market at hour h for system i. [MW]
pE,c
i,h
Energy consumption from energy market at hour h from system i.
[MWh]
pE,d
i,h
Energy production from energy market at hour h from system i.
[MWh]
pR,c
i,h
Power consumption for reserve markets at hour h from system i.
[MW]
pR,d
i,h
Power production for reserve markets at hour h from system i.
[MW]
Realtime optimization problem Вӯ Sets
SRT
t
Set of the Markov processes simulated at time t
T RT
Set of all time steps in the dynamic realВӯtime problem
T RT
M
Set of all timesteps in one Markov process
Realtime optimization problem Вӯ Variables
xB,c
i,t
Normalized power consumption for energy market at time t from system i.
[Вӯ]
xB,d
i,t
Normalized power production for energy market at time t from system i.
[Вӯ]
xR,c
i,t
Normalized power consumption for reserve markets at time t from system i.
[Вӯ]
xR,c
t
Total normalized power consumption for reserve markets at time t.
[Вӯ]
xR,d
i,t
Normalized power production for reserve markets at time t from system i.
[Вӯ]
xR,d
t
Total normalized power production for reserve markets at time t.
[Вӯ]
iv
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Market framework in DK2 and market opportunities for electricity storage
systems
2
2.1
Introduction to electricity markets in the EU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Market opportunities for ESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Ancillary services in DK2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Gridscale ESS and HESS technologies
6
3.1
ESS technologies for grid applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
HESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Assessing LiВӯion batteries degradation costs
13
4.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Assessing degradation costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5
Methodology and mathematical formulations
17
5.1
General method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
DayВӯahead problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.3
RealВӯtime problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6
Case study
31
6.1
General parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Results for the dayВӯahead problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.3
Sensitivity analysis for the dayВӯahead problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.4
Results for the realВӯtime problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7
Discussion and potential improvements
42
7.1
DayВӯahead model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.2
RealВӯtime model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7.3
Interdependancies between dayВӯahead and realtime strategies . . . . . . . 44
8
Conclusion
46
A Result of the sensitivity analysis on reserve and energy prices
51
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Following rising energy prices and a growing need for decarbonising the European energy
system, the European Union published in May 2022 the REPowerEU plan. The main
objectives of this plan is to improve energy security by decreasing the consumption of gas
from Russia in the EU and also to decrease the environmental impact of the European
energy system. This plan defines short, mid and longВӯterm strategies to answer those
challenges. Those strategies rely on increasing the share of renewables in the electricity
mix while decreasing the share of power from gas power plants. This would ensure a
higher energy independence and a lower environmental impact. [1]
A higher share of renewables such as wind or solar in the electricity mix presents many
challenges in terms of security and flexibility of the power grid due mostly to their variable
power production. Electricity storage systems (ESS) have been identified as major soВӯ
lutions for ensuring grid stability while having low emissions by the International Energy
Agency. Among all ESS, LiВӯion batteries are today the dominant technology for grid scale
applications. According to the IEA, investments in LiВӯion batteries are also expected to
grow by 30% every year by 2030. This is due to their technical characteristics that make
them suitable for many applications and their relatively low capital cost. [2]
However, the main disadvantage of batteries, and especially LiВӯion batteries, is their high
cycle aging. Cycle aging refers to the degradation of the battery cell due to power cycling.
Different solutions have been investigated to increase LiВӯion batteries lifetime by modifying
the technology itself or decreasing cycling rate by limiting services that it offers to the grid.
[3] Another promising solution is the hybridisation of batteries with other technologies
that are less affected by power cycling. [4] The OSMOSE project (Optimal SystemВӯMix
Of flexibility Solutions for European electricity) investigates the integration of standalone
ESS and HESS technologies in smart grid for grid fexibility. However, the operational
strategy of such systems are still being investigated as they present many challenges in
terms of control strategy. [5]
The objective of this work is to investigate operational strategies for gridscale HESS bidВӯ
ding on energy and reserve markets in DK2. It identifies the main challenges in the dayВӯ
ahead and in the realtime operational decisions. First, context is provided for the role of
ESS in DK2 markets and three different technologies considered for hybridisation are preВӯ
sented. Then, two models are presented for optimizing dayВӯahead and realtime decisions.
Those considerations are illustrated in a case study for a LiВӯion / SC hybrid operating on
both energy and reserve markets in DK2. Finally, sensitivity analysis are conducted to
discuss interdependancies between dayВӯahead an realtime strategies with a focus on risk
strategy and degradation costs.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Market framework in DK2 and market
opportunities for electricity storage
systems
The following section gives an overview of power markets in the East Denmark synВӯ
chronous area (DK2). It also presents the current role of electricity storage systems (ESS)
in power markets and its projected evolution.
2.1
Introduction to electricity markets in the EU
In the EU, power markets are organized in synchronous areas (or zones). Even though
each zone has its own markets structures, the European Network of Transmission System
Operators (ENTSOВӯE) identifies four major markets:
вҖў Forward markets: participating in those markets allows partcipants to mitigate risks
regarding dayВӯahead prices by trading long term products at a fix price.
вҖў DayВӯahead (or wholesale) market: it is the main market in terms of capacity in
Europe. Hourly bids are settled one day before delivery for the next 24h.
вҖў Intraday market: market participants that submitted a bid on the dayВӯahead market
can adjust those bids the intraday markets.
вҖў Ancillary services: ancillary services aim at maintaining a reliable power system
at all times. Ancillary services include frequency regulation, voltage support, black
start services etc.
Those four major markets exist in all synchronous areas of the EU. However, products
and technical requirements for power generators are zone dependant. For this work,
the choice was made to focus on the DK2 zone (East Denmark). The requirements for
ancillary services relevant to storage technologies are detailed in section 2.3.
2
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Market opportunities for ESS
The IEA identifies power flexibility as one of the main challenges arising from a higher
share of variable renewable energy (VRE) in the power grid. Power flexibility is mostly
achieved by power generators providing ancillary services. Increasing power flexibility
implies developping solutions for intraВӯhour imbalances and requires more generators with
short response time. Power flexibility is currently achieved mostly through conventional
power plants such as coal, lignite or gas power plants. Those generators have a short
response time which allows them to participate in balancing markets.
The current issue with power flexibility is then to increase the capacity for ancillary services
while limiting the carbonВӯintensive technologies that currently provides those services. It
is then necessary to develop low carbon solutions that do not rely on gas or fossil fuels for
providing ancillary services. Most solutions that adress this issue rely on ESS technoloВӯ
gies. [5] LiВӯion batteries are today the most widely accepted ESS technologies as they
have relatively low costs, a low response time and also a lower environmental impact than
conventional generators. NREL recently published a comparison of life cycle greenhouse
gas emissions of different electricity generators and indicates that LiВӯion batteries have a
33 gCO2eq/kWh while gas represents 486 gCO2eq/kWh. [6]
However, other mechanisms allowing gridВӯscale ESS to be profitable already exist. In
the past 50 years, investors in gridВӯscale storage have relied on energy arbitrage as their
main source of revenue. Energy arbitrage refers to the practice of buying energy when
market prices are low and then selling it when market prices are high. Revenues are
then highly dependant on the range of energy prices. This mechanism allowed pumpedВӯ
hydro electricity storage (PHES) to be the dominant type of storage today with a global
installed capacity of 160GW compared to 16 GW for gridВӯscale batteries. [2] PHES has a
response time of over 1 minute which makes it allows it to participate in the dayВӯahead and
forward markets. However, its response time is too low for providing ancillary services
since they require a response time of under 2s. Other ESS are nonetheless able to comВӯ
bine participation in dayВӯahead and reserve markets. This revenueВӯstacking is actually
now considered essential in DK2 for any ESS project to be profitable. This includes LiВӯion
battery projects that rely now on both energy arbitrage and ancillary services provision for
revenues. Figure 2.1 shows the increase in NPV over the lifetime of a battery storage.
Finally, another major application of ESS is hybridization with a VRE plant such as wind
or PV. In order to mitigate the uncertainties of power production, battery storage is now
being commissionned along with major VRE projects. [7] For this study, this type of grid
application will not be considered.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Lifetime revenues (NPV) of a gridВӯscale battery depending on its
participation to different markets. The results are based on data for the UK markets.
From [8]
2.3
Ancillary services in DK2
As presented in the previous section, energy arbitrage and ancillary services are two of
the main revenue sources for a gridВӯscale ESS. This section gives an overview of ancillary
services for frequency regulation in DK2.
In DK2, ancillary services refer to frequency regulation services that ensure a constant
50Hz frequency on the grid. Deviation from the 50Hz frequency is due to small imbalances
between demand and supply. Here, the products for ancillary services are described for
the DK2 zone (East Denmark) which is part of the Nordic markets. DK1 (the synchronous
area connected to continental Europe) has different products for ancillary services. [9]
вҖў FCRВӯN (frequency containment reserve Вӯ normal) refers to reserve for a deviaВӯ
tion in the range of 49.9HzВӯ50.1Hz. FCRВӯN requires activation in less than 2.5min.
Generators are remunerated based on availability payments and energy payments.
вҖў FCRВӯD (frequency containment reserve Вӯ disturbance) refers to reserve for a deВӯ
viation in the ranges 49.5HzВӯ49.9Hz (upwards FCRВӯD) and 50.1HzВӯ50.5Hz (downВӯ
wards FCRВӯD). FCRВӯD requires a faster activation than FCRВӯN of less than 1min.
вҖў FFR (fast frequency reserve) refers to reserve for major system disturbances that
FCRВӯD can not meet on its own. It can be activated for frequency lower than 49.7Hz,
49.6Hz and 49.5Hz with an activation time of 1.3s, 1s and 0.7s respectively. It reВӯ
quires the generator to sustain power for at 5s or 30s. The frequency and duration
time are part of the bids. The generators are remunerated based on a market clearВӯ
ing price. Currently only ESSs are able to meet the fast frequency activation time.
вҖў aFRR and mFRR (automatic and manual frequency reserve restoration) reВӯ
quires an activation time of 30s to 15min. It refers to the necessary reserve for
restoring frequency after a major disturbance. mFRR is also used to handle conВӯ
gestions. In DK2, mFRR is settled through longВӯterm contracts and aFRR is bought
from DK1.
The characteristics of each product are summarized in figure 2.2.
4
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Response time, activation range and droop control for frequency regulation
services in DK2. From [10].
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
5
==PAGE:13==
3
Gridscale ESS and HESS technologies
The overview of market opportunities for storage proposed in section 2.2 identifies LiВӯion
batteries as the most promising gridscale ESS since it is a relatively cheap technology that
can benefit from both energy arbitrage and ancillary services. In this section, the main
technical and economical characteristics of LiВӯion batteries are presented and compared
to those of vanadium redox flow batteries (VRFB) and supercapacitors (SC).
For this study, it is relevant to present both LiВӯion and VRFB since they have similar charВӯ
acteristics and similar potential gridscale applications. SC have very different but compleВӯ
mentary characteristics to the ones of VRFB and LiВӯion batteries. The complementarity
of SC and batteries is discussed in the case of hybrid electricity storage systems (HESS).
3.1
ESS technologies for grid applications
This section presents the main principles behind LithiumВӯion battery, Vanadium redox flow
batteries and supercapacitors. Relevant economic and technical characterisitcs for grid
applications are compared in table 3.1. Finally, those characteristics are compared to
determine the advantages of each technology for gridscale applications.
3.1.1
LiВӯion batteries
LiВӯion batteries are a type of electrochemical storage. Even though LiВӯion batteries are
a relatively recent technology and were first commercialized in the 1990s, they are the
considered the most promising ESS for gridscale applications. [11]
Most of conventional LiВӯion battery cells are composed of a graphite anode, a lithiumВӯ
metal cathode, a nonВӯaqueous electrolyte, a porous separator and two power collectors.
The overall chemical reaction for a lithiumВӯcobalt battery is :
LiC6 + CoO2 вҶ”C6 + LiCoO2
(3.1)
with the reaction happening left to right during discharge and right to left during charge.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the charge and discharge of a LiВӯion battery cell.
LiВӯion batteries have high energy and power density which makes them good candidates
for many applications ranging from electric vehicule to gridscale storage. Also, it is easily
scalable by combining cells in series or parallel. They also have a high roundВӯtrip efficiency
compared to other battery technologies [13] such as VRFB or LeadВӯacid.
However, LiВӯion batteries have very high degradation rate due mostly to mechanical degraВӯ
dation of the electrodes, side reactions occuring at the anode (dendrite formation and
lithiumВӯplating) and electrolyte oxidation. [14]
6
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Schematic of a LiВӯion battery cell. From [12].
3.1.2
VRFB
AllВӯvanadium redox flow batteries (VRFB) are a type of flow batteries. Flow batteries
are composed of two electrolytes tank and a cell. The cell comprises a ion selective
membran andtwo electrodes. While energy is stored in the electrodes in LiВӯion batteries,
flow batteries store energy in the electrolytes. The reaction occurs in the cell (see figure
3.2). In a VRFB, both electrolytes contain vanadium ions. The two following half reactions
take place in the electrolytes:
вҖў In the catholyte:
V 2+ вҶ’V 3+ + eвҲ’
(3.2)
вҖў In the anolyte:
V 5+ + eвҲ’вҶ’V 4+
(3.3)
In flow batteries, the energy capacity is determined by the volume of electrolyte while the
power capacity is determined by the surface area of the electrode. This means that power
and energy capacity are decoupled, contrarily to LiВӯion battery and SC. VRFB are then
easily scalabale and can be sized for various grid applications. VRFB also have a lifetime
comparable or higher to the one of LiВӯion batteries.
However, they have low energy and power density which means that they require larger
facilities than LiВӯion batteries. They also have a lower round trip efficiency. LiВӯion batВӯ
teries are currently preferred over flow batteries for economic reasons. VRFB have high
investment cost mostly due to the cost of electrolyte and of the electrode. However, those
costs are expected to drop in the next years. [16]
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.2: Schematic representation of a VRFB cell. [15]
3.1.3
SC
Supercapacitors (SC), also called ultracapacitor or electric doubleВӯlayer capacitor, store
energy in an electric field between two plates. In a conventional capacitor, the space
between plates is filled with a isolating material like air. [15] The energy E stored in
the supercapacitor depends on the conductance C and the voltage V applied to the two
plates:
E = 1
2CV 2
(3.4)
P = 1
4
V 2
R
(3.5)
The capacitance C is defined as : C = ПөA/d with Пө the dielectric constant of the electrolyte,
A the electrods surface area and d the distance between the plates. Supercapacitors use
an electrolyte between plates with a high dielectric constant. Porous carbon electrodes
and liquid electrolyte allow a higher surface area and a higher energy capacity of the
supercapacitor. [15]
8
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.3: Representation of a SC. [17]
[18] identifies the main advantages of SC for grid applications and also the main chalВӯ
lenges for their deployment. Their main advantages are low response time, high power
density, high cycle life, high efficiency and they require low maintenance. Also, they have
a low environmental impact compared to LiВӯion and VRFB.
However, they have a high energy cost compared to LiВӯion batteries. They also have a
high selfВӯdischarge rate and a low specific energy which make them unsuitable for apВӯ
plications that require to provide power for a long period of time like energy arbitrage.
However, the production cost of SC have decreased by 70% between 2005 and 2020
and are expected to drop by 30% by 2030. The energy density of supercapacitors is also
expected to be multiplied by 10 to 30 between 2020 and 2030.[18] That is why SC are
considered to be a promising technology for grid applications, especially if combined with
batteries. [19]
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
9
==PAGE:17==
3.1.4
Comparison of ESS technical and economic characteristics
participating in power markets
Table 3.1 is based on [19] that proposes a comprehensive review of stationary storage
devices for grid applications. The data presented is also highly dependent on the use and
operation of the technologies. For example, operations of a LiВӯion battery that implies a
high number of cycles or deep cycles will reduce the lifespan of the battery.
From table 3.1, it appears that LiВӯion is a good compromise as it offers relatively high power
density and high energy density compared to VRFB and SC. However, it has a low cycle
life which means that it is highly sensible to cycle aging. The associated degradation costs
are compensated by the revenues from arbitrage and reserve. However, it is possible to
limit those costs by optimizing the operational strategy of the battery. Most of the installed
capacity of gridscale LiВӯion batteries is used for frequency regulation (520MWh), peak
shaving (420MWh) or energy arbitrage(340MWh). Also a non negligible use of batteries
is storage of excess power from wind and solar power sources (290MWh) as it offers a
better integration of intermittent power source. [20]
On the contrary, the main advantage of SC compared to electrochemical storage systems
is the very high cycle life and power density. SC discharge rate is too high for longterm
or even midterm energy storage. [19] SC can not rely on energy arbitrage to generate
revenue. Its high cycle life allows it to provide frequency reserve with very limited degraВӯ
dation costs compared to LiВӯion batteries. Nonetheless, the low energy capacity of SC
does not allow it to submit high bids on reserve markets. A standalone SC can not genВӯ
erate significant revenues from energy nor reserve markets. It is concluded that SC are
not suitable as standalone ESS. However, their potential in hybrid electricity systems is
quite high.
10
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:18==
LithiumВӯion
VRFB
SC
Technical characteristics
Specific Energy [Wh/kg]
75Вӯ200
25
5Вӯ10
Energy density [kWh/m3]
150Вӯ400
20Вӯ70
2.5Вӯ15
Specific power [Wh/kg]
150Вӯ315
80Вӯ150
2 000Вӯ5 000
Power density [kW/m3]
1000Вӯ5000
1Вӯ34
4000Вӯ5000
Round trip efficiency [%]
85Вӯ98
80
95Вӯ99
Lifetime [years]
5Вӯ20
10Вӯ20
20
Daily self discharg rate [% ]
0.1Вӯ0.3
0.2
5Вӯ40
Response Time [s to hr]
20 ms
sec to min
10 ms
Cycle life
10 000
10 000
1 000 000
Economic characteristics
Energy cost [$/kWh]
130
350Вӯ400
300Вӯ2 000
Power cost [$/kW]
1 200Вӯ4 000
600Вӯ1 500
100Вӯ450
O&M cost [$/kW/year]
10
7Вӯ12
6
Table 3.1: Main technical and economic characteristics of LiВӯion batteries, VRFB and SC.
Figure 3.4: Energy and power densities of different ESS technologies. [4]
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
11
==PAGE:19==
3.2
HESS
The analysis of the previous section indicates that both high energy density and high
power density technologies have disadvantages when it comes to providing services to the
grid. Even then, some technologies might meet the technical requirements for providing
a specific service to the grid while not being a viable investment. [19] This is the case
for example of VRFB and SC. On the contrary LiВӯion batteries are today considered the
most viable ESS investment. This is mostly due to the fact that they are predicted to have
the lowest LCOS in 20 years for participation in various power markets (energy arbitrage,
secondary response, black start etc.). [21]
However, LiВӯion usually have a lower lifespan when providing reserve and energy due to
cycle aging. [22] Energy arbitrage involves deep daily cycling while frequency regulation
involves more shallow but also more frequent cycling. For high power density technoloВӯ
gies like SC, their low energy density and high self discharge rate makes them suitable for
only a few applications which limits their revenue greatly if used as a standalone storage
solution. Hybridization of two or more technologies has recently been considered as a soВӯ
lution to mitigate the cycle aging of LiВӯion batteries while also ensuring a higher revenue
by providing higher bids.[19] While most research on BESSВӯSC hybrids was conducted
for electric vehicles application [23], [4] gives a review of the possible hybridizations of
ESS for grid applications and of the specific features of HESS compared to standalone
ESS. It concludes that SCВӯLithiumВӯion battery HESS are the most common and the most
viable investment for HESS. For this reason, it is decided to focus on LiВӯion/SC HESS in
this study.
One of the main challenges arising with HESS is to define an optimal strategy for energy
management that maximizes revenue while minimizing battery degradations. This conВӯ
trol strategy is even more challenging when the HESS participates in several electricity
markets at the same time. Those energy management strategies aim at handling the ISO
command in real time and allocate power based on the state of the HESS.
The main control strategies that were developped for Battery/SC HESS are: [4]
вҖў RuleВӯbased control strategies: it is a simple method with low computational costs
and is suitable for realВӯlife applications. The output is however highly dependent on
parameters. [24]
вҖў Filter based control strategies: this method identifies in realВӯtime a low frequency
component and allocates it to the battery. High frequency components are allocated
to the SC. This method is also suitable for realВӯtime applications since it has a low
computational cost. It is however less accurate than ruleВӯbased or intelligent control.
[25]
вҖў Intelligent based control strategies: this includes artificial neural networks, fuzzy
logic control, evolutionary methods etc. Those methods are more efficient than filter
based or rule based control strategies but they require large amounts of data and are
very computationnally intensive. They are then not suitable for realtime applications.
[26]
12
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:20==
4
Assessing LiВӯion batteries degradation
costs
As stated in the previous section, the main interest in large scale HESS is to limit degradaВӯ
tion of a battery while increasing power production. The business case for HESS relies on
the additional revenues from the SC and the lifetime extension compensating the higher
initial investment cost [27].
It is then necessary to assess degradations of the battery for operational and investment
decisions. For this work, we focus on assessing degradation costs for operational deВӯ
cisions. Calendar or longterm aging of the battery is then not taken into account in this
assessment [3]. The objective of this section is to calculate degradation costs from a SOC
profile by accounting for cycle aging.
4.1
Assumptions
Even though power cycling is as a major component of LiВӯion battery aging [22], many
other operational parameters also impact aging of the battery:
вҖў Temperature: Both low temperatures and high temperatures can lead to cell degraВӯ
dation mainly as loss in cell capacity [28], [29]. For stationary LiВӯion batteries used
for grid application, low temperatures are usually not an issue. Also, even though
high temperatures are a side effect of charging and discharging of the battery, batВӯ
tery farms have extensive cooling systems [30]. For operational decision in realВӯ
time, it is then reasonable not to take into account temperature variations [31].
вҖў Moisture: operating in highly humid climate or environment leads to higher degraВӯ
dation due to chemical reactions. Since gridscale LiВӯion batteries operate in a conВӯ
trolled environment where moisture can be monitored, it is assumed that the chemВӯ
ical degradation due to moisture are negligeable [14].
вҖў High and low SOC: Operating at high or low SOC can lead to power capacity or
energy capacity decrease. For this work, it is assumed that the SOC is constrained
by a maximum and a minimum SOC [14].
It is also assumed that the cycle aging of the SC in the HESS is negligeable for daily
operational decisions. [25] SC have a cycle life of over 500000 cycles while LiВӯion batteries
only have a cycle life of around 10000 cycles (see table 3.1) [32].
4.2
Assessing degradation costs
This section describes how to calculate the degradation costs associated with a state of
charge time series SOC(t) due to power cycling. In section 4.2.1, a model is developed
to associate degradation costs to a series of cycling events. Section 4.2.2 introduces the
the rainflow counting algorithm (RCA) to count and extract cycles from a time series of
SOC(t). Both methods are based on standard fatigue analysis methods. [33]
4.2.1
Cycle aging model
The following model was used to assess the degradation cost associated with a serie cycle
or a half cycle, called cycling events. A cycle is defined as charging from a level SOC0
to SOC1 and then discharging from SOC1 to SOC0 (or discharging and then charging).
A half cycle is only charging (or discharging) from SOC0 to SOC1. The following model
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
13
==PAGE:21==
is based on the model used in [34] to assess degradation of a battery. The following
assumptions were made:
вҖў The degradation due to a cycle is only dependent on the DOD with DOD = SOC1вҲ’
SOC0 for a charging or discharging cycle from SOC0 to SOC1. For example, a cycle
between SOC0 = 70% and SOC1 = 90% is assumed to have the same impact as a
cycle between SOC0 = 20% to SOC1 = 40% [34].
вҖў The lifetime consumption is linear. The lifetime consumption of several successive
cycling event is the sum of the lifetime consumption of each event. [34]
For a cycling event from SOC0 to SOC1, the depth of discharge is defined as:
DOD = |SOC0 вҲ’SOC1|.
(4.1)
For one event of DODi, the maximum number of cycles the system can go through before
it reaches its end of life is calculated from manufacturerвҖҷs data points (see figure 4.1). This
maximum number of cycles is plotted against DOD fitting data from the manufacturer.
These data can then be fitted using different models (linear, exponential, polynomial etc.).
For this work, the chosen model is a polynomial model similar to the one used in [31].
This maximum number of cycles follow the relation:
Nmax(DODi) = ОІ0 В· DODвҲ’ОІ1
i
(4.2)
with Nmax the maximum number of cycles, DODi the depth of discharge and ОІ0, ОІ1 fitting
coefficients.
Figure 4.1: Maximum number of cycles different DOD. Data from [35]
For a cycling event, the lifetime consumption is defined as:
LCi =
ni
Nmax(DODi)
(4.3)
with n = 1 if the event is a full cycle and n = 0.5 if the event is a halfВӯcycle. The degradation
cost associated with this event is calculated by multiplying the life consumption with the
capital cost of the battery Ccost:
14
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:22==
Ci = LCi В· Bcost
(4.4)
Since it is considered that lifetime consumption is linear, for a sequence of cycles I, the
total life consumption and degradation cost can be calculated as:
LC =
вҲ‘
iвҲҲI
ni
Nmax(DODi),
(4.5)
C = Bcost В·
вҲ‘
iвҲҲI
LCi,
(4.6)
with LC the total lifetime consumption of the SOC timeserie and C the associated degraВӯ
dation cost.
4.2.2
Rainflow counting algorithm (RCA)
In section 4.2, a method for calculating the degradation cost associated with a sequence
of cycling events was developed. In this section, the 4Вӯpoint rainflow cycle algorithm
(RCA) is presented to identify those cycles from a time series of SOC(t). The RCA is a
standard method for assessing fatigue in systems subjected to load cycles, or in the case
of a storage system power cycles [36]. It takes as inputs a sequence SOC(t) to apply the
following procedures:
1. Filtering: identify the local extrema of SOC(t) and filter the sequence to only keep
those points.
2. Ranges calculation: from four local extrema SOC1, SOC2, SOC3 and SOC4, the
following ranges are calculated:
вҖў вҲҶ1 = |SOC1 вҲ’SOC2|
вҖў вҲҶ2 = |SOC2 вҲ’SOC3|
вҖў вҲҶ3 = |SOC4 вҲ’SOC3|
3. Cycles extraction:
вҖў If вҲҶ2 вүӨвҲҶ1 and вҲҶ2 вүӨвҲҶ3, then a full cycle of range вҲҶ2 is counted and the points
SOC2 and SOC3 are removed from the sequence.
вҖў If not, thee same method is applied to points SOC2, SOC3, SOC4 and SOC5.
4. Residue treatment: The SOC points left are called the residue. For this work, the
residue is then treated as a new sequence to apply the rainflow algorithm to until
the residue does not change. The last points are counted as half cycles.
Figure 4.2 presents the procedures of the cycle extraction. The grey area represents one
full cycle. Figure 4.2e is the residue from the procedure with one segment being one
halfВӯcycle.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
15
==PAGE:23==
(a) Step 1
(b) Step 2
(c) Step 3
(d) Step 4
(e) Residue from the RCA.
Figure 4.2: RCA procedure. From [33]
16
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:24==
5
Methodology and mathematical
formulations
In order to define the optimal operational strategy of an HESS, it is necessary to model
its operation as optimization problems. The objective of the study is to highlight the chalВӯ
lenges of modelling operational decisions of an HESS operating on both reserve and
energy markets. For operating a power genrator on energy and reserve markets, two
main problems need to be defined. First of all, generators need to decide how much to
bid on the energy and reserve markets one day before the production occurs based on the
state of the system and forecasted power and energy prices. Then, the operator needs to
decide in realВӯtime its power production based on the dayВӯahead bids and the command
given by the ISO for frequency regulation.
For a hybrid storage system, the problem also includes power allocation decisions beВӯ
tween the battery and the supercapacitor to limit degradation while maximizing revenue.
A rule based control strategy is defined in section 5.3.3 to address this concern. For this
work, the first system is a LiВӯion battery, an ESS with a high energy capacity and a low
cycle life. The second system is a supercapacitor, an ESS technology with low energy caВӯ
pacity but very high cycle life. The operational decisions are based on the maximization
of the revenue from energy and reserve markets while taking into account degradation
and penalty costs.
5.1
General method
The following sections describe two seperate models for dayВӯahead and realВӯtime deciВӯ
sions. For this work, the problems were applied successively according to the following
method:
1. The dayВӯahead model is first run for a standard day and risk conservative approach.
2. The bids and prices for energy and reserve are used as parameters in the realВӯtime
model.
3. The realВӯtime model is ran for several set of parameters for the power allocation
algorithm to find an optimal strategy.
4. The degradation costs of the battery are calculated for each of those set of paramВӯ
eters based on the equations of 4 and the RCA.
The decisionВӯmaking challenges of the HESS operating on both reserve and energy marВӯ
kets are mostly due to the interdependency between the power allocation strategy in realВӯ
time and dayВӯahead decisions. While this study does not give one optimal strategy for both
decisions, those models are sufficient to provide insights in HESS operational strategy.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
17
==PAGE:25==
5.2
DayВӯahead problem
In this section, a dayВӯahead problem is formulated for a HESS operating on energy and
reserve markets. The output decision of this problem is then used as parameters in a
realВӯtime operational problem.
5.2.1
General description of the model
This model considers a HESS bidding on both energy and reserve markets. On both of
those markets, the HESS is considered to be a price taker without market power. Also,
prices for those markets are considered to be certain. Price uncertainty is not taken into
account in this model.
For the reserve market, the HESS is considered to be providing frequency containment
reserve only. The prices for frequency reserve are those of the FCRВӯN product. For the
sake of simplicity, the following features of the FCRВӯN product were not modeled:
вҖў In DK2, FCRВӯN remuneration is based on energy and availibility payments. For
cimplicity, revenue from reser production is considered to be based on one market
price and the reserve bid of the HESS.
вҖў For reserve products, the ISO take bids on a dayВӯahead (DВӯ1) and on a two daysВӯ
ahead (DВӯ2) basis. Generators bid both on DВӯ2 and DВӯ1. For this work, only the DВӯ1
bid is modeled.
вҖў Reserve bids can be submitted as block bids of more than 1h. In this work, only
hourly bids are considered.
Also, the signal from the ISO for reserve is considered to be energy neutral over one
hour, which means that the hourly change in state of charge is only due to the energy
bid. Finally, a score is associated to the HESS based on its performance in the reserve
market. This score depends on the HESS performance on the reserve market.
18
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:26==
5.2.2
Mathematical formulation
The following formulation of the dayВӯahead problem was based on the one proposed in
[37].
Objective function
The objective function maximizes the profit. The profit of the HESS consists of the revenue
from energy, the revenue from reserve considering the HESS score and the degradation
costs.
MAX
pE
h ,pR
h ,pB
h,i
Profit =
вҲ‘
hвҲҲH
(
вҲ’ОӣE
h В· pE
h + ОӣR
h В· pR
h В· SHESS вҲ’
вҲ‘
iвҲҲI
Оӣdeg
i
В· (pR
h,i + pB
h,i)
)
, (5.1)
with ОӣE
h , ОӣR
h and Оӣdeg
i
respectively the price for energy in [DKK/MWh], the price for reВӯ
serve in [DKK/MW] and the degradation costs in [DKK/MW]. pE
h and pR
h,i the energy and
reserve bids. pB
h is the power production basepoint for energy production. SHESS is the
performance score of the HESS for reserve provision.
Fixed operational costs are not taken into account in this model since they reflect yearly or
biВӯyearly maintenance interventions and does not impact hourly decisions for production.
Variable OM costs for ESS reflect mostly cost for losses and degradations. Degradations
are difficult to assess for dayВӯahead decisions since calendar aging and cycle aging has
to be taken into account. A more detailed degradation cost model based on section 4
is used in the realВӯtime problem to assess specifically the cycle aging of the battery. It
was assumed that variable OM costs could be modeled as a constant DKK/MW factor
multiplied by energy production.
Constraints
Secondary variables definition
The primary variables used in the objective function have to be defined from secondary
variables that are indexed on the hour h but also the storage system i. Each of those
variables are defined from the charging and discharging power that are indicated by the
superscript c and d respectively. The need for having variables for charging and dischargВӯ
ing comes from the efficiencies for charging and discharging that can be different.
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
pE
h =
вҲ‘
iвҲҲI
pE
h,i,
(5.2)
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
pR
h =
вҲ‘
iвҲҲI
pR
h,i,
(5.3)
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
pB
h,i = pB,c
h,i вҲ’pB,d
h,i .
(5.4)
For this work, the HESS participates in the energy market for arbitrage. The HESS is
remunerated per MWh produced on the energy market but a basepoint has to be set to
be able to provide energy without exceeding power capacity. The basepoint used for the
dayВӯahead decision is an hourly basepoint indexed h. This basepoint can be adjusted
every 5min inside the hour.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
19
==PAGE:27==
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
pE
h,i = pB
h,i В· вҲҶh
(5.5)
Power constraints
The power production for regulation and arbitrage is limited by the power capacity of each
ESS.
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
pR
h,i + pB
h,i вүӨP max
i
,
(5.6)
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
вҲ’pR
h,i + pB
h,i вүҘвҲ’P max
i
.
(5.7)
For providing regulation, the system should be able to provide its power bid for at least
15min. This requirement constraints the possible amount offered for reserve by P max
i
and
a coefficient Оіi defined in equation 5.8.
вҲҖi вҲҲI, Оіi = min (Ei/Pi, Оә)
Оә
with Оә = 0.25h for a 15min requirement
(5.8)
For an ESS with similar energy and power capacity such as a LiВӯion battery, Оі = 1 and
the reserve bid is only limited by the power capacity. For an ESS with an energy capacity
significantly lower than the power capacity, it is possible to have Оі вүӨ1. For example, if
a supercapacitor bids at its maximum power capacity, it might not be able to provide that
bid for 15min since it does not have the energy capacity to charge or discharge at P max
for 15min.
There is however little chance that this 15min requirement is applied since it only occurs
in case of rare disturbances in the power grid. It is then possible to be less conservative
with this constraint. A parameter О¶i вүҘ1 is introduced to reflect the risk strategy regarding
this requirement. The most conservative approach corresponds to О¶i = 1. Then pR
h,i is
constrained only by P max
i
and Оіi. For higher values of О¶i, the upper bound for reserve
is higher. This parameter depends on the technology i as technology are not expected
to participate equally in reserve market. As detailed in 3.1.4, technologies with relatively
high power density (which corresponds to a low value of Оі) are more suitable for providing
reserve which should be reflected in the risk strategy.
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
pR
h,i вүӨP max
i
В· Оіi В· О¶i
(5.9)
Binary variables are introduced to indicate the charging/discharging state of ESS i. The
charging (resp. discharging) power of ESS i is set to 0 if the binary variable zc
i (resp.zd
i )
is 0.
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
pB,c
h,i вүӨP max
i
В· zc
h,i,
(5.10)
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
pB,d
h,i вүӨP max
i
В· zd
h,i.
(5.11)
The next constraint ensures that each system can not charge and discharge simultaneВӯ
ously.
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
zc
h,i + zd
h,i вүӨ1.
(5.12)
20
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:28==
State of charge constraints
The state of energy at hour h is calculated from the basepoint and the state of energy
of ESS i in the previous hour. Static losses and charging and discharing efficiencies are
also taken into account. It was verified that the frequency signal was energy neutral over
one hour, it is then not taken into account in the state of energy calculations.
вҲҖh вҲҲHвҲ—,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
SOEi,h =О·stat
i
В· SOEi,hвҲ’1
+ pB,ch
i,hвҲ’1 В· О·c
i В· вҲҶh
Ei
вҲ’pB,d
i,hвҲ’1 В· О·dch
i
В· вҲҶh
Ei
.
(5.13)
The initial and final state of energy are taken as parameters. It is considered that the final
SOE should be equal to the initial SOE to be able to provide energy and reserve on the
next day.
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
SOEi,h=0 = SOEi,h=24
(5.14)
A maximum and maximum SOE are defined to avoid to charge at full capacity (or disВӯ
charge to 0) which would cause degradations. At any hour the SOE of each ESS is
constrained by SOEmin
i
and SOEmax
i
.
вҲҖh вҲҲH,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
SOEmin
i
вүӨSOEi,h вүӨSOEmax
i
(5.15)
Similarly to constraint 5.9 with power capacity, intraВӯhour change in energy due to reserve
has to be constrained by the maximum and minimum SOE. With the 15min requirement,
the maximum change in SOE corresponds to providing up or down regulation uninterВӯ
rupted for Оә =15min. The same risk parameter О¶i is taken into account to relax this 15min
constraint.
SOEi,h + pR
i,h В· Оә
О¶i
вүӨSOEmax
i
(5.16)
SOEi,h вҲ’pR
i,h В· Оә
О¶i
вүҘSOEmin
i
(5.17)
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
21
==PAGE:29==
5.3
RealВӯtime problem
In this section, the realВӯtime decisions are modeled using a dynamic optimization problem.
The dayВӯahead decisions are used as parameters in this model. The ISO signal is conВӯ
sidered uncertain and modeled using Markov chains. A ruleВӯbased energy management
strategy (see section 3.2) is applied using a power allocation algorithm.
5.3.1
General description of the model
The general formulation of the realВӯtime model is based on the one proposed in [38]. The
authors focus on the optimal decisions for a BESS operating on energy and reserve marВӯ
kets in the PJM market (US). In this article, dayВӯahead, intraВӯhour and realВӯtime decisions
are modeled in one nested dynamic program. It considers the price evolution and the
regulation signal as uncertain and models them as Markov processes.
For this work, the model is simplified as the dayВӯahead problem is considered to be solved
and the hourly basepoint for energy market is considered to be a parameter of the realВӯ
time problem. The prices for energy and reserve are also considered certain parameters.
Only the signal is modeled using Markov chains. Also, the formulation proposed in the
article is modified to be used for the operation of a HESS in DK2. The HESS is operated
using a rule based power allocation algorithm. This algorithm is tuned before the dispatch
interval to limit degradation.
The hourly basepoint was calculated using the dayВӯahead model. This basepoint can be
adjusted every 5min depending on the SOE with the HESS still producing its energy bid
over 1h. For this part, it is assumed that the 5min basepoint is equal to the hourly baseВӯ
point. The model is run for this 5min interval with a 2s timestep for decisions.
For the power allocation problem, it is assumed that the HESS comprises two ESS:
вҖў S1 with equivalent energy and power capacities such as a LiВӯion battery.
вҖў S2 with high power capacity and low energy capacity such as a supercapacitor.
The model allows the HESS to deviate from the ISO signal with penalties. However,
penalty costs are difficult to model since there are no published rules for nonВӯdelivery
of reserve. Penalties are setlled between the ISO and the ESS. They vary according
to technologies and are usually in favor of new technologies such as ESS. According to
[39], penalties for nonВӯdelivery and nonВӯavailibility in DK2 are proportional to the power
that was not delivered. Also, faulty participants might have to cover the purchase of power
from another market participant to cover for the nonВӯdelivery. The generator might also be
forbidden to participate in ancillary markets for a period of up to 30 days. For this work, a
conservative approach was assumed regarding penalty costs and they were considered
to be three times higher than the price for reserve.
22
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:30==
5.3.2
Frequency signal calculations
The command from the ISO was based on frequency data from 2019 in the Nordics power
system [40]. This section describes how the original data was processed to obtain a
normalized and discretized power command for the HESS.
First, the frequency data was filtered to only keep datapoints with a 2s time granularity
according to the rules for providing FCRВӯN in DK2. In order to use the frequency signal of
2019 with the bids calculated with 2022 market prices, the statistics of the frequency signal
was studied to ensure that there was no seasonal trend in the signal. The autocorrelation
function is calculated for the 2019 frequency signal (figure 5.1). The autocorrelation shows
a daily trend with a peak every 24h. [41] presents a stochastic and spectral analysis of the
signal in GreatВӯBritain and identified similar daily periods. Weekly, seasonly and yearly
periods were expected to appear in the frequency signal. However those trends do not
leave any significant patterns in the spectrum.
For this work, it is considered reasonable to take a random day from the 2019 frequency
signal data to match hourly prices from a random day in 2022. However, since intraВӯday
patterns were identified in the autocorrelation function, the same hour was taken for prices
data and frequency signal.
Figure 5.1: Autocorrelation function of the frequency signal.
The frequency signal had then to be normalized and discretized. This work focuses on
the FCRВӯN product but it can be adapted to FCRВӯD product that is similar to FCRВӯN but
for different frequencies. The droop control can also be adapted to markets that include
a deadband between 49.95Hz and 50.05Hz (like in the US).
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.2: Droop for FCRВӯN product.
The normalized signal given by the ISO is then discretized with a 0.1 accuracy. This gives
20 potential values for the normalized power signal from Вӯ1 to +1. Figure 5.3 presents the
previously described process to adapt the original data to the realВӯtime problem.
24
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:32==
(a) Frequency signal from data.
(b) Equivalent normalized power command frequency signal after
droop control.
(c) Discretized normalized power command. Command to ESS from
ISO.
Figure 5.3: Frequency data and power command to the ESS from the ISO.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
25
==PAGE:33==
5.3.3
Power allocation strategy
Section 3.2 details the different energy management control strategies from [4]. Since
intelligent control methods were considered too computationnally intensive, the control
strategy considered here is a rule based control strategy.
As detailed in section 3.1.4, batteries are more adapted for energy arbitrage while superВӯ
capacitors are more fit to provide frequency regulation if taking into account cycle aging.
For this formulation, the battery provides most of the power for energy market but can
modulate this production to follow the trend of the frequency signal.
The power allocation algorithm used in the realВӯtime model is based on [24]. The authors
consider a HESS of two storage systems and calculate the production of one of the two
storage systems (system 1, S1). The production of the other storage system (system 2,
S2) is left to the optimization model only and is not mentionned in this algorithm. The goal
of the algorithm is to limit the production of S1 so that it does not go through too many
cycles.
The algorithm takes as inputs the frequency signal given by the ISO at time t, the direction
of the signal from times 0 to t and the power production of S1 from time 0 to time t вҲ’1.
This algorithm then gives the production of S1 at time t. The algorithm also takes three
parameters: c, T1 and T2 that should be defined before dispatch. The value of those
parameters would ideally be determined through an optimization problem based on the
state of charge of S1 and S2 at time 0, the bidding strategy on the energy and reserve
markets and the uncertain evolution of the signal.
The output of the algorithm can be to keep producing the same amount or to change the
production towards the signal. The production of S1 is shifted towards the signal on two
conditions: if the difference between the production and the signal is high enough and if
the signal is evolving in the same direction for long enough. The first condition ensures
that the production level is not changed if it is already close to the signal. The difference
can then be covered by the other storage system S2. The second condition ensures that
the production is not changed for a signal that is fickling around one value. Then the
difference can also be covered by a system S2 that is not too affected by fast cycles.
It is then necessary to determine two thresholds for the algorithm. T1 is the minimum
difference between signal and production required. T2 is based on the direction of the
signal, it is the minimum number of consecutive direction required to shift production. The
last parameter c determines by how much the production should be shifted when the two
conditions are fulfilled.
26
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:34==
Algorithm 1 Power allocation algorithm
1: if dtвҲ’1 = dt then
2:
if |st вҲ’P 1
tвҲ’1| вүҘT1 then
3:
if NtвҲ’1 вүҘT2 then
4:
kt = ktвҲ’1 + c
5:
Nt = 0
6:
else
7:
kt = 0
8:
Nt = NtвҲ’1 + 1
9:
end if
10:
else
11:
kt = 0
12:
Nt = NtвҲ’1 + 1
13:
end if
14: else
15:
kt = 0
16:
Nt = 0
17: end if
18: P 1
t = (1 вҲ’kt) В· P 1
tвҲ’1 + kt В· P tot
t
In algorithm 1, dt is the direction of the signal at time t, P 1
t is the normalized production
of S1 at time t, Nt is the number of consecutive direction dt, st is the normalized power
signal from the ISO.
This algorithm is adapted to match the problem of a HESS producing for both energy and
reserve market. The main issue with providing both reserve and arbitrage is that one
system can not charge (resp. discharge) for arbitrage while discharging (resp. charging)
to follow the ISO instructions.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
27
==PAGE:35==
5.3.4
Markov process
The dynamic optimization problem takes as a stochastic parameter the frequency signal
from the ISO. It is modeled as a Markov process. At every time step t, the set of all possiВӯ
ble evolution of the signal is generated with their probabilities. For computational reason,
only the processes with significant probabilities are generated. Then the production of
the system at time t is optimized taking into account those possible evolutions. The probВӯ
abilities for the signal evolution are based on yearly statistics of the DK2 grid frequency
[40].
28
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:36==
5.3.5
Mathematical formulation
Description of power variables for reserve market
For the realВӯtime, the choice was made to use normalized variables for reserve since the
ISO signal is normalized on the bid for reserve. [9] Similarly, the state of charge is used
instead of the state of energy.
To formulate this problem, a certain number of variables have to be defined. Variables
x represent normalized power productions. Variables xR are the power production norВӯ
malized by the hourly power bid for reserve while xB is the power production normalized
by the basepoint for the energy market. The subscript t indicates the time of production
with a 2s time increment. The subscript i indicates the storage system of the HESS. The
superscritpts c and d indicates if this power is for charging or discharging the system.
Variables for charging and discharging are always positive variables.
For example, xR,d
i,t is the discharging power of system i at time t for the reserve market so
it is normalized by P R. It is a positive real number.
Power variables for energy market
For the energy market, it is assumed that the 5min production basepoint is a parameter
and allows the HESS to meet its hourly energy bid. For simplicity, it is assumed that
the basepoint for energy is met at every timestep t. It is then not necessary to define
penalties for nonВӯdelivery on the energy market. The realВӯtime decisionВӯmaking for energy
production is then only the power allocation between the supercapacitor and the battery.
Objective Function
вҲҖt вҲҲT RT ,
Max
xR
t ,Оҙt,s
вҲ‘
sвҲҲS
ПҖs В·
(вҲ‘
tвҲҲT
xR
t В· P R В· ОӣR + P B В· вҲҶt В· ОӣE вҲ’ОҙR
t,s В· PenR
)
(5.18)
In the objective function, the main variables are xR
t and Оҙt,s. xR
t is the total power producВӯ
tion of the HESS at time t for frequency regulation. P R is the power bid for the reserve
market in MW. ОӣR is the power price for that hour in [DKK/MW]. PenR is the penalty for
non delivery of power for regulation in [DKK/MW].
P B is the basepoint for energy arbitrage over the 5min interval. ОӣE is the energy price
for that hour in [DKK/MWh]. The production for energy market is considered to be a
parameter.
ОҙR
t,s is the difference between the signal from the ISO and the power production for reguВӯ
lation at time t in simulation s in absolute value. The last term of the objective function is
the penalty term and is nonВӯlinear due to the absolute value. However, it is linearized in
constraint 5.24.
Energy constraints
For all systems, the state of charge at time t is defined from the power production at time
t вҲ’1, the efficiencies and the energy capacity of the system.
вҲҖt вҲҲT RT
M ,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
SOCi,t =SOCi,tвҲ’1 + zc
i,tвҲ’1 В· xR,c
i,tвҲ’1 В· О·c
i В· P R В· вҲҶt
Ei
вҲ’zd
i,tвҲ’1 В· xR,d
i,tвҲ’1 В· P R В· вҲҶt
Ei В· О·d
i
+ zc
i,tвҲ’1 В· xB,c
i,tвҲ’1 В· О·c
i В· P B В· вҲҶt
Ei
вҲ’zd
i,tвҲ’1 В· xB,d
i,tвҲ’1
P B В· вҲҶt
Ei В· О·d
i
.
(5.19)
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
29
==PAGE:37==
At time t = 0, the SOC of every ESS i is a parameter of the realВӯtime model. It is set on
the results of the dayВӯahead model at hour h.
вҲҖi вҲҲI, SOCt=0,i = SOC0
i
(5.20)
At every timestep, the SOC is constrained to be under a maximum level and above a
minimum level. Those levels are parameters of the realВӯtime problem.
вҲҖt вҲҲT RT
M ,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
SOCmin
i
вүӨSOCi,t вүӨSOCmax
i
(5.21)
Power constraints
For all system i, there is a maximum power. For this model, the maximum discharging
power and charging power are assumed to be equal.
вҲҖt вҲҲT RT
M ,
вҲҖi вҲҲI,
xR
i,t В· P R + xB
i,t В· P B вүӨP MAX
i
(5.22)
Power allocation constraint
Based on section 5.3.3, the production of S1 is defined by a power allocation function
called here pow1 detailed in algorithm 1 and is enforced in the optimization model as an
equality constraint.
вҲҖt вҲҲT вҲ—, xR
1,t = pow1(xR
1,tвҲ’1)
(5.23)
As stated in section 5.3.3, the parameters c, T1 and T2 of the power allocation algorithm
are also parameters of the realВӯtime optimization problem. They should be determined
before the dispatch interval starts based on the state of charge of the ESSs. If the paВӯ
rameters are not correctly defined, the model can become infeasible. For example, it is
possible that the algorithm decides to charge system 1 even though it is already charged
at its maximum (SOC1,tвҲ’1 = SOCMAX), making the model infeasible. For the rest of this
report, it is assumed that those parameters are defined so that the model is feasible.
Penalty definition constraint
The penalty is based on the absolute difference between the signal from the ISO and the
total power production of the HESS. The absolute value is a nonВӯlinear term. In order to
keep the problem linear, the secondary variable Оҙs,t is used in the objective. It is defined
in the next constraint:
вҲҖs вҲҲSRT
t
,
вҲҖt вҲҲT RT
M ,
ss,t вҲ’xR
t вүӨОҙs,t вүӨвҲ’ss,t + xR
t .
(5.24)
30
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:38==
6
Case study
Since LiВӯion is today the preferred technology when it comes to gridВӯscale storage, the
case study focus on LiВӯion over VRFB. A LiВӯion battery is used along a SC to provide enВӯ
ergy on the wholesale dayВӯahead market and also frequemcy containment reserve (FCRВӯ
N) for the reserve market (see section 2.3). The choices made in the case study for HESS
costs and strategy are taken as conservative and are discussed in sensitivity analysis on
the price.
6.1
General parameters
This section describes the HESS main parameters, the prices data for energy and reserve
markets and the frequency signal used for the realВӯtime model. The considered HESS is a
hybrid of a 2MW/2MWh LiВӯion battery and a 2MW/0.5MWh supercapacitor. The technical
and economic characteristics of the ESS are based on data provided in [42].
BESS
SC
General parameters
Energy capacity [MWh]
2
0.5
Power capacity [MW]
2
2
Charging efficency [%]
0,95
0,95
Discharging efficency [%]
0,95
0,95
Degradation parameters
Lifetime [years]
20
20
Minimum SOC [%]
0,15
0,15
Maximum SOC [%]
0,9
0,9
Cycles at 80% DOD
8600
500000
Table 6.1: Technical parameters used for the HESS.
As supercapacitors have a very low power density, it is more relevant to give their capital
cost as DKK/kW. The investment cost includes capital cost, power conversion system,
balance of plant and construction and commisionning. For calculating HESS costs, the
conservative assumption was made that the investment cost of the HESS would be the
sum of the investment for each ESS.
BESS
SC
Capital cost [DKK/kWh]
150
Capital cost [DKK/kW]
6081
Degradation cost [4 DKK/MW]
10
Degradation cost [DKK/kW/year]
0.04
Cycle life data is presented in section 4.2.1 in figure 4.1.
6.1.1
Data and parameters for the dayВӯahead problem
Data for market prices comes from 2022 data from Nordpool and Energinet for energy
market and FCRВӯN market. For the dayВӯahead problem, prices are those from the 11/03/2022,
which was considered to be representative of the very high energy prices of 2022.
For this simulation, a conservative approach was considered with О¶ = 1. The HESS is
also considered to have a performance score of SHESS = 1.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.1: Market prices data for energy and reserve.
6.1.2
Signal data for the realВӯtime problem
Hour 4 from day 50 of year 2019 was selected randomly from the yearly data for the 2019
data. The daily, hourly and 5min signal is represented in figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Signal for regulation.
Before running the simulation, the energy associated with the ISO signal for every hour
of that day was calculated and found to be always in the order of magnitude of 10вҲ’8kWh.
It is then reasonable to consider that the signal is energy neutral.
32
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:40==
6.2
Results for the dayВӯahead problem
Figure 6.3 presents side by side the prices and the bids on energy and reserve markets.
As expected, the HESS sells energy when energy prices are high (negative energy bids)
and buys when prices are low (positive energy bids). The same goes with reserve prices
and bids.
It is also noticeable that at hour 19 energy prices are significantly high while reserve prices
are low. This leads the HESS to sell as much energy as possible and bid 0MW on the
reserve market (see figure 6.6 for the SOE of the ESSs). The same pattern is observed
around hour 7 with also high energy prices. On the contrary, reserve prices are signifiВӯ
cantly high around hour 15 which leads the HESS to have a very high bid for reserve and
an energy bid close to 0 MWh.
(a) Hourly prices for energy and reserve.
(b) Hourly bids for energy and reserve.
Figure 6.3: Comparison of prices and bids for energy and reserve markets.
Figures 6.4 and 6.5 present the hourly bids of the HESS with the expected hourly particВӯ
ipation of each ESS to the energy and reserve production. For each service, the battery
participation is significantly higher than the one from the supercapacitor.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.4: Hourly energy bid for energy market. Production from BESS and SC.
Figure 6.5: Hourly power bid for reserve market. Production from BESS and SC.
34
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.6 presents the hourly evolution of the SOC of both technologies. In the model,
a constraint was implemented to keep the initial and final SOC close to 50% to avoid not
being able to provide energy on the next day. This explain the positive energy bids of
the supercapacitor at hours 0 and 23. The SOE of both technologies follows their hourly
energy bids.
Figure 6.6: Hourly power bid for reserve market. Production from BESS and SC.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
35
==PAGE:43==
6.3
Sensitivity analysis for the dayВӯahead problem
The sensitivity of the dayВӯahead bids to market prices, to the risk strategy and to the
degradation cost is investigated in this section.
6.3.1
Sensitivity to hourly prices
From the results for the dayВӯahead problem, the HESS bid mostly on the reserve market.
However, the prices considered are those of 2022 which is a year with very high energy
prices. Figure 6.7 presents the evolution of energy prices in the year 2022. It is then
important to compare the results for different prices characteristics.
Figure 6.7: Evolution of prices on the dayВӯahead energy market in DK2 in [EUR/MWh].
Figure from Nordpool.
A qualitative sensitivity analysis was conducted for several days of 2022 with different
characteristics for reserve and energy (see table 6.2). The days chosen have relatively
high or low prices compared to 2022 prices (cases 1, 2 and 3). Also two days were chosen
with high dispersion of energy and reserve prices (cases 4 and 5).
Case
Date
Prices description
Energy
Regulation
Case 1
6/5/2022
AverageВӯLow
High
Case 2
8/17/2022
High
AverageВӯLow
Case 3
7/9/2022
Low
Average
Case 4
7/10/2022
High dispersion
Average dispersion
Case 5
5/28/2022
Average dispersion
High dispersion
Table 6.2: Energy and reserve prices description for sensitivity analysis.
The resulting bids for each of those cases are presented side by side in appendix A. Cases
2, 4 and 5 have non constant energy an reserve bids, while cases 1 and 3 have constant
bids over the day.
вҖў Cases 1 and 3 have high or average reserve prices and low energy prices. This
leads the HESS to bid as much as possible for reserve. For both cases, the HESS
highest possible bid for reserve is 2.75 MW. This bid accounts for 2MW from the
battery and 0.75MW from the supercapacitor even though both systems have a
2MW power capacity. This illustrates how the low energy capacity and the static
losses of the supercapacitor constraint its power production. The bid on the energy
market is close to 0MWh but always positive (вүғ.01 MWh). This energy bid only
accounts for the static losses of the supercapacitor.
вҖў Case 2 presents similar prices to the ones used in the case study. As presented in
the previous case study results, high energy prices make it profitable for the HESS
36
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:44==
to do energy arbitrage and lower its bid for reserve when it is bidding on the energy
market.
вҖў Case 4 and 5 illustrates how a high dispersion in prices can influence the bidding
strategy. The HESS charges when both energy and reserve prices are low to then
sell when energy prices are high. The hourly bids reflect then even more clearly the
trends in energy and reserve prices.
This sensitivity analysis highlights the dayВӯahead general strategy of HESS operating on
reserve and energy markets. The HESS usually operates mostly on reserve markets and
only benefits from energy arbitrage when energy prices are exceptionnally high. However,
it is still advantageaous to submit low bids on the energy market for losses compensation.
6.3.2
Sensitivity to risk strategy
As detailed in section 5.2.1, the dayВӯahead bids depend on a 15min requirement. This
requirement implies that the HESS should be able to provide the power bid for reserve
for 15min. This 15min requirement is particularly limiting for the supercapacitor that has
a low energy capacity. The low energy capacity does not allow it to provide power for an
extended period of time. However, the HESS can consider that there is a low risk of a
major disturbance on the power grid that would require to provide the full bid for 15min.
Then the constraint can be relaxed using the factor О¶i as detailed in equation 5.9 and 5.17.
The following figures present the hourly reserve and energy bids for different values of О¶i.
The lowest value corresponds to the most conservative approach and is the one presented
in the case study.
As the 15min requirement is particularly constraining for the supercapacitor, О¶SC has more
impact on the reserve bid than О¶Bat. From figure ??, increasing the value of О¶SC increases
the reserve bid across the wole day. The most significant change occurs at low hours.
The energy bid also varies with higher positive bids for charging the battery. This allows
the supercapacitor to have enough energy to provide both energy and reserve.
Increasing О¶Bat has less effect on the overall strategy for energy or reserve. The reserve
is only significantly higher around hour 7. At hour 7, energy prices are peaking which
leads the HESS to limit its bid on the reserve market since it is more profitable to use
its energy capacity for the energy bid. However, by relaxing the 15min requirement, the
HESS is able to still provide reserve without limiting its energy bid too much.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
37
==PAGE:45==
(a) Hourly energy bid depending on risk strategy
of the supercapacitor.
(b) Hourly reserve bid depending on risk stratВӯ
egy of the supercapacitor.
Figure 6.8: Comparison of hourly bids for different risk strategy for the supercapacitor
(a) Hourly energy bid depending on risk strategy
of the supercapacitor.
(b) Hourly reserve bid depending on risk stratВӯ
egy of the supercapacitor.
Figure 6.9: Comparison of hourly bids for different risk strategy for the supercapacitor
38
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:46==
6.4
Results for the realВӯtime problem
This section presents the results of realВӯtime optimization. First, the impact of the power
allocation algorithm parameters on degradation cost and production decisions are preВӯ
sented. A set of parameters that limit degradation while not impacting energy production
is then fixed. This set of parameters is used in a sensitivity analysis that presents the
sensitivity of degradation to the reserve bid on the dayВӯahead market.
Filter tuning
Figure 6.10 presents the outcome of the realВӯtime simulation for two different set of filter
parameters. Case 1 corresponds to a limited participation of the battery in production for
reserve. Case 2 presents a battery that mostly participate in production for the energy
market.
Figures (a) and (b) presents the power production normalized by the reserve bid. In both
cases the total production from the HESS follows exactly the ISO input with the difference
between battery production and ISO signal is covered by the supercapacitor. Figures (c)
and (d) presents the SOC of both ESS. Figures (e) and (f) present the power production
of both ESS for the energy market.
The battery degradation costs were calculated for both cases from the SOC profile using
the RCA. From those two examples, there is a significant difference in degradation costs
depending on the filter parameters. For case 1 where battery mostly participate in energy
production, the total battery degradation cost is 3.2DKK while in case 2, it is 8.4DKK.
Also, it appears that filter parameters impact the repartition of energy production. In case
1, the battery participates more in the energy production than in case 2.
The tuning of those parameters then depends not only on the battery degradation costs
but also on the ability of the HESS to follow the ISO command and the repartition of enВӯ
ergy production between the two ESS. Tuning the power allocation algorithm is achieved
by calculating degradation costs and participation in the energy market for a range of paВӯ
rameters. Tables 6.3 and 6.4 present degradation costs and the battery participation in
the energy market for different set of parameters. High values are presented in red colors
and low values in green.
The expected participation of the battery in the energy market at that hour is of 67% (see
figure 6.4). From table 6.4, the participation of the battery in the energy market ranges
from 52% to 77% for the different power allocation parameters. Degradation costs range
from 2.6DKK to 10.8DKK.
If the algorithm is only tuned by taking the set of parameters with the lowest degradation
costs, there is a chance that the battery would provide too much of the energy bid. This
would consequently reduce the participation of the SC in the energy market. Over one
hour, that could involve not being able to deliver the full energy bid and paying penalties.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
39
==PAGE:47==
(a) Input signal and HESS production.
(case 1)
(b) Input signal and HESS production.
(case 2)
(c) SOC of the battery.
(case 1)
(d) SOC of the battery.
(case 2)
(e) Power production for energy market. Total
degradation cost: Cdeg = 3.54DKK
(case 1)
(f) Power production for energy market.
Cdeg = 8.25DKK
(case 2)
Figure 6.10: Simulation results for different parameter values.
Case 1: c = 0.1,
Thres1 = 0.05,
Thres2 = 5
Case 2: c = 0.5,
Thres1 = 0.05,
Thres2 = 3
40
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:48==
Thres_2
1
3
5
0,05
0,50
0,42
0,35
0,25
0,44
0,38
0,34
Thres_1
0,35
0,32
0,30
0,26
(a) c = 0.1
Thres_2
1
3
5
0,05
0,86
0,74
0,56
0,25
0,52
0,51
0,49
Thres_1
0,35
0,42
0,41
0,41
Thres_2
1
3
5
0,05
1,00
0,85
0,71
0,25
0,54
0,62
0,53
Thres_1
0,35
0,37
0,37
0,37
(b) c = 0.5
Table 6.3: Normalized values of degradation costs for different parameters values.
A value of 1 is a cost of 10.8DKK
Thres_2
1
3
5
0,05
0,57
0,56
0,55
0,25
0,56
0,55
0,56
Thres_1
0,35
0,54
0,54
0,54
(a) c = 0.1
Thres_2
1
3
5
0,05
0,72
0,69
0,60
0,25
0,57
0,57
0,56
Thres_1
0,35
0,55
0,54
0,54
(b) c = 0.3
Thres_2
1
3
5
0,05
0,77
0,71
0,65
0,25
0,54
0,59
0,54
Thres_1
0,35
0,52
0,52
0,52
Table 6.4: Participation from the battery to energy production for the energy market.
A participation of 1 corresponds to the battery providing the total production for energy
market.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
41
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion and potential improvements
As highlighted in the previous section, there are many interdendancies between dayВӯ
ahead and realtime operational decisions. The case study allowed us to quantify how
power allocation strategy for reserve affected also the production for energy markets and
the degradation costs to take into account. However, the case study was only run for a
specific day and for a timeframe of 5min.
7.1
DayВӯahead model
As presented in figures 6.4, the HESS participation in reserve and energy markets rely
mostly on production from the battery. This result is coherent with applications of HESS
where the supercapacitor is used as a support for the battery. For both markets, the
supercapacitor bids are relatively low due to its energy capacity.
The supercapacitor uses its capacity to bid for reserve mostly but is limited by its energy
capacity and the 15min requirement while battery can bid more for reserve as it has a
higer energy capacity. Also, the supercapacitor hourly bid on the energy market is never
equal to 0 even though its low energy capacity is not compatible with the energy market,
as detailed in 3.1.4. Supercapacitors have high static losses and buying energy on the
energy market allows it to compensate for those losses. This mechanism can be highВӯ
lighted between hour 8 and 14 where the SOC of the supercapacitor is constant while it
participates in the energy market (see figures 6.5 and 6.6).
As presented in the sensitivity analysis, the HESS usually favors revenues from the reВӯ
serve market over revenues from the energy market even with the high energy prices
from the year 2022. This conclusion is similar to the ones from [37] where a dayВӯahead
bidding strategy is developped for an ESS using reinforcement learning. However, one
of the main assumptions of this research is that the bidding price of the HESS allows it
to participate in the reserve and energy markets. However, ESS usually have high costs
compared to conventional generators providing frequency regulations. As discussed in
[43], the HESS bid price for reserve can often be too high to participate in the reserve
market, while its bid price for energy allows it to participate in the energy market. The
HESS then makes its revenue from energy arbitrage. The model presented in our study
might then overestimate the participation of the HESS in the reserve market.
In the dayВӯahead model, degradations were considered to be a constant rate per MW
produced. However, including a more accurate degradation model might also help to get
more accurate results. [44] includes cycle life calculation based on the deepest cycles only
due to energy production while smaller cycles are approximated using the statistics of the
frequency signal. They found that there is a 10 to 15% difference in revenue between
considering cycle life calculations and using a constant degradation factor. The bidding
strategy is also different with lower participation in reserve market when the cycle life
calculations are considered.
42
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:50==
7.2
RealВӯtime model
First of all, it is important to highlight the fact that the realВӯtime model was only used for
a 5min frequency signal data. Even though the signal can be considered random [41], a
more inВӯdepth approach would be to run this model for different 5min interval and compare
the results.
A notable result of the realtime simulations is that battery degradation costs are positively
correlated with battery participation in the reserve market. Simulations that present high
battery participation in reserve markets also present high battery degradation costs. This
is counterВӯintuitive since participation in reserve involves a high number of cycles and
should highly degrade the battery. However, degradation costs depend on the number
of cycles but also on the depth of those cycles. The evolution of the SOC due to energy
production is presented in ??. It shows that the SOC evolution of the battery over the hour
is of 0.4 MWh (from 70% to 90% of its capacity). Those findings are coherent with the ones
proposed by Padmanabhan N., Ahmed M. and Bhattacharya K. in [45]. They develop a
similar model for a standalone battery with a more inВӯdepth depgradation model. They
find that taking into account degradation costs increases the reserve bid while decreases
the energy bid.
Also, the tuning of the filter could be improved with more simulations, longer time periods
and a wider range of tested parameters. However, those simulations are computationВӯ
nally intensive. As detailed in setion 3.2, the rule based energy management strategy is
simple to implement and not computationnally intensive which are the reasons why it was
implemented in this study. However, the realtime decisions are highly dependant on the
algorithm parameters [4], which was verified in our results.
An improvment of this model would be to develop another optimization problem to tune
those parameters every 5min. This optimization should be based on the signal, the state
of the HESS at time t = 0, degradation costs and reserve and eneryg bids. This approach
might be highly dependant on the signal uncertainties and would probably not be optimal
and also computationnally intensive. It might then be better to directly include degradation
in the objective of the realtime model which is possible but difficult. [46]
The degradation calculations and rainflow counting algorithm presented in 4.2.1 would
have to be redesigned. Indeed, the rainflow counting algorithm defines cycles using the
local extrema of the battery power production. It is not possible to define those local
extrema in an optimization setting since power production is a variable [46]. Several
methods have been proposed to get around this problem and still account for degradation
explicitly in the objective by simplifying the RCA:
вҖў [46] proposes a subgradient algorithm to identify cycles.
вҖў [22] defines a threshold for SOC in realtime based on the price for reserve and the
penalty for deviating from the ISO signal.
вҖў [43] describes a method that separates decision variables from local extrema idenВӯ
tification and then uses a RCA to calculate degradation costs.
However, those approaches are still too computationally intensive for a 2s decision reВӯ
quired to provide frequency regulation. Also, they do not guarantee the optimal decision
for minimizing degradation. As described in 3.2, another approch would be to use intelliВӯ
gent based control strategies. However, they require a large amount of data and are too
computationnally intensive for a 2s realtime decision required to provide reserve.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
43
==PAGE:51==
7.3
Interdependancies between dayВӯahead and realtime
strategies
To highlight how the realtime decision depends on the dayВӯahead decisions, a sensitivity
analysis is conducted on degradation costs and penalty. As presented in section 6.3.2, the
approach for this work is very risk conservative. However, more risk tolerant strategies
lead to higher bids on reserve markets. The following figure presents the sensitivity of
degradation costs and penalty costs to the power bid on reserve market. The power
allocation settings are the one proposed at the end of section 6.4.
Figure 7.1: Degradation and penalty costs associated with a higher reserve bid.
The initial reserve bid is 2.35MW.
Figure 7.1, shows that degradation costs vary linearly with the reserve bid at a rate of
4DKK/MW which is coherent with the degradation cost approximation of a constant rate
of 3.75DKK/MW for a LiВӯion battery. Also, this figure highlights that for the signal data of
this 5min dispatch interval, the production only starts deviating from the signal when the
reserve bid increases of 50% compared to the most conservative bid. This highlights that
a more risk tolerant approach for the bidding strategy is acceptable.
This result also shows the necessity of modelling risk for dayВӯahead decisions since penalВӯ
ties impact the HESS score in the objective function (see equation 5.1). The sensitivity
analysis conducted in section 6.3.2 shows indeed that the HESS overbid more than 50%
when the 15min requirement is relaxed.
For simplicity, this research decomposes the decisionВӯmaking process in dayВӯahead and
realtime decisions. However, the HESS has the possibility to adjust its production baseВӯ
point for the energy market every 5min. The realtime model proposed in section ?? conВӯ
siders that the production for energy market is constant over 1 hour. A more accurate
description of the decisionВӯmaking process would be to also develop an optimization probВӯ
lem for setting the 5min basepoint. Cheng and Powell propose a multiscale dynamic proВӯ
gramm in [38] for optimizing the operational strategy of a battery operating on both reserve
44
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:52==
and energy markets. The dayВӯahead, intrahour and realtime decisions are optimized in
one nestedВӯdynamic model while accounting for prices and signal uncertainties. They
find that coВӯoptimizing all decisions lead to a 40$ to 80$ improvement in daily revenue.
However, they do not model the ESS degradation. They also precise that the algorithm
they present is highly computationnally intensive. They estimate at 60TB the diskspace
required to run their model without any adaptation.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
45
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis explored the main challenges facing operational decisions of
HESS operating on reserve and energy markets in DK2. Through the examination of
opportunities for LithiumВӯion batteries (LiВӯion), Vanadium Redox Flow Batteries (VRFB),
and supercapacitors (SC) in power markets, HESS is demonstrated to be a promising
approach to increase grid flexibility and revenue.
Two linear optimization models for dayВӯahead and realtime decisions were developped.
Those models were tested in a case study of a LiВӯion/SC hybrid system operating in the
energy and frequency regulation markets in DK2 in 2022 revealed important findings. The
HESS predominantly bid on the reserve market to maximize revenue and participate in
the energy market to compensate for losses in the SC. Energy arbitrage is only being
used when energy prices exceed reserve prices significantly.
The results of this case study are discussed by performing sensitivity analysis. For the
dayВӯahead decisions, market prices and risk strategy were identified to have a significant
impact on the bidding strategy. For the realtime decisions, the power allocation strategy
shows to have a significant impact on battery degradations. It is also important to precise
that the intraВӯhour decision for an energy production basepoint was not modeled.
Further improvment could focus on assessing the interdependancies between dayВӯahead
and realtime operational strategies. DayВӯahead decision would benefit from a more acВӯ
curate degradation model while realtime decisions would benefit from a more optimal
approach to power allocation.
To conclude, this study contributes to understanding complex HESS operational strateВӯ
gies. The results of this study provides useful information for sizing and investment in
HESS project.
46
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
вҖң2022.05.19ВӯREPowerEUВӯPressВӯReleaseвҖқ. In: ().
[2]
IEA. GridВӯScale Storage. 2022. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/grid-scale-storage.
[3]
Amelie Krupp et al. вҖңCalendar aging model for lithiumВӯion batteries considering the
influence of cell characterizationвҖқ. In: Journal of Energy Storage 45 (Jan. 2022).
ISSN: 2352152X. DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2021.103506.
[4]
Salman Hajiaghasi, Ahmad Salemnia, and Mohsen Hamzeh. Hybrid energy storage
system for microgrids applications: A review. Feb. 2019. DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2018.
12.017.
[5]
OSMOSE project decription. 2022. URL: https://www.osmose-h2020.eu/.
[6]
Scott Nicholson and Garvin Heath. Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions from
Electricity Generation: Update Life Cycle Assessment of Energy Systems. 2012.
URL: https://data.nrel.gov/submissions/171.
[7]
Darrell Proctor. Гҳrsted Plans Battery Storage to Support Hornsea 3 Offshore Wind
Farm.
[8]
The value of electricity storage An outlook on services and market opportunities in
the Danish and international electricity markets. URL: www.eaea.dk.
[9]
Energinet. Ancillary services in DK2. 2022. URL: https://en.energinet.dk/Electricity/
Ancillary-Services/.
[10]
Zeenat Hameed, Chresten TrГҰholt, and Seyedmostafa Hashemi. вҖңInvestigating the
participation of battery energy storage systems in the Nordic ancillary services marВӯ
kets from a business perspectiveвҖқ. In: Journal of Energy Storage 58 (Feb. 2023).
ISSN: 2352152X. DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2022.106464.
[11]
Bloomberg. Research report on global liВӯion market. 2023. URL: https : / / www .
bloomberg.com/press-releases/2023-02-17/research-report-on-global-lithium-ion-
battery-market-size-share-to-surpass-165-65-billion-by-2030-growing-research-on.
[12]
John B Goodenough and KyuВӯSung Park. вҖңThe LiВӯIon Rechargeable Battery: A
PerspectiveвҖқ. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 135 (4 2013). PMID:
23294028, pp. 1167вҖ“1176. DOI: 10.1021/ja3091438. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja3091438.
[13]
Kyle Bradbury. Energy Storage Technology Review. 2010. URL: https : / / www .
researchgate.net/publication/265064873.
[14]
M. M. Kabir and Dervis Emre Demirocak. Degradation mechanisms in LiВӯion batterВӯ
ies: a stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart review. Nov. 2017. DOI: 10.1002/er.3762.
[15]
Pavlos Nikolaidis and Andreas Poullikkas. Journal of Power Technologies 97 (3)
(2017) 220Вӯ245 A comparative review of electrical energy storage systems for betВӯ
ter sustainability Electrical Energy Storage View project Cost metrics of electrical
energy storage technologies in potential power system operations View project 30
PUBLICATIONS 2,007 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Journal of Power Technologies
97 (3) (2017) 220Вӯ245 A comparative review of electrical energy storage systems
for better sustainability. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320755664.
[16]
Igor Iwakiri et al. вҖңRedox flow batteries: Materials, design and prospectsвҖқ. In: EnerВӯ
gies 14 (18 Sept. 2021). ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en14185643.
[17]
Marcelo G. Molina. вҖңDistributed energy storage systems for applications in future
smart gridsвҖқ. In: 2012 Sixth IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution: Latin America
Conference and Exposition (TDВӯLA). Sept. 2012, pp. 1вҖ“7. DOI: 10.1109/TDC-LA.
2012.6319051.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
47
==PAGE:55==
[18]
Portfolio Management Energy from Smart Grid Deliverable: Report/white paper on
Ultracapacitor technology Unlocking New Possibilities through Innovative Energy
Storage The Role of Ultracapacitors in the Energy Transition. 2020.
[19]
Abraham Alem Kebede et al. A comprehensive review of stationary energy storage
devices for large scale renewable energy sources grid integration. May 2022. DOI:
10.1016/j.rser.2022.112213.
[20]
Daiwon Choi et al. вҖңLiВӯion battery technology for grid applicationвҖқ. In: Journal of
Power Sources 511 (Nov. 2021). ISSN: 03787753. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.
230419.
[21]
Oliver Schmidt et al. вҖңProjecting the Future Levelized Cost of Electricity Storage
TechnologiesвҖқ. In: Joule 3 (1 Jan. 2019), pp. 81вҖ“100. ISSN: 25424351. DOI: 10.
1016/j.joule.2018.12.008.
[22]
Bolun Xu et al. вҖңFactoring the Cycle Aging Cost of Batteries Participating in ElecВӯ
tricity MarketsвҖқ. In: (July 2017). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.04567.
[23]
Reza Hemmati and Hedayat Saboori. Emergence of hybrid energy storage systems
in renewable energy and transport applications вҖ“ A review. Nov. 2016. DOI: 10.1016/
j.rser.2016.06.029.
[24]
Jianwei Li et al. вҖңSize optimization and power allocation of a hybrid energy storage
system for frequency serviceвҖқ. In: International Journal of Electrical Power Energy
Systems 141 (Oct. 2022), p. 108165. ISSN: 0142Вӯ0615. DOI: 10.1016/J.IJEPES.
2022.108165.
[25]
Rongchuan Tang et al. вҖңA dynamic bidding strategy of hybrid energy storage sysВӯ
tem participating in dayВӯahead frequency regulation marketвҖқ. In: Journal of Energy
Storage 56 (Dec. 2022). ISSN: 2352152X. DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2022.106161.
[26]
He Yin et al. вҖңAn adaptive fuzzy logicВӯbased energy management strategy on batВӯ
tery/ultracapacitor hybrid electric vehiclesвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 2 (3 Sept. 2016), pp. 300вҖ“311. ISSN: 23327782. DOI: 10.1109/TTE.
2016.2552721.
[27]
Tao Zhu et al. Sizing a batteryВӯsupercapacitor energy storage system with battery
degradation consideration for highВӯperformance electric vehicles A R T I C L E I N
F O.
[28]
Yan Ji, Yancheng Zhang, and ChaoВӯYang Wang. вҖңLiВӯIon Cell Operation at Low TemВӯ
peraturesвҖқ. In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society 160 (4 2013), A636вҖ“A649.
ISSN: 0013Вӯ4651. DOI: 10.1149/2.047304jes.
[29]
Feng Leng, Cher Ming Tan, and Michael Pecht. вҖңEffect of Temperature on the Aging
rate of Li Ion Battery Operating above Room TemperatureвҖқ. In: Scientific Reports 5
(Aug. 2015). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/srep12967.
[30]
Martin Henke and Getu Hailu. Thermal management of stationary battery systems:
A literature review. Aug. 2020. DOI: 10.3390/en13164194.
[31]
Michael Koller et al. Defining a Degradation Cost Function for Optimal Control of a
Battery Energy Storage System.
[32]
Pranoy Kumar et al. Economic Comparison Between a Battery and Supercapacitor
for Hourly Dispatching Wave Energy Converter Power: Preprint. 2021. URL: https:
//www.nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/77398.pdf..
[33]
C Amzallag et al. Standardization of the rainflow counting method for fatigue analВӯ
ysis Preliminary treatment of the sequence.
[34]
Qingmian Chai et al. вҖңOptimal Daily Scheduling ofDistributed Battery Energy StorВӯ
age Systems Considering Battery Degradation CostвҖқ. In: vol. 2021ВӯJuly. IEEE ComВӯ
puter Society, 2021. ISBN: 9781665405072. DOI: 10 . 1109 / PESGM46819 . 2021 .
9638252.
48
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:56==
[35]
E Нҫ Thorbergsson et al. Primary Frequency Regulation with LiВӯIon Battery Energy
Storage SystemВӯEvaluation and Comparison of Different Control Strategies. 2013.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6663276.
[36]
Jin Oh Lee and Yun Su Kim. вҖңNovel battery degradation cost formulation for optimal
scheduling of battery energy storage systemsвҖқ. In: International Journal of Electrical
Power and Energy Systems 137 (May 2022). ISSN: 01420615. DOI: 10.1016/j.
ijepes.2021.107795.
[37]
Yi Dong et al. вҖңA Strategic DayВӯahead bidding strategy and operation for battery
energy storage system by reinforcement learningвҖқ. In: Electric Power Systems ReВӯ
search 196 (July 2021). ISSN: 03787796. DOI: 10.1016/j.epsr.2021.107229.
[38]
Bolong Cheng and Warren B. Powell. вҖңCoВӯOptimizing Battery Storage for the FreВӯ
quency Regulation and Energy Arbitrage Using MultiВӯScale Dynamic ProgrammingвҖқ.
In: IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9 (3 May 2018), pp. 1997вҖ“2005. ISSN: 19493053.
DOI: 10.1109/TSG.2016.2605141.
[39]
AndrГ©s PintoВӯBello. The smartEn Map European Balancing Markets Edition. 2018.
URL: www.smarten.eu.
[40]
Andreas Thingvad and Mattia Marinelli. Grid frequency measurements of the Nordic
Power System during 2019. 2020. URL: https://data.dtu.dk/articles/dataset/Grid_
Frequency_Measurements_of_the_Nordic_Power_System_during_2019/12758573.
[41]
Mehrnaz Anvari et al. вҖңStochastic properties of the frequency dynamics in real and
synthetic power gridsвҖқ. In: (Sept. 2019). DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.013339.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09110%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.
2.013339.
[42]
K Mongird et al. Energy Storage Technology and Cost Characterization Report.
2019.
[43]
Yi Dong, Tianqiao Zhao, and Zhengtao Ding. вҖңAn optimal dayВӯahead bidding stratВӯ
egy and operation for battery energy storage system by reinforcement learningвҖқ. In:
vol. 53. Elsevier B.V., 2020, pp. 13190вҖ“13195. DOI: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2020.12.144.
[44]
Guannan He et al. вҖңOptimal Bidding Strategy of Battery Storage in Power MarВӯ
kets Considering PerformanceВӯBased Regulation and Battery Cycle LifeвҖқ. In: IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid 7 (5 Sept. 2016), pp. 2359вҖ“2367. ISSN: 19493053.
DOI: 10.1109/TSG.2015.2424314.
[45]
Nitin Padmanabhan, Mohamed Ahmed, and Kankar Bhattacharya. вҖңBattery Energy
Storage Systems in Energy and Reserve MarketsвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems 35 (1 Jan. 2020), pp. 215вҖ“226. ISSN: 15580679. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.
2019.2936131.
[46]
Yuanyuan Shi et al. вҖңA Convex CycleВӯbased Degradation Model for Battery Energy
Storage Planning and OperationвҖқ. In: (Mar. 2017). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.
07968.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
49
==PAGE:57==
50
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:58==
A
Result of the sensitivity analysis on
reserve and energy prices
(a)
Hourly
prices
for
energy
and
reserve
(case1).
(b) Hourly bids for energy and reserve (case1).
Figure A.1: Comparison of prices and bids for energy and reserve markets.
(a)
Hourly
prices
for
energy
and
reserve
(case2).
(b) Hourly bids for energy and reserve (case2).
Figure A.2: Comparison of prices and bids for energy and reserve markets.
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
51
==PAGE:59==
(a)
Hourly
prices
for
energy
and
reserve
(case3).
(b) Hourly bids for energy and reserve (case3).
Figure A.3: Comparison of prices and bids for energy and reserve markets.
(a)
Hourly
prices
for
energy
and
reserve
(case4).
(b) Hourly bids for energy and reserve (case4).
Figure A.4: Comparison of prices and bids for energy and reserve markets.
(a)
Hourly
prices
for
energy
and
reserve
(case5).
(b) Hourly bids for energy and reserve (case5).
Figure A.5: Comparison of prices and bids for energy and reserve markets.
52
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
==PAGE:60==
Optimal operational planning of hybrid energy storage systems in energy and reserve markets
53
