==PAGE:1==
Analyzing the Impact of Dwell-Time Prediction
Accuracy on Container Terminal Efficiency
Benjamin Simon Stenbjerg Jepsen
Master Thesis
Computer Science and Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
June 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis is part of the fulfillment of the requirements for the Master of Science
in Engineering programme in Computer Science and Engineering from the Technical
University of Denmark. The project accounts for 30 ECTS, and has been carried out
between 01-09-2022 and 15-06-2023.
Supervisor:
Associate Professor Nina Gierasimczuk, DTU Compute
Benjamin Simon Stenbjerg Jepsen
s184374
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby, June 15th 2023
II
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Thank you to my parents for their continued support of me throughout my life and my
education.
Thank you to my advisor, Nina Gierasimczuk, for her help and understanding of my
difficult situation when writing the thesis.
Thank you Blockshipping A/S for the inspiration for the thesis and helping me with the
background information for the thesis.
Thank you to my former cat, Dima, who helped me write my Bachelor thesis, and whose
memory helped me write this thesis.
And finally, thank you, too, for reading this thesis.
IV
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
In this Master Thesis, tests are conducted on simulated container terminals with various
stacking AIs, some of which use container dwell times in their decision-making, to analyze
the gains in container terminal efficiency with various dwell time prediction accuracies.
Overall, the efficiency of terminals increases with increased dwell time prediction accuracy
at low initial congestions in the terminals. Stacking AIs that use dwell time in addition
to other factors when deciding where to stack containers have increased efficiency, overall,
than AIs that either solely rely on dwell time, or do not rely on dwell time at all.
VI
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
Introduction
1
1
Background
2
1.1
Container Terminals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Maritime Terminals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Container Terminal Layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
The Yard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.4
Container Reshuffles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Dwell Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Dwell time and Estimated time of dispatch . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Current Stacking Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Current Literature on Stacking Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.1
Dynamic adjustment of container stacking policy in an automated
container terminal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.2
A Fuzzy Logic Model for the Container Stacking Problem at Con-
tainer Terminals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Problem Statement and Test Setup
11
2.1
Blockshipping AI-IDP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Basic Model overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.2
Integration of AI-IDP into thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Terminal Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Software Description and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Proposed Solution and Evaluation
19
3.1
Chosen Stacking Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Fuzzy Logic Stacking Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
LDT Stacking Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.3
Levelling and Random Stacking Policies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
Stacking Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.2
Percentage of Import containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.3
Congestion Rate in the Terminal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.4
Dwell time prediction accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
VIII
==PAGE:10==
3.3.5
Other Factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Further Development and Conclusion
39
Glossary
42
Bibliography
43
Appendices
44
A
Test results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.1
Fuzzy Logic paper replication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.2
Periodically Incoming Vessels Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
IX
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
Stacking containers in a container terminal can be a very complicated endeavour. Many
factors affect where containers should be placed, such as the type of container to be
stacked, its size, its destination, the location of other containers, etc. Inefficiently stacked
containers can lead to monetary loss for a container terminal, delays in delivering goods
around the world, and large amounts of greenhouse gas emissions. This thesis aims to
provide insights into how using a container’s predicted dwell time in a yard, more specif-
ically, a dwell-time with a given prediction accuracy, can help increase the efficiency with
which containers are stacked in container terminals, and therefore alleviate some of the
monetary and ecological costs incurred by inefficiently stacked containers.
This Master’s Thesis focuses on evaluating the impact of dwell time prediction accuracy
on the efficiency of a container terminal as it pertains to container relocations (“reshuf-
fles”) and is done in cooperation with Blockshipping A/S.
The first chapter of this thesis provides background information on maritime terminals,
such as how they operate and are laid out. The concept of a container’s dwell time is
then introduced, as well as the fundamentals of how containers are stacked in maritime
terminals. Current literature focused on improving these stacking methods is then sum-
marized, and serves as a foundation for the thesis moving forward.
The second chapter describes the problem of predicting a container’s dwell time and
Blockshipping A/S’s machine learning solution for doing so, and gives a general outline
of the model terminal implemented in this thesis and a summary of how that model
terminal is implemented in code. The tests to be conducted on the model terminal and
how they are set up is also defined.
The third chapter introduces the four stacking AIs (some of which stack by dwell time
and some of which don’t) used to stack containers in the model terminal, presents the
results of the experiments conducted by running the four stacking AIs in the model ter-
minal, and then evaluates those results.
Finally, further work that can be conducted on this thesis is outlined, and conclusions
from the conducted experiments are drawn.
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Background
1.1
Container Terminals
Container terminals are key pieces of infrastructure in the global supply chain network.
They serve as temporary storage points for cargo containers on their journey from shipper
to consignee [1]. Many types of container terminal exist, but the focus of this thesis is
on maritime terminals, which are described below.
1.1.1
Maritime Terminals
Maritime Terminals can have various scopes of operation, depending on the type of cargo
arriving at the terminal, the geographic location of the terminal, and other geopolitical
factors. Three main types of terminal exist: Import Terminals, Export Terminals, and
Transshipment Terminals, all three of which are described below.
Import Terminals
Import terminals are terminals that primarily focus on importing goods from container
ships to then send those goods out through either a rail yard or truck system to inland
terminals. Notable examples are the the terminals in the ports of Los Angeles, which
receive large amounts of loaded import containers and export many empty containers [2].
Export Terminals
Export Terminals are terminals that primarily focus on exporting goods from inland
terminals via container ships. Notable examples are terminals in the ports of Shanghai,
Shenzen, and Guangzhou [3], although official export volumes are hard to find, with
reports mainly giving gross volumes of containers imported, exported, or transshipped
through the terminal.
Transshipment Terminals
Transshipment terminals primarily focus on serving as intermediary triage points for
containers being shipped around the world - containers mainly arrive and leave by cargo
ship. An example of this are the terminals in the port of Busan in South Korea, which
2
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Container Terminals
transship over 50% of the goods they handle [3]. This is the only port for which itemized
transshipment data could be found, although terminals in the port of Singapore, for
example, primarily act as transshipment terminals.
1.1.2
Container Terminal Layout
Container terminals are typically laid out in a way to optimize cargo handling efficiency,
safety, and space utilization. Each terminal layout is unique, however, and depends on
factors such as the size of the terminal, the types of cargo that are handled, and the
available equipment. Most terminals have common features that are laid out in similar
ways:
Berths
are areas of the terminal where ships are loaded and unloaded. They are located
near the water and typically allow for deepwater access and are lined with cranes and
other cargo handling equipment to load and unload containers from ships.
The Yard
is the main operational area of the terminal where cargo handling takes
place. Yard operations are the main focus of this thesis, so the yard is discussed in detail
in subsection 1.1.3.
Long-term container storage
space is allocated for containers that are expected to
sit in the yard for a long time. This is done so that the containers in the yard are not
obstructed by long-dwelling containers.
Equipment storage
is allocated for storing equipment such as cranes, forklifts, and
other cargo handling equipment.
The layout of a container terminal is important for several reasons. A well-designed layout
can optimize cargo handling efficiency by minimizing the movement of cargo equipment,
maximizing the use of space, and streamlining operational processes. These factors can
help reduce delays, increase productivity, and lower costs.
1.1.3
The Yard
The yard is the main operational area of a maritime terminal where the cargo handling
takes place. Containers are discharged from ships and placed in the yard before they are
then “gated-out” to trucks, rail operators or other carriers for delivery to final destina-
tions. Containers arriving from inland terminals are also “gated-in” to the yard before
being loaded onto vessels. Containers may also be “transshipped” which involves dis-
charging containers and stacking them in the yard, then loading those containers into
other vessels towards their final destination.
The layout of the yard when it comes to stacking containers an be seen in the following
image:
3
==PAGE:14==
1.1 Container Terminals
Figure 1.1.1: Container layout in yard [4]. YC stands for Yard Crane
Containers are divided into blocks. Each block may have multiple bays, and rows. Each
level of containers is a tier. Each row contains multiple stacks of containers, and each
stack can have multiple containers stacked on top of each other. Each terminal has a
maximum stack height allowable for safety and equipment reasons, with typical maxi-
mum stack heights ranging from five to six containers per stack [1].
Stacking containers involves using cranes to move the containers from the ship to the
yard and vice-versa, as well as cargo handling equipment such as cranes or Rubber-Tired
Gantry Cranes (RTGs) to move containers around the yard or onto trucks and trains.
The use of this equipment is costly in terms of fuel consumption, maintenance, man-hours
involved in using the equipment, and carbon dioxide emissions. In order to reduce these
costs, container terminals can attempt to reduce their equipment use by minimizing the
amount of container reshuffles that occur in the yard.
1.1.4
Container Reshuffles
Large amounts of operations in container terminal yards are the result of so-called “un-
productive” moves, wherein containers are moved in order to gain access to containers
lower down in the stack, or to free up space for other containers.
4
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Dwell Time
Containers may be inefficiently stacked due to many factors, such as the lack of space:
containers must be placed densely and on top of each other because there is no other
space to place containers; or incorrectly estimating the dwell times of containers: con-
tainers with later gate-out times are stacked on top of containers with earlier gate-out
times.
The dwell time of a container is a vital piece of information for any stacking pol-
icy/algorithm in a container terminal.
1.2
Dwell Time
Dwell time refers to the amount of time a container stays at a maritime terminal before
being loaded onto another ship or sent to its final destination. The dwell time of a con-
tainer is important when stacking it in the yard of a maritime terminal for several reasons:
Space Optimization: Knowing the dwell time of a container can help to optimize the
use of space in the terminal yard. Containers that are expected to have shorter dwell
times can be stacked in areas of the yard that are more easily accessible, while containers
that are expected to have longer dwell times can be stacked in areas that are less easily
accessible but have more space.
Inventory Management: Knowing the dwell time of a container can help the terminal to
manage its inventory more effectively by keeping track of the containers that are at the
terminal, the cargo they contain, and when they are expected to be shipped out, which
helps to avoid overstocking or stockouts.
Environmental Impact: Longer dwell time implies more space and resources used by the
container, this may increase the environmental impact of the terminal’s operations. Each
container in the yard needs to be inspected, requiring manpower and equipment to do
so. It can also be expected that the longer a container sits in the yard, the more it
will need to be moved to either access the container below it, or to be maintained. The
more movements a container makes around the yard, the more resources and equipment
is needed to make those relocations, and the more energy will be spent on that container.
The dwell time of a container can be estimated in many various ways, although most
current methods depend on paperwork, typically filed with a port’s customs office, speci-
fying the estimated pick-up time of a container. This paperwork is sometimes difficult to
obtain, however, and is sometimes filed after a container has already been discharged and
stacked in the yard, meaning that there was no estimated gate-out time available when
the container was stacked. The estimated pick-up time specified in paperwork is not a
guarantee of the actual pick-up time either, and there may be a large variance between
the two.
In order to solve this problem of not being able to easily estimate the dwell time of a
5
==PAGE:16==
1.3 Current Stacking Methods
container, Blockshipping developed AI-Import Dwell Time Prediction (AI-IDP), a ma-
chine learning model based on container terminal data that can estimate the dwell times
of containers in a terminal.
1.2.1
Dwell time and Estimated time of dispatch
The estimated time of dispatch (ETD) of a container can be calculated by adding a
container’s dwell time to the time at which it is discharged (unloaded from the vessel).
Generally speaking, the ETD is the actual value that container terminals would use to
aid in stacking containers, as the a container’s dwell time alone does not give enough
information for stacking. For example, two containers may have the same dwell time, but
a different ETD, indicating that they were discharged at different times.
Although ETD is usually used to describe the estimated time of departure of a vessel,
ETD here describes Estimated Time of Dispatch because this is the terminology used
in the paper A Fuzzy Logic Model for the Container Stacking Problem at Container
Terminals [5], on which many of the experiments in this thesis are based.
1.3
Current Stacking Methods
Many container terminals are controlled by a Terminal Operating System (TOS) that
is used to manage the terminal and provide a platform for berth scheduling, inventory
management, yard planning, and container stacking policies. Many terminals use the
built-in container stacking policy that comes by default with the TOS and do not change
any of the parameters in the stacking policy, which may lead to inefficiencies in how
containers are stacked. Most terminals also rely on the experience and know-how of the
people in charge of the yard in order to organize how the yard is planned and containers
are stacked [1].
Containers are typically stacked based on whether they are import, export, or transship-
ment containers. Some terminals allocate entire blocks for each type of container, while
some terminals allow for stacks of import containers and export containers in the same
block. Import and export containers are almost never mixed in the same stack [1].
Some container ships may discharge thousands of containers at a time, all of which need
to be placed in the yard. Adequate space for these containers must be planned out ahead
of time, and many containers may be shuffled around the yard in order to make space for
incoming containers [1].
Where possible, containers are stacked by dwell-time, but, as mentioned in section 1.2,
this is not usually feasible. Containers are also typically stacked in groups according to
the vessel from which they arrived/on which they will depart. Some containers may be
destined for the same recipient, in which case they will likely be picked up at the same
time, and are thus stacked together [1].
Quay crane scheduling plays a large role in how containers are stacked and placed in the
yard. Containers that are to be loaded onto vessels are typically placed near quay cranes
6
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Current Literature on Stacking Methods
to ensure that they can be loaded quickly, although considerations must be made to en-
sure that the stacks by the cranes do not get too congested [1]. Quay crane scheduling
is not factored into this thesis, however, as it is more pertinent for export and transship-
ment containers.
The distance containers (and thus, more importantly, RTGs and/or cranes) travel also
plays a large role in deciding where to stack containers [1, 6, 5]. However, due to a lack of
geographical detail about container terminals, as well as to limit the scope of the thesis,
distances containers travel in the terminal are not taken into consideration.
1.4
Current Literature on Stacking Methods
1.4.1
Dynamic adjustment of container stacking policy in an
automated container terminal
Taejin Park,Ri Choe,Young Hun Kim, and Kwang Ryel Ryu propose an online search al-
gorithm that dynamically adjusts weights used in their heuristic-based stacking policy [6].
Containers are first assigned to a block, and then a stack in that block based on a weighted
decision criteria heuristic whose weights are dynamically updated. The decision criteria
for the blocks are the short-term workload of a block in a given time interval, and the
future workload of the block in a given time interval, which is estimated using the number
of incoming containers and number of containers in a block.
The decision criteria for stacks are:
• the stacking cost, determined by the distance of a stack to either the quay or gate
and the stacking crane utilization;
• the expected retrieval cost, also given in distance and stacking crane utilization;
• the rehandling cost, which aims to evaluate whether or not the container at the top
of a candidate stack will be retrieved before the incoming container, thus leading
to a reshuffle; and
• the waste of space of a stack, which uses estimated dwell time, stack height, and
the capacity of the terminal to determine whether placing an incoming container
on a candidate stack makes it so that the stack can not be used for a long period
of time.
In experimental results, various combinations of the criteria, including all criteria at once,
are used in stacking policies used to stack containers in the same scenario. The results
show that the combination of all criteria reduce the average delays of quay cranes, while
using just the stacking cost criterion leads to the lowest delays in quay crane operation.
7
==PAGE:18==
1.4 Current Literature on Stacking Methods
Evaluation of applicability of stacking method for this thesis
The various stacking criteria give good insights into the high levels of complexity stack-
ing algorithms can have. The algorithm is too complex to be replicated in this thesis,
given that there are many criteria for which to account when testing, as well as the fact
that there are no data points for many of the criteria outlined in the paper. The main
contribution of this paper to the thesis is the possible inclusion of a criterion to predict
future reshuffles that could result from a container placement, as this criterion led to the
second lowest gate-out delays in experiments.
1.4.2
A Fuzzy Logic Model for the Container Stacking Problem
at Container Terminals
Fuzzy Logic
Before delving into the paper, a short overview of fuzzy logic is necessary.
Fuzzy logic is a mathematical framework for dealing with uncertainty and imprecision. It
was developed in the 1960s by Lotfi Zadeh as a way to represent and manipulate knowl-
edge that is not easily expressed in traditional, binary logic [7].
In traditional logic, propositions are either true or false, and there is no in-between. How-
ever, in many real-world situations, there are degrees of truth or falsity. For example,
when we say that a temperature feels “hot”, it is not a clear-cut definition. Different peo-
ple may have different interpretations of what “hot” means, and the temperature itself
can be measured on a continuous scale.
Fuzzy logic allows us to represent and reason with this kind of imprecise and uncertain
knowledge by using degrees of truth, or “fuzzy” truth values. These truth values can
range between 0 and 1, where 0 represents complete falsity, 1 represents complete truth,
and values in between represent degrees of truth or uncertainty.
Fuzzy logic is particularly useful in applications such as artificial intelligence, control sys-
tems, and decision-making, where the input data may be uncertain or incomplete. Fuzzy
logic systems define membership functions for values and “fuzzify” values by mapping
the concrete value to various degreees of membership in the fuzzy system [8]. Each fuzzy
system has a knowledge base that describes what rules, such as logical connectives from
propositional logic apply. The fuzzy inference engine deduces queried fuzzy output vari-
ables through fuzzy implications and fuzzy rules of inference. These rules are different
to those in propositional logic. In order to obtain a crips value from a fuzzy system, the
output needs to be defuzzified. This is done (in this thesis) by finding the center of area
of the area under the membership functions that has been found by the fuzzy rules of
inference.
8
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Current Literature on Stacking Methods
Overview of paper
Jana Ries, Rosa G. Gonz´alez-Ram´ırez, and Pablo Miranda propose a fuzzy logic model
to address the problem of storage space allocation in a sea port terminal [5]. The overall
model consists of a 2-Phase strategy where the first phase assigns containers to blocks
based on the block’s distance to the gate, and the block utilization. Blocks are assigned
a Value of Goodness (VoG) based on these two parameters, with blocks that are both
close to the gate and have low block utilization considered the best possible blocks for
the container.
Phase 2 then assigns the container to a stack within the chosen block.
Similarly to
blocks, stacks are assigned VoGs based on the stack height and the Estimated time of
dispatching (ETD) of the container on the top of the stack (similar to the dwell-time of
the container). The ETD is a normalized difference between the dispatch time of the
current container that is being assigned to the block and the container on the top of a
candidate stack, and gives a value between 0 and 1 where values larger than 0.5 indicate
that the incoming container is estimated to be dispatched before the container on top of
the candidate stack, and values lower than 0.5 indicate the opposite.
When containers are retrieved from a stack to be discharged, any containers in the stack
above the container to be discharged go through the same two phases of stacking, with
an altered Phase I, where, instead of the distance of the block to the gate, the distance
between the container’s current block and a candidate block is used in the VoG calcula-
tion.
The fuzzy logic model is compared to other various stacking strategies, such as a random
stacking of containers, a levelling strategy where containers are assigned to the lowest
stack in the yard, and a Less Difference Time (LDT) strategy that focuses on minimizing
the difference in ETD between incoming containers and containers on the tops of stacks.
The results show that for low congestions (starting with an empty yard) the fuzzy model
outperforms the other models in terms of distance traveled by the containers and reshuf-
fles. At higher congestions of 50%, the fuzzy logic model is again the best performing
model, but has lower consistency compared to the levelling algorithm. At high congestion
(80% of the capacity of the terminal is occupied at the start of the experiment) the LDT
strategy performs best, followed by the fuzzy logic model.
An important aspect of this paper is that the simulation is based on a real-life container
terminal, which means that replicating this model gives a good reproduction of a potential
use case for AI-IDP.
Evaluation of applicability of stacking method for this thesis
The fuzzy logic model proposed by Ries et al. appears to perform well and lends itself
well to this thesis because it includes the ETD, stack height, and block utilization metrics,
all of which are easily calculated from available data. The block-gate, and block-block
distances are not available for this thesis, though, and cannot easily be incorporated into
the the final algorithm implemented into the thesis due to a lack of data, and would
either need to be omitted or replaced with another metric in the final implementation.
9
==PAGE:20==
1.4 Current Literature on Stacking Methods
The LDT, and levelling algorithms proposed in the paper are also good algorithms against
which to compare the algorithm presented in this thesis, and a dynamic algorithm that
varies its stacking strategy based on congestion could be worth considering, given the
results of the fuzzy logic paper.
10
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Problem Statement and Test Setup
2.1
Blockshipping AI-IDP
Blockshipping AI-IDP is an AI solution that uses machine learning to estimate how long
a container will stay in a container terminal (a container’s dwell time), more precisely,
the amount of time between when a container is discharged from a ship, to when it exits
the terminal either through the gate by truck, the quay by barge, or the rail yard by
train.
An overview of Blockshipping’s AI-IDP can be seen in the following image:
Figure 2.1.1: Blockshipping AI-IDP overview [9]
11
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Terminal Model
2.1.1
Basic Model overview
The type of AI model used in AI-IDP varies from terminal to terminal, depending on
which model predicts dwell times with the highest accuracy. For the purposes of this
thesis, it can be abstracted as a black box that takes in information about a container or
batch of containers, and returns a predicted dwell time for that/those containers.
Given that the model is a machine learning model, it comes with a certain accuracy
ascribed to each prediction.
The extent to which the dwell time prediction accuracy
improves the efficiency of a terminal, though, is unknown, so this thesis was conceived to
discover that efficiency gain, and at which dwell time prediction accuracies that efficiency
emerges.
2.1.2
Integration of AI-IDP into thesis
This thesis does not use “live” predictions from the model, rather, it uses simulated data
for a container terminal. Using the live model would be expensive and may impair the
models that are currently in production. Thus, dwell time predictions are simulated as
described in section 2.4.1.
2.2
Terminal Model
A simulated terminal has been created with variable amounts of blocks, rows per block,
and amount of containers that can be placed in each stack.
The model can be created empty, meaning that there are no containers present in the
terminal at the start of the simulation, or with a preset number of containers in the yard
at the start of the simulation. Containers can be pre-allocated to each block and stacked
individually to refine the amount of congestion to be simulated, and, potentially, to ar-
tificially create “hotspots” of congestion in the terminal to evaluate how each stacking
method performs with uneven congestion in the yard.
The model keeps track of the number of containers in the yard, the stack heights, the
block utilization, the number of reshuffles per stack/block/overall, and the overall uti-
lization of the yard.
Container activity is simulated by creating a “scenario”.
Each scenario consists of a
user-chosen amount of containers that will pass through a terminal as well as the initial
layout of the terminal. Containers are given a random name and time, or step, at which
the container will enter the yard as well as a random dwell-time, in steps, that deter-
mines how long the container will sit in the yard. In addition, each container is given a
simulated dwell-time, described in 2.4.1, which is then added to the incoming step and
given to the AI as the estimated time of dispatch that is “predicted” for the container.
Containers are moved in and out of the terminal by the stacking AIs according to the in
and out times defined previously, but the AIs use the simulated dispatch times to inform
12
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Software Description and Development
their stacking decisions. Scenarios are stored as JSON files for ease of reuse
The number of steps, containers, and maximum/minimum dwell times of the containers
can be specified when creating a scenario. A scenario ends when there are no more moves
out to be made.
Containers are assumed to be uniform, i.e. all containers have the same size, can be
stacked anywhere in the yard, and are all import-dry containers.
2.3
Software Description and Development
The terminal model was implemented entirely in Python. The main considerations when
implementing the model were: ensuring that the implementation of the terminal in code
would accurately reflect the physical layout of a real-life terminal; creating JSON output
files that would accurately reflect the movements of containers in and out of the terminal,
and give information about container locations; and easy “one-click” running of experi-
ments.
ProbLog, a probabilistic extension to the Prolog programming language [10], was orig-
inally considered as the programming language in which the stacking AIs (outlined in
section section 3.1) would be written. ProbLog allows for adding probabilistic facts (such
as the estimated gate-out time of a container is 30 hours from now, with a 20% chance)
which, in conjunction with facts about the terminal layout and container locations, would
allow for queries to be performed on the optimal location for a container to be placed.
Using ProbLog, however, proved to be infeasible in the scope of this thesis as it would
require re-writing much of the already-implemented terminal logic in ProbLog, and creat-
ing a method by which to run ProbLog code from Python. In early tests of using ProbLog
as the programming language to write the stacking AIs, the “compounding effect of low
dwell time prediction accuracies” described in subsection 3.3.4 was first identified as a
factor in the overall performance of the stacking AIs.
Originally, the thesis was intended to be conducted on real data from a maritime termi-
nal. In order to do this, container data from the past two to three years of the terminal’s
activity would have been parsed to infer the layout of the terminal and create a model
terminal from the real-life data. Statistics about the terminal’s container dwell times
would also have been available, from which an idea about the possible ranges of dwell
times and average container dwell times could be used to better inform the stacking AIs.
Overall, the implemented code consists of around 2000 lines of Python code. The code
is divided into various classes for generating scenarios, modeling the terminal, running
the stacking AI, and generating graphs and LaTeX-formatted tables of results. JSON
files were chosen as intermediate data files for scenarios and results, so that the scenario
generation, test running, and results generation could be run independently.
The ScenarioGenerator class was designed to be as tunable as possible, with various pa-
13
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Software Description and Development
rameters such as the number of blocks, rows, and stacks, as well as the stack height,
simulation duration, number of replicate tests, target dwell time prediction accuracies,
and initial congestions all being modifiable. Two functions were also implemented to
simulate bulk discharges of containers, and waves of container discharges.
The terminal model consists of the main Terminal class, which contains Block, Row, and
Stack subclasses. Although the Block and Row classes could be removed, and the func-
tionality of the Terminal class with only Stack subclasses would essentially remain the
same, the intermediate classes were kept for potential future insights, such as number of
container reshuffles and capacity utilization, on specific blocks and rows.
The stacking AIs are all individual classes, each with an implementation of the function
move(step) which takes in the current step of a simulation, removes all the containers
to be gated out, and places each “discharged” container into the yard according to the
stacking AI’s logic. Each stacking AI also has a method by which it can dump all of its
container movements to a JSON log file, which is then processed by the results generators.
Results are generated from the stacking AI container movement logs. Graphs like those
seen in section 3.2 are generated, with the average relocation ratio of all replicate tests for
a given dwell time prediction accuracy, plotted against dwell time prediction accuracy.
LaTeX formatted tables are also generated for each stacking AI, detailing the average
relocation ratio, its standard deviation, and the average maximum block utilization, and
its standard deviation. The average maximum block utilization is a statistic that was
expected to give more information than it does. It seems the maximum block utilization
typically peaks at the beginning of experiments, when most containers are initially added
to the terminal. The statistic was kept because future test configurations may lead to
more varied maximum block utilizations, and the value can give some insight to how
evenly a stacking AI stacks containers around the yard.
A potential addition to the code would be to add a method by which to visualize the
movements of containers with 3D graphics. Test implementations were made using Mat-
plotlib [11] voxel arrays, and JavaScript 3D graphics. However, due to the lack of time
when running experiments and writing the thesis, the feature of visualizing the container
movements was dropped. Having this visualization would give a clear insight into the
manner in which the stacking AIs place containers in the terminal, and would be a good
future addition to this project.
All experiments were run on a computer with 32 GB of RAM and an Intel i7-10750H
processor. Generating scenarios, running experiments, and generating results sequentially
takes around 1 hour per congestion rate, running 10 dwell time prediction accuracies, and
10 replicate tests per scenario on this hardware.
14
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Testing
2.4
Testing
A variety of scenarios has been used to test the stacking AIs on a model terminal in order
to assess the impact of dwell time accuracy on the model terminal’s efficiency. The model
terminal is a terminal with a maximum stacking height of 6, with 5 stacks per row, and
5 rows per block. 5 blocks are used in total for a maximum capacity of 750 containers.
The various tests are described in this section.
2.4.1
Test setup
Each stacking AI is given a copy of the model terminal on which to perform the actions
of moving containers in and out of the model terminal. Each scenario, described be-
low, generates a dictionary with the initial terminal layout, and moves in and out to be
performed by the AIs in each step. The Fuzzy Logic and LDT AIs use the simulated
estimated time of dispatch of a container (provided in the moves dictionary) to aid in
decision-making. The simulated estimated times of dispatch of containers are calculated
as described in the next section. Each stacking AI generates a python dictionary with
the average relocation ratio across all ten tests for a given scenario, as well as the average
peak block utilization across all blocks in the terminal, throughout the ten tests.
The relocation ratio for a given test is calculated as follows, and is the same as what is
done in the Fuzzy Logic paper [5]:
Reloc. ratio(r) =
Reloc. moves
Reloc. moves + effective moves
(2.1)
Where relocation moves consist, essentially, of counting each container that is reshuffled,
and effective moves are moves in which containers are stacked in, and removed from, the
model terminal.
Each step is modeled to be an hour, meaning that a dwell time of 90 steps, indicates that
a container will sit in the terminal for 90 hours.
A note on 110%
Because a dwell time prediction with an accuracy of 100% ±48 hours
does not indicate that the predicted dwell time will be the actual dwell time, the 110%
notation has been created to indicate that the predicted dwell time is the actual dwell
time of a container.
Simulation of Dwell Times
Because “live” predictions of dwell time are not available, as explained in section 2.1,
dwell times are predicted by attempting to reverse engineer the definition of the AI-IDP
dwell time accuracy.
A possible dwell time accuracy could be something like: 50% accurate within ±48 hours,
meaning that 50% of the time a dwell time prediction is made, it will be within ±48
hours of the actual dwell time of the container. To be able to replicate this accuracy, a
15
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Testing
“lottery” of sorts is devised, as described below:
In the scenario in which, for example, an estimated well time is given as 90 hours with an
accuracy of 50%±48 hours, 10,000 chances of choosing the correct dwell time would be
spread evenly between 90 −48, and 90 + 48 hours, so each dwell time between 42 hours
and 136 hours has approximately 104 chances of being the dwell time chosen. Because
the accuracy is 50%, that means that for the dwell times between 42 and 136 hours to
constitute 50% of the total chances, there needs to be a total of 20,000 chances. These
remaining 10,000 chances are then spread within ±5 days of the extremes of the previous
dwell time range, so 42 hours - 5 days (absolute minimum dwell time), and 136 hours +
5 days (absolute maximum dwell time).
Because 42 hours - 5 days is a negative dwell time, which is not possible, the absolute
minimum dwell time the container could have is set to 1. The ratio of possible dwell time
ranges between the absolute minimum dwell time and the lower bound of the 50% dwell
time range, and the upper bound of the 50% dwell time range and the absolute maximum
dwell time is then used to decide how many of the remaining 10,000 chances to allocate
to each range. For this example, that means that 42 −1 = 41 bins are on the ’left’ of the
dwell time range, and 256 −136 = 120 bins are on the ’right’ of the dwell time range, so
41/120 = 0.3417, ⌊0.3417 ∗10, 000⌋= 3416 chances are allocated between and including
1 and 41, and 10, 000 −3416 = 6584 chances are allocated between and including 137
and 256. Each dwell time between 1 and 41 then has 3416/42 = 81.3 chances of being
chosen as the dwell time, and each dwell time between 256 and 137 has 6584/120 = 54.87
changes of being chosen as the dwell time.
In practice, a random value generator is used to generate a list of values to evenly generate
these distributions, so the actual allocations of chances is slightly uneven. Each list of
values is joined, and the scenario generator chooses a dwell time randomly from the list.
A graphical representation of the above scenario is shown below in a histogram of a
generated list of possible dwell times.
16
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Testing
0
50
100
150
200
250
dwell time
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Chances of being picked (out of 2000)
avg. = 83
avg. = 103
avg. = 55
Histogram of array generated by scenario for dwell time of 90
50% chance between 
 42 and 136 hours
Figure 2.4.1: 50% of chances are randomly distributed between dwell times 42 and 120
This same process is repeated every time a simulated dwell time is given to a container.
The process ensures that the simulated dwell time adheres to the dwell time range given
by the prediction and assumes that the AI-IDP prediction is always correct within ±6
days. This assumption is in line with the results of the AI-IDP model. The process does
not assume any “shape” of the distribution of possible predicted dwell times, i.e that
they are normally distributed, for example.
Fuzzy Logic Paper Test Replicate
In order to have a baseline against which to compare the results of the stacking AIs
performance, and to gauge how the AI would perform compared to another test run on
data similar to real-life data, a replicate test of the test run in the Fuzzy logic paper was
conducted, with the number of containers entering the model terminal scaled relative to
the size of the terminal in the Fuzzy logic paper.
Three hundred scenarios were created in total: Each initial congestion rate (0%, 50%, and
80%) has one-hundred scenarios consisting of ten base scenarios, each created with dwell
time prediction accuracies between 10% and 110% (see section 2.4.1) in 10% increments.
This ensures that each test of dwell time accuracy has ten replicate tests from which to
draw an average of relocation moves and block utilizations.
A summary of the scenarios that were created can be found below, with the initial number
of containers present in the terminal, the number of containers that were added, and the
17
==PAGE:28==
2.4 Testing
rate at which they were added. A rate of five hours/container indicates that a container
was added every five hours. These numbers are scaled from the tests run in the Fuzzy
logic paper.
Initial Congestion
0%
50%
80%
Initial n. containes
0
375
600
n. containers added
535
158
158
rate (hours/container)
1
5
5
Table 2.4.1: Summary of generated scenarios
Periodically Incoming Vessels Test
Another test was run to simulate vessels periodically arriving at the terminal and dis-
charging a large batch of containers at once. An overlap of 96 hours in the dwell times of
the vessels’ discharged containers was added to stress the dwell time prediction accuracy’s
impact on the efficiency of the terminal. The initial congestion of the terminal in each
test is always 0%.
Five waves of containers, each consisting of 100 containers discharged at once, arrive every
192 hours, with each dispatched container having a possible estimated time of dispatch
within 288 hours of being discharged. This is better seen in the following graph:
0
200
400
600
800
1000
ETD
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of containers added to terminal 
 at start of wave
overlap 
 in wave
Containers added per wave and estimated times of dispatch
Figure 2.4.2: Waves of containers, each with 100 containers are added in waves, with an
overlap of 4 days between waves
Each scenario consists of ten tests, each modified for each dwell time prediction accuracy
between 10% and 110% (see section 2.4.1) in 10% increments, for a total of 100 tests.
18
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Proposed Solution and Evaluation
3.1
Chosen Stacking Policies
In order to test the impact of dwell time prediction accuracy on container terminal ef-
ficiency, four different stacking policies were selected for testing: A fuzzy logic stacking
policy based on the paper outlined in subsection 1.4.2, a simple stacking policy that
stacks containers purely by dwell time, a stacking policy that attempts to maintain even
stack heights in the terminal, and a stacking policy that randomly assigns containers to
stacks.
These stacking policies were chosen because they provide a gradation of dependence on
dwell time. The stacking policy that stacks purely based on dwell time should, in theory,
be the most affected by the change in dwell time prediction accuracy, and serves as a
direct indicator for the effect of the change in dwell time prediction accuracy on stacking
efficiency. The fuzzy logic stacking policy, although it makes use of a container’s dwell
time when deciding where to stack it, is not entirely affected by a change in dwell time
accuracy, and thus serves as an intermediate indicator for evaluating stacking policies
that factor dwell time into their stacking logic. The leveling stacking policy is wholly
unaffected by the dwell time prediction accuracy, and provides an indicator of how a
semi-efficient stacking policy fares in a given test, providing context for the results of
the dwell time and fuzzy logic policies. The random stacking policy serves as a baseline
indicator for the three other stacking policies and is also unaffected by the change in
dwell time prediction accuracy.
The four stacking policies are described in further detail below:
3.1.1
Fuzzy Logic Stacking Policy
The fuzzy logic paper outlined in subsection 1.4.2 was chosen as the basis for the fuzzy
logic stacking policy. The main differences between this policy and the one outlined in
the paper are that the block allocation phase does not include block-gate distances, and
the fuzzy variable for stack height has been altered to account for the higher stacking
height used in the terminal model. Due to there being no distance metric, the relocation
phase uses the same fuzzy logic policy as in Phase I.
19
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Chosen Stacking Policies
The decision-making for the fuzzy logic stacking policy has also been altered so that
empty stacks are prioritized in situations in which the terminal has empty stacks avail-
able.
Block Allocation Phase
The method by which input variables and output variables are fuzzified for the block-
allocation phase is outlined below:
Variable
Subset
Min
Med
Max
input variables
block utilization
Low
0
0
0.4
block utilization
Medium
0.1
0.5
0.9
block utilization
High
0.6
1
1
output variables
block VoG
Low
0
0
0.4
block VoG
Medium
0.1
0.5
0.9
block VoG
High
0.6
1
1
The block utilization is given by the amount of containers in a block, divided by the
block’s total capacity. The membership functions derived from the fuzzified input and
output variables are as follows:
20
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Chosen Stacking Policies
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
0.0
0.5
1.0
μ(x)
block_utilization
Low
Medium
High
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
0.0
0.5
1.0
μ(x)
block_VoG
Low
Medium
High
Membership functi ns μμx) Bl ck Assingment
Figure 3.1.1: Fuzzy logic membership functions for determining a block’s VoG when
assigning containers to a block
Stack Allocation Phase
The method by which input variables and output variables are fuzzified for the stack-
allocation phase is outlined below:
Variable
Subset
Min
Med
Max
input variables
Stack height
Low
0
0
0.4
Stack height
Medium
0.1
0.5
0.9
Stack height
High
0.6
1
1
ETD
Earlier
0.0
0.0
0.6
ETD
Later
0.4
1
1
output variables
stack VoG
Low
0
0
0.4
stack VoG
Medium
0.1
0.5
0.9
stack VoG
High
0.6
1
1
The stack height is determined by the number of containers in a given stack, and the
ETD is calculated as outlined in Figure 3.1.1.The membership functions derived from the
fuzzified input and output variables are as follows:
21
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Chosen Stacking Policies
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x
0
1
μ(x)
stack_height
Low
Medium
High
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
0
1
μ(x)
ETD
Earlier
Later
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
0
1
μ(x)
stack_VoG
Small
Medium
High
Membership functions μ(x) Stack Assingment
Figure 3.1.2: Fuzzy logic membership functions for determining a stack’s VoG when
assigning containers to a stack
Reshuffled Containers Allocation Phase
When removing containers from a stack, the terminal removes all the reshuffled containers
above the removed container, if there are any, to the fuzzy logic stacking AI for re-
allocation. Containers that have been reshuffled but are due to be gated out in the given
step are not re-allocated to a stack.
Overall Stacking Policy Logic
The overall outline for deciding a suitable stack to which to allocate a container is as
follows:
22
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Chosen Stacking Policies
Figure 3.1.3: Decision diagram in each step for FuzzyLogic stacking AI
Implementation in code
The code used to implement the Fuzzy Logic AI’s fuzzy logic was taken and slightly
modified from Carmel Gafa’s [12] implementation of type 2 fuzzy logic. The code can be
found at Carmel Gafa’s GitHub page linked here and in the bibliography [13].
23
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Chosen Stacking Policies
ETD calculation
The function used to calculate the ETD input variable for the fuzzy logic stack assignment
phase takes in the difference between the estimated time of dispatch of the incoming con-
tainer and the estimated time of dispatch of the container at the top of a candidate stack.
The difference is then normalized to the highest estimated time of dispatch generated by
the scenario. The function is as follows:
ETD(ETD difference) =

0.5
highest ETD ∗ETD difference

+ 0.5
(3.1)
The function changes for each scenario because it is dependent on the highest ETD of a
given scenario. The graph of the function for a scenario that has a highest ETD of 200
is shown below:
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
ETD difference (steps)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ETD value
ETD value as a function of ETD difference
Figure 3.1.4: ETD difference to ETD fuzzy input variable for a maximum estimated time of
dispatch of 200 steps
This formula ensures that the ETD value used by the fuzzy logic stack assignment policy
is always greater than 0.5 when the estimated time of dispatch of an incoming container is
higher than that of the top container of a candidate stack, and less than 0.5 in the opposite
case. It also ensures that the difference is normalized to the highest possible estimated
time of dispatch so that the difference in estimated times of dispatch is proportional to
the overall length of the scenario.
24
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Test Results
3.1.2
LDT Stacking Policy
The LDT stacking policy is the policy that is most directly affected by the change in
dwell time accuracy. This policy stacks containers by their difference in estimated time
of dispatch. The LDT stacking AI finds the minimum difference in estimated times of
dispatch of the incoming container and the top container of a candidate stack by calculat-
ing the difference in estimated times of dispatch for all stacks. If the minimum difference
found is less than 0, the incoming container is allocated to the stack corresponding to that
minimum difference. If the minimum difference found is greater than 0 (meaning that
all stacks have top containers estimated to be dispatched before the incoming container’s
estimated dispatch time), however, the stacking AI attempts to place the incoming con-
tainer into a randomly chosen empty stack. If there are no empty stacks in the terminal,
the stacking AI then places the incoming container randomly among the highest stacks
in the terminal.
In the event that containers are reshuffled when removing a container from the termi-
nal, they are reshuffled “in-place” by removing the outgoing container and shifting all
containers on top of it down one space in the stack.
3.1.3
Levelling and Random Stacking Policies
These two stacking policies are not at all influenced by container dwell times.
The Levelling stacking AI stacks containers by placing all incoming containers randomly
among the stacks in the terminal with the fewest amount of containers. If all stacks have
the same amount of containers, then a stack is chosen at random. The overall objective
of this stacking policy is to ensure consistent stack heights in the terminal.
The Random random stacking AI stacks containers randomly among all available stacks.
In the event that containers are reshuffled when the Levelling and Random AIs remove
a container from the terminal, the reshuffled containers are reshuffled “in-place” by re-
moving the outgoing container and shifting all containers on top of it down one space in
the stack.
3.2
Test Results
Each test has been run using each stacking AI described in section 3.1. The results consist
of the average relocation ratio calculated for each of the ten replicate tests run on each
scenario and the standard deviations of those averages, as well as the average peak block
utilizations in each scenario and the standard deviations of those averages.
The average peak block utilizations did not vary much between AIs among tests, although
they do provide an indication of the stacking AIs propensity to distribute containers
around the terminal. The Fuzzy Logic AI and Levelling AI tended to have lower peak
block utilizations than the other two AIs. These results, along with the full results of all
25
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Test Results
tests conducted can be found in Appendix A. The full results are not discussed here as the
relocation ratios of the Random and Levelling AIs remain relatively constant with dwell
time prediction accuracy as the AIs do not use dwell time predictions in their stacking
policies.
Fuzzy Logic Paper Test Replicate
0% congestion
The results are in line with the results from the fuzzy logic paper.
The average relocation ratios are higher for this test, likely because all the moves that
are simulated are import-dry containers, while the fuzzy logic paper includes containers
that are not import-dry, increasing the amount of total moves and thus decreasing the
relocation ratio. This is true for all results from simulations run in these tests.
Figure 3.2.1: Average relocation ratios for all AIs
It can be seen that the relocation ratios decrease a lot with an increase in dwell time
accuracy for the LDT and Fuzzy AIs. The LDT AI, which is wholly dependent on the
estimated time of dispatch of containers, increases in efficiency dramatically as the dwell
time accuracy increases. The Fuzzy Logic AI increases in efficiency at a slower rate, as
it uses other inputs other than the dwell time to choose stacking locations.
The Fuzzy Logic AI performs worse than the Levelling AI for dwell time prediction ac-
curacies below 20%, but quickly overtakes the Levelling AI and continuously increases in
26
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Test Results
efficiency as the dwell time prediction accuracy increases.
The LDT AI performs worse than the Levelling AI and Fuzzy Logic AIs for the majority
of dwell time prediction accuracies, only overtaking the Levelling AI in efficiency around
the 80% dwell time prediction accuracy mark. The LDT AI, however, is the most efficient
AI when the exact estimated times of dispatch are given, surpassing even the Fuzzy Logic
AI in efficiency.
The Random and Levelling AIs’ efficiency remains constant with increases in dwell time
prediction accuracy, which is expected, given that they do not use dwell time to allocate
containers to stacks.
The relocation ratios for the Fuzzy Logic AI and LDT AI are shown in more detail below:
Figure 3.2.2: Average relocation ratio and errors for the Fuzzy Logic AI
The efficiency of the Fuzzy Logic AI seems to increase linearly with respect to dwell time
prediction accuracy. The overall increase in terminal efficiency between 20% and 100%
dwell time accuracy is from a average relocation ratio of 0.097 to 0.023, or approximately
a 76% increase in efficiency. On average, a 10% increase in dwell time prediction accuracy
results in a 4.5% to 23% increase in efficiency, for an average of around 14% efficiency
gains per 10% increase in dwell time prediction accuracy. It should be noted, though,
that due to the errors in the results, and the overall small numbers, these percentages of
27
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Test Results
increase in efficiency should be taken with a grain of salt and are likely not completely
accurate to what would be observed in real life.
Figure 3.2.3: Average relocation ratio and errors for the LDT AI
The efficiency of the LDT AI seems to increase quadratically with respect to dwell time
prediction accuracy. The LDT AI performs relatively inefficiently at low dwell time pre-
diction accuracies, but quickly picks up in efficiency as dwell time prediction accuracy
increases. This could likely be caused by a compounding effect of the dwell time pre-
diction accuracy, in that each choice of allocation of a stack includes two dwell time
predictions, whose accuracies are effectively multiplied for the overall accuracy of stack
choice. As dwell time prediction accuracy increases, the overall stack choice accuracy
increases by a power of two.
The graphs for the Random and Levelling AIs can be found in section A. They are
not described here, nor in the following sections because they remain more or less stable
with dwell time prediction accuracy. Variations in efficiency can be attributed to the
randomness of container stacking.
50% congestion
The results for the 50% initial congestion indicate that, as congestion
increases in the terminal, the effect of increased dwell time prediction accuracy on the
efficiency of the terminal is greatly reduced, except for the LDT AI, where the above-
28
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Test Results
mentioned compounding effect of dwell time prediction accuracy starts increasing the
overall effect of the dwell time prediction accuracy.
Figure 3.2.4: Average relocation ratios for all AIs
The Fuzzy Logic, Levelling, and Random AIs all seem to perform more or less steadily
with respect to dwell time prediction accuracy, with the Levelling AI far outperforming
the other AIs until the LDT AI nears the Levelling AI’s efficiency when exact estimated
times of dispatch are known.
The large amount of containers already present in the terminal likely impacts the Fuzzy
Logic and LDT AIs in that there is a large amount of containers whose location has not
been chosen by the AIs which impedes their ability to have an impact on the overall
efficiency of the terminal.
The LDT AI begins increasing in efficiency around the 80% dwell time prediction accuracy
mark, but is still not as efficient in stacking containers as the Levelling AI.
29
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Test Results
Figure 3.2.5: Average relocation ratio and errors for the LDT AI
80% congestion
This test ends up being a comparison of the stacking policies, rather
than a direct evaluation of the impact of dwell time prediction accuracy. Overall, all
stacking AIs performed poorly with respect to how they performed at lower congestion
rates, which is to be expected given the high initial congestion, and many randomly
stacked containers that need to be picked through when retrieving containers.
30
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Test Results
Figure 3.2.6: Average relocation ratios for all AIs
All stacking AIs remain relatively constant in terms of terminal efficiency. Here, the
Fuzzy Logic AI vastly outperforms all other AIs. This is likely due to the fact that the
Fuzzy Logic AI has the ability to decide where to place reshuffled containers and thus
can spread containers around the terminal, redistributing and evening stack heights and
likely leading to fewer container reshuffles therefore.
31
==PAGE:42==
3.2 Test Results
Figure 3.2.7: Average relocation ratio and errors for the LDT AI
The LDT increases very slightly in efficiency over the entire span of dwell time prediction
accuracies assessed, but the errors on the results are high relative to the overall increase
in efficiency, so this result should not be relied upon too heavily, although the pattern
appears to be there.
Periodically Incoming Vessels Test
These tests are meant to simulate multiple vessels arriving at a terminal over the course
of several weeks. Because they all begin with an initial congestion rate of 0, the perfor-
mance is comparable to that of the 0% congestion rate mentioned in the previous section.
All the relocation ratios for each AI are lower compared to their respective relocation
ratios in the 0% congestion rate test outlined in the previous section. This can likely be
attributed to the fact that a) fewer containers were added to the terminal overall, and b)
those containers had proportionally higher possible dwell time ranges.
32
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Test Results
Figure 3.2.8: Average relocation ratios for all AIs
We can see that once again the LDT AI’s efficiency increases dramatically with increasing
dwell time prediction accuracy. Overall the LDT AI performs worse than the Levelling
AI, beating it only when the exact dwell time is known. Just like in the 0% congestion test
in the previous section, the Fuzzy Logic AI starts performing better than the Levelling
AI around the 20% dwell time prediction accuracy mark.
33
==PAGE:44==
3.2 Test Results
Figure 3.2.9: Average relocation ratio and errors for the Fuzzy Logic AI
Compared to the performance in the 0% congestion rate test in the previous section, the
Fuzzy Logic AI’s performance in this test seems to logarithmically increase in efficiency.
This could be due to the fact that as the efficiency of the terminal increases, there are only
so many efficiency gains to be made at higher dwell time prediction accuracies, and that
the returns in efficiency between higher accuracies are comparatively lower than those
between lower accuracies. The largest changes in efficiency gain, in fact, are between 10%
and 20%, and 20 and 30% dwell time prediction accuracy.
The errors on the average relocation ratios are also much larger at lower percentages of
dwell time prediction accuracy, indicating far more variation in efficiency those accuracies,
while as dwell time prediction accuracies increase, the errors decrease, indicating more
consistency in the results.
34
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Evaluation
Figure 3.2.10: Average relocation ratio and errors for the LDT AI
Once again, the efficiency of the LDT AI seems to increase quadratically, albeit much
less so than for the 0% initiall congestion test. This discrepancy between the 0% initial
congestion and the “wave” scenrio is likely due to the periodic nature of the incoming
containers, leading to inefficiencies in how containers are stacked when waves overlap.
3.3
Evaluation
Several key insights from the test results can be explored to understand how dwell time
prediction accuracy impacts container terminal efficiency. In brief, the impact of dwell
time prediction accuracy mainly depends on: how much of a factor a container’s estimated
time of dispatch plays in a stacking policy’s choice of assigning the container to a stack;
What percentage of the containers in the yard are import containers (are given a dwell
time prediction); the amount of congestion in the terminal; and the dwell time prediction
accuracy itself, due to the observed compounding nature of lower dwell time prediction
accuracies. There are other factors at play, which are also discussed in the last subsection
of this section.
35
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Evaluation
3.3.1
Stacking Policy
The stacking policies used by the stacking AIs had a very large effect on the overall effi-
ciency of the terminals they controlled. This was evident in scenarios with high rates of
congestion, where the impact of the dwell time prediction accuracy was negligible com-
pared to how stacking policies choose stacks in which to put containers. The Levelling
AI performed consistently well compared to the Fuzzy Logic AI for a large range of dwell
time prediction accuracies, and generally outperformed the LDT AI, except for at very
high dwell time prediction accuracies in scenarios with low congestion rates.
The LDT AI, which was solely reliant on the dwell time prediction for stacking containers
generally performed worse than the Fuzzy Logic and Levelling AIs, and even worse than
the random AI in certain cases. The relative increases in efficiency of the LDT AI as
the dwell time prediction accuracies increased was remarkable, hovever, compared to the
increases in efficiency shown by the Fuzzy Logic AI.
The Fuzzy Logic AI seemed to hit the “sweet-spot” between the Levelling and LDT AIs,
in that it was not overly reliant on the dwell time for stacking containers, yet took the
dwell time into consideration. It also had some stack height and block utilization metrics
in order to level out containers like the Levelling AI did. Even though, compared to
the LDT AI, the Fuzzy Logic AI did not see as much improvement in efficiency with
increasing dwell time prediction accuracies, the Fuzzy Logic AI overall performed very
well.
This is likely due to the fact that the fuzzy logic AI’s “medium” range for its
stack height membership function quickly decreases between stack heights of three and
four, which highly discourages the AI from stacking containers higher than three/four
containers high in the yard, and promotes looking for shorter stacks, thus leveling out
the containers it places in the yard.
Stacking policies that are overly reliant on dwell time predictions, although make great
efficiency gains as the accuracy of those predictions increase, do not perform better,
on average, than stacking policies that do not factor dwell time into their container
placement decisions at all, or, in addition to dwell time, rely on other metrics such as
block utilization and stack height for their decision making.
3.3.2
Percentage of Import containers
The impact of dwell time prediction accuracy has only been evaluated in the context of
a model terminal that only handles import-dry containers that can be considered homo-
geneous, i.e that they can all be stacked on top of each other in any order, and can be
stacked in any location in the yard.
Terminals with higher ratios of export and transshipment containers, that make more
moves overall other than just import moves, will likely see lower rates of efficiency gains,
purely based on the fact that import-dry container moves constitute a lower percentage
of their moves and thus an increase of efficiency in just import-dry container allocation
will be less impactful overall.
36
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Evaluation
Regardless, any increase in efficiency should be welcome, given the high costs involved in
operating a maritime terminal.
3.3.3
Congestion Rate in the Terminal
The congestion rate of a terminal has a large effect on the increase in efficiency of the
terminal due to increased dwell time prediction accuracy. From the 0%, 50%, and 80%
initial congestion rate tests conducted on the model terminals, it is evident that the
Fuzzy Logic and LDT AIs saw fewer gains in efficiency as dwell time prediction accuracy
increased. This was most noteable in the LDT AI, which, in the 0% initial congestion
scenario, went from an efficiency gain of an average relocation rate of 0.147 at 10% accu-
racy down to an average relocation rate of 0.007 when the exact dwell time was known,
to similar average relocation rates of 0.324 down to 0.308 at 50% initial congestion, and
0.454 down to 0.447 at 80% initial congestion.
A possible explanation for this decrease in effectiveness of increased dwell time predic-
tion accuracy at higher congestion rates could be that the sheer volume of containers
necessitates a large amount of container reshuffles, and any efficiency gains by stacking
containers more efficiently are diluted.
An important factor to consider is that the containers present at the beginning of the
scenario have not been stacked by the AIs, and are therefore not stacked according to a
policy that takes advantage of knowing a container’s dwell time. If these containers had
all been initially placed into the terminal by the AI, and then allowed for the simulation
to run, the relocation rates would likely have been lower.
This factor could be an important thing to consider when potentially rolling out a new
stacking policy that uses dwell time accuracy in real life - If there is a large amount of
containers already present in the yard when the stacking policy is introduced, there may
be short-term efficiency losses as the stacking policy takes effect.
3.3.4
Dwell time prediction accuracy
As was evidenced in the 0% initial test, stacking AIs, such as the LDT AI, that are overly
reliant on dwell time predictions for making stacking decisions, may suffer from ineffi-
ciencies caused by the compounding effect of low dwell time prediction accuracies, due to
the fact that choosing a stack requires two dwell times, whose accuracies are effectively
multiplied together when choosing the correct location.
Low dwell time accuracies compound to give low efficiencies if overly used, so stacking
policies that factor dwell times into their decisions to a lower extent can benefit from
dwell time predictions with lower accuracies, as evidenced by the Fuzzy Logic AI, while
stacking policies that factor dwell times to a larger extent, such as the LDT AI, contrarily,
are disadvantaged at low dwell time prediction accuracies.
When choosing a stacking policy that makes use of dwell time in making decisions, the
37
==PAGE:48==
3.3 Evaluation
accuracy of the prediction should be factored into the decision, with more weight being
placed on dwell time if the prediction accuracy is high, and less weight if the dwell time
prediction is low.
3.3.5
Other Factors
The Fuzzy Logic AI seems to have greatly benefited by the ability to re-allocate reshuffled
containers, especially in the 80% initial congestion scenario, outperforming all other AIs
significantly. Although this is likely common practice in terminals, additional gains in
efficiency are likely when reshuffling containers by dwell time accuracy.
38
==PAGE:49==
Further Development and
Conclusion
The fuzzy logic stacking AI does not take into account the dwell time accuracy when
stacking containers, which could possibly lead to improved results. Creating a stack-
ing algorithm that is ’aware’ of a high or low accuracy would mean that the algorithm
would be more attuned to the uncertainty that a low accuracy poses. This could be
implemented by creating a stacking policy that changes the manner in which it stacks
containers depending on the dwell time prediction accuracy - when the dwell time pre-
diction accuracy is low, the stacking AI should focus on levelling containers in the yard
and, as dwell time prediction accuracy increases to above 20% approximately, gradually
increase the amount of importance dwell time plays on the decision of where to stack
containers. Because this thesis does not account for distances traveled by containers in
the yard, however, research should be done on the the impact of moving containers large
distances when they are reshuffled. The trade-off between having a level yard and moving
containers large distances in order to level the yard is not explored in this thesis, and is
worth investigating in further research.
In order to create a better fuzzy logic stacking AI, the ranges of its variable subsets could
be fine-tuned, even down to the hundredth, by repeated testing. This would create the
ideal membership functions that allow for the terminal to stack containers with the high-
est efficiency. These ranges are likely very terminal-dependent, however, so they would
need to be tuned to the specific terminal in which the fuzzy logic stacking policy is used.
A method by which to create better simulated dwell time predictions could be imple-
mented, as the current method does not assume any shape to the dwell time prediction
accuracy. A model that could better encapsulate the distribution of dwell times from a
prediction will likely lead to more accurate results. The shape of the distributions of dwell
times in terminals can vary greatly, so having a good understanding of dwell times in a
container terminal could lead to a better distribution of simulated predicted dwell times,
which would likely increase the effectiveness of using simulated dwell time predictions
when stacking containers.
A possible metric to be included in stacking policies is a “future reshuffles” metric by
which the amount of expected reshuffles caused by placing a container in a certain location
could be calculated and/or predicted. This could be done by using machine learning
trained on past container data to predict the number of reshuffles a certain move will
produce, or by looking through upcoming container discharges to forecast where they
39
==PAGE:50==
3.3 Evaluation
will be placed, and what ripple effects a container being placed in a certain location
could have on future container placements and reshuffles. This metric would greatly aid
in deciding a container’s location, and would likely lead to higher efficiencies in a terminal.
The ideal use of this thesis for industry applications would be to test out various stacking
policies in the terminal without having to risk losing productivity in the terminal if those
stacking policies turn out to be inefficient. To be able to do this, a method by which to
model the real life terminal would need to be implemented, as well as a method by which
to visualize the “real-time” movements of containers in the model terminal.
In thesis, a brief introduction to container terminals and the concept of container dwell
times was given. Blockshipping’s AI-IDP dwell time prediction model was introduced,
and it’s theoretical benefits in improving container terminal efficiency were explained.
An overview of stacking policies and various papers on potential stacking polices was
outlined, and stacking policies that use dwell time predictions in their decision making
were defined and then tested in model terminals.
The main stacking policies evaluated were a stacking policy that attempts to level out the
heights of stacks in the terminal, a stacking policy that stacks containers purely by dwell
time, and an intermediate stacking policy based on fuzzy logic that stacks containers
according to block utilization, stack height, and dwell time.
Four main test scenarios were chosen to analyze the impact of dwell time prediction ac-
curacy on container terminal efficiency. These four scenarios were: 1) an empty terminal
with containers arriving every hour and departing at a random time within a fixed time
period, two, 2) and 3), terminals, one at 50% initial capacity, and the other at 80% initial
capacity, both simulated to have containers arriving every 5 hours and departing at a
random time within a fixed time period, and 4) a scenario in which waves of containers
arrive in intervals and whose containers’ dwell times may randomly overlap with those of
the containers in the subsequent wave.
The test results showed that the main factors affecting the impact of dwell time pre-
diction accuracy on container terminal efficiency are: The stacking policy used to stack
containers, how reliant on dwell times it may or may not be; the congestion rate of the
terminal, with more congested terminals benefiting less from increased dwell time pre-
diction accuracy; and the dwell time prediction accuracy itself, or, more precisely, how
low dwell time prediction accuracies amplify each other when dwell times are compared,
and thus should be less relied upon when making decisions, although increased efficiency
can still be had at low dwell time accuracies if other factors are considered when stacking
containers.
The test results also show that terminals that wish to stack containers by predicted dwell
time should gain a good understanding of their current dwell times and typical congestion
rates, and fine tune their stacking policies so that they are optimized for the terminal
environment. Efficiency at high congestion rates is primarily attained by levelling the
containers in the terminal and relocating reshuffled containers instead of reshuffling them
“in-place”, while efficiency at low congestion rates is primarily attained by disregarding
40
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Evaluation
low-accuracy dwell time predictions (below 20%), and stacking by a policy that balances
stacking by predicted dwell time and levelling the containers in the yard.
Overall, increases in efficiency seem to be possible, even at relatively low dwell time pre-
diction accuracies, provided that there is low congestion in the terminal, and the stacking
policy does not put too much importance on dwell time. Higher dwell time prediction
accuracies lead to larger increases in container terminal efficiency at low congestion rates,
but are less effective at higher congestion rates.
41
==PAGE:52==
Glossary
Discharging a container
Removing a container from a vessel
AI-IDP
AI Import Dwell Time Prediction
Dwell Time
Amount of time a container spends in the terminal
Block Utilization
Percentage of a block’s container capacity that is filled by containers
Import-dry containers
Import containers that do not require refrigeration nor special handling
Consignee
Entity to which the container will be delivered
Gate out
When a container leaves the terminal via truck gates
Gate in
When a container enters the terminal via truck gates
Table 3.3.1: Caption
42
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1] J. W. B¨ose. Handbook of Terminal Planning. Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2011,
second edition, 2020.
[2] The Port of Los Angeles. https://www.portoflosangeles.org/business/statistics/container-
statistics, 2023.
[3] Busan Port Authority. 2021 container statistics of busan port, 2022.
[4] Mohamed Gheith, Amr Eltawil, and Nermine Harraz.
A Proposed Heuristic for
Solving the Container Pre-Marshalling Problem, pages 955–964. 04 2013.
[5] J. Ries, R. G. Gonz´alez-Ram´ırez, and P. Miranda. A fuzzy logic model for the con-
tainer stacking problem at container terminals. International Conference on Com-
putational Logistics, pages 93–111, 2014.
[6] T. Park, R. Choe, Y. H. Kim, and K. R. Ryu. Dynamic adjustment of container
stacking policy in an automated container terminal. Int. J.Production Economics,
133:385–392, 2011.
[7] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fuzzy logic. https://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/logic-fuzzy/, 2021.
[8] Carmel
Gafa.
A
very
brief
introduction
to
fuzzy
logic
and
fuzzy
systems.
https://towardsdatascience.com/
a-very-brief-introduction-to-fuzzy-logic-and-fuzzy-systems-d68d14b3a3b8,
2020.
[9] Blocshipping A/S. https://blockshipping.net, 2023.
[10] KU Leuven DTAI Research Group. The language. probabilistic logic programming.
https://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/problog/#, 2015-2020.
[11] The Matplotlib development team. Matplotlib: Visualization with python. https:
//matplotlib.org/, 2012-2023.
[12] Carmel Gafa.
Type-2 fuzzy logic library.
https://carmelgafa.com/project/
type2fuzzy_library/, 2020.
[13] Carmel Gafa Github. fuzzy system. https://github.com/carmelgafa/ml_from_
scratch/tree/master/algorithms/fuzzy_inference/fuzzy_system, 2022.
43
==PAGE:54==
Appendices
A
Test results
A.1
Fuzzy Logic paper replication
0% Initial Congestion
Figure A.1: 0% Congestion rate, all AIs
44
==PAGE:55==
A Test results
FuzzyLogicAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.097
0.012
0.286
0.007
20%
0.097
0.011
0.286
0.007
30%
0.082
0.013
0.281
0.007
40%
0.078
0.012
0.28
0.006
50%
0.067
0.011
0.279
0.006
60%
0.062
0.01
0.279
0.006
70%
0.054
0.007
0.279
0.006
80%
0.043
0.009
0.279
0.006
90%
0.039
0.01
0.279
0.006
100%
0.03
0.007
0.279
0.006
110%
0.023
0.008
0.279
0.006
Figure A.2: 0% Congestion rate, Fuzzy Logic AI
45
==PAGE:56==
A Test results
LDTAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.147
0.008
0.347
0.031
20%
0.146
0.008
0.331
0.02
30%
0.142
0.007
0.339
0.017
40%
0.127
0.011
0.336
0.018
50%
0.124
0.011
0.329
0.021
60%
0.116
0.01
0.337
0.016
70%
0.099
0.011
0.339
0.019
80%
0.085
0.006
0.339
0.021
90%
0.071
0.009
0.337
0.021
100%
0.054
0.005
0.336
0.025
110%
0.007
0.003
0.333
0.017
Figure A.3: 0% Congestion rate, LDT AI
46
==PAGE:57==
A Test results
LevellingAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.089
0.012
0.302
0.008
20%
0.089
0.01
0.298
0.008
30%
0.087
0.009
0.297
0.007
40%
0.089
0.01
0.299
0.008
50%
0.084
0.007
0.302
0.011
60%
0.087
0.006
0.303
0.006
70%
0.087
0.007
0.305
0.01
80%
0.088
0.006
0.3
0.008
90%
0.085
0.008
0.302
0.008
100%
0.089
0.01
0.303
0.012
110%
0.088
0.009
0.301
0.005
Figure A.4: 0% Congestion rate, Levelling AI
47
==PAGE:58==
A Test results
RandomAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.214
0.011
0.338
0.022
20%
0.207
0.015
0.329
0.017
30%
0.221
0.016
0.341
0.011
40%
0.212
0.011
0.341
0.034
50%
0.214
0.01
0.341
0.02
60%
0.214
0.013
0.343
0.023
70%
0.205
0.009
0.335
0.024
80%
0.206
0.014
0.337
0.022
90%
0.213
0.016
0.339
0.02
100%
0.212
0.011
0.338
0.018
110%
0.203
0.01
0.341
0.016
Figure A.5: 0% Congestion rate, Random AI
48
==PAGE:59==
A Test results
50% Initial Congestion
Figure A.6: 50% Congestion rate, all AIs
FuzzyLogicAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.324
0.005
0.601
0.019
20%
0.324
0.006
0.601
0.019
30%
0.323
0.006
0.601
0.019
40%
0.324
0.005
0.601
0.019
50%
0.325
0.004
0.601
0.019
60%
0.324
0.004
0.601
0.019
70%
0.323
0.006
0.601
0.019
80%
0.323
0.004
0.601
0.019
90%
0.322
0.006
0.601
0.019
100%
0.322
0.007
0.601
0.019
110%
0.325
0.005
0.601
0.019
49
==PAGE:60==
A Test results
Figure A.7: 50% Congestion rate, Fuzzy Logic AI
LDTAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.324
0.014
0.562
0.022
20%
0.327
0.015
0.563
0.022
30%
0.324
0.016
0.564
0.023
40%
0.324
0.014
0.564
0.024
50%
0.326
0.017
0.563
0.025
60%
0.319
0.014
0.562
0.022
70%
0.321
0.017
0.565
0.022
80%
0.321
0.013
0.563
0.022
90%
0.316
0.016
0.565
0.023
100%
0.315
0.017
0.563
0.023
110%
0.308
0.016
0.564
0.022
50
==PAGE:61==
A Test results
Figure A.8: 50% Congestion rate, LDT AI
LevellingAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.302
0.015
0.562
0.024
20%
0.302
0.016
0.562
0.024
30%
0.302
0.015
0.562
0.025
40%
0.303
0.014
0.561
0.024
50%
0.302
0.015
0.562
0.024
60%
0.302
0.015
0.562
0.024
70%
0.301
0.015
0.563
0.023
80%
0.303
0.014
0.561
0.024
90%
0.303
0.014
0.562
0.023
100%
0.302
0.014
0.561
0.024
110%
0.304
0.015
0.561
0.024
51
==PAGE:62==
A Test results
Figure A.9: 50% Congestion rate, Levelling AI
RandomAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.375
0.014
0.564
0.026
20%
0.37
0.014
0.562
0.024
30%
0.372
0.013
0.566
0.02
40%
0.373
0.012
0.566
0.024
50%
0.371
0.015
0.565
0.021
60%
0.369
0.014
0.564
0.023
70%
0.368
0.011
0.565
0.024
80%
0.37
0.013
0.561
0.024
90%
0.371
0.015
0.565
0.023
100%
0.369
0.011
0.563
0.023
110%
0.376
0.013
0.564
0.025
52
==PAGE:63==
A Test results
Figure A.10: 50% Congestion rate, Random AI
53
==PAGE:64==
A Test results
80% Initial Congestion
Figure A.11: 80% Congestion rate, all AIs
FuzzyLogicAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.368
0.003
0.857
0.028
20%
0.368
0.003
0.857
0.028
30%
0.368
0.001
0.857
0.028
40%
0.367
0.003
0.857
0.028
50%
0.367
0.004
0.857
0.028
60%
0.368
0.003
0.857
0.028
70%
0.367
0.003
0.857
0.028
80%
0.367
0.004
0.857
0.028
90%
0.366
0.003
0.857
0.028
100%
0.367
0.003
0.857
0.028
110%
0.369
0.004
0.857
0.028
54
==PAGE:65==
A Test results
Figure A.12: 80% Congestion rate, Fuzzy Logic AI
LDTAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.454
0.012
0.859
0.028
20%
0.455
0.012
0.857
0.028
30%
0.452
0.011
0.857
0.028
40%
0.455
0.012
0.86
0.027
50%
0.453
0.012
0.857
0.028
60%
0.452
0.013
0.861
0.026
70%
0.453
0.013
0.858
0.028
80%
0.452
0.011
0.859
0.028
90%
0.449
0.012
0.858
0.028
100%
0.45
0.011
0.857
0.028
110%
0.447
0.013
0.859
0.028
55
==PAGE:66==
A Test results
Figure A.13: 80% Congestion rate, LDT AI
LevellingAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.439
0.009
0.859
0.027
20%
0.44
0.007
0.86
0.025
30%
0.439
0.009
0.86
0.025
40%
0.44
0.008
0.859
0.025
50%
0.439
0.009
0.859
0.026
60%
0.439
0.009
0.861
0.025
70%
0.44
0.008
0.861
0.025
80%
0.441
0.008
0.86
0.025
90%
0.44
0.009
0.86
0.025
100%
0.439
0.008
0.859
0.025
110%
0.44
0.009
0.859
0.027
56
==PAGE:67==
A Test results
Figure A.14: 80% Congestion rate, Levelling AI
RandomAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.478
0.012
0.861
0.027
20%
0.478
0.009
0.859
0.026
30%
0.479
0.01
0.859
0.028
40%
0.478
0.01
0.86
0.027
50%
0.478
0.01
0.858
0.03
60%
0.479
0.01
0.86
0.028
70%
0.478
0.007
0.86
0.027
80%
0.477
0.009
0.861
0.024
90%
0.478
0.011
0.86
0.026
100%
0.478
0.01
0.86
0.026
110%
0.478
0.008
0.859
0.027
57
==PAGE:68==
A Test results
Figure A.15: 80% Congestion rate, Random AI
58
==PAGE:69==
A Test results
A.2
Periodically Incoming Vessels Test
Figure A.16: Periodically Incoming Vessels Test, all AIs
FuzzyLogicAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.023
0.009
0.201
0.009
20%
0.019
0.01
0.197
0.006
30%
0.013
0.006
0.195
0.005
40%
0.013
0.006
0.194
0.004
50%
0.01
0.004
0.194
0.004
60%
0.008
0.004
0.193
0.003
70%
0.008
0.004
0.193
0.004
80%
0.005
0.003
0.192
0.003
90%
0.004
0.004
0.193
0.003
100%
0.003
0.002
0.192
0.003
110%
0.002
0.002
0.192
0.003
59
==PAGE:70==
A Test results
Figure A.17: Periodically Incoming Vessels Test, Fuzzy Logic AI
LDTAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.179
0.01
0.246
0.015
20%
0.163
0.012
0.246
0.021
30%
0.152
0.005
0.243
0.014
40%
0.14
0.012
0.244
0.014
50%
0.13
0.008
0.248
0.03
60%
0.109
0.004
0.252
0.024
70%
0.093
0.011
0.253
0.021
80%
0.074
0.008
0.244
0.016
90%
0.053
0.005
0.255
0.019
100%
0.032
0.007
0.246
0.042
110%
0.002
0.001
0.252
0.028
60
==PAGE:71==
A Test results
Figure A.18: Periodically Incoming Vessels Test, LDT AI
LevellingAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.019
0.005
0.199
0.005
20%
0.02
0.005
0.199
0.006
30%
0.019
0.006
0.203
0.007
40%
0.02
0.005
0.199
0.009
50%
0.018
0.006
0.197
0.005
60%
0.018
0.006
0.197
0.006
70%
0.02
0.006
0.199
0.007
80%
0.018
0.005
0.199
0.005
90%
0.02
0.006
0.201
0.006
100%
0.018
0.006
0.2
0.007
110%
0.02
0.006
0.198
0.006
61
==PAGE:72==
A Test results
Figure A.19: Periodically Incoming Vessels Test, Levelling AI
RandomAI
Accuracy
avg. reloc. r.
stdev
avg. max block u.
stdev
10%
0.163
0.012
0.241
0.016
20%
0.155
0.006
0.234
0.019
30%
0.161
0.009
0.247
0.013
40%
0.162
0.011
0.244
0.019
50%
0.161
0.008
0.233
0.025
60%
0.159
0.014
0.245
0.017
70%
0.166
0.012
0.235
0.008
80%
0.161
0.008
0.231
0.012
90%
0.163
0.015
0.233
0.01
100%
0.165
0.004
0.235
0.014
110%
0.158
0.015
0.233
0.012
62
==PAGE:73==
A Test results
Figure A.20: Periodically Incoming Vessels Test, Levelling AI
63
