==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
IDUN – Center for Intelligent Drug Delivery and Sensing Using microcontainers and Nanomechanics
Master Thesis
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
Oral Delivery of Insulin
Author
Sintija Ursulska
MSc Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Supervisors
Matteo Tollemeto
PhD Student in Nanomedicine Eurotech (DTU-TU/e)
Prof. Anja Boisen
Professor, Head of Section, Department of Health Technology, IDUN
January 2023 - July 2023
==PAGE:2==
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
Oral Delivery of Insulin
Master Thesis
July 2023
By
Sintija Ursulska
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, IDUN, Department of Health Technology, , 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den-
mark
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the Center for Intelligent Drug Deliv-
ery and Sensing Using Microcontainers and Nanomechanics (IDUN) at the Department
of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng in Pharmaceutical Engineering and Design.
Sintija Ursulska - s184416
Signature
Date
ii
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Matteo Tollemeto, PhD student, Technical University of Denmark
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor Matteo for his close guidance and patience
during my project. Having his daily support and advice helped me immensely to carry
out the project, especially when reaching challenges and obstacles throughout the thesis.
His approach to problem solving and finding new ideas on how to improve the project is
something I greatly appreciate.
Anja Boisen, Professor, Head of Section, IDUN, DTU Health Technology
I would like to thank Anja for the opportunity to carry out the project in her research group.
The research area of drug delivery has always been an immense research field and I feel
extremely grateful to have written my master thesis on a subject that I am truly passionate
about. I have learned immensely on what it means to be a scientist, how to solve complex
issues with an open mind
IDUN
Thank you to all the members of IDUN research group for making the days of work en-
joyable, while helping me throughout my project with valuable advice and discussions. I
thoroughly enjoyed working in the research group and being among such inspiring indi-
viduals.
My family and friends
I would not have been able to go through this journey without the support of my family, who
have been a grounding rock to me during my studies abroad. I would like to thank my dad
for inspiring me to become an engineer. I hope I make you proud. I would like to especially
thank my friends in Copenhagen, who have been there for me as a moral support: Astrid,
Helga, Julie, Justina, Lisa, Nicolas, Lucas, Leila, Tamires, Benjamin, Katrine and the
entire General Engineering class of 2021. My journey of studying in Denmark would not
have been the same without their constant support and incredible memories together.
Ilze Pomere, Chemistry Teacher at Riga State Gymnasium Nr. 1
I would especially like to thank one of the first teachers that inspired me to pursue science
after graduation of gymnasium. Her discipline, knowledge and support guided me in the
direction of pursuing life science degree. She inspired me in the field of chemistry and life
sciences, and was always eager to help me learn, without serving me the answers on a
plate - she truly taught me the very basis of science, and how to think like a scientist.
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Biopharmaceuticals are one of the most widely used therapeutics nowadays, due to the
high prevalence of metabolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, which often requires
three or more insulin injections a day. Regardless of extensive research within drug deliv-
ery of biological drugs, insulin therapy remains administered by subcutaneous injections,
leading to a great risk of infections and generally low patient compliance.
In this work, polymersomes based on ampiphilic copolymers of PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC)
and PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC) were used for biopharmaceutical encapsulation, formulated
via the direct hydration method. The nanoparticles were studied in terms of morphol-
ogy, drug loading efficiency, mucoadhesiveness, and pH stability. The polymersomes
were tested under simulated physiological conditions, to establish an understanding of
the drug formulation behaviour in the pH environment it encounters upon oral administra-
tion. In vitro release studies were performed to establish a drug release profile at pH 6.8,
imitating the environment in the small intestine. Drug release kinetics were evaluated to
determine the mechanism of drug release from the nanoparticles.
The polymersomes were proven to remain stable at acidic pH, and largely increase in
average size and PDI upon a pH > 5, indicating an efficient system for drug delivery to
the small intestine. The nanoparticles showed a significant increase in size upon addition
of mucin, confirming the polymers mucoadhesive properties. Encapsulation of insulin re-
sulted in an increased size and zeta potential of the nanoparticles, which was validated
by TEM imaging of drug-encapsulated particles. The drug encapsulation results demon-
strated insulin loading efficiency of 36.43 % ± 0.09 and drug loading capacity of 50.66
% ± 0.05. The average drug release was estimated to be 10%, and the release mech-
anism was determined to follow a kinetic profile driven by diffusion and other transport
mechanisms.
By formulating the insulin-loaded polymersomes, and verifying their suitability for oral ad-
ministration, a promising platform for a novel strategy of an insulin delivery system.
Figure 1: Graphiclal abstract: Polymersome self-assembly by direct hydration, insulin
encapsulation, and drug release upon pH > pKa of the polymer. Created with [1]
.
iv
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
State of The Art
3
2.1
Oral Administration of Insulin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Polymersomes as Insulin Delivery Vesicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Aims and Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Experimental
9
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Synthesis of of PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC35) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Synthesis of the pH-responsive polymer PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC)
. . . 10
3.4
Preparation of blank and insulin-loaded pH-responsive polymersomes . . . 10
3.5
Evaluation of encapsulation efficiency, drug loading capacity and drug re-
lease
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Mucoadhesiveness studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.7
In vitro drug release from insulin-loaded polymersomes
. . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Results and Discussion
14
4.1
Preparation of polymersomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
pH-triggered destabilization of polymersomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Qualitative characterization of mucin and polymersome interactions
. . . . 19
4.4
Characterization of insulin-loaded polymersomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
In vitro drug release from insulin-loaded polymersomes
. . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Conclusion
30
5.1
Future prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Bibliography
31
A Supplementary Information
35
A.1 pH-triggered destabilization of polymersomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
A.2 Hydrophobic drug encapsulation: Characterization of curcumin-loaded poly-
mersomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1
Graphiclal abstract: Polymersome self-assembly by direct hydration, in-
sulin encapsulation, and drug release upon pH > pKa of the polymer. Cre-
ated with [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
2.1
The insulin molecular structure. [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Oral insulin administration (Phase I-V) versus subcutaneous insulin admin-
istration (Phase 1-4). Created with [1].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The proposed polymersome drug delivery system for insulin encapsulation.
Created with [1].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
Schematic overview of the synthetic route for synthesis of PEG22-p(CLy35-
gTMC)z . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Schematic overview of the synthetic route for synthesis of the carboxy func-
tionalized PEG22-p(CLy35-gTMCTBC)z . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.1
Average hydrodynamic size distribution of pINS0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 for-
mulations at pH 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Average hydrodynamic size distribution of A) pINS0 and B) pINS100 at pH
6.5 over 2-hour incubation. (N=3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
pINS0 and pINS100 formulations over 2-hour timespan at different pH: A)
Zeta-average size and B) PDI at pH 5; C) Zeta-average size and D) PDI at
pH 6.5. Results are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3).
. . . . . . 17
4.4
pINS0 and pINS100 formulations after 24-hour incubation at different pH:
A) Size-intensity distribution at pH 5; B) Size-intensity distribution at pH 6.5.
(N=3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.5
Transmission electron microscopy images of PEG22p(CL35gTMC) poly-
mersomes: A) Polymersomes assembled with TMC polymer dissolved in
DMSO at 10% wt, and B) in PEG350 at 10%.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.6
Polymersome interaction with mucin. A) Hydrodynamic diameter of poly-
mersomes interacting with mucin at different PM:mucin ratios. The graph
shows the hydrodynamic diameter of different ratios of PM:mucin: poly-
mersomes (grey), 2:1 (light yellow), 1:1 (blue), 1:2 (light blue), 1:5 (green),
1:10 (red), mucin (purple). B) -potential of polymersomes interacting with
mucin at different nanoparticle:mucin (PM:mucin) ratios. The graph shows
the hydrodynamic diameter of different ratios of PM:mucin: polymersomes
(grey), 2:1 (light yellow), 1:1 (blue), 1:2 (light blue), 1:5 (green), 1:10 (red),
mucin (purple). C) Size distribution intensity profile of different ratios of
PM:mucin: polymersomes (grey), 2:1 (light yellow), 1:1 (blue), 1:2 (light
blue), 1:5 (green), 1:10 (red), mucin (purple). Results are shown as the
average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3), and the final concentration of polymersomes
was 0.2 mg/mL in PBS, *p < 0.05.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.7
Average size distribution of A) insulin-loaded pINS100 polymersomes and
B) insulin-loaded pINS0 polymersomes at 3 different insulin concentrations.
Results are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.8
Average zeta potential of pINS0 and pINS100 formulations, with and with-
out insulin at pH 2. Results are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n =
3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
vi
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:8==
4.9
Insulin release profiles from pINS100 in cumulative per cent and amount
(mg) of insulin released. A) porcine insulin detected by HPLC and B) FITC-
insulin detected by a fluorescence microplate reader. C1 depicts a control
sample of FITC-Insulin pINS0 formulation at pH 6.5. C2 depicts a control
sample of FITC-Insuln pINS100 formulation immersed in pH2 buffer. (F1:
N =2, n=2); (F2: N = 4, n = 4) (C1 and C2:, N=3, n=3).
. . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.10 Kinetic release models of insulin-loaded pINS100 formulations, fitted to four
models: Zero-order, First-order, Higuchi and Korsmeyer-Peppas models.
(F1: N=2, F2: N=4)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
A.1 Intensity distribution graphs of the hydrodynamic size of pINS25, pINS50,
pINS75 and pINS100 formulations after 2-hour incubation at different pH.
(N=3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
A.2 A cumulative graph displaying the pINS0, pINS25, pINS50, pINS75 and
pINS100 formulations hydrodynamic size after 2-hour incubation at differ-
ent pH. (N=3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
A.3 A cumulative graph displaying the pINS0, pINS25, pINS50, pINS75 and
pINS100 formulations poly density index (PDI) after 2-hour incubation at
different pH. (N=3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.4 A graph displaying the size of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75 at pH 5 every
20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.5 A graph displaying the polydispersity index of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75
at pH 5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
A.6 A graph displaying the average hydrodynamic size of pINS25, pINS50 and
pINS75 at pH 6.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3) . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
A.7 A graph displaying the polydispersity index of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75
at pH 6.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.8 A graph displaying the average hydrodynamic size of pINS25, pINS50 and
pINS75 at pH 7.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3) . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.9 A graph displaying the average polydispersity index of pINS25, pINS50 and
pINS75 at pH 7.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3) . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
A.10 A graph displaying the intensity distribution of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75
at pH 6.5 after 24-hour incubation. (N=3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
A.11 A graph displaying the intensity distribution of pINS0, pINS25, pINS50,
pINS75 and pINS100 at pH 7.5 after 24-hour incubation. (N=3) . . . . . . . 41
A.12 A graph displaying the average hydrodynamic size distribution of curcumin-
loaded pINS0 at pH 2. Cur 0.5 refers to sample loaded with 0.5 mg/mL
curcumin, Cur 0.25 refers to sample loaded with 0.25 mg/mL curcumin,
and Cur 0.125 refers to sample loaded with 0.125 mg/mL curcumin. (N=3)
42
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
3.1
Release mechanisms from the polymeric system, depending on the n value
found from the Korsmeyer-Peppas kinetic model [48].
. . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.1
pH-responsive polymersome formulations and their Z-average size at pH 2. 15
4.2
Average hydrodynamic size, PDI and ξ-potential of polymersomes and their
interaction with mucin at different polymersome:mucin ratios (PM:mucin). . 20
4.3
Blank and insulin-loaded pINS0 and pINS100 polymersome formulations.
Samples S1-S3 were prepared with the non-pH-responsive TMC polymer
dissolved in PEG350 at 1 %wt. Samples P1-P3 were prepared with the
pH-responsive TMCTBC polymer dissolved PEG350 at 1%wt. Results are
shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Insulin loading in non-pH-responsive polymersomes. Samples were pre-
pared with the TMC polymer dissolved PEG350 at 1%wt.
Results are
shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Insulin loading in pH-responsive polymersomes. Samples were prepared
with the pH-responsive TMCTBC polymer dissolved PEG350 at 1%wt. Re-
sults are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.6
In vitro release of insulin from polymersome formulations. INS-pINS100 at
pH 6.5 = (F1); FITC-INS-pINS100at pH 6.5 = F2; FITC-INS-pINS0 at pH 6.5
=C1; FITC-INS-pINS100 at pH 2 = C2. Results are shown as the average
± SD (F1: N =2, n=2); (F2: N = 4, n = 4) (C1 and C2:, N=3, n=3) . . . . . . 25
4.7
In vitro release kinetics parameters of insulin from pINS100 formulations,
fitted to four models: Zero-order, First-order, Higuchi and Korsmeyer-Peppas
models. F1 depicts Insulin-pINS100 sample, detected by HPLC; F2 depicts
FITC-Insulin-pINS100 sample; K.P. is short for Korsmeyer-Peppas kinetic
model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
A.1 A summary of pINS0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 formulation average hydrody-
namic size, obtained in the pH-destabilization studies after 2 hours of incu-
bation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
A.2 A summary of pINS0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 formulation average PDI, obtained
in the pH-destabilization studies after 2 hours of incubation. . . . . . . . . . 35
A.3 Curcumin loading in non-pH-responsive pINS0 polymersomes. Samples
were prepared with the TMC polymer dissolved in DMSO at 10 and 1%wt.
(N=3). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus, a complex metabolic disorder characterized by chronic hyperglycemia,
is globally the most prevalent metabolic disorder to date. As of 2019, a total of 463 million
people are living with diabetes and the number is expected to rise to 578 million by 2030
and 700 million people by 2045 [2]. Among the available diabetes treatment options,
subcutaneous insulin therapy remains a cornerstone for managing the disease, despite
the related risk factors and low patient compliance.
Regardless of the vast research efforts in the last 85 years to develop an orally adminis-
tered insulin formulation, no such technology has reached the market yet [3]. Neverthe-
less, oral insulin remains a focal point in drug delivery research, due to its great potential
for eliminating the need for injections and easing the lives of millions of diabetes patients.
However, oral administration of insulin poses significant challenges due to its rapid degra-
dation in the stomach, poor stability, and low oral bioavailability [4] [5].
When administered orally without a sufficient protective formulation, only less than 0.1% of
insulin reaches the bloodstream [6]. The fact that insulin is highly susceptible to degrada-
tion by the acidic pH and peptide-degrading proteases found in the stomach raises signif-
icant challenges to oral delivery. Furthermore, transcellular delivery of insulin is impaired
by the presence of mucus, which is one of the main concerns for retaining the effective-
ness of the drug [7]. These factors significantly lower the amount of insulin absorbed and
available to reach the target site, eliminating the necessary therapeutic benefits [8].
Due to these challenges, oral delivery of biopharmaceuticals largely relies on drug for-
mulations that maintain the activity of the drug while delivering it to the desired target
site. Recent advancements in nanotechnology have introduced specialized drug delivery
systems for peptide drug encapsulation, such as stimuli-responsive, mucoadhesive, pH-
sensitive nanoparticles, nanoemulsions and nanogels, among many others [9] Polymer-
based nanocarriers have become one of the leading drug formulations to circumvent the
challenges of oral bioavailability of peptide drugs [10]. In the last decades, researchers
have advanced many new oral insulin delivery technologies in terms of enhanced drug
stability, mucoadhesion, intestinal absorption and targeted drug release [11].
Among the various oral delivery systems, polymer-based nanoparticles, also called poly-
mersomes, have shown to be a promising platform for biopharmaceutical delivery [12].
Polymersomes offer advantages such as drug protection from degrading environments,
enhanced stability, mucoadhesiono, prolonged circulation time, and site-specific release
[13]. The polymersome drug delivery system utilizes the the self-assembly properties
of amphiphilic block copolymers, which can encapsulate peptide drugs within their core,
while providing a hydrophilic shell for improved drug stability [12]. In the context of insulin
delivery, polymersomes present an effective solution to overcome the limitations of con-
ventional insulin formulations while improving patient compliance by eliminating the use
of needle injection systems.
2
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:11==
2
State of The Art
Despite the immensely high prevalence of insulin injection-dependent patients worldwide
[2], no oral insulin formulation has reached the market yet. The inconvenience associated
with frequent injections has fueled the interest to develop alternative delivery methods,
particularly oral administration. Oral insulin offers numerous advantages, such as im-
proved patient compliance and the potential for mimicking physiological insulin release,
thereby improving the therapeutic benefits [14].
2.1
Oral Administration of Insulin
Insulin is a natural peptide hormone, secreted in healthy individuals by the β-cells located
in the pancreas. For diabetes patients, however, insulin secretion is impaired, and exoge-
nous insulin administration is required to maintain healthy blood sugar levels [15]. The
hormone is a 51-residue protein of weight 5.8 kDa, which has been extensively studied
for the development of therapeutic analogs and effective formulations for the treatment of
diabetes [16]. See fig. 2.1 for the molecular structure of insulin.
Currently, insulin is most commonly administered by subcutaneous injections, where it is
absorbed in the systemic blood circulation [17]. While the effects of lowered blood glucose
levels are achieved through this route, it comes with an increased risk of hypoglycemia
due to absorption variability, poor patient compliance and risk of infections [18]. In healthy
individuals, endogenously secreted insulin is transported directly to the liver through the
portal circulation [19]. When administered by subcutaneous injections, the insulin ab-
sorption occurs through the peripheral circulation, which bypasses the first-pass hepatic
insulin clearance and can lead to unintended metabolic consequences. This can produce
a state of peripheral hyperinsulinemia, which is the principle driver for insulin resistance
[20].
Regardless of the many benefits of oral insulin, the dosage of an oral formulation may
have to be up to 100 times higher than what is typically administered subcutaneously
[21]. In order to reduce blood glucose concentration by 50%, a subcutaneous injection
would inject a dose of 1 U/kg. To achieve the same therapeutic benefits with polymeric
nanoparticles, the dose must be from 30 to 100 U/kg due to [22]. Moreover, frequent
and high-dose administration of insulin to the GI tract may lead to mitogenicity in the GI
epithelium and cause metabolic issues [16], which needs to be taken in consideration
when the formulation reaches in vivo studies.
Figure 2.1: The insulin molecular structure. [1]
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Oral insulin administration (Phase I-V) versus subcutaneous insulin adminis-
tration (Phase 1-4). Created with [1].
The medical complications of subcutaneous insulin, and the frequent injections required
for the desired therapeutic effects, have raised immense interest in oral insulin formu-
lations. Besides eliminating the need for injections, another advantage of oral insulin is
that it promotes a more beneficial absorption by imitating the physiological insulin uptake
through the hepatic vein [23]. This route promotes the necessary hepatic activation, and
avoids the long-term metabolic complications and hyperinsulinemia from constant subcu-
taneous injections [24]. However, no oral insulin formulation has yet been fully developed
and approved for clinical use due to various complications that arise in oral administration,
such as low bioavailability and the high susceptibility to insulin degradation by acidic pH
and proteases found in the stomach[8].
2.1.1
Barriers to oral delivery of insulin
To overcome the challenge of low bioavailability for orally administered insulin, the exact
mechanism of drug uptake through the gastrointestinal tract must be examined closely.
The physiological purpose of the human GI tract is the digestion and uptake of nutrients
while acting as a barrier to unwanted toxins and pathogens[25]. Being a protein drug, in-
sulin is prone to degradation by the enzymes and low pH found in the stomach. Moreover,
the absorption of large molecules is highly limited due to the protective mucosal barrier
lining the intestinal epithelium [23]. For effective insulin delivery to the hepatic portal vein,
orally administered insulin must first transport through the stomach, then reach the small
intestine and cross the intestinal epithelium. However, this administration route is highly
dependent on formulations that allow to keep the insulin molecule intact, while crossing
all the barriers it encounters. The three obstacles to insulin administration orally are (1)
chemical barrier, (2) enzymatic barrier, and (3) physiological barrier.
The very first obstacle to oral insulin ingestion is the chemical barrier of the acidic con-
ditions (pH 1.2 - 3) found in the stomach [8]. The peptide drug is highly susceptible to
degradation at strongly acidic conditions, which strictly reduces the number of therapeu-
tic proteins reaching portal circulation [20]. Secondly, the enzymatic barrier consisting of
peptidases and other degrading enzymes in the stomach is known to digest 94 - 98% of in-
gested proteins [23]. This barrier readily breaks down the administered insulin molecules
4
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:13==
before it can reach the absorption site in the small intestine [26]. Lastly, the physiological
barrier, referring to the mucus layer and the intestinal epithelium, counters the transport
of large molecules and particles. The semipermeable mucus barrier only allows for the
passage of water, nutrients and small molecules, while remaining impermeable to large
molecules and peptide drugs. Moreover, the mucus layer is negatively charged and tends
to create an electrostatic repulsion between protein drugs, thus limiting their absorption
[27]. The second physiological barrier is the intestinal epithelium, which possesses a
strictly limited passage for molecules. The chemical properties and molecular weight of
orally administered pharmaceuticals highly limit drug absorption [23]. In order to for a
molecule to be absorbed by passive diffusion, the drug must be highly lipophilic and with
a MW < 700 Da. Unfortunately, biopharmaceuticals do not meet these criteria as most
peptide drugs exceed the molecular weight of 3000 Da and are highly hydrophilic [28]. In
terms of drug delivery, researchers aim to overcome this barrier by employing mucoad-
hesive materials to penetrate the mucus layer and promote drug delivery [29].
All these barriers obstruct the free passage of insulin, leading to insufficient absorption
through the oral administration route. Thereby, numerous strategies for improved oral
bioavailability have been developed in the form of carrier systems, absorption enhancers,
surfactants, protease inhibitors and many others [11]. Among the many drug delivery sys-
tems, nanoparticles have proven to significantly improve oral bioavailability, while allowing
for versatility in the formulations[30]. By drug encapsulation in nanocarriers, insulin can
remain intact while passing through the degrading environment of the stomach, and be re-
leased at the desired target site[31]. While nanoparticles have proven to greatly increase
the oral bioavailability of peptide drugs [22], the aforementioned challenges still need ex-
tensive research to be fully overcome. This work suggests a polymer-based nanoparticle
drug delivery system that can encapsulate biopharmaceuticals, and protect the drugs from
the barriers to efficient oral delivery.
2.2
Polymersomes as Insulin Delivery Vesicles
Polymersomes are vesicles that resemble liposomes by their structure, with a hydrophobic
bilayer and a hydrophilic core, but with enhanced stability and cellular uptake properties
[32]. Before the emergence of polymeric nanoparticles, researchers had found that poly-
merized phospholipids rapidly improve the stability of liposomes [33] and this was one
of the first papers to propose a polymer-based nanoparticle system. Later on, the very
first polymersomes were mentioned in the late 1990s, as described by the Discher group
[34], where amphiphilic block copolymers were used for self-assembly of nanoparticles.
Since then, the research field on drug delivery applications of polymersomes has grown
immensely, ranging from the encapsulation of hydrophobic, hydrophilic drugs, nucleic
acids, fluorescent imaging agents and diagnostic molecules for disease detection and
monitoring[35]. The versatility of polymersome applications in drug delivery relies on the
wide range of possible copolymer formulations and functionalities the nanocarriers can
entail.
Polymersomes can be formed from diblock, triblock, and multiblock copolymers with am-
phiphilic properties, with PEG commonly used as the hydrophilic moiety [32]. Typically,
the block copolymer architectures are chosen based on the desired functionality of the
drug delivery vesicles. Various polymer architectures can be used to develop different
membrane conformations: AB, ABA, and ABC, where A and C stand for hydrophilic blocks
while B stands for hydrophobic block. Typically, in the case of ABC triblock copolymers,
the hydrophilic block with the greatest length forms the exterior layer, while the other forms
the interior[35]. Therefore, when a specific stimuli response is desired, it is beneficial to
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
5
==PAGE:14==
link the functionality (such as pH response) in the largest hydrophilic group of the polymer
for the most effective response.
The choice of polymers and their physiochemical properties is important due to the di-
rect impact on the nanocarrier structures.
The polymer must be biodegradable, bio-
compatible and, once assembled in nanoparticles, the system must portray the neces-
sary stability and mucoadhesion properties for enhanced drug delivery [9]. Many nat-
ural proteins such as gelatin and casein have been reported for insulin encapsulation
in therapeutic nanoparticles, portraying targeted and sustained release [36]. However,
synthetic polymers such as polylactic acid (PLA), poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA), and
poly(ϵ-caprolactone) (PCL) have reported increased properties for stability and reten-
tion of insulin-loaded polymersomes [26]. Not only do these platforms provide stability,
bioavailability and sustained release enhancements, but they also portray excellent mu-
coadhesive properties and biocompatibility [23]. Moreover, the polymers used in this work
are highly biocompatible, as PEG and PCL have been approved by the FDA for safe use
in patients [37] [38].
Historically, several methods have been used to prepare polymersomes, such as thin
film rehydration, direct hydration, electroformation, polymerisation-induced self-assembly,
emulsion phase transfer, or microfluidics [39][40] [35] [41].. For low molecular weight
polymers, direct hydration has been reported as a highly effective method. Sui et al. and
Welzen et al. have shown successful results of polymersome assembly by direct hydration
[42] [43]. This was done by dissolving the block copolymer PEG-b-PCL in PEG 350/550,
and adding the polymer directly in water, yielding polymersomes. Besides the simplicity of
this method, it does not involve any organic solvents that may affect the biocompatibility
of the drug delivery system.
Recent advancements have enabled to utilize pH-responsive properties of functionalized
synthetic polymers for oral drug delivery, thereby allowing for targeted and sustained re-
lease [9]. The concept of pH-responsive polymersomes relies on the pKa of the polymer,
by utilizing the protonated state below its pKa value to remain in stable particles and dis-
mantling the structures at pH above the polymer pKa. Due to the ionization and repulsion
of the polymer chains at pH above its pKa values, the release of cargo can be triggered
at the required site [30].
2.2.1
Overcoming the challenges for oral delivery
The Proposed Polymersome System
To counter the highly degrading environment in the stomach, and protect the encapsulated
insulin molecules, a polymer with an overall pKa above the pH of the stomach (pH 1.5 - 3)
must be chosen. In this work, a pH-responsive polymersome system is proposed for the
encapsulation of biopharmaceuticals (see fig. 2.3 for a graphical representation of the drug
delivery system). The polymersome formulation is based on two polymers: pH-responsive
PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC) and non-pH-responsive PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC35). By uti-
lizing the physiochemical properties of the carboxylic group functionalized on the PEG22-
p(CL35-g-TMCTBC) polymer, a pH-dependent behaviour can be achieved. As the pKa =
5 for carboxylic acid, the polymersomes are expected to remain stable at pH values below
5. When exposed to pH > 5, however, the particles shall disassemble due to the depro-
tonation of the carboxylic group, thereby releasing the encapsulated cargo. Furthermore,
the mucoadhesive properties of the particles will be studied, based on previously reported
mucus interactions of PCL-based drug delivery systems[44]. Incorporating polymers with
PEG moieties has shown better penetration through the mucus layer, due to a minimized
adhesive interaction between the nanoparticle and the mucins [45]. This allows us to hy-
6
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:15==
pothesize that the proposed polymersomes will interact with mucins and thus be able to
deliver the encapsulated drug across the epithelial layer.
Figure 2.3: The proposed polymersome drug delivery system for insulin encapsulation.
Created with [1].
2.3
Aims and Hypotheses
This master’s thesis aims to explore the potential of polymersomes as a delivery system
for insulin, focusing on their formulation, characterization, and loading of biopharmaceu-
ticals, specifically - insulin, for enhanced encapsulation and controlled release. The re-
search will delve into the application of novel block copolymers suitable for polymersome
formation, optimization of formulation parameters, and investigation of the physicochem-
ical properties of insulin-loaded polymersomes. Moreover, the thesis will investigate the
influence of various factors, such as pH, drug-to-polymer ratio, and particle size, on the
encapsulation efficiency and stability of insulin within the polymersomes.
Additionally, this work will evaluate the in vitro release kinetics of insulin from the drug
formulation in simulated physiological conditions. The release profiles will be assessed
to determine the impact of polymersome properties on the sustained and controlled re-
lease of insulin, mimicking the physiological requirements for effective glycemic control.
Furthermore, the future outlook for this drug formulation will be established, in order to
define the necessary steps to further validate this drug delivery system.
The following hypotheses are established:
1. The use of amphiphilic copolymers PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC35) and PEG22-p(CL35-
g-TMCTBC) allows for polymersome formation and drug encapsulation through di-
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
7
==PAGE:16==
rect hydration method.
2. A pH-dependent change to the morphological structures of PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC)
polymersomes can be triggered upon pH<5.
3. The PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC) polymersomes can encapsulate large-MW drugs
and retain a hydrodynamic size < 200nm.
4. Drug-loaded PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC) polymersomes can release the encapsu-
lated cargo upon a pH increase above pH 5.
5. The polymers PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC35) and PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC) can por-
tray mucoadhesive properties for effective mucin interactions.
8
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:17==
3
Experimental
3.1
Materials
All chemicals were used as received unless otherwise stated. Monomethoxy-polyethylene
glycol, 1 kDa (≥95%), was obtained from JenKem Technology USA. Monomer trimethy-
lene carbonate was purchased from TCI Europe (>98%). Monomer ε-caprolactone (99%)
were purchased from Fluorochem. All other chemicals and reagents, including, methane-
sulfonic acid (≥99%), triethylamine (≥99.5%), mucin from porcine stomach Type III (PGM),
polyethylene glycol 350 (PEG350), phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO), dichloromethane (DCM), toluene, sodium carbonate (NaHCO3) sodium sulfate
(Na2SO4), 1,4-dioxane were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Pure crys-
talline porcine insulin (27.8 IU / mg) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Schnelldorf, Ger-
many) and stored at -10 degrees celsius. FITC- labelled human insulin powder was pur-
chased from Sigma-Aldrich (Schnelldorf, Germany) and stored at -10 degrees celsius.
Curcumin powder was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Schnelldorf, Germany) and stored
at -10 degrees celsius. Solvents were HPLC grade and used as received. Ultrapure
water was used throughout the experiments and obtained from Merck Millipore Q-Pod
system (Merck Group, Burlington (MA), U.S.A) with a 0.22 μm Millipore Express 40 filter
(18.2 MΩ).
3.2
Synthesis of of PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC35)
// *This section is purely descriptive; the polymer synthesis was done by the PhD stu-
dent Matteo Tollemeto. // The synthesis of the non-pH-responsive block copolymer was
done following a previously published procedure aiming for a composition of poly(ethylene
glycol)22 - block-poly[(ϵ-caprolactone)38 - gradient -(trimethylene carbonate)37] (PEG22-
p(CL35-g-TMC35)). The solution was prepared in a 250 ml single-necked round bottom
flask and initially charged with monomethoxy-poly(ethylene glycol) (Mn 1000 g/mol; 705.2
mg; 0.71 mmol), to which it was added ϵ-caprolactone (εCL) (2.74 ml; 35 eq.; 24.7 mmol)
and trimethylene carbonate (TMC) (2.52 g; 35 eq.; 24.7 mmol). To remove any trace of
water the polymers were dissolved in anhydrous toluene and concentrated in vacuo; this
was repeated two times. Under nitrogen, the dried reagents were then redissolved in dry
dichloromethane (DCM) (150 ml, [ϵ-CL] = 0.17 m) with stirring, and methane sulfonic acid
(MSA) was added (0.1 eq. with respect to ϵ-CL). The mixture was left to react at room
temperature for approximately 24h. After completion, the mixture was further diluted us-
ing DCM. The organic phase was washed with saturated NaHCO3 (aq.) followed by water
and finally a brine wash. The remaining water from the organic phase was removed using
Na2SO4 (5–10 min) and the mixture was then filtered and concentrated in vacuo. An oily
colourless product was collected. The remaining oil was lyophilized from 1,4-dioxane for
2 days to yield a waxy oil (87% yield).
Figure 3.1: Schematic overview of the synthetic route for synthesis of PEG22-p(CLy35-
gTMC)z
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
9
==PAGE:18==
3.3
Synthesis of the pH-responsive polymer
PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC)
*This section is purely descriptive; the polymer synthesis was done by the phD student
Matteo Tollemeto.
A 100 mL three necked round bottom flask, equipped with a magnetic stir bar and a
drip-funnel, was charged with 2-(tert-butoxy)-2-oxoethyl 3-hydroxy-2-(hydroxymethyl)-2-
methylpropanoate (8 g; 34.15 mmol) and 60 mL dry DCM. After dissolution a clear yellow
solution was obtained. While stirring, triethylamine (16.7 mL; 3.5 eq.; 102.3 mmol) was
added to the mixture. A clear light yellow solution was obtained. Hereafter, the reaction
was cooled to -50°C (acetone/water/liq. N2 bath) and slowly a solution of triphosgene
(11.14 g; 1.1 eq. with respect to the acid, 37.54 mmol) in 40 mL DCM was added using
the drip-funnel in approximately 20 minutes. Immediately precipitation was observed,
which was presumably TEA.HCl salt. The reaction mixture, kept in the acetone/water
bath, was allowed to warm up to RT overnight while stirring.
The reaction mixture was diluted with DCM and the precipitate was removed by filtration.
Hereafter, the supernatant was washed with 10wt% NaOH (aq.) twice in order to quench
and remove phosgene, followed by a water and brine wash step. The remaining water
from the organic phase was removed using NaSO4 (5 - 10 min) and the mixture was then
filtered and concentrated in vacuo. A yellow/red oil was obtained. The oil was dissolved in
ethylacetate and n-hexane was added till a cloudy suspension was obtained. Hereafter,
the mixture was heated until clarity. The mixture was left for crystallization (cap was re-
moved allowing ethyl acetate to evaporate) overnight. Hereafter, the mixture was stored
in the freezer at -20°C allowing for maximum crystallization. The crystals were collected
and washed using ice-cold n-hexane followed by diethyl ether. Crystals were collected
and dried in a desiccator for <2 hours. See figure fig. 3.2 for a schematic overview of the
synthesis.
Figure 3.2: Schematic overview of the synthetic route for synthesis of the carboxy func-
tionalized PEG22-p(CLy35-gTMCTBC)z
3.4
Preparation of blank and insulin-loaded pH-responsive
polymersomes
Based on previous research describing a similar polymer used for polymeric nanopar-
ticle formation [42], direct hydration method was chosen as the method of assembly.
The PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC) or PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC) polymer was dissolved in
PEG350 at 1 or 10%wt, 20 µL of the chosen polymer (or TMC:TMCTBC ratio) was added
10
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:19==
drop-wise to a glass vial equipped with a magnetic stirrer, rotating at 250 rpm. Then, 80
µL of PBS buffer at pH 2, or insulin solution at different concentrations (0.25, 0.5, 1, 2
mg/mL) was added, and stirred for 5 minutes. For Z-potential measurements and insulin
release studies, MQ-water at pH 2 was used instead. At 5 minutes, 900 µL of PBS at pH
2 was slowly added to dilute the solution to the desired concentration.
3.4.1
Size, Zeta-potential and morphology measurements
The average particle diameter, size distribution (PDI) and zeta potential (Z-pot) of the
polymersomes was determined with Malvern Nano ZS Zetasizer dynamic light scatter-
ing (DLS) using disposable 100µL Mobius polystyrene cuvettes. Briefly, the 100 µL of
freshly assembled polymersomes were diluted in 900 uL PBS or MQ-water at pH2. 100
µL of the diluted polymersome sample was measured on DLS 3 times for average size
and Z-potential. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed
to investigate the size, morphology and homogeneity of the prepared blank and insulin-
loaded polymersomes using a transmission electron microscope.
3.5
Evaluation of encapsulation efficiency, drug loading
capacity and drug release
Insulin was encapsulated in polymersomes by the direct hydration method described by
[42] at concentrations of 0.5, 1, and 2 mg/mL. The same method was applied for cur-
cumin encapsulation at 0.125, 0.25 and 0.5 mg/mL drug concentrations. Encapsulation
efficiency (EE%) and drug loading capacity (DLC%) was determined by the two methods:
(1) supernatant analysis, and (2) nanoparticle disruption to release the encapsulated drug.
(1) The samples of insulin-loaded polymersomes were centrifuged at 7500 - 10 000 rpm
for 30 minutes, and the supernatant was removed while leaving the formed pellet intact.
(2) The remaining pellet after the first centrifugation was washed by adding 1mL MQ-
water, and centrifuged 3 times. Afterwards, the nanoparticles were disrupted with either
MeOH or by changing the pH < 6.5 to release the encapsulated insulin.
Insulin concentration was analysed with reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatog-
raphy (RP-HPLC), based on a validated method for insulin detection as described by [46].
The HPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) was equipped with a C18 column (150 x 4.6 mm,
320 Å pore size), and a PDA detector at various wavelengths (214, 218, 254 and 280
nm). All HPLC measurements were performed in triplicate.
Standard curves of insulin, FITC-insulin and curcumin dilutions were prepared for accurate
anaylsis of the detected drug concentrations. Curcumin concentration was determined
using a Nanodrop 1000 spectrophotometer at OD420, and obtained emission data was
fitted against a standard curve at concentrations 0.5 to 0.0078. The obtained standard
curve for curcumin was: 4.8309 · x + 0, 1248, R2 = 0, 9743. FITC-insulin concentration
was measured by fluorescence using a spectrofluorimetric microplate reader (Shimadzu,
Japan), with λexcitation 494 nm and λemission 517-530 nm. A FITC-insulin concentration
series from 0,02 to 2, 56∗10−7 was prepared in MQ-water at pH 2 and pH 6.5 and detected
at 517 nm with a spectrofluorimeter. The standard curve obtained for FITC insulin was:
2980.9·x−0.9913, R2 = 0, 983. Insulin concentration was determined with HPLC against a
standard curve of insulin at concentrations 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.5 mg/mL of insulin
in PBS or HCl. The obtained standard curve for insulin was: 106 · x −19117, R2 = 0.9976
The encapsulation efficiency for drug-loaded particles was determined by equation 3.1 for
the supernatant analysis method, and 3.2 for disrupted nanoparticle method. Equation 3.3
was used for determining the drug loading capacity.
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
11
==PAGE:20==
EE% = masssupernatant
massaddeddrug
∗100%
(3.1)
EE% =
massloaded
massaddeddrug
∗100%
(3.2)
DLC% =
massloaded
massdrug+NP
∗100%
(3.3)
3.6
Mucoadhesiveness studies
The hydrodynamic size, polydispersity index, and ζ-potential measurements of the nanopar-
ticles, mucin and the mixture were measured at 37°C using a Malvern Zetasizer, following
a previously published method with slight modifications. Briefly, polymersomes and mucin
at different (w:w) ratios (NP:Mucin) were tested (2:1, 1:1, 1:2, 1:5, 1:10). The mucin so-
lution was prepared at 1mg/mL in PBS adjusted to pH 6.5 and dissolved by mixing and
sonication the solution. For size determination, nanoparticles and the mucin dispersion
were mixed at different rations and incubated for 1 h at 37°C (final nanoparticle concen-
tration of 0.2 mg/mL). Dynamic light scattering was done using a volume of 100 μL and a
173° angle of detection with 13 runs of 10 s/run and three measurements. The ζ-potential
was investigated by laser Doppler electrophoresis using the Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern
Panalytical). A volume of 700 μL of the mixture was measured in folded capillary cells
(Malvern Panalytical) with 10 runs in 3 measurements. (N=3, n=3)
3.7
In vitro drug release from insulin-loaded polymersomes
In order to understand the release mechanism from insulin-loaded polymersomes, an in
vitro release study was performed. Two metods were used for released insulin detection:
HPLC and spectrofluorimetric microplate reader (adapted from the method used in [47]).
To allow for both detection methods, two types of insulin were used: porcine insulin for
HPLC detection, and FITC-insulin for fluorescence microplate reader.
Briefly, insulin-loaded and blank nanoparticles were prepared based on the direct hydra-
tion method, and samples were centrifuged and washed 3 times to remove the unloaded
drug. The pellet was then resuspended in 1 mL of MQ-water or PBS (pH=2), and the
samples were added to Float-a-Lyzer dialysis devices (MWCO: 8.10 kD), vol. 1 mL. 20
mL of MQ-water or PBS (pH=6.5) for each sample was pre-heated to 37 degrees celsius
in an oven equipped with a magnetic stirrer base. Each dialysis tube with nanoparticles
was immersed in the release solution, equipped with a magnet and stirred while incubated
at 37 degrees Celsius. At specific time intervals, 0.15 - 0.45 mL of the dialysate was with-
drawn and replaced equal amount of fresh media. The amount of drug in each sample
was measured using the respective anayltical method. Experiments were carried out for
24h, while focusing on the release profile during the first 2-3 hours. The experiments with
FITC-insulin were prepared in the dark and samples were covered with aluminum foil to
retain the fluorescent properties.
3.7.1
Data analysis and kinetic models
The cumulative insulin release rates from the pH-repsonsive polymersomes were calcu-
lated using the following equation: Release(%) = Cn/Cmax ∗100% where Cn is the con-
centration of insulin detected at each time point, and Cmax is the maximum concentration
of drug released during the experiment.
In order to predict the drug release mechanism from the nanoparticles, the in vitro release
data was fitted using kinetic models: (5.1) Zero-order (5.2) First-order, (5.3) Higuchi and
12
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:21==
(5.4) Korsmeyer-Peppas release models:
M(t)
M∞= k0t
(3.4)
M(t)
M∞= e−kt
(3.5)
M(t)
M∞= kHt1/2
(3.6)
M(t)
M∞= kKP tn
(3.7)
where M(t) = drug released at time t and M∞= cumulative drug released (maxiumum
drug detected), and M(t)/M∞is a fraction of drug released at time t, and n is the release
rate exponent, which depends on the release mechanism [48].
The exact release mechanism was determined by finding the n value from equation 5.4
after analyzing the obtained drug release data. See Table 5.1 for the correlation of the n
value to the drug delivery release mechanisms.
n value
Diffusion mechanism
0.45 ≤n
Fickian diffusion
0.45 < n < 0.89
Non-Fickian diffusion
n = 0.89
Case II transport (relaxation)
n > 0.89
Supercase II transport
Table 3.1: Release mechanisms from the polymeric system, depending on the n value
found from the Korsmeyer-Peppas kinetic model [48].
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
13
==PAGE:22==
4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results obtained from experiments executed during the thesis are pre-
sented and discussed. Results of polymersome preparation, size, PDI, morphology and
pH stability are first described. Secondly, morphological characterization is described.
Thirdly, polymersome-mucin interactions are analyzed. Next, the drug-loaded polymer-
somes are discussed in terms of size, PDI, zeta potential, encapsulation and drug loading
capacities. Finally, in vitro drug release is described and analyzed by fitting of kinetic drug
release models. This chapter focuses only on insulin studies, while curcumin-loaded poly-
mersome characterization can be seen in Supplementary Information A.2.
4.1
Preparation of polymersomes
To obtain an optimal formulation of pH-sensitive polymersomes, two different polymers
(the pH-responsive PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMCTBC) and the non-pH-responsive PEG22-p(CL35-
g-TMC)) were synthesized as described in section 3.2 and section 3.3. A carboxylic group
(pKa = 5) was incorporated in the pH-responsive polymer to allow for deprotonation at pH
< 5, while ensuring a stable drug encapsulation system at low pH values [49]. Poly-
mersome assembly was induced by direct hydration, based on previous work done by
Welzen et. al, where pH-responsive PEG22-pCL-gTMC copolymers effectively formed
uniform polymersomes [42].
Five different polymersome formulations were established at different polymer TMC : TM-
CTBC ratios, to evaluate the influence of polymer composition on the vesicle size, PDI
and pH-response profiles. The polymersomes were formulated at pH 2 to ensure a stable
protonation of the carboxylic group in the TMCTBC polymer. Figure 5.1 and table 4.1
shows an overview of the average size distribution and PDI of pINS formulations at pH 2.
Figure 4.1: Average hydrodynamic size distribution of pINS0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 formu-
lations at pH 2.
14
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:23==
Table 4.1: pH-responsive polymersome formulations and their Z-average size at pH 2.
Sample
TMCTBC
TMC
Z-average size
PDI
(%)
(%)
(nm)
pINS0
0
100
145.3 ± 1.32
0.15 ± 0.17
pINS25
25
75
110.8 ± 0.78
0.12 ± 0.01
pINS50
50
50
100.1 ± 1.12
0.17 ± 0.02
pINS75
75
25
95.27 ± 0.38
0.15 ± 0.02
pINS100
100
0
93.31 ± 0.67
0.14 ± 0.03
From figure fig. 4.1 and Table 5.1 it is evident that the pINS formulations are increasingly
smaller with the higher TMCTBC polymer ratio. The average particle size decreased
from 145.3 nm for pINS0, to 93.31 nm for pINS100, while the PDI of the formulations re-
mained within 0.12 to 0.17, indicating a uniform particle size distribution. The observation
of smaller pINS100 particles can be explained by the increased stability of the protonated
carboxylic acid group in pH 2, thereby driving the assembly of smaller and more uniform
particles. The carboxylic group can improve the solubility of the polymer in acidic condi-
tions, thereby leading to better dispersion of the polymer and leading to reduced particle
size [49]. The particle size is a crucial parameter to consider when developing an oral de-
livery system, as this directly impacts the particle transport across the epithelial cell layer.
In this work, it is very important to establish a particle size between 100 - 200 nm, as this
promotes efficient cellular uptake when administered orally. Smaller particles (<100 nm)
are more desirable since they can more readily interact with cell surface receptors and un-
dergo endocytosis. Larger nanoparticles (200 - 300 nm) are more prone to phagocytotic
clearance and less likely to undergo cellular uptake [50]. Moreover, this data validates the
stability and uniformity of the polymersomes at the low pH found in the stomach, meaning
they are able to remain stable in the first stages of oral administration, before reaching
the release site - the small intestine.
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.2: Average hydrodynamic size distribution of A) pINS0 and B) pINS100 at pH
6.5 over 2-hour incubation. (N=3)
4.2
pH-triggered destabilization of polymersomes
The polymersomes are expected to protect the encapsulated drug from the low pH en-
vironment in the stomach and release it in the small intestine, where the pH is 6-7. To
determine how the pINS formulations would behave in different pH environments of the
GI tract, the polymersomes were incubated and measured at different pH values: 5, 6.5
and 7.5. Z-average size and PDI measurements were taken immediately after pH adjust-
ment and continued for every 20 minutes for 2 hours and after 24 hours. For simplicity,
the chapter is focused on pINS0 and pINS100 formulations at pH 6.5, as this is the envi-
ronment in the small intestine, where the polymersomes are expected to release cargo.
Results from incubation pH 5 and above are discussed, as the morphological changes are
expected to occur above the pKa of the carboxylic group (pKa 5) [51]. The first two hours
are most important for delivery in the small intestine, as the particles of size 100-200 nm
typically have a short retention time of approx. 1.5 - 2 hours [52]. Therefore, 2-hour data
points were examined to determine the disassembly time of polymersome formulations
when they reach the small intestine. See figure 4.2 for the Z-average size and PDI val-
ues of pINS0 and pINS100 formulations after 2 hours of incubation in the respective pH
values. See supplementary information for the pINS25, pINS50, and pINS75 formulation
data.
Increasing the pH of the solutions to 6.5 resulted in particle destabilization in the carboxyl
group functionalized vesicles, confirming the hypothesis of polymersome disassembly at
pH > 5. It is evident that pINS0 size and PDI remained constant after increasing the pH to
6.5, which correlates to the fact that this formulation does not contain any of the carboxylic-
acid functionalized polymers. For pINS100, however, a rapid increase in size from 93.31
nm to 148.9 nm was observed already at 15 minutes after the pH increase. Likewise, the
polydispersity index of the particles increased rapidly from 0.136 to 0.419 within 15 min-
utes of incubation, verifying the disassembly and structural changes of the particles in the
sample. Because the carboxylic group is located on the hydrophobic part of the polymer,
i.e. the interior of the polymersome, it causes repulsion after its deprotonation at pH >
5 (above the pKa of the carboxylic acid group), thereby disrupting the previously formed
uniform vesicles. The rapid increase in size and PDI confirms the particle destabilization
and disassembly at pH 6.5.
16
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.3: pINS0 and pINS100 formulations over 2-hour timespan at different pH: A)
Zeta-average size and B) PDI at pH 5; C) Zeta-average size and D) PDI at pH 6.5. Results
are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3).
Furthermore, the polymersome size distribution was evaluated after 24-hour incubation.
Compared to the 2-hour incubation data (fig. 4.2), nanoparticles remained at a similar
size for the pINS100 formulation. Even though pH-responsive polymersomes typically
undergo disassembly or swelling upon pH changes [49], the structural changes are highly
individual between formulations, and depend on the used polymer composition. The ob-
servance of nanoparticles at 24h timespan might indicate that the nanoparticles have only
partially disassembled, and exhibit an incomplete response to the pH stimulus. Another
possible explanation is particle swelling, re-assembly or aggregation of the polymers af-
ter the initial pH response [39]. It must be considered that the yield of the synthesized
polymer is not determined after functionalization with the carboxylic group. Therefore, the
exact proportion of the pH-responsive polymer from the synthesis reaction is unknown.
This may contribute to the partial pH response, indicating both TMC and TMCTBC poly-
mers present in the formulation. To improve this, the polymer yield can be estimated by
NMR for a more accurate pH-responsive polymersome characterization.
However, the PDI after 24h incubation was the highest for all samples, confirming that the
initially formed polymersomes are not mono-disperse and have disassembled to some ex-
tent. To better understand what structures have been formed after increasing the pH, fur-
ther investigations are needed. Morphological characterization with cryo-TEM may clarify
what changes the nanoparticles undergo upon the pH increase. It must be emphasized
that the 24h observation is not expected to impact the drug delivery system performance
in vivo, since the nanoparticles would be retained in the small intestine for approximately
2 hours after oral ingestion [52]. However, we cannot be certain of how long the particles
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
17
==PAGE:26==
are retained in the intestine, therefore a 24-hour profile is still necessary.
Figure 4.4: pINS0 and pINS100 formulations after 24-hour incubation at different pH: A)
Size-intensity distribution at pH 5; B) Size-intensity distribution at pH 6.5. (N=3)
After evaluating the physicochemical characteristics and the pH response of the pINS
polymersome formulations, the most effective was found to be pINS100, i.e. the for-
mulation where 100% of the polymer used was the pH-responsive PEG22-p(CL-35-g-
TMCTBC). This was due to the small particle size at pH 2, and the highest rate of increase
of size distribution and PDI at pH 6.5. The almost instantaneous particle reaction to pH
changes, while retaining some of the particles, is highly beneficial for drug release in the
small intestine. The initial encounter with gut mucosa layer should allow for the particle
to be transported across the epithelial cell layer, and release the drug at the target site.
Thereby, for further experiments, pINS100 is chosen as the optimal formulation, while
pINS0 is used for the validation of the system before performing pH-responsive studies.
4.2.1
Morphological characterization of polymersomes
The morphology, homogeneity and configuration of blank and insulin-loaded PEG22-
p(CL35-gTMC) polymersomes were investigated by TEM (See fig. 4.5). The obtained
images verified that the particles form individually dispersed spherical particles, distributed
at 100-200 nm size. To allow for encapsulation of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs,
the polymers PEG22-p (CL35-g-TMCTBC) and PEG22-p(CL35-g-TMC) were dissolved
in two different solvents: PEG350 and DMSO at concentrations of 1 or 10 wt%.
Figure 4.5 shows that there are no differences in the polymersomes formed in DMSO or
PEG, meaning that both solvents can be used for the respective drug formulations. The
morphological image of insulin-loaded polymersomes (fig. 4.5 C ) confirms that the drug
loading was effective and resulted in spherical particles of 204.4 nm size. Insulin-loaded
polymersomes are evident to have increased in size, as a result of insulin loaded in the
core and surrounding the external layer of the particles.
18
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.5: Transmission electron microscopy images of PEG22p(CL35gTMC) polymer-
somes: A) Polymersomes assembled with TMC polymer dissolved in DMSO at 10% wt,
and B) in PEG350 at 10%.
4.3
Qualitative characterization of mucin and polymersome
interactions
*This section is purely descriptive and provided as a discussion point. The mucoadhesive
studies were done by the PhD student Matteo Tollemeto.
Now that we have validated that the polymersomes are able to remain stable in the acidic
pH of the stomach, and disassemble at pH 6.5 of the small intestine, we will further inves-
tigate how the particle interacts with mucus. The role of mucus in peptide drug absorption
has been extensively reported as one of the main factors causing low bioavailability [53].
Additionally, the mucoadhesive properties of PCL polymers have been shown to increase
the transit time through the gastrointestinal tract, thereby enhancing the residence time
in the uptake site [11]. We previously hypothesized that the polymer would interact with
mucin, providing mucoadhesion and facilitating passage through the epithelial cell layer.
Subsequently, we tested the mucin and polymersome interaction with DLS measurements
of size, PDI and ξ-potential at different NP:mucin ratios after 1 hour of incubation.
It was observed that the hydrodynamic radius, PDI and ξ-potential of the mucin-nanocarrier
complex increasingly changes upon the addition of a higher concentration of mucin (see
figure 4.6 and table 4.2). As shown in the hydrodynamic size distribution and PDI values,
there is a distinct increase in both size and PDI, specifically at the polymersome:mucin
(PM:mucin) ratio of 1:10.where the highest size and PDI is reported. The size had in-
creased from 120.6 nm to 252.1 nm upon adding 10x the ratio of mucin to polymersomes.
Moreover, the PDI reached 0.703 which indicates that the interaction between mucin and
particles leads to highly polydisperse particles.
The ξ-potential measurements confirm the interaction between mucin and nanoparticles,
as the negatively charged polymersomes increased in their charge upon the addition of
mucins. Mucin molecules contain positively charged amino acid residues, such as lysine
and arginine [54], which are likely to attract the negatively charged nanoparticles and
drive mucoadhesion. Even though the overall charge of mucins was -8.3 mV, the poly-
mersomes still showed strong interaction with mucins by the largely increased size and
PDI values. It must be noted that even at the highest NP:mucin ratio, the average size,
PDI and ξ-potential of the particles increased, meaning that the interaction is not limited
to the mucin concentration. Therefore, we can confirm the hypothesis of polymersome
mucoadhesion. To further validate these findings, more studies should be done, by using
QCM-D or intestinal simulation, where an in vitro model can be developed to mimic the
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 4.2: Average hydrodynamic size, PDI and ξ-potential of polymersomes and their
interaction with mucin at different polymersome:mucin ratios (PM:mucin).
Sample ratio
Average size (nm)
PDI
ξ −potential
(PM:Mucin)
(%)
(%)
mV
Polymersomes
120.6
0.14
-29.73
2:1
128.6
0.18
-20.3
1:1
134.5
0.22
-16.6
1:2
145.4
0.29
-13.0
1:5
217.3
0.51
-9.64
1:10
252.1
0.703
-7.8
Mucin
803.5
1
-8.3
conditions of the intestinal environment.
Figure 4.6: Polymersome interaction with mucin. A) Hydrodynamic diameter of polymer-
somes interacting with mucin at different PM:mucin ratios. The graph shows the hydrody-
namic diameter of different ratios of PM:mucin: polymersomes (grey), 2:1 (light yellow),
1:1 (blue), 1:2 (light blue), 1:5 (green), 1:10 (red), mucin (purple). B) -potential of poly-
mersomes interacting with mucin at different nanoparticle:mucin (PM:mucin) ratios. The
graph shows the hydrodynamic diameter of different ratios of PM:mucin: polymersomes
(grey), 2:1 (light yellow), 1:1 (blue), 1:2 (light blue), 1:5 (green), 1:10 (red), mucin (pur-
ple). C) Size distribution intensity profile of different ratios of PM:mucin: polymersomes
(grey), 2:1 (light yellow), 1:1 (blue), 1:2 (light blue), 1:5 (green), 1:10 (red), mucin (pur-
ple). Results are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3), and the final concentration
of polymersomes was 0.2 mg/mL in PBS, *p < 0.05.
20
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:29==
4.4
Characterization of insulin-loaded polymersomes
After establishing the optimal pINS formulation for pH-response, insulin-loaded polymer-
somes were evaluated in terms of their size, PDI, ξ-potential, encapsulation efficiency
(EE%) and drug loading capacity (DLC %). We previously hypothesized that insulin will
interact with the negatively charged polymers at a low pH value, thereby driving polymer-
drug interaction and enhancing the drug encapsulation. To validate this, encapsulation
experiments were done with the direct hydration method, and the obtained size and PDI
data are summarized in table table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Blank and insulin-loaded pINS0 and pINS100 polymersome formulations.
Samples S1-S3 were prepared with the non-pH-responsive TMC polymer dissolved in
PEG350 at 1 %wt. Samples P1-P3 were prepared with the pH-responsive TMCTBC poly-
mer dissolved PEG350 at 1%wt. Results are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3)
Sample code
Insulin C)
Z-average size
PDI
(mg/mL)
nm
S1
1
190.5 ± 1.002
0.303 ± 0.01
S2
0.75
173.5 ± 1.604
0.182 ± 0.001
S3
0.5
167.1 ± 1.769
0.185 ± 0.025
P1
1
85.99 ± 0.807
0.132 ± 0.015
P2
0.75
105.2 ± 1.747
0.122 ± 0.028
P3
0.5
103.8 ± 3.225
0.212 ± 0.025
Figure 4.7: Average size distribution of A) insulin-loaded pINS100 polymersomes and
B) insulin-loaded pINS0 polymersomes at 3 different insulin concentrations. Results are
shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3)
Similarly to the previous results, the pINS100 polymersomes have formed smaller par-
ticles than pINS0, even after insulin loading. A large increase in size is observed for
insulin-loaded pINS0 particles,
Subsequently, the zeta potential of loaded and blank polymersomes was measured, to ob-
serve any changes in the particle charge upon adding insulin. As reported in fig. 4.8, the
zeta-potentials for blank polymersomes, -29.46 for pINS0 and -15.5 for pINS100, showed
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
21
==PAGE:30==
a large difference between the two polymer formulations. The observation of pINS100
polymersomes being more positive than pINS0, can be explained by the carboxylic acid
group on the pINS100 polymer being protonated at pH 2, leading to a more positive sys-
tem. Insulin loading rapidly increased the polymersome charge, due to the positively
charged amino acids on insulin at acidic conditions. The insulin-loaded polymersomes,
charged at -3.03, showed a rapid increase of +12.02 in the overall pINS100 polymersome
charge, indicating a strong electrostatic interaction between the drug and nanoparticle.
This indicates that the particles have encapsulated insulin, and some molecules might be
attached to the outer layer of the polymersomes, causing them to increase in size. More-
over, the positively charged insulin is expected to be prone to adherence to the negatively
charged polymersomes and thus increasing the particle charge.
Figure 4.8: Average zeta potential of pINS0 and pINS100 formulations, with and without
insulin at pH 2. Results are shown as the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3)
22
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:31==
4.4.1
Encapsulation Efficiency and Drug Loading Capacity
In this chapter, we assess the drug encapsulation efficiency and loading capacity for the
pINS0 and pINS100 polymersomes. Two drugs were used to determine the encapsulation
profiles of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs: insulin and curcumin. Here, we focus
on insulin encapsulation. Results from curcumin encapsulation studies can be seen in
supplementary information.
Three different methods were applied to determine the insulin encapsulation: (1) super-
natant analysis, (2) particle disruption with organic solvent MeOH, and (3) pH-induced
disruption. The following results were obtained from the insulin encapsulation studies:
Table 4.4: Insulin loading in non-pH-responsive polymersomes. Samples were prepared
with the TMC polymer dissolved PEG350 at 1%wt. Results are shown as the average ±
SD (N = 3, n = 3).
Sample
Method
Insulin [C]
EE
DLC
(mg/mL)
(%)
(%)
N1
SN
2
22.96 ± 0.03
47.61 ± 0.034
N2
SN
1
26.37 ± 0.08
41.19 ± 0.54
N3
SN
0.75
20.43 ± 0.08
27.31 ± 0.32
N4
SN
0.5
22.05 ± 0.15
16.5 ± 0.33
N5
MeOH
2
15.95 ± 0.002
38.95 ± 0.003
N6
MeOH
1
32.63 ± 0.0008
39.49 ± 0.0006
Table 4.5: Insulin loading in pH-responsive polymersomes. Samples were prepared with
the pH-responsive TMCTBC polymer dissolved PEG350 at 1%wt. Results are shown as
the average ± SD (N = 3, n = 3).
Sample
Method
Insulin [C]
EE
DLC
(mg/mL)
(%)
(%)
S1
SN
1
16.30 ± 0.01
24.56 ± 0.02
S3
SN
2
23.72 ± 0.03
48.58 ± 0.03
M4
MeOH
1
34.96 ± 0.02
39.39 ± 0.002
P5
pH
2
22.99 ± 0.09
50.66 ± 0.07
P1
pH
1
36.43 ± 0.09
50.28 ± 0.05
The encapsulation and loading capacity data in table 4.5 and table 4.4 clearly indicates
a correlation between insulin concentration and loading efficiency. By the addition of 2
mg/mL insulin, higher encapsulation efficiency was detected with the supernatant analy-
sis method. This correlates with the previously observed increase in particle size when
increasing the loaded insulin concentration. This observation also explains the drug load-
ing capacity, which is a polymer-to-drug ratio, indicating how efficiently the drug takes up
the nanoparticle space. The drug loading capacity
By comparing the pINS0 and pINS100 loading data, a generally more effective encapsu-
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
23
==PAGE:32==
lation is observed in pINS100 polymersomes. This may be due to the carboxylic acid on
the TMCTBC polymer increasing the electrostatic attraction between polymer and insulin,
thereby enhancing the encapsulation and benefiting the smaller size of the polymersomes.
However, the values remained within the 5 - 10% range between pINS0 and pINS100,
indicating a similar encapsulation pattern across the polymers.
The second method, particle washing and disruption, showed similar results to the su-
pernatant method, indicating a robust model for encapsulation efficiency determination.
Overall, the pH and MeOH disrupted nanoparticles showed encapsulation between 23 -
36 %, which is approximately 10 - 15 % higher than detected by the supernatant method.
The pH-disrupted nanoparticles showed the most efficient encapsulation values for both
formulations, i.e. 34.63% for pINS0 and 36.43% for pINS100. The highest value of encap-
sulation efficiency reported in this work was 36.45% and 50.66% DLC% for pH-disrupted
nanoparticles loaded with 1 mg/mL insulin.
It must be noted that differences in methods may influence the results. Generally, the
supernatant method showed lower encapsulation results than particle disruption. This
might be related to the aforementioned probability of insulin adherence to the particle
surface. However, because the method involved re-suspension of the nanoparticle pellet,
the likelihood of free insulin being adhered to the particle surface was lower than after one
step of centrifugation as in the supernatant method. The repetition of washing is known to
better ensure that the unencapsulated insulin is removed by centrifugation [55], therefore
the samples N5, N6, M4, P5 and P6 are regarded as the most realistic representation of
loaded drug amount.
To improve further encapsulation studies, the exact methods for drug loading determina-
tion must be examined closely. The supernatant analysis method, where the unencapsu-
lated drug is separated from the nanoparticles by centrifugation, is one of the most widely
applied methods for determining encapsulation efficiency [56]. However, the drawbacks
of using this method must be considered when observing the data. The centrifugation
may not lead to full separation of the polymersomes and unencapsulated drug, which can
increase the insulin detected in the supernatant. Moreover, the centrifugation process,
especially at high rpm speeds, can cause disruption to the polymersomes, thereby lead-
ing to drug release from the particles. The particle fragility and sensitivity to mechanical
stress are undetermined, therefore the centrifugation speed must be chosen carefully, in
order not to disrupt the particles. Furthermore, as proteins have a tendency to adhere
to the surface of polymeric particles [57], even some of the unencapsulated insulin may
remain adhered to the particle surface, leading to overestimated amounts of the loaded
drug in the particle interior. The particles adhered to the outer surface of polymersomes
are likely to be the first molecules to release upon a structural change, which is later
discussed in drug release studies.
Generally, the supernatant and particle disruption are reported to be the most reliable
detection methods across drug delivery research [56], therefore we conclude that the
obtained data is reliable.
Centrifugal ultrafiltration was also applied in this work, but
showed unreliable results by split HPLC peaks, indicating that the insulin might be de-
graded while passing through the filter membrane. If further studies were conducted, the
dialysis method could be employed, where the samples are loaded in dialysis devices and
the free drug is removed via a concentration gradient-driven diffusion process [58].
24
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:33==
4.5
In vitro drug release from insulin-loaded polymersomes
One of the most important factors of polymersome encapsulation is the ability to facilitate
controlled release of the encapsulated drug [39]. Understanding the drug release mech-
anisms from nanostructures is a complex problem that researchers still struggle to fully
explain, due to the variability of parameters for boundary conditions of each drug formula-
tion. Despite the vast differences between formulations, almost all drug release processes
involve diffusion phenomena, which is a well-described and widely applied mathematical
model [48]. Thereupon, several mathematical methods are developed for understanding
drug release behaviour, known as pharmacokinetic models. The very basis of these mod-
els relies on Fick’s law of diffusion, but is not limited by it, as many drug delivery systems
undergo a combination of multiple release mechanisms [59].
To further validate the pH-responsive behaviour of the polymersomes, in vitro drug release
studies were performed. This chapter focuses on the cumulative release, detected by
two different methods, and the kinetic release profiles of pINS formulations. As already
shown in Section pH responsive studies, the polymersomes disassemble quickly within
a pH above 6.5 and continue to increase in PDI for 2-3 hours. It has been reported that
insulin-loaded particles are absorbed in the small intestine for approx. 1 -2 hours ([13]),
therefore we will discuss the release profiles of 2-3 hours.
Insulin release from polymersomes was determined by the dialysis method, where sam-
ples of insulin-loaded polymersomes were added to dialysis devices, and immersed in a
solution at pH 6.5, 37 degrees Celsius. Two insulin-loaded formulations were prepared:
F1 with porcine insulin, for detection in HPLC, and F2 with FITC-insulin for detection with
fluorescence microplate reader. Two control formulations were prepared: C1 - FITC-
insulin loaded pINS0, immersed in pH 6.5 buffer, and C2 - FITC-insulin loaded pINS100,
immersed in pH 2 buffer. Table section 4.5 provides an overview of formulation parame-
ters and total drug released during the release study.
Table 4.6: In vitro release of insulin from polymersome formulations. INS-pINS100 at pH
6.5 = (F1); FITC-INS-pINS100at pH 6.5 = F2; FITC-INS-pINS0 at pH 6.5 =C1; FITC-INS-
pINS100 at pH 2 = C2. Results are shown as the average ± SD (F1: N =2, n=2); (F2: N
= 4, n = 4) (C1 and C2:, N=3, n=3)
Sample
Added drug
Loaded drug
Drug released
Drug released
(mg)
(mg)
(mg)
(%)
F1
0.8
0.22 ± 0.04
0.04 ± 0.02
14.54 ± 0.06
F2
0.32
0.13 ± 0.02
0.02 ± 5.60 · 10−5
4.92 ± 3.20 · 10−3
C1
0.32
0.17 ± 0.01
0.0003 ± 1.91 · 10−7
-
C2
0.32
0.16 ± 0.03
0.0003 ± 1.91 · 10−7
-
To fully understand the drug release profiles, the amount of encapsulated drug must be
taken into consideration. For sample F1, 0.22 mg of insulin was loaded, and only 14%
of the drug was released during the experiment, leaving most of the drug unreleased.
For F2, an even lower drug release of 4.92 % was detected. Nevertheless, even the low
release concentrations allowed for kinetic evaluation of the release profiles. In both exper-
iments, a burst release phase can be observed within 30-40 minutes, which contributes
approximately 35-45% of the cumulative release (see fig. 4.9). Interestingly, the detected
concentration for some samples dropped right after the burst-release phase, possibly in-
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.9: Insulin release profiles from pINS100 in cumulative per cent and amount (mg)
of insulin released. A) porcine insulin detected by HPLC and B) FITC-insulin detected
by a fluorescence microplate reader. C1 depicts a control sample of FITC-Insulin pINS0
formulation at pH 6.5. C2 depicts a control sample of FITC-Insuln pINS100 formulation
immersed in pH2 buffer. (F1: N =2, n=2); (F2: N = 4, n = 4) (C1 and C2:, N=3, n=3).
26
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:35==
dicating a delayed pH response after the initial insulin release. It must be noted that
the HPLC studies showed high interference in the samples at samples taken from 15-20
minute time points. The initially released insulin did not show this interference, indicat-
ing that the initially detected insulin might be released from the surface of the particles.
The interference in HPLC peaks is likely due to the insulin-polymer interactions, as the
insulin molecule would be electrostatically more likely to adhere to the negatively charged
polymer.
After the initial burst phase, a more constant drug release is observed, indicating a diffusion-
driven process [48]. This data correlates to the pH-response studies described in Section
X (pH responsive). We reported that the polymeric nanoparticles undergo disassembly of
the initial structures within 15-40 minutes upon a pH change above 5.5, which in drug re-
lease context translates into the initial burst-release occurring between 10 to 40 minutes.
Despite the low drug release rate, the data confirms a pH-driven response that releases
drug from the nanoparticle formulations.
To further examine the insulin release mechanisms more closely, the obtained in vitro
drug release data was fitted using kinetic models: Zero-order, first-order, Higuchi and
Korsmeyer-Peppas release models. The kinetic models were chosen based on previous
studies on similar nanoparticle formulations investigating drug release mechanisms [60],
[61]. The zero-order model explains release mechanisms where the drug release rate
is constant and independent of the drug concentration remaining in the system. The
first-order kinetic model describes a process where the drug release is concentration-
dependent, and the drug release rate is directly proportional to the drug remaining in
the system. The Higuchi model describes drug release which is entirely controlled by
diffusion. Finally, the Korsmeyer-Peppas model is derived from Fick’s law of diffusion
and allows to define whether a drug release profile follows Fickian diffusion-controlled
release or the non-Fickian diffusion and other particle disassembly or erosion mechanisms
[62][48].
Based on the results from kinetic model fitting (shown in fig. 4.10). , we can determine
which release mechanism describes this drug delivery system. Table ?? Table 7.7 shows
the correlation coefficients and K constants of the mathematical models, found from fitting
the cumulative drug release data. The most accurate model describing this drug delivery
system was found by comparing the correlation coefficients R2, i.e. determining which
model shows the closest R2 value to 1. The Korsmeyer-Peppas (K-P) model was found
to be the best-fitting model, as the R2 values for both formulations were the highest.
The K-P model is commonly applied to polymeric or matrix-based drug delivery systems
such as hydrogels, microspheres, nanoparticles, or polymer-based implants. The kinetic
model suggests that the main drivers for drug release are either Fickian diffusion, or a
combination of diffusion and particle erosion mechanisms [48]. For a complete evaluation
of the K-P model, the n value must be considered, which shows the nature of the release
mechanism. When n ≤0.45, the release is primarily driven by Fickian diffusion; and if
0.45 < n < 0.89, then drug release follows other transport mechanisms [62].
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
27
==PAGE:36==
Sample
Zero-order
First-order
Higuchi
K.-P.
K0
R2
K
R2
KH
R2
KHP
R2
n
F2*
1.73 ∗10−4
0.911
8.66
0.894
1.89 ∗10−3
0.911
9.75 ∗10−4
0.913
0.50
F1*
4.21 ∗10−4
0.899
7.77
0.947
5.40 ∗10−3
0.899
5.62 ∗10−3
0.949
0.48
Table 4.7: In vitro release kinetics parameters of insulin from pINS100 formulations, fit-
ted to four models: Zero-order, First-order, Higuchi and Korsmeyer-Peppas models. F1
depicts Insulin-pINS100 sample, detected by HPLC; F2 depicts FITC-Insulin-pINS100
sample; K.P. is short for Korsmeyer-Peppas kinetic model.
Figure 4.10: Kinetic release models of insulin-loaded pINS100 formulations, fitted to four
models: Zero-order, First-order, Higuchi and Korsmeyer-Peppas models. (F1: N=2, F2:
N=4)
In this work, the pH-responsive stimuli are expected to be the main driving mechanism for
initial drug release, accompanied by diffusion after the burst-release phase. This hypoth-
esis was validated by the fitting of the Korsmeyer-Peppas model and the n values of 0.50
and 0.48, describing a combination of Fickian diffusion and other transport mechanisms.
By examining the kinetic model data further, it is evident that the concentrations of re-
leased drugs are relatively low. In the Korsmeyer-Peppas model, the KKP value relates
to the release rate at which the drug leaves the system [48]. Especially, the rate constants
K are relatively low when compared to previous kinetic drug release studies from poly-
meric nanoparticles. Similar drug release studies have reported KKP values between 30
and 55, and KH values of 15 to 40, which were considered slow-release drug delivery
systems [62]. Another pH-sensitive insulin-loaded drug delivery system reported KKP
28
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:37==
values between 7 and 30, however with a diffusion-driven release mechanism [30]. In
this study, the KKP was reported at 9.75∗10−4 and 5.62∗10−3, indicating that the release
rate of this drug delivery system is very low, which may be caused by a strong interaction
between insulin and the polymersomes. As the total drug released was only 4.92 - 14%
of the loaded drug, a large fraction of the loaded insulin has remained encapsulated, even
after 24 hours. The low K value can often be desirable in some delivery systems where
sustained and controlled release is desired over a rapid release [48]. However, when
designing an insulin-based drug delivery system, it is important to ensure the full insulin
dose is delivered to the bloodstream, to reach the therapeutic benefits [11]. Therefore,
it is necessary to investigate further what causes drug retention within the particles after
exposure to pH stimuli.
The obtained kinetic data shows a correlation with the previously studied pH-response
profiles of polymersomes. At pH 6.5, the size distribution and PDI profiles of polymer-
somes indicated a large increase in the parameters after 2 and 24 hours, but not a com-
plete disruption. This can explain the low drug release profiles, as the insulin may still be
adhered to or encapsulated in the remaining particles even after pH-induced changes.
Moreover, we previously reported that the Zeta potential significantly increased upon
adding insulin to polymersomes.
Thereby, it can be hypothesized that the positively
charged insulin molecules would interact strongly with the negatively charged polymer-
somes. This interaction is likely to lead to drug retention in the release experiments,
explaining the slow drug release rate. Another factor to consider is that the detected
amount of released drug might only contribute to the insulin that is adhered to the surface
of nanoparticles. The insulin on the surface of polymersomes would be readily released
once the pH change initiates the polymersome disassembly and drives particle erosion.
Thereupon, it is necessary to perform further studies to investigate the polymersome be-
haviour at increased pH. Morphological characterization with cryo-TEM or SEM would
allow us to determine what kind of morphological changes the nanoparticles undergo.
For stability and degradation analysis, size exclusion chromatography (SEC), differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) can be
applied for determining the structural and stability changes over time.
In previous kinetic studies on other pH-responsive polymeric nanoparticle drug delivery
systems, many similarities can be observed in the kinetic release profiles. A study on poly-
meric nanoparticles reported a Korsmeyer-P guided release, however with much higher K
values[62] . A pH-responsive nanoparticle delivery system for insulin showed similar com-
bined drug release profiles of diffusion and erosion, [30] indicating a common trend within
polymersome formulations. However, the reported n values were significantly higher,
indicating initial release driven by diffusion, followed by particle erosion. It must be em-
phasized that drug release kinetics is highly individual to each DDS, and is influenced
by a variety of factors, ranging from physiochemical to environmental parameters. The
kinetic evaluation allows us to better understand the driving mechanisms for drug release,
thereby allowing us to improve further studies and the drug delivery system itself.
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
29
==PAGE:38==
5
Conclusion
In this work, we analyzed a pH-responsive polymeric nanoparticle oral delivery for bio-
pharmaceuticals. First of all, we characterized the formed nanoparticles in terms of size
distribution, polydispersity index and morphology. By using direct hydration as a basis
for polymersome formulation in acidic conditions (pH = 2), uniform vesicles with a size
between 93 to 145 nm were formed. Furthermore, pH-response profiles were analyzed
with DLS for five different drug formulations at pH 5, 6.5 and 7.5, simulating the intesti-
nal environment. The polymersomes showed a large increase in size after as short as 15
minutes, and remained dismantled after 24h. The results confirmed the previously formed
hypothesis of particle destabilization at pH > 5. Furthermore, mucoadhesion of the poly-
mersomes was studied with DLS, by addition of mucin to the particles at different ratios,
and observing larger particle structures with a lower charge. Next, we analyzed the drug
loading capabilities of the polymersomes, which yielded in successful encapsulation of
insulin at EE% of 36% and DLC% of 50%, and was confirmed by TEM imaging of insulin-
loaded particles. Finally, drug release profiles were established by simulating the condi-
tions of the small intestine, and the drug release values were fitted to kinetic models. It
was found that insulin release from polymersomes follows the Korsmeyer-Peppas model,
indicating a system that follows both Fickian diffusion and other transport mechanisms.
These findings are aligned with the expected behaviour, as the pH-response would drive
a burst-release of the particles at pH 6.5, followed by a slower, diffusion-driven release
mechanism.
5.1
Future prospects
This study is only a fraction of what is necessary for a new drug formulation to reach the
patients. As this work was limited to drug delivery system formulation, characterization,
mucoadhesion and drug release studies, there is a multitude of steps to take until this
formulation can make an impact in the therapeutic world. First of all, toxicity and cell
toxicity studies must be performed in order to assess the biocompatibility of the polymer-
somes. This can be done by an in vitro cytotoxicity assay against Caco-2 cells (CCK-8),
where the cells are incubated with the sample solutions, subsequently by measuring their
adsorbance the cell viability can be determined. Secondly, more mucoadhesion studies
are needed to further investigate the interactions of polymersomes and mucus, thereby
validating and characterizing the particle interactions with the mucosal layer. This can
be studied with QCM-D and SAXS to determine structural changes of the particles upon
mucin addition and pH increase. Furthermore, to extensively analyze the intestinal up-
take and degradation, a simulated intestinal study can be performed, by incubating the
DDs with proteases found in the stomach. Another method that allows to explore the gas-
trointestinal uptake is a TWIN-SHIME simulator, which resembles the human intestinal
microbial ecosystem.
Once a sufficient cell viability is determined, and mucoadhesion characteristics are un-
derstood better, the DDS should be studied in vivo. For oral administration to animals,
the polymersomes can be incorporated in larger drug delivery structures such as micro-
containers, nanofbers and enteric coatings, which would provide an external protection
through the GI tract. This would allow to investigate whether the orally administered in-
sulin formulation acts as we have predicted, by releasing the cargo in the small intestine.
This can be determined by analyzing the glycemic and insulin profiles of diabetic pigs or
rats after administration of the novel insulin formulation.
30
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
app.biorender.com. BioRender.
[2]
Pouya Saeedi et al. “Global and regional diabetes prevalence estimates for 2019
and projections for 2030 and 2045: Results from the International Diabetes Feder-
ation Diabetes Atlas, 9th edition”. In: Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 157
(Nov. 2019). ISSN: 18728227. DOI: 10.1016/J.DIABRES.2019.107843.
[3]
Lutz Heinemann and Yves Jacques. Oral Insulin and Buccal Insulin: A Critical Reap-
praisal. Tech. rep. URL: www.journalofdst.org.
[4]
Bahman Homayun, Xueting Lin, and Hyo Jick Choi. Challenges and recent progress
in oral drug delivery systems for biopharmaceuticals. Mar. 2019. DOI: 10.3390/
pharmaceutics11030129.
[5]
Hiroshi Ikegami, Yoshihisa Hiromine, and Shinsuke Noso. “Insulin-dependent dia-
betes mellitus in older adults: Current status and future prospects”. In: Geriatrics &
Gerontology International 22.8 (Aug. 2022), pp. 549–553. ISSN: 1447-0594. DOI:
10.1111/GGI.14414. URL: https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/full/
10.1111/ggi.14414%20https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/abs/10.
1111/ggi.14414%20https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1111/
ggi.14414.
[6]
Aaron C. Foss et al. “Development of acrylic-based copolymers for oral insulin de-
livery”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 57.2 (2004),
pp. 163–169. ISSN: 09396411. DOI: 10.1016/S0939-6411(03)00145-0.
[7]
Peter Charles Griffiths et al. “Probing the interaction of nanoparticles with mucin
for drug delivery applications using dynamic light scattering”. In: European Jour-
nal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 97 (Nov. 2015), pp. 218–222. ISSN:
18733441. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.05.004.
[8]
Ehud Arbit and Miriam Kidron. “Oral Insulin: The Rationale for This Approach and
Current Developments”. In: Journal of diabetes science and technology (Online) 3.3
(2009), p. 562. ISSN: 19322968. DOI: 10.1177/193229680900300322. URL: /pmc/
articles/PMC2769870/%20/pmc/articles/PMC2769870/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2769870/.
[9]
Gayatri Iyer et al. An overview of oral insulin delivery strategies (OIDS). May 2022.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.03.144.
[10]
Patrik Lundquist et al. “Barriers to the Intestinal Absorption of Four Insulin-Loaded
Arginine-Rich Nanoparticles in Human and Rat”. In: ACS Nano 16.9 (Sept. 2022),
pp. 14210–14229. ISSN: 1936086X. DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.2c04330.
[11]
Camile B Woitiski et al. Strategies Toward the Improved Oral Delivery of Insulin
Nanoparticles via Gastrointestinal Uptake and Translocation. Tech. rep. 4. 2008,
pp. 223–237.
[12]
Shazia Mansoor et al. Polymer-based nanoparticle strategies for insulin delivery.
2019. DOI: 10.3390/polym11091380.
[13]
Jianbo Li et al. “Oral insulin delivery by epithelium microenvironment-adaptive nanopar-
ticles”. In: Journal of Controlled Release 341 (Jan. 2022), pp. 31–43. ISSN: 18734995.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.11.020.
[14]
A. K.J. Gradel et al. Factors Affecting the Absorption of Subcutaneously Adminis-
tered Insulin: Effect on Variability. 2018. DOI: 10.1155/2018/1205121.
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
31
==PAGE:40==
[15]
Alison J. Evans and Andrew J. Krentz. “Insulin resistance and β-cell dysfunction as
therapeutic targets in type 2 diabetes”. In: Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism 3.4
(Aug. 2001), pp. 219–229. ISSN: 14628902. DOI: 10.1046/j.1463-1326.2001.00101.x.
[16]
Stephen Gough and Parth Narendran. “Insulin and Insulin Treatment”. In: Textbook
of Diabetes. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, July 2010, pp. 425–439. DOI: 10.1002/
9781444324808.ch27.
[17]
Mark W. J. Strachan and Brian M. Frier. “Subcutaneous Insulin Administration”. In:
Insulin Therapy. London: Springer London, 2013, pp. 17–27. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-
4471-4760-2{\_}3.
[18]
P. Palumbo et al. “Observer-based glucose control via subcutaneous insulin admin-
istration”. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 45.18 (2012), pp. 107–112. ISSN: 14746670.
DOI: 10.3182/20120829-3-HU-2029.00065.
[19]
P. De Vos et al. “Insulin Levels After Portal and Systemic Insulin Infusion Differ in
a Dose-Dependent Fashion”. In: Hormone and Metabolic Research 30.12 (Dec.
1998), pp. 721–725. ISSN: 0018-5043. DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-978966.
[20]
Justin M. Gregory, Alan D. Cherrington, and Daniel J. Moore. “The Peripheral Peril:
Injected Insulin Induces Insulin Insensitivity in Type 1 Diabetes”. In: Diabetes 69.5
(May 2020), pp. 837–847. ISSN: 0012-1797. DOI: 10.2337/dbi19-0026.
[21]
Tiago Henrique Honorato Gatti et al. “Insulin-loaded polymeric mucoadhesive nanopar-
ticles: Development, characterization and cytotoxicity evaluation”. In: Brazilian Jour-
nal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 54.1 (2018). ISSN: 21759790. DOI: 10.1590/s2175-
97902018000117314.
[22]
Milind Sadashiv Alai, Wen Jen Lin, and Shailaja Suresh Pingale. Application of poly-
meric nanoparticles and micelles in insulin oral delivery. Sept. 2015. DOI: 10.1016/
j.jfda.2015.01.007.
[23]
Mei Chin Chen et al. A review of the prospects for polymeric nanoparticle platforms
in oral insulin delivery. Dec. 2011. DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.08.087.
[24]
P. R. Van Dijk et al. Intraperitoneal insulin infusion: Treatment option for type 1 di-
abetes resulting in beneficial endocrine effects beyond glycaemia. 2014. DOI: 10.
1111/cen.12546.
[25]
Asma Nusrat, Shanthi V. Sitaraman, and Andrew Neish. “Interaction of bacteria and
bacterial toxins with intestinal epithelial cells”. In: Current Gastroenterology Reports
3.5 (Oct. 2001), pp. 392–398. ISSN: 1522-8037. DOI: 10.1007/s11894-001-0081-9.
[26]
Ahmed Gedawy et al. Oral insulin delivery: existing barriers and current counter-
strategies. Feb. 2018. DOI: 10.1111/jphp.12852.
[27]
Elisabet Gullberg and Geotryckeriet). Particle transcytosis across the human in-
testinal epithelium : model development and target identification for improved drug
delivery. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, 2005. ISBN: 915546145X.
[28]
V. T. Ivanov and V. I. Deigin. “Evolution of Peptide Drug Biopharmaceutics”. In:
Russian Journal of Bioorganic Chemistry 49.3 (June 2023), pp. 422–434. ISSN:
1068-1620. DOI: 10.1134/S1068162023030123. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.
1134/S1068162023030123.
[29]
Giovanni M Pauletti et al. controlled release Structural requirements for intestinal
absorption of peptide drugs. Tech. rep. 1996, pp. 3–17.
[30]
Lei Sun et al. “A pH gated, glucose-sensitive nanoparticle based on worm-like meso-
porous silica for controlled insulin release”. In: Journal of Physical Chemistry B
117.14 (Apr. 2013), pp. 3852–3860. ISSN: 15205207. DOI: 10.1021/jp400442x.
[31]
Piyasi Mukhopadhyay et al. “Strategies for effective oral insulin delivery with modi-
fied chitosan nanoparticles: A review”. In: Progress in Polymer Science 37.11 (Nov.
32
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:41==
2012), pp. 1457–1475. ISSN: 0079-6700. DOI: 10.1016/J.PROGPOLYMSCI.2012.
04.004.
[32]
Noorjahan Aibani, Talat N. Khan, and Bridgeen Callan. “Liposome mimicking poly-
mersomes; A comparative study of the merits of polymersomes in terms of formu-
lation and stability”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 2 (Dec. 2020),
p. 100040. ISSN: 25901567. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpx.2019.100040.
[33]
Okada Jun’ichi, Smadar Cohen, and Langer Robert. “In Vitro Evaluation of Poly-
merized Liposomes as an Oral Drug Delivery System”. In: (). DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1023/A:1016214332030.
[34]
Bohdana M. Discher et al. “Polymersomes: Tough vesicles made from diblock copoly-
mers”. In: Science 284.5417 (May 1999), pp. 1143–1146. ISSN: 00368075. DOI:
10.1126/SCIENCE.284.5417.1143.
[35]
James Lefley, Christopher Waldron, and C. Remzi Becer. “Macromolecular design
and preparation of polymersomes”. In: Polymer Chemistry 11.45 (2020), pp. 7124–
7136. ISSN: 1759-9954. DOI: 10.1039/D0PY01247E.
[36]
Pengchao Zhao et al. “Nanoparticle-assembled bioadhesive coacervate coating
with prolonged gastrointestinal retention for inflammatory bowel disease therapy”.
In: Nature Communications 12.1 (Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10 . 1038 /
s41467-021-27463-6.
[37]
Ed Margerrison et al. Polyethylene glycol Safety Profile Report Details Date of Sub-
mission ECRI Corporate Governance Project Manager. Tech. rep. 2021.
[38]
Ed Margerrison et al. Polycaprolactone (PCL) Safety Profile Report Details Date of
Submission ECRI Corporate Governance Project Manager. Tech. rep. 2021.
[39]
Dennis E. Discher and Fariyal Ahmed. “POLYMERSOMES”. In: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10
8 (July 2006), pp. 323–341. ISSN: 15239829. DOI: 10.1146/ANNUREV.BIOENG.8.
061505.095838.
[40]
Tayebeh Anajafi and Sanku Mallik. Polymersome-based drug-delivery strategies for
cancer therapeutics. Apr. 2015. DOI: 10.4155/tde.14.125.
[41]
Sabna Kotta et al. Progress in Polymeric Micelles for Drug Delivery Applications.
Aug. 2022. DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14081636.
[42]
Pascal L.W. Welzen et al. “Reversibly self-assembled pH-responsive PEG-p(CL-g-
TMC) polymersomes”. In: Journal of Polymer Science 59.12 (June 2021), pp. 1241–
1252. ISSN: 26424169. DOI: 10.1002/pol.20200871.
[43]
Xiaofeng Sui et al. “Robust formation of biodegradable polymersomes by direct hy-
dration”. In: Polymer Chemistry 6.5 (Feb. 2015), pp. 691–696. ISSN: 17599962.
DOI: 10.1039/c4py01288g.
[44]
Talib Hussain et al. “In Vivo Evaluation of a Novel Chitosan-Polycaprolactone Based
Mucoadhesive Gastro-Retentive Sustained Release Drug Delivery System for Mil-
nacipran HCl”. In: AAPS PharmSciTech 21.2 (Feb. 2020). ISSN: 15309932. DOI:
10.1208/s12249-019-1606-6.
[45]
Ying-Ying Wang et al. “Addressing the PEG Mucoadhesivity Paradox to Engineer
Nanoparticles that “Slip” through the Human Mucus Barrier”. In: Angewandte Chemie
120.50 (Dec. 2008), pp. 9872–9875. ISSN: 00448249. DOI: 10.1002/ange.200803526.
[46]
B A Moussa, F Farouk, and H M E Azzazy. A Validated RP-HPLC Method for the
Determination of Recombinant Human Insulin in Bulk and Pharmaceutical Dosage
Form. Tech. rep. S1, pp. 449–457. URL: http://www.e.
[47]
Ming Guang Li et al. “Distribution, transition, adhesion and release of insulin loaded
nanoparticles in the gut of rats”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 329.1-2
(Feb. 2007), pp. 182–191. ISSN: 03785173. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2006.08.040.
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
33
==PAGE:42==
[48]
Constantin Mircioiu et al. Mathematical modeling of release kinetics from supramolec-
ular drug delivery systems. Mar. 2019. DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics11030140.
[49]
Bapurao Surnar and M. Jayakannan. “Stimuli-responsive poly(caprolactone) vesi-
cles for dual drug delivery under the gastrointestinal tract”. In: Biomacromolecules
14.12 (Dec. 2013), pp. 4377–4387. ISSN: 15257797. DOI: 10.1021/bm401323x.
[50]
Jesús Mosquera, Isabel García, and Luis M. Liz-Marzán. “Cellular Uptake of Nanopar-
ticles versus Small Molecules: A Matter of Size”. In: Accounts of Chemical Research
51.9 (Sept. 2018), pp. 2305–2313. ISSN: 0001-4842. DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.
8b00292.
[51]
Manuela Curcio et al. “Facile synthesis of pH-responsive polymersomes based on li-
pidized PEG for intracellular co-delivery of curcumin and methotrexate”. In: Colloids
and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 167 (July 2018), pp. 568–576. ISSN: 18734367. DOI:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2018.04.057.
[52]
Ji Hye Kang et al. “Small intestine- and colon-specific smart oral drug delivery sys-
tem with controlled release characteristic”. In: Materials Science and Engineering
C 91 (Oct. 2018), pp. 247–254. ISSN: 09284931. DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2018.05.052.
[53]
T Jung. “Biodegradable nanoparticles for oral delivery of peptides: is there a role
for polymers to affect mucosal uptake?” In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and
Biopharmaceutics 50.1 (July 2000), pp. 147–160. ISSN: 09396411. DOI: 10.1016/
S0939-6411(00)00084-9.
[54]
Bindu M. Boddupalli et al. Mucoadhesive drug delivery system: An overview. 2010.
DOI: 10.4103/0110-5558.76436.
[55]
Masahiro Fujiwara, Kumi Shiokawa, and Takayuki Kubota. “Direct encapsulation
of proteins into calcium silicate microparticles by water/oil/water interfacial reaction
method and their responsive release behaviors”. In: Materials Science and Engi-
neering: C 32.8 (Dec. 2012), pp. 2484–2490. ISSN: 09284931. DOI: 10.1016/j.
msec.2012.07.030.
[56]
T. S. Kovshova et al. “Optimization of Methods for Determination of the Encapsula-
tion Efficiency of Doxorubicin in the Nanoparticles Based on Poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) (PLGA)”. In: Drug development & registration 9.2 (May 2020), pp. 113–118.
ISSN: 2658-5049. DOI: 10.33380/2305-2066-2020-9-2-113-118.
[57]
Mona Alibolandi et al. “Dextran-b-poly (lactide-co-glycolide) polymersome for oral
delivery of insulin: In vitro and in vivo evaluation”. In: Journal of Controlled Release
227 (Apr. 2016), pp. 58–70. ISSN: 18734995. DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.02.031.
[58]
José A. Portilla-Arias et al. “Nanoparticles Made of Microbial Poly(γ-glutamate)s
for Encapsulation and Delivery of Drugs and Proteins”. In: Journal of Biomaterials
Science, Polymer Edition 20.7-8 (Jan. 2009), pp. 1065–1079. ISSN: 0920-5063.
DOI: 10.1163/156856209X444420.
[59]
SUVAKANTA DASH et al. KINETIC MODELING ON DRUG RELEASE FROM CON-
TROLLED DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS. Tech. rep.
[60]
Kiran Sonaje et al. “In vivo evaluation of safety and efficacy of self-assembled
nanoparticles for oral insulin delivery”. In: Biomaterials 30.12 (Apr. 2009), pp. 2329–
2339. ISSN: 01429612. DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2008.12.066.
[61]
Ankit Jain et al. “Docetaxel loaded chitosan nanoparticles: Formulation, charac-
terization and cytotoxicity studies”. In: International Journal of Biological Macro-
molecules 69 (2014), pp. 546–553. ISSN: 18790003. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.
06.029.
[62]
Ramona-Daniela Pavaloiu et al. “Evaluation of drug release kinetics from polymeric
nanoparticles loaded with poorly water-soluble APIs”. In: Ovidius University Annals
of Chemistry 32.2 (July 2021), pp. 132–136. DOI: 10.2478/auoc-2021-0020.
34
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:43==
A
Supplementary Information
A.1
pH-triggered destabilization of polymersomes
Table A.1: A summary of pINS0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 formulation average hydrodynamic
size, obtained in the pH-destabilization studies after 2 hours of incubation.
Formulation
Size
Size
Size
Size
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
pH 2
pH 5
pH 6.5
pH 7.5
pINS0
145.3 ± 1.32
100.4 ± 0.9
128.6 ± 0.54
131.2 ± 1.9
pINS25
110.8 ± 0.781
101.2 ± 0.69
141.1 ± 1.973
143.7 ± 0.98
pINS50
100.1 ± 1.126
108.6 ± 2.85
142.3 ± 0.777
151.7 ± 4.015
pINS75
95.27 ± 0.376
89.11 ± 8.339
140.2 ± 1.758
141.0 ± 1.328
pINS100
93.96 ± 0.67
91.8 ± 2.35
143.9 ± 4.455
151.1 ± 5.6
Table A.2: A summary of pINS0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 formulation average PDI, obtained
in the pH-destabilization studies after 2 hours of incubation.
Formulation
Size
Size
Size
Size
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
pH 2
pH 5
pH 6.5
pH 7.5
pINS0
0.153 ± 0.017
0.143 ± 0.029
0.157 ± 0.0023
0.212 ± 0.005
pINS25
0.123 ± 0.01
0.167 ± 0.021
0.197 ± 0.012
0.141 ± 0.009
pINS50
0.165 ± 0.022
0.358 ± 0.007
0.223 ± 0.006
0.277 ± 0.021
pINS75
0.146 ± 0.022
0.247 ± 0.055
0.222 ± 0.016
0.271 ± 0.022
pINS100
0.136 ± 0.034
0.205 ± 0.026
0.566 ± 0.004
0.596 ± 0.046
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure A.1: Intensity distribution graphs of the hydrodynamic size of pINS25, pINS50,
pINS75 and pINS100 formulations after 2-hour incubation at different pH. (N=3)
Figure A.2: A cumulative graph displaying the pINS0, pINS25, pINS50, pINS75 and
pINS100 formulations hydrodynamic size after 2-hour incubation at different pH. (N=3)
36
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:45==
Figure A.3: A cumulative graph displaying the pINS0, pINS25, pINS50, pINS75 and
pINS100 formulations poly density index (PDI) after 2-hour incubation at different pH.
(N=3)
Figure A.4: A graph displaying the size of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75 at pH 5 every 20
minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure A.5: A graph displaying the polydispersity index of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75
at pH 5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
Figure A.6: A graph displaying the average hydrodynamic size of pINS25, pINS50 and
pINS75 at pH 6.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
38
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:47==
Figure A.7: A graph displaying the polydispersity index of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75
at pH 6.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
Figure A.8: A graph displaying the average hydrodynamic size of pINS25, pINS50 and
pINS75 at pH 7.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.9: A graph displaying the average polydispersity index of pINS25, pINS50 and
pINS75 at pH 7.5 every 20 minutes for 2 hours. (N=3)
Figure A.10: A graph displaying the intensity distribution of pINS25, pINS50 and pINS75
at pH 6.5 after 24-hour incubation. (N=3)
40
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:49==
Figure A.11: A graph displaying the intensity distribution of pINS0, pINS25, pINS50,
pINS75 and pINS100 at pH 7.5 after 24-hour incubation. (N=3)
A.2
Hydrophobic drug encapsulation: Characterization of
curcumin-loaded polymersomes
A.2.1
Encapsulation efficiency and drug loading capacity
Table A.3: Curcumin loading in non-pH-responsive pINS0 polymersomes. Samples were
prepared with the TMC polymer dissolved in DMSO at 10 and 1%wt. (N=3).
Sample
Polymer [C]
Curcumin [C]
EE
DLC
(wt%)
(mg/mL)
(%)
(%)
pINS0
10
0.5
8.46 ± 0.12
9.40 ± 0.04
pINS0
10
0.25
9.77 ± 0.03
5.75 ± 0.02
pINS0
10
0.125
8.26 ± 0.013
2.50 ± 0.003
pINS0
1
0.5
66.96 ± 0.23
37.14 ± 0.102
pINS0
1
0.25
58.80 ± 0.41
22.62 ± 0.22
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.12: A graph displaying the average hydrodynamic size distribution of curcumin-
loaded pINS0 at pH 2. Cur 0.5 refers to sample loaded with 0.5 mg/mL curcumin, Cur
0.25 refers to sample loaded with 0.25 mg/mL curcumin, and Cur 0.125 refers to sample
loaded with 0.125 mg/mL curcumin. (N=3)
42
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
==PAGE:51==
Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceuticals
43
