==PAGE:1==
Computer Vision-based Detection and Robotic
Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture
Automation
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Cul­
ture Automation
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Daniel Schober
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Generative AI picture using DreamStudio by stability.ai
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Pl. 348,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Automation and Control group, Depart­
ment of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science (MSc) in Autonomous Systems.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of automation, mathematics,
programming, and statistics.
Daniel Schober ­ s212599
Signature
Date
ii
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Observing and handling liquids is one of the scientists’ most executed and time­consuming tasks
in research laboratories. To effectively deploy robots to work alongside research scientists, they
must be able to detect transparent containers and liquids and perform pouring tasks like human
scientists. One of the main difficulties in automating workflows in research laboratories is the
cost of introducing specialized and specifically designed hardware, which is often immutable
and not reusable.
This work investigates the opportunities of a vision­ and simulation­based approach to make
a robot a flexible and adaptable laboratory assistant demonstrated with a proposed new low­
batch system for cell culture automation. Cell culture is one of the fundamental tools in life
science research. It describes the process of maintaining and growing cells under controlled
physiological conditions in artificial environments outside of living organisms. Automating the
required manual processes can free up time for researchers, make working hours more flexible,
increase data generation, and reduce the use of disposable plastic. Existing laboratory hard­
ware and consumables used in manual cell culture applications are combined with a robot arm,
which executes all human tasks, including the pouring of liquids.
A two­step vision­based system is used for liquid volume estimation. First, segmented depth
maps of transparent containers and the liquids inside are generated based on a convolutional
neural network (CNN) trained on computer­generated images. In the second step, the volume of
the liquid inside the container is estimated based on those results using a CNN trained on a new
proposed dataset, created specifically for this work, which consists of more than 5,000 images
of liquids inside laboratory containers and their volume. Based on the liquid volume estimation
for the pouring container, the best robot movement is selected from more than 6,000 simulated
pours. Unlike previous autonomous pouring approaches, the pouring container rotates around
the liquid exit point, making the trajectory more suitable for pouring into containers with small
openings.
The system prototype demonstrates the possibilities of integrating existing hardware and a robot
arm for laboratory automation by successfully executing the three required workflows for cell
culture automation. The liquid volume can be estimated with a mean absolute percentage error
of less than 17% just providing an RGB image and of less than 10% when the container vol­
ume is given. The liquid segmentation and volume estimation outcomes demonstrate superior
performance when applied to glass containers compared to plastic containers. The simulation­
to­reality transfer for pouring using a robot arm shows reasonable accuracy, with potential for
improvement in future work when using accurate 3D models of the containers and adapting
the liquid parameters. The new pouring trajectory results in low spilling in real executions. Per­
forming all human pouring tasks in research laboratories with the presented combined approach
with the presented results is not feasible. However, improving the accuracy of the sub­elements
could lead to sufficient precision for many laboratory tasks.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my deep gratitude and appreciation to my two supervisors, who have sup­
ported and contributed to the successful completion of my master’s thesis:
Lazaros Nalpantidis, Professor of Autonomous Systems at the Department of Electrical and
Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
University supervisor of the thesis.
James Love, Vice President, Automation and Process Optimization, Novo Nordisk.
Company supervisor of the thesis.
While it is impossible to mention every individual who has influenced my work, I extend my
gratitude to everyone who has played a part, no matter how big or small, in the realization of
this thesis.
iv
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Research Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline of the Problem and the Proposed Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Goals and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Technical Background and Related Work
10
2.1
Unmanned Systems in Research Laboratories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Computer Vision in Research Laboratories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Autonomous Liquid Pouring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methodology and Procedures
23
3.1
System Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Vision­based Detection and Volume Estimation of Liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Simulation­based Autonomous Pouring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Results and Evaluation
53
4.1
Results of Liquid Detection and Volume Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Results of Simulation­based Autonomous Pouring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3
Overall System Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5
Discussion and Future Work
74
6
Conclusion
76
Bibliography
77
A GitHub Repository and Reproducibility
83
B Appendix
87
B.1 LabLiquidVolume Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.2 Volume Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B.3 Pouring Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.4 System Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.5 Additional Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
This thesis explores the opportunities for an autonomous cell culture system. For that, existing
laboratory hardware already used in the process will be integrated for a proof­of­concept proto­
type. To execute the required steps, it is aimed to perform human tasks with liquids using one
single robot arm. More precisely, computer vision techniques combined with a deep learning
approach will be used to detect liquids and estimate their volume, to be then able to simulate
and execute the liquid pouring steps. This section presents the larger scientific context of the
underlying research problem, followed by potentials and restrictions of current systems and an
overview of the proposed solution. Finally, the structure of this work is explained.
1.1
Research Background
The gradual incorporation of autonomous systems into various work settings has notably im­
pacted the productivity, effectiveness, and caliber of a diverse range of industrial procedures
[1]. Recent improvements in advanced technology areas like robotics and artificial intelligence
have automated processes that were previously only achievable through human labor. Although
automated equipment has been increasingly integrated into life science laboratories in the last
few years, it is noticeable that a high level of manual manipulation remains. Many experimental
procedures still require researchers to carry out protocols manually in the research facility [2].
The life sciences are a group of disciplines that deal with living organisms’ biochemical, micro­
biological, and molecular aspects and cover a wide range of life processes, from microbes to
animals, fungi, and plants. Through experimental methods and in­depth investigations, they
seek to deepen the understanding of the complexity and diversity of life forms and their biolog­
ical mechanisms [3].
1.1.1
Motivation
A text mining study by Groth and Cox in 2017 shows that 89% of the analyzed life science
articles use a manual protocol that could be automated using current technologies [4]. Possible
reasons for this automation gap are the high initial investment costs, high variability in research
protocols, and the lack of lower­cost interim labor­saving automation options. Despite ongoing
efforts by life scientists to overcome these challenges by isolating and automating specific parts
or segments of their workflows, the manual programming required for each subsystem remains
a significant obstacle, diverting valuable time and resources from actual research activities.
Therefore, there is a growing need for more comprehensive and efficient automation solutions
that streamline the entire research process from data collection to analysis and help researchers
achieve their goals more effectively.
A recent survey by Holland et al. [2] highlights three significant pain points for autonomous
systems in research laboratories: (1) difficulty of use, (2) high initial cost of investment, and
(3) inability to use a single system for multiple purposes.
Hence, to expand the range of
automation options suitable for research laboratories, there is a need for more flexible, modular,
and cost­effective designs. This work is motivated by the current lack of affordable labor­saving
automation alternatives, particularly in the pharmaceutical wet lab industry. Despite the avail­
ability of high­level and large­batch solution machines, scientists often struggle with the ineffi­
ciency of performing repetitive low­batch experiments. This results in a significant amount of
time being spent on such tasks. Consequently, this work aims to investigate more cost­effective
automation options that can enhance laboratory productivity and efficiency. The main advan­
tages of an increased automation level in research laboratories lie in improved efficiency of the
researchers, higher safety for operators, and better reproducibility through standardization [5].
2
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:8==
Additionally, traditional automation systems are often designed for specific tasks, making them
inflexible and challenging to adapt to new applications. Computer vision technology provides a
solution to many of these challenges by allowing the development of cost­effective and adapt­
able autonomous systems. Specifically, in laboratory environments, computer vision could en­
able robots to detect and handle liquids and transparent laboratory containers as precisely and
efficiently as humans, which could help make a robot arm an intelligent and adaptable labora­
tory assistant. Furthermore, by integrating computer vision­based liquid detection and handling
capabilities with existing laboratory equipment, it is possible to create modular and scalable
systems that can be customized for different applications. This can help reduce automation
costs while providing a more flexible solution for laboratory automation.
1.1.2
Significance of Cell Culture Automation
This thesis will explore how computer vision­based liquid detection and handling can be in­
tegrated with robotic systems to develop a comprehensive and versatile automation system
for cell culture applications for low throughput. Cell culture is one of the fundamental tools in
life science research and biotechnology. Applications range from testing drugs or toxins, de­
velopment of gene and cell therapies, and investigation of the function of biomolecules to the
production of biologics or vaccine particles. It enables consistent and reproducible results by
utilizing clonal cells, increasing accuracy and reliability in data analysis [6]. It describes the
process of maintaining and growing cells under controlled physiological conditions in artificial
environments outside of living organisms. Both primary cell cultures and cell lines are valuable
models for exploring cell physiology and biochemistry in healthy and diseased states. Primary
cell cultures consist of dispersed cells that are directly obtained from tissues and have a limited
lifespan, while cell lines are immortalized cells that can be cultured infinitely [7, 8].
The culture conditions for each cell type are highly specific, but generally, the in vitro environ­
ment for cell culture requires a suitable vessel containing a range of essential components.
These include a media that provides crucial nutrients. In addition, growth factors, hormones,
and gases such as oxygen and carbon dioxide are provided to support the survival and devel­
opment of the cells. The culture environment must also maintain a carefully regulated physic­
ochemical environment, including pH, osmotic pressure, and temperature, to ensure optimal
conditions for the cells [8].
There are entirely automated high­level systems for the process of cell culture for high through­
put (see subsection 2.1.4). Examples are the StemmCellFactory [9], which can handle up to 60
different cell lines in parallel, and Formulatrix Cell Culture System [10], a fully automated and
enclosed platform. However, there are currently no examples of commercially available low­
cost solutions for cell culture automation for low throughput [2]. Several advantages could be
gained from implementing this solution. Worth mentioning are a decrease in contamination, an
increase in the rate of data generation, a reduction in human­induced variability, an efficiency
improvement of researchers, and a transition from manual to cognitive labor [11, 12, 2]. Specif­
ically for cell culture automation in research laboratories, one main factor is improving working
times and flexibility. Researchers can schedule processes to run autonomously over extended
periods, including weekends and evenings, by automating tasks such as media changing and
cell passaging. This flexibility not only improves the efficiency of experimental procedures but
also reduces the burden on researchers who would otherwise need to be physically present in
the laboratory outside of regular working hours. Additionally, the amount of disposable plastic
can be reduced by replacing the manual work of pipetting through robotic pouring. For every
new process step, researchers use a new plastic pipette. Only considering research institutions,
laboratories are estimated to produce more than 5.5 million tons of plastic waste each year [13].
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
3
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Outline of the Problem and the Proposed Solution
The focus lies on the problem of maintaining adherent cell cultures. This includes three main
procedures: (1) Analyzing the cells, (2) changing media, and (3) passaging (also known as
subculturing) of cells. For adherent cell cultures, it is necessary to repeatedly remove the spent
media and replace it with fresh media. To achieve optimal cell proliferation, it is essential to
provide cells with fresh media two to three times per week [8]. When cells reach confluency, it
is crucial to passage them. Otherwise, they will experience reduced mitotic index and eventually
result in cell death. The interval for cell passaging varies based on the cell line and its growth
rate [14]. The growth of cells in culture can be divided into four distinct phases: (1) the lag
phase, which is the period of minimal growth before cell growth begins, (2) the log phase, which
is characterized by exponential growth, (3) the stationary phase, during which cell growth slows
down and reaches a plateau, and (4) the death phase, where cells die due to lack of nutrients
and unfavorable living conditions. To maintain optimal growth conditions, it is recommended
to change the culture media during the log phase and to passage cells before they reach the
stationary phase [15]. An exemplary growth curve of adherent cells with the described phases
and a suitable time for passaging is shown in fig. 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Exemplary growth curve of adherent cells (based on [15]).
The manual process for the three procedures starts with getting the selected cell culture flask
from the incubator, which has a chamber lined with shelves and equipped with a thermostat, a
humidifier, and a carbon dioxide (CO2) regulator. The cell culture flask is placed on a microscope
to check cell confluency. Cell confluency is typically given as a percentage, which refers to the
proportion of the cell culture flask covered by adherent cells. In the case of low confluency,
the flask is placed back in the incubator if no media change is planned. If high confluency is
detected, passaging of the cell culture is needed.
After, the flask is opened, and the spent cell culture media is removed. A balanced salt­washing
solution without calcium and magnesium (approximately 3 mL per 10 cm2 culture surface area)
4
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:10==
is added to the flask. Then, the flask is moved back and forth several times, and the washing
solution is removed. For the procedure of media change, a specific amount of pre­warmed
complete growth media is added to the flask, the lid attached, and the flask is placed back in
the incubator.
For the passaging procedure, a dissociation reagent such as trypsin (approximately 0.5 mL per
10 cm2) is added. Next, the flask is gently moved to get complete cell layer coverage and secure
full detachment. Depending on the used cell line, the cell culture vessel can be incubated for
a short time (approximately two minutes). After, the cells are observed for detachment under
a microscope. As an optional step, a small number of cells can be removed for cell counting.
Pre­warmed growth media is then added to the flask. Depending on the volume and desired
cell density, the cells get split into a specific number of new flasks by pipetting. As a final step
of the passaging procedure, the lid is attached to the flasks, and the flasks are placed back in
the incubator [8, 14]. A simplified process flow diagram for the manually performed workflows
for adherent cells can be seen in fig. 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Simplified process flow diagram for analyzing cells, media change, and passaging
of adherent cells performed manually by laboratory professionals (based on [8]).
The exact execution of the steps can vary depending on the researcher. Pictures of exemplary
steps of passaging cells performed manually by laboratory technicians at R&eD of Novo Nordisk
can be seen in fig. 1.3. For further visualization of the manual process, a video of the passaging
process can be found here in the GitHub repository of the project.
This thesis presents a solution to automate the described manual processes. The main idea
is visualized in fig. 1.4 and consists of three main contributions, each taking a significant step
towards building a fully autonomous cell culture system for low throughput.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: Pictures of exemplary steps of passaging performed manually by laboratory techni­
cians at R&eD of Novo Nordisk: (1) Initial setup with cell flasks and materials, (2) Observation
of cells under a microscope, (3) Pouring of washing solution, (4) Adding dissociation reagent by
pipetting, (5) Gently moving the flask, (6) Removing/Placing of cell flasks from/to an incubator.
• System prototype for full robotic automation: The proposed system includes a UR5e
collaborative industrial robot with an Intel RealSense D415 camera, a standard incubator
that is adapted for automated opening and closing, a microscope, a unit for heating and
cooling of liquids, and a capping and decapping unit. All the additional parts are 3D­printed
or custom­built. The entire system is made to fit on one table. The robot arm executes
the tasks usually done by human labor. The laboratory technician is only responsible for
providing empty input flasks and refilling the required liquids.
• Vision­based liquid and transparent object detection and liquid volume estimation:
A vision­based system is developed to detect transparent objects for process monitoring
(e.g., how many flasks are present) and to estimate the volume of liquid in the different
transparent containers. The first step to achieve this is a deep­learning approach based
on the TransProteus dataset [16]. The result of this model is a segmentation and depth
estimation of transparent vessels and the liquid inside of them. This model is used to
generate a new dataset of images of laboratory containers with liquid content, including
their segmentation and depth estimation and the object and liquid volumes. A new model
trained on this dataset estimates the volume of liquid given in a transparent container. This
estimation builds the base for autonomous robotic pouring from the given containers.
• Adaptable robotic pouring using fluid simulation: Instead of pipetting, the autonomous
solution is based on robotic pouring. The robot arm movement to pour a desired amount
of liquid with varying starting volumes is based on the vision­based estimation of the liquid
volume in the pouring container and the results of a simulation of the pouring movements
with the particle­based simulator NVIDIA Flex. This pouring simulation can be adapted to
different scenarios and objects also outside research laboratory environments.
6
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4: Simplified overview of the proposed solution. All the equipment including the robot
is placed on one table (grey box). The user selects the desired workflow in a human­machine
interface, loads empty input flasks, and can see the recorded data from the microscope. Cell
flasks can be requested from the system and then taken from the flask storage (output flasks).
The camera records RGB images, which are used for transparent object and liquid detection.
The liquid volume estimation in combination with the simulation results helps to control the robot
in the liquid pouring steps.
1.3
Goals and Research Questions
As mentioned, there is currently no cell culture automation system for low throughput. Also,
the research on using computer vision for robotic tasks in research laboratories is still in its
beginning, and no approach for vision­based liquid volume estimation in research laboratory
environments is available (see section 2.2). That is why the research of this thesis is exploratory,
with flexible and open­ended goals to create a basis and provide ideas for further projects and
research in this area.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
7
==PAGE:13==
The overall goal is to investigate the opportunities of an automated cell culture system for low
throughput. This central idea splits into two subgoals: (1) to integrate existing laboratory hard­
ware for a proof­of­concept prototype and (2) to perform human tasks that include liquids using
a camera and a robot arm.
For goal (1), the question of if and how existing laboratory hardware can be combined to create
an autonomous cell culture system is to be answered. Desired is a modular, adaptable, low­cost
setup to enhance reusability for future laboratory automation projects.
Goal (2) can be divided into two subtopics. First, computer vision techniques are supposed
to detect liquids and transparent vessels during the cell culture process. One question to be
addressed is how a vision­based system can be used for process monitoring. However, the
main focus lies on the question of how accurately the volume of liquid can be estimated based
on vision. The reason for this focus is that a working and well­generalizing approach for vision­
based volume estimation can be used for various tasks in laboratory systems, including the
problem of robotic pouring. Second, based on those results, the pouring process for laboratory
containers will be simulated for autonomous robotic pouring in laboratory environments. The
resulting research question is whether a particle­based simulation can predict the required robot
arm movement to pour a specific amount of liquid depending on varying starting volumes. A
schematic overview of the goals and research questions can be seen in fig. 1.5
Figure 1.5: Overview of the goals and research questions.
1.4
Structure of the Thesis
This thesis starts by providing the relevant technical background and explaining the relevant
work done in the fields of unmanned systems and computer vision in research laboratories, as
well as autonomous liquid pouring.
The methodology and procedures chapter is divided into three parts. The first part explains
8
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:14==
the hardware components, the connection and configuration, and the process and workflows
of the system prototype. The second part provides details about the methodology used for
the vision­based detection and volume estimation of liquids. This includes data generation,
model architectures, and experimental setups. The third part explains the process behind the
approach for simulation­based autonomous pouring from laboratory vessels.
Building on the methodology and procedures chapter, the results chapter is also divided into
three sections. First, the liquid detection and volume estimation results are presented, followed
by the results of the simulation­based autonomous pouring. Finally, the overall performance of
the system is evaluated.
The thesis finishes with a discussion about the results, possible future work, and a short con­
clusion.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
9
==PAGE:15==
2
Technical Background and Related Work
This chapter will provide the technical background and related work surrounding the three rel­
evant topics. First, a comprehensive understanding of unmanned systems in research lab­
oratories (section 2.1) is provided, especially in the field of cell culture automation (subsec­
tion 2.1.4). After, general background in computer vision technologies and deep learning will
be given (subsection 2.2.1), followed by an overview of the challenges of computer vision in re­
search laboratories as well as the previous work done in liquid detection and volume estimation
(subsection 2.2.2). Finally, the current research and boundaries of autonomous liquid pouring
will be explained (section 2.3).
2.1
Unmanned Systems in Research Laboratories
2.1.1
Definition and Classification of Unmanned Systems in Research
Laboratories
Unmanned systems in research laboratories are robotic systems that are designed to perform
various experimental operations without the need for human intervention. They are used in
various laboratory applications, including sample preparation, analysis, and processing. These
systems can perform tasks such as weighing, mixing, and dispensing reagents and samples, as
well as data collection and analysis. Recent developments in unmanned systems for laboratory
automation include the integration of robotics and artificial intelligence (AI). Robotics can auto­
mate sample handling, while AI can optimize reactions by adjusting experimental conditions in
real time based on sensor data recorded during the process (closed­loop approach). Combining
machine learning methods and research experiments makes it possible to narrow the gap be­
tween the infinite parameter space and the finite experimental capacity [17]. Recent laboratory
systems that combine full hardware autonomy with data­based recommendations are known
under the term self­driving lab (SDL) [18, 19]. The transition from conventional laboratories,
where humans execute manual tasks, to unmanned laboratories, where the researchers are
primarily responsible for interpreting the results and solving high­level questions, is visualized
in fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the transition from a conventional research laboratory (left) to an un­
manned laboratory (right) (based on [19]).
To the author’s knowledge, a classification system for research laboratory automation equip­
ment has not been published yet. However, several comparable methods have been devised
for classifying industrial automation. In a study conducted by Frohm et al. [20], these exist­
ing systems were examined, and the authors suggested their own framework consisting of 7
levels of automation. Table 2.1 presents these levels, corresponding descriptions, examples
commonly found in research laboratories, and approximate costs.
It demonstrates that most equipment items deemed the most expensive in most present lab­
oratories are classified under level 5. Finding higher­grade 6 and 7 items is uncommon in
10
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:16==
Table 2.1: Automation levels from Frohm et al. [20] with example laboratory automation equip­
ment including an indicative cost range (based on [2]).
Level of
auto­
mation
Description
Research
laboratory
examples
Indicative
costs
1
Totally manual ­ Totally manual work, no
tools are used, only the users own muscle
power.
Washing of glasses,
pouring of liquids
€0
2
Static hand tool ­ Manual work with
support of static tool. E.g. Screwdriver
Dissection scalpel
€10­30
3
Flexible hand tool ­ Manual work with
support of flexible tool.
E.g. Adjustable spanner
Pipetting
€50­250
4
Automated hand tool ­ Manual work with
support of automated tool.
E.g. Hydraulic bolt driver
Stripette and handheld
dispenser
€250­400
5
Static machine/workstation ­ Automatic
work by machine that is designed for
a specific task. E.g. Lathe
Centrifuge,
automated freezer,
capper/decapper
€500­
80,000
6
Flexible machine/workstation ­ Automatic
work by machine that can be reconfigured
for different tasks. E.g. CNC­machine
Motorized stage
microscope, liquid
handler
€80,000­
150,000
7
Totally automatic ­ Totally automatic
work, the machine solves all deviations
or problems that occur by itself.
E.g. Autonomous systems
Automated cell culture
system, bespoke
laboratory
equipment e.g.,
Labman
formulation engine.
€100,000­
5,000,000
academic research laboratories, but those systems are increasing rapidly in industrial envi­
ronments. While mid­range level 5 automation items undoubtedly increase the efficiency of
laboratory research, they are designed for specific sub­tasks and require a large amount of
manual manipulation before and after machine usage. Most of the equipment in this category
performs sub­tasks that humans would be incapable of doing, e.g. centrifuging. Level 6 and 7
systems and devices often combine lower­level automation equipment to replace the manual
tasks in between [2]. The recent development of unmanned systems from level 7 is explained
in subsection 2.1.2. The system prototype proposed in this work can also be classified as a
level 7 since it requires only minimal human input and can adapt to the execution of steps itself.
2.1.2
Implementations and Applications of Unmanned Systems in Research
Laboratories
One of the first works on unmanned systems in research laboratories was done in 2009. The
fully automated system called Adam [21] uses decision trees and random forests to study the
function of genes and enzymes. It is equipped with sophisticated software and hardware to
perform various microbiological experiments. In biomedicine, Adam has been used to discover
new scientific knowledge related to gene functions and drug targets. An autonomous discov­
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
11
==PAGE:17==
ery system called Eve [22] focuses on drug screening. It is designed to be flexible and can
perform different bio­activity analyses. Eve uses machine learning algorithms to predict the
biological activity of potential drug candidates. In 2020, MacLeod et al. introduced a flexible
and modular self­driving robotic platform called Ada, capable of autonomously synthesizing,
processing, and characterizing organic thin films. The configuration of the robotic platform for
a specific experimental workflow is achieved by mounting an appropriate collection of experi­
mental modules on the robot [23]. ARChemist, an automated laboratory system proposed by
Fakhruldeen et al. in 2022, was developed to carry out experiments such as solubility screening
and crystallization without human intervention [24]. One of the main challenges for unmanned
systems in laboratory automation is the integration of various components, including sensors,
actuators, consumables, and control systems, to enable seamless operation [17]. Most de­
veloped systems focus on integrating existing laboratory equipment and combining it with au­
tonomous robotic solutions. One main example of this approach was accomplished by Burger
et al. in 2020. The authors used a mobile robot to create an unmanned system to accelerate the
search for improved photocatalysts for hydrogen production from water. The strategy focuses
on automating the researcher rather than the existing instruments. The mobile robot can au­
tonomously navigate in a laboratory and perform reagent­dispensing and handling operations
at different experimental stations [25].
Critically, previous robot­assisted laboratory automation systems were tested in carefully con­
trolled environments to prevent the occurrence of unsatisfied task constraints. Additionally,
existing setups cannot incorporate perception for creating scene descriptions, which restricts
experiment setups to static and structured environments. The dependency on predefined tasks
and motion plans imposes limitations on the adaptability and robustness of those systems to
new environments.
2.1.3
Components and Design Considerations for Unmanned Systems in
Research Laboratories
The complexity of an unmanned system for a research laboratory is directly related to the variety
of the required experimental modules (e.g., single versus multistage experimental stages), the
range and number of operating process conditions (e.g., pressure and temperature), type of sol­
vent (aqueous versus organic), required characterization techniques and acceptable precision.
Since the complexity of an autonomous system is usually directly correlated to development time
and costs, reusability through standardization and modularization of hardware and software is
a crucial aspect of the design of future unmanned systems [19]. Designing for flexibility is also
an essential factor for laboratories with a high level of protocol variation. In addition, the ability
to modify an autonomous system without requiring specialized engineering knowledge is highly
desirable. This enables researchers to automate a broader range of process steps without re­
quiring time­consuming and costly redesign of tools or extensive reprogramming. An intriguing
advancement of the modular design approach is integrating existing automation equipment into
a unified system capable of seamlessly executing the desired protocol in a continuous process
stream [2]. Additionally, laboratory automation systems built upon an anthropomorphic design
that mimics human movements are more likely to be trusted by laboratory operators [26].
The robot is considered the most critical component in designing an unmanned system for
research laboratories. When analyzing successful systems for laboratory automation, three
approaches to integrating robots for transferring materials and devices become clear: mobile
robots (usually including a moveable arm), stationary robot arms, and fluidic robots. Examples
can be seen in fig. 2.2.
The right approach heavily depends on the characterizations of the system. Mobile robots have
a distinct advantage in research labs due to their easy access to existing large equipment. Mod­
12
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Pictures of examples of mobile, stationary, and fluidic robots used to create un­
manned laboratory systems. Left: KUKA mobile robot used for the mobile chemist [25], Center:
Automated dosing system using a stationary UR5 arm [27], Right: The Chemputer platform
using a fluidic robot [28].
ularizing process steps and sharing the workplace with laboratory staff is possible. Examples
of mobile robots used in laboratory automation are the KUKA mobile robot used for the mobile
chemist by Burger et al. [25] and Kevin, a mobile robot designed by Fraunhofer IPA for life sci­
ence laboratory tasks [29]. Although Kevin was developed to fulfill non­value­adding activities
in the laboratory, it could combine different submodules of a self­driven laboratory. However,
due to mobile robots’ high initial cost and setup time, they are not commonly used in research
laboratories yet [19].
Stationary robots are usually cheaper and can move faster in a protected environment than
mobile robots. The main downside is the limited range of movement, which limits the number
of reachable laboratory devices. An often­used solution is putting the robot arm on a linear rail.
Examples of the use of stationary robots for unmanned systems in laboratory automation can
be found in academic research projects [30] as well as in serial industrial products [27].
Another crucial aspect of the system design is the selection of consumables such as flasks,
plates, and pipettes. The effectiveness and robustness of autonomous laboratory systems are
maximized when input materials or consumables are standardized. In the case of standard­
shaped labware, this enables non­adaptive, rigid automation components like grippers to have
complete control over the device, resulting in improved placement accuracy and potentially
faster operations. However, there is a significant amount of variation in labware not only be­
tween different research laboratories but even within the same laboratory. Researchers often
switch between different variants of labware based on cost, availability, or personal preference,
which introduces challenges for automation processes [2]. Robotic perception using vision mod­
ules can help to improve the system’s flexibility to handle different input consumables (see sub­
section 2.2.2). Furthermore, automation­friendly labware can simplify tasks such as decapping
containers.
The selection of additional devices depends on the specific tasks of the system. The emer­
gence of cost­effective 3D printing technologies for laboratory applications [31], off­the­shelf
actuators, and programmable microcontrollers [32] has empowered research laboratories to
combine components that can be easily assembled, controlled, and automated at a relatively
low cost for prototyping and final solutions. This technological advancement allows researchers
to customize their existing equipment and create new elements without significant expenses [2].
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
13
==PAGE:19==
2.1.4
Cell Culture Automation
In the field of cell culture automation, a wide range of solutions has emerged to improve lab­
oratory work and streamline processes. These systems encompass a range of components
and technologies, including robotic arrangements for labware handling, sterile hoods with filters
to maintain aseptic conditions, liquid handling systems, cell count devices, and incubators set
at 37 °C with a controlled CO2 atmosphere. Additionally, advanced systems may incorporate
devices for real­time detection of biological processes and microscopes for precise evaluation
of cell confluency [33, 34].
The design and functionality of these systems are aimed toward monitorability, typically facili­
tated by specific software. The existing systems in this field can be categorized based on the
type of labware they are designed for, such as microplates or cell culture flasks. Most of the
systems are built with an emphasis on large­scale studies that would otherwise be difficult to
undertake (e.g., Formulatrix [10], StemCellFactory [9]). Solutions were proposed both by com­
panies in the laboratory automation sector and as academic work. A non­exhaustive list of cell
culture systems can be found in Table 2.2.
Among the notable examples is the CompacTSelecT system, which features a six­axis anthro­
pomorphic robotic arm enabling access to 90 T175 flasks. It also includes a plate incubator,
along with integrated components such as a cell counter, a medium pump, and flask capper­
s/decappers and holders. To maintain a sterile environment, a HEPA filter is employed in the
system [42].
Researchers have also investigated the AI.CELLHOST system, which combines automated cell
cultivation with fluorescence imaging. The system incorporates the Hamilton Microlab STAR for
precise liquid handling, a cell counter, and a Cytomat 24C incubator for accommodating up to
504 SBS plate stackers in a sterile environment. Sterile conditions are maintained by a flow
chamber equipped with HEPA filter systems. A MICROLAB SWAP robot arm achieves the
connection between the modules [39].
TECAN offers the Cellerity system designed for high­throughput automated cell culturing. This
system provides various options for cell culture processes. It includes a housing with a HEPA
filter system to ensure sterile handling of samples and reagents [36].
The BioCel system by Agilent Automation incorporates a fast central radial robotic arm for high­
throughput processes. The system provides an array of environmental support solutions, includ­
ing filter systems with ultra­low penetration air filters, unidirectional airflow, and precise control
of temperature and humidity [37].
Another notable system is the compact cell culture system developed by Kato et al., specifically
designed for the cell expansion of primary tissue, particularly fibroblasts. This system consists
of different units, including a supply unit, an incubation unit, and a collection unit. Rotary pumps
and valves are incorporated into the system, which is compact (70 × 60 × 86 cm). The required
solutions are contained in bags within the supply unit. The system utilizes disposable tubing
sets that connect the central units, including the culture dish, aeration filters, and collection
tubes [38].
The Biomek Cell Workstation is another noteworthy system that offers compatibility and flexibility
for the automated cultivation of various cell types. The workstation supports both two­ and
three­dimensional cell cultures. Initially designed for adherent cell cultures, the Biomek Cell
Workstation has also been enhanced to handle suspension cells. The system includes a Biomek
NX for precise liquid handling steps, an incubator, a centrifuge for sample preparation, and a
cell counter. Notably, the vertical arrangement of the system allows for a compact footprint,
distinguishing it from other existing systems [34].
14
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.2: Non­exhaustive list of cell culture systems both commercially available as well as
built as an academic project (sorted in ascending order by year of publication).
Cell Culture
System
Type of
Labware
Applications
Throughput
Cellmate [35]
Flasks
Seeding and harvesting of adherent
cells
Medium/High
Cellerity/Freedom [36]
EVO
Plates
Adherent cell cultivation and
transfection to produce HIV
pseudovirus; cell handling
High
BioCel Systems [37]
Plates
Cell expansion and cell biology
(high­throughput screening)
High
Cell Culture
System [38]
Plates
Cultivation of adherent cells
from gingival tissue and
bone marrow aspirate
Low
AI.CELLHOST [39]
Plates
Cultivation of adherent cells
(SH­SY5Y, BE(2) M17, and
HEK293T cell lines)
High
Biomek Cell
Workstation [34]
Plates
Cultivation of adherent and
suspension cells
Medium
CELP [40]
Flasks
Cultivation of adherent and
non­adherent cells
Medium
AUTOSTEM [41]
Plates
Large scale production of clinical­grade
mesenchymal stromal cells
High
StemCellFactory [9]
Plates
Automated generation and expansion
of human induced pluripotent stem cells
High
CompacTSelecT [42]
Plates/
Flasks
Regular cell handling
High
Formulatrix [10]
Plates
Large scale cultivation of adherent
cell lines
High
RoboCell [43]
Flasks
Cell culturing, passaging, and
imaging tasks
High
As shown in the table 2.1, most systems are designed for high throughput and are, therefore,
expensive and unsuitable for small­scale laboratory automation, both for small laboratories and
small cell cultures. Small­batch systems are either made for a specialized use case [38] or not
commercially available [40].
2.2
Computer Vision in Research Laboratories
The journey of computer vision technologies started in the 1960s. At the initial stage, computer
vision illustrates the extraction of information through digital images using computational mod­
els [44]. In recent years, there have been significant advances in computer vision technologies,
in particular deep learning techniques and convolutional neural networks, enabling more effec­
tive and accurate visual recognition and analysis (see subsection 2.2.1). Computer vision is
a technology suitable for acquiring, processing, and analyzing visual inputs and, therefore, is
and will increasingly be an essential aspect of modern laboratory automation. In unmanned
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
15
==PAGE:21==
systems in research laboratories, visual recognition involves object identification, position es­
timation, and material detection as the prerequisites for robotic manipulation tasks. Ideally, a
computer vision system for a research laboratory would be able to replicate a human scientist’s
observation and analytics skills. While computer vision has been extensively researched and
applied in other areas, such as autonomous vehicles and surveillance, its application for robotic
tasks in experimental research laboratories is relatively new and limited.
2.2.1
Background on Deep Learning in Computer Vision
AI is a field of computer science with the goal to create algorithms that mimic human intelligence
to solve problems and automate decision­making. Machine learning (ML), a subfield of AI, is
widely used in research and various applications. These include text mining, spam detection,
video recommendation, and image classification. Deep learning (DL), which is a subset of ML
(see fig. 2.3), draws inspiration from the information­processing patterns observed in the human
brain [45].
Figure 2.3: Venn diagram of artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep learning, and com­
puter vision (based on [45]).
Unlike traditional rule­based systems, deep learning does not rely on human­designed rules
for its operation. Instead, it leverages vast quantities of data to establish mappings between
input and corresponding labels. DL uses multiple layers of algorithms known as artificial neu­
ral networks (ANNs). Each layer offers a distinct interpretation of the input data it is fed with.
For example, to perform a classification task, traditional ML methods involve a series of se­
quential steps, including preprocessing, feature extraction, careful feature selection, learning,
and classification. The effectiveness of those ML techniques depends heavily on accurate fea­
ture selection, as biased selection can lead to incorrect class differentiation. In contrast, DL
offers the advantage of automating the learning process for feature sets for different tasks. DL
facilitates simultaneous learning and classification, eliminating the need for separate steps [46].
Deep learning techniques can be broadly categorized into three main categories: unsupervised,
semi­supervised, and supervised learning. Since only labeled data is used in this work, the
focus lies on deep supervised learning. In supervised learning, the environment consists of a
set of inputs and their resultant outputs ((xt, yt) ∼ρ) [46].
Convolutional neural network (CNN) is one of the most popular and used deep learning net­
works, which is especially the case for computer vision applications. The structure of CNNs
takes inspiration from the neurons found in human and animal brains, similar to conventional
neural networks. Specifically, the visual cortex in a cat’s brain, which consists of a complex
arrangement of cells, serves as a simulation model for CNNs [47]. The main advantage of
16
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:22==
CNNs compared to other network types is that it automatically detects significant features with­
out human supervision. The benefits of using CNNs over other traditional neural networks in
the computer vision environment can be summarized as follows [48, 46, 44]:
• The weight­sharing feature reduces the number of trainable network parameters and helps
the network to enhance generalization and avoid overfitting.
• When feature extraction layers and the final layer are learned concurrently, it leads to a
model output that is well­structured and heavily dependent on the extracted features.
• CNNs offer greater simplicity in implementing large­scale networks than other types of
neural networks.
The CNN architecture comprises multiple layers, also known as building blocks. The following
section briefly describes each layer in the CNN architecture and its respective function [46, 48].
These will be used later on during this work.
• Convolutional Layer: This layer acts as a primary building block, determining the output
by computing dot products between input and convolutional filter (kernel) values, creating
a 2D activation map. Through this process, a CNN efficiently learns filters that activate
when specific features are observed in the input.
• Pooling Layer: It performs sub­sampling of feature maps, reducing their size while pre­
serving important information. Different types of pooling methods, such as max pooling,
min pooling, and global average pooling, can be used. However, the pooling layer’s draw­
back is that it focuses on the location of features rather than capturing all relevant informa­
tion, potentially reducing the overall CNN performance. Nonetheless, pooling layers help
scale down the spatial size of representations, speeding up calculations and preventing
overfitting.
• Activation Function (Non­linearity Layer): They map the input to the output. This is achieved
by computing the weighted sum of neuron inputs, including bias if applicable, and deter­
mining whether the neuron should fire based on the input, generating the corresponding
output.
• Fully Connected Layer: This layer is located at the end of each CNN architecture, and
connects each neuron to all neurons of the previous layer. It takes a vector input obtained
by flattening the feature maps and produces the final output of the CNN.
• Loss Function (Loss Layer): The loss layer plays a crucial role in minimizing the difference
between true and predicted values/labels during training, serving as a guide for the neural
network’s learning process. Various loss functions can be used for different tasks, which
will be explained in more detail in the following sections.
Deep learning­based methods for object segmentation and monocular depth estimation are
particularly important for the course of the work, which is why they will be briefly discussed.
Semantic Segmentation
CNN­based segmentation has found applications in various domains, including medical imag­
ing, object detection, and autonomous driving. The aim of segmentation is to find distinct and
meaningful regions in the picture. Other than in an image classification task, the last layer of
the neural network architecture is typically designed to produce a dense output map that repre­
sents the segmentation mask for pixels or regions in the input image. For the segmentation of a
single object, the segmentation mask is usually predicted as a two­layer probability mask (pixel
belongs/does not belong to the object). A fully convolutional network (FCN) is a specific type
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
17
==PAGE:23==
of CNN architecture designed for pixel­wise predictions, particularly in tasks like semantic seg­
mentation. FCNs are tailored to preserve spatial information and enable end­to­end pixel­level
predictions [49, 50].
Monocular Depth Estimation
Estimating scene depth is a crucial aspect of computer vision that enhances perception and un­
derstanding of three­dimensional environments in the real world. This capability has significant
implications for several fields, including robot navigation, autonomous driving, and virtual real­
ity, as it enables more accurate spatial understanding. Active depth estimation methods often
rely on lasers, structured light, and reflections to capture depth information from object surfaces,
resulting in depth point clouds, surface models, and scene depth maps [51]. However, these
methods often demand significant computing resources and fail for transparent objects given
in a research laboratory (see subsection 2.2.2). As a result, image­based depth estimation has
gained popularity as a more practical alternative, offering efficient and cost­effective solutions
that can be applied in various applications. Monocular depth estimation based on deep learning
is a task of learning depth maps from a single two­dimensional color image using a deep neural
network, which was first presented by Eigen et al. in 2014 [52]. Since then, many researchers
have developed DL methods for monocular depth estimation. Modern approaches are usually
based on an encoder­decoder network. The encoder consists of a combination of convolution
and pooling layers to capture the depth features, while the decoder network includes decon­
volution layers to rebuild the estimated pixel­level depth map with the same size as the input.
Additionally, to preserve the features of each scale, the corresponding layers of the encoder
and decoder are concatenated with skip connections. With known camera parameters, it is
possible to convert the predicted depth map into an XYZ map with the 3D position of each pixel
in the world [51, 53].
2.2.2
Computer Vision Challenges in the Research Laboratories
The diverse and complex environments of research laboratories present a challenging scenario
for computer­vision­based systems, as a variety of instruments and equipment may become
targets for recognition with different distances, locations, and sizes. At the same time, images
may vary in brightness, darkness, and mutual occlusion [17]. Especially transparent plastic and
glass objects, which are almost always present during research experiments, are challenging.
They often appear as noisy or distorted approximations of the surfaces that lie behind them
and do not form disjoint boundaries with their environment. Although transparent objects have
unique characteristics based on the material and thickness, there has been little research on ap­
plying DL methods to this area due to the difficulties in gathering and labeling a sufficiently large
dataset [54]. Consequently, segmentation or classification approaches often fail for transparent
vessels.
Additionally, experimental research laboratories often lack standardized protocols for capturing
images and data, leading to variations in image quality, lighting conditions, and experimental
setups. These variations pose challenges for developing robust computer vision algorithms
that can work reliably across different labs and experiments. Tackling that problem using a DL
approach requires large amounts of annotated data. However, annotating laboratory images
can be time­consuming and resource­intensive, often requiring domain expertise and manual
labeling. Building comprehensive and accurately labeled datasets can be a significant challenge
[17, 3].
To mimic the observation and analysis skills of a human scientist, the vision system must also
be able to recognize and analyze the samples used in the experiments. Laboratory samples
can have complex and diverse structures, with a high variety in the appearance of liquids and
mixtures. These variations make it challenging to develop computer vision algorithms that can
accurately analyze different types of samples, which is crucial for autonomous process moni­
18
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:24==
toring and task execution [3, 17]. In the following, the main tasks approached in this work will
be explained in more detail, and the current state­of­the­art will be shown.
Transparent Object Detection
In unmanned systems, visual recognition involves identifying and detecting target objects. De­
tection is a prerequisite for robotic manipulation tasks and process monitoring. Research lab­
oratories often involve dynamic experimental setups, where the arrangement of equipment,
containers, and samples may change over time. The computer vision system should be able to
adapt to these changes and update the planning of the movement of the robot accordingly. De­
veloping efficient and practical computer vision­based object recognition and detection systems
for autonomous laboratory systems remains a significant challenge. While current computer
vision technology has improved experiment efficiency, most existing unmanned systems in re­
search laboratories rely on multiple dedicated automation devices, leading to high costs and
limited versatility. Most current approaches are still limited to simple conditions with controlled
environments and often fail in complex real­world scenarios [16, 17].
The main difference between an object detection system in the research laboratory and a con­
ventional object detection system is the frequency of transparent objects. As described, trans­
parent objects have unique visual properties that make them extremely difficult to perceive.
Since they do not adhere to the geometric light assumptions used in classic vision algorithms,
deep learning approaches are the current state­of­the­art in transparent object detection. One
recent DL­based approach for estimating accurate 3D geometry of transparent objects from a
single RGB­D image that could be applied to robotic manipulation in laboratory environments
was presented by Sajjan et al. [55]. The CNN was trained on a large­scale synthetic dataset of
over 50,000 RGB­D images. The work also demonstrates that the vision system can be applied
out­of­the­box to improve grasping for transparent objects algorithms’ performance on transpar­
ent objects. A similar dataset, which supports caustics, dispersion, and refraction and therefore
shows better results, was created by Mousavi et al. [54]. However, both datasets only contain
images of empty containers, which is rarely the case in experimental research environments.
The primary studies about transparent object detection, specifically in laboratory environments,
were conducted by Sagi Eppel et al. and the matter lab at the University of Toronto [56, 57,
58, 16]. In [16], the authors achieved a mean Intersection­over­Union (mIoU) of 87% for trans­
parent vessel segmentation on real images. All these approaches also include the detection of
materials and liquids in particular and will therefore be described in the next section.
Liquid Detection
Handling liquids inside mainly transparent containers is one of the main activities performed
by human scientists in the laboratory and is, therefore, a crucial task to be solved to achieve
completely autonomous laboratory systems. Compared to multiple sensors like pressure sen­
sors, laser distance sensors, or millimeter­wave radars, camera­based vision solutions have
the potential to be the most suitable option in terms of both flexibility and economy [17]. There
have been attempts for general liquid detection and some specifically in research laboratory
environments. An approach based on conventional image processing techniques by Eppel and
Kachman in 2014 achieved a miss rate of less than 1% for gas­liquid surfaces [56]. Since the
solution is based on edge detection for vessel and liquid level recognition, it requires standard­
ized image­taking conditions with plain backgrounds and fails in more complex environments.
Another early method to detect liquids using computer vision was presented by Hara et al. in
2014 [59]. The authors used data from a depth camera and based the detection on light refrac­
tion and triangulation principles. The main limitations are the necessity to acquire depth data
and that the method only works for the liquid surface visible from the top. Elbrechter et al. intro­
duced a classification system for discriminating liquids in different containers used in kitchens
using point cloud data. However, the approach fails for previously unseen liquids due to the
lack of a large training dataset and does not provide any information about the liquid quantity.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
19
==PAGE:25==
A graph­cut computer vision approach for tracing liquid levels and material boundaries in trans­
parent vessels was proposed by Eppel et al. in 2016 [57]. The method gave high accuracy in
boundary recognition for liquid, solid, granular, and powder materials in various glass contain­
ers in chemical environments. Since it relies on the assumption that the bottom of the vessel
is completely covered by material and the top is empty, the method fails for small quantities of
materials. Schenck and Fox [60] used an LSTM­based neural network trained on a synthetic
dataset to track liquids in video sequences. The study demonstrates that aggregating data over
multiple frames yields the best liquid detection results compared to standard image segmen­
tation. However, the work focuses mainly on the liquid in motion. Therefore, no conclusions
about liquids inside transparent containers are possible.
In 2020, Tara Zepel et al. [61] created an inexpensive and adaptable computer vision system
to monitor and control liquid levels in a chemical reactor. Since the liquid­level detection algo­
rithm is based on canny edge detection specifically improved for that reactor, it is unlikely to
perform well in other, more general environments. During the same year, the first ML­based
approach that specifically targeted research laboratory environments was presented by Eppel
et al. [58]. They provided a new dataset, Vector­LabPics, which consists of 2,187 annotated
images for identifying materials and containers in laboratory environments. The CNN trained
on this dataset showed satisfactory accuracy in identifying and separating vessels and material
phases and classifying liquids and solids. However, the accuracy was relatively lower regard­
ing segmenting systems with multiple phases, such as liquids undergoing phase separation.
The major limitation in increasing the accuracy of the models is the relatively small size of the
dataset.
That problem was tackled again by Eppel et al. in 2022 when they introduced a new procedurally
generated dataset consisting of 50,000 images of liquids and solid materials inside transparent
containers. To create the computer­generated images (CGI), 13,000 distinct objects, 500 en­
vironments, and 1,450 material textures were combined with simulated liquids and generated
vessels.
The trained CNNs aim to predict the 3D shape and properties of materials, liquids, and objects
and the shape of transparent containers. The trained CNN for semantic segmentation achieved
a mIoU of 55% for content segmentation on real images. The major challenge described by
the authors is increasing the prediction accuracy in more complex chemical environments [16].
Since this dataset can be considered state­of­the­art for liquid and vessel images with depth
and segmentation ground truth in terms of variety and size, it is also used in this thesis.
Liquid Volume Estimation
Very little research can be found to estimate the volume of liquid and the container itself. To
the author’s knowledge, there is currently no existing approach for estimating volumes based
on computer vision in research laboratory environments.
A first approach to estimating the volume of transparent containers and their liquid content
based on an RGB image was proposed by Mottaghi et al. in 2017 [62]. The CNN trained on the
data recorded by the authors classified the container volume into one of ten classes (50, 100,
200, 300, 500, 750, 1000, 2000, 3000 mL, and above) and the liquid volume into one of five
classes (0%, 33%, 50%, 66%, 100% of the container volume). Average per­class accuracies
of 17.79% for the container volume estimation and 32.01% for the content volume estimation
were achieved. In 2022, Zhu et al. [63] introduced a model for real­time volume estimation of
liquids based on the inputs from an RGB image and a customized tactile sensor. The multi­
modal CNN achieves a high precision with an error of 2 mL for volumes of 40­80 mL. The main
limitation of this system is the low flexibility since it was only trained for one object containing
the liquid. Therefore generalization for complex research laboratory environments with different
20
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:26==
containers is not possible.
An approach to estimating the liquid volume from single­view RGB images was presented by
Cobo et al. in 2022 [64]. The authors aimed to determine the wine volume in nine different
glass containers. The CNN was trained on a newly introduced dataset which consists of more
than 24,000 images of glasses filled with red wine. A mean average error lower than 10 mL for
volumes of 50­300 mL was achieved. However, the model is limited to using glass containers
and liquids similar to the ones used in the dataset and was not tested on other settings or more
diverse data.
2.3
Autonomous Liquid Pouring
To be able to create a fully autonomous and flexible laboratory system, the robot must be able
to pour precisely, similar to a human scientist. To the author’s knowledge, there is currently
no approach focussing specifically on the pouring of liquids in laboratory environments, es­
pecially using vessels present in a research laboratory. However, various approaches to the
general problem of liquid pouring, often focussing on kitchen assistant tasks, can be transferred
to laboratory environments. The pouring problem can be divided into three main components:
observing the fluid in the pouring and/or target container, modeling the flow dynamics, and con­
trolling the pouring container to reach a specified volume [65]. Possibilities of observing the
fluid were described in subsection 2.2.2. One central question is whether observing the liquid
in the pouring container or the target container is better. Previous work done in the field used
different approaches, which will be described briefly.
Burgard and Do [66] focus on a vision­based height detection in the receiving container and
then using a PID controller to execute the movement of the wrist joint of the robot. Narasimhan
et al. [67] also detect the fill level in the target container and use a generative model that is
capable of translating images of colored liquids into synthetically generated transparent liquid
images, trained only on unpaired data of colored and transparent liquid images. Schenk and
Fox [68] use a deep learning­based approach to estimate the amount of liquid in an opaque
target container and combine it with a simple PID controller to pour specific amounts of liquid.
The ground truth data for the pixel­wise liquid classification and subsequent volume estimation
is generated from experiments with heated water and a thermal camera.
Huang et al. [69] propose a self­supervised learning approach that learns pouring dynamics,
motion, and outcomes from unsupervised demonstrations. The poured volume is only mea­
sured in the target container using a scale. To better generalize, Kennedy et al. [65] try to
pour precisely from various unknown containers. The approach combines vision­ and scale­
based volume estimation in the receiver and a pouring simulation in NVIDIA Flex. This solution
improved the average pour error and time of 38 mL and 20 seconds achieved by [68] to an
average error of 3 mL with pouring varying from 20­45 seconds and can be seen as state­of­
the­art in precision. However, the setup requires a scale and a defined environment for the
liquid segmentation in the target container. Another simulation­based approach was presented
by Guevara et al. [70] in 2017. The work aims to minimize spilling in robotic pouring through
approximate fluid simulation in NVIDIA Flex, assuming a known liquid volume in the pouring
container.
One of the significant downsides of only detecting the liquid in the target container is the time
delay of the pour. Most of the systems are programmed to halt and turn the source container
to its original position once the estimated volume has reached the desired level. However, this
method may result in over­pouring since liquid may continue to flow out of the source container
during its backward rotation. This is especially relevant for pours with a low target volume in the
receiving container. Additionally, pouring in multiple target containers requires multiple liquid
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
21
==PAGE:27==
detection setups, which could be avoided by observing the liquid in the pouring container.
This work is based on the mentioned simulation­based approaches of Kennedy et al. [65] and
Guevara et al. [70], and the same simulation environment NVIDIA Flex will be used. This
approach requires an understanding of the physics of fluids and their simulation.
2.3.1
Fluid Simulation and Position-Based Fluids
Depending on the required accuracy, speed, and stability, the physics of fluids can be derived
in many different ways [71]. Here, the focus lies on particle methods, which are popular for their
simplicity and flexibility. One particle­based approach based on the Lattice­Boltzmann method
considers fluids as particles on a lattice that move along a discrete set of directions, which leads
to easy parallelization. However, this is inefficient for coarse flows [70]. Another approach
sees the fluid as a continuum of particles. It solves the resulting Navier­Stokes­equations to
estimate the velocity field within the fluid by sampling at various points (Eulerian) or gathering
velocities of particles (Lagrangian). Nevertheless, none of the mentioned methods can be easily
extended for two­way coupling between solids/objects and liquids in a mixed simulation, like
pouring liquids out of a rigid body [70].
One exception for this issue is using simulation based on position­based dynamics. This fast
but approximate method deals with two­way coupling by calculating the dynamics of the interac­
tion of particles based only on their position. The main advantage of a position­based approach
is its controllability. Additionally, the positions of vertices and parts of objects can be directly
manipulated during the simulation, and an explicit position­based solver is easy to understand
and adapt [72]. The concept of position­based fluids is based on the idea of position­based
dynamics. This technique achieves comparable incompressibility and convergence as modern
smoothed particle hydrodynamic solvers while benefiting from the stability inherent in geometric­
based, position­based dynamics methods.
Consequently, this method supports larger time
steps, making it well­suited for real­time applications [73]. Most recent simulation­based pour­
ing approaches are based on an approximate position­based particle simulator (see [74, 75, 70,
65, 76]).
2.3.2
Digital Twins
Digital twins serve as effective tools for comprehensively addressing real­world phenomena by
seamlessly bridging the gap between reality and virtual predictions. By leveraging a wealth of
data inputs, it becomes possible to establish connections between physical objects or processes
and simulations, thereby enabling the acquisition of meaningful real­time results. Ultimately,
the digital twin of the object or process of interest provides a cost­effective solution for making
decisions analogous to those we would make when directly interacting with the actual object
or process [77]. The main characteristic of using a digital twin is that there are two worlds, the
physical and the digital. The digital one mirrors the real state of the physical world, and based
on the exchange of data between the worlds, it may be synchronized [78].
Implementing these virtual replicas has already demonstrated their utility across various indus­
tries and scientific disciplines. In robotics, digital twins play a crucial role in scene understanding
and interaction, enabling a seamless connection between robots and the physical reality they
operate in. By leveraging digital twins, robots can effectively comprehend their surroundings
and interact with the real world meaningfully [78]. In the case of a liquid pouring environment,
a digital twin containing the same pouring and receiving objects, liquids, and robot coordinates
must be transferred between the digital and real world. Instead of trying different pouring move­
ments by changing the path, velocity, maximum pouring angle, and start volume in the real
world, it is possible to explore the parameter space in the digital world and only execute a suit­
able movement on the real robot.
22
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:28==
3
Methodology and Procedures
3.1
System Prototype
This section will mainly focus on the work to achieve the goal (1) mentioned in section 1.3: In­
tegrating existing laboratory hardware for a proof­of­concept prototype of an autonomous cell
culture system. The following sections will explain the selection and design of the hardware
components, details on the connection and configuration of the system and the intended au­
tonomous workflows.
In the planning and design phase of the system, several key considerations following the expla­
nations made in subsection 2.1.3 were addressed to achieve a consistent overall design and
architecture:
• Modularity: Incorporating a modular design enables the system to be easily expand­
able or adaptable. By dividing the system into smaller, independent modules, changes
or upgrades to specific components can be made without affecting the system, which is
especially important for a system prototype. Modularity facilitates future enhancements
and the reuse of subelements of the system prototype for future projects regarding life
science automation.
• Integration of existing laboratory equipment: The system integration into existing lab­
oratory workflows should be seamless, minimizing disruptions and maximizing utilizing
existing resources. This can be achieved by selecting machines and consumables al­
ready used in manual laboratory workflows. This can also be considered a cost­saver for
future system scaling.
• Simplicity: Designing the system with simplicity aims to make it user­friendly and intuitive
for operators. Simplicity enhances usability, decreases the chances of errors, and allows
researchers to focus more on their experiments and analysis rather than dealing with
complex system operations. This is essential for a low throughput system since various
end­users often use the system instead of an experienced operator.
One of the major decisions was the choice of the right robot type. Since only one big piece
of equipment is needed (incubator), the reach of a stationary arm was expected to be enough
to automate the process. Hence, no mobile robots were considered in the design process. A
collaborative robot arm was chosen over an industrial robot arm since the system is to be used
alongside humans, and therefore safety and human­robot collaboration were essential criteria.
In cell culture automation, there may be instances where human intervention or interaction is
required, such as the delicate handling of sensitive samples or troubleshooting unexpected situ­
ations. Collaborative robots can assist human operators while ensuring safety and augmenting
their capabilities, allowing for efficient and productive teamwork. The system is built on a move­
able table with surface dimensions of 121x198 cm, with the robot mounted in the center to reach
the different elements around it.
3.1.1
Components of the Hardware Setup
The following describes the purpose, characteristics, and, if applicable, the design process of
the hardware components used in the system prototype. A list of the used purchased devices
and elements can be seen in table B.3. The technical drawings of the 3D printed parts are
located in section B.4. The CAD files can be accessed here.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
23
==PAGE:29==
Robot
The used robot is a UR5e from Universal Robots [79]. It has a maximum payload of 5 kg and
a reach of 850 mm. Both parameters are suitable for the setup since the maximum weight in
the process is a medium bottle with 0.75 kg, and the reach allows it to go to most positions on
the table [79]. The robot is responsible for moving objects between the modules mounted on
the table and handling the consumables during the process. The robot is attached to a Vention
mounting plate.
Consumables
Only consumables utilized in the manual cell culture process carried out by laboratory labor
are used to enable seamless system integration. These are Nunc EasYFlask 175 cm2 Cell
Culture Flasks [80] from ThermoFisher Scientific (from now on referred to as flask, cell flask,
or cell culture flask) and Gibco Bottles 500 mL [81] from ThermoFisher Scientific for media and
washing solution (from now on referred to as bottle, media bottle, or media/washing solution
bottle). Pictures of the consumables can be seen in fig. B.15.
Multipurpose Gripper
A Hand­E Adaptive Gripper from Robotiq [82] was attached to the robot arm, and custom grip­
per fingers were designed to create a multipurpose gripper. The goal was to allow the robot to
carry out all the tasks required in the workflow with the same gripper fingers to avoid tool chang­
ing. These tasks involve gripping the cell culture flask, the media/washing solution bottles, and
capping/decapping the flask lid.
Multiple iterations of the gripper fingers were designed and printed using a Raise3D E2 3D
printer. The final solution involves a design with two levels to achieve a wide range of strokes
for the different sizes of flasks (40 mm) and bottles (100 mm). The lower level of the fingers has
a semicircular recess for gripping and capping/decapping the flask lid. The recess’s diameter
and the lid’s outside diameter are equal. For the final solution, adhesive tape was attached
to the gripping surfaces to reduce slippage between the consumables and the plastic surface
of the fingers. Figure 3.1 provides images of the multipurpose gripper. Further details of the
gripper finger design are shown in fig. B.16.
Figure 3.1: Visualisations of the gripper finger design and its functionalities. From left to right:
(1) Isometric view of the gripper finger in Autodesk Inventor. (2) Gripper fingers attached to
the Hand­E Adaptive Gripper from Robotiq. (3) Gripper holding a cell culture flask. (4) Gripper
decapping a cell culture flask.
Incubator
One main challenge was automating a standard laboratory incubator commonly used in manual
cell culture automation processes. Automated incubators are rarely commercially available
and usually only made for plates, not cell culture flasks. Hence, a standard, non­automated
VWR INCU­Line ILCO 180 Premium CO2 Incubator was selected. It is designed to provide
24
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:30==
optimal growth conditions for cell cultures while ensuring maximum sample safety. Additional
characteristics include a multi­functional microprocessor controller, adjustable temperature/time
profiles, and safety features such as temperature alarms, power failure control, and door alarms
[83].
Multiple approaches to opening the handle and door of the incubator with the robot arm and
gripper have proved unsuitable. The handle must be turned 90° and then pulled in a circular
motion on the door. The biggest obstacle is the resistance when opening and closing the handle
since the collaborative robot often blocks the movement because of too high force. Hence, the
final solution for opening and closing the incubator is independent of the robot. It includes a
pneumatic piston rod cylinder (Festo ISO cylinder DSNU­25­500­PPV­A) connected to 1 bar of
compressed air each for opening and closing. The cylinder is attached to the upper back of the
incubator on one end and to the door of the incubator on the other end. Extending the cylinder,
therefore, leads to opening the door by pushing, and compressing leads to closing the door
by pulling. Only by pulling using the cylinder, the door could not be sealed airtight, which is a
prerequisite for stable CO2 levels. To solve this issue, three linear pneumatic clamps (Festo
linear/swivel clamp) were attached to the side of the incubator. These clamps are connected to
dual 5­bar compressed air inputs, enabling both closing and opening actions. Once the door of
the incubator is closed by pulling with the cylinder, the three clamps are closed to lock the door
and make it airtight.
Conversely, when opening the incubator, the clamps are released first, followed by the extension
of the pneumatic cylinder. Refer to fig. 3.2 for visuals of the incubator and the opening/closing
mechanism.
Figure 3.2: Visualisations of the incubator and its opening/closing mechanism. From left to
right: (1) Closed, but not airtightly locked, door. (2) Opened door after extending the pneumatic
cylinder. (3) Top view of the compressed pneumatic cylinder. (4) Front view of the closed door
with locked clamps. (5) Detail view of one of the three closed clamps to lock the door.
Flask Storage
Storage locations both for empty input flasks on the table for cell passaging and for flasks inside
the incubator are needed. For this prototype, input and incubator storages of five flasks were
considered sufficient. To upscale the system, more storage locations for flasks would be re­
quired. This could be achieved by using a rotating flask holder. Similar to the manual process,
they should be placed horizontally. Hence, a flask holder plate with a recess was designed to
allow the gripper fingers to grasp the flask. Five plates each were fixed on top of each other to
a structure made of 20 x 20 mm aluminum profiles. In the experimental setup, two structures
are utilized: one is affixed to the table, and the other is inside the incubator. The incubator’s
functioning necessitates a water bath component at the bottom of the incubator chamber. To
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
25
==PAGE:31==
accommodate the placement of the water bath, the flask storage unit was elevated by 10 cm,
allowing sufficient space for the water bath to be positioned underneath it. Figure 3.3 offers
visual representations of the flask storages.
Figure 3.3: Visualisations of the flask holder plate and the final solution for flask storage. From
left to right: (1) Isometric view of the flask holder plate in Autodesk inventor. (2) Detail view of a
3D printed flask holder plate. (3) Final solution of the input flask storage affixed to the table. (4)
Final solution of the flask storage inside the incubator with a water bath placed underneath it.
Lid Holder
Lid holders are needed during manipulation tasks with open flasks. After decapping with the
robot arm, the lid must be placed in a fixed position so that the robot can continue with the
process until the flask needs to be capped again. Multiple iterations of the lid holder elements
were designed and printed. The final solution is made to hold the lid upside down to avoid cross­
contamination between different lids. The holder’s width is chosen to fit between the closed
gripper fingers when holding the lid. Five lid holder elements were 3D printed and attached
to a 550 mm high structure made of 20x20 mm aluminum profiles, which allows horizontal
approaching of the robot while holding the lid upside down. The final solution of the lid holder
is visualized in fig. B.17.
Flask Holder for Pouring and Capping/Decapping
Multiple iterations of the flask holder as a base for pouring and capping/decapping tasks were
designed and printed. Since the flask opening and the lid should be parallel to the XY plane of
the robot to enable easier decapping and pouring, and the flask neck is tilted in relation to its
body, the flask holder needs to be tilted as well. The final solution is tilted by 13.5° and contains
several flattenings on the input level to ensure smooth insertion. Refer to fig. 3.4 for a graphical
representation of the flask holder.
Camera and Camera Mounting
An Intel RealSense D415 Depth Camera [84] was selected for capturing images for computer
vision tasks. It captures depth at a resolution of up to 1280x720 pixels and color imagery at
1920x1080 pixels [84]. The camera was mounted to the Robotiq gripper to achieve high flexi­
bility and mobility, not stationary in the system. As a result, the robot arm can move the camera
to various locations and angles, allowing it to capture different viewpoints. In addition, the cam­
era can monitor different system modules during the process, ensuring continuous functionality.
The mount was designed to position the camera perpendicularly to the gripper fingers to enable
a wide field of view. The camera mount is attached with two M4 x 8 mm screws to the Robotiq
gripper and two M3 x 8 mm screws to the camera. The camera and the camera mount can be
seen in fig. B.18.
26
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.4: Visualisations of the flask holder for pouring and capping/decapping and its place­
ment in the system. From left to right: (1) Isometric view of the flask holder in Autodesk inventor.
(2) Detail view of three holders containing cell culture flasks, which lids are parallel to the table.
(3) Top view of the flask holders affixed to the table.
Capper/Decapper
Capping/decapping the media/washing solution bottles requires a lid rotation of around 750°.
Since the last joint of the UR5e has a maximum range of rotation of 720°, using the arm for this
task is unpractical. The robot would need to grip the lid, rotate for 720°, open the gripper, rotate
back, grip again, and finish the capping/decapping process. Therefore, an RGI 100 Rotary
Electric Gripper Jaw from DH Robotics is used [85]. Four M3 x 16 mm pins are used as gripper
fingers. Since it is an infinite rotating gripper, no regripping is needed. Therefore, the robot arm
can hold the bottle below the gripper module, and after decapping, the module can keep the lid
while the robot executes tasks with the bottle. The gripper module is lifted by attaching it to a
650 mm high 40x40 mm aluminum profile to allow easy access for the robot arm. Figure B.18
shows a picture of the capping/decapping unit.
Microscope
A CytoSMART Lux3 BR [86] was selected as a microscope to analyze the confluency of the
cells. It was developed especially for cell culture applications and utilizes brightfield and digi­
tal phase­contrast microscopy to capture high­quality images of living cells. The image size of
2072x2072 pixels combined with the 1.45x1.45 mm field of view provides a 0.7 µm/pixel res­
olution. Another advantage is the Python­based CytoSMART Lux Open API, which allows a
more straightforward incorporation of the microscope into the cell culture automation system
[86]. In addition, a microscope holder was designed, 3D printed, and attached to the table to
ensure a fixed position of the device and, therefore, consistent imaging quality. A picture of the
microscope is shown in fig. B.18.
Trypsin Unit
Since only a very low amount of dissociation reagent such as trypsin (approximately 0.5 mL
per 10 cm2) needs to be added to the cell culture flask, pouring is unsuitable. Instead, a bottle
dispenser (1­10 mL) was attached to a trypsin bottle and mounted on a structure of aluminum
profiles to allow vertical insertion of the reagent into the flask. Images of the unit can be seen
in fig. B.19.
Heating and Cooling of Liquids Unit
Different options were evaluated for cooling the media and the washing solution during storing
and heating before pouring it into the cell culture flask. Adding a fridge to the system would
require another door­opening mechanism and significant space. Instead, the final solution in­
cludes a thermoelectric chiller (TCube edge [87]). It has a temperature range of 0°C to 65°C.
Cooling/heating liquid is pumped through pipes surrounding the tightly fitted media and washing
solution holder.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
27
==PAGE:33==
3.1.2
Connection and Configuration
The components described in subsection 3.1.1 are combined on one table to establish a func­
tional system. The positions of the substations were chosen iteratively during prototyping and
programming, focussing on keeping a modular approach. One of the main constraints is the
position of the incubator since the door can only open to one side. The incubator module, in­
cluding the opening/closing mechanism, can be moved and reused for future projects. The
microscope is placed close to the incubator to ensure easy and fast analysis of the flasks. The
capping/decapping unit is located close to the pouring unit to avoid long movements of the robot
with open bottles, which could lead to spilling. The positions of the flask holders for pouring and
capping/decapping are selected so that they are reachable and approachable from the right
angle by the robot. All the elements needed for passaging cells by pouring are combined on
one side of the table into one pouring module. This includes three flask holders, the lid holder
element, and the flask storage. The setup of the hardware modules on the table can be seen
in fig. 3.5. Further images of the setup are shown in fig. B.20.
Figure 3.5: Overview of the hardware setup on the table. (1) Automated incubator. (2) Micro­
scope. (3) Trypsin unit. (4) Capper/Decapper. (5) Lid holders. (6) Flask storage. (7) Flask
holder for pouring. (8) UR5e with 3D­printed gripper fingers. (9) Heating and cooling of liquids
unit.
All the devices are either connected to the UR control box or directly to the PC (Dell Precision
3630 Tower). The connection between the UR5e and its control box and the PC is established
using the UR­RTDE library developed by SDU [88]. The library works by establishing a com­
munication link using an Ethernet connection. It utilizes the Real­Time Data Exchange (RTDE)
protocol, a proprietary protocol developed by Universal Robots for real­time communication
[89]. The connection makes it possible to receive real­time feedback from the robot arm, send
commands, and control its motion in real time.
28
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:34==
The pneumatic clamps and the cylinder are controlled by using electrically actuated 5/2­way
control valves. These are both connected to two digital output connectors of the UR control box.
Each output can control the airflow in one output tube of the valve, which is responsible for ex­
tending or compressing the clamps and the cylinder. The Robotiq Hand­E gripper is connected
to the robot arm by a power and communication cable with a USB adapter. The microscope,
camera, and electric rotary gripper are connected to the PC by a USB cable. While the camera
and the gripper can be controlled using specific Python libraries (pyrealsense2, minimalmod­
bus), the microscope needs the CytoSMART driver installed on the PC. The entire system is
controlled by an application written in Python. This includes a simple human­machine interface
to control the tasks and see the microscope’s output. The recorded data (images taken by mi­
croscope and camera) are stored locally on the PC. The functional interconnection of hard­ and
software is visualized in fig. 3.6. The UR control box, the electric rotary gripper, the incubator,
and the PC are connected to standard 230V electrical sockets.
Figure 3.6: Simplified overview of the functional interconnection of hard­ and software.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
29
==PAGE:35==
3.1.3
Process and workflow description
Similar to the manual process, the autonomous process is split into three high­level workflows.
• Workflow A: Analyzing cell growth.
• Workflow B: Changing media.
• Workflow C: Passaging.
The system should be able to execute the three workflows independently, depending on the
user input or the scheduled plan. To enhance reusability and simplicity, the steps to achieve
completion of the workflows are structured into workflow modules.
The following gives a mid­level overview of the purpose of each process module, including a
summarized description of the substeps. A low­level description is given in each function block
of the Python code.
• Module 1: Get a cell culture flask from the incubator (open clamps, open door, grip the
flask, move the flask outside, close door and clamps).
• Module 2: Analyze cells (move flask to regripping station, regrip, place the flask on the
microscope, take images at different positions, move back to start position).
• Module 3: Place a flask in a flask holder (move to the flask holder, place the flask inside,
and move back to the start position).
• Module 4: Decap flask(s) (move to the flask, grip the lid, take off the lid, place the lid on a
lid holder, and move back to the start position).
• Module 5: Remove liquid from a flask (take the open flask from a flask holder, move to
the waste container, pour out all the liquid, and place the flask back into the flask holder).
• Module 6: Add liquid to a flask (heat media or washing solution, take the bottle, decap
the bottle, regrip the bottle, pour a specific amount into the flask, regrip the bottle, cap the
bottle, and place it back into the bottle holder).
• Module 7: Add trypsin to a flask (move to the trypsin unit, move up the bottle dispenser,
push it down, and move back to the start position).
• Module 8: Get three empty flasks and place them into the flask holders (move to flask
storage, grip an empty flask, move to the flask holder, place the flask inside, and move
back to the start position).
• Module 9: Split cells into empty flasks (take the full flask from the flask holder, move to
the empty flasks, pour liquid three times, and place the empty flask into the flask storage).
• Module 10: Cap flask(s) (get a lid from the lid holder, place the lid on a flask, cap the flask,
and move back to the start position).
• Module 11: Place a flask in the incubator (open clamps, open door, move the flask inside,
place the flask on the flask storage, close door, and close clamps).
Throughout the implementation of the modules, careful consideration was given to selecting
start and end positions, ensuring the flexibility to arrange them in any order, thus enabling di­
verse workflows to be executed. The process diagram illustrating the three primary workflows
can be observed in fig. 3.7. This design approach enables seamless customization and adap­
tation of the system to various operational requirements. Implementation details on how to use
the system are described in appendix A.
30
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.7: Process diagram for the three main autonomous workflows.
3.2
Vision-based Detection and Volume Estimation of Liquids
This chapter explains the methodology used for vision­based detection and volume estimation
of liquids. As seen in subsection 2.2.2, very little research has been done in the field of liquid
detection in research laboratories. Additionally, to the author’s knowledge, there is currently no
established approach for estimating volumes based on computer vision in research laboratory
environments. This chapter starts by explaining the idea and approach of the vision­based sys­
tem (subsection 3.2.1). It continues by providing details about the process for segmentation and
depth estimation of transparent vessels and liquids inside of them (subsection 3.2.2). After, the
methodology and procedures for the vision­based volume estimation of liquids will be explained
(subsection 3.2.3).
3.2.1
Idea and Approach
The proposed approach consists of a two­step process for liquid volume estimation. First, train a
CNN on the TransProteus dataset for segmentation and monocular depth estimation of liquids
and transparent vessels. The resulting model can be used for liquid and transparent object
detection for process monitoring (e.g., is a flask present or not). Segmented vessel and liquid
XYZ maps can be created using camera intrinsics and combining the segmentation and depth
maps. Subsequently, a custom dataset is generated, containing images of transparent vessels
commonly used in research laboratories and the liquid volumes stored as information. The initial
custom dataset is then converted into a new dataset containing segmented depth maps of liquids
and vessels using the trained segmentation and depth estimation model. Finally, a new CNN
is trained on the converted dataset for liquid volume estimation. The approach is based on the
idea that a model can learn from the shapes of vessel and liquid as well as from the relationship
between liquid and vessel maps (e.g., the percentage filled) to infer a better estimation of the
volume than just from providing an image. The approach is visualized in fig. 3.8.
3.2.2
Segmentation and Depth Estimation
The aim is to create segmentation and depth maps of both transparent vessels and liquids
present in research laboratories based on a single input RGB image. This can be used for
process monitoring during experiments carried out in the laboratory and for flexible robotic tasks
(e.g., grasping containers in an unknown environment).
The approach is based on the idea and data provided by Eppel et al. in 2020 [58] and 2022
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.8: Visualization of the two­step approach for liquid volume estimation.
[16]. However, the model trained in [16] tries to predict the XYZ map directly from an RGB
input image. As suggested by the authors, an approach to predicting a depth map and then
transforming it into XYZ coordinates using the known camera parameters is preferable over
predicting the 3D model as an XYZ map. In autonomous systems in research laboratories, the
camera does not change, and the camera parameters can be assumed to be known. Hence,
the model from [16] is modified to predict the depth maps instead of the XYZ maps. Also, the
model in this work is only trained on liquid content inside the vessels rather than on object and
liquid content.
Dataset Selection and Description
Deep learning­based approaches for computer vision rely on large annotated datasets encom­
passing images and their associated properties. However, manually creating such datasets is
a labor­intensive process that is typically limited to simple properties such as material class (liq­
uid/solid) and region within the image. Unfortunately, annotating 3D structures manually proves
challenging due to limitations in accuracy. Moreover, viewing an object through a transparent
surface introduces significant shape distortion, which human annotators are unable to account
for fully. Therefore, an alternative approach that circumvents these challenges is the utilization
of computer­generated images (CGI). Synthetic datasets containing transparent objects were
available for some years (e.g., ClearGrasp [55], SuperCaustics [54]), but datasets containing
transparent objects with liquid content were just recently published. The biggest and most di­
verse one is the TransProteus dataset [16]. That is why it was chosen for the segmentation and
depth estimation in this work.
The TransProteus dataset consists of more than 50,000 CGI with annotated 3D models of trans­
parent vessels and their contents, including segmentation masks and material properties such
as color, transparency, reflectance, and roughness. Generated using Blender, the dataset en­
compasses over 500 high­definition backgrounds and more than 13,000 random objects for
diverse and realistic scenes. It also includes simulated liquids with various properties using the
Blender MantaFlow tool, featuring effects like splashing, foam, and bubbles. Material textures
were generated using the principled BSDF shader in Blender, providing control over visual prop­
erties such as color, transparency, reflectance, and roughness. Examples of simulated vessels
with liquid content from the dataset can be seen in fig. 3.9.
The dataset is available online and publically accessible [90]. It is split into eight subfolders,
resulting in a total size of around 220 GB. Each subfolder is split into a training and testing folder.
32
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.9: Examples of simulated vessels with liquid content from the TransProteus dataset.
Both of them are divided into four subdirectories depending on the vessel content (liquids, flat
liquids, single objects, objects). Each folder in the subdirectories contains one sample. That
includes the RGB image, content material, vessel material, camera parameters, and depth and
segmentation maps of the empty vessel, the vessel opening, and the content, respectively.
Examples of the detailed content of the folders can be seen in figure fig. 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Examples of the content of a folder from three samples of the TransProteus dataset.
Since the model in this work should specifically focus on liquids inside the transparent vessels,
the model explained in the following section is trained only on the images containing liquids.
Only the subfolders called LiquidContent are used for that. That sums up to a dataset size
of around 14,500 samples. To improve results on real­world images, the Vector­LabPics data
[58] is used as additional training data for vessel and liquid segmentation mask prediction. The
Vector­LabPics dataset comprises 7,900 images capturing materials in diverse stages and pro­
cedures observed in transparent vessels within chemistry labs, medical labs, hospitals, and
other relevant settings. The depth loss is set to zero since no ground truth depth maps are
available for the Vector­LabPics data. A description to download the datasets is provided in the
subfolder for segmentation and depth estimation in the GitHub repository of the project.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
33
==PAGE:39==
Model Architecture
The model architecture for the segmentation and depth estimation of liquids and transparent
vessels is based on the work presented by Eppel et al. [16]. The used final architecture is
a modified version of a standard fully convolutional network (FCN) based on the DeepLab­v3
architecture [91, 50] with the following components:
• Encoder: The model uses a pre­trained ResNet­101 [92] model as the encoder. ResNet­
101 is a deep residual network consisting of convolutional layers and pooling layers to
extract features from the input RGB images.
• ASPP (Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling) Layers: The decoder component employs an
ASPP module with dilated convolutions as in the DeepLabv3 architecture [91]. To capture
multi­scale contextual information, these layers have different dilation rates (1, 2, 4, 12,
16). Using multiple scales, the model can effectively analyze objects of various sizes and
preserve spatial resolution. Each of the five ASPP layers applies a dilated convolution
operation followed by batch normalization and ReLU activation.
• Squeeze ASPP Layer: This layer applies a regular convolution operation to reduce the
number of channels in the feature maps obtained from the ASPP layers from 2560 to 512.
It consists of a convolutional layer, batch normalization, and ReLU activation.
• Skip Connection Layers: The model includes skip connections to fuse the features from
the encoder with the upsampled features. These connections help retain fine­grained de­
tails from the early stages of the network during upsampling. Three different skip connec­
tion layers are added after specific layers of the encoder. Each skip connection consists
of a convolutional layer, batch normalization, and ReLU activation.
• Squeeze Upsample Layers: These layers upsample the fused features from the three
skip connections. They increase the spatial resolution of the features while reducing the
number of channels. They consist of a convolutional layer, batch normalization, and ReLU
activation. The three layers of skip connections and upsampling follow the U­Net structure
[93].
• Output Layers: The model has separate output layers for each depth and segmentation
mask prediction (vessel mask, vessel depth, liquid mask, liquid depth, vessel opening
mask, and vessel opening depth). Each output layer is a convolutional layer that produces
the predicted depth maps or segmentation masks. The vessel, liquid, and vessel opening
masks are predicted as a two­layer probability mask. The depth maps for vessel, liquid,
and vessel openings are predicted as a one­layer map.
Overall, the architecture is designed to take advantage of the ResNet­101 encoder’s ability to
extract image features. The ASPP layers and skip connections enable the model to capture both
global and local context, while the squeeze layers and upsample layers refine and upsample
the features to produce the final predictions. The input and outputs of the model are visualized
in fig. 3.11.
Implementation Details
The model and all required scripts for training, evaluating, and using the model were imple­
mented using Python and the PyTorch library. The project folder for the usage of the segmen­
tation and depth estimation of liquids and transparent vessels is a subfolder of the main project
repository. It follows the structure of the Cookiecutter Data Science project template, which
provides a standardized and organized layout for data science projects. Further implementa­
tion details, including a description of how to train, evaluate, and use a model, are described in
appendix A.
34
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.11: Visualization of the input and output layers of the segmentation and depth estima­
tion model for an example of the TransProteus dataset.
Experimental Setup
All training processes were carried out on a Tesla A100­PCIE GPU available in the DTU HPC
clusters. The final model was trained for 75 epochs using the described subset of the TransPro­
teus dataset and the Vector­LabPics dataset. The Vector­LabPics data was applied in 33% of
the training steps. Image augmentation for training data includes resizing, centered cropping,
gaussian blurring, decoloring, and darkening. The testing data is already excluded in an extra
folder in each folder of the TransProteus dataset. An Adam optimizer was used with an initial
learning rate of 1×10−5 and a weight decay of 4×10−5. The learning rate is adjusted every five
epochs based on the average loss. If the average loss does not decrease for ten consecutive
epochs, the learning rate is reduced by 10%. The batch size was set to 6. The trained model
weights and optimizer state are overwritten after each epoch. After every fifth epoch, the model
gets saved permanently. The loss for each segmentation mask is calculated using the standard
per­pixel cross­entropy function.
The loss for each depth map is calculated only for the region of the object as given by the
specific ground truth mask. As described, for Vector­LabPics samples, the depth loss is set to
zero. In the TransProteus dataset, the scale of the 3D model can not be extracted from the
image. Therefore, the loss needs to be independent of the predicted model scale, which is why
the scale­invariant depth loss, as introduced by Eigen et al. [52], is used. The scale­invariant
depth loss is defined in eq. (3.1):
L(yi, ˆyi) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
di2 −1
N2 (
N
X
i=1
di)2
(3.1)
where di = log(yi)−log( ˆyi). yi is the predicted depth at pixel i, and ˆyi the ground truth depth for
pixel i, and N the number of pixels in the region. Note that the network output is log(y). Hence,
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
35
==PAGE:41==
the final linear layer predicts the log depth, and the depth maps need to be converted to linear
scale before further use.
The loss curves of the category losses of vessel depth, liquid depth, vessel opening depth,
vessel mask, liquid mask, and vessel opening mask for the described training are shown in
fig. 3.12.
Figure 3.12: Category loss curves of vessel depth, liquid depth, vessel opening depth, vessel
mask, liquid mask, and vessel opening mask.
In the evaluation of the segmentation of the vessel, liquid, and vessel opening regions, the
standard Intersection over Union (IoU) metric is used. IoU is a widely­used metric for assessing
semantic segmentation and is calculated separately for each region. It quantifies the degree of
overlap between the pixels identified as belonging to a region in both the network prediction and
the ground truth from the dataset. The IoU is computed by dividing the intersection of these
pixels by their union. Additionally, Recall is calculated as the intersection divided by the total
number of pixels belonging to the region according to the ground truth annotation. Precision is
computed as the intersection divided by the total number of pixels assigned to the region based
on the model prediction.
Evaluation of the depth map prediction is done using a metric suggested by Eigen et al. [52].
Since the scale of the 3D model in the TransProteus dataset is arbitrary, the scale­dependent
metrics like the linear root mean squared error (RMSE) have little meaning. Therefore, only
the scale−invariant log RMSE is used. It is calculated by taking the mean of the values using
the square root of the result of eq. (3.1), resulting in eq. (3.2).
RMSE(log, scale −invariant) = 1
T
T
X
t=1
v
u
u
u
t

1
N
N
X
i=1
d2
i −1
N2
 N
X
i=1
di
!2

(3.2)
36
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:42==
where T is the number of samples, and di and N the same as defined for eq. (3.1).
3.2.3
Liquid Volume Estimation
The aim is to predict the volume of liquids inside transparent vessels present in research lab­
oratories based on a single RGB image. For the input of the volume estimation model, the
described segmentation and depth estimation network is used first to create the segmented
depth maps of vessels and liquids. A vision­based volume estimation can be used for various
robotic tasks in­ and outside of research laboratories. Exemplary use cases for research lab­
oratories are the autonomous pouring of liquids based on a known start volume or the control
of liquid materials in a self­driving laboratory. Almost empty vessels could be detected and
automatically replaced using a mobile robot. To the author’s knowledge, no similar two­step
approach for the vision­based estimation of liquid volume has been used. The idea is based on
the food volume estimation approach by Graikos et al. [94]. However, instead of the proposed
point­cloud­to­volume calculation, another CNN is used.
Data Generation
Since the TransProteus dataset does not include a volume ground truth, it can not be used
for liquid volume estimation. To the author’s knowledge, there is no publicly available dataset
that contains images of liquids and their volumes in laboratory environments. Therefore, a new
dataset called LabLiquidVolume, which fills that gap, was created for this work by the author. It
includes 5,451 images of liquids in laboratory containers.
The images were taken using an Intel RealSense D415 camera. The ground truth of the liquid
volume was measured using a Mettler Toledo XSR2002S balance with an accuracy of ± 0.5 mL.
The camera was connected to a PC via a USB cable. The balance has a digital display for data
readout. The images were generated in different environments in the automation laboratory and
various research laboratories at the Novo Nordisk R&eD site in Måløv, Denmark. The setup for
one of the data generation scenes is shown in fig. 3.13.
Figure 3.13: An exemplary setup for the generation of the LabLiquidVolume dataset. It includes
the laboratory vessels, the balance, and the Intel RealSense D415 camera.
For the data generation, a simple user interface was created in Python using the Tkinter library.
It asks the user to select the vessel name and liquid color and to enter the liquid volume. The
camera view is streamed in another window. The sample is saved by clicking capture, and the
corresponding data is stored in a new subfolder. The user interface during the data generation
can be seen in fig. 3.14.
Twelve of the most common research laboratory containers, including the consumables used
in cell culture processes, were selected for the dataset. Details of the vessels (official name,
company, material, height, opening diameter, max. width) are listed in table B.1. The twelve
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.14: The user interface during data generation. Left: User input window for vessel
name, liquid volume, and liquid color, and buttons for capturing images and quitting. Right:
Live camera RGB stream.
empty vessels are visualized in fig. 3.15. In consultation with laboratory scientists, three different
liquid colors were chosen: red, green, and blue. Besides transparent liquids, these are the most
frequent colors of liquids in laboratory experiments. Due to a recognized high variability of the
results of the segmentation and depth estimation for completely transparent liquids, these were
not used for the dataset. To create as diverse a dataset as possible, many different liquid
volumes were chosen. Depending on the vessel, these range from 3 to 600 mL. For the same
reason, various distances to the object (50 ­ 600 mm) and different camera angles were used.
However, all images were taken from above so that the surface of the liquid is visible. To illustrate
the diversity of the dataset, 20 sample images are shown in fig. B.1.
Figure 3.15:
The vessels selected for the LabLiquidVolume dataset.
From left to right
(short names used in the dataset): Duran_500mL, Duran_250ml, Duran_100mL, Storage­
Bottle_500mL, Storage_Bottle_250mL, Pyrex_100mL, Cell_Flask_400mL, Cell_Flask_160mL,
Gibco_500mL, Gibco_125mL, Tube_50mL, Tube_15mL.
An initial dataset is created during the data generation, which is then converted to the final
dataset using the trained segmentation and depth model. The initial dataset contains a subfolder
for each sample. Each subfolder includes the recorded RGB image and depth map from the
camera (as .png and .npy files) and the liquid color, the vessel name, the liquid volume, and the
vessel volume in separate text files.
38
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:44==
For the processed final dataset, the content of each subfolder is copied and extended by the
output of the segmentation and depth estimation model using the RGB images as input. This in­
cludes the segmented liquid and vessel depth maps, the liquid and vessel segmentation masks
(each as .png and .npy files), and the unsegmented depth maps of liquid and vessel. Addition­
ally, a combined image is created for easier visualization of the samples, including the original
RGB image, the normalized segmented liquid and vessel depth maps, and the liquid and vessel
segmentation masks. Consequently, the converted final dataset consists of 5,451 subfolders
with the following content:
• Input_color.txt: Liquid color (red, blue, or green)
• Input_ContentDepth_segmented.npy/.png: Segmented liquid depth map.
• Input_ContentDepth.npy: Liquid depth map.
• Input_ContentMaskClean.npy/.png: Liquid segmentation mask.
• Input_DepthMap.npy/.png: Recorded depth map from camera.
• Input_EmptyVessel_Depth_segmented.npy/.png: Segmented vessel depth map.
• Input_EmptyVessel_Depth.npy: Vessel depth map.
• Input_RGBImage.npy/.png: Recorded RGB image from camera.
• Input_vessel.txt: Short name of the vessel.
• Input_VesselMask.npy/.png: Vessel segmentation mask.
• Input_visualize.png: Combined image showing the original RGB image, the normalized
segmented liquid and vessel depth maps, and the liquid and vessel segmentation masks.
• Input_vol_liquid.txt: Liquid volume.
• Input_vol_vessel.txt: Vessel volume.
Three samples of the generated LabLiquidVolume dataset are visualized in fig. 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Visualization of the content of three samples of the generated LabLiquidVolume
dataset.
The vessels in the images in the dataset have an average maximum volume of 178 mL and an
average fill proportion of 48%. 31% percent of the samples contain green, 57% red, and 12%
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
39
==PAGE:45==
blue liquid. A more detailed analysis of the distribution of the samples can be seen in table 3.1.
A histogram of the distribution of liquid volumes in the dataset is shown in fig. B.2.
Table 3.1: Details of the content of the LabLiquidVolume dataset.
Name
Number
of
Samples
Max.
Vessel
Vol.
Average
Liquid
Vol.
Average
Fill
Level
Prop.
of Green
Samples
Prop.
of Red
Samples
Prop.
of Blue
Samples
Cell_Flask
_160mL
417
268
125
47%
40%
41%
19%
Cell_Flask
_400mL
665
647
292
45%
45%
34%
21%
Duran_100mL
335
125
58
46%
49%
51%
0%
Duran_250mL
409
302
161
53%
21%
65%
15%
Duran_500mL
631
594
290
49%
24%
63%
13%
Gibco_125mL
652
180
86
48%
23%
47%
8%
Gibco_500mL
512
755
321
43%
34%
72%
21%
Pyrex_100mL
530
115
60
52%
26%
59%
15%
StorageBottle
_250mL
401
359
183
51%
32%
68%
0%
StorageBottle
_500mL
423
682
281
41%
22%
78%
0%
Tube_15mL
119
16
9
56%
32%
68%
0%
Tube_50mL
357
55
31
56%
33%
53%
14%
Total
5451
385
178
48%
31%
57%
12%
Model Architecture
The neural network architecture employed for the volume estimation is a basic CNN as ex­
plained in [46]. It comprises multiple layers, including convolutional, batch normalization, and
fully connected layers. The input of the main presented network consists of two components:
vessel depth map and liquid depth map. The network processes these depth maps to generate
a corresponding liquid volume prediction.
The architecture begins with convolutional layers, which extract relevant features from the input
depths using a series of 2D convolutions. The first convolutional layer takes in two channels,
representing the vessel and liquid depth. It applies a kernel size of 5x5 and utilizes padding
to maintain spatial dimensions. The subsequent convolutional layers gradually increase the
number of output channels, allowing for more intricate patterns and features to be extracted.
To enhance the training process and reduce overfitting, batch normalization layers are incorpo­
rated after each convolutional layer. These layers normalize the outputs, ensuring more stable
and efficient learning throughout the network. Max pooling layers are inserted to downsample
the feature maps, reducing spatial dimensions while retaining important information. This helps
to capture and preserve the most relevant features while discarding less significant details.
Dropout layers are included to randomly deactivate a portion of the neurons during training, re­
ducing interdependencies and encouraging the network to learn more robust representations.
The architecture has a configurable dropout rate, allowing control over the dropout intensity
during training.
40
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:46==
Following the convolutional and pooling layers, the feature maps are flattened and passed
through fully connected layers. The fully connected layers allow the network to learn com­
plex relationships and mappings between the input depths and the desired volume output. The
number of neurons gradually decreases across the fully connected layers. ReLU activation
is applied after each convolutional and fully connected layer, introducing non­linearity and en­
abling the network to model more complex and nonlinear patterns. The final fully connected
layer outputs a single value, representing the predicted liquid volume.
The second main model, besides the mentioned model trained with the segmented depth maps
as input, is the vessel volume input model. In addition to the segmented depth maps, the
model takes the maximum volume of the vessel as an input. The vessel volume is transformed
using a fully connected layer before being concatenated with the features extracted from the
convolutional layers of the segmented depth maps.
Implementation Details
The implementation of the model, along with all the necessary scripts for training, evaluation,
and utilization, was done in Python using the PyTorch library. Specifically, the project folder
dedicated to the volume estimation of liquids is a subfolder within the main project repository. It
follows the same organized structure as the previously described subproject for segmentation
and depth estimation.
The main.py file serves as the main entry point for running the liquid volume estimation. It
provides three modes of operation: training the model, predicting the volume based on an RGB
image, and evaluating the model on a folder of images containing the segmented liquid and
vessel depth maps.
Further implementation details, including a description of how to train, evaluate, and use a
model, are described in appendix A. An explanation of how to get the dataset and the trained
models depicted in this section is also included.
Experimental Setup
The training processes for the liquid volume estimation were performed on a Tesla V100 GPU,
which is available in the DTU HPC clusters. The final model was trained for 200 epochs using
90% of the LabLiquidVolume dataset. 10% of the training data is used for validation. All testing
results are based on the remaining 10% of the data (545 samples). The input images undergo
a downsampling process as part of the preprocessing stage. A grid search was done for hy­
perparameter tuning to find the best learning rate, batch size, and dropout rate. Learning rates
of 0.0001, 0.001, and 0.01, batch sizes of 2, 4, 8, and 16, and dropout rates of 0.1, 0.15, 0.2,
and 0.25 were used. The final model was trained with a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of
8, and a dropout rate of 0.2.
In this experimental setup, the chosen loss function is the Mean Squared Error (MSE), which is
commonly used for regression problems. The MSE loss is calculated by taking the average of
the squared differences between the predicted values and the actual target values. The Adam
optimizer is used for iteratively adjusting the model’s parameters to minimize this loss. The loss
curves of the two main models during training are visualized in fig. 3.17.
In addition to the two mentioned main models, two additional approaches were chosen for com­
parison:
1. Segmentation mask model: Instead of the segmented depth maps, this model only takes
the segmentation masks of vessels and liquids as inputs.
2. Scaled segmented depth maps model: To provide a better global scale, the segmented
depth maps are first normalized and then multiplied by the median of the segmented real
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.17: Loss curves of the two main models during training. (1) Only segmented depth
maps as input. (2) Segmented depth maps and vessel volumes as input.
depth maps captured by the RealSense camera. The two scaled segmented depth maps
are the input of the model.
All the additional models were trained and tested with the same data and parameters described
above. An overview of the four approaches is visualized in fig. 3.18.
Figure 3.18: Overview of the four approaches for liquid volume estimation based on the LabLiq­
uidVolume dataset.
Three different metrics, which are commonly used for regression problems, are used for eval­
uating the performance of the described models (all based on [95]): The root­mean­squared
42
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:48==
error (RMSE, eq. (3.3)), the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE, eq. (3.4)), and the R2
score (coefficient of determination, eq. (3.5)).
The results are calculated based on the real and predicted liquid volumes. In the following, Vreal
stands for the actual liquid volume inside the vessel, Vpredicted for the predicted liquid volume
from the model, n for the number of samples, and ¯Vreal for the mean of the real liquid volumes.
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Vpredicted,i −Vreal,i)2
(3.3)
MAPE = 1
n
n
X
i=1

Vpredicted,i −Vreal,i
Vpredicted,i

(3.4)
R2 = 1 −
Pn
i=1(Vreal,i −Vpredicted,i)2
Pn
i=1(Vreal,i −¯Vreal)2
(3.5)
3.3
Simulation-based Autonomous Pouring
This chapter explains the methodology behind the approach for simulation­based autonomous
pouring from laboratory vessels. The aim is to be able to use the vision­based liquid volume
prediction for the pouring container to subsequently take the results from the simulation to get
the required robot movement to pour a specific amount of the predicted liquid volume into a
target vessel. The idea is visualized in Figure 3.19. This chapter starts by giving an overview
of the simulation framework (subsection 3.3.1), followed by the details about the implemented
pouring simulation (subsection 3.3.2). Finally, the simulation­to­reality transfer to the robot is
explained (subsection 3.3.3).
Figure 3.19: Visualization of the overall idea of the autonomous robotic pouring approach based
on simulation.
3.3.1
Simulation framework
As mentioned in section 2.3, this work is based on the same simulation framework used in many
recent approaches for liquid pouring: NVIDIA Flex. NVIDIA Flex is a particle­based simulation
library designed for real­time applications. It is based on position­based dynamics [72] and uni­
fied particle physics for real­time applications [96]. NVIDIA Flex revolves around a fundamental
concept: representing everything as a system of particles interconnected by constraints. As ex­
plained in section 2.3, this representation offers several advantages, including efficient modeling
of diverse materials and seamless interaction between elements of different types. Notably, it
enables two­way coupling between rigid bodies and fluids, facilitating a comprehensive simu­
lation of their interactions. By adopting this particle­based approach, NVIDIA Flex allows the
simulation and study of a wide range of materials with complex behaviors in a computationally
efficient manner.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
43
==PAGE:49==
The NVIDIA Flex library consists of two main parts: the core solver (NvFlex.h) and the ex­
tensions library (NvFlexExt.h). The core solver operates on flat arrays of particles and con­
straints, efficiently handling large numbers of elements. The extensions library provides objec­
t/asset management features. The core solver is closed source, while the extensions library
and demo application come with full source code. The API follows a C­style design and re­
quires a structure­of­arrays data layout for optimal simulation performance. Particles serve as
the fundamental building blocks. Each particle contains essential dynamic attributes such as
position, velocity, and inverse mass. The inverse mass is stored with the position in the format
[x, y, z, 1/m]. This is especially useful for counting particles to calculate volumes of liquids inside
various vessels at different timesteps. Additionally, Flex assigns a per­particle phase value that
governs the behavior of the particles.
All simulations were executed on a Vision Gaming Windows 11 PC with an NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 4090 graphics card and 64 GB of RAM.
3.3.2
Pouring simulation
Two scenes are created to simulate the two main liquid pouring movements required for cell
culture automation. One for pouring from a cell culture flask, and one for pouring washing
solution or media from a Gibco 500 mL bottle, both into another flask standing in one of the
flask holders mounted on the table.
Object Import
The 3D models of the pouring and receiving objects are required for a precise simulation. The
vendor of the specified vessels was contacted, but because of reasons of confidentiality, the
3D models were not received. Therefore, the 3D models were created using Autodesk Inventor
based on the publicly available 2D drawings. This is particularly difficult for complex structures
such as the opening neck of the cell culture flask. The origin of the coordinate system was
placed in the center of the objects to allow easier later usage as a tool­center­point (TCP) for
the robot movement. A visualization of the 3D models can be seen in fig. B.5.
The 3D models are loaded to the simulation as object files (.obj) and converted into a triangle
mesh object. The flask holder, including the receiving flask, is placed on the ground plane
of the simulation and centered on the origin of the coordinate system. The start setup in the
simulation for pouring with the cell culture flask and the media/washing solution bottle can be
seen in fig. 3.20
Figure 3.20: The start setup of the pouring scenes in NVIDIA Flex. Left: Cell culture flask and
receiving container. Center and right: Washing solution/media bottle and receiving container.
Liquid Generation and Calibration
At the start of every pouring simulation scene, the pouring container is filled with a certain
amount of liquid. A liquid emitter is created in the center of the container. At every selected
44
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:50==
simulation timestep, this emitter creates new liquid particles. The number of particles is propor­
tional to the area of the emitter. After the required amount of particles is created, ten seconds of
waiting time is added to let the liquid settle. Since the stored attributes of the particles at each
time step include the coordinates, the amount of liquid inside of regions inside and outside of
the pouring and receiving containers can be calculated.
All liquids used in the cell culture process are assumed to behave similarly to water. To achieve
a good simulation­to­reality transfer, the liquid parameters for the simulation must be varied,
transferred, and tested in reality. Multiple approaches, including grid search and Bayesian op­
timization, were used for this problem. Since this procedure was done in [75] and [74], the best
liquid parameters found for water in these works are used for the simulation. These can be
found in table 3.2.
Adhesion
Cohesion
Surface Tension
Viscosity
0.0001
0.001
0.005
0.01
Table 3.2: Liquid parameters used for the simulation in NVIDIA Flex.
To use the simulation results in reality, the number of particles must be converted to liquid
volume. For that, a calibration scene was created. This includes a cylindrical container with
an inner volume of 500 mL. This container was designed in Autodesk Inventor, imported to the
scene, and then filled with particles with the mentioned parameters. The maximum amount of
particles that fit into the container was iteratively determined. The ratio between the number of
particles and the volume is used as a conversion factor. The calibration scene is visualized in
fig. B.6.
Pouring Movement
Most recent approaches for autonomous robotic pouring only consider a rotation of the wrist
of the robot (e.g., [65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 74]). That means that the x, y, and z coordinates of
the TCP of the robot stay constant. Consequently, the exit point of the liquid is constantly
changing. Although this is possible for receiving containers with a large opening surface and
pouring containers with a small height, pouring into objects with a small opening, such as cell
culture flasks, poses problems. Because of the large movement of the liquid exit point, the
liquid will only reach the receiving container for specific pouring angles. This issue is visualized
in fig. 3.21.
More advanced approaches for trajectory planning usually consider the entire robot movement,
including approaching the receiving container from longer distances [75, 97].
The suggested new approach for pouring liquids into containers with a small opening surface
is based on human movement. When manually executing the task, humans usually first move
the opening of the pouring container close to the opening of the receiving container. Once the
liquid starts pouring, the liquid exit point remains constant and is used as a center of rotation.
Consequently, the pouring container rotates around the liquid exit point.
To execute that movement, the TCP changes both in position and orientation. Assuming a
movement in the XY plane, the x and y coordinates must be calculated based on the rotation
angle θ around the liquid exit point. From now on, the liquid exit point will be referred to as the
center of rotation (CoR).
The start position for the cell culture flask is horizontal since there will never be more than 150
mL inside the container during the process. As a result, the fill level always remains below the
lowest opening point of the flask. When gripping the flask horizontally, the TCP will be in the
middle between the upper and lower flask surface. For this case, it is valid that TCPy = CoRy
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
45
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.21: Visualization of the issue with pouring movements only considering a wrist rota­
tion. Left: Successful pouring only using rotation because of a receiving container with a large
opening surface and a pouring container with a small height. Right: Liquid is spilled when only
rotating the cell culture flask around the TCP.
(see fig. 3.23). Therefore, the TCP position depending on the rotation angle θ is calculated as
presented in eq. (3.6) and eq. (3.7).
TCPx(θ) = TCPx,start −l ∗(1 −cos(θ))
(3.6)
TCPy(θ) = TCPy,start + l ∗sin(θ)
(3.7)
where l = |TCPx,start −CoRx|. An exemplary simulation scene of the cell culture flask execut­
ing the described movement can be seen in fig. 3.22.
Figure 3.22: An exemplary simulation scene of the cell culture flask executing the new pouring
movement.
For the media/washing solution bottle, TCPx ̸= CoRx (see fig. 3.23). From the 3D model, we
get the distance between TCPstart and CoR as l = 88.99mm and β = 46.11°. In a horizontal
position, the CoR can not be placed close enough to the opening surface of the receiving flask
since the gripper would touch the lower part of the flask. Therefore, the start orientation of the
46
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:52==
bottle is rotated by α = 14.5°, which is the same angle as the rotation of the flask holder. From
there, the start angle between TCPstart and CoR is calculated as αstart = β−α = 31.61°. TCPx
and TCPy for a specific time step with the angle of rotation θ can then be calculated as shown
in eq. (3.8) and eq. (3.9). These equations can be used to calculate the pouring trajectory for
any new pouring container for any start position TCPstart and initial rotation α.
TCPx(θ) = TCPx,start −l ∗cos(αstart) + l ∗cos(αstart −θ)
TCPy(θ) = TCPy,start + l ∗sin(αstart) −l ∗sin(αstart −θ)

for θ ≤αstart
(3.8)
TCPx(θ) = TCPx,start −l ∗cos(αstart) + l ∗cos(θ −αstart)
TCPy(θ) = TCPy,start + l ∗sin(αstart) + l ∗sin(θ −αstart)

for θ > αstart
(3.9)
The suggested new approach for the pouring movement is visualized in fig. 3.23. It also demon­
strates the initial rotation of the bottle. An exemplary pouring movement of the bottle in the sim­
ulation is shown in fig. 3.24. The final simulated pouring sequences include the movement of
the pouring container until θmax is reached and the inverse movement back to the start position.
Figure 3.23: Visualization of the pouring movement. θ represents the pouring angle (equivalent
to the rotation of the pouring container), β the angle between the TCP and the CoR of the bottle
in the horizontal position, α the rotation of the bottle to the same angle as the receiving flask
(α = 14.5°), and αstart the start angle between the TCP and the CoR. Left: Pouring with the
cell culture flask. Center: Explanation of the start position of the bottle. Right: Pouring with the
media/washing solution bottle.
Videos of the simulated pouring movements captured from different viewing angles can be found
here in the pouring simulation subfolder of the GitHub repository of the project.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
47
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.24: An exemplary simulation scene of the media/washing solution bottle executing the
new pouring movement.
Parameter Space and Problem Formulation
Using only mathematical approaches to find the best robot movement usually involves simplified
models. The calculations are often limited to varying one parameter of the pouring
action. Most of the time, the rotation angle around the TCP is used (e.g., [65, 69]). By using
simulation, more parameters of the pouring movement can be varied, which results in a more
comprehensive and realistic approach to understanding, designing, and optimizing robotic liquid
pouring tasks. More detailed output volumes can be achieved by exploring a wider range of the
parameter space.
In this study, the objective of the simulation is to pre­evaluate the outcomes of various pouring
movements by manipulating different parameter inputs. The goal is to use these simulation
results to identify the optimal robot movement for specific input parameters in real­world sce­
narios.
The complete set of parameters is divided into two categories: action parameters and simulation
parameters. The action parameters include all variables that specify the control of the pouring
movement as described above. This contains the angular velocity, the start position and ori­
entation, the maximum rotation angle (stop angle), the duration of the stop at the maximum
rotation angle (stop time), the pouring container, and the gripping position of the container. The
simulation parameters are defined as input variables that must be given to the simulator. This
includes the number of particles at the start (start volume), the particle radius, and the liquid
parameters (adhesion, cohesion, surface tension, viscosity).
Certain variables are selected to remain constant to reduce the complexity of the parameter
space and minimize the time required for pre­running the simulations. These include the liquid
parameters, which are set to the values mentioned above, the particle radius, the angular ve­
locity (0.03 rad/s), and the start position and orientation relative to the receiving container (as
visualized in fig. 3.23). The gripping positions were chosen iteratively using the robot and the
3D­printed gripper fingers and were also kept constant throughout the simulations.
We use p ∈P to denote a set of parameters, p(i) to denote the ith dimension of the set of
parameters, and p∗to represent an optimal set of parameters. Hence, the combination of
the remaining 2D action parameter space and the 2D simulation parameter space results in a
reduced 4D parameter space p. This consists of the pouring container p(0) = c, the start volume
in the pouring container p(1) = Vstart, the stop angle p(2) = θstop, and the stop time p(3) = tstop.
As mentioned, the cell culture flask and the washing solution/media bottle were selected as
pouring containers. Therefore, p(0) has a cardinality of 2. The range and step size of the other
parameters were chosen iteratively using different test movements and expert knowledge of the
cell culture processes. For the cell culture flask, the start volume varies from 35 to 150 mL in 5
mL steps (
p(1)(c = 0)
 = 25), the stop angle from 2° to 50° in 2° steps (
p(2)(c = 0)
 = 25), and
the stop time from 0.2 s to 1.8 s (
p(3)(c = 0)
 = 5). The start volume for the bottle ranges from
48
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:54==
50 mL to 500 mL in increments of 10 mL, resulting in a cardinality of 46 (
p(1)(c = 1)
 = 46).
The stop angle varies from 30° to 90° in 4° steps (
p(2)(c = 1)
 = 31). Similarly, the stop time
ranges from 0.2 s to 1.8 s (
p(3)(c = 1)
 = 5). Using a grid search approach, this results in
a total number of scenes of 6,805. The described parameter space is visualized in fig. 3.25.
The simulation of the pours with the cell culture flask took around 52 hours. The simulation
process for the media/washing solution bottle required approximately 140 hours to complete. A
timelapse video of 12 consecutive pouring movements with different parameters can be seen
here.
Figure 3.25: Parameter space for the simulation of liquid pouring.
Based on the given real­world parameters, which are the pouring container, the start volume,
and the desired volume to be poured Vgoal, the best­fitting simulated scene with an optimal set
of parameters p∗needs to be selected. For that, the start volume, the received volume, and the
spilled volume of each scene are stored. The resulting cost function is defined in eq. (3.10).
C(p) = Cstart + Creceived + Cspill
(3.10)
Cstart is the magnitude of the difference between the start volume in the simulation scene and the
start volume in the real­world scenario. Creceived is the magnitude of the difference between the
received volume in the receiving container in the simulation and the desired real­world volume
to be received. Cspill is the volume of spilled liquid in the simulation. The overall goal is to
determine an action with parameters p∗that minimizes the cost C(p). By iterating through
the results of the simulation with the selected pouring container, real­world start volume, and
desired output volume, this minimum can be found.
3.3.3
Simulation-to-Reality Transfer for Robot Movement
To achieve the final goal of the pouring task, the simulated movement must be transferred to a
real robot. In the context of transferring the policy to a robot, the role of the pouring container
changes to that of the manipulator’s end effector (TCP). This shift occurs because the grippers
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
49
==PAGE:55==
hold and manipulate the pouring container, making it functionally equivalent to an end effector
during the motion planning process in the simulation. The coordinates of the TCP and the
rotation angle of the pouring container at every time step for every scene are recorded and
stored.
However, it is essential to note that these positions and orientations are defined with respect
to the coordinate system of the simulation, where the origin is located at the ground plane in
the center of the flask holder. By subtracting the start position coordinates from the recorded
TCP, the origin can be moved to the start position of the pouring movement. The new poses
represent the movement of the robot’s end effector with respect to the tool’s coordinate system.
However, the positions sent to the used UR5e through the RTDE need to be defined with respect
to the base coordinate system. Therefore, a pose transformation must be applied to every pose
to make them relative to the base coordinate system. For the transformation, the initial start tool
position and orientation (before rotating around α) in the base coordinate system is used as the
origin of the tool’s coordinate system (Posestart). The transformation function begins by extract­
ing the position (x, y, z) and rotation (Rx, Ry, Rz) components from Posestart and the pouring
pose in the tool’s coordinate system Posetool at a specific timestep. The rotation components
are initially given as rotation vectors and are first converted to Euler angles. It then calculates
the rotation matrices for both poses (Rtool, Rstart). The rotation matrices are multiplied to obtain
the combined rotation matrix, which is then converted back to a rotation vector. The translation
of Posetool is rotated by Rstart and added to the translation of Posestart to achieve the combined
position. Finally, the resulting combined position and rotation components are returned as the
transformed pose, which represents the pose of the tool (which is equivalent to the pouring
container) relative to the base coordinate system.
Another problem to solve was transferring the movement speed from the simulation to the real
world. The pose in the simulation is stored at every timestep with a defined frequency. However,
the commands sent to the robot need to include velocity. To get this value in meters per second,
the distance between two positions at two consecutive timesteps is calculated in meters and
then multiplied by the given frequency used in the simulation. For a continuous robot movement,
two paths with a blending radius of 0.001 m are created. The first path represents the movement
from the start position to the stop angle. There, the movement is stopped for the defined stop
time. After, the second path is executed, which moves the pouring container back from the stop
angle to the start position.
The advantage of performing the movement in the simulation relative to the tool’s coordinate
system and subsequently converting it to the base coordinate system is that the same movement
can be executed from various start positions. This flexibility is particularly crucial for scenarios
involving multiple pouring sequences at different positions, such as cell passaging.
All pouring experiments were executed with the same UR5e robot, Robotiq Hand­E gripper,
and 3D­printed gripper fingers as used for the cell culture system prototype. The specifications
are described in subsection 3.1.1. The same connection setup was used as mentioned in sub­
section 3.1.2. A Mettler Toledo XSR2002S balance was used to measure the amount of liquid
before the pouring sequence inside the pouring container and after the pouring sequence inside
the pouring and receiving containers.
A random selection of 50 samples was made from the pouring results obtained through simu­
lations for both the cell culture flask and the bottle. The experiments for pouring from the cell
culture flask were executed as follows:
1. Load the parameters for the sample, which include the start volume and the pouring tra­
jectory from the simulation, and the predicted received and spilled volumes.
50
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:56==
2. Manually fill the required amount of liquid into the pouring container by measuring the
weight using the balance.
3. Manually place the empty and open receiving flask into the flask holder and the open
pouring flask into the start flask holder.
4. Convert the pouring trajectory from the tool coordinate system to the base coordinate
system.
5. Grip the pouring flask at the same location as in the simulation with the gripper fingers, and
move the robot to the start pose where the pouring flask is above the receiving container.
6. Execute the pouring movement.
7. Open the gripper and manually remove the pouring and receiving flask.
8. Measure the remaining and the received volume with the balance, and write down the
results.
9. Restart the procedure.
The procedure of the pouring experiments is visualized in fig. 3.26. A video of a demonstra­
tion of the experiment procedure of pouring from the media/washing solution bottle is provided
here in the simulation subfolder of the GitHub repository of the project. Each execution takes
around 150­240 seconds, of which the robot only spends 5­45 seconds for the actual pouring
movement. The rest of the time is spent on weighing and cleaning. In total, around six hours
were spent performing real pouring executions.
Figure 3.26: Visualization of the pouring experiment procedure and setup. From left to right:
(1) Manual filling of the pouring container with the start volume. (2) Robot holding the pouring
container at the start position. (3) Execution of the pouring movement. (4) Measuring the
received volume in the receiving container and the remaining volume in the pouring container.
In the evaluation of the simulation­to­reality experiments, three different metrics are used: The
root­mean­squared error (RMSE, eq. (3.11)), the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE,
eq. (3.12)), and the R2 score (coefficient of determination, eq. (3.13)) (all based on [95]). The
results are calculated based on the real and simulated received volumes in the receiving con­
tainer and the real and simulated spilled volumes. In the following, Vreal stands for volumes
measured in the real­world experiments, Vsim for volumes from the simulation results, n for the
number of samples, and ¯Vreal for the mean of the real volumes.
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Vsim,i −Vreal,i)2
(3.11)
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
51
==PAGE:57==
MAPE = 1
n
n
X
i=1

Vsim,i −Vreal,i
Vsim,i

(3.12)
R2 = 1 −
Pn
i=1(Vreal,i −Vsim,i)2
Pn
i=1(Vreal,i −¯Vreal)2
(3.13)
52
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:58==
4
Results and Evaluation
This chapter provides a detailed analysis of the outcomes obtained from the computer vision­
based approach for the detection and volume estimation of liquids (section 4.1), the pouring
simulation for the autonomous robotic pouring of liquids (section 4.2), and the overall system
performance (section 4.3). The focus lies on the performance, accuracy, and practicality of the
developed approaches within the context of cell culture automation.
4.1
Results of Liquid Detection and Volume Estimation
This section presents the results of the models for vision­based detection and depth estimation
of transparent vessels and liquids, as well as the estimation of the volume of liquids as described
in section 3.2.
4.1.1
Segmentation and Depth Estimation
The results are based on the segmentation and depth estimation model trained with the pa­
rameters described in subsection 3.2.2. The depth maps are normalized and shown as a color
map for better visualization. First, the model was tested on test images from the TransProteus
dataset, which are stored in the testing subfolders of the dataset.
Three examples of the masks and depth maps predicted by the model based on a single RGB
input image are shown in fig. 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Examples of the masks and depth maps predicted by the trained segmentation and
depth estimation model for images from the TransProteus test set. From left to right: (1) Input
RGB image. (2) Vessel mask. (3) Liquid Mask. (4) Opening Mask. (5) Vessel depth map. (6)
Liquid depth map. (7) Opening depth map.
The model performance was evaluated on 1,500 samples from the test set. The results of
the segmentation of liquids, transparent vessels, and vessel openings are given in table 4.1.
The vessel region is predicted with high accuracy (IoU > 96%), with high precision and recall.
These results are similar to the ones shown in [16] (IoU = 96%, Precision = 99%, Recall =
98%). The stored model after 20 epochs of training has an IoU < 90%, while after 40 epochs,
a similarly high accuracy was achieved (IoU = 94%).
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
53
==PAGE:59==
The vessel opening mask was predicted with similar accuracy as the vessel mask (IoU = 94%).
The IoU is equal to the one achieved in [16], with slightly higher precision (98% vs. 96%) and
lower recall (96% vs. 98%). The liquid mask was predicted with an IoU of 85%, which is slightly
higher than the one achieved by training on the whole dataset in [16] (IoU = 84%).
Table 4.1: Results of semantic segmentation on 1,500 simulated images from the TransProteus
test set for vessel, liquid, and vessel opening.
IoU
Precision
Recall
Vessel Mask
0.96
0.99
0.97
Liquid Mask
0.85
0.91
0.93
Vessel Opening Mask
0.94
0.98
0.96
The results of the depth estimation of vessels, liquids, and vessel openings are given in table 4.2.
As noted in subsection 3.2.2, only the scale −invariant log RMSE is used as a metric. The
depth estimation of the vessel shows better results than the one for liquid and vessel opening.
Since this is the first approach for depth estimation on this dataset, no baselines for comparison
exist.
Table 4.2: Results of depth estimation on 1,500 CGI from the TransProteus test set for vessel,
liquid, and vessel opening.
Vessel
Liquid
Opening
RMSE (log, scale −invariant)
0.031
0.034
0.043
Evaluating the depth estimation of liquids on real images is not possible since no samples exist
or can be created. Since it is not possible to remove the vessel while keeping the liquid in the
same place, no 3D scans of the liquid inside the vessel can be done. However, the prediction
can be made on real images of vessels containing liquids taken in the research laboratories
to evaluate the results qualitatively. For that, the predicted segmented depth maps of images
from the LabLiquidVolume dataset described in 3.2.3 based on the trained models after different
epochs are compared. Two samples are visualized in fig. 4.2. The analysis reveals that in the
case of vessel prediction, the segmentation mask achieves a high level of accuracy within a
few epochs. Conversely, the depth prediction, which provides a visualization of the object’s
shape, produces more detailed results after a longer training period. For the liquid, the shown
segmentation masks achieve high accuracy after 55 epochs. The depth predictions of the liquid
get more precise after more epochs. However, the edges of the liquid top surfaces are not clearly
visible.
As mentioned in subsection 2.2.2, liquids and transparent objects often appear for a camera
as noisy or distorted approximations of the surfaces that lie behind them and do not form dis­
joint boundaries with their environment. Especially for depth cameras, liquids and transparent
objects pose challenges due to their unique optical properties. When light passes through a
transparent material with different refractive properties, such as a liquid, it undergoes refrac­
tion. Refraction causes the path of the light rays to change direction, making it difficult for the
depth camera to estimate the object’s depth. Transparent objects can reflect light or create
specular highlights, further complicating depth estimation. The reflections and highlights can
confuse the depth camera by introducing additional sources of light that are not directly related
to the object’s depth. Consequently, many values in the recorded depth maps are missing.
To quantify that problem, the predicted segmentation masks were overlaid with the captured
54
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.2: Examples of the masks and depth maps predicted by the trained segmentation and
depth estimation model. From left to right: (1) Input RGB image. (2) Vessel mask. (3) Liquid
mask. (4) Opening mask. (5) Vessel depth map. (6) Liquid depth map. (7) Opening depth map.
depth maps obtained from the camera. This enabled a calculation of the percentage of depth
values that were missing within the segmented regions. Specifically, for the vessel depth maps,
an average of 49.8% of depth values were found to be missing. Similarly, for the liquid depth
maps, an average of 52.1% of depth values were missing. To illustrate that, two samples of
the LabLiquidVolume dataset are presented in fig. 4.3. It shows the predicted segmented depth
maps of liquid and vessel as well as the segmented depth map recorded by the depth camera.
In addition, it should be noted that the model predicts the undistorted liquid shape, which is the
liquid as it would be viewed if the vessel was not there. This would not be possible using the
depth map recorded by the camera.
As explained, scale­invariant losses focus on learning relative depth, leading to accurate rel­
ative depth predictions. This means that it does not consider the scale discrepancy between
the ground truth annotation and the output predicted by the model. In other words, two iden­
tical liquids at different distances from the camera can have the same predicted depth map.
For an accurate liquid volume prediction, the global scale is essential. This raises the ques­
tion of whether global depth is learned from training in a scale­invariant manner. To perform
a quantitative evaluation, 221 images from the LabLiquidVolume dataset, specifically featuring
the Duran 250 mL vessel, were randomly selected. These images were manually classified into
three distinct classes: close, mid­range, and far (referred to as true liquid distance class). After,
the mean of the predicted segmented liquid depth map for every sample was calculated. The
samples were sorted by the resulting mean value and put into the same classes with the same
amount of samples per class (e.g., the 76 samples with the lowest mean liquid depth into the
class close). The results of this evaluation are shown in the confusion matrix in fig. 4.4. It can
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
55
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.3: Two samples of the LabLiquidVolume dataset to illustrate the problem of missing
depth values. The first row shows the predicted segmented depth maps, while the second row
shows the segmented depth map recorded by the depth camera. From left to right: vessel depth
map cell flask 400 mL, liquid depth map cell culture flask 400 mL, vessel depth map Duran 250
mL, liquid depth map Duran 250 mL.
be seen that for most of the samples, the predicted liquid distance class is correct (81.9%). No
samples were mispredicted from close to far or from far to close.
Figure 4.4: Confusion matrix of the global depth evaluation of 221 samples from the LabLiquid­
Volume dataset.
This means that the liquid depth prediction takes the global scale into account to some degree.
A more detailed evaluation would require more manual classifications or manually annotated
liquid depth maps.
The segmentation prediction can be easier evaluated on real images. To get results specifically
for the containers present in a research laboratory and in the cell culture processes, images
56
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:62==
from the generated LabLiquidVolume dataset are used. Ten samples per container were ran­
domly selected, and the liquid and vessel segmentation masks were manually annotated using
a custom­made script. A visualization of the interface of the manual annotation can be seen in
fig. B.21.
For the evaluation of the manually annotated images, the same metrics as for the TransProteus
data are used. The results for every vessel and summarized for all glass and plastic objects are
shown in table 4.3. The vessel region is accurately predicted for all objects (IoU > 80%). The
vessels with the lowest IoU for vessel segmentation are the Cell Flask 400 mL and the Tube 15
mL. For vessel segmentation, the difference in accuracy for glass and plastic objects is small
(0.008).
However, there is a gap between glass and plastic objects for liquid segmentation. While the
liquid region inside glass vessels is predicted with an IoU of 91.3%, it is significantly lower for
liquids inside plastic objects (IoU = 84.3%).
Table 4.3: Results of semantic segmentation for liquids and vessels of 120 manually annotated
images from the generated LabLiquidVolume dataset. Ten samples were randomly selected
per vessel.
Liquid
Vessel
IoU
Recall
Precision
IoU
Recall
Precision
Cell Flask 160mL
0.844
0.982
0.858
0.959
0.976
0.981
Cell Flask 400mL
0.744
0.984
0.754
0.887
0.975
0.908
Duran 100mL
0.895
0.956
0.934
0.905
0.916
0.987
Duran 250mL
0.917
0.956
0.957
0.936
0.946
0.988
Duran 500mL
0.914
0.948
0.960
0.927
0.937
0.988
Gibco 125mL
0.797
0.980
0.814
0.921
0.959
0.959
Gibco 500mL
0.890
0.985
0.904
0.942
0.975
0.965
Pyrex 100mL
0.925
0.967
0.955
0.941
0.952
0.987
Storage Bottle 250mL
0.934
0.969
0.962
0.950
0.964
0.984
Storage Bottle 500mL
0.928
0.963
0.962
0.949
0.959
0.989
Tube 15mL
0.759
0.948
0.793
0.819
0.913
0.888
Tube 50mL
0.842
0.919
0.907
0.931
0.959
0.969
Glass Objects
0.913
0.957
0.952
0.928
0.938
0.988
Plastic Objects
0.843
0.966
0.870
0.920
0.961
0.956
All Objects
0.866
0.963
0.897
0.923
0.953
0.966
The Cell Flask 400 mL (IoU = 74.4%), the Tube 15 mL(IoU = 75.9%), and the Gibco 125 mL
(IoU = 79.7%) show the worst results for the liquid segmentation. Those objects are all made
out of plastic. The vessels made out of glass all have an IoU > 0.89 for the liquid region. The
best predictions for the liquid region were made for the Pyrex 100 mL and the 250 mL and 500
mL Storage Bottles.
The aggregated outcomes from the analysis of the 120 real images indicate relatively inferior
performance across all three testing metrics in vessel segmentation compared to the evaluation
conducted on the TransProteus test set. For the liquid segmentation, the testing on the real
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
57
==PAGE:63==
images shows better results for IoU (0.87 vs. 0.85) and Precision (0.96 vs. 0.91) and worse
results on Recall (0.90 vs. 0.93) compared to the CGI from the TransProteus test set.
The visualization in fig. 4.5 shows the two samples with the best predictions and the two with
the worst predictions of the liquid region. It includes both the predicted and manually annotated
segmentation masks for liquids and vessels. The first row represents a Cell Flask 400 mL with
an IoU for the liquid region of 67.6% and an IoU for the vessel of 75.1%. The second row
illustrates a Gibco 125 mL bottle, with an IoU score of 23.9% for the liquid region and an IoU
score of 81.7% for the vessel. The predictions for the Gibco 500 mL and the Storage Bottle 500
mL in rows three and four have IoU scores of > 96% for both liquid and vessel regions.
Figure 4.5: Visualizations of the two samples with the worst predictions and the two samples with
the best predictions of the liquid region from the selected 120 images from the LabLiquidVolume
dataset. From top to bottom: (1) Cell Flask 400 mL. (2) Gibco 125 mL. (3) Gibco 500 mL. (4)
Storage Bottle 500 mL.
4.1.2
Liquid Volume Estimation
The results presented in this section are based on the liquid volume estimation models trained
with the parameters and data from the LabLiquidVolume dataset as described in subsection 3.2.3.
The distribution of real and predicted liquid volumes for the model trained on the segmented
depth maps of liquid and vessel only is shown in fig. 4.6. The colors of the data points indicate
the vessel present in the image. The dashed line represents the true regression line, where the
real volume equals the predicted volume. A histogram of the distribution of the RMSE can be
seen in fig. B.3. The average amount of liquid inside the vessels in the test set is 185.39 mL.
The analysis indicates that the model’s performance shows an RMSE of 37.90 mL, a mean
absolute percentage error of 16.96%, and an R2 score of 0.94 on the test set. However, the
predicted volume exhibits significant discrepancies from the actual volume for some samples,
58
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.6: Scatter plot of the real and predicted liquid volumes for images from the test set for
the model trained only on the segmented depth maps.
with a maximum error of 320.20 mL. Large errors occur in both positive and negative directions.
The equivalent plot for the model trained on the segmented depth maps and the volume of
the vessel is shown in fig. 4.7. The histogram of the distribution of the RMSE can be seen in
fig. B.4. The results show an overall RMSE of 17.83 mL, a MAPE of 9.39%, and a R2 score
of 0.99 on the test set. Fewer samples with a predicted volume far from the real volume can be
seen, with a maximum error of 118.70 mL.
Detailed results of both models for each vessel are listed in table 4.4. It can be observed that
the model which includes the vessel volume has better results for RMSE and MAPE for every
vessel. The objects with the most precise results are the Duran 500 mL and the 250 mL and
500 mL Storage Bottles. The vessels with the highest MAPE for both models are the Tube 15
mL, the Cell Flask 160 mL, and the Pyrex 100 mL.
The negative R2 score for the Cell Flask 160 mL for the segmented depth maps model implies
that the model’s predictions are performing worse than a horizontal line representing the mean
of liquid volume for that particular vessel. The relevant vessels for cell culture automation show
satisfactory results for the segmented depth maps with vessel volume model (Cell Flask 400
mL: MAPE =12.4%, Gibco 500 mL: MAPE =10.1%).
The five samples with the highest MAPE were extracted and visually inspected for both mod­
els. This showed that most bad liquid volume predictions were already based on non­accurate
segmentation and depth estimation results, especially regarding the liquid. Three samples with
the highest MAPE predicted with the model trained only on the segmented depth maps are
visualized in fig. 4.8. The figure shows the original RGB images, the predicted segmented depth
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
59
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.7: Scatter plot of the real and predicted liquid volumes for images from the test set for
the model trained on the segmented depth maps and the volume of the vessel.
maps of liquids and vessels, and the predicted and real liquid volumes.
To quantify this inspection, the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the IoU for liquid seg­
mentation from the manual annotation for each vessel (table 4.3) and the MAPE of the liquid
volume estimation for each vessel was calculated. The analysis revealed a moderate negative
correlation coefficient of ­0.694. This finding suggests that higher IoU values, indicating bet­
ter liquid segmentation performance, were associated with lower MAPE values, which implies
improved accuracy in liquid volume estimation. In other words, when the model excelled at
accurately segmenting the liquid, it also made more precise volume predictions.
Besides the two mentioned main models, the two additional models (Segmentation Mask Model,
Scaled Depth Maps Model) were analyzed to evaluate the usefulness of the presented ap­
proaches. The results of this comparison are listed in table 4.5. It shows the final RMSE for
the training data after 200 epochs and the mentioned metrics for the test set. The results indi­
cate that the segmented depth maps and vessel volume model outperforms other approaches
across all evaluation criteria. The model using only the segmented depth maps as input yields
slightly better results compared to the model using scaled segmented depth maps. However,
omitting depth information entirely and solely relying on liquid and vessel segmentation masks
as input significantly degrades the model’s performance.
4.1.3
Interpretations and Limitations
The segmentation and depth estimation model shows satisfactory results for the tested data. It
demonstrates better liquid segmentation results for glass containers compared to plastic con­
tainers on real images. This discrepancy might arise because the TransProteus dataset ex­
60
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:66==
Table 4.4: Detailed results of both main models for each vessel in the LabLiquidVolume dataset.
Segmented Depth
Maps Model
Segmented Depth
Maps with Vessel
Volume Model
Mean Liquid
V olume (mL)
RMSE
(mL)
MAPE
(%)
R2
RMSE
(mL)
MAPE
(%)
R2
Cell Flask 160mL
115.22
74.64
38.61
­0.21
20.88
14.44
0.90
Cell Flask 400mL
277.46
62.62
21.60
0.83
29.88
12.40
0.96
Duran 100mL
54.31
7.26
14.14
0.94
5.18
9.80
0.97
Duran 250mL
142.29
31.66
13.08
0.76
11.30
8.79
0.97
Duran 500mL
302.71
22.44
6.84
0.98
18.55
4.11
0.98
Gibco 125mL
85.29
16.80
20.51
0.83
9.67
8.63
0.94
Gibco 500mL
325.45
43.63
13.53
0.92
27.09
10.06
0.97
Pyrex 100mL
57.29
8.21
22.46
0.91
5.37
14.34
0.96
Storage Bottle 250mL
175.05
38.94
7.99
0.65
7.94
3.60
0.99
Storage Bottle 500mL
279.40
17.06
7.39
0.99
11.88
4.90
0.99
Tube 15mL
8.47
2.51
44.52
0.62
1.95
15.79
0.77
Tube 50mL
33.03
4.02
10.62
0.89
3.64
9.67
0.91
All Vessels
185.39
37.90
16.96
0.94
17.83
9.39
0.99
Table 4.5: Comparison of the results of the four approaches used for liquid volume estimation.
Model Input
RMSE
Training
(mL)
RMSE
Testing
(mL)
MAPE
Testing
(%)
R2
Testing
Segmented Depth Maps
13.00
37.90
16.96
0.94
Segmented Depth Maps and Vessel Volume
4.63
17.83
9.39
0.99
Segmentation Masks
32.94
53.92
24.21
0.88
Scaled Segmented Depth Maps
18.84
41.20
18.20
0.92
clusively contains glass containers. Transparent plastics and glass differ in visual properties.
Glass typically has higher optical clarity and a higher refractive index than most transparent
plastics. The refractive index determines how light bends as it passes through a material [98].
A solution would require adapting the TransProteus dataset using Blender to include plastic
containers. Because of the found correlation between the liquid segmentation results and the
accuracy of the volume estimation, this would most likely also decrease the MAPE of the liquid
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
61
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.8: Three samples of the test set with the highest MAPE predicted from the model
trained with the segmented depth maps.
volume estimation.
Beyond liquid volume estimation, the segmentation and depth estimation results offer potential
for other applications in research laboratories. For instance, the segmentation of the opening
region can be utilized to determine the success of decapping or capping, identify the presence
of required transparent objects, or ascertain which flasks are loaded. An example of using the
vessel opening segmentation to determine the success of decapping or capping for a laboratory
tube is shown in fig. 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Exemplary usage of the vessel opening segmentation to determine the success of
decapping for a laboratory tube. From left to right: (1) Tube with attached lid. (2) Predicted
segmentation mask of the vessel opening of the tube with attached lid. (3) Opened tube. (4)
Predicted segmentation mask of the vessel opening of the opened tube.
Incorporating depth maps alongside segmentation masks significantly enhances the liquid vol­
ume estimation model’s performance, underscoring the benefits of utilizing depth information.
It is important to note that the volume estimation component of the model is trained solely on
images obtained from the Intel RealSense D415 camera. Consequently, using cameras with
different camera intrinsics may yield varying results. To address this limitation, a new approach
could involve training the model on XYZ maps instead. Another alternative approach to address
the limitation of varying camera intrinsics is to incorporate a calibration step. By calibrating the
62
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:68==
camera intrinsics of different devices used for data capture, it would be possible to transform the
images into a standardized coordinate system, ensuring consistency across different cameras.
This way, the model could be trained on the transformed depth maps, enabling it to generalize
better to different camera setups.
The adequacy of the liquid volume estimation model’s accuracy depends on the specific task
and context in which it is applied. For research laboratories, the approach can be useful for
tasks such as detecting and replacing nearly empty vessels using mobile robots. However, it
may not be suitable for experiments that require high precision. The liquid volume estimation
model trained with the vessel volume provides a solution to the problem of training the depth
estimation using scale­invariant loss. It provides a scaling factor for the size of the container
and is, therefore, advantageous when confronted with new objects. The first exemplary trials
with one of the biggest transparent vessels in research laboratories (Glass Media Bottles, GL­
45, Schott) showed good results when providing the vessel volume. One example is shown in
fig. 4.10. Even though the liquid depth prediction considers the global scale to some degree,
the model only using the segmented depth maps shows worse results for known objects and
fails for unseen objects. The approach of using the median of the ground truth depth from the
depth camera probably failed because of wrong depth values due to the described difficulties
with transparent objects.
Figure 4.10: An example of the liquid volume estimation trials with new, unseen laboratory
vessels.
Alternatively, a new method could use the approach from the ClearGrasp paper [55] to infer the
accurate 3D geometry of the transparent objects from the recorded RGB­D image and include
that information for scaling the predicted liquid and vessel depth maps.
A comparison with existing liquid volume estimation approaches is difficult because of the dif­
ferences in the variability in the datasets. The only exciting approaches for predicting the liquid
volume from a single RGB image are the ones from Mottaghi et al. [62] and Cobo et al. [64].
The suggested method by Mottaghi et al. followed a classification approach, reaching a 32%
per­class accuracy. A direct comparison between the regression and classification evaluation
metrics is not possible. They divided the volume space of the containers into ten classes and the
liquid volume of each container into five classes. The volume spacing between trained classes
limits their methodology. This results in an average spacing of 176 mL, significantly higher than
the shown RMSE of 37.9 mL for the segmented depth maps model. The model trained for
wine volume prediction by Cobo et al. [64] achieved a MAE of 8 mL, which is slightly lower
than the achieved MAE of 9.3 mL for the model with vessel volume input and 18.4 mL for the
model without. However, given the limited diversity of the dataset, the model’s applicability is
restricted to scenarios involving red liquid and wine glasses that closely resemble those used in
the dataset in terms of shape and size. Despite this limitation, the authors provided early access
to the API. To evaluate the model’s performance on laboratory containers, twenty images from
the LabLiquidVolume dataset were randomly selected and used with the API to predict the liq­
uid volume in each image. However, the results obtained were inconsistent, showing arbitrary
predictions. The RMSE was 164 mL, with an average liquid volume of 189 mL.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
63
==PAGE:69==
The usage of the trained models for fully transparent/non­colored liquids is possible and was
tested on some laboratory samples. However, it should be noted that the segmentation and
depth estimation results exhibited inferior performance when applied to non­colored liquids,
consequently leading to a degradation in the precision of the liquid volume estimation. A pos­
sible solution could include a fine­tuning of the segmentation and depth estimation model with
manually segmented images of transparent liquids.
4.2
Results of Simulation-based Autonomous Pouring
This section presents the results of the pouring simulation conducted in NVIDIA Flex and the
simulation­to­reality transfer experiments described in section 3.3.2. The summaries of the re­
sults of all the pouring simulation scenes are provided in CSV files containing the scene number,
the path to the recorded trajectory, the stop angle, the stop time, the start volume, the poured
volume, the received volume, and the spilled volume. Exemplary samples from the file for the
cell culture flask can be seen in table 4.6. For space reasons, the path is not shown.
Table 4.6: Exemplary results provided in the simulation summary output files.
Scene
Number
Stop
Angle (°)
Stop
Time (s)
Start
Vol. (mL)
Poured
Vol. (mL)
Received
Vol. (mL)
Spilled
Vol. (mL)
235
20.0
1.8
38.8
17.7
17.6
0.1
1388
26.0
0.2
86.9
72.0
71.2
0.8
2189
28.0
1.0
116.1
105.2
100.7
4.6
1560
20.0
1.0
91.8
60.3
59.8
0.5
1786
22.0
0.6
101.6
74.8
73.0
1.8
4.2.1
Analysis of the Simulation Result Space
The simulations need to cover the whole result space to give valuable predictions with the
possibility of selecting a pouring movement with any start and output volume. In other words,
for a specific start volume, the maximum distances between the different poured volumes should
be as small as possible.
For the cell culture flask, for every starting volume, 125 pours were simulated. An exemplary
plot of the course of the remaining volume in the cell culture flask with a start volume of 35
mL over time is illustrated in fig. 4.11. It can be seen that most of the possible output volumes
can be covered, with a more detailed distribution for lower remaining volumes. An equivalent
visualization of the pouring movements with the media/washing solution bottle for a start volume
of 80 mL is shown in fig. B.7.
The entire result space must be considered to find the simulated movement with the lowest
cost calculated in eq. (3.10). Important is hereby the coverage for the start and the received
volumes. This relation for all simulated pouring movements is visualized in fig. 4.12.
It can be seen that the coverage of possible received volumes in the receiving flask is very high
for low start volumes and gets lower for higher start volumes. It can also be observed that for
start volumes above 80 mL, not the entire start volume in the pouring flask is received from the
receiving container. The higher the stop angle, the higher the received liquid volume.
The equivalent plot for the media/washing solution bottle is shown in fig. B.11. Similarly to the
cell culture flask, higher initial volumes result in reduced coverage, while lower start volumes
exhibit higher coverage.
Detailed outcomes of the analysis of the results space for each start volume are shown in ta­
ble 4.7. It includes the maximum difference between two consecutive received volumes in mL
64
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.11: Visualizations of the course of the remaining volume in the cell culture flask with a
starting volume of 35 mL over time for the 125 simulated pours.
Figure 4.12: Visualization of the start and received volumes for all simulated cell culture flask
pouring movements.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
65
==PAGE:71==
and the mean difference between two consecutive received volumes. Those values are based
on the minimum and maximum received volume range. The coverage represents the propor­
tion of the possible output values between the minimum and maximum received volume in 1 mL
steps that can be reached from the simulation outputs (received volume) with an error of less
than 0.5 mL. The equivalent results for the media bottle are shown in table B.2.
Table 4.7: Detailed analysis of the results space for the different start volumes for the simulated
pours with the cell culture flask.
Start Volume (mL)
Max. Difference (mL)
Mean Difference (mL)
Coverage (%)
15
0.49
0.11
100
20
0.71
0.15
100
24
0.94
0.19
100
29
1.22
0.23
92.86
34
1.46
0.25
87.88
39
1.78
0.30
92.11
43
2.06
0.34
90.48
48
2.16
0.38
85.11
53
2.47
0.42
80.77
58
2.77
0.45
83.93
63
3.02
0.49
80.33
68
3.32
0.53
80.30
72
3.52
0.57
74.29
77
3.82
0.61
72.00
82
4.04
0.64
67.50
87
4.39
0.68
68.24
92
4.83
0.72
62.92
97
5.06
0.76
60.64
102
5.49
0.79
62.24
106
5.78
0.82
59.80
111
6.10
0.86
57.94
116
6.38
0.89
56.36
121
6.54
0.92
56.14
126
6.79
0.94
55.56
131
7.07
0.97
53.72
135
7.27
0.99
52.85
140
7.28
1.01
53.17
For start volumes below 70 mL, the coverage is > 80%, with a maximum difference between
two consecutive received volumes of < 3.5 mL. The higher the start volume, the higher the
maximum and mean difference, and the lower the coverage of possible output values.
Further analysis can be done on the influence of varying the different input parameters. A
detailed view of the course of the remaining volume for varying start volumes for a fixed stop
angle and stop time is shown in fig. B.8. The influence of a varying stop angle on the remaining
volume over time for a fixed stop time and start volume can be seen in fig. B.9. The impact of
changing stop times on the progression of the remaining volume over time, with a fixed stop
angle and start volume, is illustrated in fig. B.10.
It can be observed that the variation in the stop angle is responsible for the coarse differences
in the poured volume and the variation in the stop time for the more subtle differences.
66
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:72==
In research laboratories, particularly where liquids can pose a safety hazard, minimizing the
volume of spills is of critical importance. The calculation of the spilled volume in the simulation
is based on the number of particles that are neither inside the receiving container nor remain­
ing inside the pouring container. The spilled volume in relation to the received volume for the
simulated pours with the cell culture flask is illustrated in fig. 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Visualization of the spilled volume in relation to the received volume inside the
receiving container for the simulated pours with the cell culture flask.
It can be observed that the spilled volume increases for higher received volumes. For target
volumes below 105 mL, a simulated pour can be found without any spilled volume. In addition,
the volume of spills increases for higher stop angles. The highest spilled amount of liquid (11.9
mL) was measured for a start volume of 140 mL, a stop angle of 50°, and a stop time of 2
seconds.
The equivalent plot for the media/washing solution bottle can be found in fig. B.12. Similar to
the cell culture flask, pouring without spillage is possible for low target volumes. However, the
spilled volume in the simulation increases significantly for pours with start volumes above 350
mL and target volumes above 340 mL.
The goal of the big parameter space in the simulation is to minimize the cost as calculated in
eq. (3.10). By finding this minimum, the best pouring movement can be chosen for a given start
volume and a desired target volume to be poured. For the analysis, a set of every possible
target volume for every possible start volume between 0 mL and the maximum of the received
volumes with a step size of 1 mL each was created. For the pouring with the cell culture flask,
this results in 9,750 possible combinations of start and target volumes. For every point, the
simulated pour with minimal cost was found in the list of results from the simulation. The plot
in fig. 4.14 shows the minimum cost depending on start and target volumes. The lowest cost
among the combinations is 0.05 mL, and the highest is 16.5 mL. The mean cost for the set is
2.3 mL.
It can be observed that the cost is lowest for samples with a start volume that was also used
in the simulation. For start volumes below 100 mL, the cost is smaller than 7.5 mL for every
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
67
==PAGE:73==
possible target volume, with a mean cost of 1.8 mL. The cost increases significantly for high
start volumes with target volumes above 90 mL.
Figure 4.14: Visualization of the minimal cost for a simulated pour with a cell culture flask given
a defined start and target volume with step sizes of 1 mL.
The equivalent plot for the media/washing solution bottle can be seen in fig. B.13. The lowest
cost among the mentioned combinations for the bottle is 0.01 mL, and the highest is 119.4 mL.
The mean cost for the set is 14.2 mL.
4.2.2
Results of the Simulation-to-Reality Transfer
As explained in subsection 3.3.3, the simulated movements were transferred to be executed in
a real­world setting on a UR5e. To illustrate this, an exemplary sequence of a simulated pour
executed on the robot is shown in Figure fig. 4.15. Videos of both simulation­to­reality transfers
for the cell culture flask and the media/washing solution bottle are available here.
The results of the 100 simulated pours executed in reality are provided in two Excel files. Be­
sides the simulation results described above, this includes the poured volume, the received
volume, and the spilled volumes from the real execution. The results of the poured volumes in
the experiments with the cell culture flask are visualized in fig. 4.16. The colors of the data points
represent the ratio of the target volume (received volume in simulation) to the start volume.
It can be seen that the results in the simulation and reality are very similar for low target volumes
(< 20 mL) and for cases where the ratio of target volume to start volume is high (yellow points).
For nine samples, the amount of poured liquid in the real world is lower than in the simulation,
with a maximum difference of 1.8 mL. The real poured volume is higher than the simulated one
for all other pours, with a maximum difference of 49.3 mL. The highest differences occur for
ratios of the target volume and start volume between 0.3 and 0.7.
The equivalent plot for the media/washing solution bottle is shown in fig. 4.17. The results are
similar to the pours with the cell culture flask. For most samples (n = 31), the real poured
68
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:74==
Figure 4.15: Visualization of a simulated pouring sequence with a cell culture flask executed in
a real­world setting on a UR5e.
.
Figure 4.16: Results of the real experiments executed with a UR5e and a cell culture flask as
pouring container.
volume is higher than the simulated one, with a mean difference of 29.2 mL and a maximum
difference of 52.6 mL. Again, precise results are achieved for cases where the ratio of the target
volume to the start volume is high.
The results of the spilled volumes in the real executions with the cell culture flask are visualized
in fig. 4.18. For 35 samples, the real spilled volume is lower than the predicted spilled volume
from the simulation, with a maximum difference of 13.2 mL and a mean difference of 2.1 mL.
For the remaining 15 pours, the real spilled volume is higher than the simulated one, with a
maximum difference of 2.4 mL and a mean difference of 0.5 mL. It can be observed that the
real spilled volume is close to the simulated spilled volume for low amounts of spilled liquid and
low start volumes. For high start volumes, the volume spilled in the simulated pours is higher
than in the real­world experiments.
The equivalent plot for the media/washing solution bottle can be seen in fig. B.14. For 40
samples, the real spilled volume is lower than the predicted spilled volume from the simulation,
with a maximum difference of 37.8 mL and a mean difference of 6.4 mL. For the other ten pours,
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
69
==PAGE:75==
Figure 4.17: Results of the real pouring experiments executed with a UR5e and a Gibco 500
mL media/washing solution bottle as pouring container.
the real spilled volume is equal to or higher than the simulated one, with a maximum difference
of 1.2 mL and a mean difference of 0.2 mL.
Figure 4.18: Results of the spilled volume in the real pouring experiments executed with a UR5e
and a cell culture flask as pouring container.
Detailed results of the simulation­to­reality experiments for the cell culture flask and the me­
dia/washing solution bottle are listed in table 4.8. The RMSE, MAPE and R2 values are
calculated as shown in eq. (3.11), eq. (3.12), and eq. (3.13).
4.2.3
Interpretations and Limitations
The main advantage of using pre­simulated pouring results is the reduction of numerous time­
consuming real pouring attempts, allowing for more efficient experimentation and adaptation.
70
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:76==
Table 4.8: Detailed results of the simulation­to­reality experiments for the cell culture flask and
media/washing solution bottle. The metrics are calculated as explained in subsection 3.3.2.
RMSE (mL)
MAPE (%)
R2
Cell Culture Flask
Received Volume
15.0
21.0
0.83
Cell Culture Flask
Spilled Volume
3.2
63.0
­0.06
Bottle
Received Volume
31.8
53.0
0.88
Bottle
Spilled Volume
9.2
111.0
­0.34
Moreover, a detailed target volume precision achieved in simulations is possible because of the
possibility of varying various pouring parameters. Additionally, the presented simulation exhibits
adaptability to new pouring containers, enhancing its practicality.
However, certain gaps between the simulation and reality results can be encountered. Notably,
the lack of available 3D models for the pouring objects poses a challenge in accurately repro­
ducing the pouring behavior. For example, a slightly wrong­modeled bottleneck can significantly
change the simulation results. The reliance on approximate liquid parameters in the simulation
also contributed to the disparities. An iterative adjustment of the used liquid parameters is a
possible solution to improve the accuracy of the simulation. However, this is only useful if the
exact 3D models of the pouring containers are available. Otherwise, the parameter adjustment
would only cancel out the error of the 3D modeling. The difference in the selected start volumes
for the cell culture flask and the actual start volumes in the simulations is due to a minimal ’hole’
in the 3D object of the flask, which leads to a leakage of particles during the particle emitting.
The simulation­to­reality gap can be minimized using a correction factor, leading to mean ab­
solute percentage errors of 14% and 25% for the received volume. To interpret the results in
a research laboratory context, the opinion of scientists in the R&eD site of Novo Nordisk was
obtained. The general tenor is that the practicability is highly dependent on the experimental
procedure. For many time­consuming preparation tasks in the laboratory, a MAPE of around
15% might be sufficient.
The described new pouring trajectory showed auspicious results for pouring into receiving con­
tainers with a small opening. During the real executions, very low spilling occurred for both
pouring containers. Since the trajectory can be easily adapted for new containers, this new ap­
proach has many possible applications in automating research experiments and other robotic
pouring problems like filling drinks for a kitchen assistant.
4.3
Overall System Performance
This section presents the results of the overall performance of the cell culture automation sys­
tem, including the prototype as presented in section 3.1 combined with the results based on
vision and simulation.
The described modules, which can be combined to execute the three main workflows, were
tested individually. Iterative adjustments and improvements were made until 20 consecutive
runs of each module were accomplished successfully. In the modules involving pouring tasks,
it is important to note that the pour’s precision was not considered a determining factor for
successful completion. Videos of the successful completion of each module can be seen here.
The precision of the autonomous pouring approach, which includes the vision­based volume
estimation of liquids, the selection of the pour with the minimum cost from the simulation, and
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
71
==PAGE:77==
the real execution of the pour, was tested. To achieve this, module 6 was repeated 20 times
for each target volume of 30 mL and 50 mL, utilizing the media bottle. Random start volumes
ranging from 100 mL to 500 mL were used.
The target volumes were specifically chosen to align with the typical amount of media poured by
human scientists, which commonly falls within the range of 30 mL to 50 mL. A correction factor of
1.15 was applied to the received volumes in the simulation to improve the simulation­to­reality
transfer. The results are listed in table 4.9. RMSE and MAPE are calculated as shown in
eq. (3.11) and eq. (3.12). An exemplary autonomous pouring execution with explanations of
the substeps can be seen here.
Table 4.9: Results of the complete autonomous pouring workflow tested with module 6 (20 times
per target volume).
Target
Volume (mL)
Average Execution
Time (s)
RMSE (mL)
MAPE (%)
Maximum
Error (mL)
30
135.3
21.4
71.3
39.6
50
124.8
26.2
52.4
44.8
The three main workflows (A: Analyzing cell growth, B: Changing media, C: Passaging) were
tested ten times each. Start conditions were one filled cell culture flask in the flask storage
inside the incubator, five empty flasks in the flask storage on the table, a media and a washing
solution bottle with sufficient liquid, and a filled trypsin container. The results of the tests are
shown in table 4.10. Exemplary pictures of the execution of the workflows and the simple user
interface to start the workflows and visualize the cell confluency are shown in fig. 4.19.
Table 4.10: Results of the autonomous workflows A, B, and C executed on the cell culture
system (10 times each).
Workflow
Average Execution
Time (s)
Completion Rate (%)
A
78.3
100
B
461.4
100
C
841.2
90
Workflows A and B achieved a completion rate of 100%. Workflow C encountered a single
failure during the flask capping phase. The execution times for workflow A and B are similar to
that of a human scientist. However, decapping and capping flasks takes more time in the au­
tonomous workflows, making workflow C comparatively time­consuming. After further testing,
the speed of the individual modules can be increased to reduce the total execution time. Videos
of the three workflows can be seen here.
The possibility of using the segmentation and depth estimation model for process monitoring is
showcased in a system setup verification phase before the execution of the autonomous work­
flows. This helps avoid human errors when loading the system without using multiple sensors
at the different units. The robot moves to different elements of the system and captures a to­
tal of eight images. After, the segmentation masks are predicted, which are then utilized to
validate the presence of containers through simple value­counting functions. Specifically, the
checks involve examining whether the microscope unit, vertical flask holders, and regripping
72
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.19: Exemplary pictures of the execution of the workflows and the simple user interface
to start the workflows and visualize the cell confluency.
station for the bottles are empty, as well as ensuring an adequate number of empty flasks (>2),
the presence of the trash container, and the availability of media and washing solution bottles.
Each of the six checks was conducted ten times with a container present and ten times without.
Notably, all 120 checks were successfully completed. A video of the system setup verification
phase can be seen here. Snapshots of the process can be seen in fig. B.22.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
73
==PAGE:79==
5
Discussion and Future Work
The exploratory character of the present work was already emphasized at the beginning. The
open­ended goals were defined to create a basis and provide ideas for further projects and
research in this area.
Research goal (1), to integrate existing laboratory hardware for a proof­of­concept prototype,
was successfully demonstrated by autonomously executing the three main workflows in cell cul­
ture for adherent cells. Combining a robot arm, existing laboratory equipment, and 3D­printed
parts allows the prototype to be easily rebuilt and extended. Sub­elements like the incubator
with the door opening mechanism can be reused and multiplied for future projects through the
achieved modularity. In combination with autonomous pouring, the desired flexibility and adapt­
ability for new applications in laboratory automation are fulfilled. The system is the first low­cost
solution for cell culture automation using cell culture flasks. The equipment costs required to
build the system are approximately DKK 432,000 (€ 58,000). An overview of the expenses is
shown in table B.4. However, some further factors need to be considered for a final system.
First, the system must be encapsulated to ensure a stable atmosphere. Second, more flask
storage inside the incubator is needed to allow multiple passaging procedures without human
intervention.
Goal (2), to perform human tasks that include liquids using a camera and a robot arm, was
approached using a two­step deep learning­based method for liquid volume estimation and a
simulation of various pouring movements. The possibilities and limitations were evaluated in
detail in the results sections. In summary, the vision­based system was successfully used for
process monitoring, and the volume of liquid can be estimated with satisfactory precision for
known laboratory vessels or when the vessel volume is given. Future work could involve the
extension of the TransProteus dataset with plastic objects, the enlargement of the LabLiquid­
Volume dataset with more vessel types, and an adaption of the volume estimation model to
the use of point clouds. Additionally, the camera could be used to read the labels or barcodes
of the containers to increase data generation and ensure that the right solutions are loaded.
The particle­based simulation predicts the required real robot arm movement to pour a specific
amount of liquid depending on varying starting volumes with satisfactory precision. However,
an adaption to multiple laboratory containers with real 3D models is desirable. Another possi­
bility to improve the simulation­to­reality transfer accuracy is to build a setup for autonomous
filling, pouring, and weighing of the liquid. This could be used to run many more real pouring
executions and subsequently adapt the simulation results with the real ones. Future simula­
tion work for liquid pouring could be done in Isaac Orbit, a unified and modular framework for
robot learning powered by NVIDIA Isaac Sim [99]. A pouring simulation module will be added
end of 2023, which could help reduce the time for setting up the pouring scenes. Compared to
the state­of­the­art approach for autonomous pouring by Kennedy et al. [65], the vision­ and
simulation­based approach presented here is worse in precision but offers higher flexibility for
pouring into multiple receiving containers and simplicity by using less equipment.
Performing all human pouring tasks in research laboratories with the presented combined ap­
proach is not feasible with the current results since the volume estimation and pouring simulation
errors add up. However, improving the accuracy of both elements could lead to sufficient pre­
cision for many laboratory tasks. The vision­ and simulation­based approach is independent of
additional hardware and the location of the pouring and receiving containers, which is especially
useful for a flexible robotic laboratory assistant, e.g., mounted on a mobile robot. In addition,
using a pouring approach instead of pipetting reduces the amount of disposable plastics and
74
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:80==
avoids integrating non­automation­friendly pipettes. When precise pouring is demanded, an
option could include the vision­based monitoring of the liquid in the pouring and the receiving
container. In the context of systems with a predetermined hardware configuration, integrating
a balance as an alternative to vision­based liquid volume estimation, along with the utilization
of simulation outcomes, holds potential for enhancing precision.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
75
==PAGE:81==
6
Conclusion
This work investigated the opportunities of a vision­ and simulation­based approach to make
a robot a flexible and adaptable laboratory assistant, demonstrated with a proposed new low­
batch system for cell culture automation. The system presents a low­cost autonomous solution
for the three main workflows in adherent cell culture. It has the potential to enhance scientists’
productivity and alleviate the workload of researchers, eliminating the necessity for their physical
presence in the laboratory during non­standard working hours. Thanks to the modularity of the
cell culture automation prototype, elements can be reused for further laboratory automation
projects and a final system solution.
A new method consisting of a two­step vision­based system was proposed for liquid volume
estimation from a single RGB image in laboratory environments. First, segmented depth maps
of transparent containers and the liquids inside are generated based on a convolutional neural
network (CNN) trained on computer­generated images from the TransProteus dataset. In the
second step, the volume of the liquid inside the container is estimated based on those results
using a CNN trained on a newly generated dataset called LabLiquidVolume. The presented
dataset consists of more than 5,000 images of liquids inside the most common laboratory con­
tainers and their volume.
More than 6,000 pours were simulated, covering different start volumes, stop angles, and stop
times. This is the first pouring simulation approach specifically focussing on laboratory contain­
ers. Unlike previous autonomous pouring methods, the proposed new movement is a rotation
of the pouring container around the liquid exit point instead of the center of the container. This
minimizes spilling and makes the trajectory more suitable for pouring into containers with small
openings, which often appear in research laboratory environments. Since the pouring simula­
tion and trajectory are easily adaptable to new containers, it offers a wide range of possibilities
for further use in laboratory automation projects.
The proposed autonomous pouring approach, which includes the vision­based volume estima­
tion and the selection of the best pour from the simulation, was demonstrated with real execu­
tions on a robot arm in the cell culture system.
The proposed vision­ and simulation­based approach offers a cost­effective solution that can
be easily integrated into existing research laboratory setups. By improving the subelements’
accuracy, this approach has the potential to revolutionize research practices through flexible
robotic assistance, enabling scientists to focus on critical tasks and driving scientific progress.
76
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1]
Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael A. Osborne. “The future of employment: How susceptible
are jobs to computerisation?” In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change 114 (Jan.
2017), pp. 254–280. ISSN: 00401625. DOI: 10.1016/j.techfore.2016.08.019.
[2]
Ian Holland and Jamie A. Davies. Automation in the Life Science Research Laboratory.
Nov. 2020. DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.571777.
[3]
Chaitanya Kulkarni. “Automating the Experimental Laboratory”. PhD thesis. Ohio: Ohio
State University, 2021.
[4]
Paul Groth and Jessica Cox. “Indicators for the use of robotic labs in basic biomedical
research: A literature analysis”. In: PeerJ 2017.11 (2017). ISSN: 21678359. DOI: 10.7717/
peerj.3997.
[5]
Giuseppe Lippi and Giorgio Da Rin. Advantages and limitations of total laboratory automation:
A personal overview. June 2019. DOI: 10.1515/cclm-2018-1323.
[6]
Irina Alecu et al. “Cell culture metabolomics and lipidomics”. In: Metabolomics Perspec­
tives: From Theory to Practical Application. Elsevier, Jan. 2022, pp. 415–456. ISBN:
9780323850629. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-85062-9.00012-X.
[7]
Charis P. Segeritz and Ludovic Vallier. “Cell Culture: Growing Cells as Model Systems
In Vitro”. In: Basic Science Methods for Clinical Researchers. Elsevier Inc., Apr. 2017,
pp. 151–172. ISBN: 9780128030783. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-803077-6.00009-6.
[8]
Merck KGaA. Fundamental Techniques in Cell Culture Laboratory Handbook 4th Edition.
Tech. rep. Darmstadt, 2018.
[9]
Andreas Elanzew et al. “The StemCellFactory: A Modular System Integration for Auto­
mated Generation and Expansion of Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells”. In: Fron­
tiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8 (Nov. 2020). ISSN: 22964185. DOI: 10.3389/
fbioe.2020.580352.
[10]
Formulatrix. Automated Cell Culture. 2023.
[11]
Péter Egri et al. “Bio­inspired control of automated stem cell production”. In: Procedia
CIRP. Vol. 88. Elsevier B.V., 2020, pp. 600–605. DOI: 10.1016/j.procir.2020.05.105.
[12]
P. Moutsatsou et al. Automation in cell and gene therapy manufacturing: from past to
future. Nov. 2019. DOI: 10.1007/s10529-019-02732-z.
[13]
M. Urbina, A. Watts, and E. Reardon. “Labs should cut plastic waste too”. In: Nature 528
(2015), p. 479. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/528479c.
[14]
Richard Ricardo and Katy Phelan. “Trypsinizing and subculturing mammalian cells”. In:
Journal of Visualized Experiments 16 (2008). ISSN: 1940087X. DOI: 10.3791/755.
[15]
Barry G. Hall et al. “Growth rates made easy”. In: Molecular Biology and Evolution 31.1
(Jan. 2014), pp. 232–238. ISSN: 07374038. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst187.
[16]
Sagi Eppel et al. “Predicting 3D shapes, masks, and properties of materials inside trans­
parent containers, using the TransProteus CGI dataset”. In: Digital Discovery 1.1 (2022),
pp. 45–60. DOI: 10.1039/d1dd00014d.
[17]
Guoqiang Wang et al. Machine Learning in Unmanned Systems for Chemical Synthesis.
Mar. 2023. DOI: 10.3390/molecules28052232.
[18]
Hector Garcia Martin et al. Perspectives for self­driving labs in synthetic biology. Tech.
rep. 2022.
[19]
Milad Abolhasani and Eugenia Kumacheva. “The rise of self­driving labs in chemical and
materials sciences”. In: Nature Synthesis (Jan. 2023). DOI: 10.1038/s44160-022-00231-0.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
77
==PAGE:83==
[20]
Johan Stahre, Jörgen Frohm, and Veronica Lindström. Levels of Automation in Manufac­
turing Factory­in­a­Box View project ProWood View project Jörgen Frohm Swedish trans­
portation administration Levels of Automation in Manufacturing. Tech. rep. 2008. URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/255793362.
[21]
Ross King et al. “The Robot Scientist Adam”. In: Computer 42.8 (2009), pp. 46–54. DOI:
10.1109/MC.2009.270. URL: www.yeastgenome.org.
[22]
Andrew Sparkes et al. “Towards Robot Scientists for autonomous scientific discovery”. In:
Automated Experimentation 2 (2010). URL: http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/1.
[23]
B. P. Macleod et al. Self­driving laboratory for accelerated discovery of thin­film materials.
Tech. rep. 2020. DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz8867. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/
sciadv.aaz8867.
[24]
Hatem Fakhruldeen et al. “ARChemist: Autonomous Robotic Chemistry System Archi­
tecture”. In: International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). Apr. 2022,
pp. 6013–6019. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.13571.
[25]
Benjamin Burger et al. “A mobile robotic chemist”. In: Nature 583.7815 (July 2020), pp. 237–
241. ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2442-2.
[26]
Ewart J. de Visser et al. “Almost human: Anthropomorphism increases trust resilience
in cognitive agents”. In: Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 22.3 (Sept. 2016),
pp. 331–349. ISSN: 1076898X. DOI: 10.1037/xap0000092.
[27]
Labman Automation Ltd. MultiDose: Automated XPR Solid Dosing System. 2023. URL:
https://www.labmanautomation.com/multidose/.
[28]
Sebastian Steiner et al. “Organic synthesis in a modular robotic system driven by a chem­
ical programming language”. In: Science 363.6423 (Jan. 2019). ISSN: 10959203. DOI:
10.1126/science.aav2211.
[29]
Sarah Kleine­Wechelmann et al. “Designing the mobile robot Kevin for a life science labo­
ratory”. In: 31st IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Commu­
nication (RO­MAN). Apr. 2023, pp. 870–875. DOI: 10.1109/RO-MAN53752.2022.9900786.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09090%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/RO-MAN53752.2022.
9900786.
[30]
Naruki Yoshikawa et al. Chemistry Lab Automation via Constrained Task and Motion Plan­
ning. Tech. rep. Dec. 2022. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09672.
[31]
Andrew J. Capel et al. 3D printing for chemical, pharmaceutical and biological applica­
tions. Dec. 2018. DOI: 10.1038/s41570-018-0058-y.
[32]
Brandon G. Wong et al. “Precise, automated control of conditions for high­throughput
growth of yeast and bacteria with eVOLVER”. In: Nature Biotechnology 36.7 (Aug. 2018),
pp. 614–623. ISSN: 15461696. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.4151.
[33]
Maciej Daniszewski et al. Automated Cell Culture Systems and Their Applications to Hu­
man Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies. Aug. 2018. DOI: 10.1177/2472630317712220.
[34]
R. Lehmann et al. “Biomek Cell Workstation: A Variable System for Automated Cell Cul­
tivation”. In: Journal of Laboratory Automation 21.3 (June 2016), pp. 439–450. ISSN:
22110690. DOI: 10.1177/2211068215599786.
[35]
Christopher J. Bernard et al. “Adjunct Automation to the Cellmate™Cell Culture Robot”.
In: Journal of Laboratory Automation 9.4 (2004), pp. 209–217. ISSN: 15402452. DOI:
10.1016/j.jala.2004.03.004.
[36]
Tecan. “Cellerity”. In: Tecan Journal 3 (2008), p. 8.
[37]
Agilent Technologies. Agilent BioCel System Configuration. 2009.
[38]
Ryuji Kato et al. A Compact, Automated Cell Culture System for Clinical Scale Cell Ex­
pansion from Primary Tissues. Tech. rep. 2010.
78
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:84==
[39]
Shushant Jain et al. “The complete automation of cell culture: Improvements for high­
throughput and high­content screening”. In: Journal of Biomolecular Screening 16.8 (Sept.
2011), pp. 932–939. ISSN: 10870571. DOI: 10.1177/1087057111413920.
[40]
Advanced Technology Inc. Automated Cell Culture System. 2016.
[41]
Jelena Ochs et al. “Advances in automation for the production of clinical­grade mesenchy­
mal stromal cells: the AUTOSTEM robotic platform”. In: Cell and Gene Therapy Insights
3.8 (Oct. 2017), pp. 739–748. ISSN: 20597800. DOI: 10.18609/cgti.2017.073.
[42]
Carlos A Tristan et al. Robotic High­Throughput Biomanufacturing and Functional Differ­
entiation of Human Pluripotent Stem Cells. Tech. rep. 2020. DOI: 10.1101/2020.08.03.
235242. URL: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.235242.
[43]
CellTrio. RoboCell. 2023. URL: https://www.celltrio.com/.
[44]
Abdullah Ayub Khan, Asif Ali Laghari, and Shafique Ahmed Awan. “Machine Learning
in Computer Vision: A Review”. In: EAI Endorsed Transactions on Scalable Information
Systems 8.32 (2021), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 20329407. DOI: 10.4108/eai.21-4-2021.169418.
[45]
Lucas Mohimont et al. Computer Vision and Deep Learning for Precision Viticulture. Oct.
2022. DOI: 10.3390/agronomy12102463.
[46]
Laith Alzubaidi et al. “Review of deep learning: concepts, CNN architectures, challenges,
applications, future directions”. In: Journal of Big Data 8.1 (Dec. 2021). ISSN: 21961115.
DOI: 10.1186/s40537-021-00444-8.
[47]
David H. Hubel and Torsten Wiesel. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional
architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. Tech. rep. 1962, p. 106.
[48]
Anamika Dhillon and Gyanendra K. Verma. Convolutional neural network: a review of
models, methodologies and applications to object detection. June 2020. DOI: 10.1007/
s13748-019-00203-0.
[49]
Hyeonwoo Noh, Seunghoon Hong, and Bohyung Han. “Learning Deconvolution Network
for Semantic Segmentation”. In: CoRR (May 2015). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04366.
[50]
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. “Fully Convolutional Networks for
Semantic Segmentation”. In: CoRR (Nov. 2014). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4038.
[51]
Yue Ming et al. “Deep learning for monocular depth estimation: A review”. In: Neurocom­
puting 438 (May 2021), pp. 14–33. ISSN: 18728286. DOI: 10.1016/j.neucom.2020.12.089.
[52]
David Eigen, Christian Puhrsch, and Rob Fergus. “Depth Map Prediction from a Single
Image using a Multi­Scale Deep Network”. In: NIPS’14: Proceedings of the 27th Inter­
national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. June 2014, pp. 2366–
2374. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2283.
[53]
Chao Qiang Zhao et al. Monocular depth estimation based on deep learning: An overview.
Sept. 2020. DOI: 10.1007/s11431-020-1582-8.
[54]
Mehdi Mousavi and Rolando Estrada. “SuperCaustics: Real­time, open­source simulation
of transparent objects for deep learning applications”. In: 2021 20th IEEE International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA) (July 2021), pp. 649–655.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.11008.
[55]
Shreeyak S. Sajjan et al. “ClearGrasp: 3D Shape Estimation of Transparent Objects for
Manipulation”. In: CoRR (Oct. 2019). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.02550.
[56]
Sagi Eppel and Tal Kachman. Computer vision­based recognition of liquid surfaces and
phase boundaries in transparent vessels, with emphasis on chemistry applications. Tech.
rep. 2014. DOI: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1404.7174.
[57]
Sagi Eppel. Tracing liquid level and material boundaries in transparent vessels using the
graph cut computer vision approach. Tech. rep. 2016.
[58]
Sagi Eppel et al. Computer vision for recognition of materials and vessels in chemistry
lab settings and the Vector­LabPics dataset. Tech. rep. 2020.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
79
==PAGE:85==
[59]
Yoshitaka Hara et al. “Detection of liquids in cups based on the refraction of light with a
depth camera using triangulation”. In: IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., Oct. 2014, pp. 5049–
5055. ISBN: 9781479969340. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2014.6943280.
[60]
Connor Schenck and Dieter Fox. “Detection and Tracking of Liquids with Fully Convolu­
tional Networks”. In: Proceedings of Robotics Science & Systems (RSS) 2016 Workshop
Are the Skeptics Right? Limits and Potentials of Deep Learning in Robotics (June 2016).
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06266.
[61]
Tara Zepel et al. Automated Liquid­Level Monitoring and Control using Computer Vision.
Tech. rep. 2021.
[62]
Roozbeh Mottaghi et al. “See the Glass Half Full: Reasoning about Liquid Containers,
their Volume and Content”. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) (Jan. 2017). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.02718.
[63]
Fan Zhu et al. “Visual­Tactile Sensing for Real­time Liquid Volume Estimation in Grasp­
ing”. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). Feb. 2022, pp. 12542–12549. DOI: 10 . 1109 / IROS47612 . 2022 . 9981153. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11503.
[64]
Miriam Cobo et al. “Artificial intelligence to estimate wine volume from single­view im­
ages”. In: Heliyon 8.9 (Sept. 2022). ISSN: 24058440. DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e10557.
[65]
Monroe Kennedy et al. “Autonomous Precision Pouring from Unknown Containers”. In:
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 4.3 (July 2019), pp. 2317–2324. ISSN: 23773766.
DOI: 10.1109/LRA.2019.2902075.
[66]
Chau Do and Wolfram Burgard. “Accurate Pouring with an Autonomous Robot Using
an RGB­D Camera”. In: International Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Systems 15
(Oct. 2018), pp. 210–221. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.03303.
[67]
Gautham Narayan Narasimhan et al. “Self­supervised Transparent Liquid Segmentation
for Robotic Pouring”. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) (Mar. 2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.01538.
[68]
Connor Schenck and Dieter Fox. Visual Closed­Loop Control for Pouring Liquids. Tech.
rep. 2017.
[69]
Yongqiang Huang, Juan Wilches, and Yu Sun. “Robot gaining accurate pouring skills
through self­supervised learning and generalization”. In: Robotics and Autonomous Sys­
tems 136 (Feb. 2021). ISSN: 09218890. DOI: 10.1016/j.robot.2020.103692.
[70]
Tatiana López Guevara et al. Adaptable Pouring: Teaching Robots Not to Spill using Fast
but Approximate Fluid Simulation. Tech. rep. 2017, pp. 77–86.
[71]
Constantine Pozrikidis. Fluid Dynamics. 3rd ed. New York: Springer, 2017. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7991-9.
[72]
Matthias Müller et al. “Position Based Dynamics”. In: J. Vis. Communications 18.2 (2007),
pp. 109–118. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvcir.2007.01.005.
[73]
Miles Macklin and Matthias Müller. “Position based fluids”. In: ACM Transactions on Graph­
ics 32.4 (July 2013). ISSN: 07300301. DOI: 10.1145/2461912.2461984.
[74]
Tatiana Lopez­Guevara et al. “Stir to pour: Efficient calibration of liquid properties for
pouring actions”. In: IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., Oct. 2020, pp. 5351–5357. ISBN:
9781728162126. DOI: 10.1109/IROS45743.2020.9340852.
[75]
Edwin Babaians et al. “PourNet: Robust Robotic Pouring Through Curriculum and Curiosity­
based Reinforcement Learning”. In: IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems. Vol. 2022­October. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,
2022, pp. 9332–9339. ISBN: 9781665479271. DOI: 10.1109/IROS47612.2022.9981195.
80
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:86==
[76]
Chau Do, Camilo Gordillo, and Wolfram Burgard. “Learning to Pour using Deep Deter­
ministic Policy Gradients”. In: IEEE RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS) (2018), pp. 3074–3079.
[77]
Beatriz Moya et al. “Physically sound, self­learning digital twins for sloshing fluids”. In:
PLoS ONE 15.6 (June 2020). ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234569.
[78]
Maria G. Juarez, Vicente J. Botti, and Adriana S. Giret. “Digital twins: Review and chal­
lenges”. In: Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering 21.3 (June
2021). ISSN: 15309827. DOI: 10.1115/1.4050244.
[79]
Universal Robots. UR5e. 2023. URL: https://www.universal-robots.com/products/ur5-
robot/.
[80]
ThermoFisher Scientific. Nunc EasYFlask Cell Culture Flask. 2023. URL: https://www.
thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/159910.
[81]
ThermoFisher Scientific. Gibco Bottle, 500 mL. 2023. URL: https://www.thermofisher.
com/order/catalog/product/10340001.
[82]
Robotiq. Hand­E Adaptive Gripper. 2023. URL: https://robotiq.com/products/hand-e-
adaptive-robot-gripper.
[83]
Avantor. VWR INCU­Line ILCO 180 Premium, CO2 Incubator. 2023. URL: https://in.vwr.
com/store/product/36173394/vwr-incu-line-ilco-180-premium-co2-incubator.
[84]
Intel. Intel RealSense Depth Camera D415. 2023. URL: https://www.intelrealsense.com/
depth-camera-d415/.
[85]
DH Robotics. RGI Series. Rotary Electric Gripper. 2023. URL: https://en.dh-robotics.
com/product/rgi.
[86]
CytoSMART Technologies B.V. CytoSMART Lux2 Duo Kit Label­free microscopy with
high image quality. Tech. rep. 2021. URL: https://cytosmart.com/sites/default/files/
resources/Lux3%20BR%20brochure%20-%20CytoSMART%20technologies.pdf.
[87]
Solid State Cooling Systems. TCube edge. 2023. URL: https : / / www . sscooling . com /
product/t-cube-edge/.
[88]
SDU. Universal Robots RTDE C++ Interface. 2023. URL: https://sdurobotics.gitlab.io/
ur_rtde/#.
[89]
Universal Robots. Real­Time Data Exchange (RTDE) Guide. 2023. URL: https://www.
universal-robots.com/articles/ur/interface-communication/real-time-data-exchange-rtde-
guide/.
[90]
Sagi Eppel. TransProteus Dataset. 2023. URL: https://e.pcloud.link/publink/show?code=
kZfx55Zx1GOrl4aUwXDrifAHUPSt7QUAIfV.
[91]
Liang­Chieh Chen et al. “Rethinking Atrous Convolution for Semantic Image Segmenta­
tion”. In: CoRR (June 2017). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05587.
[92]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. Tech. rep. Dec. 2015.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[93]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­Net: Convolutional Networks
for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: MICCAI 2015: Medical Image Computing and
Computer­Assisted Intervention (May 2015), pp. 234–241. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1505.04597.
[94]
Alexandros Graikos et al. “Single image­based food volume estimation using monocular
depth­prediction networks”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). Vol. 12189
LNCS. Springer, 2020, pp. 532–543. ISBN: 9783030491079. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-
49108-638.
[95]
Alexei Botchkarev. “Performance Metrics (Error Measures) in Machine Learning Regres­
sion, Forecasting and Prognostics: Properties and Typology”. In: Interdisciplinary Journal
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
81
==PAGE:87==
of Information, Knowledge, and Management 14 (2019), p. 4579. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.28945/4184.
[96]
Miles MacKlin et al. “Unified particle physics for real­time applications”. In: ACM Transac­
tions on Graphics. Vol. 33. 4. Association for Computing Machinery, 2014. DOI: 10.1145/
2601097.2601152.
[97]
Zherong Pan, Chonhyon Park, and Dinesh Manocha. “Robot Motion Planning for Pour­
ing Liquids”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty­Sixth International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling. 2016, pp. 518–526.
[98]
L. R. Kambam and R. Aarthi. “Classification of plastic bottles based on visual and physical
features for waste management”. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Electrical,
Computer and Communication Technologies (ICECCT). 2019, pp. 1–6.
[99]
Mayank Mittal et al. ORBIT: A Unified Simulation Framework for Interactive Robot Learn­
ing Environments. Tech. rep. Jan. 2023. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04195.
82
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:88==
A
GitHub Repository and Reproducibility
The GitHub repository containing all the code of the project can be found under the following
link:
https://github.com/DaniSchober/LabLiquidVision.
The repository is divided into four different subfolders:
• System Prototype for Cell Culture Automation: cell_culture_automation
• Vessel and Liquid Segmentation and Depth Estimation segmentation_and_depth
• Liquid Volume Estimation: volume_estimation
• Pouring Simulation: pouring_simulation
The cell_culture_automation subfolder contains the drawings of the 3D printed parts and videos
of the automated workflows and individual modules. The pouring_simulation subfolder includes
videos of the simulation and the simulation­to­reality transfer.
To reproduce the described results, start with the following:
git clone https://github.com/DaniSchober/LabLiquidVision
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate labliquidvision
Detailed descriptions of how to train and test models, run a prediction on a model, use the
simulator, and use the system prototype are included in the specific subprojects. The specific
requirements are also included in the ReadMe of the subfolders.
All the models and the LabLiquidVolume dataset are stored in Google Cloud. To get them, go
to the specific subfolder, and run:
dvc pull
To only get the models, run this inside the specific subfolder:
dvc pull models
To only download the LabLiquidVolume dataset, run this in the volume_estimation subfolder:
dvc pull data
Implementation Details of the Segmentation and Depth Estimation
The main.py file serves as the main entry point for running the segmentation and depth predic­
tion. It provides three modes of operation: training the model, predicting the segmentation and
depth of an image, and evaluating the model on a folder of images.
To run the script, the following command­line arguments can be used:
• --mode: Specifies the mode of operation, which can be train, predict, or evaluate.
• --cuda: Specifies whether to use CUDA for GPU acceleration. It accepts either True or
False.
• --batch_size: Specifies the batch size for training (applicable only in the train mode).
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
83
==PAGE:89==
• --epochs: Specifies the number of epochs for training (applicable only in the train mode).
• --load_model: Specifies whether to load a pretrained model. It accepts either True or
False.
• --use_labpics: Specifies whether to use lab pictures for training. It accepts either True
or False.
• --model_path: Specifies the path to the trained model file.
• --image_path: Specifies the path to the image for prediction (applicable only in the predict
mode).
• --folder_path: Specifies the folder path for evaluation (applicable only in the evaluate
mode).
Exemplary usage and further information are described in the ReadMe of the folder. The main
training code is provided in the train.py file.
Implementation Details of the Liquid Volume Estimation
To get the two main models (volume_model_no_vol.pth, volume_model_with_vol.pth), run
dvc pull models inside this subproject. The models get saved in volume_estimation/models.
This subfolder contains code for training, predicting, and testing models for volume estimation of
liquids and possibilities for new data generation and data conversion to include the segmentation
and depth maps. The main file, main.py, handles these operations based on the provided
arguments.
The main.py can be used with the following command:
python main.py --mode <mode> [--image_path <image_path>]
[--folder_path <folder_path>] [--num_epochs <num_epochs>]
[--vessel_volume <vessel_volume>] [--use_vessel_volume]
[--no_GPU] [--path_input <path_input>] [--path_output <path_output>]
[--model_path <model_path>]
The available modes are:
• train: Trains a model. If --use_vessel_volume is used, a model that takes the volume
of the vessel as an additional input is trained. Otherwise, only the segmented depth maps
of liquid and vessel are used as input.
• predict: Predicts the volume of liquid in an RGB image. The image can be changed
by using --image_path. If --use_vessel_volume is used, the model, which includes the
vessel volume input, is used. The vessel volume can be provided using --vessel_volume.
• test: Tests the model. If --use_vessel_volume is used, the model that takes the volume
of the vessel as an additional input is tested. Otherwise, only the model trained with
the segmented depth maps of liquid and vessel is tested. The folder for testing can be
changed using --folder_path.
• record: Records new samples for the dataset. A user interface is opened to simplify the
data generation. The vessel name, liquid volume, and liquid color need to be provided by
the user. Every sample gets saved in a new subfolder in data/interim.
• convert: Converts the generated data to the processed dataset. The path for the in­
put data can be defined using --path_input, the path for the processed data using
--path_output. The segmentation and depth maps are generated using the model de­
fined using --model_path.
84
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:90==
• predict_on_depth_maps: Predicts the volume of liquid based on already generated seg­
mented depth maps of liquid and vessel. A random sample from data/processed will be
selected for the prediction.
Optional arguments:
• --no_GPU: Disables GPU usage for prediction.
• --image_path: Path to the image for prediction (default: ”example/image.png”).
• --folder_path: Path to the folder containing the converted LabLiquidVolume dataset
(default: ”data/processed/”).
• --use_vessel_volume: If that is selected, the training, testing, and predictions are made
using the volume of the vessel (in mL) as an additional input.
• --vessel_volume: Volume of the vessel as input for the prediction when
--use_vessel_volume is used (default: 0).
• --num_epochs: Number of epochs to train for (default: 200).
• --model_path: Path to the model for dataset conversion
(default: ”../segmentation_and_depth/models/segmentation_and_depth.torch”).
• --path_input: Path to the input dataset for conversion (default: ”data/interim”).
• --path_output: Path to the output dataset for conversion (default: ”data/processed”).
Please note that some modes require additional arguments. Make sure to provide the necessary
arguments based on the chosen mode. Exemplary usage and further information are described
in the ReadMe of the folder. The main training code is provided in the train_model.py files.
Implementation Details of the Cell Culture Automation System
The main.py file serves as the central component of the Cell Culture Automation User Interface.
It incorporates various modules and functionalities to facilitate the control and monitoring of the
automated cell culture system. The following are the key implementation details of the main.py
file:
1. Importing Required Modules: The necessary modules are imported at the beginning of the
file to enable the functionality of the User Interface. These include tkinter for creating the
graphical user interface, PIL for image processing, glob for file operations, os for operating
system­related tasks, and other custom modules specific to the system’s components.
2. Device Connection: The connect_device() function is responsible for establishing con­
nections with the robotic arm, microscope, and decapper devices. It utilizes the respective
modules for each device to establish the connections and displays a connection status
message box to inform the user.
3. Analyze Cell Growth: The analyze_cell_growth() function prompts the user to input the
flask number in the incubator to initiate the cell growth analysis process. It calls various
functions to manipulate the robotic arm, microscope, and decapper devices accordingly.
The captured images are resized and displayed in separate image windows.
4. Change Media: The change_media() function enables the user to change the media of
a specific flask. Similar to the analyze_cell_growth() function, it prompts the user for
the flask number, performs the required actions using the devices, captures and displays
images, and executes the necessary steps for media change.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
85
==PAGE:91==
5. Passaging: The passage() function allows the user to perform the cell passaging process.
After inputting the flask number, the function carries out the required operations using the
devices, captures images, executes the steps for flask decapping, cell splitting, and flask
recapping, and places the passaged flasks back into the incubator.
6. Graphical User Interface (GUI): The main window of the user interface is created using
tkinter. The window includes buttons for connecting devices, analyzing cell growth,
changing media, and performing passaging. Additionally, separate frames are created to
display captured images of cell growth analysis.
To start the system, simply run:
python main.py
That opens the GUI, from where the devices need to be connected first by selecting Connect
Devices. After, the desired cell culture process can be selected, and the flask number can be
chosen. The captured images from the camera and the microscope will be stored.
86
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:92==
B
Appendix
B.1
LabLiquidVolume Dataset
Name in
Dataset
Name
Company
Material
Height
(mm)
Opening
Diameter
(mm)
Max.
Width
(mm)
Cell_Flask
_160mL
T75 EasYFlask
Thermo
Fisher
Plastic
150
24
81
Cell_Flask
_400mL
T175 EasYFlask
Thermo
Fisher
Plastic
228
114
26
Duran_100mL
DURAN GL 45 Blue
Laboratory Bottle
100 mL
Duran
Glas
106
17
50
Duran_250mL
DURAN GL 45 Blue
Laboratory Bottle
250 mL
Duran
Glas
139
30
71
Duran_500mL
DURAN GL 45 Blue
Laboratory Bottle
500 mL
Duran
Glas
176
30
85
Gibco_125mL
Gibco Bottle, 100 mL
Thermo
Fisher
Plastic
94
37
50
Gibco_500mL
Gibco Bottle, 500 mL
Thermo
Fisher
Plastic
149
37
100
Pyrex_100mL
PYREX Griffin Low
Form 100 mL
Beaker
Corning
Glas
68
54
55
StorageBottle
_250mL
Corning 250 mL Easy
Grip Polystyrene
Storage Bottle
Corning
Plastic
117
38
74
StorageBottle
_500mL
Corning 500 mL Easy
Grip Polystyrene
Storage Bottles
Corning
Plastic
139
38
94
Tube_15mL
Corning 15mL
Centrifuge Tubes
Corning
Plastic
118
15
17
Tube_50mL
Corning Self­standing
50 mL Centrifuge
Tube
Corning
Plastic
115
27
29
Table B.1: Details of the vessels in the LabLiquidVolume dataset.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
87
==PAGE:93==
Figure B.1: 20 samples of the recorded RGB images of the LabLiquidVolume dataset.
88
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:94==
Figure B.2: Histogram of the distribution of volumes of liquids in the LabLiquidVolume dataset.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
89
==PAGE:95==
B.2
Volume Estimation
Figure B.3: Histogram of the RMSE results from the testing on the test set of the LabLiquidVol­
ume dataset for the model without vessel volume input (only segmented depth maps).
Figure B.4: Histogram of the RMSE results from the testing on the test set of the LabLiquidVol­
ume dataset for the model with vessel volume input.
90
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:96==
B.3
Pouring Simulation
Figure B.5: Visualization of the created 3D models of the cell culture flask and the washing
solution/media bottle in Autodesk Inventor.
Figure B.6: Visualization of the filling of the container in the calibration scene of the simulation.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
91
==PAGE:97==
Figure B.7: Visualization of the course of the remaining volume in the media/washing solution
bottle with a starting volume of 80 mL over time for the 155 simulated pours.
Figure B.8: Visualization of the course of the remaining volume in the cell culture flask for
different start volumes and a fixed stop angle and stop time.
92
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:98==
Figure B.9: Visualization of the course of the remaining volume in the cell culture flask for
different stop angles and a fixed stop time and start volume.
Figure B.10: Visualization of the course of the remaining volume in the cell culture flask for
different stop times and a fixed stop angle and start volume.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
93
==PAGE:99==
Figure B.11: Visualization of the start and received volumes for all simulated media/washing
solution bottle pouring movements.
Figure B.12: Visualization of spilled volume in relation to the received volume inside the receiv­
ing container for the simulated pours with the media/washing solution bottle.
94
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:100==
Figure B.13: Visualization of the minimal cost for a simulated pour with a media/washing solution
bottle given a defined start and target volume with step sizes of 1 mL.
Figure B.14: Results of the spilled volume in the real pouring experiments executed with a UR5e
and a Gibco 500 mL bottle as pouring container.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
95
==PAGE:101==
Table B.2: Detailed analysis of the results space for the different start volumes for the simulated
pours with the media bottle.
Start Volume (mL)
Max. Difference (mL)
Mean Difference (mL)
Coverage (%)
50
2.80
0.17
82.23
60
3.23
0.20
80.56
70
3.68
0.25
73.33
80
3.73
0.30
68.52
90
4.12
0.34
60.66
100
4.34
0.38
59.42
110
4.70
0.43
61.84
120
4.63
0.47
58.82
130
4.56
0.53
55.32
140
7.57
0.80
37.62
150
14.28
1.42
29.46
160
14.63
1.54
28.69
170
15.30
1.67
28.03
180
15.65
1.79
27.46
190
15.75
1.93
26.32
200
16.06
2.05
25.93
210
20.42
3.20
16.47
220
16.83
2.37
26.37
230
17.57
2.43
25.0
240
17.15
2.54
25.37
250
17.86
2.68
24.17
260
17.92
2.80
23.98
270
18.15
2.91
23.48
280
17.77
3.03
23.01
290
17.98
3.16
22.4
300
19.69
3.30
22.48
310
17.94
3.37
22.56
320
18.20
3.48
22.18
330
18.52
3.61
22.46
340
18.18
3.71
21.84
350
18.26
3.81
21.59
360
20.88
5.12
16.29
370
20.26
4.08
20.69
380
18.87
4.13
21.1
390
19.97
4.24
20.6
400
21.20
4.34
19.83
410
22.33
4.34
20.12
420
21.56
4.34
19.83
430
22.00
4.35
19.19
440
23.22
4.36
19.48
450
24.00
4.37
19.13
460
24.02
4.36
19.42
470
22.99
4.38
19.02
480
25.14
4.36
18.21
490
26.2
4.34
18.44
500
26.3
4.39
18.34
96
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:102==
B.4
System Prototype
Figure B.15: Pictures of the Gibco Bottles 500 mL [81] from ThermoFisher Scientific for me­
dia and washing solution and the Nunc EasYFlask Cell Culture Flask [80] from ThermoFisher
Scientific.
Figure B.16: Visualisations of the details of the gripper finger design. From left to right: (1)
Isometric view in Autodesk Inventor. (2) Side view. (3) Top view.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
97
==PAGE:103==
Figure B.17: Visualisations of the lid holder. From left to right: (1) Isometric view of the lid holder
part in Autodesk Inventor. (2) The lid holders attached to the aluminum structure.
Figure B.18: Visualisations of different components of the system. From left to right: (1) Infinite
rotating gripper module for capping/decapping the bottles. (2) The microscope in the system.
(3) Isometric view of the camera mount in Autodesk Inventor. (4) The camera mount, including
the camera attached to the gripper.
Figure B.19: Visualisations of the trypsin station including a Disp­X Bottle Dispenser 1­10mL.
98
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:104==
Table B.3: Equipment list for the system prototype (excluding the 3D printed parts).
Quantity
Equipment
3
Festo linear/swivel clamp (8072624)
1
Universal Robots UR5e
1
VWR INCU­Line ILCO 180 Premium, CO2 Incubator
1
Disp­X Bottle Dispenser 1­10mL (30373528)
1
RGI 100 Rotary Electric Gripper Jaw
1
CytoSMART Lux3 BR
1
Festo ISO cylinder DSNU­25­500­PPV­A
1
Festo Compressed air filter regulator LFR (8003637)
1
Vention table (121 x 198 cm)
1
TCube Edge Thermoelectric Chiller (52­14072­1)
2
Festo Solenoid Valve (VUVS­LK20­B52­D­G18­1C1­S)
1
Festo Basic valve LR­D­MINI (546430)
1
Robotiq Hand­E Adaptive Gripper
Figure B.20: Multiple perspectives of the system setup on the table.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
99
==PAGE:105==
Table B.4: Cost overview for rebuilding the system.
Quantity
Equipment
Price (DKK)
3
Festo linear/swivel clamp (80726224)
4,399.08
1
Universal Robots IJR5e
191,093.00
1
VWR INCU­Line ILCO 180 Premium, CO2 Incubator
63,727.50
1
Disp­X Bottle Dispenser 1­10mL (30373528)
2,630.91
1
RGI 100 Rotary Electric Gripper Jaw
19,400.00
1
CytoSMART Lux3 BR
80,337.65
1
Festo ISO cylinder DSNU­25­500­ppv­A
508.15
1
Festo Compressed air filter regulator LFR (8003637)
382.43
1
Robotiq Hand­E Adaptive Gripper
29,835.00
1
Cooling Circulator and ThermoWraps
39,328.45
Total
431,642.17
100
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
==PAGE:106==
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
DSOB
03-06-2023
DWG NO
Gripper
TITLE
SIZE
A4
SCALE
REV
1 / 2
10.00
10.00
5.50
5.50
26.00
2.50
18.00
R10.00
R10.00
R5.00
R2.00
27.00
13.00
R10.00
R15.00
R2.00
7.26
R1.00
R3.00
R2.00
R2.00
R5.00
R2.00
Gripper Fingers
==PAGE:107==
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
DSOB
03-06-2023
DWG NO
Flask_holder_receiver
TITLE
SIZE
A4
SCALE
REV
1 : 1
Flask Holder
170.00
47.10
123.00
117.00
3.00
2.80
24.00
P6.50
10.00
25.00
11.00
85.00
2.00
52.9
5.00
R2.00
76.5
13.5
==PAGE:108==
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
DSOB
03-06-2023
DWG NO
T-175_holder
TITLE
SIZE
A4
SCALE
REV
1 / 2
36.41
70.00
2.00
2.00
R2.00
R2.00
R2.00
R2.00
R2.00
2.00
2.00
R2.00
R2.00
260.00
150.00
P5.00
P10.00
P12.00
16.75
2.00
2.00
112.50
129.23
119.4
36.83
45.00
10.00
Flask Holder Horizontal
==PAGE:109==
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
DSOB
03-06-2023
DWG NO
CameraHolder
TITLE
SIZE
A4
SCALE
REV
1 : 1
36.00
P4.50
18.00
9.00
40.00
70.00
10.00
17.00
P3.50
44.80
4.40
32.00
5.00
5.00
R5.00
16.00
8.00
5.00
R2.00
R5.00
R5.00
Camera Mount
==PAGE:110==
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
DSOB
03-06-2023
DWG NO
Lid_holder
TITLE
SIZE
A4
SCALE
REV
1 : 1
P35.50
P40.00
19.00
9.50
45.00
5.00
P4.50
7.00
5.00
15.00
R2.00
R2.00
R2.00
R2.00
Lid Holder
==PAGE:111==
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
DSOB
29-06-2023
DWG NO
MediumHolder
TITLE
SIZE
A4
SCALE
REV
1 / 2
80.00
3.00
3.00
P6.50
12.50
50.00
15.00
75.00
2.00
5.00
20.00
2.00
2.00
21.00
24.00
Medium Holder
==PAGE:112==
B.5
Additional Figures
Figure B.21: Visualization of the process of manual annotation for the segmentation of liquids
and vessels.
Figure B.22: Snapshots of the process monitoring using the segmentation maps predicted from
the segmentation and depth estimation model.
Computer Vision­based Detection and Robotic Handling of Liquids for Use in Cell Culture Automation
107
==PAGE:113==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl. 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk
