==PAGE:1==
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech
perception
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Hearing Systems, De-
partment of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Tongthai Taotong - s213247
Signature
Date
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Multiple studies have demonstrated the influence of gaze direction on auditory spatial
perception. However, the underlying effect of realistic listening with various targets and
interferers is still unclear. In the current study, we asked participants to selectively listen
to one target loudspeaker while gazing at various directions. Five loudspeakers served
as sound sources and gaze directions were located at ±30°, ±15°, and 0° azimuths. In
experiment A, we found an improved task performance of on-target gaze condition when
presented with single-digit and four-digit stimuli. The result also exhibits assymmetry,
where the benefit area of the lateral listening targets was larger than that of the central lis-
tening target, even with intelligibility equalised across targets. In experiment B, the effect
of auditory information at gaze direction was examined. Digit sequences at gaze direction
were replaced by speech-modulated speech-shaped noise. The result showed identical
task performance. Head rotation and gaze direction were tracked during the experiment.
On the whole, the results demonstrate the influence of on-target gaze direction on different
lengths of speech and the potential underlying mechanism between visual and auditory
systems.
iv
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I express my sincere gratitude to all those who have contributed to the completion of
this master’s thesis. First, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Axel
Ahrens, for his invaluable guidance, support, and expertise throughout the entire process.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Fiona Mulvey for her insightful guidance on
eye-tracking methodology. Also, I express my gratitude to Henrik Hvidberg for spending
time to find and build all the tools and equipment needed for the project. Lastly, I would
like to thank my colleagues and friends for their continuous support, encouragement, and
stimulating discussions. Finally, I am indebted to my family for their unwavering love and
understanding.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Spatial sound perception
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Effect of gaze direction on sound perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Methods
5
3.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Speech material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Stimuli preprocessing and randomisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.6
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.7
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.8
SRT measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Results
15
4.1
Speech recognition threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Experiment A: Effect of stimulus length on speech score . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Experiment B: Effect of auditory information at gaze direction . . . . . . . . 26
5
Discussion
31
5.1
Effect of stimulus length on speech score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Asymmetry between central and lateral targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Effect of informational masking at gaze direction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.4
Limitations and recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
A Results of experiment A excluding trials with excess head or gaze direction 41
B Results of experiment B excluding trials with excess head or gaze direction 45
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Numerous studies have extensively explored the mechanisms underlying auditory atten-
tion and visual gaze independently, providing insight into their individual contributions to
perception. However, an exciting area that remains relatively unexplored is the interaction
between auditory attention and visual gaze during selective listening.
The visual system has been observed to play a significant role in improving auditory per-
ception. The direction of gaze can influence the spontaneous activity and the firing rate
of auditory neurones in animals (Werner-Reiss et al., 2003). In humans, the direction of
gaze has been shown to introduce a shift in sound localisation (Lewald, 1998), binaural
cue threshold (Maddox et al., 2014), and influence spatial stream segregation (Pomper
and Chait, 2017).
In terms of speech intelligibility, it is well established that access to visual information
improves performance in speech intelligibility tasks in noisy environments (Crosse et al.,
2016; Sumby and Pollack, 1954). Some have explored the benefit of gaze direction further
than the information available in the scene. Best et al., 2023 and Fleming et al., 2021
have observed a positive effect when gaze and auditory stimuli are spatially aligned even
without visual information.
These findings are of significant importance as they aim to provide valuable insight into
the multimodal processing of the auditory system. They have the potential to inform the
design of more accurate hearing technology, including the development of gaze-steered
beamformers for modern hearing aids. Additionally, the findings can contribute to our
future understanding of how hearing impairment can potentially affect the interconnection
between visual and auditory systems. Finally, the findings may lead to something as
simple as knowing whether to inform patients with hearing impairment that simply directing
their gaze could improve intelligibility.
In Maddox et al., 2014, the interaural-time difference (ITD) and the interaural-level differ-
ence (ILD) thresholds were improved by aligning the gaze with the target. Both binaural
cues were processed separately earlier in the pathway, in the superior olivary complex
(SOC) in the brain stem (Irvine, 1992). On the other hand, Best et al., 2023 showed that
gaze direction also benefits tasks that required both speech intelligibility and verbal work-
ing memory, using sequences of 4 digits as stimuli. Speech is processed at higher stages
of the auditory system, especially in the Wernicke area in the left hemisphere of the cor-
tex, modulating the understanding of individual words (Ardila et al., 2016). Verbal working
memory is processed by regions beyond the auditory cortex. It is mainly processed in the
prefrontal and parietal cortices (Crottaz-Herbette et al., 2004). Details regarding Maddox
et al., 2014 and Best et al., 2023 are explained further in section 2.2.
Hence, it is unclear whether the gaze direction benefits individual-word speech intelligibil-
ity tasks where close to no memory is required, or it only benefits verbal working memory.
We hypothesised that the gaze direction benefits individual-word intelligibility in the same
way that it has been shown to benefit longer word sequences.
From ibid., one surprising result is the asymmetry between the effect of gaze direction
on the lateral and central targets. For example, when listening to the left, the effect of
looking away from the left to the centre is less severe than the effect of looking away
from the centre to the left when listening to the centre. Although the angular differences
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
1
==PAGE:10==
between the listening target and the gaze were the same in both cases. The reason for
this asymmetry to occur remained unclear in the previous study due to the difference in
binaural benefit between the 3 target listening directions, where the speech intelligibility
of the central loudspeaker was found to be lower than the left and right source directions.
The asymmetry was hypothesised to be caused by the difficult acoustical condition in the
centre or by interference caused by the lateral direction of the eyes. This study aims to
equalise the difficulty in speech perception in the three target listening directions. If the
asymmetric pattern still appeared in the result, it would likely be the lateral directions of
the eyes that affect the performance differently from the centre direction.
Moreover, even though participants did not have a tendency to report digits arising from
the gaze direction, it was unclear whether the decline in performance in off-target listen-
ing was caused by auditory informational masking occurring in the gaze direction or by
the misalignment between gaze and listening target. It is hypothesised that the auditory
information presented at the gaze direction does not affect speech intelligibility.
2
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
2.1
Spatial sound perception
Our auditory systems make use of various cues to perceive the location of sound sources.
Two essential lateral binaural cues are the interaural-time difference (ITD) and the interaural-
level difference (ILD). ITD refers to the difference in arrival time of a sound wave between
the two ears. When a sound source is located to one side of our head, the sound reaches
the ear closest to the source slightly earlier than the other ear. The superior olivary com-
plex processes this time difference, and the higher auditory centres in the brain use it to
determine the direction of the sound source. ILD, on the other hand, is the difference in
sound intensity between the two ears. When a sound source is closer to one ear, that
ear receives a more intense sound compared to the other ear. Multiple levels within the
auditory pathway detect this difference and use it as a cue to determine the location of
the sound source. Both ITD and ILD are used together to provide our brain with spatial
information about sound sources.
When a target speech is presented concurrently with spatially separated interfering speech,
human can use the spatial cues to benefit and understand the target better. Jelfs et al.,
2011 proposed a model that predicts the increase in speech intelligibility of the target
when the target and the interferer are spatially separated. The model is modified from
Lavandier and Culling, 2010, which is based on the theory of binaural unmasking and
better-ear listening. Binaural unmasking predicts the binaural masking level difference
using equalisation and cancellation theory (Durlach, 1963). The theory works on the ba-
sis of ITD. It describes our ability to match the amplitude and phase of signals that are
equally presented in both ears and cancel them out. This means that if the interfering
speeches are presented equally in both ears, but the target speech is presented differ-
ently, the interferers would be cancelled, leaving the highly intelligible target behind. On
the other hand, better-ear listening (Edmonds and Culling, 2006) is based on ILD. It de-
scribes our ability to use only the ear that has a better signal-to-noise ratio, ignoring the
other. For example, when a target speech is present from the right and interference noise
is present from the left, the signal-to-noise ratio at the right ear is better than at the left
ear. Our internal processing can detect the difference and choose to reject the side with
a lower signal-to-noise ratio and listen to the better ear.
2.2
Effect of gaze direction on sound perception
Maddox et al., 2014 demonstrated that the gaze direction towards a sound source sig-
nificantly improved the discrimination thresholds for ITD and ILD, revealing a possible
interaction between the oculomotor and early level of auditory processing. Participants
were presented with a visual or auditory primer followed by two noise bursts with vary-
ing perceived directions. One set of primers was directional, in which the visual primer
informed the participants where to look and the auditory primer informed the participants
where to listen without directing gaze. The other set of primers was noninformative. The
noise bursts were octave-wide noise centred at 4 kHz and 500 Hz to measure ILD and ITD
separately. As a result, the directional auditory primer, which directed only the attention
to the target, did not increase the percent correct in both binaural cues. Interestingly, the
directional visual primer, which directed gaze and attention to the target, increased the
percent correct in both binaural cues. It was theorised that gaze direction dictates where
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
3
==PAGE:12==
the steepest area of spatial receptive field is. In this area, the range in which the neu-
ral response rate can vary is the largest, providing the best coding resolution (Harper and
McAlpine, 2004), hence the best discrimination performance. Where this spatial receptive
field lies in the processing chain is still a question. The neural responses of ILD were the-
orised to have spatial information integrated with other modalities in the superior colliculus
in the midbrain (Lewald and Dörrscheidt, 1998) due to its response to high frequencies,
while the responses of ITD were inhibited (Zhou et al., 2005) depending on signals from
other systems and had their spatial receptive field shifted in the medial superior olive.
Fleming et al., 2021 presented participants with two competing short sentences spoken
by two different female talkers at ±15° azimuths. Participants were instructed to look at
the target speech on the left in one condition and the distractor on the right in the other
condition. It was found that looking at target speech resulted in a 5% higher percent
correct than looking at distractor. It was theorised that looking at the distractor resulted in
reduced event-related potentials, which is a measure of successful formation of attention
(Okita and Wei, 1993).
Best et al., 2023 presented participants with 5 streams of 4 digits simultaneously pre-
sented at 5 different azimuths at ±30°, ±15°, and 0°. One of the streams was a listening
target and the remaining streams were interferers. The participants were instructed to
look and listen at a combination of -30°, 0° and 30°, which means that there were 9 con-
ditions in total. Under all conditions, the participants were instructed to keep their heads
straight and only move their eyes towards the assigned gaze direction. The study found a
significant benefit of gaze direction when being upon the listening target. Surprisingly, the
result was not symmetric, even though the azimuth differences between the target and
gaze directions were the same. For example, gazing at -30° while listening to the 0° direc-
tion resulted in worse percent correct than gazing at 0° while listening to the -30° direction.
Furthermore, interferer directions that caused confusion to the participant revealed that
most mistakes were caused by the loudspeakers next to the target loudspeaker and that
there was no tendency for the participants to report digits arising from the gaze direction.
Two main explanations were given to explain the source of the benefit seen in this study.
First, the off-target gaze direction required additional spatial coordinate transformation to
maintain perceptual alignment (Zimmer et al., 2004). Second, the division of attention
between auditory and visual tasks came at a cost, similarly to what was suggested by
Fleming et al., 2021.
4
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:13==
3
Methods
This chapter describes the methods used in this study as well as the reasoning behind
them. The measurement paradigm in this study was developed based on Best et al.,
2023.
3.1
Participants
There were nine participants, 7 men and 2 women, with ages ranging from 21 to 28 years
(mean 24 years), seven of which are native English speakers. All participants have self-
reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Five participants have audiometrically nor-
mal hearing, while the rest have self-reported normal hearing. Participants were paid on
an hourly basis and provided informed consent, and all experiments were approved by the
Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391).
3.2
Speech material
The speech material is from the TIDIGIT database (Leonard, 1984), the same as that
used by Best et al., 2023. The material consists of digits from one to nine, spoken by 12
different male talkers.
Four main factors contributed to the choice of this material. First, the material contained
the speech of 12 individuals. The differences in voice characteristics was intended to par-
tially aid the participants since it could be used as a cue for speech segregation (Brungart
et al., 2001). Secondly, the material contains only digits which is practical for responding
on numpad and scoring by non-native speakers. A native speaker would be needed in
a scoring process if speech material contained words which could be partially misinter-
preted. Third, almost all of the material contains one syllable, meaning that the gain from
energetic masking release would be less likely. The digit, seven, is bisyllabic which has
higher intelligibility than other digits. Though it was excluded in previous study of digit SRT
(Ramkissoon et al., 2002; Wilson et al., 2005), a decision was made to include seven to
preserve the natural numerical scale of the task. Finally, using the same material would
make the result of this study comparable to Best et al., 2023.
In total, there were 108 audio files, each containing one digit. They are different in length
with the mean duration of 593 ms per file.
3.3
Task
Figure 3.1 shows the top-view of the experimental set up. There were five loudspeakers,
located at -30°, -15°, 0°, 15°, and 30° azimuths (0° elevation) 2.4 metre in front of a
participant. On top of the ±30° and 0° loudspeakers, there are three monitors capable of
displaying red and green visual cues. The task was to gaze to the loudspeaker with the
green visual cue while keeping the head straight to the 0° azimuth (illustrated by the yellow
arrow), and listen to the target digit(s) arising from the loudspeaker with the red visual cue.
Four loudspeakers other than the one with red visual cue are interferers which should be
ignored.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Experimental setup, adapted from Best et al., 2023. Blue circles are five
loudspeakers 2.4 m in front of a participant. There are three monitors, each on top of
±30° and 0 loudspeakers, capable of displaying green and red visual cues. Yellow arrow
represent participant head direction, which was instructed to keep at 0° throughout the
experiment. Participants gaze at the loudspeaker with green visual cue and listen to
target digits from loudspeaker with red visual cue.
Figure 3.2 shows the overview of the experiment. The experiment started with SRT mea-
surements. The resulting target loudspeaker level for each of the six conditions was ap-
plied to the corresponding target loudspeaker under the corresponding condition. Then,
the main experiment started. There were 2 blocks, each containing 20 conditions in dif-
ferently randomised order. The order of conditions of both experiments A and B are ran-
domised together since they shared two of the conditions. Details regarding SRT mea-
surement are presented later in this chapter (see section 3.8).
Figure 3.2: Overview of the experiment. First, six SRT measurements were carried out in
fixed order, in which their resulting levels were applied to the target loudspeakers. There
are 2 main experiment blocks, each containing 20 randomly ordered conditions of exper-
iment A and B.
6
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:15==
3.3.1
Experiment A: Effect of stimulus length on speech score
Figure 3.3 shows example trials of two main variations of experiment A. Experiment A
aims to answer the first hypothesis, namely whether gaze direction affects speech intel-
ligibility without the need for memory or not. In this experiment, the need for memory is
represented by the number of digits in each stimulus. A 4-digit stimulus requires memory,
while a 1-digit stimulus does not.
(a) 4-digit trial
(b) 1-digit trial
Figure 3.3: Example trials of 5 simultaneous streams of stimuli with different number of
digits, adapted from Best et al., 2023.
For each stimulus length, there are 3 target listening directions and 3 gaze directions.
This makes up 18 conditions in total. Each condition contains 36 balanced trials (to be
explained in section 3.4). This experiment assumes that trails with 4 digits and trials with
1 digit, since trials with 4 digits are assumed to require 1 unit of memory. As a result,
the total number of digits being presented to the participant of conditions with 4 digits is 4
times higher than conditions with 1 digit.
3.3.2
Experiment B: Effect of auditory information at gaze direction
Experiment B aims to test the third hypothesis, namely whether the mistakes were from the
gaze direction or informational masking. This experiment introduces two additional con-
ditions in which participants gazed at speech-modulated speech-shaped noise (SMSSN)
instead of digits while listening to the target digits coming from 30°. The modulation of
the noise matched the envelope of the digits and voices that would be in that position if it
was experiment A. The idea is that the noise would energetically mask the target speech
in the same way as a digit would, but it would not informationally mask the target speech.
The assumption here is that the modulation does not contain any information.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
7
==PAGE:16==
(a) Gaze at 0°
(b) Gaze at -30°
Figure 3.4: Example trials of 2 additional for experiment B, consisting of 5 simultaneous
streams of stimuli, adapted from Best et al., 2023. SMSSN replaced digits at gaze direc-
tion. The modulation in SMSSN is the envelope of the digits (and voices) replaced. Red
arrow represents the listening target direction.
.
The analysis of this experiment also includes two analogous conditions from experiment A,
which had a number of digits per stimulus of 4, target direction of 30°, and gaze direction
of 0° and -30°. The total of four conditions would lead to a calculation of how much
decrement (or increment) in percent correct when the gaze direction changed from being
30° to 60° away from the target listening direction. Then, the comparison would be made
between looking at digits and looking at noise. If gazing at the digits is worse, the change
in percent correct is probably caused by informational masking.
3.4
Stimuli preprocessing and randomisation
Since five of the audio files will be played back at the same time, one on each loudspeaker,
their onsets were aligned to avoid giving any advantage to one or another. The onsets
were obtained using MATLAB’s detectSpeech function, which is based on the energy of
the signal and the spectral centroid (Giannakopoulos, 2009). The alignment was done
by zero-padding in the front of each file individually. The earlier the onset (relative to the
latest onset of five simultaneous digits), the longer the silence was added at the beginning.
SMSSN was created from digit stimuli. The first step was to create speech-shaped noise
(SSN). Each of the 9 digits of the 12 talkers was repeated 10 times. Each repetition was
started at a random sample. Each repeated audio was truncated so that they all had
the same length, and then all were summed into one. The frequency component of the
output audio takes the shape of the averaged speech used in this study; hence the name
speech-shaped noise. The speech modulation was obtained by extracting envelope of
each digit of each talker by the Hilbert transform and forth-order lowpass filtering with 40-
Hz cutoff frequency. The SSN and each of the 108 envelopes were multiplied to create
108 SMSSNs. Finally, the level of each SMSSN was adjusted to match the mean RMS
of all the digits spoken by all the talkers.
The target and interferer digits and voices were drawn at random under several con-
straints. First, both the digits and the voices are unique in five loudspeakers. Second,
all conditions have exactly the same distribution of target digits and talkers, resulting in
8
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:17==
the minimum of 36 trials (least common multiple of 12 voices and 9 digits) per condition.
Third, the consecutive digit stimuli at the same position cannot be the same to avoid the
performance gain from repeating the message (Best et al., 2008; Pollack, 1959). Lastly,
during the pilot tests, it was found that the voice of the same person in consecutive stimuli
could cause problems in two different ways. When a voice stayed at the same position
for more than one presentation and the first presentation is relatively easy, the participant
could easily guess the answer of the second presentation using the voice cue instead of
the intended spatial cue. On the other hand, when the voice moved to a different position
in the second presentation, it sounded like the talker was unnaturally jumping around the
scene, which was difficult for the participant to focus on the correct position. To deal with
this matter, the last constraint was that a target voice was removed from the randomisa-
tion pool in the following presentation and brought back to the randomisation pool in the
following.
3.5
Apparatus
The experiment was carried out in the Audio Visual Immersion Lab (AVIL) at DTU, Lyngby.
The laboratory is a single-walled chamber with the dimension of 6 x 7 x 8 m (length x width
x height). On the inside, there are 1.2-m absorbers on all surfaces, and net and grid floors.
The participants sat on the height-adjustable HÅG chair with its height adjusted so that
their ears were at the same level as the loudspeakers. A HÅG headrest was installed to
assist participants in minimising head movement. Stimuli were presented through the five
front loudspeakers (KEF LS50), all 2.4 metres from the participant at azimuths of 0°, ±15°,
and ±30°. The loudspeakers were driven by equipment outside the chamber consisting
of a sonible d:24 amplifier, a Biamp Tesira SERVER-IO network digital signal processor
and digital-to-analogue converter, and RedNet PCIeR Sound Card on a Dell Precision PC
running MATLAB R2020a. Figure 3.5 shows the general setup that includes a participant
before one of the trials.
(a) front view
(b) back view
Figure 3.5: Front and back photos of the measurement setup taken before one of the
trials. A participant wore eye-tracking glasses, held numpad in his hand, and positioned
his head to the front. This example condition instructed the participant to gaze at 0° (green
visual cue) and listen to 30° (red visual cue). The white circle underneath the 0° monitor
is the landmark for head tracking.
To minimise the need to look away from the instructed position, three Dell U2412M mon-
itors were mounted above the 0° and ±30° loudspeakers. The same content appeared
on all monitors simultaneously, while visual cues varied depending on where participants
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
9
==PAGE:18==
were instructed to gaze and listen. Figure 3.6 shows an example of what was on one
of the monitors. The participants could see their progress in percentage, instructions,
number of digits in current condition, the answer they had typed in, and visual cues. The
’LOOK’ and ’LISTEN’ light up differently among the 3 screens depending on where they
were. The bottom panel turns dark grey during an audio presentation to indicate when
participants were not allowed to type in their responses. These visuals were three inter-
connected MATLAB R2020a applications controlled by an HP Z4 PC located inside the
chamber. Open Sound Control (OSC) protocol connected and allowed communication
between the two PCs inside and outside the chamber.
Figure 3.6: An example of the content displayed on each monitor. ’LOOK’ and ’LISTEN’
panels lights up green and red differently depending on where the monitor was, such
as the case shown in fig. 3.5b. The progress percentage informed participants of their
progress. Length number inform participant whether the sequence length was 1 or 4
digits. The field with orange text showed instructions and error messages. The bottom
half of the monitor is the response field where participants could see the answers they
typed in.
The participants navigated the experiment and typed in their answer using a numpad held
in their hands, which is connected to the PC inside the chamber. They were allowed to
remove their answer using the backspace key on the numpad before submission and sub-
mit their answer using an enter key. The application registered only valid button presses
and displayed an error message in the instruction box when an invalid key was pressed.
Key presses during the audio presentation are discarded. The result collected for each
trial was sent from the PC inside the chamber to the other PC outside the chamber.
3.5.1
Head tracking and eye tracking
The information from the head and eye tracking is crucial in making sure that the results
obtained from the experiment are valid. Too much head rotation causes the intelligibility
of the acoustic condition to change and too much off-target gaze position does not align
with the goal of the study. Trials in which any of the two azimuths was above a threshold
were removed from the data analysis. The participants wore a Tobii Pro Glasses 3 eye
tracker, which was recalibrated every time they put on using a calibration card held in front
of the glasses at their arm-lengths.
Head tracking uses video recorded by front-facing camera of the glasses. The camera
operated at 25 Hz, and a visible landmark was displayed on an iPad mounted between the
10
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:19==
loudspeaker and the monitor at 0°, as shown in fig. 3.5b. The landmark was a white filled
circle with a diameter of 13 cm on a black background. The brightness of the landmark
was adjusted to be the brightest object in the room to allow the circle detection function to
work accurately. The video of each condition was processed after the experiment, being
resized (imresized) by half (a quarter of the original pixel count), converted to greyscale
(rgb2grey), binarised (imbinarize) at a fixed threshold of 0.99 (the range of pixel values
was from 0 to 1), then searched for circles (imfindcircle) using radius range from 6 to
15. The centre column of the circle detected with the highest confidence was marked as
0° azimuth. If the participant turned right, the circle would appear on the left of the video
and vice versa. The azimuth of head turn was calculated from rescaling the number of
pixels between the centre of the scene camera to the centre of the circle to fit the camera’s
field-of-view of 106°. If no circle was detected, the data sample was considered missing.
Figure 3.7 shows an example of a processed video frame.
Figure 3.7: An example of processed video frame for head tracking. Green cross mark
the centre of the circle with highest confidence. Green vertical line is the centre pixel
column of the camera. Head rotation azimuth is calculated from rescaling the horizontal
distance between the green cross and line.
The acceptable range of head rotation in this study is defined as ±7.5° because the an-
gular distance between each loudspeaker and the next was 15°. Head rotation beyond
±7.5° would put the participants’ ears in the position where the next loudspeaker domi-
nated. This acceptable range results in the maximum improvement and deterioration of
the binaural benefit of approximately 0.37 dB and 0.41 dB, respectively, according to the
model of Jelfs et al., 2011.
For eye tracking, the raw Cartesian vector was converted to degree azimuth using an
open-source MATLAB toolbox, GlassViewer (Niehorster et al., 2020). Then the azimuths
of two eyes are averaged into one. If the data of one of the eyes was invalid, only the
azimuth of the valid eye was taken. The resulting data only tells the relative eye position
to the head, meaning that to get the gaze direction, the eye data has to be compensated
for by the head turn. Because the scene camera and eye tracking operated at different
sampling rates, the sum of head and eye directions was derived from merging timestamps
from both head and eye data. Each data was interpolated using sampling-and-hold to
match the merged timestamps. After that, the head and eye azimuths were summed
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
11
==PAGE:20==
together. If any of the two azimuths was missing, shown as NaN on MATLAB, the sum
would also be missing.
The acceptable range of gaze azimuth was defined by the sum of the object dimension
that participants were asked to look at, the accuracy, and the precision of the eye-tracking
equipment (Wang et al., 2017). Dilbeck et al., 2023 has measured the accuracy and
precision of Tobii Pro Glasses 3 with the result shown in table table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Accuracy and precision of Tobii Pro Glasses 3, taken from fig. 6 in Dilbeck
et al., 2023.
Actual vergence demand
Measured vergence
Precision
degree
degree
degree
0.25
0.6
±1.1
0.5
1.4
±1.2
1
1.9
±1.4
2
3.0
±1.7
4
4.9
±1.5
8
8.8
±1.8
16
16.2
±1.1
32
28.9
±2.7
Using an average interpupillary distance of 63.8 mm (Pointer, 2012), the distance from
the seat to the loudspeaker of 2.4 m and the loudspeaker width of 200 mm, the vergence
demand for each eye for each gaze position can be obtained geometrically. Then, the
corresponding measured vergence and precision for each vergence demand are obtained
by linear interpolation of the data in table 3.1. Lastly, each pair of left-eye and right-
eye measured vergence and precision is summed together in the direction pointing away
from the centre of a loudspeaker. This results in a range of -4.9° to 4.9° for the centre
loudspeaker, and from ±23.2° to ±31.9° for the ±30° loudspeakers.
3.6
Procedure
The experiment began by seating a participant and adjusting the height of the chair so that
their ears matched the height of the loudspeaker array. They were instructed to look at
the loudspeaker where the ”LOOK” on the screen above it lighted up in green and listen to
the loudspeaker where the ”LISTEN” on the screen above it lighted up in red. They typed
what they heard on the provided numpad and then press enter to submit their answers.
As soon as the enter key was pressed, the next trial started. There was no feedback
about whether the submitted answer was correct or not. Between conditions, there is a
prompt reminding them to change where they look and listen, before pressing the minus
sign to continue.
They were instructed to keep their heads as they were looking forward toward the 0°
loudspeaker as much as possible and to only move their eyes toward the gaze direction.
They were also encouraged to lean their head against the head rest provided to keep
their head stable. When the audio is not presented, participants were allowed to look
anywhere and relax while seated. This means that they could take a short break by not
pressing enter to continue to the next trial. They were also instructed to look up vertically
to the 0° loudspeaker whenever they looked down to the numpad, then move their eyes
toward the looking position instead of looking up diagonally.
12
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:21==
In addition to the short breaks the participants could take, long breaks could be taken
between any of the conditions. In each long break, a participant removed the eye-tracking
glasses and went outside of the chamber.
The experiment took place over 2 sessions. SRT measurement and the first block were
done in the first session, and the second block was done in the second session. There
were no training trials before the SRT measurement. Overall, the experiment took 4.5 to
6.0 hours to complete.
3.7
Data processing
The percentage of correct responses was processed and visualised using R with lmerTest
and emmeans packages. A linear mixed-effects model was fitted to the data, and non-
significant effects were eliminated. Then, type III analysis of variance (ANOVA) table with
Satterthwaite’s method was obtained from the model. Furthermore, post hoc comparisons
between groups were used to test whether the hypotheses were true.
3.8
SRT measurement
The goal of this measurement is to equalise the intelligibility in three listening directions to
see if the asymmetry still persists. If it does, the asymmetry is not due to the unfavourable
speech intelligibility of the middle target.
The initial idea was to add more loudspeakers on both sides of the array. The additional
loudspeakers will be additional interferers for the ±30° target conditions to make the tasks
more difficult to match the middle condition. A preliminary modelling work using Jelfs et al.,
2011 suggested that the introduction of more loudspeakers would be inadequate to match
the intelligibility. Also, the amount of increased informational masking from additional
loudspeakers is difficult to quantify and take into account. Instead, an SRT measurement
will be performed to measure the level of target loudspeaker that results in the same
intelligibility of each participant for each condition, then the sound pressure level of the
target loudspeaker for each condition for each participant would be adjusted accordingly.
In total, the SRT measurement was performed 6 times. The first three measured the
SRT of 4-digit sequences, while the next three measured the 1-digit sequence. In each
measurement, the looking and listening were at the same azimuth. All interference stimuli
were presented at 60 dB, while the target was initially presented at 75 dB. The target
level was then adjusted using the difference, ∆L, obtained from the adaptive procedure
(Brand and Kollmeier, 2002), which changes the presentation level of the subsequent
target stimulus by
∆L = −f(i) · (prev −tar)
slope
.
(3.1)
The target discrimination value at which the procedure should converge, denoted by tar,
was set to 0.7. Although the psychometric function of having 9 alternate-digits choices is
steepest around 0.55 ratio correct, the pilot tests suggested that the tasks in this study
were demanding, resulting in frustration when the following experiments continued using
0.55 ratio correct. The prev parameter denotes the discrimination value obtained in the
previous response. For one-digit conditions, correct and incorrect answers give prev of
1 and 0. For four-digit conditions, getting 4, 3, 2, 1, and 0 correct gave a prev value of
1, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25, and 0, respectively. The slope parameter was set to 0.15 dB−1. The
parameter f(i) controls the rate of convergence and was set to f(i) = 1.5 × 1.41−i.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
13
==PAGE:22==
The maximum target level was limited to 80 dB SPL. Measurement stopped when any of
the following two conditions were satisfied. The first was when the maximum response
number of 36 had been reached. The second was that both the minimum response num-
ber of 20 had been reached and 11 reversals had occurred. The final target loudspeaker
level is the mean of the levels of the last three reversals.
14
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:23==
4
Results
This section presents the result from the SRT measurement, a comparison with previous
work, and the full result of experiments A and B with head- and eye-tracking data. The
result in which the trials with excess head or gaze direction are removed is presented in
appendix A. Although there is a trade-off in each version of the results, the findings remain
the same. The full result matches the previous study and is known to be certain that the
digits are well balanced in all conditions, but it includes the cases where participants turned
or gazed too far from the acceptable ranges. On the other hand, the filtered result only
includes the trials where head rotation and gaze direction are valid, but it lacks power and
loses the balance of the digits.
4.1
Speech recognition threshold
Figure 4.1 shows the level of target loudspeaker over number of trials during six SRT
measurements. In general, the target level converged to approximately 60 dB when the
conditions are more intelligible, with the targets at ±30°. For the more difficult condition of
having the target at 0 °, the convergence was at a higher level. A greater variation between
participants could be observed when one digit was presented at a time compared to four.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.1: Sound pressure level of target loudspeaker over number trials during six SRT
measurements. For 4-digit condition, one trial corresponds to one set of 4-digit response.
The four interfering loudspeakers presented at 60 dB sound pressure level. Shaded red
and blue patches are examples of trials with multiple mistakes at the beginning. Shaded
yellow patch is an example of last 3 reversals that were far from the converged level.
There were multiple instances in which the measurements did not converge properly. The
first case is shaded in red and blue in the top-right and bottom-centre panels, respectively.
The participants made multiple mistakes while getting some correct at the beginning. As a
result, the adjusted step size for the following trials became too small for the measurement
to converge within the 36-trial limit. The second case is shown in yellow in the bottom-
right panel, where there were too many reversals causing the step size to become too
small, and no reversal took place towards the end of the measurement. Since the final
SRT value was calculated using the last 3 reversals, the final value did not represent the
performance of the participant.
The resulting target level is shown in fig. 4.2. As expected, the less intelligible centre
position required the target loudspeaker to be louder than the less challenging lateral po-
16
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:25==
sitions to achieve the same percentage correct. The 1-digit conditions had more variance
than the 4-digit conditions at 0° and 30° targets. On the surface, the 4-digit condition at
-30° target had higher variance, but that was due to the three distinct outliers. The rest of
the results were closer together. The 30° condition required a lower level than the -30°
even though they provided the same level of binaural advantage. A similar effect was
observed by Best et al., 2023, and it was speculated that it was the result of the right ear
advantage for speech (Westerhausen and Kompus, 2018).
Figure 4.2: Sound pressure level of target loudspeaker that resulted in 70% correct. The
final value is the average of the last three reversals. Each point in each column and
colour represents one participant. The measurements were perform by having the other
four interfering loudspeakers presented at 60 dB SPL.
4.2
Experiment A: Effect of stimulus length on speech score
To compare with the result from Best et al., 2023, fig. 4.3 shows the percent correct of
each combination of target and gaze directions of the 4-digit condition. The result shows a
similar trend to what has been shown before, where on-target gaze conditions performed
better than off-target gaze conditions, and the percent correct decreased as the gaze
direction was farther from the target. However, the effect is very modest at the -30° target.
It was suspected that the flaw in the SRT measurement is the cause since the first trial
that all participants completed was the 4-digit SRT measurement at -30°. In addition, the
variance between the participants is higher in all conditions, which is likely caused by the
compromise that this study has 48% of the number of trials in the previous study.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.3: Box plot and individual speech scores for different combinations of target and
gaze azimuths of 4-digit condition. The midline of the box plot is the median of the data.
Each point on the lines represents a mean score of 2 blocks of a condition. The dash-
dotted line shows the chance performance of the task at 11%.
Figure 4.3 also shows the effect of the adjustment of the target level based on the SRT
measurement. Percent corrects of on-target conditions are approximately at the same
level, removing the right ear advantage and the effect of poor SNR at the centre target.
The training effect is also prominent here. The SRT measurements aimed for 70% to be
correct for the on-target conditions, but the participant performed better in the experiments
that followed, resulting in approximately 75% to 80% for all three on-target conditions.
To investigate the training effect that occurred after SRT measurement, fig. 4.4 shows
each percent correct during the on-target conditions in the main experiment plotted against
the measured SRT levels. For the result to be valid, the percent correct must stay close
to the 70-percent dash line. This is clearly not the trend. High SRTs, which led to a high
presentation level of the target, resulted in a higher percentage of correct than low SRTs.
It is clear that there was a training effect which was not taken into account during the
experiment.
18
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.4: Percent correct over target loudspeaker level of on-target gaze conditions.
Each point represents one condition of one block of a participant. Dash line refers to
the expected result, where the recognition threshold is at 70%. The resolution of percent
correct is 2.78% for 1-digit conditions and 0.69% for 4-digit conditions.
Because multiple SRT measurements did not converged properly and there was a training
effect, a decision has been made to analyse the absolute difference between the percent
correct of each condition by its corresponding on-target condition’s percent correct in-
stead. Block indexes were also separated to see if they had any effect.
Figure 4.5 shows the speech scores relative to the on-target condition of experiment A. In
general, the trend is the same as before where on-target conditions are generally superior.
The statistical model reveals a significant effect of the gaze azimuth (F(2,304) = 5.29, p
= .005), block index (F(1,304) = 5.83, p = .016), and significant interaction between the
target and gaze azimuths (F(4,304) = 7.61, p < .001) and between block index and the
number of digits (F(1,304) = 9.29, p = .003).
Looking further into the interaction between target and gaze azimuths, planned compar-
ison showed that for the -30° target, on-target gaze was superior to the gaze direction
of +30° (t(304) = 2.49, p = .013), but not 0° (t(304) = 0.76, p = .4). For the +30° target,
on-target gaze was superior to the gaze direction of -30° (t(304) = 4.64, p < .001), but not
0° (t(304) = 1.46, p = .14). For the 0° target, on-target gaze direction was superior to the
gaze direction of -30° (t(304) = 3.22, p = .001) and +30° (t(304) = 2.71, p = .007).
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.5: Box plot and individual speech scores relative to the speech scores of on-
target gaze for different combinations of target and gaze azimuths of 4-digit and 1-digit
conditions. The midline of the box plot is the median of the data. Each point on the lines
represents a score of one block of a condition. The resolution of percent correct is 2.78%
for 1-digit conditions and 0.69% for 4-digit conditions.
To investigate the effect of stimulus length on speech intelligibility, pairwise comparisons
between block index and number of digits were made. Comparing two lengths of digits
for each block index shows a significant difference between the lengths of the digits in the
first block (t(304) = 3.28, p = .001), but not in the second block (t(304) = 1.03, p = .3).
Similarly, the comparison between the block index reveals a significant difference in the
block index in 1-digit condition (t(304) = 3.86, p < .001), but not in 4-digit condition (t(304)
= 0.45, p = .6). The comparisons indicate that 4-digit stimuli lead to consistent results
in both blocks, but not for 1-digit stimuli. Only the first block that both stimulus lengths
behave the same.
Figure 4.6 shows the results separated by the number of digits. Visually, using one-digit
and four-digit sequences results in a similar effect. There is more variance in conditions
with one-digit stimuli. The difference between the first and second blocks, which was
previously shown statistically, is also visible in the left panel of fig. 4.6b. In the first block,
the result aligned with the trend that has been shown so far. On the contrary, a significant
number of speech scores improved as the gaze was directed further away from the target
in the second block. This unusual finding will be revisited after the trials with excess head
or gaze directions are removed.
The asymmetry in the results can be observed in the 4-digit result, fig. 4.6a. Cross-
hemifield conditions, in which the target and gaze directions were 60° apart, resulted
in a benefit of approximately 5%, similar to 7% found in Best et al., 2023. On the contrary,
approximately 4% benefit was found when the target was in the centre, located 30° from
the gaze directions. The effect of off-target conditions for ±30° targets is significantly less
pronounced than for the the 0° target even though they are 30° apart in both conditions.
20
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:29==
For 1-digit conditions, the result is unclear whether it is symmetric or not due to the high
variance.
(a) 4-digit conditions. The resolution of percent correct is 0.69%.
(b) 1-digit conditions. The resolution of percent correct is 2.78%.
Figure 4.6: Box plot and individual speech scores relative to the speech scores of on-
target gaze for different combinations of target and gaze azimuths. The midline of the
box plot is the median of the data. Each point on the lines represents a score of one block
of a condition.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.7 shows the response distribution to compare the effect of different stimuli lengths
on the sources of errors. In general, participants had a tendency to report digits presented
by the loudspeakers next to the target loudspeakers and there is no tendency to report
digits presented at the gaze azimuth. These patterns are consistent with the previous
study (Best et al., 2023). The observation is clear when one looks at values relative to
the on-target conditions. The gaze away from the target created a negative difference in
the responses on the correct loudspeaker and a positive difference on the nearby loud-
speakers. The further the gaze from the target, the less responses are from the target
and more from nearby loudspeakers. Regarding the difference in stimulus length, no
significant differences were observed between 1 digit and 4 digits.
22
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.7: Percent of responses corresponding to the azimuth of loudspeaker present-
ing the stimuli. One hundred percent refers to the highest possible response number in
a combination of target and gaze azimuths. R refers to random responses where the an-
swered digits were not presented by any of the loudspeakers. Top row shows the absolute
number of responses while the bottom row shows the number of responses relative to the
on-target conditions.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2.1
Effect of excess head or gaze directions
Figure 4.8 shows the distributions of the median directions of the head, eye and gaze
while the auditory stimuli were being presented. As expected, when directed to look at
0°, the participants kept their head rotation around 0° better than when directed to look
at ±30°. The variance increases as participants were asked to look at ±30° where their
head directions shift towards the directed directions. The eye direction distributions coun-
teracted the head rotation in the way that the final gaze is approximately where they were
directed to be.
Figure 4.8: Head and eye position distributions obtained using Tobii Pro Glasses 3 and
its front-facing camera. Each data point is a median of valid data points during an audio
presentation. Grey regions represent the azimuth which was considered to be too much
head rotation or too much off-target gaze. The resolution of the azimuth is 1 Hz.
Looking at the yellow peak in the centre-top panel of fig. 4.8, there is an unusual 2° shift
to the right in head rotation when participants were directed to both look and listen at 0°.
In this condition, there is no incentive for the participants to turn their heads elsewhere,
this raised a question. It is not caused by the measurement hardware issue since there
24
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:33==
is no shift away from 0° when head and eye directions are summed together, as shown
in the centre-bottom panel. It was speculated that the chair in the chamber was turned
accidentally. The chair was a repurposed office chair that is supposed to be rotationally
fixed, but it can be turned when enough force is applied.
The grey region in fig. 4.8 represents where the head rotation angle and gaze azimuth
are excessive, in which the corresponding trials will be removed from the results. It is
important to note that the valid ±30° gaze directions are not centred at ±30° due to the
accuracy of eye tracking measured by Dilbeck et al., 2023. The resulting gaze distribution
is mostly within the valid region, but slightly shifts away from 0°. It is likely caused by the
fact that the accuracy and precision of the head tracking in this experiment is unknown
and not taken into account by the region-of-interest calculation.
Although the front-facing camera has fish-eye correction, the rotational distance between
2 objects measured by the camera does not scale linearly with the number of pixels be-
tween them. The further away from the centre of the camera, the higher the number of
pixels that cover the same rotational distance. This means that the head rotation az-
imuths around 0° are likely overestimated, while azimuths further from 0° are likely under-
estimated, resulting in inaccurate head direction result. This could be the reason why the
majority of ±30°-gaze trials that was removed were on the other side of 0 °, more than 31.9
° from the centre, because the head position was close to 0° and overestimated, result-
ing in an overestimated head-correct gaze position. Moreover, the precision of this setup
lies in the degree to which the landmark positions can be detected. Changes in lighting
conditions and motion blur while turning heads can affect where the circle is detected.
fig. 4.9 shows the relation between the percent correct and the target loudspeaker level
after the deviant trails have been removed. This removal causes significant data loss,
where some conditions of some participants were removed entirely. Some remaining
conditions have so few data points, causing the resolution of percent correct to become
large. Visually, the same trend as before can be observed with much higher variance. A
higher level of sound pressure leads to a percent of correct more than the target 70%.
One distinction is that there is no clear difference between the first and second block of
one-digit conditions. However, it is unclear whether this distinction is caused by the head
turn and gaze or by lack of data.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.9: Percent correct over target loudspeaker level of on-target gaze conditions.
Each point represents one condition of one block of a participant where deviant trials have
been removed. Dash line refers to the expected result, where the recognition threshold
is at 70%.
The rest of the results, in which the trials with excess head or gaze direction were re-
moved, are shown in appendix A. In summary, although the statistical analysis shows
less significant results since many trials were removed, the trend of the results stays the
same. Additionally, the perplexing difference between the first and second blocks of 1-
digit conditions also shows up in the filtered result.
4.3
Experiment B: Effect of auditory information at gaze
direction
Experiment B investigates whether the decrease in percent correct is due to the physical
direction of the eyes gazing away from the sound source or the informational masking from
the loudspeaker where the eyes are gazing upon. Figure 4.10 shows the result, in which a
similar trend can be observed in both cases. There was a decrease in performance when
participants gazed away from the position in both conditions where they gazed at SMSSN
and the digits. There is more variance when they looked at SMSSN. The statistical model
reveals only one significant effect of gaze azimuth (F(1,56) = 12.8, p < .001). There is
no evidence that gazing at digit interferers is different from gazing at SMSSN interferers
(F(1,56) = 1.33, p = .25), and there is no significant interaction between interferer types
and gaze direction (F(1,56) = 1.33, p = .25).
26
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.10: Box plot and individual speech scores relative to the speech scores of 0°-
gaze for different gaze-direction interferers. Target azimuth was at +30°. The midline of
the box plot is the median of the data. Each point on the lines represents a score of one
block of a condition. The resolution of percent correct is 0.69%.
On the surface, the condition with noise seemed to have more variance, but that was only
due to the 2 outlying blocks, each from different participants. If the blocks were to be
removed, the result would have been very similar between digits and noise.
Figure 4.11 shows the distribution of responses in this experiment. It can be seen that
both interferers resulted in similar responses, in which most of the mistakes come from
nearby loudspeakers.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.11: Percent of responses corresponding to the azimuth of loudspeaker present-
ing the stimuli. One hundred percent refers to the highest possible response number in
a combination of target and gaze azimuths. R refers to random responses where the an-
swered digits were not presented by any of the loudspeakers.
4.3.1
Effect of excess head or gaze directions
Figure 4.8 shows the distributions of the median directions of the head, eye and gaze
while auditory stimuli were presented. The same trend as in experiment A is observed,
where the mistakes were caused by the nearby loudspeaker and not the loudspeaker in
which it was gazed upon.
28
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.12: Pooled head and eye position distributions obtained using Tobii Pro Glasses
3 and its front-facing camera. Each data point is a median of valid data points from a
one-digit trial during an audio presentation. The resolution of the horizontal-axis is 1 Hz.
The results after removing trials with excess head or eye direction are shown in ap-
pendix B. Similar to experiment A, removing the trials results in less significant statistical
differences, but does not change the finding.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
29
==PAGE:38==
30
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:39==
5
Discussion
This chapter is divided into 4 sections. Each of the first three sections discusses each of
the hypotheses which are (1) whether there is a benefit of gaze on speech intelligibility
when memory is not required or not, (2) whether the asymmetry observed in the previous
study was due to the uneven speech intelligibility across the target directions or due to the
gaze direction, and (3) whether the auditory information presented at the gaze direction
affects speech intelligibility or not. At the end of this chapter, limitations and recommen-
dations are discussed.
In summary, the findings of the project are as follows. The percent correct and the error
pattern of experiment A showed that the on-target gaze direction resulted in a higher
percent correct than the off-target gaze direction. asymmetry was observed even with
target intelligibility equalised. The 4-digit and 1-digit stimuli behaved the same for the
first block, but not for the second block of the experiment. The results of experiment
B showed no differences between gazing at the digits and gazing at speech-modulated
speech-shaped noise. After the trials with excess head rotation and gaze azimuth were
removed, the results retained the same trend, but lacked significance in both experiments.
5.1
Effect of stimulus length on speech score
The results from the first block of experiment A show a benefit of on-target gaze on speech
intelligibility in both 1 and 4 digit stimuli. Furthermore, no differences were found between
the condition with 1 and 4 digits. This means that there is a benefit not only in ITD and ILD
(Maddox et al., 2014) and stimuli that require memory, such as 4-digit sequences (Best
et al., 2023), but also in simple intelligibility tasks that do not require memory, such as
1-digit stimuli.
As hypothesised in chapter 1, under the assumption that the auditory neural pathway
is a hierarchical system, the processing of individual words physically lies between the
processing of binaural cues and auditory working memory in the auditory neural pathway
(Irvine, 1992; Ardila et al., 2016; Crottaz-Herbette et al., 2004). Gaze direction has also
been shown to influence auditory responses in many locations along the processing chain,
including the superior colliculus (Jay and Sparks, 1984) and the primary auditory cortex
(Werner-Reiss et al., 2003), where individual words are processed. It is unlikely that the
interaction occurs only during the processing of binaural cues and the benefit permeates
throughout the auditory processing chain since Zimmer et al., 2004 has shown that the
integration of audio and visual coordinates occurs later in the cortex.
On top of the bottom-up explanation, the effect observed here could also be top-down. As
suggested by Pomper and Chait, 2017, in which the misalignment between gaze and au-
ditory attention increased the suppression of irrelevant input and cognitive control, shown
by increases in the occipital alpha band and the central theta band, respectively. The
increase in visual demand when looking away from the target in this study could have the
same effect as their coherent condition.
5.2
Asymmetry between central and lateral targets
The asymmetry in the result of Best et al., 2023 was also present in the result of exper-
iment A. Listening to -30° while gazing at 0° has less negative effect than listening to 0°
while gazing at -30° (see fig. 4.6a, left and centre columns of the left and centre panels).
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
31
==PAGE:40==
Similarly, listening to 30° while gazing at 0° also has less negative effect than listening
to 0° while gazing at 30° (see fig. 4.6a, centre and right columns of the centre and right
panels). In this study, the aim was to remove the unfavourable signal-to-noise ratio of
the central target, thus removing the likelihood that the signal-to-noise ratio caused the
asymmetry. Instead, it is likely that the lateral direction of the gaze was the cause be-
cause the force required to horizontally maintain the gaze away from the centre increases
proportionally to the angle of deviation (Robinson, 1965). The effort required in the visual
system put participants in an uncomfortable state, leading to a decrease in focus in the
auditory system.
Alternatively, this asymmetry can be viewed as the result of dissociation between eye-
and head-coordinate systems. Gazing at 0° while facing at 0° does not require additional
processing, while gazing at ±30° while facing at 0° does. Since transformation is required
between the two coordinate systems to maintain perceptual alignment (Zimmer et al.,
2004), the performance worsens when this happens.
It is also possible that the distance between target and gaze direction plays a less impor-
tant role compared to the amount of gaze directed away from the centre. Although there
is some variation between listening directions, gazing at ±30° seems to result in a very
similar performance regardless of where the target listening direction is.
5.3
Effect of informational masking at gaze direction
Experiment B demonstrates that there is no significant difference between gazing at noise
and gazing at digits (see fig. 4.10), indicating that auditory information in the gaze direction
does not have an effect on speech intelligibility and is more likely that the decrease in
performance is caused by the gaze direction as discussed by Best et al., 2023. This
is also supported by the fact that there was no tendency for participants to report digits
arisen from the gaze direction.
5.4
Limitations and recommendations
The data in experiment A show contradictory findings. Only the first block of experiment
A proves that memory is not required to observe the effect, while one of the target direc-
tions of the second block went the opposite direction of what was expected even with all
the trials with excess head and gaze directions removed (see fig. 4.6b, left panel). The
expectation is that gazing away from the target position results in a poorer performance,
but in the second block, the performance was better. It is likely that the result of the -30°
target of the 1-digit condition in the second block was an outlier.
This leads to another question of whether it was a right decision to consider 1 and 4 digits
as equals when it comes to the number of repetitions. Participants had 4 times as many
stimuli compared to 1 digit to listen to and type in their responses. From the goal of this
particular hypothesis, they are almost the same in terms of the completed processing
chain since it needs more than one digit to use memory. But from the signal point of view,
repeating 1-digit conditions 3 more times to match the signal in 4-digit condition could
be a good idea. It can also be a good idea for the SRT measurement, in which 4 digits
converged at approximately the same level across all participants with a few outliers, and
the SRT of 1-digit stimuli ended up at a wide range of levels. Considering that a 4-digit
simulus has 4 times more information than its 1-digit counterpart, allowing more maximum
trials would make more sense for 1-digit SRT measurement.
Previous studies have shown that SRT measurement using digits is possible(Ramkissoon
et al., 2002; Smits et al., 2013). However, there are several differences that could cause
32
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:41==
the deviation. The main flaw would be the fact that there is no limit on how small a step
size could become. The studies above both used a fixed step size of 2 dB. It is unlikely that
the lack of a training set, where Smits et al., 2013 needs 24 trials of 3-digit sequences
in speech-shaped noise, had a large effect. In this study, unconverged measurements
were still presented after 60 trials of 4-digit stimuli had been passed. Moreover, at a given
time, five randomly chosen digits and voices were being presented, which could lead to
a high variety in task difficulty. This introduced uncertainty, making it difficult to define the
minimum trial number needed. The noise maskers used in previous studies likely resulted
in more consistent difficulties in all trials than the digits employed here.
Two sets of data are shown in the results and Appendix section. The first is without any
removal due to head or eye directions, meaning that all of the stimuli are well balanced
across condition. On the contrary, the second set of data is after the removal, giving
priority to where the participants actually turned and looked. Although the results before
and after removal largely conveyed the same information, the latter often showed less
significant statistical findings. In addition, the feedback from the participants revealed that
the task throughout this study was overwhelming. They needed to remind themselves to
listen and look at the correct directions, to reposition their head as they are looking forward
to the centre every single time they move, which means every response they made if they
could not touch-type on the numpad. Additionally, they still had to do the task, which was
a difficult task in itself. All of these issues could be prevented by incorporating head and
eye tracking into the experiment flow, where participants could focus solely on listening,
and everything else was taken care of. Although a decision was made not to use virtual
reality because of how unnatural it could feel to the participants, it could be a good trade-
off to make. Virtual reality combined with real-time higher-order ambisonics allows the
loudspeaker array to be virtually attached to the test participant heads both visually and
auditorily, so that they do not have to worry about their head rotation at all. Moreover,
real-time eye tracking could also provide an in-experiment check for when the boundary
conditions are matched, such as having gaze at the desired direction before starting a
trial. This would create results that are always valid and potentially an experiment that is
less overwhelming to the participants.
In this study, not all aspects of the collected data were analysed, especially eye-tracking
data. Analysing blink rate, duration, and interval, as well as saccades, can provide addi-
tional information on brain functions (Schleicher et al., 2008; Eckstein et al., 2017), which
can be used to monitor participant status and potentially be additional matrices in addition
to the percent correct used in this study. Additionally, this study only used the median of
the 50-Hz gaze data for each trial in the analysis. It would be interesting to see whether a
fixation, gaze at the same target for more than approximately 100 ms (Patla and Vickers,
2003) which supposedly affects the neural function, has any effect on the result.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
33
==PAGE:42==
34
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:43==
6
Conclusion
This study aims to bridge the gap between the extensively explored auditory and visual
systems by studying the interaction between the two. Eye gaze has been shown to benefit
the intelligibility of auditory stimuli of vast range of complexity, from noise bursts for binau-
ral cue measurement to short sentences. This wide range of stimuli demands processing
in different parts of the auditory neural pathway. A stimulus missing from the studies was
a single word stimulus. This study hypothesised that a single-word stimulus would also
benefit from on-target gaze direction since single words are processed at the auditory cor-
tex, which is located between the superior olivary complex that processes binaural cues,
and the prefrontal and parietal cortices that processes verbal working memory. Two addi-
tional hypotheses were also included to answer the questions stated in the previous study
Best et al., 2023. First, the objective was to uncover whether the asymmetric benefit of
gaze on intelligibility was due to uneven speech intelligibility of the setup or due to the
eye gaze. Second, we hypothesised that the auditory information presented at the gaze
direction does not affect speech intelligibility.
Through experiments using a single digit and a sequence of 4 digits as a stimulus, it was
found that the on-target gaze direction resulted in a higher percent correct, but modest,
than the off-target gaze direction, similar to what has been shown before. The result also
shows a similar effect between 1 and 4 digit stimuli, supporting the first hypothesis that a
single-word stimulus would benefit from the on-target gaze direction. Moreover, the result
exhibited an asymmetric feature even with the intelligibility across the target directions
being equalised. This means that eye gaze is the main cause of asymmetry, benefiting
the auditory system differently, depending on where the target and gaze are.
From the last experiment in which speech-modulated speech-shaped noise was pre-
sented instead of digits at the gaze direction, the results showed that there is no significant
difference in percent correct between gazing at digits and gazing at noise. Since the noise
was assumed not to contain any information, it was clear that auditory information pre-
sented at the gaze direction does not affect intelligibility.
The presented findings introduce paths to new research questions. A big assumption in
this study, as well as numerous similar ones, assumed that auditory stimulus process-
ing adhered to a unidirectional pattern within the hierarchical auditory neural pathway,
where influences from other sensory systems directly modulate each step in the pathway.
However, it is worth considering and exploring the potential existence of an underlying
top-down influence from other senses that potentially modulate the behaviour of the au-
ditory system.
Although the impact of on-target gaze may seem insignificant and unlikely to yield notice-
able changes in our daily lives, exploring its effects on individuals with hearing impair-
ments could be interesting. Similar studies conducted with the hearing impaired could
offer valuable information on the influence of multimodal processing on their impairments.
These findings have the potential to shape the development of hearing aids capable of
achieving even more remarkable outcomes.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
35
==PAGE:44==
36
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
Werner-Reiss, Uri, Kristin A Kelly, Amanda S Trause, Abigail M Underhill, and Jennifer M
Groh (2003). “Eye position affects activity in primary auditory cortex of primates”. In:
Current Biology 13.7, pp. 554–562.
Lewald, Jörg (1998). “The effect of gaze eccentricity on perceived sound direction and its
relation to visual localization”. In: Hearing research 115.1-2, pp. 206–216.
Maddox, Ross K, Dean A Pospisil, G Christopher Stecker, and Adrian KC Lee (2014).
“Directing eye gaze enhances auditory spatial cue discrimination”. In: Current Biology
24.7, pp. 748–752.
Pomper, Ulrich and Maria Chait (2017). “The impact of visual gaze direction on auditory
object tracking”. In: Scientific reports 7.1, p. 4640.
Crosse, Michael J, Giovanni M Di Liberto, and Edmund C Lalor (2016). “Eye can hear
clearly now: inverse effectiveness in natural audiovisual speech processing relies on
long-term crossmodal temporal integration”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 36.38, pp. 9888–
9895.
Sumby, William H and Irwin Pollack (1954). “Visual contribution to speech intelligibility in
noise”. In: The journal of the acoustical society of america 26.2, pp. 212–215.
Best, Virginia, Alex D Boyd, and Kamal Sen (2023). “An Effect of Gaze Direction in Cocktail
Party Listening”. In: Trends in Hearing 27, p. 23312165231152356.
Fleming, Justin T, Ross K Maddox, and Barbara G Shinn-Cunningham (2021). “Spa-
tial alignment between faces and voices improves selective attention to audio-visual
speech”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 150.4, pp. 3085–3100.
Irvine, Dexter RF (1992). “Physiology of the auditory brainstem”. In: The mammalian au-
ditory pathway: Neurophysiology, pp. 153–231.
Ardila, Alfredo, Byron Bernal, and Monica Rosselli (2016). “The role of Wernicke’s area in
language comprehension.” In: Psychology & Neuroscience 9.3, p. 340.
Crottaz-Herbette, Sonia, RT Anagnoson, and Vinod Menon (2004). “Modality effects in
verbal working memory: differential prefrontal and parietal responses to auditory and
visual stimuli”. In: Neuroimage 21.1, pp. 340–351.
Jelfs, Sam, John F Culling, and Mathieu Lavandier (2011). “Revision and validation of a
binaural model for speech intelligibility in noise”. In: Hearing research 275.1-2, pp. 96–
104.
Lavandier, Mathieu and John F Culling (2010). “Prediction of binaural speech intelligibility
against noise in rooms”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 127.1,
pp. 387–399.
Durlach, Nathaniel I (1963). “Equalization and cancellation theory of binaural masking-
level differences”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 35.8, pp. 1206–
1218.
Edmonds, Barrie A and John F Culling (2006). “The spatial unmasking of speech: Ev-
idence for better-ear listening”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
120.3, pp. 1539–1545.
Harper, Nicol S and David McAlpine (2004). “Optimal neural population coding of an au-
ditory spatial cue”. In: Nature 430.7000, pp. 682–686.
Lewald, Jörg and Gerd Joachim Dörrscheidt (1998). “Spatial-tuning properties of auditory
neurons in the optic tectum of the pigeon”. In: Brain research 790.1-2, pp. 339–342.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
37
==PAGE:46==
Zhou, Yi, Laurel H Carney, and H Steven Colburn (2005). “A model for interaural time dif-
ference sensitivity in the medial superior olive: interaction of excitatory and inhibitory
synaptic inputs, channel dynamics, and cellular morphology”. In: Journal of Neuro-
science 25.12, pp. 3046–3058.
Okita, Tsunetaka and Jing-Han Wei (1993). “Effects of eye position on event-related po-
tentials during auditory selective attention”. In: Psychophysiology 30.4, pp. 359–365.
Zimmer, Ulrike, Jörg Lewald, Michael Erb, Wolfgang Grodd, and Hans-Otto Karnath (2004).
“Is there a role of visual cortex in spatial hearing?” In: European Journal of Neuroscience
20.11, pp. 3148–3156.
Leonard, R (1984). “A database for speaker-independent digit recognition”. In: ICASSP’84.
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Vol. 9.
IEEE, pp. 328–331.
Brungart, Douglas S, Brian D Simpson, Mark A Ericson, and Kimberly R Scott (2001).
“Informational and energetic masking effects in the perception of multiple simultaneous
talkers”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 110.5, pp. 2527–2538.
Ramkissoon, Ishara, Adele Proctor, Charissa R Lansing, and Robert C Bilger (2002). “Digit
speech recognition thresholds (SRT) for non-native speakers of English”. In.
Wilson, Richard H, Christopher A Burks, and Deborah G Weakley (2005). “A compari-
son of word-recognition abilities assessed with digit pairs and digit triplets in multitalker
babble.” In: Journal of Rehabilitation Research & Development 42.4.
Giannakopoulos, Theodoros (2009). “A method for silence removal and segmentation of
speech signals, implemented in Matlab”. In: University of Athens, Athens 2.
Best, Virginia, Erol J Ozmeral, Norbert Kopčo, and Barbara G Shinn-Cunningham (2008).
“Object continuity enhances selective auditory attention”. In: Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences 105.35, pp. 13174–13178.
Pollack, Irwin (1959). “Message repetition and message reception”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 31.11, pp. 1509–1515.
Niehorster, Diederick C, Roy S Hessels, and Jeroen S Benjamins (2020). “GlassesViewer:
Open-source software for viewing and analyzing data from the Tobii Pro Glasses 2 eye
tracker”. In: Behavior Research Methods 52, pp. 1244–1253.
Wang, Dong, Fiona B Mulvey, Jeff B Pelz, and Kenneth Holmqvist (2017). “A study of
artificial eyes for the measurement of precision in eye-trackers”. In: Behavior Research
Methods 49, pp. 947–959.
Dilbeck, Mikayla D, Thomas N Gentry, John R Economides, and Jonathan C Horton
(2023). “Quotidian profile of vergence angle in ambulatory subjects monitored with
wearable eye tracking glasses”. In: Translational Vision Science & Technology 12.2,
pp. 17–17.
Pointer, Jonathan S (2012). “The interpupillary distance in adult Caucasian subjects, with
reference to ‘readymade’reading spectacle centration”. In: Ophthalmic and Physiologi-
cal Optics 32.4, pp. 324–331.
Brand, Thomas and Birger Kollmeier (2002). “Efficient adaptive procedures for threshold
and concurrent slope estimates for psychophysics and speech intelligibility tests”. In:
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 111.6, pp. 2801–2810.
Westerhausen, René and Kristiina Kompus (2018). “How to get a left-ear advantage: A
technical review of assessing brain asymmetry with dichotic listening”. In: Scandinavian
journal of psychology 59.1, pp. 66–73.
Jay, Martha F and David L Sparks (1984). “Auditory receptive fields in primate superior
colliculus shift with changes in eye position”. In: Nature 309.5966, pp. 345–347.
Robinson, Do A (1965). “The mechanics of human smooth pursuit eye movement.” In:
The Journal of Physiology 180.3, p. 569.
38
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:47==
Smits, Cas, S Theo Goverts, and Joost M Festen (2013). “The digits-in-noise test: As-
sessing auditory speech recognition abilities in noise”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 133.3, pp. 1693–1706.
Schleicher, Robert, Niels Galley, Susanne Briest, and Lars Galley (2008). “Blinks and
saccades as indicators of fatigue in sleepiness warnings: looking tired?” In: Ergonomics
51.7, pp. 982–1010.
Eckstein, Maria K, Belén Guerra-Carrillo, Alison T Miller Singley, and Silvia A Bunge
(2017). “Beyond eye gaze: What else can eyetracking reveal about cognition and cog-
nitive development?” In: Developmental cognitive neuroscience 25, pp. 69–91.
Patla, Aftab E and Joan N Vickers (2003). “How far ahead do we look when required to
step on specific locations in the travel path during locomotion?” In: Experimental brain
research 148.1.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
39
==PAGE:48==
40
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:49==
A
Results of experiment A excluding
trials with excess head or gaze
direction
This chapter shows the same set of results from experiment A, but without the data from
the trials in which excess head turn or off-target gaze azimuth were measured. The filtered
result, shown in fig. A.1, exhibits a trend similar to the data before removing the deviant
trials, where on-target gaze conditions are superior to the others. The significance of in-
teractions between the target and gaze azimuth (F(4,272) = 2.98, p = 0.020), and between
the number of digits and the block index (F(1,274) = 5.42, p = 0.021) has been reduced.
The same can be said for planned comparisons. The only significant comparison is at the
target +30 °, where the gaze on the target was superior to the gaze direction -30° (t(272)
= 3.26, p = 0.001). For other comparisons, the differences have become insignificant.
Figure A.1: Box plot and individual speech scores relative to the speech scores of on-
target gaze for different combinations of target and gaze azimuths of 4-digit and 1-digit
conditions after deviant trails have been removed. The midline of the box plot is the
median of the data. Each point on the lines represents a score of one block of a condition.
Similarly, the result of pairwise comparisons between block index and number of digits
follows the same trend as before. There is a significant difference between the numbers
of digits in the first block (t(273) = 3.12, p = .002), but not in the second block (t(274) = 0.20,
p = .8). Similarly, the comparison between the block index reveals significant differences
in the block index in 1-digit condition (t(274) = 2.54, p = 0.012), but not in 4-digit condition
(t(274) = 0.76, p = .4).
Figure A.2 shows the remaining results separated by number of digits. As the statistic
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
41
==PAGE:50==
demonstrated, the difference between the first and second blocks in 1-digit conditions are
still visible in fig. A.2b. Now it is likely that the result in the second block is random.
(a) 4-digit conditions.
(b) 1-digit conditions.
Figure A.2: Box plot and individual speech scores relative to the speech scores of on-
target gaze for different combinations of target and gaze azimuths after deviants trial have
been removed. The midline of the box plot is the median of the data. Each point on the
lines represents a score of one block of a condition.
42
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.3 shows the remaining response distribution that behaves similarly to the one
before removal. Mistakes were made with the nearby loudspeaker, not with the gaze
direction.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.3: Percent of responses corresponding to the azimuth of loudspeaker present-
ing the stimuli after the deviant trials were removed. One hundred percent refers to the
highest possible response number in a combination of target and gaze azimuths. R refers
to random responses where the answered digits were not presented by any of the loud-
speakers. Top row shows the absolute number of responses while the bottom row shows
the number of responses relative to the on-target conditions.
44
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:53==
B
Results of experiment B excluding
trials with excess head or gaze
direction
This chapter shows the same set of results from experiment A, but without the data from
the trials in which excess head turn or off-target gaze azimuth were measured. Figure B.1
shows the result after removal. In general, the same pattern can be seen where the digits
and SMSSN had a similar effect on the speech score. The statistical model reveals only
one significant effect of gaze azimuth (F(1,54) = 10.9, p = .002). There is no evidence that
gazing at digit interferers is different from gazing at SMSSN interferers (F(1,53) = 0.188,
p = .7), and there is no significant interaction between interferer types and gaze direction
(F(1,53) = 0.188, p = .7).
Figure B.1: Box plot and individual speech scores relative to the speech scores of 0°-gaze
for different gaze-direction interferers after deviant trials were removed. Target azimuth
was at +30°. The midline of the box plot is the median of the data. Each point on the lines
represents a score of one block of a condition.
Figure B.2 shows the remaining response distribution that behaves similarly to the one
before removal. Mistakes were made with the nearby loudspeaker, not with the gaze
direction.
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure B.2: Percent of responses corresponding to the azimuth of loudspeaker present-
ing the stimuli. One hundred percent refers to the highest possible response number in
a combination of target and gaze azimuths. R refers to random responses where the an-
swered digits were not presented by any of the loudspeakers.
46
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
==PAGE:55==
The effect of eye-gaze direction on speech perception
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
healthtech.dtu.dk
