==PAGE:1==
Process Mining and Data Analysis for
Optimization and Prediction in a Production
Industry
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production
Industry
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Mathilde Tannebæk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Crystal Kwok ”Liquid washing equipment” for Unsplash. Logos from Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU), Emendo Consulting Group and Novo
Nordisk A/S
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5.5 months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The thesis was facilitated by
the Emendo Improvement/Digital unit in Emendo Consulting Group and was conducted
in the IM2 Recovery / IM2 Maintenance department of Novo Nordisk, Kalundborg.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science and
statistics.
Mathilde Tannebæk - s184376
Signature
Date
ii
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Many industries are in the midst of a digital data-driven revolution aiming to be smarter
and more efficient. Within manufacturing and production, the goal of Industry 4.0 is to
transform into smart factories. This thesis provided a take on how to further digitalize
production equipment within the pharmaceutical industry through a case on an ethanol
distillation column.
It was done through an innovative approach of combining process mining, probabilistic
graphical models and statistics to provide insights, advice and predictions within the op-
erations merely through the use of event logs. Through process mining discoveries and
statistical t-testing, it was possible to prove that low-duration warnings have a low effect
on maintenance of the machine, and thereby propose a filter for producing fewer warnings
in the system.
By providing suggestions for a lighter information load from the machine, there was room
for introducing smarter advice and even predictions within the operation.
To achieve
this, an approach of using process mining discoveries as the structural basis of discrete
Bayesian networks was proposed. A Bayesian network learned from the control flow of
the event log provided diagnostics and predictions of breakdowns in the equipment in
relation to the occurrence probability of the other activities. A Bayesian network learned
from discretized activity duration information provided insights into correlations between
activity durations and unwanted outcomes of the operations. High operation time did not
correlate with the activity durations. The prediction ability of the two discovered Bayesian
networks were carefully evaluated and proven to be able to predict with 74-91% accuracy
based on knowing the occurrence of at least the four first activities.
The Bayesian networks learned automatically from event logs proved successful in both
backward and forward-looking predictions and diagnostics within the operations of a ma-
chine in pharmaceutical production. Hence, they served as a proof of concept to how
pharmaceutical production could use the combination of process mining and probabilistic
graphical models to further drive their digitalization steps towards becoming smart facto-
ries.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
As the author of this thesis, I would like to acknowledge all participants that have helped
me over the course of this project. Especially the following individuals for their invaluable
contributions to the completion of this master thesis:
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor in Software and Process Engineering, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU
I wish to thank Andrea for his exceptional guidance, always useful feedback and unwa-
vering support throughout the entire process of supervising this thesis.
Ragnar Ingi Jónsson & Casper Mark Petersen, Senior Consultants, Emendo Improve-
ment/Digital, Emendo Consulting Group
I want to acknowledge and thank Ragnar and Casper for their co-supervision, support
and genuine interest in this project right from the beginning. Their readiness to assist me
at all times has been indispensable.
David Gottlied Bording, Associate Manager, IM2 BIO, Novo Nordisk A/S, Kalundborg
I wish to thank David for his diligent efforts and assistance with materials and legal aspects
that were all crucial for the completion of this thesis. Also for seeing the potential in the
results and interest in more research along the lines of this thesis topic.
Lars Lund Hansen, Senior Manager, IM2 Maintenance, Novo Nordisk A/S, Kalundborg
I would like to acknowledge Lars for his openness and willingness to take in the project
and provide me with office space for carrying out this research. Additionally, I appreciate
his keen interest in the use of the results, which further motivated and enriched my work.
Finn Hunneche, Senior Partner, Emendo Consulting Group
I acknowledge Finn for believing in and catching the project swiftly and for utilizing his
extensive network to secure the project’s placement at Novo Nordisk.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the entire Novo Nordisk organization and
Emendo Consulting Group for providing me with the opportunity to undertake this research
and for their support throughout the project.
Finally, I would like to extend my appreciation to my friends, family and colleagues for
their support and encouragement throughout this academic journey.
iv
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Process Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.2
Conformance Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.3
Process Enhancement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Bayesian Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Digitalization in Manufacturing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Case Setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Problem
7
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Methodology
9
4.1
PM2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Iterative Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.3
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
5
Solution
12
5.1
Alarms and Warnings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.1.1
Zones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.2
Phase Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.3
Event Log Retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.4
Process Mining Implemented . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.5
T-testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.6
Bayesian Networks From Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.6.1
Obtain Process Model Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.6.2
Loop Elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.6.3
Discretizing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.6.4
Parameter Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.6.5
Obtain Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.6.6
Visualize Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.7
Evaluating Bayesian Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6
Results
30
6.1
Warning Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.1.1
Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.1.2
Conformance Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.1.3
Investigating Durations and T-testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Phase Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2.1
Discovery and Conformance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
v
==PAGE:8==
6.2.2
Performance in Distillation Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2.3
Root Cause Analysis of Automatic Shutdowns
. . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2.4
Binary Bayesian Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2.5
Prediction Ability in Binary Bayesian Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.2.6
Duration Bayesian Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2.7
Prediction Ability in Duration Bayesian Network . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Evaluation
53
7.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.1.1
Limitations in Warning Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.1.2
Limitations in Phase Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
8
Conclusion
57
8.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.1.1
Improve Implemented Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.1.2
Bayesian Networks in Streaming Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
8.1.3
Broaden Scope of Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
8.1.4
Other Process Mining Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Bibliography
59
A Petri Nets
61
B Eventdata
62
C Warnings
64
D Phases
68
vi
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The rapid advancement of technologies has sparked a digitalization revolution across
industries, driving the pursuit of smarter and more efficient operations. There exist several
definitions of the word digitalization, but in the context of this report, digitalization refers
to the process of adapting a system to be controlled and operated through the use of
digital technologies. To facilitate the transition into smarter factories, the digitalization of
production equipment is a necessity, even within highly regulated sectors such as the
pharmaceutical industry.
In line with this transformative wave, this master thesis centers on further digitalizing a
piece of equipment within a large-scale pharmaceutical production setting. The equipment
is an ethanol distillation column providing distilled alcohol to the protein recovery process
of insulin production. Through a comprehensive analysis of existing event logs from the
machinery, the thesis aims to utilize process mining techniques combined with statistical
tests and probabilistic graphical models. The goal is to develop a solution to provide
diagnostics and predictions and drive the journey toward a smarter factory. The solution
is meant to serve as a proof of concept to facilitate the further digitalization of the remaining
equipment in the department.
This master thesis has been conducted utilizing confidential data. As a result of this, all
presented results have been normalized and specific events and concepts have been
anonymized. This approach was implemented to safeguard the integrity of the data while
maintaining a comprehensive overview of the outcomes and results.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
This thesis explores the integration of process mining and Bayesian networks, aiming to
leverage their combined power in the context of optimization and prediction in a pharma-
ceutical production setting.
2.1
Process Mining
Process mining is a generic analytical technique used to automatically discover, monitor
and enhance on operational processes through a systematic use of event data.[1] The
discipline lies at the intersection of business process management (BPM) and data min-
ing. By bridging these fields, it facilitates the opportunity of transforming event data into
insights and actions. In order to perform process mining, an event log is necessary. An
event log consists of cases, each of which possesses a unique case ID and represents a
sequence of events characterized by a timestamp and an associated activity. Event logs
can be various data types, but it is necessary to have a notion of case IDs, activities and
timestamps (remaining information becomes attributes in the logs). Process mining can
be divided into three subdisciplines, namely discovery, conformance and enhancement
of processes.
2.1.1
Process Discovery
Process discovery covers the discipline of automatically discovering a model of a real
process from an event log. There exist many different discovery algorithms for obtain-
ing these process models, such as the alpha miner, inductive miner, fussy miner and
others.[2] This thesis uses the heuristics mining algorithm, which is an algorithm that im-
proves on the simplest discovery algorithm, namely the alpha miner. It improves by utiliz-
ing frequencies to minimize the risk of noise in the event logs carrying over to the model. It
works by calculating a frequency-based metric over each dependency relation. The met-
rics are then evaluated over a dependency threshold to determine whether each relation
is a true dependency relation.[3] The frequency-based metric is calculated as follows:
a ⇒W b =
(
|a >W b| −|b >W a|
|a >W b| + |b >W a| + 1
)
(2.1)
Where a and b are activities in the event log and |a >W b| is the number of times a has
been directly followed by b in the event log. If the metric is calculated to be below the
given dependency threshold, the dependency relation is then discarded.
The final output of the heuristics miner is a heuristic net with the activities and the found
dependency relations. The heuristic net can be visualized as it is or transformed into other
model types e.g. Petri nets or BPMN models.
2.1.2
Conformance Checking
Conformance checking is used for comparing and evaluating deviations between the ob-
served behavior in an event log and a process model i.e. how well the two conform.
Comparing the extent to which the event log can be replayed in the process model is
called fitness, while measuring the extent to which the process model is represented in
the log is called precision. The two concepts are illustrated in fig. 2.1.
2
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Illustration of how the terms fitness, precision and alignment relate to the
process model and event log (inspired by [4])
If R denotes the recorded behavior and M denotes the modeled behavior. Then a fitness
measure of 1 is obtained if R ⊆M and a fitness measure of 0 if R ∪M = ∅. Likewise, for
precision, a precision measure of 1 is reached if M ⊆R and a precision measure of 0 if
R ∪M = ∅.
In general, there are two techniques for conformance checking, namely token-based re-
play and alignments. Token-based replay, checks which extend all traces from an event
log can be replayed in the model without having any missing or remaining tokens in the
end.[4] Alignments are focusing on finding the best possible match between the event
log and process model and are more flexible in their assessment of conformance. Token-
based replay reports every time an error is detected in the control flow, while alignments
are focused on limiting the amount of reported errors, by finding the best match.
2.1.3
Process Enhancement
Process enhancement covers the technique of enhancing and improving on target models
based on observed data. The optimization potentials can for example be revealed by
process discovery or conformance checking. Process enhancement is typically part of an
iterative process, where the new models are challenged by discovery/conformance and
then enhanced, thereby ultimately improving the process models.
2.2
Bayesian Networks
Bayesian networks are a type of probabilistic graphical models, that are able to capture
probability distributions in graphs. Bayesian networks are directed acyclic graphs where
each node represents a random variable that holds a conditional probability distribution
and the edges are conditional dependencies between the variables.[5] This means, con-
structing Bayesian networks includes defining a structure and defining their correspond-
ing conditional probability tables (CPTs). Bayesian networks can for example be used for
decision-making under uncertainty (i.e. decisions without information on the outcomes)
or machine learning tasks. One advantage of Bayesian networks is the level of trans-
parency. It is a white-boxed technique with the opportunity of visualizing all probabilities
as a contrast to many other machine learning techniques that are black-boxed and hard
to grasp if the reader has no previous knowledge of the used model/technique. A disad-
vantage is the acyclic nature of Bayesian networks. It is not possible to represent loops in
the networks as this would mean that the probability distribution would not sum to 100%
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
3
==PAGE:12==
which is a general requirement. Bayesian networks can both hold discrete and continuous
variables, but this thesis only considers discrete Bayesian networks.
Figure 2.2: Example of Bayesian network (inspired by [6])
Figure 2.2 shows an example of a Bayesian network that represents the following proba-
bility distribution:
P(R, S, W) = P(R)P(S | R)P(W | R, S)
(2.2)
Where R is Rain, S is Sprinkler and W is Wet Grass.[7]
From the Bayesian network, it is possible to derive the inference through the marginal
probabilities. This makes us able to answer questions such as what is the probability of
the grass being wet, i.e. what is the marginal probability of Wet Grass (P(W)):
P(W) =
∑
R
∑
S
P(R, S, W) =
∑
R
∑
S
P(R)P(S | R)P(W | R, S)
(2.3)
Due to the nature of Bayesian networks, in many cases, this marginal probability equation
can be simplified and refactored utilizing the structure of the network. If random variables
are not dependent on the respective other variables, they can be left out of the equa-
tion. This gives Bayesian networks a computational advantage. Variable Elimination is
an inference algorithm, that utilizes these properties to estimate the marginal distributions
over the variables in the network. The example presented in fig. 2.2 then becomes the
inference presented in fig. 2.3a.
(a) No evidence provided
(b) Evidence of Wet Grass
Figure 2.3: Inference derived from network presented in fig. 2.2 with and without evi-
dence.[8]
4
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:13==
When having the inference, it is possible to query by providing various evidence. Fig-
ure 2.3b shows an example of a query where the evidence was Wet Grass = True. It is
then possible to see the updated probabilities of the remaining variables given that Wet
Grass was true.
To learn a Bayesian network one needs to determine both the structure and the parame-
ters of the network, leading to two different learnings:
Parameter learning A learning where the network structure is known and the parame-
ters are estimated through a data set.
Structure learning
A learning where the parameters of the variables in the network are
known and the structure is estimated through a data set.
This thesis will only use parameter learning, where the structural properties of the network
are known. An approach for parameter learning is the Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE). It involves finding the parameters that maximize the likelihood of observing the
given data and thereby providing the most probable solution for the observed data.
2.3
Digitalization in Manufacturing
As with many industries, manufacturing is in the midst of a digital data-driven revolution.
A global manufacturing survey from 2019 made by McKinsey & Company showed that
68% of companies have Industry 4.0 as a strategic top priority, yet only 30% manages to
capture the values of the Industry 4.0 solutions.[9]
The illustration presented in fig. 2.4 is a breakdown of the necessary steps in order to go
from an analog and unintelligent factory to a smart digitalized factory.
Figure 2.4: Illustration of factory digitalization steps developed by Emendo Consulting
Group [10]
The first step, Manual Records, is an analog environment where no data collection from
equipment is being retrieved. The second step, Reports, involves automatic data collec-
tion from the equipment resulting in reports about the production. Live data brings the
reports to life in real-time. Signals is where digital pointers communicate deviations. Ad-
vice involves providing digital suggestions for improvements. Prediction is the ability to
foresee process events before they occur. Adjustments, is the ability to automatically act
on all the knowledge automatically obtained from previous steps. The final stage, Au-
tonomous, represents the point at which production can run fully automatically, free from
human intervention, often referred to as a ”lights out” operation. In this stage, machines
are capable of operating independently even in the absence of light.
Even though it can sound simple, the transition from one digitalization step to another can
require a massive behavioral change in practice and there can be many obstacles. The
obstacles can be everything from insufficient digital resources, lack of competence, diffi-
culty in breaking habits and lack of time. Additionally, there is a big discrepancy between
modern analytical technologies and deployable/implementable solutions. The respective
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
5
==PAGE:14==
company may have hard governance-related constraints or the settings are much more
complex than what the standard solutions can accommodate. This thesis is a take on
how to climb the digital ladder in the setting of a pharmaceutical industry. More specifi-
cally, this project is focused on the two steps Advices and Predictions. This means that
the scope is a production, that has begun digitalizing, and the journey towards a smart
factory, but is not all the way there.
2.4
Case Setting
Novo Nordisk Kalundborg is the biggest insulin manufacturing site in the world covering
around 1.2 million square meters of ground. It is responsible for producing the active phar-
maceutical ingredients (API) for over 50% of the world’s insulin demand, thereby helping
over 34 million people around the globe.[11, 12] Among others, the site handles processes
in insulin manufacturing such as fermentation, recovery and purification of proteins. This
project focuses on the recovery process, where the desired materials need to be recov-
ered from the fermented biomass. The recovery process is complex, yet well-defined in
different steps in order to comply with strict regulatory and quality requirements. Certain
steps of the recovery process involve the addition of rectified alcohol (Danish: finsprit).
The alcohol is supplied by a distillation column (Danish: spritkolonne) and returned to it
for reuse of the alcohol. The distillation column in the recovery department serves as the
case study for this thesis.
The operation of the distillation column in the recovery department in Kalundborg is par-
tially automatic. This is made possible by the many sensors and transmitters placed at
the column measuring values for temperature, pressure, flow, etc. The data from all these
sensors are collected in an operations data solution called AVEVA PI System [13], which
enables the operators to view the sensor data in all parts of the distillation column in
real-time. The operations of the column are semi-automatic by the use of the distributed
control system (DCS) called SattLine.[14] Operation and shutdown logics can be defined
in SattLine as so-called phase logics. These logics are initiated and interrupted at the
appropriate times by the operators, but when running the phase logics, the distillation col-
umn operates itself. The phase logics are detailed flow diagrams with carefully chosen
parameters for initiating phase transitions and firing alarms and warnings. The distillation
column is thereby a rather digitalized production equipment. In relation to the digitaliza-
tion steps presented in fig. 2.4, the distillation column operation is placed at the Signals
step, since live data is available and the alarms and warnings produce signals for the
operations. This implies that the next steps in the digitalization process of the distillation
column would be Advices and Predictions.
6
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:15==
3
Problem
This thesis wishes to investigate an approach of utilizing process mining and probabilistic
graphical models to assist a pharmaceutical production in taking the next digitalization
steps that evolve around advice and predictions.
3.1
Related Work
A selection of the central work around these topics are highlighted below.
Process Mining in the Context of Maintenance
The article ”Application of process mining in Industrial Maintenance: An Approach for the
Analysis of Equipment Shutdown” by Borges et al. [15] had the goal of using process min-
ing for analyzing shutdowns. The study was done on automotive safety belt production,
but the event log structure was found insufficient. The cases had conflicting activities and
there was noise from incorrect entries from the operators. Thus, the study did not succeed
in the analysis of shutdowns using process mining.
The article ”Application of Process Mining Techniques to Support Maintenance-Related
Objectives” by Horn et al. [16] investigated process mining techniques for facilitating main-
tenance insights. The study takes a theoretical approach to identify the specific areas
within industrial maintenance, where process mining is applicable for knowledge extrac-
tion.
Bayesian Networks for Prediction
The dissertation ”Application of Probabilistic Graphical Models in Forecasting Crude Oil
Price” by Danish A. Alvi [17] investigates the prediction abilities of probabilistic graphical
models in forecasting oil prices. The dissertation provides a comprehensive exploration of
techniques for effectively splitting data into test and validation data sets to obtain accurate
predictions using Bayesian networks in Python. The Bayesian networks and the analysis
were performed without process mining.
Pairing Process Mining and Bayesian Networks
Using process mining as the basis for probabilistic graphical models has received limited
research attention. However, a few successful studies were identified and used for inspi-
ration in the development of this thesis, though none of these studies specifically focused
on the pharmaceutical industry.
The article ”Bayesian network construction from event log for lateness analysis in Port Lo-
gistics” by Sutrisnowati et al. [18] proposes a method for generating a Bayesian network
from process mining to explore the probability of late containers in a port logistic. The
study developed algorithms for unfolding different loop types for transforming a depen-
dency graph with loops into a directed acyclic graph. The developed Bayesian network
was validated through the use of chi-square testing and the local Markov property. This
article shares many methodological goals with this thesis, though the case setting is in a
completely different industry (container shipping while this thesis is set in pharmaceutical
production).
Additionally, the article ”An Experiment on Using Bayesian Networks for Process Mining”
by Catarina Moreira [19] researches the problem of dealing with uncertainty in processes.
Through a case study of a loan application, the study manage to prove an approach to
represent business processes automatically extracted from event logs through Bayesian
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
7
==PAGE:16==
networks. The analysis was solely based of Bayesian networks representing whether the
activity was present or not, there were not any experiments of extending the network with
additional information.
The article ”Establishment of maintenance inspection intervals: an application of process
mining techniques in manufacturing” by Ruschel et al. [20] explores the use of process
mining techniques and probabilistic models integrated with predictive models to determine
optimal maintenance inspection intervals in industrial settings. By considering process
behavior, cycle times, and related costs, the study provides a solution to minimize the time
and costs wasted while performing maintenance. This piece of work uses the obtained
Bayesian network as a stepping stone to get a prediction model of availability and cost
function for the machine. Hence, it is not used for any predictions around the activities or
the internal elements of the process itself.
A denominator of these studies is the use of external software tools like ProM [21] or
Fluxicon Disco [22] for process mining and JavaBayes [23] or SamIam [24] for proba-
bilistic graphical models. None of the encountered studies have worked with lightweight
integratable tools like Python libraries.
3.2
Problem Statement
The primary objective of this thesis is to demonstrate the potential of further digitalizing
pharmaceutical production by focusing on a case study of the distillation column. The
aim is to apply process mining and probabilistic graphical models to optimize and predict
outcomes.
Currently, the distillation column generates a high number of daily warnings, creating a
noisy operational environment. Reducing the frequency of warnings is crucial to provide
effective guidance for machine operations. Additionally, the existing advice and predictive
methods are often complex and difficult to comprehend and communicate for individuals
without a strong background in computer science.
This thesis aims to overcome these challenges by developing a solution that enhances op-
erational efficiency and offers more accessible and understandable advice and predictive
techniques for non-technical personnel. Consequently, the study is dedicated to answer-
ing the following essential research questions (RQ) in the context of a machine that is part
of a large pharmaceutical production:
RQ1. Can an event log relevant for analyzing processes in a machine be synthesized and
assembled from raw operations data and machine events?
RQ2. How can insights into machine operations be obtained by pairing maintenance records
with event data from the machine?
RQ3. Is it possible to utilize event log data from operations to predict machine breakdowns
and reveal causes/connections related to them?
By exploring the presented research questions, this thesis aims to contribute with insights
and practical solutions to drive advancements in the digitalization of pharmaceutical pro-
duction.
8
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:17==
4
Methodology
To investigate and answer the problem outlined in chapter 3, two main methodologies
were applied. The PM2 methodology and a take on the agile iterative analysis approach.
Each methodology is described below and additionally, this chapter highlights the tools
utilized for realizing the goals of the thesis.
4.1
PM2
A well-known process mining methodology is the L*, which is made for discovering a well-
structured process in a non-iterative manner. This makes the method unsuitable for most
processes in practice as they can be complex and cluttered. The PM2 methodology, is a
take on how to structure process mining projects on both structured processes and more
complicated unstructured processes by being iterative and goal-oriented.[25] It is defined
in five steps as illustrated in fig. 4.1, where each step has an input and output object
together with activities to be executed in the step.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the PM2 methodology as it appears in the article ”PM2: A Process
Mining Project Methodology” [25]
The PM2 methodology includes two types of actors, the business experts and the process
analysts, that work closely together on the project. Business experts possess knowledge
of the business aspects and domain knowledge of the processes, while process analysts
are the process mining experts performing the analyses.
Each step of the PM2 methodology is defined as follows:
1. Planning:
The inputs of this step are actual business processes and the output are research
questions to be answered in the analysis and the information systems to facilitate
the analysis. This step involves selecting the business processes to analyze and
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
9
==PAGE:18==
the project team (business experts and process analysts included) and defining re-
search questions.
2. Extraction:
The inputs are the research questions and information systems defined in the previ-
ous step, and the output is the event data (and possibly process models). This step
involves deciding on the event data to be extracted and extracting it.
3. Data Processing:
The inputs are the event data and the output is event logs. The step involves pro-
cessing the event data to transform it into relevant event logs. This can for example
involve aggregation, filtering or enriching the event data.
4. Mining & Analysis:
The inputs are event logs and the output is analytical findings to answer the research
questions defined in step 1. This step is where the process mining analysis tech-
niques are applied such as discovery, conformance or enhancement of processes.
5. Evaluation:
The inputs are the analytical findings from step 4 and the output is new research
questions or a take on process improvement. This step involves interpreting the
results from the analysis and discussing/validating them.
6. Process Improvement & Support:
The inputs are improvement ideas and the output is concrete actions to modify the
processes. The step involves the implementation of the improvements or supporting
the operations of the processes by providing predictions and insights.
PM2 was the main methodology followed in the development of this thesis and it was kept
in mind from the beginning until the end of the project. The author of this thesis acted as
the process analyst, while selected contacts at Novo Nordisk Recovery filled the roles as
business experts.
4.2
Iterative Development
Throughout the development of this thesis, an iterative approach inspired by agile devel-
opment principles was followed. The goal was to execute the research in sprints, allowing
for continuous availability of results. The project consisted of two major sprints, leading
to two distinct analyses, each comprised of several smaller sprints.
In the early stages of the project, a project plan was established including a time plan
that was considered every week at the supervisor meetings. The time plan was updated
as the project advanced to include deadlines and action plans for example around data
retrieval, system access establishments and software/tool installation. This approach en-
sured continuous progress through the different challenges.
4.3
Tools
Like many pharmaceutical companies, Novo Nordisk pays a high value in protecting their
data in order to maintain their intellectual property and competitive advantage. The data
used for the development of this thesis is strictly confidential and is classified as Tier 1.
Tier 1 means that the data can not leave Novo Nordisk’s servers so all analysis of the data
would need to be performed on a virtual machine. Installing new software on the virtual
machine is a very cumbersome task and it involves several administrative permissions
and approvals. This put strict bounds on which tools that were realistic to work with in the
10
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:19==
case setting of this thesis. The virtual machine already had Python, so this was chosen as
the implementation language. After careful assessment with the IT department, the three
Python packages listed below were installed in a Python environment (running Python
3.9.14) and chosen as the tools to realize the goals of this thesis.
pm4py
is an open sourced Python package for process mining [26]. It supports the en-
tire stack of process mining: discovery, conformance checking and enhance-
ment. The documentation is limited, but due to the package’s open-sourced
nature, many answers can be found in the source code. Pm4py supports var-
ious discovery algorithms (alpha miner, inductive miner, heuristic miner, etc.),
conformance checking techniques (token-based replay and alignments) and
extensive filtering options. This thesis utilizes version 2.6.1.
graphviz is an open-sourced Python package for visualization of graphs and it is used
for the visualization tools in pm4py [27]. Graphviz is well-documented and it is
easy to manipulate the graphs as desired. This thesis utilizes version 2.47.1.
pgmpy
is a Python library for probabilistic graphical models [28]. Pgmpy supports var-
ious parameter learning methods (Maximum Likelihood Estimator, Bayesian
Estimator, etc.) and various inference algorithms (Variable Elimination, Belief
Propagation, etc.). It is well-documented with detailed examples and tutorial
notebooks. This thesis utilizes version 0.1.21.
Furthermore, the scipy package was used for statistical testing, which was already in-
stalled on the virtual machine (version 1.9.1). Additionally, standard Python libraries, such
as numpy, pandas, statistics and random were used.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
11
==PAGE:20==
5
Solution
This thesis was developed using real event data coming from a distillation column in the
recovery process of insulin production. The event data is given with a timestamp and
a string containing all information on the event. The string can be decomposed into the
following attributes in the respective order:
Status
A status number of the event.
ID
An identifier first initiated with the ID of the machine group followed by the
ID of the unit the event is attached to.
Description
Short string describing the event that occurred.
Status_string A string specifying the status of the event. If the event is referring to a
value change, Status_string will be the updated value.
Severity
A value between 0-40 indicating how critical the event is. The lower the
number is, the more severe.
Class
a number that indicates the event grouping to which the event belongs.
The event data from the distillation column consists of several different event types. Specif-
ically, the Class and Severity attributes can be used to differentiate between the different
groupings of events. Selected groupings and their corresponding identifiers are specified
in table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Overview of event types and their definition
Type
Severity
Class
Require Acknowledgement
Process alarm
0
1
Yes
Warning
1-5
1
Yes
System alarm
0-3
2
Yes
Operator message (acknowledgement)
15
6
Yes
Operator message (info)
16
6
Only some do
Phase change
20
11
No
Other
-
-
Does not appear in Operators user interface
As mentioned in section 2.4, the distillation column’s current digitalization level corre-
sponds to the Signals stage. All events that need acknowledgment correspond to a signal
from the machine. For the distillation column specifically, there is a high load of signals
and for it to be realistic to advance to the Advices stage, an analysis of how to clean up
some of the excessive alarms and warnings has been made. By reducing the informa-
tion load from the signals, there is room for advice and predictions. These stages have
been realized by investigating the phase change data produced by the phase logic. The
sections below highlight the solutions developed to address the analyses.
5.1
Alarms and Warnings
Alarms and warnings are events classified with high severity, which in the system is indi-
cated by a low number (severity 0-5). Alarms and warnings can have four different Sta-
tus_strings in the event data: On, Off, Kvitteret and Auto blok. All alarms and warnings
follow a strict logic, which is informally described in the points below:
12
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:21==
• Alarms and warnings can be triggered on sensors and sensors are identified by a
sensor ID.
• An alarm/warning activates when specified alarm/warning conditions are fulfilled and
an event with the sensor ID and status ’On’ will be logged. Examples of alarm/warn-
ing conditions can be sensor measurement value ranges.
• When the particular alarm/warning condition is no longer fulfilled, an event with the
sensor ID and status ’Off’ will be logged.
• All alarms and warnings need to be acknowledged by an operator. This can be
done regardless of the alarm/warning being On or Off. When the alarm/warning is
acknowledged, an event with the sensor ID and status ’Kvitteret’ will be logged.
• Acknowledgements are attached to a sensor ID, and an acknowledgment includes
all alarms/warnings activated for the sensor since the last acknowledgment.
• If an alarm/warning has gone ’On’ three times without being acknowledged, it will
go into a blocking state, which is recorded as ’Auto blok’. When in this state, the
alarm/warning can no longer go ’On’ or ’Off’ until it has been acknowledged.
The status of the alarms and warnings are thereby strictly bounded and has been encap-
sulated in the state machine presented in fig. 5.1, where awCond is a variable that holds
the alarm/warning condition, ack indicates if the warning/alarm has been acknowledged,
active indicates whether the warning/alarm is currently on and k is a counter for how many
times the warning/alarm has turned on.
Figure 5.1: State machine for describing the states of alarms/warnings
In the state machine, two types of arrows are present (dark green and red) to differentiate
between the transitions that are automatically determined by boolean conditions and the
transitions that happen by operator acknowledgments. The four possible states are On,
Off, Auto blok and Kvitteret, which are in compliance with how they appear in the data as
Status_strings and Kvitteret refers to the acknowledgment.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
13
==PAGE:22==
From the state machine and informal explanations, all successful/legal variations of traces
for a warning/alarm life cycle can be deduced. These are listed below:
1. On, Off, Kvitteret
2. On, Kvitteret, Off
3. On, Off, On, Off, Kvitteret
4. On, Off, On, Kvitteret, Off
5. On, Off, On, Off, On, Auto blok, Kvitteret
6. On, Off, On, Off, On, Off, Kvitteret (special)
The first five are obvious valid trace variations, while the sixth variation (marked with spe-
cial) is an exception to the state machine presented in fig. 5.1. Auto blok does not occur
in the same second as the third recorded On, it happens after a short delay. If the opera-
tors happen to acknowledge the alarm/warning within this delay, the Auto blok does not
fire, hence the 6th legal variation. This list of legal variations can be used for uniquely
identifying each alarm/warning. In the data set, the ID of an alarm/warning is the ID of the
sensor where it was triggered. Since only one alarm/warning can trigger at each sensor
at a time, the patterns can be used for identifying each alarm/warning life cycle (from the
warning/alarm turning On for the first time until it has been acknowledged). The code pre-
sented below in algorithm 1, describes how an ID can be assigned to each alarm/warning
life cycle by creating a new column containing the original ID and an incremental number
for every new pattern initiation. The algorithm utilizes the fact that every successful pat-
tern starts with the status On and ends with (Off, Kvitteret), (Kvitteret, Off) or (Auto blok,
Kvitteret).
Algorithm 1: Assign Alarm/Warning ID
Input
:df
Output :df
1 endings ←{[’Off’, ’Kvitteret’], [’Kvitteret’, ’Off’], [’Auto blok’, ’Kvitteret’]};
2 df[’aw_id’] ←NaN;
3 foreach group in df.groupby(’ID’) do
4
id_count ←0;
5
foreach index in group do
6
start_idx ←find_idx_of_next_On_occurence(group[index :]);
7
end_idx ←find_idx_of_next_ending_occurence(group[start_idx :], endings);
8
if end_idx ̸= None then
9
group[start_idx:end_idx].aw_id ←ID + id_count;
10
id_count ←id_count + 1;
11
skip iteration to end_idx;
12 return df;
The implementation of algorithm 1 can be seen in the function _assign_aw_id of ap-
pendix C.
Now that it is possible to uniquely identify each alarm/warning, it is obvious to use these
IDs as case IDs for process mining. The expected process model would then look like
the Petri net presented in fig. 5.2a. This Petri net is unable to capture all rules of the state
machine presented in fig. 5.1. For example, it is unable to enforce the rules concerning
how many times On can occur before an Auto blok or the fact that Kvitteret needs to
happen in all cases. Thereby it was natural to unfold the Petri net for the warning/alarm
14
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:23==
life cycle and the result is presented in fig. 5.2b. This Petri net is on the other hand able
to enforce and capture all rules from the state machine by annotating the activities to
differentiate between them.
(a) Folded
(b) Unfolded
Figure 5.2: Illustration of the two expected Petri nets for alarms/warnings
In order to unfold the warnings and alarms in the event data, algorithm 2 have been devel-
oped. It is an algorithm for keeping track of the warning/alarm’s life cycle in compliance
with the unfolded Petri net in fig. 5.2b. A new column is added called dec_Status_string
that holds the decorated Status_strings. This column can then be used as the activity
reference for process mining of unfolded warnings and alarms. The implementation of
algorithm 2 can be seen in the function _decorate_status_string of appendix C.
5.1.1
Zones
Warnings and alarms are fired on sensors e.g. flow transmitters or temperature trans-
mitters. Maintenance orders are placed on components e.g. a valve. The maintenance
orders are placed manually in the enterprise resource planning system SAP by the repair-
ers when the components are being maintained. This means that there is an unrecorded
time gap between the events occurring when the maintenance was ongoing and the main-
tenance order, and thereby no temporal linkage between the PI data and the maintenance
order. So there is no direct connection between maintenance orders and warnings/alarms.
A solution to this problem was to relate the two via the physical placement of the sensor/-
component. Each sensor and component of the distillation column has an ID. In this ID a
letter is present relating it to a physical area in the column which is for the rest of this thesis
referred to as zones. The zone is derived from the ID automatically using the following
regex patterns:
Regex pattern for alarms/warnings on sensors: {pi_ID}_i?([A-Z]|[A-Z]V\d{2})_
Alarms/warnings have an ID beginning with the ID of the machine group (i.e. the PI tag),
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
15
==PAGE:24==
Algorithm 2: Decorate status_string for unfolding of alarms/warnings
Input
:df
Output :df
1 df[’dec_Status_string’] ←NaN;
2 foreach group in df.groupby(’aw_id’) do
3
on_count ←0;
4
off_count ←0;
5
foreach index in group do
6
switch group[index, ’Status_string’] do
7
case ’On’ do
8
on_count ←on_count + 1;
9
group[index, ’dec_Status_string’] ←’On’ + on_count;
10
case ’Off’ do
11
if last recorded dec_Status_string is ’KvitteretOffMissing’ then
12
group[index, ’dec_Status_string’] ←’OffToFinal’;
13
on_count ←0;
14
off_count ←0;
15
else
16
off_count ←off_count + 1;
17
group[index, ’dec_Status_string’] ←’Off’ + off_count;
18
case ’Kvitteret’ do
19
if last recorded dec_Status_string is ’Auto blok’ or on_count ≤
off_count then
20
group[index, ’dec_Status_string’] ←’KvitteretToFinal’;
21
on_count ←0;
22
off_count ←0;
23
else
24
group[index, ’dec_Status_string’] ←’KvitteretOffMissing’;
25
otherwise do
26
group[index, ’dec_Status_string’] ←’Auto blok’;
27 return df;
then comes the letter of the zones (potentially prefixed with ”i”), sensor type and lastly
information on the alarm/warning type. Each element is separated by an underscore.
Regex pattern for SAP maintenance orders: {pi_ID}([A-Z])
SAP maintenance orders have an ID beginning with the ID of the machine group (i.e. the
PI tag), then comes the letter of the zones and lastly the ID of the component.
In practice, this means zones can be assigned as a column in the event data frame derived
from the ID column and the respective regex_pattern using the following code snippet:
1
df['Zone'] = df['ID'].str.extract(fr'{regex_pattern}', expand=False).str[0]
Listing 5.1: Assign zones from regex pattern
Linking the physical placement of the maintenance orders and the event data enables the
analysis of warnings/alarms coming from zones where specific maintenance has taken
place.
16
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:25==
5.2
Phase Logic
As mentioned in section 2.4, the operation of the distillation column is semi-automatic and
operated through the use of phase logics in SattLine. For the distillation column, there
exists three phase logics: distillation, empty column and CIP (Cleaning-In-Place). The
distillation phase logic is the logic for the actual operation of the column, meaning where
alcohol is being distilled and fed into the production (or storage tank). This thesis investi-
gates the distillation phase logic. The logic can only be accessed from the control room
of the Recovery department, but it is documented in a Functional Design Specification
(FDS). The FDS includes a flow diagram that specifies each phase and their transitions.
An illustration of this flow diagram can be seen in fig. 5.3a. The phase logic is a rather
serialized process with one event leading to the next. The phase names are anonymized
but represent the activities leading to Operation, which is the activity where the distillation
is running. This activity needs to be manually shut down when the timing is right and
the column will proceed to an emptying and cleaning process. The right time for Manual
Shutdown is determined on sight by the operators when they determine that there is a
high build-up of materials or the operation is starting to run unevenly and there is a need
for rinsing. This is the ideal operation of the column, but starting from activity E, there are
edges leading to Automatic Shutdown. Automatic Shutdown happens if certain criteria
for the distillation column are not met, which causes the machine to shut off immediately.
Automatic Shutdown is thereby an unwanted event since it is not guaranteed it occurs at
an ideal time and operators must accommodate the shutdown and restart the process,
causing potential disruption and inefficiency. Last but not least, the documented process
shows two loops in the system. These are the edges going from Operation to activity D
and from Operation to activity J.
In fig. 5.3b the flow diagram has been transformed into a Petri net using the naming of
events from the event data. This enables conformance checking between the Distillation
phase logic data and the expected behavior from the FDS. The only differences between
the two figures is that activity E is not logged, and is therefore not present in the Petri net,
and the STOP activity is included. STOP is a manual stop of the process, that is not to
be confused with Manual Shutdown as it is not the intended ending of the process.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Flow diagram
(b) Petri net
Figure 5.3: Illustrations describing expected behavior for the Distillation phase logic
18
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:27==
Only one phase logic can be played at a time, but the event data does not hold a unique
ID to identify each phase logic from one another. This means, that similar to how it was
done for warnings and alarms, the life cycle pattern of the process is used for uniquely
identifying each phase logic life cycle. The activity INIT is used for every initiation of a
phase logic, but the combination (INIT, A) is unique for the distillation phase logic and can
be used to identify the start. The three activities Manual Shutdown, Automatic Shutdown
and STOP can then be used to identify the ending. This approach is utilized in the devel-
opment of the algorithm for identifying phase logic cycles. The algorithm is presented in
algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: Assign distillation phase logic id
Input
:df
Output :df
1 end_activities ←[’Manual Shutdown’, ’Automatic Shutdown’, ’STOP’];
2 df[’destillation_phaselogic_id’] ←NaN;
3 phase_id_count ←0;
4 active ←False;
5 foreach i in range(length(df)-1) do
6
current_phase ←df[i].Description;
7
next_phase ←df[i+1].Description;
8
if current_phase is ’INIT’ and next_phase is ’A’ then
9
active ←True;
10
if active then
11
df[i,’destillation_phaselogic_id’] ←phase_id_count;
12
if current_phase is in end_activities or next_phase is ’INIT’ then
13
active ←False;
14
phase_id_count ←phase_id_count + 1;
15 return df;
The implementation of algorithm 3 can be seen in the function _assign_destillation_id of
appendix D.
5.3
Event Log Retrieval
For retrieving relevant event logs, the classes illustrated in fig. 5.4 have been imple-
mented.
The Eventdata class is responsible for holding all event data for a specific machine group
ID (PItag) in a specified time frame (start_time to end_time). The event data is held in the
events_df attribute as a classic Pandas DataFrame.[29] The Warnings and Phases are
two classes that extend the Eventdata class. They have a DataFrame as their attribute
(warnings_df and phase_df) which is a filtered version of the events_df that only includes
warnings/phase-related events. Relevant columns are added to the warnings_df and
phase_df using the private methods of the class in order to obtain information to be used
in the analyses, for example assigning ID columns to be later used as case IDs. get-
methods are specified in the two classes for obtaining event logs from the classes with a
format ready to be used for process mining in pm4py.
The implementation of the three classes can be found in Appendix B, Appendix C and
Appendix D.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.4: Implemented classes for extracting relevant event data represented as UML
class diagram. Private functions are prefixed with an underscore as a naming convention
to mark that the functions should not be accessed outside the class.
5.4
Process Mining Implemented
Having specified the solution to retrieve the relevant event logs for the analyses, it is pos-
sible to define how to concretely perform process mining on the event logs using pm4py.
All process models discovered in this thesis are obtained using heuristic mining. The code
snippets presented in listing 5.2 show how heuristic nets and Petri nets can be retrieved
and visualized annotated with frequency-based metrics.
1
import pm4py
2
3
# Heuristic net
4
heu_net = pm4py.discover_heuristics_net(log, dependency_threshold)
5
pm4py.view_heuristics_net(heu_net)
6
7
# Petri net
8
net, im, fm = pm4py.discover_petri_net_heuristics(log, dependency_threshold)
9
pm4py.view_petri_net(net, im, fm)
Listing 5.2: Discovering and viewing process models annotated with frequencies using
heuristic mining
20
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:29==
In the code, log is the event log and dependency_threshold is a number between 0 and
1 indicating the desired dependency threshold for the heuristic mining. For confidential-
ity purposes, all labels on the discovered process models presented in this thesis are
normalized over the total number of cases.
For discovering Petri nets with performance annotations the code presented in listing 5.3
was used.
1
import pm4py
2
from pm4py.visualization.petri_net import visualizer as pn_visualizer
3
4
# Performance Petri net
5
net, initial_marking , final_marking = pm4py.discover_petri_net_heuristics(log,
dependency_threshold)
6
gviz = pn_visualizer.apply(net, initial_marking , final_marking , variant=
pn_visualizer.Variants.PERFORMANCE , log=log)
7
pn_visualizer.view(gviz)
Listing 5.3: Discovering and viewing process models annotated with performance metrics
using heuristic mining
For confidentiality purposes, all labels on the discovered performance Petri nets presented
in this thesis are normalized over the average total case duration. So if an arc in a perfor-
mance Petri net is labeled 10 minutes and the average case duration is 40 minutes, the
label of the respective arc will be translated to 25%.
For conformance checking, the fitness analysis was performed using alignments. The
code for such a conformance check is presented in listing 5.4.
1
import pm4py
2
3
pm4py.fitness_alignments(log, exp_net , exp_initial_marking , exp_final_marking)
Listing 5.4: Conformance checking fitness using alignments
Here, exp_net, exp_initial_marking and exp_final_marking make up the expected
Petri net.
For creating expected Petri nets, the pm4py PetriNet object can be used. An example of
the Petri net creation can be seen in listing 5.5.
1
import pm4py
2
from pm4py.objects.petri_net.obj import PetriNet , Marking
3
from pm4py.objects.petri_net.utils import petri_utils
4
5
pn = PetriNet("Petri net")
6
7
p = PetriNet.Place("place")
8
pn.places.add(p)
9
10
t = PetriNet.Transition("transition", "transition")
11
pn.transitions.add(t)
12
13
petri_utils.add_arc_from_to(p, t, pn)
14
15
pn_initial_marking = Marking()
16
source = PetriNet.Place("source")
17
pn.places.add(source)
18
pn_initial_marking[source] = 1
19
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
21
==PAGE:30==
20
pn_final_marking = Marking()
21
sink = PetriNet.Place("sink")
22
pn.places.add(sink)
23
pn_final_marking[sink] = 1
24
25
pm4py.view_petri_net(pn, pn_initial_marking , pn_final_marking)
Listing 5.5: Example for creation of expected Petri nets
With the basic operations presented in listing 5.5, it is possible to create Petri net objects
that represent the expected Petri nets introduced in fig. 5.2 and fig. 5.3b.
5.5
T-testing
T-testing was used in this thesis for comparing the average duration of warnings between
groups.
A two sample t-test is a statistical test to determine whether two population means are
equal. The null hypothesis looks as follows:
H0 : µ1 = µ2
(5.1)
Where µ1 and µ2 are the means of the two populations.
The approach for two-sample t-testing was developed inspired by GeeksForGeeks’ article
”How to Conduct a Two Sample T-Test in Python”.[30] First, the variance ratio is calculated.
If the ratio falls below the customary threshold of 4, it signifies equal variance, thereby en-
abling the execution of a standard independent two-sample test that assumes equivalent
population variances. However, if the ratio exceeds 4, a Welch’s t-test is executed, which
does not assume equal population variances. The results of the test are printed with a
statement of whether the hypothesis could be rejected under the significance level of 0.05.
The solution is presented in listing 5.6.
1
import numpy as np
2
import scipy.stats as stats
3
4
def two_sample_ttest(g1, g2):
5
var_g1 = np.var(g1)
6
var_g2 = np.var(g2)
7
var_ratio = max(var_g1,var_g2) / min(var_g1 ,var_g2)
8
9
print("Equal population variance (ratio < 4)?", var_ratio <4)
10
print("Degrees of freedom:", len(g1)+len(g2)-2)
11
12
test_res = stats.ttest_ind(a=g1, b=g2, equal_var=(var_ratio <4))
13
14
print(test_res)
15
if (test_res.pvalue < 0.05):
16
print(f'We REJECT the null hypothesis')
17
else:
18
print(f'We CAN NOT REJECT the null hypothesis')
Listing 5.6: Two sample t-testing
One way ANOVA is a statistical test used for determining whether there is a significant
difference in the means across three or more groups. A post hoc analysis such as Tukey’s
range test can determine specifically which groups have significantly different means.
Tukey’s range test works on three assumptions.[31]
22
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:31==
1. The observations being tested are independent within and among the groups.
2. The groups in the test are normally distributed.
3. There is equal within-group variance across the groups in the test (homogeneity of
variance).
Listing 5.7 shows the implementation of one way ANOVA and Tukey’s range test, where
the results are printed. The input for the code is list_of_groups, which is a list containing
multiple sublists representing different groups. Each group consists of values that are
being examined to determine the significance of their respective means.
1
from scipy.stats import f_oneway , ttest_ind , t, norm
2
import numpy as np
3
import pandas as pd
4
5
def one_way_ANOVA_and_Tukeys_post_hoc(list_of_groups):
6
# Welch ANOVA F-statistic and p-value
7
f, p = f_oneway(*list_of_groups)
8
9
# Calculate the degrees of freedom for the ANOVA test
10
n_groups = len(durations_by_zone)
11
n_total = len(df)
12
df_between = n_groups - 1
13
df_within = n_total - n_groups
14
df_error = df_within - df_between
15
16
# Calculate the critical value for Tukey's HSD method
17
q = norm.ppf(1 - 0.05 / (2 * n_groups * (n_groups - 1)) ** 0.5)
18
19
# Pairwise comparisons using Tukey's HSD method
20
means = list_of_groups.mean()
21
se = list_of_groups.std(ddof=1) / np.sqrt(list_of_groups.count())
22
combs = [(a, b) for i, a in enumerate(means.index) for b in means.index[i
+1:]]
23
combs_t = [abs(means.loc[a] - means.loc[b]) / (se.loc[a] ** 2 /
list_of_groups.count()[a] + se.loc[b] ** 2 / list_of_groups.count()[b
]) ** 0.5 for a, b in combs]
24
p_values = [t.sf(np.abs(t_stat), df_error) * 2 for t_stat in combs_t]
25
reject = [p_value < 0.05 for p_value in p_values]
26
27
# Print results
28
print("Welch ANOVA test:")
29
print(f"F = {f:.2f}, p = {p}")
30
print("\nTukey HSD pairwise comparisons:")
31
32
result_df = pd.DataFrame()
33
for i, (a, b) in enumerate(combs):
34
if reject[i]:
35
result_df.loc[a, b] = "REJECTED"
36
result_df.loc[b, a] = "REJECTED"
37
else:
38
result_df.loc[a, b] = "NOT REJECTED"
39
result_df.loc[b, a] = "NOT REJECTED"
40
print(result_df)
Listing 5.7: One way ANOVA and Tukey’s range test
The code presented in listing 5.7 prints the results from the one way ANOVA and Tukey’s
range test with the groups as columns and rows and REJECTED or NOT REJECTED in
the cells to indicate the pairwise comparison results.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
23
==PAGE:32==
5.6
Bayesian Networks From Process Mining
To answer research questions related to predictions and breakdowns, this thesis aims to
pair Bayesian networks with process mining. This is done by letting the process model
discoveries from the process mining become the structural basis for the Bayesian network.
The methodology developed for obtaining discrete Bayesian networks from event logs
through the use of process mining is defined in steps:
1. Obtain the structure of the process model through heuristic mining
2. Apply heuristic for loop elimination
3. Discretize event log
4. Parameter learning from discrete data using Maximum Likelihood Estimation
5. Obtain inference through Variable Elimination (eliminating non-observed variables)
6. Visualize network and the resulting inference
The approach is inspired by the previous research highlighted in section 3.1. The following
subsections specify the developed approach for each of the six steps.
5.6.1
Obtain Process Model Structure
To obtain the structure of the process model, pm4py’s heuristic miner with a dependency
threshold of 0.5 was used. The dependencies in the process model can then be derived
from the resulting heuristic net. The code is presented in listing 5.8.
1
heu_net = pm4py.discover_heuristics_net(log, dependency_threshold = 0.5)
Listing 5.8: Discovering heuristic net from log using pm4py
Here, heu_net holds the heuristic net to be used for the rest of the steps.
5.6.2
Loop Elimination
Bayesian networks are represented in directed acyclic graphs, but a process model is
allowed to have cycles. Thus a heuristic need to be applied to the process models to
eliminate potential cycles before it can be used for the graphical structure of the Bayesian
networks. Examples of three of such heuristics are illustrated in fig. 5.5. The figure depicts
a heuristic net (fig. 5.5a) and demonstrates how its loops can be eliminated by applying
various heuristics.
(a) Heuristic net
(b) Unfolding
(c) Grouping
(d) Frequency
Figure 5.5: Example of three loop elimination heuristics being applied on a heuristic net
24
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:33==
The first loop-eliminating heuristic applied is called Unfolding and is demonstrated in
fig. 5.5b. This heuristic unfolds the loop by replicating the activities that are revisited.
This heuristic maintains the detail of the control flow but should be used carefully as the
graph size increases proportionally to the loop frequency.
The second loop-eliminating heuristic applied is called Grouping and is demonstrated in
fig. 5.5c. Here, all activities that are included in a cycle are grouped. This heuristic is
appropriate for small and highly repetitive cycles, but if many activities are included in the
cycle, the resulting graph will lack detail.
The last loop-eliminating heuristic applied is called Frequency and is demonstrated in
fig. 5.5d. This heuristic utilizes the frequency of the edges and eliminates the least visited
edge in the loop and thereby the least probable. This heuristic is appropriate for graphs
with a high difference in the edge frequencies in the cycle, but where Unfolding is unde-
sired. This is the heuristic applied in this thesis for obtaining the graphical structure of the
Bayesian networks.
5.6.3
Discretizing Data
To perform parameter learning for a discrete Bayesian network, the input data would need
to be discretized. In this solution, two discretizing approaches are considered, resulting
in two different Bayesian networks. One is referred to as a binary Bayesian network, the
other as a duration Bayesian network.
The binary encoding is very simple. It transforms each case in the event log into a row
and each activity into a column. The cell values are 1 if the activities happened in the case
or 0 if they did not. The binary encoding loses information about activities occurring more
than once, but since loops are not allowed in Bayesian networks, this loss is accepted.
The code for performing the binary encoding is presented in listing 5.9.
1
def encode_binary(log):
2
# Make frequency table
3
crosstabbed = pd.crosstab(log['destillation_phaselogic_id'], log['
Description'])
4
encoded_df = crosstabbed.reset_index(drop=True)
5
# Make all frequencies above 1 into 1, such that the result is binary
6
encoded_df[encoded_df > 1] = 1
7
8
return encoded_df
Listing 5.9: The implemented binary encoding
The duration encoding is based on categorizing the activities on duration. Each event in
the phase log marks the beginning of an activity. The duration of the phase can then be
calculated by the time difference until the next activity occurs for the case. This gives a
duration for all activities except the end activities, where the duration will be NaN. This
duration column is used for categorizing the events into the following categories:
Low
Activity duration is below the 30th quantile of all durations for this partic-
ular activity.
Normal
Activity duration is between (or equal to) the 30th and 70th quantile of all
durations for this particular activity.
High
Activity duration is above the 70th quantile of all durations for this partic-
ular activity.
Not Occurring Activity did not occur for the particular case.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
25
==PAGE:34==
If the event is an end activity, the category will simply be Occurred or Not Occurring
(since end events do not have duration).
The duration encoding transforms each case in the event log into a row and each activity
into a column and each cell is then one of the five categories mentioned (Low, Normal,
High, Occurred, Not Occurring). If a loop is present for the case, the represented category
is determined by the first time the activity is visited. Again, this is an acceptable loss of
information due to the acyclic nature of Bayesian networks. The code for performing the
duration encoding is presented in listing 5.10.
1
def encode_duration_categories(log, all_activities):
2
lower_thresholds = log.groupby('Description')['Duration'].quantile(0.3)
3
upper_thresholds = log.groupby('Description')['Duration'].quantile(0.7)
4
5
log['Duration_category'] = np.NaN
6
for index, row in log.iterrows():
7
if np.isnan(row['Duration']):
8
category = 'Occurred'
9
else:
10
lower_threshold = lower_thresholds[row['Description']]
11
upper_threshold = upper_thresholds[row['Description']]
12
category = 'Low' if row['Duration'] < lower_threshold else 'High'
if row['Duration'] > upper_threshold else 'Normal'
13
log.at[index, 'Duration_category'] = category
14
15
# Perform pivot operation (aggfunc='first', ensures that first loop is the
one that counts)
16
pivot_log = log.pivot_table(index='destillation_phaselogic_id', columns='
Description', values='Duration_category', aggfunc={'Duration_category'
:'first'})
17
18
# Reset index and ensure all cells that do not have a duration_category
assigned are filled with "Not Occuring"
19
encoded_df = pivot_log.fillna('Not Occurring').reindex(columns=
all_activities , fill_value='Not Occurring').reset_index(drop=True)
20
21
return encoded_df , lower_thresholds , upper_thresholds
Listing 5.10: The implemented duration encoding
5.6.4
Parameter Learning
To learn the parameters of the Bayesian network, the Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE) is utilized. MLE is fast, not so computationally intensive and works well when
having medium or large data set sizes. Therefore MLE was chosen over other parameter
learning estimators like the Bayesian Estimator. The approach to obtain the Bayesian
network using pgmpy is presented in listing 5.11.
1
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
2
from pgmpy.estimators import MaximumLikelihoodEstimator
3
4
model = BayesianNetwork(dependencies)
5
model.fit(encoded_df , estimator = MaximumLikelihoodEstimator)
Listing 5.11: Learning Bayesian network parameters with MLE
Here, dependencies are the structure of the network obtained from applying the heuristics
defined in step 2 to the heuristic net discovered in step 1. encoded_df is the discretized
data obtained from step 3. The variable model then holds the Bayesian network.
26
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:35==
5.6.5
Obtain Inference
To get the inference of the Bayesian network, the Variable Elimination algorithm is used.
It is a popular choice for inference calculation due to its efficiency by the ability to reuse
intermediate results and exploit the variable order. The approach to obtain the inference
using pgmpy is presented in listing 5.12.
1
from pgmpy.inference import VariableElimination
2
3
infer = VariableElimination(model)
Listing 5.12: Obatining inference from Bayesian network through Variable Elimination
Here, model is the Bayesian network and infer is the resulting inference.
5.6.6
Visualize Network
Pgmpy does not have any implementation for visualizing Bayesian networks. But pm4py
has great visualization tools for heuristic nets. Since the structure of the Bayesian net-
work originally comes from a heuristic net, it is possible to manipulate the heuristic net
visualization to contain inference information. When using pm4py’s heuristic net visual-
ization tools it is possible to get the graph from a heuristic net as a DOT file, where it is
possible to manipulate the graph colors, labels, etc. The inference obtained in step 5 can
be queried with evidence (if any) using the line infer.query([node_name], evidence).
The developed visualization tool for Bayesian networks can be seen below in listing 5.13.
1
import graphviz
2
from pm4py.visualization.heuristics_net import visualizer as hn_visualizer
3
4
# convert the heuristic net to a DOT file
5
graph = hn_visualizer.get_graph(heu_net)
6
7
# Remove edges that are not part of the inference model
8
for source , destination in eliminated_edges:
9
graph.del_edge(source, destination)
10
11
# modify the label names of the nodes to contain inference information
12
for node in graph.get_nodes():
13
label = node.get_label()
14
node_name = re.sub('\s*\(\d+\)$', '', label)
15
if node_name in evidence:
16
label = f'{node_name} \n {evidence[node_name]}: 100%'
17
node.set_fillcolor("#85A1AB")
18
else:
19
states = infer.query([node_name], evidence).state_names[node_name]
20
values = infer.query([node_name], evidence).values
21
label = node_name
22
for i in range(len(states)):
23
label = label + f' \n {states[i]}: {round(values[i]*100,4)}%'
24
node.set_fillcolor("#bfe6f5")
25
node.set_label(label)
26
27
# Remove edge labels
28
for edge in graph.get_edges():
29
edge.set('label', '')
30
31
# Visualize the resulting graph
32
dot = graphviz.Source(graph.to_string(),'')
33
dot.format = 'png'
34
dot.view()
Listing 5.13: Visualizing Bayesian network inference using pm4py’s visualization tools
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
27
==PAGE:36==
Here, heu_net is the heuristic net obtained from step 1, eliminated_edges is a dictionary
of the edges to eliminate loops defined by step 2, infer is the inference obtained from step
5 and evidence is the list of variables that are given as evidence. The resulting inference
is visualized with the evidence as grey nodes and the rest of the variables as light blue
nodes. The inference query for every variable is stated underneath each variable name
in the nodes.
5.7
Evaluating Bayesian Networks
The discovered Bayesian networks were evaluated on their ability to predict Automatic
Shutdowns with increasing evidence. The evidence is increased by following a depth-first
search through the process model imitating the control flow from the activity INIT to any
of the three end activities (Manual Shutdown, Automatic Shutdown or STOP).
Pgmpy’s Bayesian network class has a predict functionality for predicting the states of all
missing variables. The code for such prediction is presented in listing 5.14, where model
is the Bayesian network and data is a data frame where the columns we wish to predict
are removed.
1
prediction = model.predict(data)
Listing 5.14: Prediction of missing variables in Bayesian network
Furthermore, pm4py support a method to split the log randomly into test and training log
while retaining the cases as wholes. The inputs are the event log and the size of the
resulting train log given in percentage (the rest will become test log).
1
train_log , test_log = pm4py.split_train_test(log, train_percentage=0.8)
Listing 5.15: Splitting into test and train logs
These mentioned elements are the basis of the developed evaluation methodology. The
evaluation takes a cross-validation approach by splitting the data into a test and train set,
training a model on the training set and evaluating its prediction ability in the discretized
test set, where unknown activities are taken out. Which columns are known and unknown
is determined by the depth-first search. All activities reachable in the respective step serve
as the known, while the rest of the activities (variables) are unknown, with the exception
of end activities (Manual Shutdown, Automatic Shutdown or STOP), these are always
kept unknown. This is carried out for all steps in the depth-first search. The approach is
outlined below:
• Go through each step in the depth-first search incrementally
• For each step, go through 10 iterations of the following cross-validation approach
and report the average of the results:
1. Split the data into a train and test data set (cases are kept whole):
– Shutdown cases are split 60% training / 40% testing
– Rest of the log is split 80% training / 20% testing
– The splits are merged into one training log and one testing log
2. Train a Bayesian network on the training log using the approach suggested in
section 5.6
28
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:37==
3. Discretize the test log using approach described in section 5.6 such that activ-
ities are represented as columns
4. Remove end activity columns and all columns not reachable for the respective
step in the discretized test log
5. Predict the ‘Automatic Shutdown’ column in the test set using the Bayesian
network
6. Compare the predicted ‘Automatic Shutdown’ column to the original ‘Automatic
Shutdown’ test column and return the resulting confusion matrix and accuracy.
• Plot the average confusion matrix and accuracy for each step
Hereby, it is possible to determine the Bayesian network’s ability to predict Automatic
Shutdowns and use this as an evaluation of the obtained network.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
29
==PAGE:38==
6
Results
The research presented in this thesis utilized actual event data from a distillation column
employed in the insulin production recovery process. The Recovery department is capa-
ble of handling different insulin product types. So the production is organized into cam-
paigns, with each campaign dedicated to producing a specific product category. The data
utilized in this thesis corresponds to the most recently concluded campaign at the start of
this research. This gives an event data set size of 20834 events. Table 6.1 describes the
distribution of the different event types in the event data from the respective campaign.
Table 6.1: Overview of event type distribution in the 20834 events
Event Type
Part in Event data
Process alarms
0.07%
Warnings
43.88%
System alarms
0.0%
Operator messages (acknowledgment)
5.47%
Operator messages (info)
0.42%
Phase changes
33.17%
Other
16.99%
As indicated in table 6.1, the event data consisted of mainly warnings and phase change
events. The low occurrences of alarms compared to warnings are unusual for a machine
in the Recovery department. This is due to the role of the distillation column in the in-
sulin recovery process. Since it is not directly represented in the production pipeline (it
simply distills alcohol for the process), it is considered a sub-process and thereby most
alarms triggered in the machine are classified as warnings. Due to the high representa-
tion of warnings and phase changes, these event types served as the basis for the further
analysis and development of this thesis.
6.1
Warning Analysis
For the analysis of warnings, two logs have been derived from the same warning data:
folded and unfolded warning logs. Both event logs use the columns Timestamp for the
timestamps and aw_id as case ID (aw_ids derived using algorithm 1 presented in sec-
tion 5.1). The folded event log then used column Status_string as activities, while the
unfolded warning log uses dec_Status_string as activities (dec_Status_strings derived
using algorithm 2 presented in section 5.1).
When assigning aw_ids, the events that do not follow the legal warning patterns are as-
signed the ID ’NaN’ (not a number). 0.34% of the warning events did not follow the pattern
’On’,...,ending (i.e. they have the case ID ’NaN’) and will not be considered in the warnings
log. After analysis of the discarded events, the following explanations were found:
Edges of campaign
Some of this behavior can be explained by the events happening
at the edges of the campaign, meaning that either the warning
went ’On’ before the start date of the campaign or the warning
ended after the end date. Hereby the entire life cycle of the warn-
ing is not represented in the respective campaign data.
30
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:39==
Recording timings
Mistakes can occur in the system around the timings of the recorded
events. If an operator is acknowledging a warning at the same
time it goes ’On’ again, the warning pattern behavior can be-
have strangely depending on which event the system records first.
This behavior is considered and sorted for the cases where the
’On’ and ’Kvitteret’ appear at the exact same timestamp, but not
when one or more seconds separate them. Changing the order
of the events with separate timestamps could introduce errors in
correctly ordered events, so this was avoided.
Overlooked warnings Finally an explanation can be in the UI of the SattLine system
where the warnings are acknowledged. There are several ways
for the operators to view the warnings, and perhaps some are con-
sidered non-crucial warnings or overlooked. They can thereby
live at the bottom of the stack and get so old that the operators
do not feel the need to acknowledge them.
This means that only complete variants are considered in the folded and unfolded warn-
ings event logs that are considered for the rest of this analysis. So the final warning logs
consist of 9106 events, which correspond to 99.66% of the warnings data or 43.73% of the
entire event data. As expected the folded log has four different activities (On, Off, Kvitteret
and Auto blok), while the unfolded log has 11 activities (On1, Off1, ..., KvitteretToFinal, etc.
all activities are presented in fig. 5.3). The number of cases is kept confidential as they re-
veal the number of warnings that occurred in the duration of the campaign, but the number
is of course the same for the folded and unfolded log.
6.1.1
Discovery
First, a discovery on the folded warnings log was made. This was done using pm4py’s
heuristic miner producing a heuristic net which can be seen in fig. 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Heuristic net discovered on folded warnings log using heuristic mining with
dependency threshold 0.5. All labels are normalized over the total number of cases for
the sake of confidentiality.
The labels in the heuristic net in fig. 6.1 are normalized over the number of cases to ensure
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
31
==PAGE:40==
confidentiality. So the activity On occurring 140.46% times, indicates that the majority of
the warnings only turn On once before being acknowledged. 40.04% turn On more than
once as it is indicated by the transition label between On and Off. Kvitteret occurs 100.08%
times, which naturally raises suspicion. This percentage would have been expected to
be 100% since all warnings need to be acknowledged precisely once. This indicates a
few erroneous events in the warnings log, the extent of which can be examined later on
through conformance checking. Auto blok occurs for 13.51% of the warnings, which is a
percentage that ideally should be as low as possible. As explained in section 5.1, Auto
blok is a state where new warnings are being blocked/ignored from that particular ID until
the Auto blok has been acknowledged (to avoid warning-flooding).
The result from the heuristic mining can also be annotated with other parameters than
frequency, for example, the average durations between activities (in pm4py this parameter
is called performance). The result from such discovery can be seen in fig. 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Performance Petri net discovered on folded warnings log using heuristic min-
ing with dependency threshold 0.5 and the performance parameter. All labels are normal-
ized over the average case duration for the sake of confidentiality.
The labels in the Petri net in fig. 6.2 are normalized over the average case duration to
ensure confidentiality. From fig. 6.2 it can be seen that the durations between On and Off
are on average longer than the durations between Off and a new On (47.29% and 15.01%
of the average case duration). The longest time in the life cycle of a warning is spent on
acknowledging the warning (70.12%).
This analysis of the folded warning log contains general information about the warning
life cycle, but it is unable to represent the details of the different warning states. This
motivates the analysis of unfolded warnings. Figure 6.3 illustrates the resulting Heuristic
net after heuristic mining was performed on the unfolded warnings log.
32
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.3: Heuristic net discovered on unfolded warnings log using heuristic mining with
dependency threshold 0.5. All labels are normalized over the total number of cases for
the sake of confidentiality.
By unfolding the warnings, we are able to confirm the observations made for the folded
heuristic net: the majority of the warnings (63.85%+9.5%=73.35%) are acknowledged
after having turned On only once. 26.61% of the warnings turn On a second time and
13.51% a third time, the majority of which go to Auto blok. A noticeable error in the
warnings is the 0.33% reaching a fourth On. This is a result of the erroneous logging
around timing behavior that can occur, which was described at the beginning of this section
under recording timings. It occurs when a warning is acknowledged very close to the
time when it turns On and the logging order can be switched. The extent of this is later
examined through conformance checking.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
33
==PAGE:42==
The performance measures were also investigated for the unfolded warning log and the
result can be found in fig. 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Performance Petri net discovered using heuristic mining (dependency thresh-
old 0.5) and the performance parameter on unfolded warnings log. Labels normalized
over average case duration for confidentiality. Petri net is split in two to fit the page with
color codes for arc identification (see appendix A fig. A.1 for original Petri net)
If we define the duration of warnings to be the time between On and Off, then from fig. 6.4
we notice the duration of the warnings is on average longer the first time than the second
time it has turned On (13.92% versus 5.33% of the average case duration). This obser-
vation indicates that the warnings reaching the second On tend to have a briefer duration
in general, potentially explaining why they are not acknowledged after the initial On.
The pause of warnings between going On the first and second time (Off1 to On2 and Off2
to On3) is approximately the same duration on average (14.79% versus 15.43%).
The delay between the third On and Auto blok can also be seen, and it corresponds to
2.17% of the average case duration.
6.1.2
Conformance Checking
From the discovery of warnings, there were hints of unexpected behavior e.g. Kvitteret
occurred in 100.08% of the cases and On4 was seen. The extent of the erroneous be-
havior can be determined through conformance checking. As mentioned in section 2.1.2,
fitness is a measure of the extent to which the process model captures the observed be-
havior in the event log. The fitness was thereby checked between the unfolded warnings
log and the expected unfolded Petri net from fig. 5.2b. The fitness results are obtained
using alignments following the method explained in section 5.4:
• Fitness Score: 99.8%
The fitness score represents the overall conformance between the event log and the
expected process model. 99.8% indicates that the expected model captures very
close to all of the behavior.
• Percentage of Fitting Traces: 99.29%
Almost all traces in the log could be replayed in the model. 0.71% of the traces could
not.
34
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:43==
• Average Trace Fitness: 99.8%
This score refers to the fitness of the individual traces in the event log. This indicates
each trace aligns closely with the expected process model.
The obtained conformance results indicate that there is a very high conformance between
the unfolded warnings log and the expected Petri net and the erroneous behavior is minor.
6.1.3
Investigating Durations and T-testing
In order to provide concrete advice on how to limit the number of warnings coming from
the distillation column, the duration of the warnings was investigated in the context of
maintenance on the machine.
Maintenance orders are placed in the enterprise resource planning system SAP. They
are registered by human service personnel at the time for which they are performing the
maintenance. They log several information such as maintenance type, who performed
the maintenance, a description of the maintenance and the specific ID of the component
being maintained. In the SAP maintenance data, the maintenance type is an attribute
that pertains to a specific maintenance category. This attribute refers to various types
of maintenance, including both scheduled/planned maintenance types as well as reac-
tive/remedial maintenance types. Figure 6.5 showcases the distribution of the various
types over the course of the campaign in a dotted chart. The warmer the color of the dot
is, the more orders of the respective maintenance type were placed on a particular day.
Figure 6.5: Dispersion of maintenance orders in SAP data over time. Maintenance type
names are anonymized and the time scale is normalized.
It can be seen that maintenance was performed throughout the entire campaign duration
and some maintenance types are more frequent than others. The exact frequency of each
maintenance type is investigated in the bar plot presented in fig. 6.6.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.6: Maintenance orders in SAP data by type from the campaign. Maintenance
type names are anonymized.
The names of the maintenance types are anonymized, but it can be seen that 107 mainte-
nance orders were placed in SAP during the campaign. Maint1 and Maint2 are the most
frequent maintenance orders. It was identified that Maint3 and Maint5 are maintenance
types that refer to categories of critical maintenance.
If the approach for synthesizing the zones from IDs explained in section 5.1.1 is followed
for the SAP data then it is possible to see how many maintenance orders are placed
around the different zones. The bar plot in fig. 6.7 depicts the occurrences of maintenance
orders throughout the zones present in the warning data.
Figure 6.7: Dispersion of maintenance orders in zones with warnings
36
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:45==
In fig. 6.7 we see that from the zones with warnings, the ones with the highest number of
maintenance orders are zone T and J, with 15 each. The red line marks the median in
the number of maintenance orders, so this gives a split between high maintenance zones
and low maintenance zones.
High maintenance zones: T, J, V, X, K, L and B
Low maintenance zones: S, A, Z, M, C, D, G, F, E, P, H, Y, N, U, Q and R
This adds context to the zones and enables the investigation of warnings coming from high
versus low maintenance zones. The zones for warnings are also derived using the ap-
proach described in section 5.1.1, where it was possible to deduce the zones from 76.91%
of the warning events. The remaining 23.09% are primarily warnings on parameters that
are not associated with a physical placement in the machinery i.e. a zone.
This enables an investigation of whether there is a significant difference in the mean dura-
tion of the warnings from the two different zone pools. To accomplish this, the approach
outlined in section 5.5 was followed, while maintaining the null hypothesis H0 : µ1 = µ2,
where µ1 and µ2 represent the means of the two populations.
The test was run on the warnings coming from low versus high maintenance zones, where
it was possible to compare the group means for different duration filters. The results can
be seen in table 6.2, where all means are normalized over the mean of the total population.
Table 6.2: Results after performing two sample t-testing on warnings sorted in low versus
high maintenance zones. Significance level α = 0.05.
Low maint. zones
High maint. zones
p-value
H0
Avg. duration On →Off
8.49%
54.07%
6.66e-07
REJECTED
Avg. duration On →Kvitteret
95.99%
87.93%
0.541
NOT REJECTED
Avg. duration On1 →Off1
4.96%
96.41%
4.577e-10
REJECTED
Avg. duration On2 →Off2
43.86%
136.32%
0.13654
NOT REJECTED
Avg. duration On3 →KvitteretToFinal
130.09%
59.68%
0.0014
REJECTED
Avg. frequency (times turned On before ack.)
1.732
1.335
4.247e-26
REJECTED
From the two sample t-test, it was proven that there is a significantly lower warning du-
ration (On to Off) in zones of low maintenance compared to zones of high maintenance.
For the duration from the first On to Kvitteret, we can not prove a difference in the mean,
indicating that the operators acknowledge the warnings at the same pace throughout the
zones. When running the test on the unfolded durations it can be seen that On1 to Off1
is on average a significantly lower duration for low maintenance than high maintenance
zones. On2 to Off2 could not be proven significant under the given significance level. On3
to KvitteretToFinal was significantly longer for low maintenance zones than high mainte-
nance zones. And finally, the frequency, i.e. the times a warning gets to turn On before
being acknowledged, is significantly higher for low maintenance zones than high. Alto-
gether, this paints a picture that low maintenance zones have shorter warnings, so they
get to appear more frequently before being acknowledged because the acknowledgment
pace of the operators remains the same. Hence, the short-duration warnings appear to
have a low impact on the overall maintenance.
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, maintenance orders are of many types.
Some are triggered with a set frequency while others are critical and unprompted. Maint3
and Maint5 are deemed critical, so it was interesting to perform the same t-testing analysis
on the warning durations coming from zones with critical maintenance (Maint3 and Maint5)
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
37
==PAGE:46==
versus zones where no critical maintenance has been performed. The split of the zones
then looks as follows:
Zones with Maint3 and Maint5:
T, H, V, Y, N, X, L, J, B and Z
Zones without Maint3 and Maint5: Q, F, D, C, A, K, M, G, R, P, U, E and S
The two sample t-test was performed on the new zone split under the same null hypothesis
as before, namely equal mean duration. The results are presented in table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Results after performing two sample t-testing on warnings sorted in zones
where Maint3 and Maint5 occurred versus zones it did not. Significance level α = 0.05.
No Maint3+5 zones
Maint3+5 zones
p-value
H0
Avg. duration On →Off
9.05%
67.41%
8.84e-10
REJECTED
Avg. duration On →Kvitteret
98.07%
83.50%
0.251
NOT REJECTED
Avg. duration On1 →Off1
14.69%
113.62%
2.0836e-07
REJECTED
Avg. duration On2 →Off2
43.91%
174.59%
0.1247
NOT REJECTED
Avg. duration On3 →KvitteretToFinal
123.60%
54.71%
0.00084
REJECTED
Avg. frequency (times turned On before ack.)
1.637
1.317
1.413e-18
REJECTED
From table 6.3 it is clear that the exact same pattern emerges for zones with Maint3+5 as
with zones of high maintenance seen in table 6.2. The zones where critical maintenance
has been performed have significantly longer warning durations than zones without crit-
ical maintenance. The remaining durations yield the same conclusions as depicted in
table 6.2. This strengthens the indications that short-duration warnings do not have a
high impact on maintenance.
It is also possible to compare all warning duration means from all zones, to investigate
the statistically significant differences across. This can be done with a one way ANOVA
test, where the result gave a p-value of 8.42e-29 which is much lower than the typical
significance level of 0.05, so it can be concluded that there is a significant difference in
warning duration means across the zones. A post hoc analysis such as Tukey’s range
test can determine specifically which zones have significantly different means. The result
can be seen in table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Result of Tukey’s range test of the warning duration means across all zones
T
M
Q
K
J
S
R
P
U
L
N
T
NaN
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
M
REJECTED
NaN
NOT REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
Q
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
NaN
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
K
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NaN
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
J
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NaN
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
S
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NaN
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
R
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NaN
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
P
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NaN
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
U
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
NaN
REJECTED
REJECTED
L
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NaN
REJECTED
N
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
NOT REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
REJECTED
NaN
It can be seen that specifically zone T’s duration means differ significantly from all other
zones. Zone U and J are also close to showing this result, where it was not possible
to prove a significant difference in means from only one other zone. Tukey’s range test
results can provide the basis for which zones can be grouped for further analysis, but this
was not pursued in this thesis.
Now that it has been proven that there is a correlation between low-duration warnings
and low maintenance (and vice versa), this knowledge can be used to provide concrete
advice for filtering warnings. Figure 6.8 investigates the low duration warnings.
38
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.8: Histogram of the dispersion of warnings with duration below a threshold of
20x where x is a confidential time value.
From fig. 6.8 a histogram of low-duration warnings can be seen, and it was found that
39.32% of all warnings had a duration below 4x, where x is a confidential time value. There
is a delay specified in the system when creating warnings, which is the delay between a
warning condition being fulfilled and the particular warning being fired. If the warning
condition is unfulfilled in the time span of the delay, the warning is not fired. This means
that if the delay is increased with the time value 4x, then the operators would get 39.32%
fewer warnings. From the t-testing it was proven that low-duration warnings have a low
impact on critical maintenance and maintenance in general. From a maintenance point
of view, it has thereby been proven that this is a feasible action to take to clean up a
significant amount of signals coming from the distillation column which leaves room for
further advice and predictions.
6.2
Phase Analysis
In order to provide diagnostics and predictions around breakdowns of the distillation col-
umn, the phase logic data was considered.
The phase change event data makes up 33.17% of the combined event data, cf. table 6.1.
For the analysis of distillation phase logic, the distillation log is considered. The distillation
log uses the columns Timestamp for the timestamps, Description as activities and destil-
lation_phaselogic_id as case ID (destillation_phaselogic_ids derived using algorithm 2).
Finally, the distillation log is filtered to only include complete variants, meaning traces start-
ing with activities INIT followed by A and ending with either Manual Shutdown, Automatic
Shutdown or STOP. The final distillation log consists of 1008 events, meaning 12.68% of
the phase change data or 4.84% of the entire event data.
6.2.1
Discovery and Conformance
A discovery on the distillation log was made. This was done using pm4py’s heuristic miner
producing a heuristic net which can be seen in fig. 6.9.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.9: Heuristic net discovered on distillation log using heuristic mining with depen-
dency threshold 0.5. All labels are normalized over the total number of cases for the sake
of confidentiality.
Similarly to the heuristic nets from the warnings, all labels in fig. 6.9 are normalized over
the total number of cases to ensure confidentiality. From the heuristic net, we can see that
13.79% of the cases ended in an Automatic Shutdown and 77.59% of the cases ended in
Manual Shutdown. Some activities are not so frequent in the data e.g. activities F, H and
I, which is indicated by a light blue color on the activities.
If the expected process is kept in mind, as presented in fig. 5.3, then there was a loopback
from Operation to activity J and D. But from the heuristic net, we see that only the loopback
40
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:49==
from Operation to J is present (happening 6.9% of the time). This is the first indicator
that there are discrepancies between the documented and observed behavior. Also, the
heuristic net reveals that many shortcuts are taken in the process that was in fact expected
to be serialized. For example, the most common shortcut from activity D to G is happening
73.28% of the time and this is not a documented option in the expected process. This
motivates a conformance check between the expected Petri net presented in fig. 5.3b
and the distillation log.
The conformance between the expected process and the distillation log is determined
using the fitness metrics. The results from using the alignment-based fitness measure
are presented below:
• Fitness Score: 78.9%
The fitness score represents the overall conformance between the event log and the
expected process model. 78.9% indicates that the expected model indeed captures
a lot of the behavior, but it is not near a perfect description of the process.
• Percentage of Fitting Traces: 0.0%
Out of all the traces in the event log, none of them perfectly fit the expected process
model i.e. none of them could be replayed in the process model.
• Average Trace Fitness: 78.3%
This score refers to the fitness of the individual traces in the event log. This indicates
how closely each trace aligns with the expected process model.
The obtained conformance results indicate that while there is some level of conformance
between the event log and the expected process model (as indicated by the average
fitness score), no traces perfectly match the model’s expected behavior. This was a sur-
prising find and a strong indicator that either the documentation of the expected process
model is faulty or the process is not running as intended. The alignment-based fitness
measure hereby acted as an automatic check to challenge the documented process and
revealed strong discrepancies between the two.
6.2.2
Performance in Distillation Log
To investigate the performance measures of the distillation log, the performance Petri net
was discovered using heuristic mining. The result can be seen in fig. 6.10.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.10: Performance Petri net discovered using heuristic mining (dependency thresh-
old 0.5) and the performance parameter on distillation log. Labels normalized over aver-
age case duration for confidentiality. Petri net is split in three to fit the page with color/ge-
ometry codes for arc identification (see appendix A fig. A.2 for the original Petri net).
From fig. 6.10 it can be seen that activity on average taking the longest is the actual Op-
eration. It takes 101.03% of the average case duration. It is above 100% as the average
case duration is calculated including cases that go into STOP or Automatic Shutdown, and
these variants have shorter case durations as they often never reach the long Operation
step. Apart from Operation, we see that the activities leading into J are the ones taking
the longest (i.e. activity G, F and I).
Figure 6.11 is the performance Petri net filtered for Manual Shutdown variants. These are
thereby the successful variants, where the necessary phases to initiate the Operation has
been carried out and manually shut down after the operation.
42
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.11: Performance Petri net discovered using heuristic mining (dependency thresh-
old 0.5) on distillation log filtered for Manual Shutdown variants. Labels normalized over
the total average case duration. Petri net is split in three to fit the page with color/geome-
try codes for arc identification (see appendix A fig. A.3 for the original Petri net).
The performance Petri net in fig. 6.11 shows the average duration of all phases when they
have been carried out in a successful process. This diagram is interesting to discuss with
business/process experts to compare the timings of the actual phases with their expecta-
tions. Unfortunately, it was not possible to gain such insight from the domain expert due
to a significant workload hindering the collaboration. From speaking with operators it was
expected that activity K took precisely what corresponds to 2.58% of the average case
duration. From the performance Petri net it can be seen that this expectation was indeed
being kept.
These discovered diagrams annotated with frequencies and performance metrics could
be used in the weekly meetings around the operation of the column as it provides an
automatic and fast overview of the actual operations of the column in a given time frame.
6.2.3
Root Cause Analysis of Automatic Shutdowns
To investigate Automatic Shutdowns, the distillation log is filtered on variants ending with
Automatic Shutdown. The resulting heuristic net can be seen in fig. 6.12.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.12: Heuristic net discovered on distillation log filtered for Automatic Shutdown
variants and heuristic mining with dependency threshold 0.5. All labels are normalized
over the total number of cases for the sake of confidentiality.
From fig. 6.12 it can be seen that four activities have been recorded leading to Automatic
Shutdowns, namely activity B, C, K and Operation. The most common Automatic Shut-
down variant has the trace (INIT, A, B, Automatic Shutdown) happening in 10.34% of all
cases (the other variants happen 1.72% and 0.86% of the times). The performance Petri
net has been discovered for this particular variant in fig. 6.13.
44
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.13: Performance Petri net discovered on the most common shutdown variant in
the distillation log using heuristic mining with dependency threshold 0.5 and the perfor-
mance parameter. All labels are normalized over the total average case duration for the
sake of confidentiality.
From fig. 6.13 it is evident that the majority of the Automatic Shutdowns happen in the early
duration of activity B. Hence if Automatic Shutdowns want to be avoided, the attention
should be drawn toward what goes on in the early stages of activity B.
6.2.4
Binary Bayesian Network
By following the approach for obtaining Bayesian networks described in section 5.6, the
inference presented in fig. 6.14a can be obtained. The binary encoding was used together
with the frequency-based heuristics for loop elimination.
The visualized inference gives a probability of the event occurring (1) or the event not
occurring (0). From the binary Bayesian network presented in fig. 6.14a it can be seen that
there is a 13.24% risk of an Automatic Shutdown when no evidence has been provided.
There is also a very low probability of the activities L, F and H occurring. This complements
the findings from the mined heuristic net presented in fig. 6.9, where these activities were
colored light blue as they were not as frequent as the other activities. All dependencies are
kept from the heuristic net, except the eliminated dependency from Operation to activity
J.
By providing evidence, the Bayesian network can be used for both backward and forward-
looking analysis i.e. either diagnostics or predictions. First, we will look into the backward-
looking analysis by providing evidence that an Automatic Shutdown occurred. The result-
ing inference can be seen in fig. 6.14b.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) No evidence
(b) Evidence of Automatic Shutdown
Figure 6.14: Binary Bayesian network. The phase names have been anonymized for the
sake of confidentiality.
When there is evidence in the inference that an Automatic Shutdown occurred, the proba-
bility of activity B occurring increases. The Bayesian network thereby complements the ob-
servations made around the control flow of Automatic Shutdown variants. Here the most
common variant was (INIT, A, B, Automatic Shutdown), hence the increased probability
of activity B. Subsequently, the probability of the activities after B occurring decreases,
also as a consequence of the nature of Automatic Shutdown variants.
The forward-looking analysis is in this case based on providing increasing evidence as
the activities are occurring, and then being able to monitor the probability of an Automatic
Shutdown. Such an analysis can be seen in fig. 6.15, where evidence is provided following
the most common control flow (i.e. imitating the order of phases in the phase logic).
46
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:55==
(a) Evidence: INIT, A, B
(b) Evidence: INIT, A, B, C
Figure 6.15: Increasing evidence following control flow.
If only evidence for activities INIT and A are provided, then the probabilities remain un-
changed as they occur in fig. 6.14a, as there is a 100% probability for these activities.
But as soon as evidence for activity B is provided also (see fig. 6.15a), then the risk of
an Automatic Shutdown increases from 13.24% to 18.45%. Although if the evidence is
updated with activity C also (see fig. 6.15b), then the risk of an Automatic Shutdown drops
drastically to 2.79%. This show that as soon as we are past activity C, the likelihood of a
normal operation ending with Manual Shutdown is more likely.
Ideally, the Bayesian network could work as an automatically discovered reference model
in a streaming setting, where evidence is provided as the activities are occurring. Hereby,
if the risk of an Automatic Shutdown reaches above a certain threshold, an alarm could be
triggered that would warn for Automatic shutdowns before they were actually occurring.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
47
==PAGE:56==
6.2.5
Prediction Ability in Binary Bayesian Network
To evaluate the binary Bayesian network, the cross-validation approach through a depth-
first search described in section 5.7 was used. First a depth-first search through the
discovered heuristic net was carried out. The result is presented in fig. 6.16 explaining
which activities can be reached in the respective amount of steps.
Figure 6.16: Depth first search through the heuristic net.
For example in step 2, it can be seen that the activities INIT, A, B and C can be reached,
hence these are the activities whose outcomes are known in the test log when trying to
predict the Automatic Shutdown column for step 2.
After cross-validating the steps in 10 iterations each, the resulting average confusion ma-
trix and accuracy can be seen in fig. 6.17.
48
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:57==
(a) Average confusion matrix per step
(b) Average accuracy per step
Figure 6.17:
Results after depth-first search step-wise cross-validating the binary
Bayesian network
The binary encoding works such that the data will say 1 if the Automatic Shutdown oc-
curred and 0 if it did not occur. This means that true positives in a confusion matrix will
correspond to the number of cases where the prediction correctly identified an Automatic
Shutdown. From fig. 6.17a it can be seen that the true negative and false positive predic-
tions for the binary Bayesian network are rather steady when increasing the number of
known variables. This is not the case for true positives and false negatives which are the
metrics referring directly to whether the Automatic Shutdowns could be predicted. It can
be observed that the prediction ability increases significantly from step 2 and onwards, i.e.
when having knowledge of INIT, A, B, and C, or more variables. This also reflects in the
accuracy of the prediction illustrated in fig. 6.17b. Here, the accuracy increases from step
2 and lands an accuracy in the range of 82-91%.
Since Automatic Shutdowns are critical for the operations of the machine, even being able
to predict one shutdown before it occurs is considered good. This means the prediction
abilities of the binary Bayesian network are promising and it has been proved that it is
able to predict Automatic Shutdowns when knowing the occurrence of at least the first
four activities.
The predict function from pm4py could technically be used for predicting Automatic Shut-
downs in real-time, but it is more time-consuming and computationally heavy compared
to the inference queries that were used to obtain results in section 6.2.4. It is thereby
more realistic to use the predict feature for evaluation and then rely on the lightweight
inference queries to warn for Automatic Shutdowns in a streaming setting.
6.2.6
Duration Bayesian Network
Discrete Bayesian networks can include any type of data, and thereby provide information
about probabilities of activities that are extended over what classic process models can
provide. In this thesis the duration of the phase logic activities where categorized to obtain
a duration Bayesian network by following the approach described in section 5.6. The
resulting inference can be seen in fig. 6.18a. The duration encoding was used together
with the frequency-based heuristics for loop elimination.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) No evidence
(b) Evidence of Automatic Shutdown
Figure 6.18: Duration Bayesian network. The phase names have been anonymized for
the sake of confidentiality.
When there is evidence in the inference that an Automatic Shutdown occurred, the prob-
ability of activity B having a low duration increases. The Bayesian thereby complements
the observations made around the performance Petri net of Automatic Shutdown variants.
Here, the Automatic Shutdowns happened very early in activity B on average. Subse-
quently, the probability of Not Occurring increases in the activities after B as a conse-
quence of the nature of Automatic Shutdown variants.
The Operation activity is when the distillation column is actually distilling and feeding alco-
hol into the tanks and the production. The operators are thereby interested in having the
Operation activity run for as long as possible. In fig. 6.19 it can be seen what happens
when we provide evidence of a long Operation versus a short one.
50
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:59==
(a) Evidence: Low Operation duration
(b) Evidence: Low Operation duration
Figure 6.19: Duration Bayesian network. The phase names have been disguised for the
sake of confidentiality.
From fig. 6.19 it can be seen that the probabilities in the activities before Operation remain
almost unchanged for the two different evidence types. This indicates a low correlation
between the duration of the different phases and the ability to run the distillation Operation
for a long time. When looking at the activities after Operation, it can be seen that there is
a higher risk of Automatic Shutdown for low duration Operation.
Many additional analyses could be run on the duration Bayesian network. For example,
the distillation column has two cylinders, it could be investigated if heating one of them
takes longer than the other one, etc.
6.2.7
Prediction Ability in Duration Bayesian Network
To evaluate the duration Bayesian network, the cross-validation approach through a depth-
first search (described in section 5.7) was used again. The steps of the depth-first search
and the approach were the same as for the binary Bayesian network (steps presented
in fig. 6.16). After cross-validating the steps in 10 iterations each, the resulting average
confusion matrix and accuracy can be seen in fig. 6.20.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) Average confusion matrix per step
(b) Average accuracy per step
Figure 6.20:
Results after depth-first search step-wise cross-validating the duration
Bayesian network
The prediction ability in the duration Bayesian network behaves a little differently from the
binary Bayesian network, but again the turning point is at step 2. The ability to predict
true positives for Automatic Shutdown actually decreases from step 2. With that said,
before step 2 there are many false positives, meaning that the performance is poor in the
early steps. This pattern is reflected in the accuracy diagram, where we again see the
accuracy increases from step 2 where it lands in the range of 74-88%. Overall this means
that in terms of predicting Automatic Shutdowns, both the binary and duration Bayesian
network can be used. The overall accuracy shows the same pattern as before where the
prediction abilities increase significantly when knowing the occurrence of at least the first
four activities.
52
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:61==
7
Evaluation
From the presented results, it is evident that it was indeed possible to assemble relevant
event logs from raw operations data and machine events in order to analyze processes
in the machine. It was made possible through the development of pattern recognition for
synthesizing warning life cycles from the event data and the development of an algorithm
to detect distillation phase logic events from the existing event data. This resulted in two
event logs, one for warnings and one for distillation phase logic, that provided valuable
insights through process mining. This provided an answer to the first research question
(RQ1) stated in chapter 3 that read ”Can an event log relevant for analyzing processes in a
machine be synthesized and assembled from raw operations data and machine events?”.
The assembled event logs facilitated the analyses, where two different solution setups
were developed. An overview of these is illustrated in fig. 7.1.
(a) Solution for reducing signals
(b) Solution for advice and predictions
Figure 7.1: Overview of the general developed solutions
The first solution illustrated in fig. 7.1a, refers to the solution developed for reducing the
number of signals from the machinery through an analysis of warnings. By extracting
different process models from the event log and filtering information from them combined
with maintenance orders, it was possible to perform t-testing to prove the significance
of mean duration from various zones. This solution was developed for the distillation
column, but considerations towards a generic approach were kept in mind throughout the
development and implementation. The analysis was conducted within a Jupyter notebook
environment. If the intention is to perform the same analysis on a different machine, it
would entail modifying the PI tag, campaign dates and path to the SAP orders of the new
machine in the first line of the notebook. When this is established, the entire warning
analysis can be carried out. If we wish to extend the scope to analyze process alarms or
system alarms, we can extend the implemented classes presented in fig. 5.4 in section 5.3
with the new type, specify the new log at the beginning of the Jupyter notebook and again
it would be possible to carry out the analysis from there. The highly adaptable and flexible
solution ensures the sustainability of the developed analysis.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
53
==PAGE:62==
The warning analysis is a direct answer to the second research question (RQ2) presented
in chapter 3. The question read ”How can insights into machine operations be obtained
by pairing maintenance records with event data from the machine?”. The suggested so-
lution proved exactly how the pairing and the insights could be obtained and the results
presented from the warning analysis in section 6.1 proved the realization and capability
of the solution.
The second solution illustrated in fig. 7.1b, refers to the methodology developed for pro-
viding advice and predictions in the machinery through an analysis of phase change data
produced by the phase logic. The solution suggests mining a process model from the
event log using heuristic mining. By applying heuristics to eliminate loops it becomes the
structural basis for a Bayesian network, where the parameters are learned from the dis-
cretized event log. The developed solution is highly automatic and fully established for the
distillation column. But if the solution were to be applied to a different scope, then fig. 7.1b
suggest the modifying parameters. The typical process mining parameters would need
to be established, namely the case IDs, activities and timestamps for the event log, in
order to obtain the process model. To then reach the Bayesian network, the discretizing
algorithms and heuristics to eliminate loops would need to be specified. Currently, the
implemented solution has hard coded the frequency heuristics into the solution, but loop-
elimination algorithms could advantageously be implemented and added to the solution to
further automize the process of obtaining new Bayesian networks for other phase logics.
Using the Bayesian networks as the basis for advice and predictions was a choice towards
a white-boxed and transparent solution for predictions. As mentioned in section 2.3 when
explaining the steps in the digitalization process, advancing from one step to another can
require a lot of behavioral and system changes in the operations. Using a solution that is
easy to visualize and get an overview from can thereby serve as a gentle introduction to
the forward-looking analyses of the event data. Using black-boxed methodology like many
machine learning models can introduce skepticism, while a visual change in inference is
easier to grasp.
The phase analysis served as an answer to the third research question (RQ3) presented
in chapter 3. The question read ”Is it possible to utilize event log data from operations
to predict machine breakdowns and reveal causes/connections related to them?”. Con-
nections to breakdowns were found through control flow and performance analysis of the
Automatic Shutdown variants. By introducing two types of Bayesian networks (binary and
duration) it was possible to establish both backward and forward-looking predictions of the
phase logic. Additionally, conformance checking of the phase change event log and the
expected phase logic process model proved how process mining can be utilized as a tool
to automatically challenge and provide suggestions for adjusting the documentation of the
phase logics.
Toward the end of this master thesis, the obtained results were presented to key stakehold-
ers in relevant departments at Novo Nordisk Kalundborg. The response was exceedingly
positive, as they expressed satisfaction with the results and demonstrated a strong inter-
est in implementing the methodology across additional processes and machines. In many
instances, their operational workflows heavily rely on the domain expertise of one or two
individuals. However, if these key personnel were to leave the company, then the de-
partment would suffer a substantial loss of operational expertise and know-how. Through
this project, process mining has been demonstrated as a powerful tool for uncovering
valuable process knowledge directly from existing data. Furthermore, the analyses of the
processes in the Recovery department have mainly been simulations of the expected pro-
54
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:63==
cesses based on chemical and biological perspectives. However, the exploration of an
empirical, data-driven approach that delves into actual operations and uncovers causes
and connections related to undesirable scenarios represents uncharted territory for the
department. Therefore they expressed a strong interest in adopting these approaches to
gain new insights and enhance their operational practices. The positive response from
Novo Nordisk ultimately validated the usability of the findings and solutions of this thesis.
7.1
Limitations
During the course of this thesis, several limitations and biases were encountered affecting
both the developed solutions and the results. The most essential limitations are discussed
below.
One of the main challenges for the project was the limited domain knowledge and ac-
cess to it, which made it difficult to fully implement the PM2 methodology. As described
in section 4.1, the methodology required collaboration between a business expert and a
process analyst. While the author of this thesis served as the process analyst, the interac-
tion with the business expert was strongly limited. Essentially only one process engineer
is the business expert of the distillation column in the department and due to his busy
schedule and unforeseen events, it was only possible to meet with him twice (1.5 hours
in total). This restricted the depth of understanding and hindered the complete realization
of the PM2 methodology. With that said, this circumstance proves the potential of the
developed solution. On very little domain knowledge of the process, it was possible to
provide valuable insights, concrete advice and data-driven predictions simply by utilizing
the knowledge that lies in the existing event data.
Time restriction also played a significant role in the limitations faced. Due to the sensi-
tive and critical nature of the data involved, extensive administrative procedures had to
be followed before gaining access to the necessary data and tools. These procedures
consumed valuable time and affected the extent of analysis that could be performed.
Furthermore, I (the author of this thesis) had no prior knowledge of the areas of process
mining and probabilistic graphical models. Consequently, I had to learn these concepts
during the course of the project, which could have limited both the time and quality of the
application of concepts.
7.1.1
Limitations in Warning Analysis
The analysis of warnings was used for providing concrete advice to limit the number of
signals from the machine. This was answered by coupling maintenance data and warning
data to see if the warnings are correlated with maintenance orders. The final advice was
thereby only given from a maintenance perspective, and it was not analyzed if removing
the low-duration warnings would affect the operation ability of the distillation column. This
was the biggest limitation of the analysis.
Moreover, the warning analysis used zones for linking maintenance data and warning
data. The number of sensors and components varied across different zones and although
it was intentional to analyze the absolute amount of maintenance, this introduced bias into
the analysis. Additionally, it was unfortunately not possible to derive all zones from the
provided IDs, further impacting the analysis. As specified in section 6.1.3, the zone of
23.09% of the warning events could not be derived. Even though it was explained that
these events are not meant to have a zone, it does introduce bias to the analysis as
they are not included in the investigation of the duration of the warnings in relation to
maintenance.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
55
==PAGE:64==
Finally, the data quality of maintenance records could introduce bias. As the SAP orders
are manually placed by humans, errors can occur, potentially affecting the accuracy and
reliability of the analysis.
7.1.2
Limitations in Phase Analysis
The use of Bayesian networks for phase analysis came with its own set of limitations.
Firstly, Bayesian networks have constraints on network size. The more activities that
are included in the network, the more complicated the dependencies become and the
inference becomes computationally expensive. With the use of Bayesian networks to rep-
resent phase logic, the number of activities is on the low side, meaning that the network
size is not an issue for the solution. Bayesian networks are not able to represent loops,
meaning that heuristics to eliminate them need to be applied as explained in section 5.6.2.
In this thesis, the frequency-based heuristic was applied from which the loop occurring in
6.9% of the cases was ignored, which naturally introduced bias to the resulting Bayesian
network. Bayesian networks are thereby not representative in processes with many cy-
cles, but in a phase logic and manufacturing setting, we are not expecting many loops,
making Bayesian networks an applicable solution. Finally, the Bayesian networks are
not able to represent new activities and make inference results for events that have not
occurred before. If the Bayesian networks were to be implemented in a streaming set-
ting, where the inference is used to warn for Automatic Shutdowns, this limitation could
be avoided by triggering the automatic training of a new Bayesian network every time an
unknown activity occurs. This is a viable solution since the activities are based on phase
change data generated from the SattLine phase logic. Since the phase logic is strictly
bounded and highly documented, it is not expected that many unknown events will occur.
Validation of the Bayesian networks was limited in this thesis. Due to time constraints,
the evaluation focused solely on the Automatic Shutdown prediction ability of the net-
works, which may not be the most comprehensive validation approach. As specified in
section 3.1, the article ”Bayesian network construction from event log for lateness anal-
ysis in Port Logistics” by Sutrisnowati et al. ([18]) experiment with other validation tools
which were unfortunately encountered in the late stages of this thesis. Applying these
techniques is thereby left for future work.
Finally, the ability to introduce the maintenance aspect into the Bayesian networks was
not possible due to the temporal misalignments between SAP maintenance data and PI
events. Since maintenance orders are not placed the second they occur, it can not be
deduced when exactly they occurred in the process. It would have been interesting to
see the effects and/or correlations between maintenance and phases.
Despite all these limitations, the research and analysis presented in this thesis still man-
aged to serve as a legitimate proof of concept for a methodology suitable for application
in a pharmaceutical production environment, such as the Recovery department in Novo
Nordisk, Kalundborg. Future studies can build upon and improve the developed solution
to further reduce and adhere to some of the encountered limitations.
56
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:65==
8
Conclusion
The overall objective of this thesis was to provide suggestions to push the digitalization
of production equipment in the pharmaceutical industry. This resulted in three research
questions presented in chapter 3, all of which have been successfully answered through
this thesis.
The distillation column was identified to be situated in the Signals stage of the digitalization
steps, but due to a high information load from the warnings, the column was not ready to
advance to the Advice or Predictions stage. Through an extensive analysis of warnings, it
was possible to prove a correlation between low-duration warnings and low maintenance
zones, implying that disregarding warnings of low durations would not affect maintenance.
The concrete advice on how to filter some of the warnings out served as a solution to de-
crease the amount of information generated at the Signal stage, thus leaving room for
the advancement to new digitalization steps. The analysis of the distillation phase logic
facilitated the possibility to reach the Advice and Predictions stage. It was found that the
majority of Automatic Shutdowns occur in the early stages of activity B, implying that in
order to avoid them, the focus should lie on this area. If the phases manage to get past
activity B, the probability of the occurrence of an Automatic Shutdown decreases dras-
tically. The developed solution for obtaining Bayesian networks automatically from the
event logs served as a proof of concept of how predictions can be made in the operations.
By introducing two types of Bayesian networks (binary and duration) it was demonstrated
how Bayesian networks are able to express additional information as compared to the
traditional process models. Finally, an evaluation of the obtained Bayesian networks re-
vealed their ability to predict Automatic Shutdowns. It was concluded that by knowing the
state of at least four activities, it was possible to reach an acceptable level of accuracy in
the predictions.
The outcomes of the thesis were validated with relevant stakeholders at Novo Nordisk
proving the business relevance and usefulness of the results. The innovative approach
of incorporating statistical testing and probabilistic graphical models in process mining
ensured the academic relevance of the thesis.
In conclusion, through this study, it was possible to successfully address the posed re-
search questions. The findings and analysis proved a positive contribution to the un-
derstanding of operations of a distillation column in the pharmaceutical industry thereby
proving the potential for achieving similar insights on the remaining production equipment.
8.1
Future Work
The thesis was the first of its kind in the specific setting and background in the Recov-
ery department of Novo Nordisk. This leaves a lot of options for future work and further
research. Some of these have been highlighted in the sections below.
8.1.1
Improve Implemented Solution
To improve on the work presented in this thesis, future work suggestions could be:
• Challenge the chosen discovery algorithms and dependency thresholds for the so-
lution to see if better results could be obtained.
• Investigating the use of Markov chains instead of Bayesian networks would resolve
the limitation of not being able to represent loops and it could be interesting to see
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
57
==PAGE:66==
the benefits of these models and whether they are able to fulfill the same goals as
the solution presented in this thesis.
• Investigations of other campaigns could be performed to see if the same results are
obtained as for the outcomes of this thesis.
• A more thorough evaluation and validation of the performance and accountability
of the Bayesian networks could further improve the reliability of the solution. In-
vestigating this area would be of great value before widely accepting the solution.
As previously suggested, inspiration for future evaluation of the Bayesian networks
could be drawn from the article ”Bayesian network construction from event log for
lateness analysis in Port Logistics” by Sutrisnowati et al. [18]. Here, the Bayesian
networks are validated through the use of chi-square testing and the local Markov
property.
8.1.2
Bayesian Networks in Streaming Setting
The solution of discovering Bayesian networks automatically was first of all developed to
fulfill the goals of this thesis, but also to serve as an automatic underlying reference model
in the operations in real-time. As mentioned previously, future work could implement
the solution in a streaming context, where new training of Bayesian networks could be
triggered for example if new activities occur. This would enable digital monitoring of the
probability of unwanted activities and trigger warnings when there is a high probability of
an unwanted event occurring. This enables the operators to counter-act or prepare for
the unwanted activity before it takes place.
8.1.3
Broaden Scope of Analyses
As mentioned in the conclusion of the thesis, the developed approach has served as a
successful proof of concept within the scope of a distillation column. A natural suggestion
for future work is to roll out the approach to other equipment in the production. This
future goal was kept in mind throughout the development of this project, which means
that the approach for this analysis was coded as generically as possible. This implies that
a similar analysis can be performed on a new machine in the recovery department solely
by changing the machine tag. After consulting with relevant parties from Novo Nordisk,
they showed high interest in adding these analyses to the pipeline for other machines.
Research on a broader scope of the production can also be made by adjusting the gran-
ularity of abstraction of the input event logs. The methodology developed for obtaining
Bayesian networks from event logs could then provide insights on the general flow through
the production rather than detailed insights on one machine.
8.1.4
Other Process Mining Tools
Due to time and resource limitations, this thesis has only investigated and utilized a frac-
tion of the process mining tools and abilities. Future work could look into other areas of
process mining for example data Petri nets. With data Petri nets it would be possible to
extend the process models with more data such as temperature and pressure and then
see precisely which parameters determine the phase changes under operation.
As the above suggestions for future work insinuate, the possibilities of utilizing process
mining for advice and predictions within the pharmaceutical industry are huge. Due to
the positive response to the findings and the research from key stakeholders within Novo
Nordisk, it is convincing that this thesis has paved the way for future investigations and
implementations of process mining and probabilistic graphical models in Novo Nordisk.
58
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Wil van der Aalst and Josep Carmona. Process mining handbook. Springer, 2022.
[2]
What are 5 best process mining algorithms to consider in 2023? URL: https://
research.aimultiple.com/process-mining-algorithms/ (visited on 03/10/2023).
[3]
A. Weijters, Wil Aalst, and Alves Medeiros. Process Mining with the Heuristics Miner-
algorithm. Vol. 166. Jan. 2006.
[4]
Carmona Josep Vargas et al. Conformance checking: Relating processes and mod-
els. Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[5]
Bayesian Network. URL: https://pgmpy.org/detailed_notebooks/2.%20Bayesian%
20Networks.html (visited on 06/15/2023).
[6]
Bayesian Network. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_network#
Example (visited on 06/30/2023).
[7]
Introduction to probabilistic graphical models. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/
introduction-to-probabilistic-graphical-models-b8e0bf459812 (visited on 06/23/2023).
[8]
Bayesian Network example ’Sprinkler, Rain, Grass Wet’. Step by Step with SpiceL-
ogic Bayesian Doctor. 2022. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dJ7yJNU0wyw
(visited on 06/23/2023).
[9]
Florian Garms et al. Capturing value at scale in discrete manufacturing with indus-
try 4.0. Sept. 2019. URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/industrials- and-
electronics/our- insights/capturing- value- at- scale- in- discrete- manufacturing- with-
industry-4-0 (visited on 03/23/2023).
[10]
Emendo Consulting Group. URL: https://emendo.com/ (visited on 06/22/2023).
[11]
Novo Nordisk: Vores forretning. URL: https://www.novonordisk.dk/about/what-we-
do.html (visited on 02/06/2023).
[12]
Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Infrastruktur, Novo Nordisk, and Trap Danmarks
redaktion. Novo Nordisk A/S (kalundborg kommune). URL: https://trap.lex.dk/
Novo_Nordisk_A/S_-_Kalundborg_Kommune (visited on 07/03/2023).
[13]
AVEVA PI System. URL: https://www.aveva.com/en/products/aveva-pi-system/
(visited on 06/13/2023).
[14]
SattLine. URL: https://new.abb.com/control-systems/service/customer-support/satt/
controllers/sattline-200 (visited on 06/13/2023).
[15]
Reginaldo Borges, Eduardo Alves Santos, and Eduardo de Freitas Rocha Loures.
“Application of process mining in Industrial Maintenance: An approach for the analy-
sis of Equipment Shutdown”. In: Proceedings on 25th International Joint Conference
on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management – IJCIEOM (2020), pp. 314–
324. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-43616-2_33.
[16]
Richard Horn and Patrick Zschech. “Application of Process Mining Techniques to
Support Maintenance-Related Objectives”. In: Feb. 2019, pp. 1856–1867.
[17]
Danish A. Alvi. “Application of Probabilistic Graphical Models in Forecasting Crude
Oil Price”. Bachelor’s Thesis. 2018.
[18]
Riska Asriana Sutrisnowati, Hyerim Bae, and Minseok Song. “Bayesian network
construction from event log for lateness analysis in Port Logistics”. In: Computers
& Industrial Engineering 89 (2015), pp. 53–66. DOI: 10.1016/j.cie.2014.11.003.
[19]
Catarina Moreira. “An experiment on using bayesian networks for process mining”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.07341 (2015).
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
59
==PAGE:68==
[20]
Edson Ruschel, Eduardo Alves Santos, and Eduardo de Loures. “Establishment
of Maintenance Inspection Intervals: An application of process mining techniques
in manufacturing”. In: Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 31.1 (2018), pp. 53–72.
DOI: 10.1007/s10845-018-1434-7.
[21]
ProM tools. URL: https://promtools.org/ (visited on 01/29/2023).
[22]
Fluxicon Disco. URL: https://fluxicon.com/ (visited on 01/29/2023).
[23]
JavaBayes. URL: http://sites.poli.usp.br/pmr/ltd/Software/javabayes/Home/
(visited on 06/26/2023).
[24]
SamIam. URL: http://reasoning.cs.ucla.edu/samiam/ (visited on 02/16/2023).
[25]
Maikel L. van Eck et al. “PM2: A process mining project methodology”. In: Advanced
Information Systems Engineering (2015), pp. 297–313. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
19069-3_19.
[26]
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology. pm4py: State-of-the-art-
process mining in Python. URL: https://pm4py.fit.fraunhofer.de/ (visited on 01/29/2023).
[27]
Graphviz. URL: https://graphviz.org/ (visited on 06/14/2023).
[28]
pgmpy. URL: https://pgmpy.org/ (visited on 02/16/2023).
[29]
pandas.DataFrame - pandas 2.0.2 documentation. URL: https://pandas.pydata.org/
docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html.
[30]
How to Conduct a Two Sample T-Test in Python. 2022. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/how-to-conduct-a-two-sample-t-test-in-python/ (visited on 06/25/2023).
[31]
Tukey’s range test. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tukey%27s_range_test
(visited on 06/25/2023).
60
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:69==
A
Petri Nets
In order to fit the page, many of the presented Petri nets had to be split up in order to have
visible labels. This appendix holds the Petri nets in their original layout.
Figure A.1: Performance Petri net discovered using heuristic mining (dependency thresh-
old 0.5) and the performance parameter on unfolded warnings log. Labels normalized
over average case duration for confidentiality.
Figure A.2: Performance Petri net discovered using heuristic mining (dependency thresh-
old 0.5) and the performance parameter on distillation log. Labels normalized over aver-
age case duration for confidentiality.
Figure A.3: Performance Petri net discovered using heuristic mining (dependency thresh-
old 0.5) on distillation log filtered for Manual Shutdown variants. Labels normalized over
average case duration for confidentiality.
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
61
==PAGE:70==
B
Eventdata
1
import pandas as pd
2
import numpy as np
3
import random
4
import pm4py
5
import datetime
6
7
from tools.readTagFromPIWebAPI import ReadFromPI
8
from tools.splitting_events import EventListDf
9
from stats.frequencies import print_frequency_of_occurrences
10
11
class Eventdata:
12
13
def __init__(self, PItag, start_time , end_time):
14
self.PItag = PItag
15
self.start_time = start_time
16
self.end_time = end_time
17
self.events_df = self._create_event_df(PItag, start_time , end_time)
18
print('PI Event data loaded')
19
20
def get_eventlog(self, df, caseID_key='Day', activity_key='Description'):
21
event_log = pm4py.format_dataframe(df, case_id=caseID_key ,
activity_key=activity_key , timestamp_key='Timestamp')
22
23
return event_log
24
25
# =======================================================================
26
#
Helper functions (functions are prefixed with _ to highlight them as
private to the class)
27
# =======================================================================
28
'''
29
Retrieves PI data for a specific PItag in the given timeframe and
30
returns the result as a pandas dataframe
31
'''
32
def _create_event_df(self, PItag, start_time , end_time):
33
pi_df = ReadFromPI(PItag, time_start=start_time , time_end=end_time).
to_frame()
34
noValues = len(pi_df)
35
36
pi_df.index.names = ['Timestamp']
37
pi_df.rename(columns={"Value": noValues}, inplace=True)
38
39
events_data = EventListDf(pi_df, noValues)
40
events_df = events_data.df_events
41
42
events_df = self._assign_day_number(events_df)
43
events_df = self._assign_zones(events_df , PItag)
44
45
return events_df
46
47
'''
48
Adds column called 'Zone' which is a letter derived from the ID
49
'''
50
def _assign_zones(self, df, PItag):
51
pi_ID = PItag.split('_')[0]
52
53
# Add column that derives Zone from the IDs
54
# If the zone is X, then the regex matches:
62
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:71==
55
# Pitag_X_abcdef
56
# Pitag_iX_abcdef
57
# Pitag_XV31_abcdef
58
# The rest are NaN
59
df['Zone'] = df['ID'].str.extract(fr'{pi_ID}_i?([A-Z]|[A-Z]V\d{2})_',
expand=False).str[0]
60
61
return df
62
63
'''
64
Each event mark the start of an activity.
65
This function goes through each case, and calculates the time passed
66
from the current event to the one that follows in a Duration column.
67
'''
68
def assign_durations(self, log):
69
# Sort the DataFrame by case_id and timestamp
70
log = log.sort_values(['case:concept:name', 'Timestamp'])
71
72
# Create an empty 'Duration' column
73
log['Duration'] = np.nan
74
75
# Calculate the duration per case
76
for case_id in log['case:concept:name'].unique():
77
case_mask = (log['case:concept:name'] == case_id)
78
log.loc[case_mask , 'Duration'] = log.loc[case_mask , 'Timestamp'].
diff().shift(-1)
79
80
# Convert the 'duration' column to numeric format
81
log['Duration'] = pd.to_timedelta(log['Duration'])
82
83
return log
84
85
'''
86
Adds column called 'Day' which is is the number of whole days since
the start date at 6:30 AM
87
'''
88
def _assign_day_number(self, df):
89
df.reset_index(inplace = True)
90
91
# get start date at 06:30:00 AM
92
min_timestamp = df['Timestamp'].min()
93
94
if min_timestamp.time() < datetime.time(6, 30):
95
start_datetime = min_timestamp.replace(hour=6, minute=30, second
=0) - datetime.timedelta(days=1)
96
else:
97
start_datetime = min_timestamp.replace(hour=6, minute=30, second
=0)
98
99
# Add column Day derived from timestamp: full days after start date at
06:30:00 AM
100
df['Day'] = df.apply(lambda x: (x['Timestamp']-start_datetime).days,
axis=1)
101
102
return df
Listing B.1: The implemented Eventdata class
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
63
==PAGE:72==
C
Warnings
1
from models.Eventdata import Eventdata
2
import pm4py
3
import numpy as np
4
5
class Warnings(Eventdata):
6
7
def __init__(self, PItag, start_time , end_time):
8
super().__init__(PItag, start_time , end_time)
9
self.warnings_df = self._create_warnings_df(self.events_df)
10
print('Warnings loaded')
11
12
13
def get_warnings_log(self, case_id='aw_id', activity_key='Status_string'):
14
15
folded_warnings_log = self.get_eventlog(self.warnings_df , caseID_key=
case_id , activity_key=activity_key)
16
17
return folded_warnings_log
18
19
def get_unfolded_warnings_log(self, case_id='aw_id', activity_key='
dec_Status_string'):
20
21
unfolded_warnings_log = self.get_eventlog(self.warnings_df , caseID_key
=case_id , activity_key=activity_key)
22
23
return unfolded_warnings_log
24
25
26
# =======================================================================
27
#
Helper functions (functions are prefixed with _ to highlight them as
private to the class)
28
# =======================================================================
29
30
'''
31
Filters the event dataframe for warnings and adds columns for unfolded
warnings
32
and aw_ids
33
'''
34
def _create_warnings_df(self, df):
35
#filter for warnings
36
filtered_W = df[(df['Class'].isin([1])) & (df['Severity'].between(1,
6))]
37
38
#Keep a copy of the old indexing
39
filtered_W = filtered_W.reset_index().rename(columns={"index": "
oldIndex"})
40
41
# if two events have the same timestamp , then 'Kvitteret' will refer
to the alarm happening before.
42
# Therefore we need to ensure that 'Kvitteret' appears first in such a
case
43
status_order = {'Kvitteret': 1, 'On': 2, 'Auto blok': 3, 'Off': 4}
44
45
filtered_W['Status_rank'] = filtered_W['Status_string'].map(
status_order) # Add temporary column Status_rank
46
filtered_W = filtered_W.sort_values(['ID', 'Timestamp', 'Status_rank'
]) # Sort ID, then by Timestamp and then by status rank
64
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:73==
47
filtered_W = filtered_W.drop('Status_rank', axis=1) # Remove the
Status_rank column again
48
filtered_W = filtered_W.reset_index(drop=True) # Reset indexes for the
new sorted ordering
49
50
#Assign warning id
51
df_with_warningIDs = self._assign_aw_id(filtered_W)
52
print(df_with_warningIDs['aw_id'].isna().sum(),'events of alarms/
warnings that did not follow the aw_id pattern. They have aw_id=np
.nan.')
53
#Assign decorated warning ids
54
df_with_warningID_and_decs = self._decorate_status_string(
df_with_warningIDs)
55
#Assign presumed sensor types
56
df_with_warningID_decs_and_sensortypes = self.
_assign_presumed_sensor_type(df_with_warningID_and_decs , self.
PItag)
57
58
return df_with_warningID_decs_and_sensortypes
59
60
'''
61
Assigns an incremental id everytime the pattern 'On',...,ending
appears
62
If the warning is never turned On, the id will be np.nan
63
'''
64
def _assign_aw_id(self, df):
65
endings = [
66
['Off', 'Kvitteret'],
67
['Kvitteret', 'Off'],
68
['Auto blok', 'Kvitteret']
69
]
70
71
df['aw_id'] = np.nan
72
for _id, group in df.groupby('ID'):
73
id_count = 0
74
statuses = list(group['Status_string'])
75
76
aw_ids = []
77
78
i = 0
79
while i<len(group):
80
#Find next occurrence of 'On'
81
if statuses[i] == 'On':
82
83
# Find the index of the next ending from i and onwards in
statuses
84
new_aw_idx = None
85
for j in range(i,len(statuses)):
86
if statuses[j:j+2] in endings:
87
new_aw_idx = j+2
88
break
89
90
# If end_of_aw_idx = None, the current warning does not
have an ending , so we keep NaN as assigned id
91
if new_aw_idx == None:
92
length_rest = len(group) - i
93
aw_ids.extend([np.nan for _ in range(length_rest)])
94
break
95
# Else we assign aw_IDs to the current warning , and
increment i to the next unassigned ID
96
else:
97
length_of_aw = new_aw_idx - i
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
65
==PAGE:74==
98
aw_ids.extend([f'{_id}_{id_count}' for _ in range(
length_of_aw)])
99
id_count += 1
100
i = new_aw_idx
101
else:
102
aw_ids.append(np.nan)
103
i += 1
104
105
# Add the aw_ids to the group and update the group in the df
106
group['aw_id'] = aw_ids
107
df.loc[group.index] = group
108
109
return df
110
111
112
'''
113
Assigns decorated status strings for unfolding warnings
114
so fx 'On,Off,On,Kvitteret ,Off' becomes 'On1,Off1,On2,
KvitteretOffMissing ,OffToFinal'
115
'''
116
def _decorate_status_string(self, df):
117
df['dec_Status_string'] = np.nan
118
for name, group in df.groupby('aw_id'):
119
on_count = 0
120
off_count = 0
121
dec_statuses = []
122
prev_dec_status = ''
123
for status in group['Status_string']:
124
# Assign decorated status (dec_status)
125
if status == 'On':
126
on_count += 1
127
dec_status = f'On{on_count}'
128
129
elif status == 'Off':
130
if prev_dec_status == 'KvitteretOffMissing':
131
dec_status = 'OffToFinal'
132
else:
133
off_count += 1
134
dec_status = f'Off{off_count}'
135
136
elif status == 'Kvitteret':
137
if prev_dec_status == 'Auto blok' or on_count <= off_count
:
138
dec_status = 'KvitteretToFinal'
139
else:
140
dec_status = 'KvitteretOffMissing'
141
142
elif status == 'Auto blok':
143
dec_status = 'Auto blok'
144
145
146
# If dec_status is at final stage, reset the counters
147
if dec_status == 'KvitteretToFinal' or dec_status == '
OffToFinal':
148
on_count = 0
149
off_count = 0
150
151
# Append the decorated status and update the previous status
152
dec_statuses.append(dec_status)
153
prev_dec_status = dec_status
154
66
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:75==
155
# Add decorated status strings to the group and update the group
in the df
156
group['dec_Status_string'] = dec_statuses
157
df.loc[group.index] = group
158
159
return df
Listing C.1: The implemented Warnings class
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
67
==PAGE:76==
D
Phases
1
from models.Eventdata import Eventdata
2
import pm4py
3
import numpy as np
4
5
class Phases(Eventdata):
6
7
def __init__(self, PItag, start_time , end_time):
8
super().__init__(PItag, start_time , end_time)
9
self.phase_df = self._create_phase_df(self.events_df)
10
print('Phase events loaded')
11
12
13
def get_destillation_log(self, case_id='destillation_phaselogic_id',
activity_key='Description'):
14
end_activities = ['STOP', 'Manual Shutdown', 'Automatic Shutdown']
15
# Create eventlog from df and exclude incomplete variants
16
d_log_including_incomplete = pm4py.format_dataframe(self.phase_df ,
case_id=case_id , activity_key=activity_key , timestamp_key='
Timestamp')
17
des_log = pm4py.filter_end_activities(d_log_including_incomplete ,
end_activities)
18
19
# Assign durations to log
20
des_log_with_durations = self.assign_durations(des_log)
21
22
return des_log_with_durations
23
24
25
# =======================================================================
26
#
Helper functions (functions are prefixed with _ to highligt them as
private to the class)
27
# =======================================================================
28
def _create_phase_df(self, df):
29
phase_df = #Filtering for IDs which is confidential
30
31
phase_df = self._assign_destillation_id(phase_df)
32
33
return phase_df
34
35
def _assign_destillation_id(self, df):
36
# Ensure df is sorted by timestamp
37
df = df.sort_values(['Timestamp'])
38
df = df.reset_index(drop=True)
39
40
# Create column for destillation id
41
df['destillation_phaselogic_id'] = np.nan
42
destillationId_index = df.columns.get_loc('destillation_phaselogic_id'
)
43
44
active = False
45
phase_id_count = 0
46
end_activities = ['STOP', 'Manual Shutdown', 'Automatic Shutdown']
47
for i in range(len(df)-1):
48
current_description = df.iloc[i]['Description']
49
next_description = df.iloc[i+1]['Description']
50
51
# Start destillation phase logic
68
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
==PAGE:77==
52
if ((current_description == 'INIT') & (next_description == 'A')):
53
active = True
54
55
# If destillation phase logic is active , assign a case id
56
if active:
57
df.iloc[i, destillationId_index] = phase_id_count
58
59
60
# End destillation phase logic
61
if ((current_description in end_activities) | (next_description ==
'INIT')):
62
active = False
63
phase_id_count += 1
64
65
return df
Listing D.1: The implemented Phases class
Process Mining and Data Analysis for Optimization and Prediction in a Production Industry
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tel. +45 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
