==PAGE:1==
Optimization of baggage handling in Copen­
hagen Airport
Master Thesis
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Technology, Management and Economics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months at the Department of Technol­
ogy, Management and Economics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, Busi­
ness Analytics.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of operation research and
mathematical modelling as well as network optimization and mixed integer programming.
Felipe Forero Meola ­ s210325
Signature
Date
Mattia Guarneri ­ s212988
Signature
Date
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
iii
June 23, 2023
June 23, 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Minimizing the missed bags in an airport can certainly lead to a greater satisfaction of the
customers and can let it reduce the costs associated with the handling of missed bags.
For these reasons, Copenhagen Airport wants to model a problem that helps it increase
its efficiency. For this, the airport plans to implement an optimal solution that assigns each
airplane to one of two baggage factories, where some baggage might go on a tail­to­tail
route after being unloaded at the airport.
Mixed Integer programming models are merged together to solve this problem. A de­
terministic approach is followed in this thesis to tackle the problem and, more in detail, a
Generalized Assignment Model is implemented to assign each arriving flight to an inbound
station, while to address the tail­to­tail task a Milkman Routing Model is employed. The
solution is reached by combining the two aforementioned models through a 0­1 Knapsack
Model.
The analysis presents an optimal solution for every instance inspected with significant
findings, that in some cases are really close to the perfect solution. Furthermore, the re­
search continues testing the algorithm in different scenarios, synthetically generated, and
analysing its sensitivity with additional experiments.
To conclude, a critical evaluation of the results is conducted and some suggestions are
proposed for a further improvement of the work here developed, among others a stochas­
tic implementation of the algorithm.
iv
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Felipe Forero Meola & Mattia Guarneri, MSc Business Analytics, DTU
To David, we would like to thank you for constantly giving a support during the thesis,
providing always great ideas to improve the project and getting us back on track when
we sidetracked. Thanks for all the funny meetings, that kept us motivated in the project.
We want to thank you for making this project run smoothly and keeping the level of panic
under control.
Virklig godt.
Mattia Guarneri:
Voglio ringraziare in modo particolare la mia famiglia, la mamma Gabri, Sara, Simone,
Chiara e mio zio Mauro e zia Michela, senza dimenticare delle nonne a tenermi impegnato
con i loro racconti e confidenze che più d’una volta mi hanno strappato un sorriso. È
grazie a tutti loro, la mamma in primis e i miei fratelli poi, che ho potuto dedicarmi appieno
allo studio e affrontare al meglio questa sfida ricca di tante complicazioni e momenti di
sconforto, ma che hanno condotto, alla fine, ad un traguardo che mai avrei pensato di
raggiungere in vita mia.
Ringrazio anche tutti i miei amici, in particolare, i miei compagni di disavventure Doc e P,
che da lontano hanno sempre creduto in me, spronandomi a dare il massimo.
I cannot forget my partner Felipe. Along with him these 5 months have passed quite
smoothly, without feeling the real pressure of this master thesis. He has proved to be a
valuable team mate, but more importantly a really good friend.
Also, I want to thank all the people I met here at DTU, especially Laurine, Isidoros, Abhi
and Orfeas for their support in every challenge I faced. With them I have learnt a lot
not only academically speaking, but also I feel I have come to know how beautiful is our
diversity.
In fine, un pensiero molto particolare va a mio padre che sono sicuro mi è sempre stato
accanto e da lassù ha seguito ogni passo di questo mio viaggio e non mi abbandonerà
mai.
Felipe Forero Meola:
Me gustaría agradecer sinceramente a mis papás, a mi familia y a mis amigos, tanto los
que están en Copenhague como los que están en Colombia por todo el apoyo que me
han brindado durante estos años, y en especial durante este periodo. A mi hermano, por
ser una fuente de inspiración y motivarme a siempre retarme a mi mismo.
A todas las personas que he conocido estos años en Dinamarca, los amigos que he
hecho en DTU, con los que he hecho trabajos o pasado el tiempo libre entre risas, y los
compañeros de trabajo que me han enseñado de diferentes ámbitos más de lo podría
haber esperado. Gracias a todos por haber hecho de este tiempo una de las mejores
experiencias que he tenido. Por enseñarme tanto y darme buenos recuerdos que atesoro.
Not to repeat what Mattia has said above, but I’d like to thank him too for being a great
thesis partner, that has made this thesis an actually enjoyable experience and a fun project
to work on. But even more than that, for being a great friend and a great support bod in
good and in bad times.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AP
Assignment Problem
BHS
Baggage Handling System
CPH
Copenhagen Airport A/S
GAP
Generalized Assignment Problem
KP
0­1 Knapsack Problem
MRP
Milkman Routing Problem
PCTSP
Price­Collecting Travelling Salesman Problem
PCTSPTW
Price­Collecting Travelling Salesman Problem with Time Windows
TW
Time Windows
TSP
Traveling Salesman Problem
TSPTW
Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Importance of Baggage Handling System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Overview of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Mathematical Models
9
2.1
Proposed Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Generalized Assignment Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Milkman Routing Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Knapsack Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.5
Discussion of the implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Data Processing
19
3.1
Data Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Distance Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
CPH Bags ­ Data Cleaning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
Generalized Assignment Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Milkman Routing Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.6
Knapsack Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.7
Synthetic Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Testing
31
4.1
Testing Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Testing ­ Real Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Testing ­ Synthetic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5
Conclusion
51
6
Future work
53
Bibliography
55
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Importance of Baggage Handling System
The problem discussed and tackled in the present Master Thesis is provided by the
Copenhagen Airport A/S, located in Kastrup, which is one of the largest international air­
port in Scandinavia and it serves a significant part of the Nordic countries. Copenhagen
Airport registered 30.3 million passengers in 2019 and 22.1 million passengers travelling
during the last year, being the fourth­busiest airport in Northern Europe.
Among others, the baggage handling system (BHS) is of paramount importance in the
problems an airport has to deal with on a daily basis. The BHS is not only of crucial
prominence for the comfort and convenience of travellers, but it can, also, make a differ­
ence in an airport’s ability to attract or keep a major airline hub. A BHS has three main
activities:
1. move bags from the check­in area to the departure gate;
2. move bags from one gate to another during transfers;
3. move bags from the arrival gate to the baggage­claim area.
Therefore, BHS is a critical part of airport operations because it involves many complex
activities that may differ, based on the final destination of a bag (transfer flight, baggage­
claim, check­in to departure flight). Furthermore, it has a direct impact on customers’
satisfaction because an inefficient handling of baggage can lead to long waiting times,
lost or delayed luggage and, thus, passengers may be discouraged to fly to that destina­
tion. Moreover, these systems come with the risk of disturbing other airport operations
impacting on the airlines ­ the biggest stakeholders ­ who have schedules to stick to and
cannot wait for airport delays.
Another critical factor to consider is that BHS is, also, a safety­critical process, as it is
essential to ensure that only authorized bags are transported on an aircraft. Baggage
screening and security checks are integral components of the BHS, which must be com­
pleted accurately and efficiently to mitigate potential security risks. Any error in the han­
dling of baggage can have severe consequences.
To sum up, in the BHS baggage need to be handled across multiple airlines, airports,
countries without forgetting the passengers’ satisfaction. Baggage must be transferred
between airlines and airports with different operating procedures and infrastructures, and
must also comply with international aviation safety and security regulations. Therefore, an
efficient BHS requires effective communication, collaboration and coordination between
airlines, airports, people and regulatory authorities.
1.2
Problem Description
For these reasons, CPH airport has decided to expand its structure, building a new bag­
gage factory. The goal is to better manage the luggage flow in the whole airport, reducing
the total amount of missed bags. To be more specific, the main focus of this thesis is on
the bags that are going to be transferred from one flight to another.
CPH airport has two in­feed, or inbound, stations for the baggage that still need to be
scanned (including the one they are building), located approximately in the middle and on
the east part of the airport. In this report, they are going to be referred to as ”New in­feed
station” for the one located in the middle of the airport, and ”East in­feed station” or ”Ex­
isting in­feed station” for the existing one in the east part of it. In addition, two out­bound
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
1
==PAGE:12==
sites for the bags ready to be delivered to the departing flight are located on the east and
on the west part of the airport. The luggage need to follow a specific route based on the
airport conformation and the regulations that need to be followed. As a result, when a
aircraft lands in CPH airport and has reached the assigned arrival gate, it also needs to
be assigned to exatly one of the two in­feed stations, thus to model this part of the problem
a variant of the Assignment Problem (AP), known as Generalized Assignment Problem
(GAP), is utilized. Then, a truck goes to the landed aircraft in order to unloading all the
bags and bring them to the in­feed station designated. After that, the bags are scanned
in the factory using the X­ray technology and sorted in order to be safely delivered to the
connected plane, waiting at the departing stand. In figure 1.1 is a schematic view of what
process the baggage need to follow after the plane touches the ground:
Figure 1.1: BHS process steps for transfer flights. From the landed aircraft to the departing
flight.
However, it takes some time for the luggage to be transferred from plane to plane going
through the baggage factory. Therefore, the bags coming from flights with short connec­
tions would be much harder to handle if they were processed in the BHS, and that is
why there is another option to deliver these luggage, called tail­to­tail. Basically, in these
cases an operator with a cart, that from now on will be identified as milkman, visits the
airplane and deliver as much bags as possible to all its connections, without checking
them in to the baggage factory. This specific part of the problem is going to be modelled
as a Price­Collecting Travelling Salesman Problem with Time Windows. Furthermore,
since the number of resources is limited for this operation, whenever a conflict arises the
milkman has to choose which plane is worth serving, and this will be modelled as a 0­1
Knapsack Problem (KP).
Hence, the project investigated in this thesis is meant to optimize the baggage flow from
their arrival at the airport to their delivery to the departing flight. To do so, CPH airport
asked to take into consideration the new baggage factory that will be built.
1.3
Literature review
In this section a broad introduction to the problem and its background is given; the method­
ologies used in this thesis are introduced and further explained referring to the state the
state of the art, trying to make the reader understand the reasons why these models were
chosen to address the problem depicted in section 1.2. It is divided in 4 sub sections,
which identify the main challenges in the airport, the assignment problem, the travelling
salesman problem with all the relevant variants, the knapsack problem in section 1.3.1,
1.3.2, 1.3.3 and 1.3.4, respectively.
2
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:13==
1.3.1
Airport optimization
Nowadays, airports are crucial for the airline industry and the transportation, of any kind,
across the globe. In fact, air transportation is fundamental for moving people across
countries and continents as well as cargo shipments around the world. As discussed in
Abdelghany and Abdelghany [1], there has been a significant growth in this sector in the
last few decades that increased the quality of life in many part of the world. Furthermore,
the fact that it is much easier to move from one point to another in the globe has, also, fa­
cilitated the globalization thanks to new chances arisen for many people and companies.
They could, in fact, connect to different cultures and meet new opportunities.
In this contest, the airports play an important role for keeping the whole industry working at
its best. A way to keep improving is optimizing where there is more need. A lot has been
done in the airports to optimize the processes and a lot more can still be done. These
enterprises are some of the most complex on earth because of the high level of security
they have to stick to and all the processes and activities that are carried out within them.
Here, several different optimization problems are faced on a daily basis. One example
could be the passenger queuing optimization (Bruno and Genovese [2]), which in Dey,
Islam and Raihan [3] is defined as a system designed for the arriving customers to be
attended by the limited number of servers. A queue forms when a customer arrives and
finds the server busy.
Yet a different problem that airports have to manage is security process optimization (Lee,
Nikolaev, and Jacobson [4]), that is a very complex and sensitive issue involving queuing,
baggage and passengers screening. It is worth to mention, seen the topic of the present
thesis, one last system that really needs to be optimized and constantly improved, and
that is the baggage handling optimization, addressed in Frey [5]. As a matter of fact,
baggage optimization is a major part of the airport optimization and the problem can be
split in more sub­problems to allow a more thorough analysis. As mentioned in section
1.1 the three most common problem regarding the baggage handling optimization are the
baggage directed to the reclaim area, the luggage that from the check­in area go to the
departure gate and, finally, the bags that must be transferred from one flight to another
(Barth [6]).
Just to give a brief definition of the related problems and a clearer overview of the entire
BHS, the first sub­problem is also known as baggage reclaim problem and its main objec­
tive is to minimize the time it takes for passengers to receive their baggage and to ensure
that each passenger receives their own luggage without any mismatches or errors, as in
Barth [7]. The main challenge here is to manage multiple airplanes arriving simultane­
ously. Then, the baggage handling from check­in to gate aims to assign the luggage to
the right departing plane and to do that the modelling should consider among other things,
the sorting of the bags, that some bags are prioritized on others and that the delivery must
happen within a dynamic time window. At last, the baggage handling problem for transfer
flights, that is the main scope elaborated in this master thesis, focuses on delivering the
most number of bags coming from the arriving plane to all its connections before their
departure time, as in Barth [6].
1.3.2
Assignment Problem
The Assignment Problem (Wolsey [8]) is a standard Operations Research problem that
means to assign to each available people exactly one task to complete. Some individuals
are better suited to accomplish a job, therefore a cost matrix ci,j is given if the person i is
assigned to task j. The problem is to find a minimum cost assignment. This problem falls
within the set of combinatorial problems. That means that the optimal solution is some
subset of a finite set. Thus, in principle, these problems can be solved by enumeration.
For the Assignment Problem there is a one­to­one correspondence between assignments
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
3
==PAGE:14==
and permutations of 1,…, n. Thus, there are n! solutions to compare and this makes it
hard to solve, but fortunately there are many algorithms that allows to solve the problem
in a polynomial time n, such as the Hungarian method.
Similarly to all the other standard problems in Operations Research, the AP is widely
used in real life because it can be applied to various fields and situations form healthcare
to sport, to education and yet transportation and logistic as explained in Faudzi, Abdul
Rahman and Rahman [9]. Besides, its mathematical formulation is very simple with a
two­dimensional variable and only two explicit constraints that ensure the task is assigned
to the person and vice versa. Therefore, it adapts to a vast amount of problems hard to
solve and it simplifies their understanding at the same time.
Since it is a very well­known and deeply studied problem, the AP has been tailored for
many other instances that required some modifications to the original problem, i.e., a
different number of explicit constraints or a more complex objective function etc. For in­
stance, one original variation of this problem is the so called Generalized Assignment
Problem (GAP). The GAP differs from the original formulation because it examines the
minimum cost assignment of j jobs to i people, such that each job is assigned to exactly
one person that is subjected to capacity restrictions. That means the person does not
have to handle exactly one task as defined in the original problem, but can manage as
many jobs as allowed by the capacity. This problem is a well­known variant to the or­
dinary Assignment Problem and ever since Ross and Soland [10] defined its structure,
many papers have been published on its application in several real life problems, such as
Transportation and Routing problems or telecommunication. To mention some practical
examples, K. Ruland in the 1999 had to deal with the transportation, by plane, of patients
between military hospitals in the United States. He were to present a model of the system
to assist the route planners in generating solutions minimizing patient inconvenience. In
Ruland [11], he uses a GAP model to determine which patients to assign to which trans­
portation asset.
Again, one last example to show the versatility of the generalized assignment problem
and let the reader understand the reason why this model is so widely used is given by
Bressoud et al. [12], where in their paper they apply a GAP model for the optimal configu­
ration for Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) and its use in inter­domain routing. BGPs play
a crucial role in the control of transit traffic flows from customers and providers. Here,
egress edge links and prefixes are respectively regarded as machines and jobs.
1.3.3
Traveling Salesman Problem
The Travelling Salesman Problem is a classical optimization problem that arises from a
travelling salesman that needs to visit all cities travelling for the least amount possible
(this can be defined as traveling time, traveling distance or other measures). The solution
needed is the sequence in which cities should be visited to travel the least possible. This
means that each city will be visited once and only once, and the sequence of cities must
be continuous, thus preventing sub­tours (Wolsey [8]).
The reason this problem is so widely used is because of its ease to explain, the wide
range of subjects where it arises, from job sequencing to crystallography, as in Laporte
[13] and Davendra [14], and the fact that it is an NP­Hard problem. All of this, making it
an interesting problem to tackle that does not have a known standard solution that solves
in reasonable time (Wolsey [8]).
The mathematical definition of the TSP consists of having a graph G = (V, E), with a set
of vertices V and a set of edges E between those vertices, associated to these edges
there is usually a matrix cij that represents the cost, distance, time, etc. of traveling along
this path. Finding the minimum path that visits all the cities for the minimum distance is
4
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:15==
the optimal solution to a given TSP Problem, this is also known as a Hamiltonian Cycle.
Besides the ubiquity of the TSP it is also common to find the problem with additional
constraints, that modify the problem slightly to fit better a problem that does not seem
related. For example, if the way of measuring the distances is changed from Euclidean
distance to Manhattan, the problem of routing traces in a motherboard becomes a TSP.
Among the most common additional constraints used on the TSP are capacity constraints,
time restrictions and price­collecting modifications, among many others (Laporte [13]).
Specifically for the purposes of this thesis the two main modifications of interest are the
time restrictions, which will set time windows, and the price­ collecting, which aims to
maximize the benefit of visiting a city, while minimizing the distance travelled.
TSP with Time Windows
In the case of the TSP with Time Windows, there is a new constrain or set of constraints
added related to the time. Keeping with the real world context of the TSP, this new con­
straint simulates the scenario where the Salesman has to visit a city before and after
certain timemarks. This slight variation can come with certain unforeseen complications,
and adjustments to the specific model might be needed. On one hand, certain algorithms
that could perform well in the classic TSP would not work for this scenario since not all
TSP solutions are a TSPTW solution, as in Omme, Perron, and Furnon [15].
One example could be the case where two cities have colliding time windows, i.e. exactly
the same time window, but not long enough to allow to travel from one to the other. Here
the problem becomes unsolvable, since the salesman cannot visit all cities in the allowed
times, as visiting some is mutually exclusive with visiting others. This needs to be taken
into account when implementing an algorithm to solve the problem, either the constraint is
kept and the problem at hand marked as unsolvable, or a constraint needs to be relaxed.
One way of modelling this restriction of time windows is by doing three modification to the
classic TSP definition (Omme, Perron, and Furnon [15]). First a time dimension is added
to the solution. With this constraint in mind, the sequence of cities is needed, but also
when to arrive to each of them. This in order to validate that the city is visited between the
allowed time­span. Apart from this two more constraints would be needed, one to ensure
the visiting time happens after the minimum arrival time and one to ensure it happens
before the maximum arrival time.
Price Collecting TSP
In a different modification of the classical TSP,it is evaluated what the Salesman receives
as he is visiting the different cities. In this case the modifications do not rely on the addition
of constraints, but rather modifying the objective function. In the classic TSP, the goal is
to minimize the distances while visiting all the cities. While in this case, the objective
targeted by the model is to maximize the price received by visiting the cities. Returning to
the real world example, this would be akin to the salesman trying to maximize the amount
of goods he will sale by visiting certain cities. On its own this modification does not change
the objective of the TSP, the price will be the same always, since it always visits all the
cities. This is why this modification usually comes with another modification that makes
the problem harder to solve than just taking a TSP solution.
One common modification is changing the requirement to visit all cities, but with a limitation
as to how many it can visit, like in Balas [16]. Instead of having to visit all cities, the
salesman has a budget that gets spent every time the salesman visits a city, which can
be in time, miles, currency, etc. This way the model has to chose which cities to visit that
are within the allowed budget and which to leave out, while maximizing the price collected.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
5
==PAGE:16==
Milkman Routing Problem
Finally, there is the model that here will be called, the Milkman Route Problem. This model
incorporates the both modifications explained in TSP with Time Windows and Price Col­
lecting TSP. Returning to the real world equivalent of this model, it relates to a salesman
that need to visit certain cities during certain periods, but also wants to visit the most
profitable cities. This can also be seen as a milk truck, that wants to sell as many bot­
tles as possible, but there is only people in houses to buy them at certain times. Doing
both of these modifications implies adding and modifying the objective function with its
constraints which can interact between each other. Because of this added complexity,
there have been different attempts at solving this relying on different approaches involv­
ing heuristics and metaheuristics, as discussed in Gao [17] and Dogan and Alkaya [18].
For example, the time windows can serve as the budget/limitation imposed on the sales­
man for the Price Collecting TSP. Instead of being limited by, maximum time for example,
the salesman will be constrained by needing to chose between cities that have colliding
time windows. On the other hand, this also lends a way to prioritize cities (with a greedy
heuristic) when conflict arises.
1.3.4
0­1 Knapsack Problem
The Knapsack Problem addresses a common problem in everyday life, how to pack the
most valuable items given a maximum carrying weight. In other words, this problem aims
to choose the set of items, n, with weights wi that maximizes return vi, without exceed­
ing a budget W. Like in many other Operations Research Problems, what each of these
parameters mean can vary significantly, lending this problem to appear in many areas.
Taking return and budget specifically, examples range from truck loading, which could
define them as number of items and the size of the truck, respectively, to portfolio opti­
mization, where they are the return­on­investment and portfolio size, respectively. Just
as with the TSP in Section 1.3.3, appearing in so many areas has led a a deep study
of this problem, and the different problems that arise by modifying it. In principle, given
a finite number of items, this problem seems to be solvable by brute­force, trying every
combination available, and picking the highest one that does not violate the constraints.
In practice, this does not work as the time complexity of this approach is n!, where n is
the amount of items. This means that the time to find the optimal solution in polynomial
time is not possible, thus it is categorized as an NP­Hard Problem.
As with many other problems in Operations Research, there are slight variations that just
come with further defining the problem. One of the most common ones, described in
Wolsey [8], is the 0­1 Knapsack Problem, which specifies that the items either go or do
not into a knapsack. Opposed to this is the case where the items can be cut into smaller
pieces (often with restrictions on how it can be cut). This changes the problem to an
Integer Programming Problem.
1.4
Contribution
Building upon the state­of­the­art discussed in the previous sections (1.3 and following),
this thesis addresses the complex baggage handling problem for transfer flights at Copen­
hagen Airport by formulating it as a combination of different problems. To tackle this chal­
lenge, a two­fold approach is employed, utilizing both a Generalized Assignment model
and Milkman Route model. While the former is widely applied and deeply studied in sev­
eral field of research, the latter has been deployed in few papers and, either way, it is not
that common according the literature. It is also worth noting that none of them has been
applied in the context of airport optimization.
The problem itself can be divided into two distinct parts. Firstly, the assignment of landed
6
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:17==
flights to the in­feed stations is considered, where all bags must undergo scanning and
safety checks before being stored or delivered to connecting flights. In this case, the
assignment of in­feed stations is not strictly limited to one arriving plane but constrained
by their capacity. Secondly, the focus shifts to tail­to­tail operations, activated when the
connection time window between arriving and departing airplanes is less than 45 minutes.
For eligible flights specified in the airport whitelist, bags can bypass the baggage system
and be directly transferred by the milkman. Notably, the milkman prioritizes planes with
the highest demand for baggage. Additionally, a 0/1 knapsack model is implemented to
connect these two aspects. The rationale behind this approach is to selectively run the
milkman model for tail­to­tail situations that significantly impact the objective value and
ultimately lead to improved solutions.
The integration of a knapsack model to connect the GAP and the MP can be considered
a significant input of this thesis. However, the main contribution of this work lies in the
integration of these three models, applied within the context of airport optimization. The
output of each model serves as the input for the subsequent one, ensuring a cohesive ap­
proach. All models share a common objective function, aimed at maximizing the number
of delivered bags during their transfer from one plane to another. By combining and ap­
plying these models simultaneously, this thesis offers a valuable framework for optimizing
airport baggage handling processes.
1.5
Overview of thesis
The present Master thesis is divided in multiple sections. Chapters 2 presents the chosen
models for tackling the problem with a thorough description of the mathematical formu­
lation and the way they perform and are used together. In chapter 3 a description of
the raw data is given together with all the actions carried out for cleaning, transforming
and pre­processing them. That was done to make it easier for the models to do all the
computation. Consequently, in chapter 4, all the simulations and tests done to verify the
implementation and the sensitivity of the models are presented and discussed, also pro­
viding the results. Lastly comes the conclusion, in section 5, and in chapter 6 some further
improvement and ideas for this project are proposed.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:19==
2
Mathematical Models
In this chapter, a general proposition of the solution used for addressing this thesis’ prob­
lem is given. After that, the mathematical formulation of the three models is thoroughly
explained. Necessary notations are introduced in sections 2.2.1, 2.3.1, 2.4.1 to better un­
derstand them. Furthermore, in sections 2.2.4, 2.3.4, and 2.4.4 the models used to solve
the Generalized Assignment Problem (GAP), the Milkman Routing Problem (MRP) and
the Knapsack Problem (KP) are presented, respectively.
2.1
Proposed Solution
The problem described in section 1.2 can be tackled using two OR problems. Those are
the Generalized Assignment Problem (Ross and Soland [10]) and the Milkman Routing
Problem, that as explained in section 1.3.3, can be assimilate to a Price­Collecting Trav­
eling Salesman Problem with Time Windows. The former, refers to the analysis on how
to assign n tasks to m agents in the best possible way (optimal way). Any agent can be
assigned to perform any task, incurring some cost that may vary depending on the agent­
task assignment. The latter, involves the design of a minimum cost path for a vehicle
which visits a set of nodes. Each node may or may not be visited. If it is visited, then it
must be exactly once and within a certain time window, defined by the earliest and the
latest time where the service can start. If the vehicle arrives too early it will wait. Both
methods have been combined using a Knapsack Problem which aims to maximise the
delivered bags choosing which flight the milkman should serve.
2.2
Generalized Assignment Problem
The goal of the GAP is to assign the incoming flight to one of the two existing in­feed
stations such as maximise the number of bags that can make it through the BHS and be
delivered to the connected flight. To ensure that, some calculations were made before­
hand, providing a matrix with the number of bags delivered per flight based on a specific
route. This was performed in advance to reduce the computing time of the model and
given to it as input. A more detailed description of what has been done is given in the
chapter 3, more precisely section 3.2.
2.2.1
Notation
Let G = (V, E) be a complete, undirected and fully connected graph where V = 1, ..., F is
the vertex set, whereas E is the edge set. The vertices are the planes landed in the airport
and the two baggage factories, while the edges are the possible connections among them.
In the following, the Sets and the parameters used in the model, respectively, will be
provided.
• I = Set of in­feed stations available at CPH airport.
• F = Set of arriving flights for the time period considered.
• D = Set of possible delays for the baggage to be processed at the in­feed station.
• T = Set of minute in a day.
• Bagsf,i,d = Parameter that identifies the amount of bags the model can delivered if
the plane is assigned to an in­feed station rather than the other one.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
9
==PAGE:20==
• Af,i,d,t = Binary parameter to indicate whether or not a plane can make it to an
in­feed station.
• T_Capi,t = Parameter for the capacity of each in­feed station per minute.
2.2.2
Mathematical Formulation
The following model is meant to maximise the delivered baggage from the arrival flights
to all the connected destinations. In addition, it is considered that every in­feed station
has a capacity and that the baggage must follow the flow of the conveyor belts, since not
all of them can go in any direction.
2.2.3
Decision variables
For this problem the following variable has been used:
• xf,i,d ∈{0, 1}, is a binary variable that indicates whether or not the plane f is as­
signed to the in­feed station i with delay d.
2.2.4
Model
maximize
x ∈{0, 1}
F
∑
f=1
I
∑
i=1
D
∑
d=1
xf,i,d · Bagsf,i,d −
d
D · F
(2.1a)
subject to
I
∑
i=1
D
∑
d=1
xf,i,d = 1
∀f ∈F,
(2.1b)
F
∑
f=1
D
∑
d=1
Af,i,d,t · xf,i,d ≤T_Capi,t
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T
(2.1c)
The objective function 2.1a maximises the number of delivered bags from the arriving
plane to all its connecting flights scheduled. The Bags matrix computes how many bag­
gage can be delivered from plane to plane, considering whether the flight is assigned to
one in­feed station or the other. Additionally, the term −
d
D·F is used to add a penalty to
the objective function in a way that the objective value will, also, consider the amount of
minutes of delay to use. That is done to force the model using the least possible amount
of delays and, thus, keep the solutions more realistic. The first constraint 2.1b, which
is the assignment constraint, ensures that each plane is assigned exactly to one in­feed
station, since it is not possible to split the bags coming from the same plane and get them
scanned in two different factories. Indeed, all the bags from one plane have to follow
the same route to the same in­feed station. Only after that they can be split. Lastly, the
capacity constraint 2.1c ensures that the conveyor belts’ capacity is not exceeded. The
delay index here, operates as if it there were a queue. Therefore, whenever the capacity
is met, the arriving baggage are waiting the necessary time for the belt to be liberated.
2.3
Milkman Routing Problem
The MRP is used to optimize the problem further, addressing the tail­to­tail activity that
is carried out in CPH. Here, the milkman tries to find the optimal path to deliver the most
number of luggage starting from one arrival flight to all its connections, within the TW
given by the actual time of arrival (ata) and the scheduled time of departure (std).
2.3.1
Milkman Notation
Given an undirected complete graph G = (N, A), where N = {0, 1, ..., P} is a set of nodes
representing the aircraft from where the tour will start (node 0) and P departing flights that
10
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:21==
need to receive the baggage, whereas A = N×N is the set of edges connecting the nodes.
A solution for this specific problem is a sequence visiting as many nodes as possible in G
exactly once without the need to come back to node 0.
The following Sets and Parameters, respectively, are considered:
• P = Set of planes.
• T = Latest time in the time window (a layover served by the milkman can last at
most 45 minutes).
• N_Bagi = Demand of bags for each plane i.
• B = Total number of bags the milkman has to deliver.
• Ci,j = Symmetrical distance matrix between plane i and plane j.
• di = Departure time of plane i.
• L = Constant parameter for the loading time per bag.
• S = Speed of the operator while travelling in km/h.
• j0 = Index to define the starting point of the operator’s tour, form where the operator
will leave.
2.3.2
Mathematical Formulation
The model in section 2.3.4 aims to maximise the number of delivered bags in time from
one arriving flight to all the connections it has scheduled. This model is, also, called
tail­to­tail because the baggage are brought from one plane directly to the next without
the need of going through the in­feed station for the scanning. This procedure can be
done in the airport only if the plane comes from a country that is inserted in a ”withe list”.
This, basically, means that the airport follows the same safety regulations as CPH airport.
Therefore, in this thesis all the data analysed are assumed to be on the aforementioned
”withe list”.
2.3.3
Decision Variables
The following decision variables are defined:
• xi,j ∈{0, 1}, ∀(i, j) ∈P, is a binary variable that indicates whether or not the path
between the point i and j is chosen in the solution.
• yi ∈{0, 1}, ∀i ∈P, is a binary variable that states whether or not the operator visits
plane i.
• ti ∈R+\{0}, ∀i ∈P, is a continuous variable that keeps track of the time of delivery
for each plane i.
• si ∈{0, 1}, ∀i ∈P, is a binary slack variable that allows to set the starting point of
the operator’s route.
• ei ∈{0, 1}, ∀i ∈P, is a binary slack variable that allows to set the ending point of
the operator’s route.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
11
==PAGE:22==
2.3.4
Model
In the following the model developed for the milkman routing problem with time windows
is defined:
maximize
y ∈{0, 1}
P
∑
i=1
yi · N_Bagi −
P
∑
i=1
ti
T · P
(2.2a)
subject to
P
∑
i=1
xi,j + sj =
P
∑
i=1
xj,i + ej
∀j ∈P,
(2.2b)
P
∑
i=1
si = 1,
(2.2c)
P
∑
i=1
ei = 1,
(2.2d)
P
∑
j=1
xi,j = yi
∀i ∈P,
(2.2e)
tj0 =B · L,
(2.2f)
tj ≥ti + Ci,j
S
+ N_Bagj · L −M · (1 −xi,j)
∀i ∈P, ∀j ∈P\{j0},
(2.2g)
ti ≤di −N_Bagi · L + M · (1 −yi)
∀i ∈P
(2.2h)
The goal of the objective function 2.2a is to maximise the total number of delivered bags.
Also, a penalty term is added with the same purpose as in the GAP in section 2.2.4.
Without this term the model tends to optimise only for the number of bags and it forgets
about the time, finishing the operator’s tour always at the last minute in the TW. Although
the time is not the most crucial part in this model, it is still quite important in the overall
problem formulation.
Constraint 2.2b ensure that everything that enters the considered node also exits it, forcing
a starting and ending point. In other words, it requires arriving at each plane from exactly
one other plane and that from each plane there is a departure to exactly one other plane.
Constraint 2.2c and 2.2d ensure that the operator starts the tour from the arrival plane and
finishes it in one among the other nodes. Here, the model cares, only, about the starting
point, because there is where the bags have to be withdrawn, while it is meaningless
where the tour ends since the worker is not asked to visit all the planes, but as many as
possible. For this reason the si variable is forced to be 1 at the same position as the one
of the arrival plane (in the P vector).
Constraint 2.2e forces the plane to be visited. Thus, all the baggage for that plane can be
delivered, if and only if the path between i and j is driven by the operator.
Constraint 2.2f simply states that the milkman starts the tour after all the bags are loaded
on the cart.
The last two constraints, 2.2g and 2.2h, are linearized with a big M method, as in Wolsey
[8], and they guarantee that the bags are delivered before the departure of the plane
considering the loading time the distances and the speed of the worker. More in detail,
constraint 2.2g ensures that the time of delivery for the next plane in the tour is greater than
or equal to the delivery time for the previous plane in the tour plus the driving distance
between the two stands and the time needed for loading all the bags on the aircraft.
12
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:23==
Here, it is worth to mention that the index j cannot take the value of the starting point
(j0), because it is not possible, and it would have no meaning, delivering the bags to the
arriving plane. Lastly, constraint 2.2h defines that the operator can visit the plane only if
it is feasible to arrive there and be able to load all the bags before the airplane takes off.
2.4
Knapsack Problem
Finally, a modified 0­1 knapsack problem is implemented to connect the models defined
in sections 2.2 and 2.3. The idea underneath this model is to incorporate the GAP with
the MRP, given as input of the latter the output of the GAP. As a result, the General­
ized Assignment Problem is solved first to get the bags that can be delivered out of the
way. Once these are delivered, all the bags from flights with non deliverable luggage are
handed to the Milkman Routing Problem model to calculate the optimal route. In particu­
lar, the model will choose which flights to perform the tail­to­tail procedure on, subject to
the constraint of the number of Milkmen available per minute of the day.
2.4.1
Notation
Given a set of flights, each with a number of connections (the ”weight” in the KP) and a
number of bags to deliver (the ”value” in the KP), the model will determine which flight to
serve in the collection so that the total amount of flights is less than or equal to the length
of set, and the total amount of deliverable bag is as large as possible.
For this problem, the following Sets and Parameters, respectively, are considered:
• F = Set of Flights.
• T = Set minutes of in a day.
• NM = Number of Milkmen at the airport.
• Bagsi = Set of Bags to deliver in each flight i.
• Milk_Occupiedt,i = Binary matrix identifying if the operator is busy at time t in de­
livering the bags for plane i.
2.4.2
Mathematical Formulation
The model in section 2.4.4 focuses on maximises further the total amount of bags deliv­
ered checking singularly all the planes in the list of flights F.
2.4.3
Decision Variables
For this last model the following variable has been utilized:
• xi ∈{0, 1}, ∀i ∈F, is a binary variable that indicates whether or not the operator
chooses to serve flight i.
2.4.4
Model
maximize
x ∈{0, 1}
F
∑
i=1
xi · Bagsi
(2.3a)
subject to
F
∑
i=1
Milk_Occupiedt,i · xi ≤NM
∀t ∈T
(2.3b)
The objective function 2.3a, as all the previous models, is simply aiming to maximise the
amount of bags delivered per plane i. Constraint 2.3b is ensuring the number of operators
available is respected. Therefore, if there is an overlapping between two or more flights
the value of the xi is chosen according to the value of the parameter NM.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
13
==PAGE:24==
2.5
Discussion of the implementation
In this section, the order of the implementation of the three models is described. Further­
more, some insights are given on how the models are combined and perform together.
Firstly, the assignment model is run to get an initial feasible solution on how to organize
the arriving flights and schedule the baggage flow. Here, a feasible solution is given by
assigning one arriving plane to exactly one of the two in­feed stations. Besides, the track
capacity is limited, so another fundamental requirements, that makes the solution for this
problem feasible, is assigning an amount of flights that is smaller than or equal to the
amount of conveyor belts in the in­feed. To better understand how a feasible solution
should look like for this problem, a graphical example of it is given in figure 2.1. The solu­
tion shows that there are few aspects to consider. First of all, the cost matrix is given by
the amount of bags that the plane would be able to deliver if it is assigned to the ”In­feed
East” rather than ”In­feed New”. It is worth noting that it is not always possible to deliver
all the bags from one flight, no matter what in­feed station is chosen. Moreover, since
this problem is a GAP the constraint that ensures that the in­feed station is assigned to
exactly one flight is replaced by a capacity constraint. In this case, the east station and
the new one can process 2 and 3 flight at the time, respectively. The solution shows the
maximum amount of bags that can be delivered with the described set­up. One last note
is that ”Flight 6” is not assigned to any station yet. Indeed, assuming that all the airplanes
arrive at the same time at their gate, the least profitable in terms of deliverable bags is
Flight 6, which would be queuing until a spot frees up in one of the stations.
Figure 2.1: Graphical example of a feasible solution for the Milkman Routing Problem.
The output of the GAP, other than the objective value with the number of delivered bags,
returns also a list of all the flights which were not able to transfer all the bags to their
destination. The milkman comes in handy when there are short layovers and it would be
quite challenging to get the bags go through the BHS. That is why, from the GAP output
list, the MRP takes as input only those flights that have less than 45 minute connections
and it solves the problem to optimality for each flight. In figure 2.2 a feasible tour for the
MPR is shown.
Here, the milkman has to visit, within the TW, as many aircraft as possible, therefore a
feasible solution is just visiting a node once without the need to have a closed sequence
of visited stands. The picture shows a case where not all the connections have been
met. As a result, in this case the milkman decides not to visit the flight next to the arriving
gate because the time is too little and the amount of bags are probably not worth it. Also,
14
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.2: Graphical example of a feasible solution for the Milkman Routing Problem.
the operator skips the flight in stand C29 because the time is too short, considering the
distance, and they can deliver more bags by visiting only the three gates pointed with
the red arrow. Therefore, the decisions made by the Milkman Routing Problem take into
consideration a combination of the bags that can be delivered and the time windows.
Based on the given solution, the KP is run. It is, in fact, developed for connecting the two
main models GAP and MRP. Basically, what this model does is identifying which flight is
better to serve rather than another one, whenever a conflict arises. A conflict happens
when two planes land at a similar time. In this case, the operator cannot be split and must
make a binary decision on serving which flight gives the highest objective value.
Since the milkman runs free some room and space for the initial Generalized Assignment
Problem, the last step in the execution is running again the GAP to see whether or not the
solution improves without those n bags that could not make it in the first run. That way
the real objective value can be obtained, and it is given by the sum of the solutions of the
KP and the second run of the GAP.
In figure 2.3 a scheme of the implementation is represented.
2.5.1
Technical Implementation
To solve the MIP­models described in this section, a decision had to be made between
implementing algorithms to tackle each problem individually or utilizing a solver. Since
the primary focus of this thesis is not to develop novel solution methods, the decision was
made to employ a commercial solver. By opting for a commercial solver, the expertise of
the solver’s designers can be leveraged without the need to expend resources reinventing
existing solutions.
When selecting a solver for a given problem, multiple aspects need to be considered, in­
cluding performance, interface support, reliability, and price, among others. In this case,
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
15
==PAGE:26==
the Gurobi Optimization Solver [19] was chosen for various reasons. In terms of per­
formance, Gurobi has demonstrated significantly faster computation times compared to
common open­source solvers such as GLPK and CBC (Parzen [20]), and it is on par with,
or slightly outperforms, HiGHS. Additionally, Gurobi provides a wide range of modeling in­
terfaces, including Python and Julia, which reduces the time required to learn how to use
the solver effectively. Another crucial advantage of Gurobi is its rich­feature set, which
enhances its efficiency in solving problems. For example, during the problem­solving
process, Gurobi makes intelligent choices that are likely to result in faster solving times.
However, these benefits come with certain drawbacks. The primary disadvantage is the
cost associated with Gurobi, as it is a commercial software. This pricing model may render
it inaccessible in certain situations, unlike open­source solutions such as GLPK, CBC, and
HiGHS. In the case of this thesis, an academic license provided by DTU circumvented
this obstacle. Another drawback of utilizing Gurobi is its closed­source nature. Despite
its external customizability, the internal workings of the solver are proprietary, making it
impossible to fully comprehend its behavior. Consequently, this may obscure the reasons
behind both good and poor performance with a given problem.
2.5.2
Running Times
The algorithm presented here is planning to be optimized for a whole day. However, it can
be run every 5­minute interval or every time the a new relevant information occurs and
it will be optimized for the next 24 hours. This is done using a rolling horizon approach,
which indicates that a time­dependent model is solved repeatedly, wherein the planning
interval is moved forward in time during each solution step. For this reason, the solving
time of every model must be fast enough for allowing this process.
In order to achieve this certain decisions where taken to decrease the running time. On
one hand, using the Gurobi Solver as explained in section 2.5.1. On the other, offloading
some computation from the model into the preprocessing. This let the implementation
reduce the number of constraints and mathematical complexity, specifically in model 2.4.4,
thus significantly reducing the running time.
16
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.3: Overview of the implementation process with the order followed and the con­
nection among the steps.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
17
==PAGE:28==
18
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:29==
3
Data Processing
In the following chapter the data processing taken for each step of the models will be
explained in detail. Each model implemented needed to receive the data in a certain
format and with some calculations done beforehand to speed up its execution. In the
following sections the steps taken to modify the input data into a format will be shown and
the reasoning behind them will be explained. On top of this, some matrices needed to be
generated from different sources for the models to accurately work, their calculation and
design will be explained in this chapter. Beside this, some synthetic data needed to be
created to further test the models, hence a section dedicated to explaining the procedure
by which these synthetic datasets we created is found in this chapter.
3.1
Data Description
The data provided is split into three different days from 2019 with all the bags that had
a layover at CPH: ”Stor”, ”Mellem” and ”Lille”, which from now on will be referred to as
”Big”, ”Medium” and ”Small”, respectively. In fact, those are a big­size day that has 8433
bags recorded, medium­size day which counts 5043 bags and small­size day with 3282
bags. The instances report different features for each bag (indicated by each row in the
datasets). In the following, only the features relevant for the case and used in chapter 3
for the pre­processing, are described:
• LastSeenConvResult = Baggage status at BHS:
– Normal = The bags are sorted correctly within chute opening times.
– Late = The bags are sorted after chute opening time, but before STD.
– Too Late = The bags are sorted after STD.
• FlightName (Departure) = Name of the departing flight.
• FlightDate (Departure) = Date of the departing flight.
• STD = Scheduled time of departure.
• Stand (Departure) = Stand from where the departing flight is suppose to take off.
• ArrivalFlightName = Name of the arriving flight.
• ArrivalFlightDate = Date of the arriving flight.
• Onblocktime = The time the flight is blocked at the stand allowing the ground han­
dlers to unload the plane.
• ATA = Actual time of arrival.
• Stand (Arrival) = Stand where the departing flight will land.
• WasAtEBS = If the bag was on the early baggage storage.
3.2
Distance Matrix
Besides the datasets mentioned in section 3.1, a distance matrix was required to calculate
tour distances. This will be used both for the model Milkman Routing Problem in section
2.3.4 and for the data pre­processing for the Generalized Assignment Model explained in
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
19
==PAGE:30==
section 3.4. In the first case, it is used to calculate how long it will take the milkman to
reach each gate based on the cart speed, and whether it will be able to reach the plane
before take­off or not. In the second case, it is used to calculate the distance the bags will
have to travel between the arrival gate, each in­feed station (representing both possible
scenarios) and the departure gate, to check whether the bag will make it or not.
To calculate the different route times for the different sub­problems, a matrix of the dis­
tances between the different gates, in­feed stations, and out­feeds across the permitted
driving routes was required. To achieve this, a way­point was created at the connection
of each finger with the central axis, that runs through CPH, and each gate was assigned
to its respective finger way­point. The procedure to calculate distances between any pair
of gates was different depending on whether they belonged to the same finger or not. If
they did, euclidean distance was used. If not, the following procedure was followed: First,
the distance from the starting gate to its respective way­point was calculated, then the
distance through the central axis to the way­point of the destination gate was added, and
finally, the distance from that second way­point to the destination gate was added. Since
all corridors work in both ways, this calculation also gave us the distance of the tour was
done the other way around.
3.2.1
GIS Processing
To calculate the eucliedean distances, a first approach was used wherein Google Maps
was utilized to place a marker on one of the gates, set another at the first way­point, set
another at the second way­point, set another at the destination gate, and take note of
the distance. However, this approach proved to be inefficient, error­prone, and unreliable
since the interface was not designed for this purpose. Another drawback of this approach
was poor replicability, since any change in corridors or gates would mean going through
the process again from scratch.
To address these issues, a Geographic Information System (GIS) was employed. Specif­
ically, QGIS [21] was utilized due to its extensive documentation, relevance to different
courses at DTU, and suitability to our requirements. Points were added for each gate,
in­feed, out­feed, and way­point, as illustrated in figure 3.1.
One feature that became useful for accuracy purposed was its flexibility of choosing the
map projection, which is later used to calculate distances. As the Earth is a spheroid,
it cannot be perfectly represented on a plane without distortions or gaps.
Therefore,
EPSG:25832 was selected to preserve the continuity and minimize distortions in Den­
mark, specifically Copenhagen, to less than a meter.
The first step in order to obtain this distance matrix was to create ”Point Features”, which
are out points of interest, these get names so they can be easily identified, both in the
interface and on further processing. The gates were assigned their proper names, while
the in­feeds were prefixed with ”In”, out­feeds with ”Out”, and way­points with ”Fake”. The
location of each gate was obtained from a PDF file available on the Copenhagen Airport’s
website.
Once all the necessary points were set up, the distance matrix functionality of QGIS was
utilized to obtain the distances between each point. This tool returns Euclidean distances
between all the Point Features in the project, which had to be further processed to calcu­
late the distances through the corridors of interest.
3.2.2
Calculating Distances
After the euclidean distances between all the point were exported from section 3.2.1, the
procedure to calculate distances through the corridors took place. The procedure followed
20
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.1: Screenshot of QGIS showing the different points used to calculate the dis­
tances.
groups of gates belonging to the same finger together, and went from West to East for an
organized approach. Since the corridors described work both ways, this procedure also
returns distances from East to West.
The first step of the procedure is to take the distances between the gates that belong to the
same finger, including the respective fingers way­point. In this case, euclidean distances
work well. After this is done the distances between each gate, from the finger at hand,
and each gate from previously calculated fingers are calculated, by iterating along both
groups of gates for all possible combinations. For sake of the readability, the gate that
belongs to the first group will be called ”starting gate”, and the gate that belongs to the
second group will be called ”destination gate”, even though the distance would be the
same if names were reversed.
The procedure consists of, first taking the distance from the starting gate to its respective
way­point (from the previous calculation). Then adding the distance from this way­point to
the destination gate way­point, this can be just one value, or the sum of distances of the
way­points connecting them along the corridor. Finally the distance from this way­point
to the destination gate is added to the running calculation and saved. This procedure is
done for all gates and all fingers until all the airport has been done.
3.3
CPH Bags ­ Data Cleaning
As mentioned in 3.1 the files provided by CPH hold all the bags that had a layover on
certain days, some of which are not of interest to this project. Thus after the data was im­
ported, the first step was to clean it by removing rows with missing data or error messages.
Only the rows for bags with the column LastSeenConvResult as Normal were kept, as the
other statuses meant there was some problem with the bag that did not concern routing or
assignment. Another set of flights that were removed were those assigned to gates that
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
21
==PAGE:32==
were no longer operational at the airport, since the datasets are from some years ago. In
order to speed up processing time, the ”Flightname” prefix was removed from the flights,
converting this column into integers instead of strings.
During a real case scenario, departing flights would already have an out­feed station as­
signed. As the data did not come with this column, they were assigned randomly to
out­feed station West or East, with probabilities of 0.1 or 0.9, respectively, based on the
recommendation from CPH.
On top of this, all times are converted to minutes since the first flight in the file. This is done
since, for the models, time data is only know when they happen in relation to the 1440
minutes array. Besides this, processing datetime data is significantly more expensive
computationally than integers.
3.4
Generalized Assignment Problem
As described in section 2.2, the approach taken for assigning flights to the in­feed stations
involves precalculating the number of bags that will be delivered to their connecting flight
when assigned to a specific station. Additionally, baggage is allowed to wait at the in­feed
station for up to 8 minutes. The resulting output matrix of this data processing has three
dimensions, including flights, assigned in­feed station, and minutes waiting (ranging from
0 to 7).
Python was used to perform these calculations due to the powerful pandas and numpy
libraries it offers, which are more effective than the dataframe library in Julia. In partic­
ular, Python enables the use of named indexes that do not incur significant overhead,
while Julia requires additional libraries that are not optimized for this purpose. Addition­
ally, we have more experience using these libraries in Python, resulting in a faster script
development time.
Aside from this, a matrix is required to represent the minutes when bags are occupying
the in­feed station tracks, as each in­feed station can only handle two or three flights
simultaneously. With this matrix, we can model the usage of a track by a flight depending
on the assigned in­feed station and its delay. Consequently, the resulting output matrix
will have four dimensions, which are flights, in­feed stations, delayed minutes, and minute
of the day.
3.4.1
Delivered Bags Matrix
Previously mentioned in section 2.2, the model does not directly compute the number of
bags by comparing arrival and departure times. Instead, these calculations are performed
in advance and used as input for the model. There are two reasons for this approach.
First, whether a bag reaches its connection flight depends on the assigned in­feed station
and delay, as it determines the time required for the bag to travel from the arrival flight
to the departure flight. Since the solver we are using will check multiple solutions and
whether they satisfy the constrains, having this requirement as different constrains would
mean they will get calculated multiple times, even though the value will not change given
the same in­feed station and delay. Rather than repeating this comparison within the
model for every checked solution (yielding the same result for the same in­feed station),
we calculate it once and store the results for the model to choose from.
Regarding the calculation, a function was defined where all calculations took place. A file
parameter was received by the function, which points to which file from the ones sent by
CPH, as described in section 3.1, has to be processed. Two HDF5 files were produced
by the function, one for each of the matrices described above.
22
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:33==
Following the data cleaning process from section 3.3, the time it would take for each bag to
complete its full tour, from arrival gate, to in­feed station, to out­feed station, to departure
gate, was calculated for both in­feed stations. The 8 minute waiting period was taken
into account and 8 different instances were created by adding 0 to 7 minutes of waiting
time. Then, this times were compared with the time windows between arrival time of the
incoming flight and schedule departure time of the outgoing flight. If it was smaller than
this, the bag was deliverable to the outgoing flight going through the in­feed station in
question with a waiting period. An important caveat is that the East in­feed station does
not have a conveyor belt connection to the West out­feed station, so the time was set
at 100000 minutes to represent this. This value could be changed in case CPH adds a
conveyor belt or a cart that moves the bags from one station to the other, as explored in
section 4.4.4.
Finally, the data was grouped by flight, in­feed station, and delay, counted, and repre­
sented in the previously described matrix. This matrix was then exported into an HDF5
file for Julia to import and use in the model.
3.4.2
Occupied Tracks Matrix
The matrix representing when a flight has a track occupied is initialized with zeros, and
the flights and waiting periods are iterated over. Using the previously calculated driving
times and arrival times, the minute of the day when bags would reach each in­feed station
from the arrival flight’s gate is calculated. Then, that minute and the next 6 minutes are
filled with 1’s, representing the occupied status. Next, the dimension of the matrix repre­
senting each additional waiting period is iterated over, and 1’s are filled in, shifted by the
corresponding waiting period. Once this process is completed, the matrix is exported as
a HDF5 file.
3.5
Milkman Routing Problem
As discussed in section 2.5, the Milkman Routing Problem is executed for flights with
undeliverable bags. Consequently, it is necessary to develop a function that provides a
summary of connections and the corresponding bag quantities for each individual flight.
These summarized files will serve as the foundation for solving the Milkman Routing Prob­
lem.
Following the data cleaning process outlined in section 3.3, the output file generated by the
initial run of the Assignment Problem, containing a comprehensive list of flights with un­
deliverable bags, was imported. The function systematically iterates through each flight,
filtering the relevant bags associated with the current flight. By creating a subset of the
dataframe with this filtered information, a grouping operation is performed based on mul­
tiple attributes, including destination flight, departure time, departure gate, arrival flight,
arrival time, and arrival gate. This grouping enables the aggregation of bags according to
the respective connections.
Upon completing the grouping operation, the function proceeds to count the number of
rows within each group, providing the total bag count for each connection.
To ensure the preservation and future accessibility of the collected information, the func­
tion saves the output of each iteration as a CSV file. This storage mechanism facilitates
subsequent utilization and analysis of the generated data.
3.6
Knapsack Problem
Regarding the Knapsack Problem described in section 2.4, the algorithm required some
data processing to determine the optimal routes for the model, including the decision of
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
23
==PAGE:34==
which routes to select and which to exclude.
Upon obtaining solutions for the Milkman Routes for each flight with undeliverable bags,
an array was constructed. This array captured essential information such as the start
time, end time, end gate, and the number of bags associated with each route.
In addition to the aforementioned array, another multidimensional array was initialized with
dimensions of 1440 (representing each minute of the day) by the number of flights. Each
element of this array was initially set to zero. Subsequently, an iterative process was con­
ducted for each flight, whereby the corresponding column in the array was populated with
ones. These ones denoted the time interval during which the respective milkman route
would take place, spanning from the minute of initiation until the minute of completion.
This data processing procedure enabled the algorithm to effectively analyze the available
routes and make informed decisions regarding their selection, taking into account factors
such as start and end times, gates, and bag quantities.
The three instances used in this thesis are summarized in table 3.1 after the data cleaning
has been performed.
Number of Flights
Number of Bags
Small­size
213
3068
Medium­size
168
3634
Big­size
266
7770
Table 3.1: Summary of the three datasets used after Data cleaning.
3.7
Synthetic Data
In order to properly test the implementation of the algorithm it needed to run on a wide
range of datasets, more than the ones provided by CPH. Since the only available dataset
represented 3 types of days, Small­size, Medium­size, and Big­size it was necessary
to create synthetic sets of data to further test the implementation of the algorithm. For
this two groups of synthetic datasets, aiming to test two different scenarios, were created.
One for different amount of bags, given randomly, and one with randomly shortened arrival
times.
3.7.1
Random Amount of Bags
The first group kept the connection times but randomized the amount of bags each con­
nection would have. Yet, to keep the data following real amounts and not just random
amounts, a distribution was fitted to the count of bags per connection. Using the python
library distfit [22] the distributions Pareto, Gamma, Beta, Exponential, T, among others
were fitted. With this in hand, they were compared through their respective Residual Sum
of Squares (RSS) error, this can be seen in figure 3.2. From this comparison, the dis­
tribution with the lowest RSS value was chosen, which for all data sets was the Pareto
distribution. For example this distribution fitted to the Medium­size dataset had a RSS
value of 0.0654. The Pareto distribution takes a scale parameter xm and a shape param­
eter α, which take the values 1.36184 and 1.46136, respectively, on top of this it has its
mean displaced by ­0.3618 for this case.
For instance, in figure 3.3 the distribution can be seen overlayed over the empirical data
for the Medium dataset. At first glance, the distribution seems to follow the general trend
of the data. Since the Pareto distribution is a continuous distribution and the dataset is
24
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.2: RSS of tested distributions on Mellem dataset
comprised of discrete values. This means that the distribution underestimates the prob­
ability around integer numbers and overestimates probabilities around the rest. This can
be solved by rounding the numbers to an integer. Here there are three possibilities round
down, round up, or round to the closest integer. Given the values have a lower bound
at 1, rounding up or to the closest integer would leave this lower bound lacking some
frequency that was distributed to the next number, thus it was selected to round down.
Figure 3.3: Pareto Distribution Overlayed over Empirical Data
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
25
==PAGE:36==
Having this in hand, it was possible to generate the random quantities of bags per con­
nection. First, using the generate function of the distribution, an array with one element
per connection was generated. Of course, this numbers were floats for the most part, so
a rounding down step took place. On top of this, given its a continuous distribution there
still is a chance that when drawing numbers a very high value (outlier) will be drawn,
that would not make sense. For this a maximum was set, after which any number would
be rounded down to it. After executing all these steps the final synthetic data set was
obtained.
The synthetic datasets based on the Small, Medium, and Big can be seen in figure 3.4
compared against the original dataset they were based on. These plots indicate that the
synthetic data follows a similar enough distribution without being exactly the same, which
was the aim of this procedure.
26
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.4: Synthetic Amount of Bags vs. Original Amount of Bags
3.7.2
Random Arrival Times
The second group of synthetic datasets’ aim is to test the performance of the models in
the case of shorter layover times. Given the milkman has to pickup the baggage at an
arriving flight and deliver the connecting bags to their respective departure flights within a
time window, the constraining factor is the time allowed for the route to take. In the inter­
est of testing the behaviour of the models, the allowed time for connection was reduced
stochastically.
The reason for doing the reduction this way, and not deterministicly, is to simulate delays
for arriving flights. These delays vary in time length and are not constant for all flights,
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
27
==PAGE:38==
since they can be caused by a wide range of reasons. In some cases, there might still
be some statistical structure to the delays, for example a storm in Copenhagen, but for
the purposes of this simulation these type of cases will not be analyzed. Such type of
simulation would require studying delays that happen in this way and this is out of the
scope of this master thesis. Thus, a uniform distribution was selected to simulate the
length of the delay.
The uniform distribution takes two parameters, minimum and maximum value. For the
minimum, zero was selected, simulating no delay at all. For the maximum some consid­
erations were needed. On the one hand, the intention is to tighten the connection times
by moving the arrival times, but not so much that the arrival flight would land after the
departure flight left. As explained in section 3.3, this occurrences were filtered out of the
dataset, so there is no need to create them in the synthetics. To achieve this, the pro­
cedure iterated over an array of unique arrival flights, were it checked all the connecting
departing flights and picked the earliest one. With this time, minus the corresponding ar­
rival time of the flight of the iteration, it was possible to obtain the shortest connection time
any bag in that flight had. This time was used as the maximum parameter for the uniform
distribution, thus the most any connection time could be reduced to was zero, keeping
data integrity.
The resulting distributions can be seen in figure 3.5 for the three scenarios. This plot
shows how the distribution of the delays shifted closer to zero, without losing its general
shape for all scenarios, which was the intended result.
28
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.5: Connection Time Distributions
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
29
==PAGE:40==
30
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:41==
4
Testing
In the following chapter the strategy used to test the correct functioning of the models
implementation from section 2 are presented. Besides, the preliminary results of the three
main instances, given by CPH airport, are going to be discussed in section 4.2. Moreover,
the way the models have been tested and pushed to their limits to verify their sensitivity
is going to be deeply analyzed in sections 4.3 and 4.4.
All the experiments were performed using the Julia Programming language and more
specifically the ”JuMP” library was employed. This library is quite functional for imple­
menting mathematical models, both for linear programming (LP) and mixed integers pro­
gramming problems (MIP), since it allows to write the mathematical formulation from the
objective function to all the constraints using a very simple syntax. In order to solve prob­
lems, JuMP get help from various types of MIP­solvers, and the one chosen for carrying
out all the tests described in this chapter is Gurobi Optimizer version 10.0.1 running on a
MacBook Air with an M1 CPU.
4.1
Testing Strategy
All the experiments that have been run in this thesis have a specific purpose, in general
they aim to test how well the models combined together perform under different extreme
circumstances.
Real Data analysis
More in detail, in section 4.2 the results and the performance of the model is presented
and described thoroughly with the aid of figures and plots. Here, the datasets used are
the ones given by CPH and they represent real records of three different days in 2019,
which are presented in 4.2.3, 4.2.2 and 4.2.1 as high season, medium season and low
season, respectively.
Quality analysis
Then, the quality of the solution has been evaluated in section 4.3 by modifying the distri­
bution of the bags to deliver, per each unique connection. That was carried out to assess
the ability of the model to handle different bag capacities and experiment, that way, how
much the solutions are affected by the number of bags. Besides, random delays were
added to all the arriving planes to examine the behaviour of the models in its worst case
scenario. More insights on this are given in section 4.3.2.
Sensitivity analysis
In section 4.4, the goal is to inspect the sensitivity of the system described in section 2,
that means analysing how reactive the model is to changes in its initial input parameters
or, more broadly, its initial conditions. Firstly, the whole program is run choosing different
numbers of milkmen for solving the knapsack problem and tuning this value to analyse
whether one operator should be used for accomplishing the tasks or more milkmen should
work together to improve the performance. Is this worth to do? How much improvement
can be gained by adding one additional person in the system?
Moreover, in subsection 4.4.2, the model is fed with a very large instance, which probably
will never be experienced by CPH, to assess again its performance and, also, examine
whether and at which point it would break returning an infeasible solution. Why would
this happen and under which conditions? Another test that has been done is tuning the
parameter that identifies the number of tracks available in each one of the in­feed stations.
Here, the goal is to investigate how varies the solution if more tracks are added in the
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
31
==PAGE:42==
stations. That is done because every track can process baggage from one plane at the
time, so adding more tracks should improve the solution. Though, is it worth based on
the improvement?
Lastly, in section 4.4.4 a new situation is explored that considers the connection between
the east in­feed station and the west out­feed station to exist. As a result, nowadays the
only connection that CPH is planning to allow, for the east inbound station, is to the east
out­feed station. This experiment is tested using two different scenarios. What happens if
an additional conveyor belt linked the two stations, to allow a connection in any direction?
How would the solution change? Another scenario could be using the milkman to carry
the bags from one station to the other. In that case, how many milkmen would CPH need
to deliver the most number of bags, given that now the operator has two different tasks?
Figure 4.1: Bags distribution over time per studied instance.
32
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:43==
4.2
Testing ­ Real Data
In this section, the results on the real data given by CPH are going to be presented. For
every instance the final output along with the outputs of each step illustrated in figure 2.3
are explained and discussed.
The first aspect that is worth to mention is how the distribution of the flights during the three
different days looks like. Figure 4.1 shows the distribution of the three datasets, small,
medium and big, respectively. It can be seen, from the picture, that based on the season,
various peaks in the arriving flights are observed. That might increase or decrease the
chances for the model to deliver all the baggage in the BHS. The reason for this may be
that having many flights concentrated in a short period of time would congest the whole
system and making it much harder to manage. As a result, more resources would be
needed to carry out the job.
4.2.1
Small­size day instance
Although the number of bags distributed over time is a good indicator to get insights on
how challenging might be the delivery task, it is not the only one. As a matter of fact, the
results bring to hypothesize that the amount of planes arriving to the in­feed at the same
time, also, affects the performance of the system.
Figure 4.2: Number of arriving flights that overlaps the arriving time at the assigned in­feed
station.
In figure 4.2 the number of planes queuing for getting processed to the in­feed station
is represented. As the graph shows, since 06:00 a.m., about when the airport starts its
activities, every hour at least one plane is waiting few minutes before accessing the BHS,
even though it is the smallest instance and the amount of bags to deliver is relatively small.
On the other hand, in the Small dataset the results obtained are pretty promising as ex­
pected (Table 4.1), since the small size of it and its distribution that does not present
important peaks of bags to handle. As a result, the highest spike in the time series (in
figure 4.1) counts about 670 bags. Considering that the capacity of each in­feed station
at the CPH is around 1200 bags per hour, these spikes can be handled decently together
with the delays that will never be more than 8 minutes (the time a bag takes to go through
the BHS system). Also, the output of the GAP shows that 36 planes were assigned to the
east in­feed station (the existing one) and 177 were assigned to the new in­feed station.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
33
==PAGE:44==
The main reason for that is that the new one is meant to move the baggage in any direc­
tion and to any outbound station without constraints, whereas the existing in­feed station
can only transfer the luggage to the closest outbound station. The table 4.1 shows, also,
the results obtained running the knapsack problem. In this case, the flights that could
be taken over by the milkman are 24. Likewise, in the generalized assignment problem,
the operator has to make a decision on which plane is more worthy to serve, since there
are periods during the day where more flights are overlapping. Thus one milkman cannot
visit all the planes at the same time and this decision is made by maximising the amount
of bags that can be delivered. Figure 4.3 presents all the flights that could not make it
through the BHS during the day because of a too tight time between the arriving flight and
the connection. Here, on the y­axis are represented the flights among which the milkman
has to choose. The flights that were not chosen are marked in red, while the ones that the
operator served are marked in blue. The y­axis is named ”Task” because this can also
be seen as a job planning problem, where the flights are the tasks that must be handled
and the milkman represents the resource that can process them. The duration can be
modeled as a function that express the time the milkman takes to finish the tour for the
chosen arriving flight.
Figure 4.3: Gantt chart showing the milkman schedule during the day in the Small­size
day instance
To give a clearer explanation of this, figure 4.4 shows a window of 45 minutes where the
milkman has to intervene. Here, four are the flights that are overlapping and a decision
must be taken. As shown in the Gantt chart, the operator decides to serve the aircraft
carrying the most number of bags, that is the one marked in blue. As a result, it has 20
bags against a total of 7 carried by the other three planes that are on block at the same
time. It is obvious how this choice is much more convenient in terms of maximising the
delivered bags.
34
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.4: 45 minutes window in the milkman schedule, showing the operator’s choice.
Finally, table 4.1 shows the outputs of the problems analysed in terms of baggage de­
livered from plane to plane. More in detail, the ”Absolute” column presents the absolute
number of delivered bags over the total in each stage of the implementation. The last row
of the table shows the second run of the generalized assignment problem where its ob­
jective value is summed to the knapsack problem result. It is worth noting that this second
run is done because the milkman has the ability to deliver all the bags from one specific
plane to all its connections no matter how wide the time window is. Thus, the amount of
bags to handle drops, and since some bags that were transferred to the in­feed station
now are taken care of by the milkman, there is the possibility of delivering more bags to
the in­feed stations from the arriving plane than before. Although not that significant, an
improvement is revealed and is about 1% of the total bags took into consideration in the
instance.
Delivered Bags
Percentage
Percentage Lost
GAP
3009/3068
98.08%
1.92%
KP
60/76
78.95%
21.05%
GAP ­ Re­run
3048/3068
99.35%
0.65%
Table 4.1: Percentages of Delivered and Missed Bags in Small Scenario based on Real
dataset.
4.2.2
Medium­size day instance
The same representations made for the small day dataset are presented for the medium
one. The graph showing the planes that have been delayed because of the capacity of
the in­feed station is given in figure 4.5.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.5: Number of arriving flights that overlaps the arriving time at the assigned in­feed
station for the Medium­size day instance.
The flights seem to be well distributed even though the size of the instance is getting bigger
and, thus, the model has to deal with more bags and more flights. Moreover, the highest
peak, of 4 aircraft arriving together to the in­feed station, is detected to be after 21:00,
which seems a bit unusual. Also, comparing the delays with the bags distribution one can
see that some of the peaks match. For instance, around 15:00 the bags to handle go over
800 and at the same time there are queues up to 3 airplanes waiting to access the BHS.
This is quite relevant because more baggage coming from different planes means a longer
processing time in the system plus the waiting time due to the queue, without mentioning
all the related operations, and this increase the risk of a bag to miss the connection.
Figure 4.6: Gantt chart showing the milkman schedule during the day in the Medium­size
instance
Another interesting fact is the way the flights are assigned to the two in­feed stations. In
fact, 28 are the planes that are served by the existing station and 140 the ones processed
36
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:47==
by the new station. The difference remains significantly high like it happened in the small­
size day dataset and the reason might, again, be the same, which is given by the flexibility
of the new in­feed station that can ship the luggage in all directions.
The output of the Generalized Assignment Problem is a list of flights with the associated
number of missed bags. These information are used as inputs for the second part of the
algorithm, the knapsack problem. In figure 4.6 all the 18 flights that could not deliver at
least one bag are represented in a Gantt chart.
Figure 4.7: 45 minutes window in the milkman schedule, showing the operator’s choice.
Here, the milkman has to pick the most profitable airplanes to serve. The picture shows
a situation where is not too complicated to take decision and it is, also, easy to deliver the
most bags. When the day gets crowded, though, few situations can appear challenging.
One example is give in figure 4.7, where the milkman has to choose among three planes
that overlap around the mid of the morning. As shown in the picture, it is worth more to
visit the arriving flight in blue because that way 15 bags can be delivered, compared to 9
and 2 for the other two. The choice here is logical, in fact not even if the milkman had the
opportunity to visit two planes at the same time he would have been able to deliver more
bags than he actually did.
At last, table 4.2 shows the results for the medium­size day instance where the absolute
values are compared to the percentage of delivered baggage. As previously seen in the
small­size day instance, a small improvement is revealed between the first and the second
run of the assignment problem. Here, almost an increment of the 2% is verified, which is
equal, in absolute terms, to 66 more bags delivered. This shows that the milkman run in
between did help the system in becoming leaner solving some bottlenecks.
Delivered Bags
Percentage
Percentage Lost
GAP
3479/3634
95.73%
4.27%
KP
71/89
79.78%
20.22%
GAP ­ Re­run
3545/3634
97.55%
2.45%
Table 4.2: Percentages of Delivered and Missed Bags in Medium Scenario based on Real
dataset.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
37
==PAGE:48==
4.2.3
Big­size day instance
In this section the results of the last real dataset given by CPH are presented. Firstly, a
graph illustrating the planes delayed during the day is shown in 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Number of arriving flights that overlaps the arriving time at the assigned in­feed
station for the Big­size day instance.
Here, the distribution of flights that have to wait in a line is definitely more dense and
with more airplanes queuing at the time, on average. This event is quite reasonable and
predictable given the size of the dataset, which is twice as big than the medium one, and
the bags distribution which has a peak of about 1500 baggage to manage at the same
time. Moreover, the second busiest moment for the system is detected to be around 12:00
where the number of flights lining up is 5. Comparing this with the bags distribution, is fairly
easy to notice that at the same time a high spike is registered. Therefore, as expected
the distribution of the bags is somehow related with the amount of delays that the system
has to utilize to be able to assign each and every plane to exactly one station.
Figure 4.9: Gantt chart showing the milkman schedule during the day in the Big instance
38
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:49==
Once again, the flights directed to the new station are a much larger number (224) than
the ones scanned in the existing inbound station (42), for the same reason previously
explained.
Among all the arriving flights managed in this dataset only 37 end up to still have some
bags to deliver. In figure 4.9 the Gantt chart showing the flights among which the milkman
has to choose is presented. The graph shows marked in blue the choices of the milkman
and in red the flights that are not worthy to visit. Whenever two or more flights are over­
lapping, in terms of time, the operator chooses according to the objective function defined
in the models, which aims to maximise the number of delivered bags.
Figure 4.10: 45 minutes window in the milkman schedule, showing the operator’s choice.
That is the reason why, in figure 4.10 the milkman makes that decision. As a matter of
facts, given the duration of each tour and the number of bags that can be delivered in time
there are no other planes worth more than the one marked in blue, not even combining
two flights it is possible to overcome 11 bags. This confirms, one more time, that the
knapsack problem is correctly optimized.
Finally, the table 4.3 shows the results for this last instance, again, comparing absolute
and percentage values of delivered luggage. From the second run of the Generalized As­
signment problem the solution gain about one percentage point, that is not much but con­
sidering the actual value, 61 bags delivered, it is aligned with the two smaller instances.
Another interesting fact to point out is the job carried out by the milkman, that appears
in the second row of the table. Here, indeed, even though the percentage of delivered
bags is by far worse than the small and the medium datasets the milkman manages to
delivered the most number of bags in absolute terms, which is 76.
Delivered Bags
Percentage
Percentage Lost
GAP
7636/7770
98.28%
1.72%
KP
76/136
55.88%
44.12%
GAP ­ Re­run
7697/7770
99.06%
0.94%
Table 4.3: Percentages of Delivered and Missed Bags in Big Scenario based on Real
dataset.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
39
==PAGE:50==
4.2.4
General results
To sum up, the distribution of the bags and the distribution of delayed flights appear to be
partially related, in fact when a spike is registered in one of them, sometimes is registered
also in the other. Also, the analysis shows that the way the data are distributed affects the
output of the algorithm, however the combination of the two aforementioned distributions
is not enough. The number of arriving flights during the day and the amount of connec­
tions that each flight have are also important to consider if one wants to understand the
behaviour of the models. Given the combination of all those elements, it is not so simple
to explain what logic is behind the knapsack outcomes. Indeed, the medium size has the
biggest increment (table 4.4), however this cannot be really argued because it is probably
very much related to the randomness of the luggage turnout and the way the flights are
connected to each other.
Absolute
Percentage
Small­size
39
1.27%
Medium­size
66
1.82%
Big­size
61
0.78%
Table 4.4: Increment of delivered bags between 1st and 2nd run of the Assignment Prob­
lem.
Despite this deficiency, it must be said that the intervention of the milkman does help
freeing up space in the system to let other bags be transferred to the stations. It might not
be too useful in these deterministic scenarios where everything is assumed to work as
intended, but in a more realistic scenarios where complications arises and maybe more
shrinked TW occurred or yet a different distribution of the baggage, that can modify the
processing time of a plane, the milkman could really make the difference.
4.3
Testing ­ Synthetic Data
In this section the goal is to stretch the algorithm testing it with two synthetic instances to
see how well it performs compared to the original data and check whether the combination
of the three models add value to the research and whether it was worth to experiment
with.
In section 4.3.1 is discussed the experiment with a different bag distribution over time
for each of the original datasets, while in section 4.3.2 is analysed the behaviour of the
algorithm when all the arriving flights are delayed randomly.
4.3.1
Number of bags
During this experiment the discrete connections between different flights were kept from
the original data, but the number of bags each connection had was randomized following
the procedure outlined in section 3.7.1. As mentioned in section 4.1, the goal of this
experiment was to test the algorithm with different datasets similar enough to the original
data but not the same. This would be homologous to feeding another day from the same
instance size to the algorithm and seeing how it behaves.
To achieve this wider testing, 10 samples we created for each instance size, and ran
through the algorithm. This provides a better overview of the performance of the algorithm
than just testing a specific dataset, where the algorithm might be very well tuned to, but not
work correctly with slight deviations. Each sample generated different amounts of bags,
which is way they were compared on the delivery percentage rather than their absolute
bag counts.
40
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:51==
The results of this testing can be seen in table 4.5 along with the average and standard
deviation for each, and in figure 4.11 where all three instances hover around the same
value. From this table, results indicate that the algorithm behaves as expected with around
a 97% delivery rate. Even more, for the medium instance the average comes close to
99%. As expected, the big instance is where results started to decrease, as collisions
between the flight times causes more bags not to be delivered. Beyond these averages,
the standard deviation for all instances was below one, showing a very low spread of
delivery rates, which is desirable.
Experiment Num.
Small Size
Medium Size
Big Size
1
97.8%
98.9%
97.3%
2
96.6%
99.3%
97.1%
3
98.2%
98.8%
97.3%
4
99.4%
98.9%
97.8%
5
98.3%
99.2%
97.3%
6
98.7%
99.1%
97.8%
7
98.3%
99.1%
97.4%
8
98.6%
99.0%
96.8%
9
98.4%
99.1%
97.1%
10
97.9%
99.0%
97.3%
Average
98.2
99.0
97.3
Std. Dev.
0.73
0.15
0.30
Table 4.5: Delivery Rate per Instance per Run
Figure 4.11: Average Delivery Rate per Instance with Std. Deviation Bar
4.3.2
Random times
As mentioned in section 4.1, the goal of reducing the connection times is to test the mod­
els in the case of smaller connections, which would be the worst case scenario. Since,
currently, CPH has the policy to only guarantee the delivery of baggage that has a con­
nection time of 45 minutes or more, this was set as the guiding principle for the design
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
41
==PAGE:52==
choices of the model. The reasoning behind this threshold comes from the fact that, on
average, a trip from a gate to an in­feed station takes 15 minutes, so 30 minutes back
and forth, plus 8 minutes of processing at the in­feed station, plus 8 minutes of leeway.
In order to test this, synthetic data was generated as explained in Section 3.7.2.
In this section, it is explored what would happen if multiple flights arrival in Copenhagen
were delayed, skewing the connection times closer to zero, thus stressing the system. The
real world reasoning for this could be a cascade reaction between delayed flights, like on
that occurred in January 2023, because of a system outage, as described in Koenig [23].
The first impact, a change like this would have on the system, is that less bags will be
delivered through the first execution of the generalized assignment model, since they will
not be able to do the round trip. This can be caused in two ways. First is, if the connection
time has shrunk so much that the bag is not able to do the full trip before the departing
flight leaves. In other words, if the connection time is smaller than the time required for
the full trip. The second case is, if even though the bags have enough time to go through
the whole system, they are delayed due to all tracks being occupied, thus not being able
to be processed. These two reasons will shift more bags from the first assignment state
into the knapsack state in the synthetic data than from the real data.
In turn, this has a second order impact, the knapsack model will have more milkman routes
to allocate. Given the number of milkmen available is not increasing, but the number of
routes is. As a percentage, less routes will be chosen from the available ones. Thus
leading to less bags delivered in total.
In order to test this eventuality, the full model was executed with the 3 real datasets and
3 datasets with their times modified. The results of these executions, for both real and
synthetic data, can be seen in Tables 4.6, 4.7, and 4.8. Across all of them there is a clear
pattern, the models are able to deliver less bags per stage in the synthetic datasets. To
start with, during the first execution of the generalized assignment model, across the three
scenarios, the synthetic datasets yielded results 20% lower than the real datasets. Due
to the two reasons stated above.
Small ­ Real
Lost Bags
Small ­ Synthetic
Lost Bags
GAP
(3009/3068) 98.08%
1.92
(2503/3154) 79.36%
20.64
KP
(60/76) 78.95%
21.05%
(429/645) 66.51%
33.49%
GAP ­ Re­run
(3048/3068) 99.35%
0.65%
(2913/3154) 92.36%
7.64%
Table 4.6: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Small Scenario in Real vs Synthetic Data
Medium ­ Real
Lost Bags
Medium ­ Synthetic
Lost Bags
GAP
(3479/3634) 95.73%
4.27%
(2941/3712) 79.23%
20.77%
KP
(71/89) 79.78%
20.22%
(569/790) 72.03%
27.29%
GAP ­ Re­run
(3545/3634) 97.55%
2.45%
(3445/3712) 92.81%
7.19%
Table 4.7: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Medium Scenario in Real vs Synthetic Data
42
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:53==
Big ­ Real
Lost Bags
Big ­ Synthetic
Lost Bags
GAP
(7636/7770) 98.28%
1.72%
(6090/7770) 78.38%
21.62%
KP
(76/136) 55.88%
44.12%
(791/1559) 50.74%
49.26%
GAP ­ Re­run
(7697/7770) 99.06%
0.94%
(6845/7770) 88.10%
11.90%
Table 4.8: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Big Scenario in Real vs Synthetic Data
After this stage, the knapsack model is executed, which also yielded lower results but the
difference was not as big as the previous step. The first thing to notice is the substantial
increase in the amount of bags handled in this stage, in all scenarios there is a 9­fold
increase, or more, from the real to the synthetic datasets, which seems to follow the
logic stated before. Besides this, when looking at the amount of flights that the knapsack
model has to handle, seen in Table 4.9, there is another clear increase. All instances had
an increase of around 5 times more flights. Though, it is important to highlight that when
comparing real vs. synthetic per instance, most of the flights in the synthetic scenario that
are not in the real are flights with one bag.
Real ­ Datasets
Synthetic ­ Dataset
Small
24
105
Medium
18
83
Big
37
156
Table 4.9: Flights with bags that need to be delivered by a Milkman
Upon further inspection of the difference in results, this result stems from whether the
bags, that become delayed with the data modification, arrive in a flight that is already
being attended by the milkman or not. The reason for this is that such a bag becomes
”easy” to deliver for the algorithm since that flight was already good enough to assign a
milkman before, and thus another bag to deliver increases the objective function at no
cost. Now, on the other side of the coin are all the bags that become the single bag that
will not make it on that arriving flight, like noted before. For the most part these flights
with single bags were not attended, increasing the count of missed bags. In the end this
second effect turns out to be stronger than the first one, but it still helps explain why the
delivery rate in this stage does not decrease as much with the time modifications.
Finally the second generalized assignment model execution. Here the trend continues
as all the values of the synthetic datasets are lower than those of the real datasets, yet it
helps illustrate the benefit of running all the different stages together. When executing the
models with the real datasets, there was around a 1% improvement, which is still helpful
for the airport in terms of number of complains and fees to pay. Yet when looking at the
synthetic data sets, the improvements ranged from 6% to 16%, making a significantly
higher contribution to the overall delivered bags, and adding a degree of redundancy to
the system.
4.4
Sensitivity
4.4.1
Number of vehicles
The first experiment that was run was varying the number of milkmen present at the airport.
Equation 2.3b stands for the constraint that represents the number of available milkmen
at the airport. By changing NM it is possible to recompute the model with more or less
of them available at any given moment. This test provides insight into the usefulness
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
43
==PAGE:54==
of hiring additional workers, and buying additional carts, to perform the task of taking
baggage tail­to­tail.
Given the results from Section 4.2 where the milkman had a considerable impact in the
amount of delivered bags, that would otherwise have missed their flight, it would be in­
teresting to see how the system behaves with more or less of them. For this, the setup
consisted in varying the NM variable from 0 to 10, observing and plotting the results to
draw conclusions.
Since the first stage of the algorithm, the first run of the generalize assignment model, is
not affected by the number of milkmen available, it was not analyzed over this tests, as it
behaved the same way as in Section 4.2.
The results of this tests can be seen in tables 4.10 and 4.11. The first table compares the
amount of delivered bags by the knapsack stage of the model vs the number of milkmen
available, and the second compares, in percentage terms, the amount of bags that were
not delivered vs. the number of milkmen available, for all three instances. For the analysis
it was also considered the case where no milkman is available as a common starting point
for all instance, since this stage will not deliver any bags in that situation.
Number of Vehicles
Small Size
Medium Size
Big Size
0
0
0
0
1
60
71
76
2
72
87
101
3
76
89
118
4
76
89
129
5
76
89
133
6
76
89
135
7
76
89
136
Table 4.10: Number of Delivered Bags vs. Number of Vehicles Available
Number of Vehicles
Small Size
Medium Size
Big Size
0
100%
100%
100%
1
21%
20%
44%
2
5%
2%
26%
3
0%
0%
13%
4
0%
0%
5%
5
0%
0%
2%
6
0%
0%
1%
7
0%
0%
0%
Table 4.11: Percentage of not Delivered Bags vs. Number of Vehicles Available
For this experiment, it was expected that at some value the knapsack would be able to
deliver all available bags, which was indeed the case. Both for the small and medium
instances the value turned out to be 3 milkmen, while for the big instance it was 7.
As seen in figures 4.12 and 4.13, each additional milkman has a smaller impact in the
number of delivered bags than the previous one. This makes sense, since there are less
and less bags to deliver. From this results, some suggestions could be provided to CPH,
44
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:55==
like adding 1 or 2 milkmen to daily operations, and considering increasing the number
during high­traveller seasons.
Figure 4.12: Delivered Bags by Number of Vehicles
Figure 4.13: Percentage of Delivered Bags by Number of Vehicles
Given each additional milkman would cost CPH some amount, the suggestion here is not
to hire as many milkman as it takes to reduce this number to zero, but rather use this as
an input to find the appropriate value. with this in mind, multiple things would have to be
considered from the point­of­view of the airport, such as wages, cost of the carts, cost
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
45
==PAGE:56==
of gasoline, etc. but these are beyond the scope of this thesis. For the moment, what
can draw is that around 7 milkmen should be the upper bound of milkmen to consider,
assuming a similar distribution of flights and baggage.
4.4.2
Huge­size day instance
In order to test the behaviour of the algorithm under extreme circumstances the Huge
instance was created with different variations of it. To create this set of instances, first the
medium and small instances were added together, then a percentage of this was added
to the big instance. The percentages utilized were 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100%.
The goal of creating such instances was to test the algorithm in case a day bigger than
the big day happened. This was done not only because it test the algorithm in harder
conditions than what it was created for, but also because such situations can occur in
case of a shock to the air­travel system. This way it would be possible for CPH take
action accordingly and prepare for the situation.
Once these instances were fed to the algorithm the resulting were taken note of and can
be seen in tables 4.12 and 4.13, with emphasis on different aspects depending on the
table. Table 4.12 allows for direct comparison between the different variations of the huge
dataset, as it is only percentage based.
In this table it is possible to see that, as expected, the bigger the instance, the lower the
delivery rate, which can also be seen in figure 4.14. Yet when comparing the amount
of bags not delivered the performance of the algorithm looks worse, since the lost bags
grows faster than the instances. For instance, taking the instance Huge (20%) as the
reference point, it lost 136 out of 9097 total bags, while Huge (100%) lost ∼5 times more,
with a size of the instance only 1.6 times bigger.
Upon inspecting the reason behind this, the saturation of the resources was the culprit. As
size increases, the tracks at the infeed stations and the number of milkmen do not grow,
but beyond a point they are occupied most of the time. As the size increases, more bags
are not able to be processed and obstruct delay even more bags from being processed as
this creates a queue. This drives the amount of lost bags faster, the bigger the instance
is. Hence, if CPH saw this situation about to occur, up­scaling the resources would help
alleviate the problem. Further simulations with different amounts of resources would be
required to determine the right amount to increase it by.
GAP
KP
GAP ­ Re­run
Huge (20%)
(8903) 97.87 %
(63) 54.78%
(8961) 98.51%
Huge (40%)
(10154) 97.08%
(72) 47.06%
(10213) 97.65%
Huge (60%)
(11398) 96.38%
(77) 42.08%
(11462) 96.92%
Huge (80%)
(12571) 95.47%
(93) 42.86%
(12643) 96.02%
Huge (100%)
(13744) 94.70%
(108) 45.00%
(13812) 95.05%
Table 4.12: Percentage of delivered bags for every huge instance.
Huge (20%)
Huge (40%)
Huge (60%)
Huge (80%)
Huge (100%)
GAP
194
305
428
596
769
GAP ­ Re­run
136
246
364
524
701
Total bags
9097
10459
11826
13167
14513
Table 4.13: Lost bags for every huge instance.
46
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.14: Percentage of lost bags per huge instance
4.4.3
Number of tracks
Another experiment run to evaluate the sensitivity of the algorithm includes increasing the
number of tracks for each in­feed station, that means increasing the capacity of the sys­
tem in order to reduce the waiting time of the flights lining up before accessing the BHS.
That would increase the velocity of the whole system and hopefully help improving the
solutions to the problems.
Given all the distribution graphs of the delayed flights shown in the previous sections (4.2,
4.5, 4.8), it seemed a good idea to take the highest peak in each of them and increase
the tracks accordingly. For example, in the small­size day instance the highest number of
flights queuing at BHS is 4, so 4 tracks were added to the system split as dictated by the
flight frequency in the two in­feed stations. As a result, the ”new station” had more tracks
added in every scenario compared to the ”east station”.
In table 4.14 the original results are compared with the ones obtained augmenting the
tracks for the new and east stations from 3 and 2 to 6 and 3, respectively. The values in
the table are clear, no improvements have been revealed increasing the capacity of the
system. This leads to believe that, given the arrival and departure times, there is nothing
that can be done to speed up the bags that are going to be missed. Also, the results in
this scenario are really good. Indeed, only 20 bags out of 3068 (0.65%) are going to miss
the connection.
However, something that might be worth noticing is that the stations now are serving
different amount of planes and the new one seems to be less overloading than before, in
fact the 46 flights are processed by the east in­feed station against the 36 in the original
scenario, whereas 167 would be the aircraft that access the new in­feed station if 6 tracks
were used instead of 3 compared to the 177 in the real data scenario.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
47
==PAGE:58==
Small ­ Real
Lost Bags
Small ­ Tracks
Lost Bags
GAP
(3009/3068) 98.08%
1.92%
(3009/3068) 98.08%
1.92%
GAP ­ Re­run
(3048/3068) 99.35%
0.65%
(3048/3068) 99.35%
0.65%
Table 4.14: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Small­size Scenario in Real vs Tracks Data
Regarding the medium­size dataset, table 4.15 shows the same comparison just pre­
sented for the small dataset. Here, something interesting occur, that is a tiny improve­
ment in the first generalized assignment run while the same exact number of bags are
delivered in total at the end of the second run of the model. In this case, the highest spike
in the delayed flights distribution was 3, which means that 3 plane were queuing at the
same time. Therefore, 3 more tracks were added to the system, 1 to the east station and
2 to the new one. Despite the 3 more bags delivered in time in the first run, the objective
value did not change. Thus, the same conclusions discussed for the small instance can
be drawn for this scenario.
Contrary to the previous case, the distribution of the flights between the two in­feed station
happened to be more biased on the new one. Indeed, 152 flights visit it against the 140
in the original scenario, while 16 visit the east in­feed station compared to the 28 in the
previous case.
Medium ­ Real
Lost Bags
Medium ­ Tracks
Lost Bags
GAP
(3479/3634) 95.73%
4.27%
(3481/3634) 95.78%
4.22%
GAP ­ Re­run
(3545/3634) 97.55%
2.45%
(3545/3634) 97.55%
2.45%
Table 4.15: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Medium­size Scenario in Real vs Tracks
Data
Lastly, the big­size day instance is the only one that reveals, although really small, some
improvements. More in detail, the tracks were intensified by 5, 3 in the new station and
2 in the existing one. That has been done because the delayed flights distribution in
figure 4.8 displays 8 to be the longest queue in the BHS. As shown in table 4.16 the first
Generalized Assignment run counts 8 more bags delivered, while overall 6 more bags
can make it through the system and catch the connection. Other that that, the frequency
of the planes at every in­feed station does not change that much. In fact, the difference
is given by a plane that is processed in the east in­feed station instead of the new one.
Big ­ Real
Lost Bags
Big ­ Tracks
Lost Bags
GAP
(7636/7770) 98.27%
1.73%
(7644/7770) 98.37%
1.23%
GAP ­ Re­run
(7697/7770) 99.06%
0.94%
(7703/7770) 99.13%
0.87%
Table 4.16: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Big­size Scenario in Real vs Tracks Data
All that said and giving the nature of the data inputted, widely presented in section 3, in
the algorithm, changing the capacity of the baggage factory by expanding the number
of conveyor belts does not really affect the solution. That can be explained by the fact
that having to wait for at most 8 minutes does not affect significantly the baggage flow.
Besides, since the models are maximizing for the amount of bags delivered, the critical
luggage should have the priority in the queue, resulting in stretching the delay for the ones
that need to meet a later connection. Therefore, the missed bags are the one that cannot
be transferred not even with delay equal to 0.
48
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:59==
On the other hand, adding tracks to the system does have an impact on how the flights are
assigned to the two stations, but that does not affect the results as shown in the related
tables. This is because, logically, in some circumstances it is more beneficial to move a
plane to another station. This does not change the fact that the east in­feed station, being
less flexible, it will always receive far fewer flights than the new one.
4.4.4
East ­ New connection
It occurs that the major difference between the two in­feed stations is their connections
with the outbound stations (in fact, the east station is connected with the east outbound,
whereas the new in­feed station is connected with both the outbound stations) and that
seems, also, to be the major reason that leads the decision of which flight to assign to
the factory. Therefore, in this section is tested how the output would change if the east
in­feed station and the west outbound station were connected.
Specifically, experiments are conducted by hypothesising that a conveyor belt, or a bag­
gage handler with a cart, connects the two locations.
In the following tables 4.17, 4.18 and 4.19, once again, the original scenario is compared
to the new setting, meaning a situation where the connection between east inbound and
west outbound exists, for each dataset.
As expected, this new conformation definitely helps the baggage handling system by de­
livering more bags in each Generalized Assignment run, reducing the amount of bags the
milkman has to deal with and, lastly, spreading more evenly the flights between the two
inbound stations.
Small ­ Real
Lost Bags
Small ­ Conveyor belt
Lost Bags
GAP
(3009/3068) 98.07%
1.93%
(3021/3068) 98.47%
1.53%
KP
(60/76) 78.94%
21.06%
(58/71) 81.69%
18.31%
GAP ­ Re­run
(3048/3068) 99.34%
0.66%
(3054/3068) 99.67%
0.33%
Table 4.17: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Small­size day Scenario in Real vs Cart
scenario
In the small­size day instance the final objective value is really close to the perfection,
indeed only 14 bags out of 3634 are missed. Besides, the increment is small but constant
at every stage of the algorithm. As a matter of fact, more bags are delivered in the first
place with the Generalized Assignment model and this allows to reduce the number of
planes that the milkman has to visit, resulting in less few bags in this case. Furthermore,
the east in­feed station processes 75 flights against the 138 for the new one. Considering
the capacity of both, 3 for the new station and 2 for the existing one, the number seems
to be proportionally distributed. As a result, 138/213 ≈0.65, which is not so far from 0.6
that is the ratio between the new inbound station capacity and the total.
Medium ­ Real
Lost Bags
Medium ­ Conveyor belt
Lost Bags
GAP
(3479/3634) 95.73%
4.27%
(3495/3634) 96.18%
3.82%
KP
(71/89) 79.78%
20.22%
(70/85) 82.35%
17.65%
GAP ­ Re­run
(3545/3634) 97.55%
2.45%
(3561/3634) 97.99%
2.01%
Table 4.18: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Medium­size day Scenario in Real vs East­
New connection scenario
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
49
==PAGE:60==
Big ­ Real
Lost Bags
Big ­ Conveyor belt
Lost Bags
GAP
(7636/7770) 98.28%
1.72%
(7684/7770) 98.89%
1.11%
KP
(76/136) 55.88%
44.12%
(58/89) 65.17%
34.83%
GAP ­ Re­run
(7697/7770) 99.06%
0.94%
(7733/7770) 99.52%
0.48%
Table 4.19: Percentages of Delivered Bags in Big­size day Scenario in Real vs Cart sce­
nario
As the instance become bigger and harder to solve it looks like that the positive gap
between the original scenario and the one discussed in this section gets slowly bigger and
bigger. Moreover, this change reduces by far (≈35%), in table 4.19, the amount of bags
that the milkman has to handle during the day. This way, the milkman successfully half
the missed bags. Not to mention the fact that also the distribution of the flights between
the stations gets more balanced. In fact, in the medium instance the new station has been
assigned to 107 flight (107/168 ≈0.64 ) and the east in­feed processes the remaining 61
planes, whereas in the big­size day instance the number becomes 166 (166/266 ≈0.62)
for the new and 100 for the existing inbound station.
50
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:61==
5
Conclusion
A common problem that Copenhagen Airport, so as all the other existing Airports, is used
to face is the baggage handling and their routing in each stage of the flow. Being able
to successfully manage this process can, other than increase the customer satisfaction,
reduce the cost for the airport and amplifying its good reputation. The object of interest of
this thesis is the combination of three combinatorial optimization problems, which are the
Generalized Assignment Problem, the Milkman Routing Problem and the 0­1 Knapsack
Problem, used to optimize the baggage handling process for transfer flights. The com­
bination of the three has not being studied yet in the literature, or at least has not been
analysed in the Airport optimization context.
A mathematical model for each problem is formulated and discussed in detail. All of them
aim to maximize the number of delivered bags from each arriving plane to all its connec­
tions before the departure time. Then all the assumptions made and the main operations
performed while cleaning and processing the data are described. For feasibility purposes,
only the flights which were not delayed were considered. Also, only flights registered on
the Airport’s white list are taking into consideration for being able to use the milkman
model. Then the performance of the algorithm is presented and discussed in all its weak­
nesses and strengths. The models happen to work really well and this is confirmed by
the nature of the results, which is pretty close to the perfect outcome, indeed for every
instance the accuracy is just below 100%.
More experiments and simulations are performed to test the validity of the algorithm con­
sidering different and extreme scenarios other than the possibility to use more resources
to tackle the problem. This has led to significant and interesting considerations that is
worth to mention.
First of all, has been shown that using the milkman to improve the GAP results is actu­
ally a solid strategy to address the problem and it always improves the results. In every
explored scenario the milkman is able to liberate spots for other flights, that could not
make it otherwise, in the in­feed station. The magnitude of the support that the milkman
provides is strongly related to the size of the instance used and its difficulty in finding a
solution. As a matter of fact in 4.3.2 the milkman brings its major contribution to the al­
gorithm,as more flight times collide with each other. Besides this, it transpires that the
milkman is very versatile in the task they are capable of, in fact the milkman can perform
the tail­to­tail task along with connecting the inbound with the outbound stations, result­
ing in a greater flexibility in the system and more manageable situation. Moreover, it has
been demonstrated that hiring one more milkman can facilitate the problem for all the
mentioned reasons and, also, for significantly improving the knapsack outcome, keeping
a reasonable trade­off between costs and performance.
Another observation refers to the importance of flights and bags distribution. Indeed, these
two factors have a greater impact on the level of difficulty in solving an instance than its
actual size. As a result, the medium­size day instance appears to be always harder to
solve compared to the small­size dataset, despite the gap between their dimensions is not
that large. To give a simple examples, 7 flights arriving at the airport at the same time are
much harder to handle than 7 flights arriving one hour apart, as well as a flight with 240
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
51
==PAGE:62==
bags with many connections is not equally challenging as 240 flights carrying only one
bag. Therefore, this kind of problems are quite complex precisely because they depend
on many different variables that make them difficult to predict.
Another interesting discovery is about the number of conveyor belts. In fact, given the
way the GAP is modelled, having more tracks in the factory to better plan the flow in
the BHS does not give meaningful improvement, since the delays index, used for queu­
ing the excess of planes at the in­feed stations, serve that function in a analogous manner.
Last but not least, the algorithm developed is composed by deterministic models, which
means it assumes everything is going to happen the way it is scheduled. Thus, this
kind of rigidity is a clear drawback of the algorithm because it does not consider all the
uncertainty that in situations like airports optimization is intensely present. On the other
hand, the algorithm has the advantage of running an ordinary scenario fast enough to
overcome the deterministic issue. As a result, the hardest instance runs in less than 2
minutes on a MacBook Air with an M1 CPU. This allows to re­run the models, potentially,
any time a delay happens.
52
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:63==
6
Future work
Although this study has provided valuable insights into optimization of Baggage handling,
there remains ample room for further investigation and advancement. The future work
outlined in this section aims to address certain limitations, expand upon the current find­
ings, and contribute to the existing knowledge in the field.
One area that warrants attention is the enhancement of data processing capabilities.
Specifically, developing a more sophisticated code to track bags designated for the milk­
man’s delivery would be beneficial. This would enable selective delivery of only the rele­
vant bags for each flight, streamlining the overall process and improving efficiency.
Expanding the scope of analysis to include the other phases of the baggage handling sys­
tem presents an intriguing challenge. Routing bags from the check­in area and directing
bags to the baggage reclaim area, in addition to transfers, would provide a more compre­
hensive understanding of the entire system. Accomplishing this may require the utilization
of more complex models, possibly incorporating different metaheuristic algorithms to find
viable solutions.
Refining the model formulation offers an opportunity for improvement. One potential ap­
proach is to convert the delay index d into a variable that tracks the flight’s waiting time at
the in­feed station. This adjustment would increase the model’s flexibility, as the current
limited range of delay values can lead to infeasible solutions. Additionally, such a mod­
ification may reduce the computational complexity of the data preprocessing and model
run time.
Considering the capacity of each conveyor belt in terms of the number of bags processed
over a specific timeframe is another aspect worth exploring. Incorporating this capac­
ity consideration into the model would optimize the allocation of bags and help alleviate
potential bottlenecks, leading to more efficient operations.
To make the algorithm more realistic and robust over the long term, the implementation of
stochastic modeling holds promise. Accounting for various uncertain parameters, such as
arrival and departure times, through multiple scenario analysis would enhance the algo­
rithm’s reliability and enable it to generate optimal solutions without the need for extensive
re­running.
Lastly, could be worth trying to implement a fully integrated model overcoming the draw­
backs that solving a problem in stages may hide, such as a lack of global optimization
or the absence of dynamic adaptation, as well as cumulative errors transferred from one
stage to another. This approach could improve further the solutions.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Abdelghany and K. Abdelghany. Modeling Applications in the Airline Industry.
Taylor & Francis, 2016. ISBN: 9781317094906. URL: https://books.google.dk/
books?id=Vt4GDAAAQBAJ.
[2]
Giuseppe Bruno and Andrea Genovese. “A Mathematical Model for the Optimiza­
tion of the Airport Check­In Service Problem”. In: Electronic Notes in Discrete Math­
ematics 36 (2010). ISCO 2010 ­ International Symposium on Combinatorial Op­
timization, pp. 703–710. ISSN: 1571­0653. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
endm . 2010 . 05 . 089. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1571065310000909.
[3]
Shibshankar Dey, Farzana Islam, and Ahmed Raihan. “An Optimization Model through
Designing a Queuing Network for a Restaurant: A Case Study”. In: Dec. 2019.
[4]
A. J. Lee, A. G. Nikolaev, and S. H. Jacobson. “Protecting air transportation: a sur­
vey of operations research applications to aviation security”. In: Journal of Trans­
portation Security 1 (2008), pp. 160–184. DOI: 10.1007/s12198-008-0014-z. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12198-008-0014-z.
[5]
Markus Matthäus Frey. “Models and Methods for Optimizing Baggage Handling at
Airports”. Vollständiger Abdruck der von der Fakultät für Wirtschaftswissenschaften
der Technischen Universität München zur Erlangung des akademischen Grades
eines Doktor der Wirtschaftswissenschaften (Dr. rer. pol.) genehmigten Disserta­
tion. Dissertation. Munich, Germany: Technische Universität München, 2023.
[6]
Torben Christopher Barth. “Optimization of baggage handling at airports”. Ph.D.
thesis. Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[7]
Torben Barth. “Optimal assignment of incoming flights to baggage carousels at air­
ports”. In: DTU Management Engineering Report 4 (2013).
[8]
Laurence A. Wolsey. Integer Programming. 1st. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 2021. ISBN: 9781119606536.
[9]
Syakinah Faudzi, Syariza Abdul Rahman, and Rosshairy Abd Rahman. “An As­
signment Problem and Its Application in Education Domain: A Review and Poten­
tial Path”. In: Advances in Operations Research 2018 (May 2018), pp. 1–19. DOI:
10.1155/2018/8958393.
[10]
G. Terry Ross and Richard M. Soland. “A branch and bound algorithm for the gener­
alized assignment problem”. In: Mathematical Programming 8 (1975), pp. 91–103.
[11]
Kevin S Ruland. “A model for aeromedical routing and scheduling”. In: International
Transactions in Operational Research 6.1 (1999), pp. 57–73.
[12]
T.C. Bressoud, R. Rastogi, and M.A. Smith. “Optimal configuration for BGP route
selection”. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2003. Twenty­second Annual Joint Conference of
the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies (IEEE Cat. No.03CH37428).
Vol. 2. 2003, 916–926 vol.2. DOI: 10.1109/INFCOM.2003.1208929.
[13]
Gilbert Laporte. “The traveling salesman problem: An overview of exact and ap­
proximate algorithms”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 59.2 (1992),
pp. 231–247. ISSN: 0377­2217. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(92)90138-
Y. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/037722179290138Y.
[14]
Donald Davendra. Traveling salesman problem: Theory and applications. InTech,
2010.
[15]
Nikolaj van Omme, Laurent Perron, and Vincent Furnon. or­tools user’s manual.
Tech. rep. Google, 2014.
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
55
==PAGE:66==
[16]
Egon Balas. “The prize collecting traveling salesman problem and its applications”.
In: Combinatorial Optimization (2007), pp. 663–695. DOI: 10.1007/0-306-48213-
4_14.
[17]
Jie Gao et al. “Approximation Algorithms for Time­Window TSP and Prize Collect­
ing TSP Problems”. In: Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XII: Proceedings of
the Twelfth Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics. Springer. 2020,
pp. 560–575.
[18]
Onur Dogan and Ali Fuat Alkaya. “A Novel Method for Prize Collecting Travel­
ing Salesman Problem with Time Windows”. In: Intelligent and Fuzzy Techniques
for Emerging Conditions and Digital Transformation. Ed. by Cengiz Kahraman et
al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 469–476. ISBN: 978­3­030­
85626­7.
[19]
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual. 2023. URL: https:
//www.gurobi.com.
[20]
Maximilian Parzen et al. “Optimization solvers: the missing link for a fully open­
source energy system modelling ecosystem”. In: (May 2022). DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.
6409432.
[21]
QGIS Geographic Information System. https://qgis.org. Accessed: April 8, 2023.
2021.
[22]
Erdogan Taskesen. distfit is a python library for probability density fitting. Version 1.4.0.
Jan. 2020. URL: https://erdogant.github.io/distfit.
[23]
David Koenig. Computer breakdown sows chaos across US air travel system. Jan.
2023. URL: https://apnews.com/article/flight-delays-us-faa-updates-5805d15f520de8eadf52abb7b170487f.
56
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
==PAGE:67==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
