==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
The CARP Analysis component
A software architecture for the analysis of mHealth
data
Aidana Nursultanova (s212994)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The use of wearables, such as fitness trackers, smartwatches, and health monitoring
devices, has become increasingly prevalent in recent years. These devices capture
various metrics, including heart rate, sleep patterns, physical activity levels, and
more. As a result, a vast amount of data is being generated, offering a rich source
of information for understanding individual health and wellness [Hic+19]. Through
careful analysis of this data, it is possible to identify health issues and make informed
decisions about treatment options.
Currently, the Copenhagen Center for Health
Technology (CACHET)1 is engaged in developing a platform that gathers sensor
data from various sources, including smartphones, desktop computers, and connected
sensors. This platform aims to analyze various data metrics, such as the participants’
daily step counts or heart rates. The objective of this project is to develop a software
architecture that provides the analysis of mHealth data for CACHET. This imple-
mentation will allow researchers to execute their own analysis scenarios. The findings
can inspire further studies and advancements in data analysis techniques.
1https://www.cachet.dk
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Computer Science
and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 21, 2023
Aidana Nursultanova (s212994)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Jakob E. Bardram for his invaluable
guidance during the thesis. His input and expertise have played a significant role in
shaping this project. I am also grateful to Steven Jeuris for his technical expertise and
for helping us figure out the software architecture. I would like to extend my thanks
for the entire time at CACHET. The facilities and resources, including the coolroom
and coffee machine enhanced my productivity during the writing process. Lastly, I
want to express my gratitude to my family and friends for their support throughout
this journey. Their encouragement has been a constant source of motivation for me.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prior work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Related work
7
2.1
RADAR-base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
AWARE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
mCerebrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Analysis
13
3.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Alignment with the CARP Core architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Analysis scripts in Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Task management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Scheduled tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Event-triggered tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Software architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.8
Programming language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Design
21
4.1
System components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
System structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
System dynamic behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
5
Implementation
27
5.1
Project structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Alignment with the CARP Core architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Analysis execution mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Task management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
The analysis scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Task continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Evaluation
39
6.1
Test scheduled task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Test event-triggered task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Discussion
43
7.1
Goals and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Possible future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Conclusion
45
A
Acronyms
47
B
An Appendix
49
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter serves as an introductory overview of the analysis of data gathered
through mobile platforms. It outlines the problem statement this work addresses and
discusses the research goals and methods employed.
1.1
Background
The use of wearables, such as fitness trackers, smartwatches, and health monitoring
devices, has become increasingly prevalent in recent years. These devices capture vari-
ous physiological and behavioral metrics, including heart rate, sleep patterns, physical
activity levels, and more. As a result, a vast amount of data is being generated, of-
fering a rich source of information for understanding individual health and wellness
[Hic+19].
The primary focus of this project lies in the field of data analysis applied to individual
health and wellness behavior. The motivation behind exploring this topic arises from
the growing prevalence of wearable technology and mobile health platforms, which
have generated an extensive volume of data. This data holds significant potential
in informing and guiding decision-making processes concerning health, wellness, and
fitness programs[HTS17][Mun+16].
Using data analysis techniques to process and analyze this information, novel insights
into user behavior and patterns can be attained, thereby enabling the identification of
areas for improvement[SNL21][Sun+22]. The resulting insights can facilitate evidence-
based decision-making, enhance the effectiveness of health and wellness programs, and
ultimately contribute to improved individual well-being. Additionally, the implemen-
tation of a system for data analysis serves as a foundation for continuous monitoring
and feedback, enabling users to track their progress and make informed choices about
their health and wellness practices.
Currently, the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET) is engaged in
developing a platform that collects data from smartphones. This platform aims to
analyze various data metrics, such as daily step counts. To facilitate this process,
they need software architecture that integrates with the CARP Core1 and is capable
of running tasks for executing diverse scripts for data analysis. Moreover, the analysis
must be triggered upon the happening of particular events, and it must also be per-
1https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-kotlin
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
formed periodically at designated intervals or whenever requested. Subsequently, the
software must store the analysis results in the database. The objective of this thesis
work is to design and implement a solution that meets these requirements, aligning
harmoniously with the existing ecosystem.
1.2
Prior work
In recent years, significant research efforts have been dedicated to exploring the po-
tential of mobile platforms in extracting valuable insights from wearables and mobile
technologies. Numerous studies have investigated various aspects of data analysis
and utilization within this context.
One notable prior work by Smith et al.[Sei+22] focused on developing a mobile plat-
form that integrates with wearables to collect and analyze health data.
The re-
searchers designed a comprehensive system capable of capturing data from multiple
wearable devices, such as fitness trackers and smartwatches. The platform leveraged
mobile technologies to synchronize and aggregate the collected data, enabling real-
time monitoring and analysis of various health parameters.
Another study by Nurmi et al.[NL21] explored using machine learning algorithms to
analyze wearables data. The study explores various applications of machine learning
techniques in processing and extracting insights from health-related data collected
through wearable devices. The authors provide an overview of the algorithms em-
ployed, discuss their performance, and identify trends and challenges in this evolving
field. This review serves as a valuable resource for researchers and practitioners seek-
ing to leverage machine learning for mHealth data analysis.
In the realm of mHealth platforms, RADAR-base[Ran+19] stands out as an open-
source solution. RADAR-base offers comprehensive data collection campaigns, per-
sonalized data streams, and secure storage, supporting diverse data types for in-depth
health monitoring.
Furthermore, the work by Ferreira et al.[FKD15] introduces AWARE, a mobile con-
text instrumentation framework that enables the collection and analysis of contextual
data from mobile devices. AWARE serves as a tool for researchers and developers,
facilitating the real-time gathering of data on diverse aspects of user behavior, envi-
ronmental factors, and device sensor information.
This study[Hos+17] introduces mCerebrum, a software platform designed to support
high-rate data ingestion, real-time sharing of raw sensor data with researchers, and
high-rate sense-analyze-act functionality. It enables high-rate data collection from
multiple sensors with real-time data quality assessment. The mCerebrum software
platform offers various analysis features, including real-time calculating of various
features and computations for tasks such as stress and smoking.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Problem statement
3
1.3
Problem statement
CARP Core is a software framework that helps developers create research platforms
for conducting distributed data collection studies. This platform offers modules to de-
fine, deploy, and monitor research studies and to collect data from multiple devices at
multiple locations. It results from a collaboration between iMotions2 and CACHET.
Both use CARP Core to implement their respective research platforms: the iMotions
Mobile Research Platform and the Copenhagen Research Platform (CARP).
The CARP platform gathers information on various health metrics of study partici-
pants, such as steps taken and heart rate. To obtain insights from the data, such as
the total number of daily steps, a software architecture is required capable of running
tasks for executing diverse scripts to aggregate or analyze the data. Additionally, the
software architecture must integrate with the CARP Core architecture. To address
these requirements, the following problem statement can be formulated:
How can software architecture be designed capable of executing diverse
scripts to analyze mHealth data?
This question can be broken down into the following sub-questions:
• What are the necessary requirements c?
• What design patterns and methods could be employed to design the software
architecture?
• How the software architecture prototype can be implemented that meets the
identified requirements and the chosen software architecture design?
• How can a proof of concept3 be validated through the evaluation of the software
architecture prototype?
1.4
Research goals and methods
The primary goal of the project is to create a software architecture and prototype
that satisfies the requirements outlined in the previous section. The research goals
align closely with the research questions and will explain the methods to be applied
to answer the sub-questions.
Goal 1: Determine the necessary requirements
The software requirements[babar2013agil] will be categorized into various as-
pects, including functional requirements, non-functional requirements, and technical
requirements. Functional requirements specify the desired behaviour of the software
and what it should do in terms of features and tasks. For example, the ability to
2https://imotions.com
3https://www.techtarget.com/searchcio/definition/proof-of-concept-POC
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
process data from various sensors and perform analysis. Non-functional requirements
define the quality attributes and constraints of the software. They include aspects
like performance, reliability, security, and extendability.
For example, the system
should work eﬀiciently and ensure data privacy and security. Technical requirements
pertain to the technical aspects of the software, such as the programming language,
frameworks, and tools to be used. These requirements will be gathered from the key
stakeholders.
Goal 2: Design an appropriate software architecture
When designing a software architecture, various factors will be evaluated to en-
sure a successful implementation. These factors include the system’s functional and
non-functional requirements, scalability needs, maintainability considerations and the
available technology stack. The design must be able to meet all the expected features
and also allow for any future improvements or alterations. One of the methodologies
that guide the design process is the 4+1 architecture pattern introduced by Philippe
Kruchten [kruchten19954]. This methodology considers different perspectives when
designing a system. The diagrams proposed in this methodology will be used to fa-
cilitate the design process.
Goal 3: Implement a software architecture prototype that meets the identified
requirements
To develop a software architecture prototype that meets the identified require-
ments and aligns with the chosen software architecture, the following methods will
be employed:
• Prioritization of the identified requirements based on their importance and im-
pact on the software’s functionality. This ensures that the critical requirements
are addressed first during the development.
• Iterative development for regular feedback and adjustments, ensuring that the
evolving software meets the requirements and aligns with the chosen architec-
ture.
• Application of design patterns[Mar00] that are appropriate for the chosen soft-
ware architecture. Design patterns provide proven solutions to common design
challenges, promoting modularity, maintainability, and scalability of the soft-
ware.
Goal 4: Validate a proof of concept
The validation ensures the software prototype meets specified requirements and
operates reliably in its intended environment. Methods such as unit testing will be
used to test the software prototype against the functional requirements. To encom-
pass realistic use cases, data collected by the CARP platform will be utilized, and
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Thesis outline
5
simple analysis scripts will be written and used to analyze this data. Non-functional
requirements will also be assessed through the simulation of various scenarios.
1.5
Thesis outline
The upcoming chapters will explain how the CARP Analysis component was designed
and implemented to solve the problem mentioned in the Problem Statement.
The next chapter provides a more detailed description of the existing projects dis-
cussed in Section 1.2 and compares them to the current project. Following that, the
Analysis Chapter outlines the requirements and explains the technological choices
made to meet those requirements. Once the technologies are chosen, the Design
Chapter illustrates the software architecture and structure using UML Diagrams4.
The subsequent Implementation Chapter describes how the software architecture
prototype was implemented. After completing the implementation, the Evaluation
Chapter introduces the validating process conducted to ensure the prototype meets
the requirements. The Discussion Chapter revises whether the research questions
have been supported by the obtained results, discusses limitations and suggests po-
tential directions for future work. Finally, the Conclusion Chapter summarises
the thesis.
Additionally, the Appendix will encompass useful information regarding the project,
including a link to the source code of the project on GitHub.
4https://www.uml.org
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related work
In this chapter, various projects with similar problem-solving objectives as the current
project are explored. Each framework is accompanied by a concise overview of its
architecture. The benefits and drawbacks of each approach are highlighted, and a
final evaluation comparing the existing solutions to the current project is presented.
2.1
RADAR-base
The RADAR-base[Ran+19]1 platform is a solution for remote monitoring and data
collection in mHealth clinical studies. It consists of a backend infrastructure and two
Android mobile apps: a cross-platform Cordova app called active remote monitoring
technology (aRMT) for active participant monitoring through conscious actions like
questionnaires, audio questions, and timed tests, and a native Android app called
passive remote monitoring technology (pRMT) for passive monitoring using phone
and wearable sensors. The platform offers capabilities for data aggregation, study
management, and real-time visualizations. A notable feature of RADAR-base is its
use of Confluent2 technologies, based on Apache Kafka3, which enables end-to-end
solutions for remote monitoring use cases, participant management, and data analy-
sis.
RADAR-base can be deployed in different settings, including local deployments for
data collection within a hospital or ambulatory studies with centralized data collec-
tion. The backend infrastructure is designed as a set of microservices using Docker
containers.
The architecture of RADAR-base consists of several key components:
• Data collection involves the recognition and registration of various data sources,
such as smartphones and wearable devices. These sources can be connected
directly through Bluetooth or through third-party application interfaces. The
collected data is then streamed in near-real-time to the server. This streaming
is facilitated by Apache Kafka, which enables the data to be transmitted and
delivered to dedicated topics in real time.
1https://radar-base.org
2https://www.confluent.io
3
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related work
• Data storage component comprises two centralized storage systems. The first
is the cold storage, designed for scalability and fault-tolerance. This storage
system is specifically optimized for storing large volumes of raw data.
The
second is hot storage, which utilizes MongoDB. The hot storage is responsible
for storing aggregated data, enabling near real-time insights and overviews of
the raw data. It primarily serves the purpose of supporting data dashboards
and providing real-time information.
• Data sharing component allows for the visualization of aggregated data in a
live dashboard. This dashboard provides real-time insights and facilitates the
monitoring of data trends and patterns. Additionally, the system enables the
export of raw data in multiple formats, including AVRO, JSON, and CSV.
Figure 2.1 shows an overview of the RADAR-base architecture.
Figure 2.1: Architecture of RADAR-base. Image source: [Ran+19].
As for the data processing and analysis, the collected data is processed in real-
time by a Kafka Streams application.
This processing enables the generation of
aggregations such as mean, max, and more, at different time resolutions including
seconds, minutes, hours, days, and weeks. These aggregations are stored in MongoDB
and made accessible through a REST API4. The REST API offers multiple endpoints
that allow users to request the aggregated data in near-real-time and supports various
combinations of queries.
However, the platform lacks support for subscribing to
custom events to conduct analysis. Moreover, it does not provide the capability to
run custom scripts for performing analysis tasks.
2.2
AWARE
AWARE is a framework designed for instrumenting, inferring, logging, and sharing
mobile context information through sensor instrumentation. It serves application de-
velopers, researchers, and smartphone users. By capturing data from various sources
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer
==PAGE:19==
2.2 AWARE
9
such as hardware, software, and human interactions on smartphones, AWARE enables
the analysis of this data through its plugins. These plugins are crucial in transforming
raw data into meaningful information.
The AWARE framework follows a modular architecture that consists of several
key components:
• Sensor Instrumentation: AWARE captures data from various sensors embedded
in smartphones, such as GPS, accelerometer, light sensor, etc.
This sensor
instrumentation allows the framework to collect diverse types of data related to
the user’s context.
• Data Collection: The collected sensor data is then logged and stored in a local
database on the user’s smartphone.
• Plugin System: AWARE employs a plugin system to enable extensibility and
flexibility in data analysis and processing. Plugins are independent modules
that can be developed by researchers or application developers to perform spe-
cific tasks on the collected data. These tasks can include data analysis, machine
learning, context inference, or data sharing.
• Context Inference: AWARE supports context inference, which involves deriving
higher-level information from the collected sensor data. By applying algorithms
and techniques, the framework can infer contextual information, such as user
activity recognition, location estimation, social context, and environmental con-
text.
2.2.1
RAPIDS
For the data analysis, the AWARE framework uses a plugin system mentioned above
called Reproducible Analysis Pipeline for Data Streams (RAPIDS)5. RAPIDS is a
reproducible pipeline that standardizes the preprocessing, feature extraction, analysis,
visualization, and reporting of data streams coming from mobile sensors [Veg+21].
Figure 2.2 shows the RAPIDS pipeline.
As of August 2021, RAPIDS has the capability to compute behavioral features for
various sensors, including Fitbit sensors (calories, heart rate, sleep, and steps), Em-
patica sensors6 (accelerometer, heart rate, skin temperature, electrodermal activity,
blood volume pulse, and inter-beat interval), and smartphone sensors (accelerometer,
activity recognition, application notifications, used applications, application crashes,
application logs, battery, Bluetooth, incoming calls, outgoing calls, missed calls, con-
versations, keyboard, light, locations, sent and received messages (SMS), screen, vis-
ible Wi-Fi access points, and connected Wi-Fi access points).
In mobile sensing
research, behavioral features are extracted from sensor data within specific time win-
dows to summarize human activities. RAPIDS provides three types of time segments:
5https://www.rapids.science
6https://www.empatica.com
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Related work
Figure 2.2: RAPIDS’s Pipeline. Image source: [Veg+21].
• Frequency segments: Repetitive windows of the same length occurring every
day, useful for capturing momentary variations in behaviors such as stress or
sleep.
• Periodic segments: Periods of any length starting at any time, on any day
or specific days of the week, month, quarter, or year.
Useful for examining
behavior variations across defined periods like mornings, weekends, weekdays,
or overnights.
• Event segments: Periods of any length starting before, on, or after specific
events of interest. Meant to quantify human behavior around events like ecolog-
ical momentary assessments or health incidents such as migraines or drinking
episodes.
By utilizing these time segments, researchers can compute behavioral features that
adapt to various study designs and analyze how behaviors vary over time in mobile
sensing research. A feature extraction scripts developed using either R or Python.
However, developers of RAPIDS suggest using it as a complementary tool to cre-
ate a mobile data analysis workflow. By incorporating RAPIDS into the workflow,
researchers can enhance the data analysis capabilities.
2.3
mCerebrum
mCerebrum[Hos+17] is a platform for the development and validation of various
mHealth biomarkers and sensor-triggered interventions. It employs a scalable storage
architecture that ensures a quick response to handle large volumes of data. A key
distinction of this platform lies in its architectural choices, enabling real-time com-
putations of data quality and multi-sensor biomarkers. The platform accommodates
the collection of sensor data for tracking activities such as eating, drinking, smok-
ing, brushing, and stress, among others. The architecture of mCerebrum is layered,
consisting of five essential layers:
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Summary
11
1. Communication Interfaces: These interfaces support both smartphone sensors
and wearable sensors, facilitating seamless data acquisition.
2. Data Sources: This layer establishes an interface between devices and the rest
of the mCerebrum platform, enabling eﬀicient data transfer.
3. Storage and Routing Interface: Responsible for persistent data storage and
routing intermediate results between various components, this layer adheres to
the rules set by a privacy controller.
4. Signal Processing Layer: This layer provides the necessary support for long-
running applications to receive and process data from other parts of the system.
5. Participant Interface Layer: This layer implements all interactions with the
participants, ensuring a seamless user experience.
Figure 2.3 shows the architecture of mCerebrum.
Figure 2.3: Architecture of mCerebrum. Image source: [Hos+17].
By incorporating these layers, mCerebrum enables data collection, processing, and
participant engagement for the study of mHealth biomarkers.
The analysis feature of the mCerebrum platform is responsible for processing the
collected sensor data to calculate various features and biomarkers. One key usage
scenario is validating a new biomarker, where real-time computation can prompt
participants to confirm or refute detected events in their free-living environment. The
platform supports sense-analyze-act functionality locally on the phone, enabling real-
time computations for tasks such as stress and smoking. Machine-learning models
are also applied in the analysis process.
However, it is important to consider that the analysis is done on the phone and the
challenge of resource constraints on mobile devices, such as limited CPU and memory.
2.4
Summary
This section focuses on comparing the analysis functionality of the mentioned frame-
works. The comparison is based on key features important for the current project:
the capability to initiate data analysis upon the happening of particular events or
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Related work
periodically at specified intervals. This feature will be referred to as the analysis ex-
ecution mode. And customizability, which refers to the ability to incorporate custom
analysis scripts.
Table 2.1 summarises the analysis features of the reviewed frameworks.
Framework
Analysis execution mode
Customizability
RADAR-base
Data
processing
occurs
in
real-time without any mode
selection.
Only supports the calculation of
aggregations: mean, max, etc. at
different time resolutions lever-
aging Kafka.
These aggrega-
tions are stored in MongoDB and
can be accessed through a REST
API. The system does not pro-
vide support for incorporating
the analysis scripts.
RAPIDS
RAPIDS
has
three
types
of time segments for data
analysis: frequency segments:
repetitive
windows
of
the
same length that occur daily.
They
capture
momentary
variations in behaviors like
stress or sleep patterns. Peri-
odic segments:
analysis can
start at any time and on any
day.
They can be specific
to certain days of the week,
month,
quarter,
or
year.
Event
segments:
analysis
can start before, on, or after
specific events of interest.
The system supports standard-
ized scripts developed using ei-
ther R or Python to conduct the
analysis. But does not support
custom scripts. This framework
serves as an additional tool for
data analysis.
mCerebrum
Data
processing
occurs
in
real-time without any mode
selection.
The
system
uses
machine-
learning models to conduct the
analysis and calculates various
features
and
biomarkers,
but
these functions are built into the
system. Adding custom cases is
currently not possible.
Table 2.1: Comparison of the analysis functionality of the frameworks.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
This chapter analyzes different aspects of the process of software development. This
includes understanding functional and non-functional requirements, the software ar-
chitecture design and the technology stack. The goal is to gather relevant information
and insights to make informed design decisions that contribute to the successful de-
velopment of the software architecture and prototype.
3.1
Requirements
Software requirements are the specific capabilities, behaviors, and constraints that
define what software should achieve.
These requirements provide the foundation
for designing, developing, and testing the software. Requirements for this project
were gathered from the following stakeholders: Jakob E. Bardram, the director of
CACHET, who provided the overall vision and requirements for the software, and
Steven Jeuris, a main developer of CARP Core, who contributed technical require-
ments and assisted in determining the architecture of CARP Core.
This section is divided into two subsections, with one focusing on functional re-
quirements and the other on non-functional requirements. To improve readability and
clarity, the requirements are listed in bullet points, providing a concise description
for each requirement along with a name. This naming enables easy reference and
clear identification of specific functionalities in subsequent sections.
3.1.1
Functional requirements
Functional requirements define features and functionalities that need to be included
in order to meet the stakeholders’ needs.
• Alignment with the CARP Core architecture: The software architecture
must be designed as a component of CARP Core, ensuring alignment with its
domain model.
The CARP Core follows a Domain-Driven Design (DDD). DDD1 is an approach
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Analysis
to software development that emphasizes understanding and modelling the prob-
lem domain. The domain model represents the key concepts, rules, and rela-
tionships within the problem domain. The domain model serves as a guide for
designing the software system, reflecting real-world processes and behaviours.
The CARP Core includes all domain models and application services for all
CARP subsystems. It is designed to be independent of specific infrastructure
dependencies.
This thesis work constitutes an Analysis component that operates between the
Data storage and the Studies subsystem, enabling common data analysis. Fig-
ure 3.1 below shows the CARP domain models.
Figure 3.1: Architecture of CARP Core.
• Analysis execution mode: At this point, it is important to explain the con-
text in which the term Task is used. In programming languages, a task2 refers
to a specific unit of work or a computational operation that needs to be per-
formed. It represents a distinct action or function that a program needs to
accomplish. When we need to analyze data, we can refer to it as ’we need a
task that performs analysis’. This task may have specific features, such as ’when
it should be performed’, ’whether it should be recurring or not’, ’what type of
analysis to be performed’, etc. From this, the following requirement arises.
The Core Analysis component must be able to execute tasks categorized into
three types:
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Task_(computing)
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Requirements
15
– Scheduled tasks. The analysis is performed at a designated time, such as
daily at midnight, for example.
The CARP mobile platform collects sensor data from smartphones. On the
CARP mobile platform, participants can view their step count for different
days of the week, as well as their mobility features and activity levels. To
generate these statistics, the data needs to be aggregated and analyzed on
a daily basis, with the results stored in a database. Currently, the CARP
platform performs these calculations and aggregation in the app without
saving the results. To improve this process, the Analysis component can
run scheduled tasks for executing scripts responsible for data aggregation
and store the obtained results.
– Event-triggered tasks. The analysis is performed upon the occurrence of a
specific event.
For example, the DiaFocus app3, one of the CACHET projects, provides
diabetes-related questionnaires to users for personalized planning and goal
setting. Once a user completes a questionnaire, the app calculates person-
alized plans and goals. However, the historical data for statistical purposes
is not saved. Calculating and analyzing the answers can be delegated to
the Analysis component. When a user completes a questionnaire in the
app, a ’questionnaire completed’ event can be sent to the Analysis com-
ponent, triggering the execution of the analysis scripts. Furthermore, the
analysis results can be stored in the database, allowing users to view the
statistics.
– Client-initiated tasks. The analysis is performed in response to a client’s
request for analysis.
This task type corresponds to one-time client requests, where analysis is
performed upon request.
• Task management: The Analysis component must expose an application ser-
vice interface 4 that provides task management, allowing actions such as creating
tasks, retrieving the task list, and removing or updating tasks. Additionally,
the application service interface must provide endpoints to manage the state of
these tasks, enabling actions like starting or stopping them.
3https://carp.cachet.dk/diafocus/
4https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-kotlin/blob/develop/carp.common/src/
commonMain/kotlin/dk/cachet/carp/common/application/services/ApplicationService.kt
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Analysis
• The analysis scripts: The Analysis component must be able to execute di-
verse analysis scripts in Python5.
Nowadays, Python is a popular choice for writing scripts for aggregating and
analyzing data due to several reasons [rti] [ucd]:
– Simplicity and Readability: Python has a clean and intuitive syntax, mak-
ing it easy to read and write code. This simplicity enables developers to
quickly prototype and implement data analysis scripts.
– Vast Ecosystem: Python has a rich ecosystem of libraries and frameworks
specifically designed for data manipulation, analysis, and visualization. Li-
braries such as Pandas6, NumPy7, and SciPy8 provide powerful tools for
handling and processing data eﬀiciently.
– Integration and Interoperability: Python can integrate with other lan-
guages and platforms, making it suitable for incorporating data analysis
scripts into software systems. It can interact with databases, web services,
and APIs, facilitating data retrieval and integration from diverse sources.
As CACHET brings together researchers, master’s students, and PhD students,
a variety of scripts, ranging from simple to advanced, have been developed by
these individuals. These scripts serve the purpose of analyzing various aspects,
including mobility features, and detecting depression using the collected data
as input. However, the current workflow involves the manual execution of these
scripts. Researchers need to request the collected data from developers, prepare
the data, and then manually run the scripts. Moreover, the analysis results are
not stored in the database. Given this context, one of the goals is to enable the
integration of data analysis scripts into software.
• The analysis results: The Analysis component must store the analysis results
in a suitable format and provide endpoints for retrieving them.
In order to enable statistical visualization and retrieval of analysis results, it is
essential to store the results in the repository.
• Task error logging: The Analysis component must record and store informa-
tion about errors, exceptions, and other important events within an analysis
process.
The process includes capturing important information such as timestamps and
error messages and saving them in log files.
5https://www.python.org
6https://pandas.pydata.org
7https://numpy.org
8https://scipy.org
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Alignment with the CARP Core architecture
17
3.1.2
Non-functional requirements
Non-functional requirements define the qualities and constraints of the software sys-
tem, such as performance, reliability, and maintainability.
• Task continuity: The software architecture must ensure the continuity of
tasks after restarting the project. For this purpose, the state of the scheduled
tasks must be persisted. This state can include information such as the task’s
execution time, status, and any relevant data needed to resume the task later.
• Error handling and task recovery: In some cases, a task might have been
in progress or incomplete when the project is being restarted. The software
should have graceful restarting mechanisms in place to handle such scenarios.
• Expandability: The main stakeholders of this software are developers who
aim to integrate data analysis into their projects. Consequently, the software
architecture design needs to provide easy addition of new analysis tasks.
The subsequent sections provide a detailed analysis of the aforementioned require-
ments and discuss how these requirements can be implemented.
3.2
Alignment with the CARP Core architecture
In CARP Core, all subsystems have their own application service interfaces9 and
integration events10. Subsystems communicate synchronously through dependency-
injected application service interfaces. Asynchronous communication between subsys-
tems occurs through an event bus11. The Analysis component can subscribe to events
coming from different CARP subsystems by using the ApplicationServiceEventBus12
class provided by CARP Core Common. This component implements helper classes
and base types used by all subsystems.
3.3
Analysis scripts in Python
As mentioned above, the software must be able to execute diverse analysis scripts
in Python. These scripts serve the purpose of analyzing various aspects, including
mobility features, and detecting depression using the collected data as input. Rather
9https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-kotlin/tree/develop/carp.common/src/
commonMain/kotlin/dk/cachet/carp/common/application/services
10https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-kotlin/blob/develop/carp.common/src/
commonMain/kotlin/dk/cachet/carp/common/application/services/IntegrationEvent.kt
11https://dzone.com/articles/design-patterns-event-bus
12https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-kotlin/blob/develop/carp.
common/src/commonMain/kotlin/dk/cachet/carp/common/application/services/
ApplicationServiceEventBus.kt
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Analysis
than standalone scripts, these Python scripts are structured as a complete project
with multiple files and modules. These projects provide an API13 that allows software
developers to call specific functions for performing data analysis. The Analysis system
runs tasks on a scheduled basis or triggered by specific events. Therefore, these tasks
could execute the corresponding Python script by making API calls and passing
relevant parameters and data required for the analysis. The API internally invokes
the appropriate methods within the Python project, triggering the execution of the
data analysis logic, which may involve data preprocessing, calculations, statistical
operations, or other relevant analysis techniques. Once the analysis is complete, the
resulting output is returned to the Analysis system, which must be responsible for
persisting the results in the database.
3.4
Task management
This section discusses the functionality of task management, particularly focusing
on the need for software to support the easy integration of new analysis tasks. To
achieve this, a visual interface could be incorporated to facilitate task creation and
management, including starting, stopping, and viewing task status. However, it is
important to clarify that the visual interface development is not within the scope
of this thesis. Instead, the thesis aims to provide endpoints that enable all these
functionalities.
Regarding task creation, there are three types of tasks, as mentioned in the ’Analysis
execution mode’ requirement description. Each type has its specific settings. For
a scheduled task, the settings list should specify the delay (e.g.
interval between
executions) and the Python script URL (e.g. the location where the Python script
can be accessed and executed) for the data analysis. Similarly, for an event-triggered
task, the settings list should include a type of event and script URL. To manage tasks,
repositories can be created to store these task-related information. Repositories can
be designed to include relevant fields such as task ID, task name, task settings, task
status, and any additional information required to effectively manage and track tasks.
3.5
Scheduled tasks
As mentioned in the requirements, the software has to run scheduled tasks that need
to work periodically, such as calculating participant steps every day. To achieve this,
ScheduledThreadPoolExecutor14 class can be utilized, specifically its scheduleAtFixe-
dRate method. The ScheduledThreadPoolExecutor is a specialized implementation
of the ThreadPoolExecutor class, which handles the execution of tasks in a thread
pool. The thread pool consists of threads that can execute tasks concurrently. The
13https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API
14https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/concurrent/
ScheduledThreadPoolExecutor.html
==PAGE:29==
3.6 Event-triggered tasks
19
scheduleAtFixedRate method allows scheduling a task to run repeatedly at a fixed
rate. It takes parameters, including the initial delay and the period between subse-
quent executions of the task. Here is a breakdown of the configuration parameters
used in ThreadPoolExecutor:
• corePoolSize: It represents the number of threads to keep in the pool. These
threads are created and kept alive, ready to execute tasks.
• maximumPoolSize: This parameter defines the maximum number of threads
allowed in the pool. If the number of tasks exceeds the corePoolSize, and there
are idle threads available, new threads will be created up to the maximumPool-
Size. Once the pool reaches its maximum size, further tasks may be queued
until a thread becomes available.
• keepAliveTime: It specifies how long an idle thread should be kept alive in the
pool if the current number of threads exceeds the corePoolSize. After this idle
period, if a thread remains unused, it may be terminated and removed from the
pool, helping to manage resource consumption.
By using the ScheduledThreadPoolExecutor with the scheduleAtFixedRate method
and configuring the corePoolSize, maximumPoolSize, and keepAliveTime parameters,
the software could schedule and execute tasks in a repeated manner. The executor
will handle thread management and ensure tasks are executed with the desired initial
delay and periodicity.
3.6
Event-triggered tasks
CARP Core follows an Event-Driven Architecture Pattern15 and asynchronous com-
munication between subsystems occurs through an event bus. The event bus serves
as a central communication channel for exchanging information and events between
the subsystems. Each subsystem can generate and publish its own events, while sub-
scribers receive and handle events of interest.
Similarly, in the case of event-triggered tasks, when a task is created and started, it
registers a subscriber to listen for a specific event. Any subsystem within the project
could generate this event. Once the subscribed event occurs and is published on the
event bus, the corresponding event handler associated with that event is invoked. The
event handler responsible for the event would then trigger the execution of a Python
script to perform the required analysis.
3.7
Software architecture
Based on the specified requirements, the system must facilitate the easy addition of
new analysis tasks. To achieve this, developers can utilize the create task endpoint,
15https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/guide/architecture-styles/
event-driven
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Analysis
which would allow them to specify the task’s name, type, settings, and the corre-
sponding Python script URL. The Analysis component, similar to other CARP Core
components, can implement the ApplicationService16 interface to expose its applica-
tion service interface with necessary endpoints. The created tasks need to be stored in
the repository. Once a task is created, it needs to be started. Depending on the task
type, the ThreadPoolExecutor can be employed for eﬀicient thread management. Ex-
ecuting tasks using threads enables asynchronous and non-blocking execution. This
means that the main application thread can continue processing other tasks or han-
dling user interactions while the background threads are executing tasks concurrently.
ThreadPoolExecutor simplifies concurrent programming by allowing the submission
of parallel tasks for execution by a thread pool, which handles the reuse of threads.
To encapsulate the execution of each task type, the Command17 pattern can be uti-
lized. Separate Command Objects can be created for executing scheduled tasks and
event-triggered tasks. This approach promotes flexibility and decoupling between the
invoker and the specific implementation of task.
Adding a new analysis task can
be accomplished by creating a new command object. To manage the execution of
commands, the Command Processor component plays a crucial role. It can schedule
and initiate the execution of command objects. This component can also provide ad-
ditional services related to command execution. In our case, it can take responsibility
for creating ThreadPoolExecutors and submitting tasks for execution.
3.8
Programming language
Kotlin18 was selected as a programming language in order to follow the CARP Core
architecture and use its helper classes and other components. Kotlin is a modern
high-level programming language developed by JetBrains that runs on the Java Vir-
tual Machine (JVM). It combines the advantages of object-oriented and functional
programming paradigms and is concise and interoperable with Java code.
16https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-kotlin/blob/develop/carp.common/src/
commonMain/kotlin/dk/cachet/carp/common/application/services/ApplicationService.kt
17https://www.dre.vanderbilt.edu/~schmidt/cs282/PDFs/CommandProcessor.pdf
18https://kotlinlang.org/docs/getting-started.html
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Design
In this chapter, the design process of the system is presented using UML diagrams,
following the recommendations of the 4+1 methodology. This methodology provides
guidance for the design process by suggesting the use of diagrams that consider dif-
ferent perspectives when designing. To show the system at a high level, a component
diagram is used. The purpose of a component diagram is to illustrate how various
components within a system are related to each other. To depict the structure of the
system, class diagrams are used. These diagrams provide an overview of the classes,
their attributes, and the relationships between them.
For illustrating dynamic el-
ements and interactions between objects, sequence diagrams are employed. These
diagrams show the sequence of messages exchanged between objects during specific
scenarios. Finally, the activity diagram is utilized to illustrate the steps needed for
users to achieve the main goal of the system - performing the analysis. Together,
these UML diagrams offer a comprehensive understanding of the system from both
structural and behavioral perspectives.
The term ’system’ is used in this chapter that refers to the Analysis component.
By referring to it as a ’system’, it highlights the organized and integrated nature of the
software architecture design, encompassing all the modules, classes and interactions
that are logically arranged and categorized based on their functionality and purpose
and collectively make up the software as a whole.
4.1
System components
To give a bird’s-eye view of the software system, this design starts with the presenta-
tion of the component diagram. The term ’component’ is applied to a set of classes
representing independent systems or subsystems that can interact with the rest of
the system. The diagram in Figure 4.1 shows the components of the system. These
components can include a set of classes or a single glass responsible for one specific
task.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Design
Figure 4.1: Component diagram of the system.
The analysis component exposes two ports to the external environment by pro-
viding application service interfaces for task management and retrieving the results
of data analysis. Task service component handles task-related operations, includ-
ing task creation, starting, stopping, etc. Analysis script executor component
is responsible for performing the analysis and saving the results by requesting this
operation from the Analysis service component. The Analysis service component
saves these results and exposes endpoints for retrieving them.
4.2
System structure
The Class Diagram illustrated in Figure 4.2 provides a visual representation of a
system’s structure from a conceptual perspective.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 System structure
23
Figure 4.2: Conceptual Class Diagram of the system.
The following information provides a detailed overview of the features of each
class:
• Task settings: This is a data class that contains task settings. These settings
include the task name, the Python script URL for the data analysis for which
the task is responsible, its last execution time, current status etc.
• Task repository: Used to store tasks and task-related information.
• Task Service: Provides task management providing endpoints and logic for
the task create | start | stop | remove operations and retrieving existing tasks.
Creates Task Execution Commands when the task is started and transfers these
commands to the Command Processor for execution.
• Task Executor Command: Provides most of the functionality required to
facilitate the data analysis: sends the requests for executing the analysis scripts
in Python and saves the analysis results. And in case of failures, logs them.
• Analysis Results Repository: Used to store the analysis results.
• Analysis Service: Provides endpoints for retrieving the analysis results.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Design
• Script Handler: Sends requests to the Python script endpoints that provide
data analysis and handles the returning results.
• Command Processor: Receives command objects from the Task Service and
takes responsibility for them. It manages thread pools, handles task scheduling,
and initiates command execution.
4.3
System dynamic behaviour
To recall, sequence diagrams represent dynamic elements and interactions between
objects during specific scenarios. The diagram in Figure 4.3 demonstrates create and
start analysis task operations and how classes interact with each other over time.
Figure 4.3: Sequence diagram for create and start task operations.
The following diagram in Figure 4.4 illustrates the sequence of events triggered
when the ”Task executor command” is invoked. This class serves as the initiator for
executing analysis scripts, as mentioned earlier. Hence, we can conclude that the
diagram represents the process of analysis execution. All objects shown in the dia-
==PAGE:35==
4.3 System dynamic behaviour
25
gram comprise the component known as the ’Analysis script executor’ we previously
discussed in the section on system components.
Figure 4.4: Sequence diagram for performing the analysis.
The activity diagram shown in Figure 4.5 is the concluding diagram in this section.
This diagram illustrates the steps required for users to achieve the main goal of the
system - performing the analysis.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design
Figure 4.5: Activity diagram of required steps for a user to run the analysis task.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter discusses the implementation details of the concept introduced in the pre-
vious section. First, it provides an overview of the structure and organization of files
and packages within the project. The content of the following sections corresponds
to the requirements outlined in the analysis section. Detailed insights are provided
in every section, which includes a comprehensive explanation of the implementation
process for each requirement.
5.1
Project structure
In software development, organizing code into different layers or components is a
common practice to achieve separation of concerns and maintain a modular and
maintainable codebase.
This project’s packages are named and organized based on the application’s architec-
tural layers. This follows the same approach as the other components of the CARP
Core. The project structure can be observed in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Project structure.
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Implementation
Domain layer represents the business logic and concepts of the component. It
encapsulates the rules, behaviors, and entities specific to the component’s domain.
Infrastructure layer handles the technical aspects, including external integrations,
configuration, and communication with external systems. It provides the necessary
infrastructure and support for the domain layer to operate.
Application layer
acts as a bridge between the domain and infrastructure layers. It is responsible for
managing application-specific operations and facilitating communication between the
domain models and the infrastructure. This layer includes use cases and application
services.
5.2
Alignment with the CARP Core architecture
The Analysis component, like other components of CARP Core, has its own appli-
cation service interfaces for task management and analysis results. It can also raise
events that are accessible to other components. The listing below shows the Analy-
sisResultsService, which implements the Core ApplicationService interface to expose
interactions with internal domain objects and trigger events for other components in
CARP Core.
1 interface AnalysisResultsService: ApplicationService <AnalysisResultsService ,
AnalysisResultsService.Event> {
2
3
companion object { val API_VERSION = ApiVersion( 1, 0 ) }
4
5
@Serializable
6
sealed class Event(override val aggregateId: String?) : IntegrationEvent
<AnalysisResultsService >
7
{
8
constructor( aggregateId: UUID ) : this( aggregateId.
stringRepresentation )
9
10
@Required
11
override val apiVersion: ApiVersion = API_VERSION
12
}
13 }
Listing 5.1: Example of using Core ApplicationService interace.
As mentioned in the Analysis chapter, in the case of event-triggered tasks, it reg-
isters a subscriber to listen for a specific event. Any CARP Core component could
generate this event. To subscribe to an event, the Core ApplicationServiceEventBus
class is used. Here is a listing of how this subscription works:
1
2 val eventBus: ApplicationServiceEventBus <EventTaskService , EventTaskService.
Event>
3 ...
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Analysis execution mode
29
4 inline fun <reified TService : ApplicationService <TService, TEvent>, reified
TEvent : IntegrationEvent <TService>> subscribe(
5
command: Command.Event
6
)
7
{
8
eventBus.subscribe {
9
event { e: TEvent ->
10
CommandProcessor.processEventTask(command, e)
11
}
12
}
13
}
Listing 5.2: Implementation of the subscription to an event.
When a user starts the event-triggered task, EventTaskService calls the method
subscribe showed in Listing 5.2.
5.3
Analysis execution mode
Referring to the requirement ’the Analysis component must be able to execute anal-
ysis tasks categorized into three types’, each task has its own specific settings as well
as some common ones. In order to accomplish this, a sealed class called TaskSettings
is created. This class has three additional data classes that extend from it. The
following listings show these data classes:
1
2 data class Scheduled(
3
// The unique identifier of the task
4
override val id: UUID,
5
// The name of the task.
6
override val name: String,
7
//The URL of the analysis script associated with the task
8
override val scriptUrl: URL,
9
// The time to delay the first execution of the task
10
val initialDelay: Long,
11
// The period between subsequent executions of the task
12
val delay: Long,
13
// The time unit used for the `initialDelay ` and `delay` parameters
14
val timeUnit: TimeUnit,
15
// The status of the task (e.g., created, running, stopped).
16
val status: TaskStatus ,
17
// The timestamp when the task was created.
18
override val createdAt: Instant,
19
// The timestamp when the task was last executed
20
val executedAt: Instant? = null
21 ) : TaskSettings()
Listing 5.3: Implementation of TaskSettings for a scheduled task.
Override parameters such as id, name, scriptUrl are common for all task types. Ini-
tialDelay represents the time to delay the first execution of the task. Delay indicates
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Implementation
the period between subsequent executions of the task. It defines the duration in Time-
Unit between the completion of one execution and the start of the next. TimeUnit
specifies the time unit used for the initialDelay and delay parameters. It allows to
define the desired time unit for expressing the time intervals, such as milliseconds,
seconds, minutes, etc. The TimeUnit class is an enumeration in Java/Kotlin that
provides different time units for conversion and calculations.
1
2 data class Event<T : IntegrationEvent <TApplicationService >,
TApplicationService : ApplicationService <TApplicationService , *>>
3 (
4
override val id: UUID,
5
override val name: String,
6
override val scriptUrl: URL,
7
// The specific type of integration event.
8
val eventType: T,
9
val status: TaskStatus ,
10
override val createdAt: Instant
11 ) : TaskSettings()
Listing 5.4: Implementation of TaskSettings for an event task.
EventType parameter in Listing 5.4 indicates the type of integration event to sub-
scribe for performing the analysis task.
1 data class OneTime
2 (
3
override val id: UUID,
4
override val name: String,
5
override val scriptUrl: URL,
6
override val createdAt: Instant
7 ) : TaskSettings()
Listing 5.5: Implementation of TaskSettings for a one-time task.
Parameters for Listing 5.6 are the same as for other types.
So far, the characteristics of the tasks have been described. Now, an explanation
of how these tasks work will be presented.
Scheduled tasks work periodically with intervals specified in the settings. The
ScheduledTaskService provides the start method for starting scheduled tasks.
1 // Starts the scheduled task with the specified id.
2 suspend fun startTask(id: UUID) : TaskStatus
3 {
4
val task = scheduledTaskRepository.getTaskById(id)
5
requireNotNull(task)
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Analysis execution mode
31
6
val command = ScheduledTaskExecutorCommand(analysisRepository ,
scheduledTaskRepository , scripHandler , task)
7
schedule(id, command, task.initialDelay , task.delay, task.timeUnit)
8
scheduledTaskRepository.updateTaskStatus(id, TaskStatus.Running)
9
return TaskStatus.Running
10 }
11
12 private fun schedule(taskId: UUID, command: Command.Scheduled, initialDelay:
Long, delay: Long, timeUnit: TimeUnit)
13 {
14
CommandProcessor.processScheduledTask(taskId, command, initialDelay ,
delay, timeUnit)
15 }
Listing 5.6: Implementation of starting a scheduled task.
The startTask method is responsible for initiating and executing a scheduled task
associated with the provided task id. The method first retrieves the task with the
given id from the ScheduledTaskRepository. After obtaining the task, the method cre-
ates a ScheduledTaskExecutorCommand instance. This command is responsible for
handling the execution logic of the scheduled task. Analysis scripts are executed as
part of the execution logic of the tasks. The method then calls the function schedule
to initiate the scheduling of the task. This schedule function takes parameters such
as command, initialDelay, delay which specify the scheduling settings for the task.
The schedule function delegates the task scheduling to the CommandProcessor by
calling CommandProcessor.processScheduledTask. The actual scheduling of the task
is done through the CommandProcessor, which manages the execution and schedul-
ing of tasks in a multi-threaded environment. This is illustrated in Listing 5.7.
1 object CommandProcessor
2
{
3
// The number of threads in the scheduled thread pool
4
private const val scheduledThreadPoolSize: Int = 3
5
6
// Thread pool for handling scheduled tasks
7
private val scheduledThreadPool = Executors.newScheduledThreadPool(
scheduledThreadPoolSize)
8
9
// ConcurrentHashMap to store scheduled tasks and their respective
ScheduledFuture instances
10
private val scheduledTasks = ConcurrentHashMap <String,
ScheduledFuture <*>>()
11
12
// Schedules a task for execution at a fixed rate in the
scheduledThreadPool
13
fun processScheduledTask(taskId: UUID, command: Command.Scheduled,
initialDelay: Long, delay: Long, timeUnit: TimeUnit)
14
{
15
val future = scheduledThreadPool.scheduleAtFixedRate( {
runBlocking {
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Implementation
16
command.execute()
17
} }, initialDelay , delay, timeUnit)
18
19
scheduledTasks[taskId.stringRepresentation] = future
20
}
21
22
...
23
}
Listing 5.7: Implementation of the CommandProcessor.
The CommandProcessor class is a singleton object responsible for managing and
processing scheduled and event tasks in a multi-threaded environment. It maintains
two thread pools, one for scheduled tasks and another for event tasks. The number of
threads in each pool is customizable. The processScheduledTask method schedules a
task for execution at a fixed rate in the scheduledThreadPool. The method schedules
the task to run periodically with the specified initial delay and delay time.
Event tasks are started similarly to scheduled tasks.
The difference is that it
creates an EventTaskCommand instance and uses subscribe method. Listing 5.8 illus-
trates this.
1
2 suspend inline fun <reified T : IntegrationEvent <TService>, reified TService
: ApplicationService <TService, T>> startTask(id: UUID) : TaskStatus
3
{
4
// Task Retrieval
5
val task = eventTaskRepository.getTaskById(id)
6
requireNotNull(task)
7
// Command Creation
8
val command = EventTaskExecutorCommand(analysisRepository ,
scriptHandler , task)
9
// Subscribing to the Event
10
subscribe<TService, T>(command)
11
// Update Task Status
12
eventTaskRepository.updateTaskStatus(id, TaskStatus.Running)
13
return TaskStatus.Running
14
}
15
16
inline fun <reified TService : ApplicationService <TService, TEvent>,
reified TEvent : IntegrationEvent <TService>> subscribe(
17
command: Command.Event
18
)
19
{
20
eventBus.subscribe {
21
event { e: TEvent ->
22
CommandProcessor.processEventTask(command, e)
23
}
24
}
25
}
Listing 5.8: Implementation of starting an event task.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Task management
33
The subscribe method in Listing 5.8 is responsible for subscribing to the specific
event. When an event is received in the eventBus, the CommandProcessor.processEventTask
method is called with the command and the received event as arguments. This means
that the CommandProcessor will execute the command.
The CommandProcessor dispatches the command execution to the eventThread-
Pool, where it will be processed concurrently with other event tasks. This logic is
demonstrated in Listing 5.9.
1 object CommandProcessor {
2
// The number of threads in the event thread pool
3
private const val eventThreadPoolSize: Int = 3
4
5
// Thread pool for handling event tasks
6
private val eventThreadPool = Executors.newFixedThreadPool(
eventThreadPoolSize)
7
8
/**
9
* Submits an event task for execution in the eventThreadPool.
10
* @param command The event task command to execute.
11
* @param event The integration event.
12
*/
13
fun <TService : ApplicationService <TService, TEvent>, TEvent :
IntegrationEvent <TService>> processEventTask(
14
command: Command.Event,
15
event: TEvent
16
) {
17
eventThreadPool.submit {
18
runBlocking {
19
command.execute(event)
20
}
21
}
22
}
23 }
Listing 5.9: Implementation of the CommandProcessor.
Overall, the CommandProcessor object acts as a central processor for managing
tasks. It receives command objects and takes responsibility for them. It manages
thread pools, handles task scheduling, and initiates asynchronous command execu-
tion.
5.4
Task management
This section covers the implementation details of task management functionality,
which enables various actions such as task creation, retrieval of the task list, task
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Implementation
removal, and starting and stopping tasks.
For every type of task, there is a corresponding Task Service that provides meth-
ods to manage the task. For example, the EventTaskService manages event tasks.
The class provides various methods to create, start, stop, and retrieve event tasks.
The content of this class is shown in Listing 5.10.
1 class EventTaskServiceHost
2 {
3
suspend inline fun <reified T : IntegrationEvent <TService>, reified
TService : ApplicationService <TService, T>> createTask(name: String,
scriptUrl: URL, type: T) : TaskStatus
4
{
5
val task = TaskSettings.Event(uuidFactory.randomUUID(), name,
scriptUrl, type, TaskStatus.Created, clock.now())
6
eventTaskRepository.saveTask(task)
7
return TaskStatus.Created
8
}
9
10
suspend fun getTaskByName(name: String): TaskSettings.Event<*, *>?
11
{
12
return eventTaskRepository.getTaskByName(name)
13
}
14
15
...
16 }
Listing 5.10: Implementation of the EventTaskService.
EventTaskService exposes createTask method, which creates a new task and saves
it to the eventTaskRepository. It then returns the Created status, indicating that the
task has been successfully created. The previous section already provided a descrip-
tion of the startTask method. GetTaskByName method is used to retrieve an event
task by its name. It calls the getTaskByName method on the eventTaskRepository and
returns the result. GetAllTask retrieves all event tasks stored in the eventTaskRepos-
itory. RemoveTask is used to remove an event task with a specific id. It removes the
task from the eventTaskRepository and returns Stopped status as an indication that
the task has been stopped. When a task is removed, the method should unsubscribe
from the event. But this is currently marked as TODO since the unsubscribe mecha-
nism is yet to be implemented in CARP Core. StopTask method stops an event task
with the provided id. It updates the task’s status to Stopped in the eventTaskReposi-
tory and unsubscribes from the event.
ScheduledTaskService works similarly. The difference is in the task stop and remove
methods logic. These methods call cancelScheduledTask on the CommandProcessor
to cancel the task.
1
==PAGE:45==
5.5 The analysis scripts
35
2 // ConcurrentHashMap to store scheduled tasks and their respective
ScheduledFuture instances
3 private val scheduledTasks = ConcurrentHashMap <String, ScheduledFuture <*>>()
4
5
6 fun cancelScheduledTask(taskId: UUID)
7 {
8
val taskToCancel = scheduledTasks.remove(taskId.stringRepresentation)
9
taskToCancel?.cancel(false)
10 }
Listing 5.11: Implementation of a task cancelling.
In Listing 5.11, the scheduledTasks.remove(taskId.stringRepresentation) returns
the Future1, which represents the result of asynchronous computation. The Future
provides a cancellation mechanism.
5.5
The analysis scripts
The Analysis component must be able to execute diverse analysis scripts in Python.
The Python scripts work independently as separate projects, and task settings hold
the URL to execute these scripts. The command object delegates this execution to
ScriptHandler class. The implementation of ScriptHandler is illustrated in Listing
5.12.
1 class PythonScriptHandler(private val client: OkHttpClient):
ScriptRequestHandler
2 {
3
override suspend fun send(jsonBody: String, scriptUrl: String):
ScriptResult
4
{
5
6
val deferredResult = CompletableDeferred <ScriptResult >()
7
8
val mediaType = "application/json".toMediaType()
9
val requestBody = jsonBody.toRequestBody(mediaType)
10
11
val request = Request.Builder()
12
.url(scriptUrl)
13
.post(requestBody)
14
.build()
15
16
client.newCall(request).enqueue(object : Callback {
17
18
override fun onFailure(call: Call, e: IOException) {
19
val errorMessage = e.message?.take(200) ?: "Script execution
resulted in an error!"
1https://docs.oracle.com/javase%2F7%2Fdocs%2Fapi%2F%2F/java/util/concurrent/Future.
html
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Implementation
20
deferredResult.complete(ScriptResult.Error(errorMessage))
21
}
22
23
override fun onResponse(call: Call, response: Response) {
24
val scriptResult = if (response.isSuccessful) {
25
response.body?.use { body ->
26
ScriptResult.Success(body.string())
27
} ?: ScriptResult.Error("Script execution result is null
!")
28
} else {
29
ScriptResult.Error(response.message.take(200))
30
}
31
deferredResult.complete(scriptResult)
32
}
33
})
34
35
return deferredResult.await()
36
}
37 }
Listing 5.12: Implementation of ScriptHandler.
ScriptHandler sends an HTTP call to the endpoint with provided URL address
with request parameters, such as startTime and endTime for scheduled tasks or in-
tegration events for event-triggered tasks. This endpoint executes Python analysis
scripts and returns the results. The scripts are executed asynchronously. To send
HTTP calls, the OkHttpClient2 framework is used. To submit an HTTP request and
handle the response through a callback mechanism in an asynchronous manner, the
enqueue method of OkHttpClient is employed.
5.6
Task continuity
The software architecture must ensure the continuity of scheduled tasks after restart-
ing the project. To implement this requirement, the logic is executed within the init
block of the ScheduledTaskService class. In Kotlin, initialization code can be placed
in initializer blocks denoted by the init3 keyword. The implementation of the task
continuity is described in Listing 5.13.
1 init {
2
val allTask = scheduledTaskRepository.getAllTask()
3
4
// Filter and process tasks that have a running status and a non-null
executedAt value
5
allTask.filter { it.status == TaskStatus.Running && it.executedAt !=
null }
6
.map { task ->
7
// Calculate the next execution time and initial delay
2https://javadoc.io/doc/com.squareup.okhttp3/okhttp/3.3.1/okhttp3/OkHttpClient.html
3https://kotlinlang.org/docs/classes.html#secondary-constructors
==PAGE:47==
5.6 Task continuity
37
8
val nextExecutionTimeMillis = calculateNextExecutionTime(task.
executedAt!!.toEpochMilliseconds(), task.delay, task.
timeUnit)
9
val initialDelayMillis = calculateInitialDelay(
nextExecutionTimeMillis , TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS)
10
val initialDelay = task.timeUnit.convert(initialDelayMillis ,
TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS)
11
12
// Schedule the task with the calculated initial delay
13
restartTask(task = task, initialDelay = initialDelay)
14
}
15 }
Listing 5.13: Implementation of a scheduled task continuity.
The code starts by retrieving all tasks from the scheduledTaskRepository. Then
it selects tasks with status Running, indicating that they are currently running. For
each selected task, the code calculates the next execution time based on the previous
execution time and the specified delay. After, the code calculates the initial delay
for scheduling the task again. The initial delay is calculated as the time difference
between the next execution time and the current time, expressed in the task’s specified
time unit. Then the restartTask method is called to schedule each task with the given
initial delay.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
This chapter describes the methods employed to test the software architecture pro-
totype and the results of these tests. The chapter explores various use cases and
discusses how the tests address software requirements.
6.1
Test scheduled task
A relevant use case for this type of task involves performing repetitive calculations
of participant step counts at regular intervals. For instance, calculating daily step
counts at midnight and storing the results in a repository for users to access statistics
and other information.
In the context of CACHET, they currently store participant step data in the
database. There are two repositories with this data: an old deprecated one and a
new one. However, for the purpose of the tests, the old repository, which contains the
necessary step count data, will be utilized as input data for the step count calculations.
Figure 6.1 shows the content of the data points table with participant steps.
Figure 6.1: Participant data points (test data).
As explained in the activity diagram of the Design chapter, it is necessary to pre-
pare and deploy a Python script before creating a task for analysis. In this particular
use case, the script should be capable of retrieving data on participant step counts
through the CARP Webservices1 and conducting calculations. The script is included
in the Appendix.
1
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Evaluation
Once the script is ready and can be used, the scheduled task can be created using
the ScheduledTaskService, which provides methods for task management.
The settings for the task that needs to be created are displayed in Listing 6.1.
1 const val TASK_NAME = "CalculateStepsTask"
2 const val INITIAL_DELAY = 1L
3 const val DELAY =
5L
4 val TIME_UNIT = TimeUnit.SECONDS
5 // Python script url
6 val SCRIPT_URL = URL("http://127.0.0.1:5000/api/calculate-step-counts")
Listing 6.1: Scheduled task settings.
The task delay for testing purposes is set to 5 seconds, indicating that the step
count calculations will be executed every 5 seconds.
In order to test the creation of scheduled tasks and other task-related operations,
the TestScheduledTaskService class was implemented. The results of the test methods
conducted within this class are presented in this section. The Appendix contains the
details of the class with test methods.
Initially, the TestScheduledTaskService creates a task with the specified settings
and proceeds to start it. Once the task has started, the software executes the script,
which calculates step counts every 5 seconds. The task is then stopped after comple-
tion. Following the testing of task management operations, the class uses Analysis-
ResultsService to obtain the analysis results.
A screenshot of the test results is shown in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Test results of CalculateStepsTask.
In this scenario, step counts are calculated for all participants within a specific
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Test event-triggered task
41
time frame and the structure of the script result in JSON2 is the following:
1 {
2
"calculatedStepCount": [
3
{
4
"stepCount": 25493,
5
"userId": "52f310e0-cd5c-11ed-9a4e-093cab8175d6"
6
},
7
{
8
"stepCount": 19875,
9
"userId": "0c85c37c -005b-49b8-a593 -67967ffaa08d"
10
}
11
],
12
"deploymentId": "4c9f8a87-b94c-455e-a6b0-5a8eb838bfbd",
13
"end_time": "2023-07-21T13:25:14.813889Z",
14
"start_time": "2023-07-20T13:25:09.813889Z",
15
"studyId": "33dbe7d6 -37bc-4559-b6ff-e8baf0de5458"
16
}
Listing 6.2: CalculateStepCounts script result structure.
To summarize the section:
Firstly, the section validates the task management requirement by demonstrating
that the software enables task creation, starting, retrieving, and stopping. Secondly,
it evaluates the requirement for using a Python script for analysis by calculating step
counts. Thirdly, the section examines the requirement for storing analysis results
and confirms its successful implementation. Fourthly, the expandability requirement,
which involves the easy addition of new analysis tasks, is addressed through the
task creation process. Users can create analysis tasks without the need to code or
redeploy the project.
Instead, they can utilize service endpoints and specify the
required settings.
6.2
Test event-triggered task
This type of task involves executing the analysis script when a specific event occurs.
Before creating a task, an analysis script in Python needs to be prepared. The test
objective is to execute analysis scripts for the events published by CARP Core com-
ponents, such as Study and Deployment. In the current scenario, the test focuses
on the analysis script’s execution when a study is removed. The Study component
publishes the StudyRemoved event after the removal, and the test creates a task for
this event type. To achieve this, the EventTaskService is used.
The settings for creating the task are displayed in Listing 6.3.
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON
==PAGE:52==
42
6 Evaluation
1 const val TASK_NAME = "StudyRemovedTask"
2 // Python script url
3 const val SCRIPT_URL = "http://127.0.0.1:5000/api/handle-studyRemoved -event"
Listing 6.3: Event task settings.
In this scenario, the Python script prints the event to confirm its successful recep-
tion. However, in practical situations, diverse analysis scripts can be implemented.
This test serves as evidence that a task can successfully execute a script upon the
occurrence of an event.
To test the creation of an event task and other task-related operations, the
TestEventTaskService class was implemented. The results of the test methods con-
ducted within this class are presented in this section. The Appendix contains the
details of the class with test methods.
Initially, the TestEventTaskService creates a task with the specified settings and
proceeds to start it. Once the task has started, the software subscribes to the StudyRe-
moved event.
Then the test initiates the publication of the StudyRemoved event.
When this event is published, the software executes the analysis script. The task is
then stopped after completion. After the testing of task-related operations, the class
uses AnalysisResultsService to obtain the analysis results.
A screenshot of the test results is shown in Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Test results of StudyRemovedTask.
To summarize this section:
This section validates the ability to create an event-triggered task, fulfilling the
requirement known as the Analysis execution mode.
This requirement entails the
software’s capability to create tasks with different types. Additionally, the section
evaluates the successful execution of Python scripts when subscribed events occur.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
7.1
Goals and results
The Goal 1 of this project is to determine the necessary requirements for the software
architecture and prototype. This process is essential to lay the foundation for the
successful development and implementation of the system. To accomplish this goal,
the software requirements were categorized into three key aspects: functional require-
ments, non-functional requirements, and technical requirements. These requirements
were gathered from key stakeholders.
It was an important step that ensured the
software development process remained user-centric and aligned with the project’s
overall vision.
The Goal 2 focused on designing an appropriate software architecture that aligns with
the project’s requirements, scalability needs, and maintainability considerations. For
this purpose, the 4+1 architecture pattern was adopted to guide the design process,
ensuring a comprehensive understanding of the architecture from multiple perspec-
tives. This successful design lays a strong foundation for the subsequent stages of
software development and integration with the CARP Core architecture.
Achieving the Goal 3, which involved implementing a software architecture prototype
that fulfills the identified requirements and aligns with the chosen architecture, re-
quired a systematic approach. The prioritization of the identified requirements based
on their importance and impact on the software’s functionality ensured that critical
requirements were addressed first during the development process. An iterative de-
velopment approach was adopted, allowing for continuous feedback and adjustments,
ensuring that the evolving software met the requirements and aligned with the chosen
architecture. Application of appropriate design patterns such as the Command Pro-
cessor pattern and Event Bus pattern, promoted the maintainability and scalability
of the software. The iterative approach and utilization of design patterns contributed
to the creation of a robust prototype that can accommodate future enhancements
and additions with ease.
To achieve the Goal 4, which focused on validating a proof of concept, several methods
were employed to ensure that the software prototype met the specified requirements
and functions reliably.
The prototype software underwent testing to evaluate its
requirements.
Realistic use cases were considered, utilizing data from the CARP
platform and simple analysis scripts to assess the features of the software prototype.
==PAGE:54==
44
7 Discussion
7.2
Possible future work
Future work can focus on developing more advanced analysis scripts. These scripts
can include complex algorithms and machine-learning models to gain a more thor-
ough understanding of the information gathered from the platform and wearables.
Currently, the prototype executes analysis scripts upon the occurrence of specific
events or times. In the future, real-time data processing capabilities can be incorpo-
rated, allowing for immediate analysis and response to incoming data streams. To
ensure data privacy and confidentiality, future work can focus on implementing user
access control and data security measures. Researchers may require different levels of
access to data and functionalities, and it is essential to enforce proper access controls
to safeguard sensitive information. As the data volume grows, ensuring scalability
and optimizing performance becomes crucial. Future work can load testing and code
optimization to enhance the software’s eﬀiciency and responsiveness, even under high
data processing demands. A user-friendly interface for managing analysis tasks can be
beneficial for researchers and developers. It can provide them with more information
about the status and state of their tasks and enhance their understanding.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis aimed to address the challenge of designing and implement-
ing a software architecture capable of executing diverse scripts to analyze mHealth
data within the context of the CARP Core framework. By aligning with the CARP
Core architecture and incorporating the necessary functionalities, the goal was to facil-
itate the integration of data analysis tasks for researchers and developers. To achieve
this, a systematic approach was adopted, starting with determining the necessary re-
quirements categorized into functional, non-functional, and technical aspects. These
requirements provided the foundation for the subsequent design and development
phases. The software architecture was designed to meet the identified requirements
and accommodate future improvements and alterations. In the implementation phase,
an iterative development approach was adopted, prioritizing critical requirements to
ensure their timely implementation. Design patterns were applied to enhance main-
tainability and scalability of the software architecture prototype. Finally, to validate
the proof of concept, various tests were conducted to assess the requirements. Real-
istic use cases using data from the CARP platform and simple analysis scripts were
utilized to evaluate performance. The software architecture prototype successfully
demonstrated its capability to execute analysis scripts for data analysis within the
CARP Core framework. It addressed the problem statement, providing researchers
and developers with a tool to analyze and aggregate health metrics from study par-
ticipants.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX A
Acronyms
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
CARP Copenhagen Research Platform
ILO
intended learning objectives
IPR
Intellectual Property Rights
API
Application Programming Interface
HTTP
HyperText Transfer Protocol.
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
mHealth Mobile Health
URL
Uniform Resource Locator
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX B
An Appendix
This is a clickable link to the source code of the project on GitHub
1 def calculate_steps(start_time, end_time):
2
# Call a function to retrieve the access token and store it in the
variable header_access_token
3
header_access_token = get_access_token()
4
5
# Construct the URL with query parameters.
6
# The request will be sent to the CARP Webservices Data API to retrieve
information about steps
7
url = "{}{}?start-time={}&end-time={}".format(base_url["local"], "/api/
data-points/step-counts/", start_time, end_time)
8
9
# Send a GET request to the API endpoint with the access token in the
headers
10
response = requests.get(url, headers=header_access_token , verify=False)
11
12
print(response.content)
13
14
# Parse the response content into a Python dictionary
15
data = json.loads(response.content)
16
17
# Extract necessary information from the JSON data
18
study_id = data['deploymentStepCountList'][0]['studyId']
19
deployment_id = data['deploymentStepCountList'][0]['deploymentId']
20
start_time = data['startTime']
21
end_time = data['endTime']
22
23
# Calculate the step count for each distinct user and store it in a
dictionary
24
user_step_counts = {}
25
for entry in data['deploymentStepCountList'][0]['userStepCount']:
26
user_id = entry['userId']
27
step_count = entry['stepCount']
28
user_step_counts[user_id] = user_step_counts.get(user_id, 0) +
step_count
29
30
# Convert the user_step_counts dictionary to a list of dictionaries in
the required format
31
calculated_step_count = [{"userId": user_id, "stepCount": steps} for
user_id, steps in user_step_counts.items()]
32
==PAGE:60==
50
B An Appendix
33
# Create a Python dictionary representing the JSON object with the
desired format
34
result_dict = {
35
"studyId": study_id,
36
"deploymentId": deployment_id ,
37
"start_time": start_time,
38
"end_time": end_time,
39
"calculatedStepCount": calculated_step_count
40
}
41
42
print(result_dict)
43
44
return result_dict
Listing B.1: Python script for calculating step counts.
1
2 class TestScheduledTaskService
3 {
4
private val analysisResultsService = AnalysisResultsServiceHost (
5
repository =
InMemoryAnalysisResultsResultsRepository()
6
)
7
8
private val scheduledTaskService = ScheduledTaskServiceHost(
9
analysisResultsService
= analysisResultsService ,
10
scheduledTaskRepository = InMemoryScheduledTaskRepository(),
11
scripHandler = PythonScriptHandler(OkHttpClient()))
12
13
companion object
14
{
15
const val TASK_NAME = "CalculateStepsTask"
16
const val INITIAL_DELAY = 1L
17
const val DELAY =
5L
18
val TIME_UNIT = TimeUnit.SECONDS
19
val SCRIPT_URL = URL("http://127.0.0.1:5000/api/calculate-step-
counts")
20
}
21
22
suspend fun testCreateTask()
23
{
24
println("1. Creating task..")
25
val taskStatus = scheduledTaskService.createTask(
26
name = TASK_NAME,
27
initialDelay = INITIAL_DELAY ,
28
delay = DELAY,
29
timeUnit = TIME_UNIT,
30
scriptUrl = SCRIPT_URL
31
)
32
println("Task status: $taskStatus")
33
println("------------------")
34
}
35
36
suspend fun testGetTaskByName()
37
{
38
println("2. Retrieving the created task..")
==PAGE:61==
B An Appendix
51
39
val task = scheduledTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
40
requireNotNull(task)
41
println("The created task id: ${task.id}")
42
println("------------------")
43
}
44
45
suspend fun testStartTask()
46
{
47
println("3. Starting the created task..")
48
val task = scheduledTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
49
requireNotNull(task)
50
scheduledTaskService.startTask(task.id)
51
val status = scheduledTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)?.status
52
println("New task status: $status")
53
println("------------------")
54
}
55
56
suspend fun testStopTask()
57
{
58
println("4. Stopping the task..")
59
val task = scheduledTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
60
requireNotNull(task)
61
val status = scheduledTaskService.stopTask(task.id)
62
println("New task status: $status")
63
println("------------------")
64
}
65
66
suspend fun testGetAnalysisResults()
67
{
68
println("5. Retrieving analysis results..")
69
val task = scheduledTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
70
requireNotNull(task)
71
val results = analysisResultsService.getResults(task.id)
72
println(Json.encodeToString(results))
73
println("------------------")
74
}
75 }
76
77 suspend fun main()
78 {
79
val t = TestScheduledTaskService()
80
t.testCreateTask()
81
t.testGetTaskByName()
82
t.testStartTask()
83
TimeUnit.SECONDS.sleep(10)
84
t.testStopTask()
85
t.testGetAnalysisResults()
86 }
Listing B.2: Testing of scheduled task.
1 class TestEventTaskService
2 (
3
coreAnalysisResultsService: CoreAnalysisResultsService ,
4
val coreStudyService: CoreStudyService ,
==PAGE:62==
52
B An Appendix
5
coreEventTaskService: CoreEventTaskService
6 ) : CommandLineRunner
7 {
8
9
val analysisService = coreAnalysisResultsService.instance
10
val studyService = coreStudyService.instance
11
val eventTaskService = coreEventTaskService.instance
12
13
companion object
14
{
15
const val TASK_NAME = "StudyRemovedTask"
16
const val SCRIPT_URL = "http://127.0.0.1:5000/api/handle-
studyRemoved -event"
17
}
18
19
override fun run(vararg args: String?): Unit = runBlocking {
20
testCreateTask()
21
testGetTaskByName()
22
testStartTask()
23
24
// Publish StudyRemoved event
25
coreStudyService.coreEventBus.publish(StudyService.Event.
StudyRemoved(UUID.randomUUID()))
26
// Publish StudyDeploymentStopped event
27
coreStudyService.coreEventBus.publish(DeploymentService.Event.
StudyDeploymentStopped(UUID.randomUUID()))
28
// Publish StudyDeploymentRemoved event
29
coreStudyService.coreEventBus.publish(DeploymentService.Event.
StudyDeploymentRemoved(UUID.randomUUID()))
30
31
TimeUnit.SECONDS.sleep(6)
32
testStopTask()
33
testGetAnalysisResults()
34
}
35
36
suspend fun testCreateTask() {
37
println("1. Creating task..")
38
val taskStatus = eventTaskService.createTask <StudyService.Event.
StudyRemoved , StudyService >(TASK_NAME, URL(SCRIPT_URL))
39
println("Task status: $taskStatus")
40
println("------------------")
41
}
42
43
suspend fun testGetTaskByName()
44
{
45
println("2. Retrieving the created task..")
46
val task = eventTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
47
requireNotNull(task)
48
println("The created task id: ${task.id}")
49
println("------------------")
50
}
51
52
suspend fun testStartTask()
53
{
54
println("3. Starting the created task..")
==PAGE:63==
B An Appendix
53
55
val task = eventTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
56
requireNotNull(task)
57
eventTaskService.startTask<StudyService.Event.StudyRemoved ,
StudyService >(task.id)
58
val status = eventTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)?.status
59
println("New task status: $status")
60
println("------------------")
61
}
62
63
suspend fun testStopTask()
64
{
65
println("4. Stopping the task..")
66
val task = eventTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
67
requireNotNull(task)
68
val status = eventTaskService.stopTask(task.id)
69
println("New task status: $status")
70
}
71
72
suspend fun testGetAnalysisResults()
73
{
74
println("5. Retrieving analysis results..")
75
val task = eventTaskService.getTaskByName(TASK_NAME)
76
requireNotNull(task)
77
val results = analysisService.getResults(task.id)
78
println(Json.encodeToString(results))
79
println("------------------")
80
}
Listing B.3: Testing of event task.
1 def handle(event_type, content):
2
return "This is a Python script that confirms that it has received an
event with type: " + event_type + \
3
" and content: " + content + \
4
" and can perform an analysis script!"
Listing B.4: Python script for event handling.
1 @app.route('/api/handle-studyRemoved -event', methods=['POST'])
2 def handle_study_removed_event():
3
# Get the JSON data from the request body
4
data = request.json
5
json_string = json.dumps(data)
6
event_type = "StudyRemoved"
7
print(json_string)
8
9
# Handle event
10
result = event_handler.handle(event_type, json_string)
11
return result
12
13 @app.route('/api/calculate-step-counts', methods=['POST'])
14 def calculate_step_counts():
15
# Get the JSON data from the request body
16
data = request.json
==PAGE:64==
54
B An Appendix
17
18
# Get fields
19
start_time = data['startTime']
20
end_time = data['endTime']
21
22
print(start_time)
23
print(end_time)
24
25
# Calculate steps
26
result = calculate_steps.calculate_steps(start_time, end_time)
27
return jsonify(result)
28
29
30 if __name__ == '__main__':
31
app.run()
Listing B.5: Python scripts API.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[FKD15]
Denzil Ferreira, Vassilis Kostakos, and Anind K Dey. “AWARE: mo-
bile context instrumentation framework.” In: Frontiers in ICT 2 (2015),
page 6.
[Hic+19]
Jennifer L Hicks et al. “Best practices for analyzing large-scale health
data from wearables and smartphone apps.” In: NPJ digital medicine 2.1
(2019), page 45.
[Hos+17]
Syed Monowar Hossain et al. “mCerebrum: a mobile sensing software
platform for development and validation of digital biomarkers and in-
terventions.” In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Embedded
Network Sensor Systems. 2017, pages 1–14.
[HTS17]
Mostafa Haghi, Kerstin Thurow, and Regina Stoll. “Wearable devices in
medical internet of things: scientific research and commercially available
devices.” In: Healthcare informatics research 23.1 (2017), pages 4–15.
[Mar00]
Robert C Martin. “Design principles and design patterns.” In: Object
Mentor 1.34 (2000), page 597.
[Mun+16]
Bernard Munos et al. “Mobile health: the power of wearables, sensors, and
apps to transform clinical trials.” In: Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences 1375.1 (2016), pages 3–18.
[NL21]
Jari Nurmi and Elena Simona Lohan. “Systematic review on machine-
learning algorithms used in wearable-based eHealth data analysis.” In:
IEEE Access 9 (2021), pages 112221–112235.
[Ran+19]
Yatharth Ranjan et al. “RADAR-base: open source mobile health plat-
form for collecting, monitoring, and analyzing data using sensors, wear-
ables, and mobile devices.” In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 7.8 (2019),
e11734.
[rti]
rtinsights.com. Why Python is Essential for Data Analysis. url: https:
/ / www . rtinsights . com / why - python - is - essential - for - data -
analysis/.
[Sei+22]
Fabio A Seixas-Lopes et al. “Seamless Wearable Data Collection in a
Mobile Environment.” In: medical care 3 (2022), page 4.
==PAGE:66==
56
Bibliography
[SNL21]
Aditi Site, Jari Nurmi, and Elena Simona Lohan. “Systematic review on
machine-learning algorithms used in wearable-based eHealth data analy-
sis.” In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pages 112221–112235.
[Sun+22]
Jithin S Sunny et al. “Anomaly detection framework for wearables data:
a perspective review on data concepts, data analysis algorithms and
prospects.” In: Sensors 22.3 (2022), page 756.
[ucd]
ucd.ie. Why Do Data Analysts Use Python. url: https://www.ucd.
ie/professionalacademy/resources/why-do-data-analysts-use-
python/.
[Veg+21]
Julio Vega et al. “Reproducible analysis pipeline for data streams: open-
source software to process data collected with mobile devices.” In: Fron-
tiers in Digital Health (2021), page 168.
