==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Towards factual certainty in Natural Language
Processing using explainability methods
Rasmus Aagaard - s164419
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Being able to trace knowledge elicited by a language model back to its training data
allows for alignment of the model’s knowledge and beliefs. Existing literature has made
attempts at developing Training Data Attribution (TDA) methods which are designed
to assign scores to training data based on their importance to a prediction.
We present an exploration of TracIn, a gradient-based TDA method, using a bench-
marking dataset called FTRACE-TREx. This dataset facilitates fact-tracing by mark-
ing proponents which is the training data that should teach the language model a
particular fact. Facts are recited by the language model as a means to test which facts
have been internalized in the model’s parameters.
Our analysis reveals important considerations for ensuring accessibility, reproducibility,
and robustness with regards to the dataset. Additionally, our research finds numerous
examples where TracIn exhibits limitations in producing intuitive and robust results
which highlights the need for further research in the area.
Furthermore, we demonstrate TracIn’s ability to identify mislabeled training samples
as suggested by previous literature. To evaluate this we present a process to inten-
tionally and systematically mislabel (i.e. poisoning) the FTRACE-TREx training set,
essentially producing misinformation.
This research thereby enhances understanding of TDA methods and their applicability
for fact-tracing in language models while offering recommendations for future research
and development.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Cognitive Systems section of the department of
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in
fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree
in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
The thesis was assigned a workload of 35 ECTS points spanning 6 months from January
16th 2023 to July 16th 2023.
Kongens Lyngby - 16th of July, 2023
Rasmus Aagaard - s164419
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my thesis supervisors, Lars
Kai Hansen and Lenka Tětková. Their invaluable guidance during the initial stages
of the project, followed by fruitful discussions over the past 6 months, have been both
enjoyable and greatly appreciated.
I would also like to extend a special thanks to Ekin Akyürek, the author of (Akyürek
et al., 2022). Ekin has been extremely helpful and readily available throughout the
project, and their work has served as a fundamental basis for my thesis.
Lastly, I want to express my heartfelt appreciation to my friends and family for their
unwavering support, engaging discussions about my thesis, and for keeping my spirits
high throughout the process.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Natural Language Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Trustworthy Machine Learning Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Language Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
n-gram models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Neural models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Loss functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Learning model parameters from data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Latent representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.4
Masked Language Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Training Data Attribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Influence Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
TracIn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Review of critique
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.4
Relation to Information Retrieval (IR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methods
19
3.1
T5 Language Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
3.2
Fact-tracing dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Results from previous studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Experiments & Results
24
4.1
Influence scores for FTRACE-TREx using TracIn . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.1
Training T5 on FTRACE-TREx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.2
Using TracIn to calculate influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Least influential proponents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Simplifying targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Data leakage causing high influence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Performance under counterfactual training set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Critical inspection of FTRACE-TREx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.1
Proponents in Candidate Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.2
Predicates for the test set queries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.3
Masked object as part of query input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.4
Accuracy by predicate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Surfacing misinformation in the training set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5.1
Constructing misinformed abstracts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5.2
Influence scores on false queries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Discussion & Conclusion
42
5.1
Dataset quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.1
Predicate for query construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Robust usages of TracIn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.1
Influence score for surfacing misinformation . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.2
Gradient similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A
Predicates
46
Bibliography
48
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The field of machine learning has achieved remarkable results in recent years by ap-
plying deep neural networks to solve complex problems by training them with large
amounts of data. Several significant achievements have been made in fields such as
computer vision, game playing, and bioinformatics. A few notable instances would be
when The ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge was won by a large mar-
gin with AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2017), or when world champions were defeated
in board games like Go and chess (Silver et al., 2016), and the massive improvements
toward solving the protein folding problem, which has been a great challenge in com-
putational biology for decades (Jumper et al., 2021).
These achievements have not only pushed the boundaries of what is possible with ma-
chine learning but have also led to practical applications with real-world impact, such
as improvements to medical diagnosis and drug discovery, enhancement of autonomous
vehicles, and advancing scientific research. Furthermore, the models for solving these
problems have been democratised in such a way that practically anyone who either
has access to relatively modest computational resources or has the budget to pay small
fees for calls to models as services can now apply these models to real-world problems
with relative ease of use.
1.1
Natural Language Processing
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a subfield of machine learning that deals with
utilizing computational resources in order to process data in the form of natural text
produced by humans. Huge advancements have been made in recent years, namely
with the introduction of the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) which
sparked a revolution in the field. The pre-training of transformer-based models on
large datasets (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019) allowed for fine-tuning of models
for various downstream tasks such as language modeling, machine translation, and
sentiment analysis, which often outperformed previous state-of-the-art methods. These
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Trustworthy Machine Learning Systems
2
advances have allowed the development of systems such as GPT (Radford et al., 2018),
which is the primary building block of ChatGPT by OpenAI.
Since the introduction of transformer-based language models it has been shown that
we can predictably estimate the performance by scaling up the size of the model and
datasets (Hoffmann et al., 2022). However, the computational costs of training these
language models are not negligible as they often require resources that are only available
to large corporations with enough capital to risk as well as willingness to train such
large models. Datasets such as Common Crawl (Etzioni et al., 2004) consists of a large
portion of the internet which is scraped on monthly basis, producing vast amounts of
data to learn from. These datasets are often used to pretrain large language models
(LLMs) in order to give the models a general understanding of language and world
knowledge. These data sets have been shown to contain undesirable content (Luccioni
& Viviano, 2021) that motivates the practice of scaling responsibly.
1.2
Trustworthy Machine Learning Systems
As we see and expect systems that rely on machine learning for their core functionality
to be an increasing part of our everyday lives it is increasingly important that we can
trust these systems to make transparent decisions that are fair and robust (Ribeiro et
al., 2016). These are essential traits for public acceptance such that we can confidently
and safely harvest the massive potential that machine learning offers (Brynjolfsson &
McAfee, 2014). We unfortunately witnessed numerous attempts of utilizing machine
learning systems to automate processes which have hurt the public acceptance due
to the disregard of the aforementioned principles. One notable instance of one such
attempt is the “Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions”
(COMPAS) algorithm used for predicting the risk of a convicted criminal to re-offend.
This algorithm was found to exhibit racial biases against African-American convicts
(Mehrabi et al., 2021). It essentially mirrored the existing racial biases found in policing
due to being trained on historical data.
Furthermore, it could be used to deflect
accountability and criticism as it would allow law enforcement to put blame on the
algorithm’s decisions despite it merely reflected the data it was trained on.
Recently we have seen rapid increase of interest in the development of LLMs ever
since OpenAI released ChatGPT in late 2022 which showed the potential that these
types of models have as virtual assistants. Being able to distill information in a way
that is suited to your specific needs is something that would otherwise require a series
of manual tasks from the user (Heaven, 2022). However, this distillation process is
not always trustworthy, as it has been observed to be prone to hallucinations wherein
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Research questions
3
the model generates text that is not faithful to any source and inadvertently produces
misinformation which oftentimes reads completely coherently and contextually relevant,
increasing the risk of creating and spreading factual inaccuracies. Ensuring factual
accuracy of LLMs poses a significant challenge which requires robust mechanisms for
source verification and content filtering to mitigate the spread of false information.
1.3
Research questions
In this thesis, we explore methods that promise to measure and evaluate where a
language model has learned specific facts. The approach utilizes methods that is able
to trace, and thereby explain, which training examples that are most influential for a
given text generation in order to find samples that are likely to have taught the model
a certain piece of information. This will allow for more faithful datasets that should
make text generation systems more reliable, accurate, and trustworthy. Therefore, the
overall goal of this thesis is to contribute to the development of more reliable and
trustworthy text generation systems and to demonstrate their practical use-cases in
real-world problems.
Specifically, we would like to seek answers to the following questions:
• What is the state-of-the-art for scoring training data influence?
• Can these methods be used to confidently make assertions about where a language
model has learned certain facts?
• Are there any issues with the available datasets which allows for tracing factual
queries back to the training data?
• What are promising use-cases for measuring training data influence?
1.4
Outline
Chapter 2: Introduces the necessary theory that is used throughout the thesis. Namely
how deep neural networks can be used to learn language models and methods
which promises to be able to attribute influential training samples to a prediction.
Chapter 3: Briefly goes through the model and dataset used for experimentation.
Chapter 4: Presents experiments and their associated results. It starts off with foun-
dational steps which replicates procedures from existing studies, then building
upon that a basis for further analysis.
Chapter 5: Concludes the thesis and discusses its contributions.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Language Modelling
The field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) stems from the interest of teaching
computers to process and understand natural language. The natural language which
is understood by humans is built upon years of evolution and is highly dependent on
geographies, societies and cultures. Computers rely solely on a logical language which
have historically have been necessary for humans to learn in order to effectively utilize
the computer’s functionalities and strengths. Technological advancements has allowed
us to process natural language eﬀiciently in such quantities that we are now able to
closely model human language on computers.
Dating back to the works of (Shannon, 1948) in the field of information theory there was
an interest of measuring language as distributions. These ideas led to the development
of language models whose goal is to provide a probability distribution over a vocabulary
of tokens1. For a vocabulary which contains some number of tokens w1, w2, . . . wD ∈V.
The conditional probability of a token wt appearing after a all the previous tokens in
the sequence wj
i = (wi, wi+1, . . . , wj−1, wj) is expressed as P(wt|wt−1
1
) meaning that a
sequence of length T is the product of those probabilities,
P(wT
1 ) =
T
Y
t=1
P(wt|wt−1
1
).
(2.1)
A way to think about Equation 2.1 is that it should be trained to measure how likely
a sentence is to appear in the corpus in which is has been trained on.
Language
models take advantage of both the order of words as well as that words that are close
to each other a statistically more dependent. This way we can train a model which
acknowledges by way of the language’s statistical properties that the sentence “I like
ice-cream at the beach” is more likely to be expressed than “I like pizza at the beach”.
1A token is defined as the basic units of text that are used to build language models, such as words
or subwords.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Language Modelling
5
2.1.1 n-gram models
A simple way to construct a language model is to count the occurrences of how often a
token is followed by another token. This is the primary idea behind n-gram language
models. Given a corpus of texts we can count and estimate the conditional probability
of seeing a token from the full context given only the previous n −1 tokens
P(wt|wt−1
1
) ≈P(wt|wt−1
t−n+1)
Fitting an n-gram model constructs a probability table providing constant lookup of
all the conditional probabilities which are obtained by counting and normalizing each
occurrence of n-grams. The operations associated with fitting an n-gram can be done
eﬀiciently and scales well with training data. The limitations of n-gram models are
apparent when n becomes larger for large vocabulary sizes. This will cause the number
of conditions, i.e. the number of dimensions, to grow exponentially, as well as causing
increased sparsity due to the low individual occurrence of each n-gram even on large
corpora. This has led to restricting the size of n to be rather small or perform some
smoothing operations on the probability table. However, much information and context
is lost by effectively concatenating small sequences together and at times sampling
arbitrary sequences as a result from smoothing, leading to poor generalizability.
2.1.2
Neural models
Neural language model (Bengio et al., 2000) learns continuous representations of tokens
as opposed to n-gram language models which bases its probabilities of tokens on a
discrete token-count of the training data. These continuous representations allows the
model to learn a probability function which will assign high probabilities to similar
semantics. For example, the sentence “The dog is walking in the room” should be
semantically similar to “The cat was running in the bedroom”. This wouldn’t be the
case in an n-gram model due to each word being viewed as a discrete entity and not a
continuous one.
The idea is that each token has an associated feature vector such that each token is
a point in a vector space that is of much smaller size than the vocabulary. Using a
multi-layer neural network we can then train these feature vectors to be similar across
words that have similar contextual meaning. For example, “dog” and “cat” would be
close in this vector space as they would often carry the same meaning in the context
of the training data.
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Deep Learning
6
2.2
Deep Learning
Neural language models are trained using the practice of deep learning to learn contin-
uous representations of tokens. If we consider the multilayer perceptron, also referred
to as feed-forward neural network, we can begin to understand how a neural language
model is trained.
A feed-forward neural network (FNN), as visually depicted in Figure 2.1, is in essence
layers of neurons that are all connected and traversed from an input x to an output y.
The connections each has an associated weight and a bias - commonly referred to as
the parameters of the model. These parameters are learned by training the network
to form a relationship between the input and the output in the hopes that it will
generalize to unseen input and output meaningful results.
The value at each neuron is calculated from the previous layer as the linear combination
of the weights and biases
y = ϕ(Wx + b)
(2.2)
where ϕ is a non-linear activation function. The introduction of non-linearity enables
the network become a universal function approximator (Leshno et al., 1993). Functions
such as the Sigmoid ϕ(x) =
1
1+e−x and ReLU ϕ(x) = max(0, x) (Nair & Hinton, 2010)
are amongst the most commonly used activation functions.
With classification problems we are interested in modelling the relationship between
an input and an associated discrete class. In this setting the network would have an
output neuron for each of the classes at the end of the network. A Softmax function
would be applied to the output layer in order to normalize the values into a probability
distribution.
The input would then be associated with the class with the highest
Softmax probability.
In the context of a simplified example of neural language modelling where it is learning
to predict the next token in a sequence we can view it as attempting to predict which
of the K tokens in the vocabulary should come after the D tokens from the input layer.
2.2.1
Loss functions
The quality of the outputs from our model is governed by the parameters of the network
and we should train the network to obtain the parameters which maximises the quality
and generalizability of the network’s output. Loss functions allow us to measure the
quality of the outputs as well as tweak the network’s parameters by being differentiable.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Deep Learning
7
...
...
...
x1
x2
x3
xD
H1
HM
y1
yK
Input
layer
Hidden
layer
Output
layer
Figure 2.1: A graphical representation of a feed-forward Neural Network. It consists
of a D−dimensional input layer, an M dimensional hidden layer, and a K−dimensional
output layer.
The cross entropy loss function is an instance of one of these loss functions that are
used for classification tasks where the model attempts to associate a class to the given
input.
L(z, θ) = −
K
X
i=1
zy,i log(y(θ, zx,i))
(2.3)
where z = (x, y) is a data point containing features, zx, and true class label, zy. The
model’s predicted class label is obtained by performing a forward pass on zx using the
model parameters θ. K is the number of classes meaning that the expression sums over
each of the classes. The predicted class label is the Softmax probability y(θ, zx) ∈(0, 1]
of the feature zx being associated with the given class.
2.2.1.1
Example of Cross Entropy Loss
Let’s go through a small practical example of calculating the Cross Entropy loss func-
tion for a binary classification problem where an input is classified into one of two
possible classes. Performing a forward pass on our data point z = (x, y) resulted in
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Deep Learning
8
the Softmax probabilities y(θ, zx) = (0.82, 0.18) and the true class is zy = (1, 0). We
can now calculate the loss as
−1 · log(0.82) + 0 · log(0.18) = 0.086
which would indicate by the low loss that the prediction is likely to be in accordance
with the training data. Using further optimization techniques we can utilize this result
to further improve the network’s performance.
2.2.2
Learning model parameters from data
Using backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1986) we can differentiate the loss function
with respect to the parameters u allowing us to calculate the gradient. This tells us how
each parameters should change in order to lower the loss as the gradient is essentially a
vector that points towards the steepest slope, so taking a step in the negative direction
of the slope should minimize the loss.
This process is called “Gradient Descent” and serves as a way to find the parameters
which results in the lowest possible loss. Due to the practical infeasibility of differenti-
ating the loss function on the entire training dataset it is often done so in mini-batches
and is referred to as “Stochastic Gradient Descent”. Figure 2.2 illustrates an example
of taking 5 gradient steps towards a minima in the loss landscape.
2.2.3
Latent representations
The idea from (Bengio et al., 2000) was that similar sequences should be represented
similarly in a vector space in order to better generalize and avoid the pitfalls introduced
by the curse of dimensionality. Learning meaningful representations is a core concept
in deep learning and is one of the primary reasons for the success of the field. For
neural language models specifically we have the concept of token embeddings which
are the learned representations of individual tokens in vector space before going into
the model’s hidden layers. Word2Vec by (Mikolov et al., 2013) showcased that these
embeddings carry semantic meaning in its dimensions such that we are able to extract
relationships or concepts from the relative position of embeddings. For example, if v(·)
returns the embedding of a word then,
v(king) −v(queen) ≃v(male) −v(female)
meaning that the vector resulting from subtracting male from king can be added to
woman and result in queen. An intuitive interpretation of this is that gender is a learned
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Deep Learning
9
ˆr0
ˆr1
ˆr2
ˆr3
ˆr4
ˆr5
Figure 2.2: Contour plot illustrating how gradient descent traverses the loss landscape
by stepping towards a minima in order to lower the output of the loss function. Note
that for stochastic gradient descent we would not see such a clear path towards the
minima due to the sampling of mini-batches.
concept in the language and we can imagine that if this i learned perfectly it can be
applied to words in order to get their gender-flipped variant, e.g. v(uncle)−v(king)+
v(queen) ≃v(aunt). These relationships, of which there are many, occur as a side
effect of learning to model meaningful representations of individual tokens that form
the natural language.
2.2.4
Masked Language Modelling
Recent success in the field of natural language processing can largely be attributed
to the introduction of the Transformer architecture and subsequent research which
utilizes it. In short, the transformer overcame some of limitations that previous state-
of-the-art methods, such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), with the attention
mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2016) which allows the network to intelligently learn
and capture long-range dependencies. Additionally, the transformer allows for eﬀicient
parallelization during training.
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers)
bases itself on the encoder of a transformer and learns representations of text via
“masked language modelling” (MLM) inspired by the Cloze task (Taylor, 1953) which
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
10
measures readability and reading comprehension. The idea is that a neural language
model can learn to comprehend language by performing the Cloze task and obtain
useful general representations as a side-effect.
As an example, let’s consider the masking of the sentence,
my dog is hairy →my dog is [MASK].
The model would then be trained to attribute the token(s) that represent hairy a
high probability amongst the entire vocabulary of tokens with cross entropy loss and
adjusting the model’s parameters. An added benefit is also that a single piece of text
is made into several training examples as multiple tokens in each sequence can be
masked out. What BERT showed is that doing this for an enormous corpus of text
will teach to model a general level of language comprehension and result in useful latent
representations of language which can be further fine-tuned for task-specific needs.
2.3
Training Data Attribution
We have now established that a trained neural network is a collection of carefully
adjusted parameters that can take some input x and produce an output y that should
follow some pattern expressed by the training data. Specifically, we have seen how
language can be modelled by deep neural networks.
However, due to the complexity and opaqueness of deep neural networks we often refer
to these systems as “black-box” in the sense that the user has no tangible way of
knowing how the network arrived at the output. As systems that utilize deep neural
networks become evermore widespread, we also see an increasing interest in explaining
how these black-boxes arrived at its output given its input. In this thesis, we focus on
the problem of attributing training data to a prediction such that we can answer the
question of which samples in the training set were the most influential for a prediction
of a test sample. A common term in the literature is that these methods attribute high
scores to proponents which are training samples responsible for lowering the loss of a
test-time prediction.
Let us consider a machine learning task where we have model which has been trained
on a dataset where each point consists of an input and a target value zi = (xi, yi). The
model has arrived at a set of parameters θ ∈Θ that minimizes a loss function L(z, θ)
ˆθ = arg min
θ∈Θ
1
n
n
X
i=1
L(zi, θ).
(2.4)
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
11
We now wish to observe what happens when we remove a particular sample z from
the training set, and particularly how the parameters change. For us to measure this
change, we would have to re-train the model on every training sample except z,
ˆθ−z = arg min
θ∈Θ
1
n −1
X
zi̸=z
L(zi, θ).
(2.5)
This allows for the evaluation of the loss function in a test sample ztest using both
sets of model parameters ˆθ−z and θ to answer how the training sample z affects the
prediction of ztest, which can effectively be interpreted as a score of how important or
influential z is for learning the relationship that ztest expresses,
I(z, ztest) = L(ztest, ˆθ) −L(ztest, ˆθ−z).
(2.6)
For modern machine learning models which are trained on large datasets and updating
model parameters in the millions or even perhaps billions, this process is quickly deemed
infeasible and too expensive for practical use-cases. Methods which grounds themselves
in the field of robust statistics (Cook & Weisberg, 1980) attempts to provide methods
that approximates this effect of removing particular training samples and attributes
them an influence score of how important they are to the prediction of ztest.
This task of tracing a model’s predictions back to the training data is commonly referred
to as “Training Data Attribution” (TDA) and is the primary problem which we will
be reviewing in this thesis.
2.3.1
Influence Functions
Koh and Liang takes direct inspiration from classic results in robust statistics and
presents a way to utilize influence functions to approximate the removal of z from the
training data used to train deep neural networks (Koh & Liang, 2017). For an optimal
set of parameters ˆθ we can upweight the training sample z by an infinitesimal amount
ϵ, which gives a new set of parameters.
ˆθϵ,z = arg min
θ∈Θ
1
n
n
X
i=1
L(zi, θ) + ϵL(z, θ)
for which (Cook & Weisberg, 1982) has shown that the influence of upweighting z on
ˆθ is given by
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
12
Iup,params(z) = dˆθϵ,z
dϵ

ϵ=0
= −H−1
ˆθ ∇θL(z, ˆθ)
where Hˆθ = 1
n
Pn
i=0 ∇2
θL(zi, ˆθ) is the Hessian which is assumed to be positive definite
as we form a local quadratic approximation around ˆθ. This then approximates the
change in parameters when removing z from the training set and re-train the entire
model ˆθ−z −ˆθ ≈−1
nIup,params without having to re-train the model.
We can now extend this using the chain rule in order to see how the upweighting of z
affects the functions of ˆθ. In particular, we can see how the loss function evaluated on
some test sample L(ztest, ˆθϵ,z) is affected by the approximate removal of z which gives
the expression
Iup,loss(z, ztest) =dL(ztest, ˆθϵ,z)
dϵ
=∇θL(ztest, ˆθ)⊤dˆθϵ,z
dϵ

ϵ=0
= −∇θL(ztest, ˆθ)⊤H−1
ˆθ ∇θL(z, ˆθ).
(2.7)
An interpretation of Equation 2.7 is that it is the dot product of the gradients produced
by the test sample ztest and a train sample z weighted by the inverse Hessian.
Several problems arise from this expression.
Namely, in regards to computing the
Hessian of the loss function, as well as finding its inverse, where the running time
for models trained on n samples and p model parameters becomes O(np2 + p3) which
is intractable for models with millions of parameters. Koh and Liang utilize several
techniques to reduce this computational cost, such as algorithms for calculating the
Hessian-Vector product more eﬀiciently.
However, for practical use-cases and with
ever-increasing model sizes, the computations are still largely intractable.
2.3.1.1
Derivation of influence for a linear model
To get a further understanding for how influence functions can help us with regard
to approximating the effect on the loss when changing a training sample’s, we can
consider the linear model where a sample is given by z = (x, y) ∈Z. The loss can be
expressed as the summed sample-wise error squared,
L(Z) =
N
X
n=1
Ln(¯zn) =
N
X
n=1
αn(yn −¯w⊤¯xn)2
(2.8)
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
13
where a constant α is placed as part of the sum-term, we can define the error influence
for ¯z at step m as
∇Lm(¯z) =∂(y −ˆ¯w⊤¯x)2
∂αm
(2.9)
= −2(y −ˆy) ∂ˆy
∂αm
(2.10)
= −2(y −ˆy) ∂ˆ¯w
∂αm
¯x
(2.11)
where the weights are given by
ˆ¯w =
 N
X
n=1
αn¯xn¯x⊤
n
!−1
|
{z
}
¯¯A−1
 N
X
n=1
αnyn¯xn
!
|
{z
}
¯a
(2.12)
and the sample gradient is defined as
∂Ln
∂¯w = −2(yn −¯w⊤¯xn)¯x⊤
n .
(2.13)
It can then be stated that the changes in αm affects ˆ¯w as
∂ˆ¯w
∂αm
= −¯¯A
−1
¯xm¯x⊤
m ¯¯A
−1
¯a + ¯¯A
−1
ym¯xm
(2.14)
= −¯¯A
−1
¯xmˆym + ym ¯¯A
−1
¯xm
(2.15)
= −2(y −ˆy)¯x⊤¯¯A
−1
¯xm(ym −ˆym)
(2.16)
= −1
2∇L(¯z)⊤¯¯A
−1
∇Lm(¯z).
(2.17)
For which we can clearly see the connection to the result of Koh and Liang in Equation
2.7 compared to Equation 2.17. The problem with Influence Functions for neural net-
works stems from the fact that their loss function non-convex as opposed to Equation
2.8 where a closed form solution exists.
As mentioned we form a local quadratic approximation around the minima we have
reached via gradient descent in the case of neural networks in order to meet those
necessary assumptions. However, due to various stochastic factors related to training,
neural networks influence functions have still been found to be unstable.
2.3.2
TracIn
Pruthi et al. introduces another perspective on how to measure the influence score to
determine how important a training example was to a test example. They introduce
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
14
an idealized notion of influence in the case when a model is trained using a single
training example at each gradient step.
This allows us to compare the loss of the
model with the parameters in the gradient step t in the test example ztest, L(ztest, θt)
with another set of model parameters that has been updated with a single training
example L(ztest, θt+1).
The difference in these losses is then an expression of how
influential the addition of zt+1 was in lowering the loss of ztest.
However, in practical scenarios, we rarely train a model on one training example at
a time and save the parameters. It is typically trained by taking steps according to
mini-batches of data and checkpoints of the model parameters are typically only saved
a few times throughout training. A heuristic was therefore introduced in order to have
a sensible formulation that could actually be used in practical settings
ITracIn(z, ztest) =
K
X
k=1
∇θL

ztest, θ(k)⊤
∇θL

z, θ(k)
(2.18)
where we take the sum of the dot-product of the gradients across model checkpoints.
The checkpoints are expressed as the parameters at a certain gradient step θ(k) where k
denotes each of the checkpoints in order. By considering the dot-product as a measure
of similarity, the influence score informs us whether the gradient of a training example
is similar to that of a test example. We can interpret this counterfactually as finding
those training examples that affect the model parameters most similarly as the test
example would have, had it been used for training.
An issue with Equation 2.18, which is further discussed and presented in Section 2.3.2.1,
is that it will attribute higher influence scores to training examples with large gradi-
ents. Large gradients occur when a training example would indicate that the model’s
parameters should change a lot in order to learn the given training example. Outliers
or incorrectly labeled training examples typically have large gradients because they are
significantly different from the group of samples with which they share their ground-
truth label. Therefore, it would not be suitable to the definition of influence to assign
those types of data a larger influence score. A way to correct for this behaviour is
to unit-normalize the gradients which effectively makes it a cosine similarity measure
between gradients instead of the dot-product (Barshan et al., 2020; Han & Tsvetkov,
2021),
ITracIn(z, ztest) =
K
X
k=1
∇θL
 ztest, θ(k)⊤∇θL
 z, θ(k)
||∇θL
 ztest, θ(k)
|| ||∇θL
 z, θ(k)
||.
(2.19)
Equation 2.19 ignores the magnitude of the gradients and only bases the influence
score of the gradients’ directions. Due to this definition, an influence score can obtain
a maximum score of K as the cosine similarity is in the interval [−1, 1].
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
15
TracIn is closely related to Grad-Dot and Grad-Cos (Charpiat et al., 2019), which are
essentially the same expressions as Equation 2.18 and 2.19, respectively, but rather
than considering the dynamics of the training process by summing over checkpoints,
they only consider the gradients of the final model. We chose to focus on TracIn due
to its prominence in the related literature.
2.3.2.1
Practical example of TracIn variants on MNIST
We can exemplify the introduced TracIn variants in a simple setting in order to get
an intuitive sense of how TracIn works and why unit-normalization is applied. We
perform this preliminary experiment on the MNIST dataset (LeCun & Cortes, 2010)
as it can be solved with a simple network and an easily controlled setting.
We shrink the training dataset to 500 observations for each of the 10 classes. This
is done to artificially limit the performance of the network. The network is a simple
feedforward neural network with a single hidden layer.
For the optimizer and loss
function we use Stochastic Gradient Descent with a constant learning rate of 0.01 and
Cross Entropy Loss. The network is trained for 100 epochs, resulting in convergence
of the loss at about 2.3 and a test accuracy of 91%. Checkpoints at epoch 20, 50 and
80 is used for calculating the influence score with TracIn.
Let’s recall that Pruthi et al. present their formula for their practical heuristic where
they calculate influence over checkpoints as Equation 2.18. As mentioned, this can
be seen as giving a high influence score to a training sample z whose gradients are
similar to those of the test sample in question ztest. However, as identified, this has
the problem of assigning a larger influence score based on the dot-product, meaning
gradients that are not only similar in terms of direction but perhaps more crucially
have a large magnitude would get larger scores.
We see this behaviour in Figure 2.3 where for a random test sample we retrieve “bad”
training samples by sorting them samples by influence score. This is due to the mag-
nitude of their gradients meaning that they are rather different, i.e. outliers, from the
rest of their class’s distribution which will attribute them a large gradient and thus a
larger influence score.
Performing TracIn again with the unit-normalized Equation 2.19 yields results as seen
in Figure 2.4 where it is clear that the identified training samples resembles the test
image, thus representing samples which should lower the loss for the test image meaning
that they are proponents to the test image.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
16
Label: 7, Prediction: 7
(a)
Label: 7 (Pred: 9)
Inﬂuence: 21.93
Label: 7 (Pred: 7)
Inﬂuence: 15.50
Label: 7 (Pred: 9)
Inﬂuence: 15.26
Label: 7 (Pred: 2)
Inﬂuence: 13.23
Label: 7 (Pred: 2)
Inﬂuence: 12.80
Label: 7 (Pred: 3)
Inﬂuence: 11.96
(b)
Figure 2.3: (a): Test sample for which we find influential training samples (b): Top
6 most influential training samples as per Equation 2.18. We see that the identified
top influential samples are likely to be dominated by samples whose gradients are large
due to the samples being outliers in some sense.
2.3.3
Review of critique
The goal of the mentioned TDA methods is to attribute training samples a score that in
some way conveys their importance to a test-time prediction. The initial promise is to
approximate leave-one-out re-training by upweighting the training sample in question.
The results of (Koh & Liang, 2017) are based on certain assumptions which are met and
well understood for linear models, but fail for deep neural networks. The robustness and
evaluation of influence functions and similar TDA methods have since been questioned
under several scopes (Bae et al., 2022; Basu et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2023; Schioppa
et al., 2023; Søgaard et al., 2021).
A major part of the criticism highlighted by Søgaard et al. as well as Basu et al. is
that the ground-truth of leave-one-out retraining is itself not a robust measure due
to the stochasticity involved with training deep neural networks, i.e.
initialization,
data ordering/mini-batch sampling, dropout, etc. This suggests that the leave-one-out
retraining is not suitable as the ground-truth to compare against when evaluating TDA
methods. Nguyen et al. tests a handful of TDA methods under a Bayesian perspective
as a way to account for the inherent noisy training process. Their results show that
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
17
Label: 7, Prediction: 7
(a)
Label: 7 (Pred: 7)
Inﬂuence: 2.80
Label: 7 (Pred: 7)
Inﬂuence: 2.78
Label: 7 (Pred: 7)
Inﬂuence: 2.74
Label: 7 (Pred: 7)
Inﬂuence: 2.71
Label: 7 (Pred: 7)
Inﬂuence: 2.71
Label: 7 (Pred: 7)
Inﬂuence: 2.70
(b)
Figure 2.4:
(a): Test sample for which we find influential samples training sam-
ples. (b): Top 6 most influential training samples according to Equation 2.19. The
normalization of the dot product disregards samples that simply have large gradients,
resulting in retrieving samples that affect the optimization process in the same direc-
tion that the test sample would.
none of the methods correlate well with leave-one-out retraining yet they correlate
strongly with each other.
A point that is brought up several times by related literature is that many of the
proposed methods are unable to capture the underlying dynamics of the training pro-
cess and are thereby not suitable for performing TDA. In the context of training deep
neural networks, we often feed lots of information through the network in order to op-
timize its parameters. It is expected that there is some level of redundancy in the data
meaning that two training samples optimizes the network similarly. The dynamics of
the training process then relates to the fact that one of the two training data samples
is more influential at the beginning of the training process than later. This is what
TracIn attempts to capture when summing over model checkpoints. Other projects
(Guu et al., 2023) have attempted to model this by simulating the training process,
which allows for viewing influence as a non-additive metric.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Training Data Attribution
18
2.3.4
Relation to Information Retrieval (IR)
Considering our comparison of TDA methods with a similarity measure between pre-
diction and training data, we might ask ourselves if there is a simpler way of measuring
similarity between the training sample z and the test sample ztest.
We can look towards classical information retrieval (IR) methods such as Okapi BM25
(Robertson et al., 1995) which is a count-based ranking function. This can be used to
find the abstracts that are most similar to a query’s input by effectively and eﬀiciently
comparing their lexical similarity.
Since the goal of TDA methods is to find training data that is influential or important
for learning some test-time prediction, we might suspect that BM25 pose as a suitable
and relatively simple method.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
T5 Language Model
There is a wide variety of publicly available language models for use due to the efforts
of the open-source communities and companies such as HuggingFace1. To perform
experiments that are comparable to relevant research, we have chosen to focus on the
T5 language model (Raffel et al., 2020) which was presented in the paper “Exploring
the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer.”
The novel idea that the T5 model brings forward is that we can view every NLP
task as a text-to-text problem whereas before we would have specific architectures and
modelling considerations for each task at hand. This allows the use of a single model
which only needs to be trained once to solve a diverse set of tasks.
T5, whose name comes from Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer, is an Encoder-Decoder
model, just as presented in (Vaswani et al., 2017), with 6 hidden layers in both the
encoder and decoder. It is pretrained on both self-supervised learning and supervised
tasks, which are formulated as text-to-text problems. T5 can distinguish between dif-
ferent tasks by simply prepending the task description into the input such as “Translate
from English to German: ...” or “Summarize: ...” as seen in Figure 3.1.
The data used for self-supervised learning during pre-training is the “Colossal Clean
Crawled Corpus” (C4) dataset (Raffel et al., 2020). This is a collection of hundreds of
gigabytes of clean English language. It is based on the Common-Crawl archive which
produces 2̃0TB of data each month by scraping the internet. However, much of the
content does not consist of natural language as a sizable portion of the internet is made
up of things like menus, boilerplates, error messages, and duplicate texts. A series of
rules is applied to produce C4 such as language detection in order to consistently have
English in the dataset, discarding pages which primarily comprises of “Lorem ipsum”
type texts and remove pages that has curly-braces as this character is mostly reserved
for coding and not natural language.
1https://huggingface.co
==PAGE:27==
3.1 T5 Language Model
20
Figure 3.1:
Diagram illustrating from (Raffel et al., 2020) examples of how the
T5 model takes input and produce output according to the task description in the
beginning of the input.
Self-supervised training is done by training the model to reconstruct the input text
from the training data after corrupting it by removing 15% of the tokens and replacing
them with so-called “sentinel tokens”. If several tokens in a row are masked out, they
are only replaced with a single sentinel token, as shown in Figure 3.2. The supervised
portion of the pre-training is done by translating tasks from GLUE (Wang, Singh, et al.,
2019) and SuperGLUE (Wang, Pruksachatkun, et al., 2019) to text-to-text tasks and
training to perform those downstream tasks. For optimization, it uses the AdaFactor
optimizer (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) due to its memory eﬀiciency.
Figure 3.2: Diagram from (Raffel et al., 2020) of the self-supervised training objective
performed in the pre-training stage of T5.
The vocabulary consists of 32,000 tokens and is made using SentencePiece (Kudo &
Richardson, 2018), which is an unsupervised text tokenizer intended to be used for
neural language modeling. It is language-independent and is therefore very suitable
for machine translation which T5 was trained to do in its pre-training. The tokens
produced by the tokenizer are both words and sub-words which are all mapped to an
ID for the model’s input layer. In Table 3.1 we see an example of an input sequence
where we use the tokenizer to both encode the sequence into IDs and decode those
back into their string representations.
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Fact-tracing dataset
21
Input
Sequence of tokens
Encoded
26859
1433
13
14145
7
1
Decoded
Sequ
ence
of
token
s
</s>
Table 3.1: Example of using the tokenizer to encode an input sequence into tokens
and their corresponding token IDs.
T5 is available in varying model sizes in terms of the number of parameters. These
are summed in Table 3.2. The trade-off we are dealing with here is that larger models
are more performant, but they also require more compute to work with in terms of
fine-tuning as well as inference.
Name
Parameter count
Small
60 million
Base
220 million
Large
770 million
3B
3 billion
11B
11 billion
Table 3.2: The publicly available versions of T5 and their parameter count.
Further iterations of the model also exist as new ideas for training and datasets sur-
faced. For example, mT5 (Xue et al., 2020) which is trained on a multilingual corpus
thus providing understanding of several languages and Flan-T5 (Chung et al., 2022)
that is fine-tuned on instruction datasets to improve performance on instruction-style
prompts.
3.2
Fact-tracing dataset
In order to systematically assess the quality and robustness of TDA methods there is
an emergent need for datasets which are designed to directly capture and easily allows
for tracing of the relationship between the information in the training set and the test
set. “FTRACE-TREx” was introduced by (Akyürek et al., 2022) in order to have a
benchmarking dataset for tracing facts from a model’s predictions back to the training
data. Figure 3.3 shows a process diagram wherein a prediction is being produced from
a query and an attribution set, which the model is trained on, is being scored with a
TDA method.
The training data consists of 1,560,453 abstracts that are built from the TREx
dataset (Elsahar et al., 2018) that bases itself on DBPedia (Brümmer et al., 2016) and
annotates facts in the form of the exact positions of objects and subjects. Each training
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Fact-tracing dataset
22
Figure 3.3: Figure from (Akyürek et al., 2022) showcasing the process of attributing
a score to a set of abstracts for a query based on the prediction of a language model.
The score would be obtained from a TDA methods such as TracIn.
example in FTRACE-TREx is a piece of text that contains some factual information
where either the object or subject is masked out resulting in a Cloze-style language
modelling task where the model will have to fill in the masking. The data is pre-masked
for the T5 model’s sentinel tokens making it easy and fast to incorporate into model
training.
An example of an abstract could be,
Input: Situated in the heart of [MASK], Denmark, it is located on Kongens
Nytorv opposite Charlottenborg, the Royal Opera and Nyhavn.
Target: Copenhagen
where the same piece of text can be used to form several abstracts and express more
facts depending on the masking.
The idea is that training on these abstracts emulates the masked language modelling
task during pre-training but in a controlled setting where it only masks out facts in
an attempt at having the model internalise the knowledge in its parameters. It allows
us to say with some level of certainty that if a fact that is expressed by the abstracts
is retained by the model it is due to being trained on this specific dataset as opposed
to the pre-training phase where the goal is to obtain a sense of how the language is
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Fact-tracing dataset
23
modelled regardless of which facts and general world knowledge the model may learn
along the way.
The test data consists of 31,479 queries which we can think of as reciting specific facts
that are guaranteed to be present in the training data. Each query has an associated
list of proponents which are abstracts that should be guaranteed to be responsible
for lowering the loss of the given fact that is being recited in the query. The queries
are created from the LAMA dataset (Petroni et al., 2019) which also bases itself in
DBPedia. A query is formed by a (subject, predicate, object)-tuple which for the fact
below would be (Charlottenborg Palace, is located in, Copenhagen).
Input: Charlottenborg Palace is located in [MASK].
Target: Copenhagen
The abstract used as an example above is in the proponent set for the example query
as it exhibits the same fact in more nuanced language as opposed to the query which
acts as concise way to test if the model can recite the fact.
3.2.1
Results from previous studies
As previously mentioned the FTRACE-TREx dataset was introduced in (Akyürek et
al., 2022) for the purpose of benchmarking TDA methods. In their work they found
that BM25 outperformed methods such as TracIn with regards to identifying a query’s
proponents. Performance was measured using mean reciprocal ranking (MRR) and
recall@10 which are standard methods for measuring the quality of IR methods.
We do not aim to challenge these claims for this particular dataset but will rather offer
insights into the methods and dataset and attempts at explanations that will hopefully
lead to a better understanding of why TracIn seems to under-perform and suggest
improvements that could be made to FTRACE-TREx.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments & Results
4.1
Influence scores for FTRACE-TREx using TracIn
In order to measure and critically investigate TracIn for calculating influence scores
as well as FTRACE-TREx it is necessary to perform some foundational steps which
we can build upon. Most of this is directly following procedures from (Akyürek et al.,
2022). This section serves to document the training process, TracIn usage and offer
some light insight by exploration of influence scores to inspire further analysis.
4.1.1
Training T5 on FTRACE-TREx
For computational simplicity and speed of iterations we have chosen to focus on T5-
small with 60 million parameters. The hyperparameters used for training can be found
in Table 4.1.
Hyperparameter
Value
Learning Rate
0.001
Batch Size
64
Optimizer
AdaFactor
# Epochs
3
Table 4.1:
Hyperparameters for training T5-small on the abstracts in FTRACE-
TREx’s training set.
We fine-tuned for ≈73, 000 gradient steps which with a batch size of 64 corresponds to
3 epochs1. During training we save 5 checkpoints which are equally spaced out across
the training process. We see from the loss curves on Figure 4.1 that the training loss
makes substantial drops during each full epoch while the evaluation loss lowers more
steadily throughout training. Training T5-small on FTRACE-TREx took 2-3 hours on
an A100 GPU using the bf16 floating point data type to increase training speed and
avoid overflow issues associated with training the T5 model at lower precision2.
1 1.56 million training points
batch size of 64
· 3 epochs ≈73, 145 gradient steps
2https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.15.0/performance#bf16
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Influence scores for FTRACE-TREx using TracIn
25
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Gradient steps
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Loss
Epoch 1
Epoch 2
Epoch 3
Training loss
Evaluation loss
0.200
0.225
0.250
0.275
0.300
0.325
0.350
0.375
Top-1 Accuracy
Figure 4.1: Training and evaluation loss curves during training of FTRACE-TREx on
T5-small as well as the top-1 accuracy curve. The evaluation loss and top-1 accuracy
was computed on the entire test set consisting of 31,479 queries
The accuracy of the model is reported in top-k accuracy where k is the number of
sequences that the model should generate in its beam searches. We specify that the
model is correct in its generation if the target is present in one of the k generations.
Evaluation of the model is done on the entire set of queries in the test set and the
top-3 accuracy is 14.38% for the pre-trained model and 33.8% top-1 accuracy after
fine-tuning. Using this, we can follow (Akyürek et al., 2022) and define the notion of
novel facts, which are test-set queries that were incorrect in the top-3 accuracy for the
pre-trained model while being correct in the top-1 accuracy of the fine-tuned model,
thus indicating that the fact must have been learned in some sense during the fine-
tuning stage. The following experiments where influence is calculated is done on a
subset of 1,000 randomly sampled novel facts.
4.1.2
Using TracIn to calculate influence
Following the experimental setup from (Akyürek et al., 2022) we construct a “candidate
set” of abstracts for each query. This is due to the infeasibility of performing TracIn on
every single one of the 1.5 million abstracts in the training data for each of the queries
in the test set. The candidate set consists of the concatenation of four subsets which
are defined such that there is a confident belief that abstracts which should contribute
in any significant way towards the model learning the specific fact is in this candidate
set along with random distractions to act as a baseline:
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Influence scores for FTRACE-TREx using TracIn
26
Definition of the Candidate Set
For each query a candidate set of abstracts is constructed which consists of:
True proponents: All abstracts which are true proponents of the given query.
FTRACE-TREx provides all proponents for each query.
Same target: 100 randomly sampled abstracts which share the same target
as the given query.
BM25: The top 100 abstracts retrieved by BM25 for the given query.
Random: 100 randomly sampled abstracts.
Implementation of TracIn is rather simple as we can use PyTorch’s (Paszke et al., 2019)
automatic differentiation engine, torch.autograd, to obtain the gradients of the loss
function with respect to the model’s parameters evaluated at both the test query and
each of abstracts in the candidate set. When these gradients are obtained it’s a matter
of simply calculating the cosine similarity between the two as described in Equation
2.19 in order to obtain the influence score for each checkpoint.
Figure 4.2 shows the mean influence grouped by the type of abstract across checkpoints.
We can immediately see that the “Same targets”-subset scored a significantly higher
score than those selected at random, BM25 and even the proponents. There are signs
of a systematic drop in influence of the abstracts with the same targets as the query.
This could be explained by the model being influenced less and less during training by
seeing the target in different contexts which would cause smaller gradients.
It could be argued that since the value for each abstract type across checkpoints is
relatively close we do not have a need to sum the gradient similarity across checkpoints
and disregard the dynamics of the training process. This would suggest that Grad-
Cos and Grad-Prod (Charpiat et al., 2019) are computationally simpler and viable
approaches.
As the average influence might hide away information about outliers we also plot the
summed influence as boxplots grouped by abstract type in the candidate set as seen in
Figure 4.3. Let’s go through each subset type to understand what we see in this figure:
Random The samples in the “Random”-subset functions as distractors and scores
low influence scores apart from when occasionally sampling an actual influential
sample. However, this randomness goes both ways and cancels out.
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Influence scores for FTRACE-TREx using TracIn
27
BM25
Proponents
Random
Same targets
Abstract type
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Inﬂuence score
Checkpoint
1
3
5
Figure 4.2:
Mean influence from 1,000 novel facts grouped by the four abstract
types found in the candidate set and colored by the checkpoint. The three checkpoints
were saved at gradient steps 14629, 43887, 73145 such that they represent the model
throughout the training process.
Same targets Just as portrayed in Figure 4.2 we see that the “Same targets”-subset
has noticeably different distribution of influence scores than those in the “BM25”
as well as “Proponents”. There also doesn’t seem to be any large negative outliers
which would explain the mean in Figure 4.2.
BM25 The samples found by the “BM25”-subset hit the upper bound3 as well as
being very close to the lower bound of the TracIn influence score. Apart from
those extreme examples influence score is usually situated close to 0.
Proponents This subset differs from the rest of the in that all proponents are included
in the candidate set as opposed to the other subsets where 100 examples are
sampled. We notice that while there is more positive than negative scores there
is a group of outliers the approach the lower bound.
4.1.2.1
Parallelization and Weights and Biases sweep for computation speed-up
If we look at the computation of TracIn we notice that there is no need for it to be done
sequentially. We can parallelize over the checkpoints-sum as well as going over each
query independently. Merely utilizing parallelization over the 3 checkpoints will cause
an immediate 3×speed-up.
We used the built-in multiprocessing-library in Python
3Recall that the TracIn influence score is upper bounded by the number of checkpoints in the
sum-term of Equation 2.19.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Least influential proponents
28
BM25
Proponents
Random
Same targets
Abstract type
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Inﬂuence score
Figure 4.3: Boxplot of the influence score distribution for the novel facts across the
four abstract-subsets in the candidate set.
which offers an easy way to dictate that a function should spawn on multiple processes
with different arguments in order to execute in parallel.
We also used Weights and Biases (Biewald, 2020) which provides an easy programmatic
interface and logging functionality in order to keep track of experiments. Particularly,
we used their “Sweep”-feature, which is typically used for hyperparameter search, how-
ever here we utilized it to launch agents that will keep track of how many and which
queries’ influence scores across training samples and checkpoints have been computed.
Alternatively, we would have to do a lot of book-keeping manually with the added risk
of runs failing and having to deal with that. If a run fails or crashes using a Weights
and Biases-sweep it will automatically retry the failed run. As briefly mentioned we
also have the added benefit of being able to launch multiple agents which each gets
assigned a query ID to work on such that no overlapping computations happen.
4.2
Least influential proponents
We can state the challenge of identifying the ground-truth proponents using TracIn
as attributing a high influence score to the proponents. However, we see in Figure
4.3 that the proponents have a wide distribution of influence scores with quite a few
proponents being attributed a negative influence score indicating that they should be
opponents rather than proponents. In an attempt to understand this behaviour we will
look at ground-truth proponents with low influence scores.
What we observe is that there is a difference between the targets of the queries and
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Least influential proponents
29
the abstracts which seemingly causes the influence score to become negative. This is
despite the targets only differing very slightly in either meaning or in terms of number
of tokens. Table 4.2 shows some of the target differences that appear in the bottom
200 proponent’s influence scores.
Query target
Abstract target
Tirana
Tiranë
Hanover
Hannover
Netherlands
The Netherlands
London
London, England
Apple
Apple Computer
Sweden
Stockholm
Houston
Houston, Texas
Mumbai
Greater Mumbai
Tehran
Tehran City
Table 4.2: Examples of targets from queries-abstracts pairs where a strong negative
influence score is observed.
It is further observed that changing either target value to align with the other practi-
cally inverts the influence score.
For example, the following query,
Input: Amsterdam is the capital of [MASK]
Target: Netherlands
has the following abstract marked as one of its ground-truth proponent,
Input: Gone Bald is a noise rock band from Amsterdam, [MASK].
Target: The Netherlands
yet TracIn attributes it an influence score of −1.94 meaning that it is identified as a
fairly strong opponent indicating that it should increase the loss of the query. Chang-
ing the abstract’s target to Netherlands or the query’s target to The Netherlands
(i.e.
matching the targets either way) results in an influence score of 1.96 and 2.1
respectively which now indicates that it is a fairly strong proponent.
We see this
behaviour happening consistently throughout the dataset. This implies that results
from (Akyürek et al., 2022) of using TracIn to identify proponents from the calculated
influence score is likely to be underestimated due to this behaviour.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Least influential proponents
30
4.2.1
Simplifying targets
An approach to circumvent this behaviour would be to simplify the training data to
only use the target variation that is also present in the test set’s queries. The abstracts
include a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for the masked target. In the training
set of abstract we observe that each mask URI has an average of 1.32 associated
target variations while the queries in the test set has a one-to-one mask URI-target
relationship. In Table 4.3 we see an example of a mask URI having several variations
of essentially the same target.
Input
Target
Mask URI
Haiti competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics
in [MASK], from 27 July to 12 August 2012.
London
Q84
John Bott (1779 in England – February 1836
in [MASK]) was an English amateur cricketer.
London, England
Q84
Merton Abbey is an in [MASK], England.
southwest London
Q84
Table 4.3:
Example of the mask URI representing several variations of a similar
target. In this case the queries use only the first variant “London” for mask URI Q84
as opposed the several you would see in the abstracts.
Some of the resulting abstracts from applying this operation will now have slightly
flawed grammar (e.g. replacing all instances of Scottish with Scotland). However,
we will only be replacing the targets for 8% of the targets as 92% of abstracts already
masks out the target which are used for the queries.
Comparing the boxplot of influence from proponents from Figure 4.3 with influence
from abstracts in which we use the same target variation that is found in the queries
set we observe in Figure 4.4 that the influence score distribution for proponents has
changed such that there are fewer, and less extreme, influence scores being attributed
to the abstracts.
What we can gather from these results is that the gradients for a single sample ∇θL(z, θ)
is very sensitive to even the smallest and seemingly inconsequential changes in z. This
can be exemplified with a pre-trained T5 model by considering the gradients from the
sample z := (Copenhagen is the capital of [MASK], Denmark) as well as z′ which
is simply z but with an added period to the target value. The cosine similarity of these
samples is then,
CosSim(∇θL(z, θ), ∇θL(z′, θ)) = 0.32
showing that the gradient direction can change considerably even when semantic simi-
larity is practically maintained.
==PAGE:38==
4.3 Performance under counterfactual training set
31
Default targets
Simpliﬁed targets
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Inﬂuence
Figure 4.4: Boxplot comparing influence score distribution for the novel facts before
and after changing the target values of the abstracts to only have the one variant that
is found in the queries.
4.2.2
Data leakage causing high influence
Now that we have considered the least influential samples it is only natural to also have
a look at the most influential samples. We notice in Figure 4.3 that some abstracts ap-
pear to have obtained a perfect influence score in the BM25 subset. Further inspection
reveals that this is due to the test sample being exactly equal to the abstract causing
the gradients to of course be perfectly similar. We found 28 of such instances which
were typically in the form of (Tokyo is the capital of [MASK], Japan), or (The
official language of Monaco is [MASK], French). While 28 does not appear to
be many instances of leaked queries it still skews the results in a way that is unin-
tended.
4.3
Performance under counterfactual training set
Inspired by the work of (Park et al., 2023) we carry out a similar experiment to their
model evaluation on counterfactual datasets. Using the trained model to predict the
mask of the queries in the test set and identify what (Akyürek et al., 2022) defines
as “novel facts”, which are queries that must have been learned from training on the
FTRACE-TREx abstracts, as they are incorrect before fine-tuning and correct after.
We wish to measure the performance impact of removing abstracts which are highly
influential on these novel facts from the training data. Due to the definition of novel
facts we can say that for any given set of queries that is identified to be novel facts we
have a 100% accuracy on the fine-tuned model.
Using the influence scores for each training sample in the candidate sets of 1,000 ran-
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Performance under counterfactual training set
32
domly sampled novel facts we can define our new training set. For each of the novel
facts we identify the top 50 most influential abstracts and remove the union of those
abstracts from the training data. This results in the removal of 37,690 abstracts from
the training data.
The expectation is that training a new T5-small model on this
counterfactual training set will result in a lower accuracy score due to the lack of the
highly influential abstracts.
In their paper, (Park et al., 2023) performs a similar process for the top abstracts
having high BM25 scores as well as dropping all ground-truth proponents for the 1,000
novel facts.
We also performed the process for a random baseline of dropping an
equivalent number of abstracts (37,960) randomly to see the performance drop from
simply having fewer training samples. The resulting performance drops can be found
in Table 4.4.
Evaluating the model that is trained on the counterfactual training set results in an
accuracy of 67%, meaning that by removing the top most influential abstracts as iden-
tified by TracIn we observe an accuracy drop of 33%. Interestingly, we see a larger
performance drop when dropping random abstracts than dropping either BM25 or
ground-truth proponents. The relatively low performance drop seen when not includ-
ing ground-truth proponents could be explained by the fact that the size of this set
might simply not be as large as the others if no outliers, in terms of number of associ-
ated proponents, are included. This will be further explored in the following section.
Type
Random
TracIn
BM25
Proponents
Drop
20%
33%
16.5%
12%
Table 4.4: Performance drops when evaluating models that are trained on counterfac-
tual training sets where a certain type of training samples are dropped. The evaluation
is done on a selected subset of queries that are guaranteed to be correct for a model
fine-tuned on the entire training set.
As pointed out by (Park et al., 2023) this result conveys that it seems like TracIn is
identifying abstracts which are indeed helping the model learn a significant amount
of factual information, however, results from (Akyürek et al., 2022) shows that there
TracIn does not perform well in the task of identifying the ground-truth proponents of
the queries.
What (Park et al., 2023) proposes is that there is a difference in fact tracing and be-
haviour tracing. We might see that the predicates that are used to form the queries
dictate a form of behaviour learned by the model instead of actually teaching the fact.
For example, being presented with Stockholm is the capital of Sweden might in-
advertently teach the model about the relationship between other countries and their
==PAGE:40==
4.4 Critical inspection of FTRACE-TREx
33
capitals without having been explicitly been presented with that particular fact.
4.4
Critical inspection of FTRACE-TREx
The promise of FTRACE-TREx is to provide a testbed for evaluating TDA methods
in their ability to trace generated facts back to the training data by annotating which
training samples should be responsible for teaching the model the answer to each
specific test-time query. This section will look at a number of potential issues that the
dataset inhibits which might cause faulty evaluations.
4.4.1
Proponents in Candidate Set
We use the construction of the candidate set as described in Section 4.1.2 to limit the
amount of computational resources spend on scoring abstracts. The candidate set is
guaranteed to include all the ground-truth proponents as those are the most interesting
to get scored with TracIn. The function of the other subsets is to be distractors to
compare against. Akyürek et al. reports an average of 83 proponents per query which
is correct however somewhat misleading as there are large outliers with thousands
of proponents as illustrated in the boxplot in Figure 4.5. We found that the median
number of proponents per query is 7 which greatly changes the balance of the candidate
sets.
101
102
103
104
Number of proponents for query
Figure 4.5:
Boxplot of the number of proponents for each query.
The y-axis is
log-scaled. We see that the average number of proponents per query of 83 is largely
influenced by the outliers which have 30-50,000 proponents as the median number of
proponents per query is 7.
Since the processing time scales with the number of abstracts in the candidate set we
naturally saw that those few outlier queries with many proponents took much longer
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Critical inspection of FTRACE-TREx
34
to process and score than the many of the other queries.
The inclusion of queries
with thousands of proponents should perhaps be reconsidered for future iterations of
the dataset as they hurt accessibility and reproducibility and is seemingly an arbitrary
factor for the purposes of the dataset.
4.4.2
Predicates for the test set queries
We saw in Section 3.2 that the input of a query is a sequence with a masked object.
These inputs can all be described as a tuple of (subject, predicate, object). There
are a total of 41 predicates4 which are used to construct queries. In Figure 4.6 we
see that some predicates are used up to 5 times as much as others.
Furthermore,
P103
P30
P176
P1412
P27
P159
P279
P106
P20
P413
P19
P937
P740
P17
P136
P1303
P31
P495
P276
P361
P131
P449
P407
P364
P39
P527
P37
P36
P1001
P127
P101
P47
P138
P178
P140
P264
P108
P190
P1376
P463
P530
Predicate ID
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
% of queries using predicate
Figure 4.6: Count of the 41 predicate IDs that are used to construct the input queries
in the test set of FTRACE-TREx.
we can inspect that the number of proponents that are associated with queries using
each type of predicate is vastly imbalanced which is what we see in Figure 4.7 where
the mean number of proponents for queries grouped by their predicate type has a
steep drop-off after just a few predicates, many of which has to do with geographical
locations (P47: [X] shares border with [Y]., P530: [X] maintains diplomatic
relations with [Y], P1376: [X] is the capital of [Y]) and is thereby expected
to share a lot of their proponent abstracts. It would likely be beneficial for the dataset
to be more balanced in this regard such that we don’t overexpose the model to propo-
nents that should be responsible for teaching the it a certain category of facts, such as
geographical knowledge.
4Predicates are found in Appendix A
==PAGE:42==
4.4 Critical inspection of FTRACE-TREx
35
P47
P530
P1376
P37
P36
P30
P1001
P131
P361
P190
P17
P276
P138
P279
P463
P178
P127
P527
P136
P449
P159
P140
P264
P495
P176
P103
P101
P27
P1303
P407
P108
P31
P1412
P937
P39
P413
P740
P20
P364
P106
P19
Predicate ID
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Mean number of proponents for
queries using predicate
Figure 4.7: Mean number of proponents for queries grouped by which predicate is
used. It is apparent that there is a steep drop-off after just a few types of predicates.
4.4.2.1
Lexical overlap in predicate templates
Standard Information Retrieval methods such as BM25 rely on the lexical overlap
between a query and retrieved documents. What we find here is that the content of
the queries is oftentimes primarily made up of the predicate template, meaning that
the retrieved abstracts which gets attributed a high BM25-score is also likely to exhibit
the same language as the predicate template, which is somewhat arbitrary since there
are many ways to express a given query.
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Percentage of predicate template in input sequence
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Count
Figure 4.8: Histogram of how many percent in terms of sequence length of the queries
in the test set is from the predicate template.
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Surfacing misinformation in the training set
36
In Figure 4.8 we see that the predicate template make up 30-40% of many of the queries’
inputs while some are upwards of 60%. A mitigation strategy for unfairly favouring
BM25 could be to have several variations of each predicate. This would also likely
enhance the overall quality of FTRACE-TREx.
4.4.3
Masked object as part of query input
Upon inspection of individual queries we find that the automatic generation of queries
using fact-triplets might have some unintended side-effects with regards to quality. One
such finding is that 13.6% of the queries has the masked object as part of the input,
such as (Apple Watch is developed by [MASK], Apple). We also find that 90% of
correct predictions using the pre-trained model prior to training on FTRACE-TREx
abstracts has the masked object in its input.
This would suggest, due to how the
predictions are evaluated, that the pre-trained model could simply recite the subject
of the input and get a correct prediction of the masked object.
This relates back to how the predicates are used to construct sentences as this behaviour
is prevalent for certain predicates such as [X] is produced/developed by [Y] since
it is oftentimes a product name which includes a company name.
4.4.4
Accuracy by predicate
We have previously hypothesised that some predicates are learned more than others
when fine-tuning T5-small on FTRACE-TREx. In order to inspect this claim we can
group the accuracy by each predicate ID as done in Figure 4.9. We indeed see that
a lot of predicates see large accuracy gains by fine-tuning on FTRACE-TREx while
some only see small improvement or even small drops in accuracy.
It is however hard to systematically and confidently make claims in this regard as some
predicates express similar or related facts. Many predicates’ accuracy should increase
with abstracts about geographical knowledge as that is prominently queried in the
test set. This is unlike predicates such as [X] is represented by music label [Y]
where information about other subject-object relations do not necessarily provide the
model with useful knowledge.
4.5
Surfacing misinformation in the training set
So far we have looked at attributing an influence score to abstracts from the training
data based on how influential they are for a test-time prediction. During experimen-
==PAGE:44==
4.5 Surfacing misinformation in the training set
37
P176
P1376
P178
P1001
P103
P138
P37
P463
P407
P36
P31
P364
P279
P276
P127
P264
P449
P30
P361
P131
P47
P159
P527
P20
P39
P413
P136
P27
P937
P1303
P19
P140
P530
P740
P17
P101
P108
P495
P1412
P190
P106
Predicate
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Accuracy
Pre-trained
Fine-tuned
Figure 4.9: Accuracy of queries grouped by predicate used in query.
tation we have gained an understanding for how TracIn attributes these scores as well
as how the FTRACE-TREx dataset is build to allow for tracing of facts from query to
proponent-marked abstracts. We have also seen that using TracIn scores is diﬀicult be-
cause of the nuances involved with learning behaviour rather than the facts themselves
due to the nature of how neural language models learn and the relative simplicity of
the constructed text sequences of the dataset.
We previously reviewed literature which criticized TDA methods for using the leave-
one-out re-training error as the ground-truth to compare against as that in itself was an
unstable measurement (Søgaard et al., 2021). The authors instead proposed to evaluate
TDA methods in their ability to detect poisoned training examples. Inspired by this
proposal we would like to investigate the capabilities of the influence scores produced by
TracIn to surface misinformation in the training set. We can systematically transform
selected proponents of queries into misinformed abstracts in order to “poison” the
training data.
4.5.1
Constructing misinformed abstracts
The first part of the process is to construct what we from here on will refer to as
“misinformed abstracts”. We will essentially be systematically replacing the targets of
a smaller subset of a query’s ground-truth proponents with a sampled target such that
the abstracts now emulate misinformation in the training set. The described process
is also depicted in Figure 4.10.
Sampling a poisonous target: In order to poison a subset of abstracts that re-
late to a query we first sample a poisonous target which will be used as a replace-
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Surfacing misinformation in the training set
38
The official language
of [X] is [Y]
Sample query to be poisoned
(The official language of 
Denmark is [MASK], Danish)
Target = Danish
Proponents
of query
Sample query with same predicate
(The official language of 
France is [MASK], French)
Filtered
proponents
Poisoned
proponents
{
 (The Kingdom of Denmark has 
  only one official language,
  [MASK] ..., Danish),
  ...,
 (Thisted Bryghus is a small
  Danish brewery located in ...
  Jutland, [MASK].,
  Denmark)
  ...
}
{
  (The Kingdom of Denmark has 
  only one official language, 
  [MASK] ..., Danish),
  ...
}
{
 (The Kingdom of Denmark has 
  only one official language, 
  [MASK] ..., French),
  ...
}
Figure 4.10: Process diagram of constructing misinformed abstracts from proponents
found in FTRACE-TREx.
ment in order to construct misinformed abstracts.
As we would still like for the
abstracts to be believable we sample the poisonous target from queries which share
the same predicate used as the original query.
For example, for the query (The
official language of Denmark is [MASK], Danish) we sample a query which fol-
lows the predicate template The official language of [X] is [Y], such as (The
official language of France is [MASK], French).
Selecting proponent subset to poison: Now that we have a poisonous target that
we would like to inject into some of the abstracts we should think about which abstracts
are suitable for injection. Using the ground-truth proponents from FTRACE-TREx to
firstly limit the abstracts to only those directly relevant for the query we further filter
by those proponents which share its target with the relevant query. An average of 30%
of a query’s proponents shares its targets with the query.
A proponent might be (The Kingdom of Denmark has only one official language,
[MASK]..., Danish) which would be suitable for poisoning since any target language
obtained by sampling a poisonous target from the predicate would fit in naturally. How-
ever, other proponents might include (Thisted Bryghus is a small Danish brewery
located in Jutland, [MASK]., Denmark) for which it would not make sense to di-
rectly change the target value to e.g. French.
Poisoning abstracts and model training: Now that we have identified abstracts
that are suitable for poisoning as well as a poisonous target we simply replace the
original and correct target with the poisonous and misinformed target. This is done
for 15% of the eligible proponents. This typically ends up affecting 30% · 15% = 4.5%
==PAGE:46==
4.5 Surfacing misinformation in the training set
39
of all the proponents for a given query. These poisoned misinformed abstracts now
replaces their original counterpart and a model is then trained on the new training set.
4.5.2
Influence scores on false queries
In an attempt to ensure robustness and limit compute usage we randomly select 1,000
queries which are eligible for poisoning, meaning that all steps in the poisoning process
are possible to be performed, and follow the described process exactly. This results
in a model which should have learned some amount of misinformation due to a small
percentage of abstracts being poisoned with a consistent false target values.
We can confirm that this is the case by comparing the softmax probabilities of pre-
dicting the poisonous target before and after model retraining with poisoned abstracts.
We should see that the softmax probability of the poisoned target from the “healthy”
model, Phealthy, is lower than that from the poisoned model, Ppoison. For example,
for query := iCloud is developed by [MASK] whose actual target is Apple we have
defined the poisoned target to be Google. Here we should see that,
Ppoison(Google|query) > Phealthy(Google|query).
where we observe that this indeed holds true as
Ppoison(Google|query)
Phealthy(Google|query) ≃5.3.
Using this model we calculate the influence scores for that query’s input along with the
poisonous target on its candidate set of which some are poisoned as all proponents are
included. We can now observe whether or not TracIn attributes a noticeably different
score to poisoned abstracts which would indicate that they are influential for generating
the false target to a query.
For 1,000 randomly selected queries we find that the influence score for poisoned pro-
ponents are on average significantly higher than the non-poisoned variant as seen in
Figure 4.11. This would indicate that using TracIn influence scores to detect poisoned
training data, which in this case is represented as misinformation, is a viable application
and evaluation strategy of TDA methods.
4.5.3
Limitations
While the results look promising there are some immediate limitations that should be
considered before attempting to use the described process for novel use-cases.
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Surfacing misinformation in the training set
40
Proponents
BM25
Random
Same targets
Abstract type
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
TracIn inﬂuence score
Poisoned
False
True
Figure 4.11: TracIn influence score across the four types of abstracts in the candidate
set for 1,000 poisoned queries. It can immediately be observed that the difference in
influence score distribution allows us to effectively distinguish between poisoned and
non-poisoned abstracts.
We know from previous results that BM25 is effective at
retrieving proponents which explains the poisoned BM25 abstracts.
4.5.3.1
FTRACE-TREx vs. real-world application
The dataset provides us a way to continue the masked language modelling task with
controlled masking on facts. In a real-world setting we would only expect the masking
to be of facts as done with FTRACE-TREx in a very small percentage of the cases.
Moreover, in order to identify misinformative training data you would have to have
some notion of specific instances of misinformation in the training data in order to
know what to look for.
4.5.3.2
Scaling data processing
The described process of injecting poisonous targets into FTRACE-TREx should be
carefully executed in order to ensure that proper poisonous targets are chosen. This is
diﬀicult to do at scale and we should therefore interpret the results with the expectation
of slight errors in the data processing.
4.5.3.3
Amount of eligible queries to poison
Only fairly few of the queries have suitable proponents for poisoning which limits
the amount of abstracts to poison. As we saw in Section 4.4 the median number of
proponents is 7 and of those we can expect 30% of them to share target with the query.
In the experiment we chose to only poison the proponents if there are more than 5
==PAGE:48==
4.5 Surfacing misinformation in the training set
41
proponents which shares their targets with the query which causes us to discard a
large portion of the queries as they would be ineligible to be poisoned.
A further limitation in this regard would also be that we have chosen a narrow definition
of how we poison abstracts by simply changing the target value as this was a fairly
straight-forward approach given the FTRACE-TREx dataset. From previous results
we know that the TracIn score is highly sensitive to the target which would suggest
that more nuanced poisonous attacks on the training set might not have such clear
results.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion &
Conclusion
We have shown that the field of developing Training Data Attribution methods, specif-
ically for language modelling and fact tracing, still faces significant challenges which
motivates further research. What we have found is that there exists a number of is-
sues related to both the available benchmarking datasets, their evaluation metrics and
the methods themselves as they lose their intuitive appeal due to having trouble with
robustness in some specific settings. We bring these issues forth and suggest suitable
interventions that can be taken to advance in the field.
5.1
Dataset quality
We have used the dataset FTRACE-TREx to teach a model to recall facts in a con-
trolled environment where the training data that should be responsible for teaching a
fact is marked as proponents for the fact. This allows for TDA methods to be evalu-
ated in that they should attribute proponents a higher score. We have identified a few
suggestions that should be considered for future development which has potential to
advance the dataset’s quality, robustness and accessibility.
5.1.1
Predicate for query construction
An aspect that we have investigated is the use of the 41 predicates that are used to
form the queries in the test set. An example could be [X] was born in [Y] where
objects and subjects are filled in accordingly. We identified a number of potential issues
with the extensive usage of these predicates to systematically create the test set.
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Robust usages of TracIn
43
5.1.1.1
Associated proponents
We have found that the size of the set of proponents for a given query varies widely.
The implication of this is that the model is trained significantly more on abstracts that
are supposed to teach the model a subset of specific queries. Furthermore, we found
that few predicates have significantly more associated proponents suggesting that the
model should disproportionately learn queries that are built from these predicates.
This also increases the risk of decreasing the loss too much, meaning that the fact
expressed by the abstracts is nearly perfectly learned. Since scores from TracIn relies
on the gradients we would expect that too small gradients will negatively impact the
gradient similarity which makes up the score.
We suggest that the proponents associated with each predicate should be balanced in
order to more fairly evaluate TDA methods’ capabilities and decrease the risk of gradi-
ent saturation. Furthermore, having discarding outliers in terms of size of proponent
sets will make the dataset more accessible and offer more robust results.
5.1.1.2
Linguistic variation
The simplicity of the queries has also been criticised as it makes it easier for the model to
utilize the learning of behaviour rather such as learning capital-country relationships
from the arbitrarily vast amount of proponents associated with queries constructed
from the [X] is the capital of [Y] predicate.
We suggest the introduction of several variations of predicates in terms of both lex-
ical diversity and length would increase the language complexity while maintaining
computational and data processing simplicity.
5.2
Robust usages of TracIn
Throughout the related literature we have found that the question of whether or not the
proposed training data attribution methods used are robust or not. In order words, can
we trust that these methods and practises provide reliable results given an experimental
setup. It has been found that specifically the leave-one-out re-training error is in itself
not a robust statistic (Nguyen et al., 2023; Søgaard et al., 2021) due to the numerous
stochastic elements that are involved with training deep neural networks. This then
opens up for the question of what influence functions might then be used for (Bae et al.,
2022).
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Future Work
44
5.2.1
Influence score for surfacing misinformation
A promising use-case of the TracIn influence function is to surface purposefully misla-
belled (i.e. poisoned) data in the training set as suggested by (Søgaard et al., 2021) as
more reliable evaluation method.
We provide an extensive description of the process used to poison FTRACE-TREx
training data systematically with incorrect labels. We showed that the influence scores
acquired from TracIn consistently attributed larger influence scores to poisoned samples
while acknowledging its limitations.
5.2.2
Gradient similarity
An overshadowing limitation that we found with TracIn was that it essentially builds
on the assumption that training data that expresses a fact that is being recited in a
query affects the network’s parameters similarly, i.e. produces similar gradients. This
concept of measuring gradient similarities is essential to TracIn producing reliable and
intuitive results.
We can summarize this concept as finding the training data that most similarly affects
the model’s parameters as the test sample in question would had it been used to
train the model. In TracIn this is done throughout the training process by the use of
checkpoints and summed into a single score in an attempt to capture the dynamics of
the training process.
What we have found during this thesis is that gradient similarity might not be a
suitable measure for noisy targets, such as the targets we saw in the abstracts which
would be expressed in various ways. This behaviour is exemplified in Section 4.2 where
we saw that the Netherlands and The Netherlands, or even simply adding a period
at the end of the target, produced vastly different gradients even though the semantic
similarity is practically perfect.
A possible explanation for this behaviour is offered through the explanation of the non-
linearities imposed by the activation functions (Dombrowski et al., 2019). They replace
ReLU with the Softplus function which can be smoothed with a β-parameter and shows
that gradient-based explanations from a β-smoothed network are more robust.
5.3
Future Work
Future work should attempt make aforementioned changes to FTRACE-TREx and
evaluate possible improvements. Evaluation should be done carefully such that aspects
==PAGE:52==
5.3 Future Work
45
like accessibility and reproducibility is not overlooked.
Furthermore, a β-smoothing of the model as previously mentioned should be evaluated
in order to avoid the counter-intuitive problem we have seen with regards samples with
near perfect semantic similarity producing vastly different gradients, causing gradient-
based TDA methods such as TracIn to become unreliable. Another possible mitigation
strategy could also be to use an ensemble of models trained with various seeds, data
orderings, etc. and instead of only summing over checkpoints as with TracIn it would
rather sum the gradient similarity across the ensemble. This of course comes at the
much greater cost of training additional models.
Other avenues could be explored where the use of influence scores from gradient-based
TDA methods play a major role. Due to regulation and the “right to be forgotten”
we currently see a spike of interest in the topic of machine unlearning. Here we might
imagine that a company has trained a large deep neural network on its customers
data. This poses the challenge of surfacing influential training data for that specific
customer that can either be excluded from future instances of model training or used
in an unlearning pipeline along with more sophisticated methods due to the associated
cost of re-training a new network from scratch.
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX A
Predicates
Predicate ID
Template
P19
[X] was born in [Y].
P20
[X] died in [Y].
P279
[X] is a subclass of [Y].
P37
The oﬀicial language of [X] is [Y].
P413
[X] plays in [Y] position.
P166
[X] was awarded the [Y].
P449
[X] was originally aired on [Y].
P69
[X] was educated at the University of [Y].
P47
[X] shares border with [Y].
P138
[X] is named after [Y].
P364
The original language of [X] is [Y].
P54
[X] plays with [Y].
P463
[X] is a member of [Y].
P101
[X] works in the field of [Y].
P1923
[Y] participated in the [X].
P106
[X] is a [Y] by profession.
P527
[X] consists of [Y].
P102
[X] is a member of the [Y] political party.
P530
[X] maintains diplomatic relations with [Y].
P176
[X] is produced by [Y].
P27
[X] is a citizen of [Y].
P407
[X] was written in [Y].
P30
[X] is located in [Y].
P178
[X] is developed by [Y].
P1376
[X] is the capital of [Y].
P131
[X] is located in [Y].
P1412
[X] used to communicate in [Y].
P108
[X] works for [Y].
==PAGE:54==
A Predicates
47
P136
[X] plays [Y] music.
P17
[X] is located in [Y].
P39
[X] has the position of [Y].
P264
[X] is represented by music label [Y].
P276
[X] is located in [Y].
P937
[X] used to work in [Y].
P140
[X] is aﬀiliated with the [Y] religion.
P1303
[X] plays [Y].
P127
[X] is owned by [Y].
P103
The native language of [X] is [Y].
P190
[X] and [Y] are twin cities.
P1001
[X] is a legal term in [Y].
P31
[X] is a [Y].
P495
[X] was created in [Y].
P159
The headquarter of [X] is in [Y].
P36
The capital of [X] is [Y].
P740
[X] was founded in [Y].
P361
[X] is part of [Y].
Table A.1: Predicate IDs and their associated text template.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
Akyürek, E., Bolukbasi, T., Liu, F., Xiong, B., Tenney, I., Andreas, J., & Guu, K.
(2022). Towards tracing factual knowledge in language models back to the
training data.
Bae, J., Ng, N., Lo, A., Ghassemi, M., & Grosse, R. (September 12, 2022). If influence
functions are the answer, then what is the question? https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2209.05364
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2016). Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate.
Barshan, E., Brunet, M.-E., & Dziugaite, G. K. (2020). Relatif: Identifying explanatory
training samples via relative influence. International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, 1899–1909.
Basu, S., Pope, P., & Feizi, S. (February 10, 2021). Influence functions in deep learning
are fragile. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2006.14651
Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., & Vincent, P. (2000). A neural probabilistic language model.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 13.
Biewald, L. (2020). Experiment tracking with weights and biases [Software available
from wandb.com]. https://www.wandb.com/
Brümmer, M., Dojchinovski, M., & Hellmann, S. (2016). Dbpedia abstracts: A large-
scale, open, multilingual nlp training corpus. Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16), 3339–
3343.
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2014). The second machine age: Work, progress, and
prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies. WW Norton & Company.
Charpiat, G., Girard, N., Felardos, L., & Tarabalka, Y. (2019). Input similarity from
the neural network perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 32. Retrieved June 6, 2023, from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2019/hash/c61f571dbd2fb949d3fe5ae1608dd48b-Abstract.html
Chung, H. W., Hou, L., Longpre, S., Zoph, B., Tay, Y., Fedus, W., Li, E., Wang, X.,
Dehghani, M., Brahma, S., Webson, A., Gu, S. S., Dai, Z., Suzgun, M., Chen,
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
49
X., Chowdhery, A., Narang, S., Mishra, G., Yu, A., … Wei, J. (2022). Scaling
instruction-finetuned language models. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.
2210.11416
Cook, R. D., & Weisberg, S. (1980). Characterizations of an empirical influence function
for detecting influential cases in regression. Technometrics, 22(4), 495–508.
Cook, R. D., & Weisberg, S. (1982). Residuals and influence in regression. New York:
Chapman; Hall.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805.
Dombrowski, A.-K., Alber, M., Anders, C., Ackermann, M., Müller, K.-R., & Kessel, P.
(2019). Explanations can be manipulated and geometry is to blame. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 32.
Elsahar, H., Vougiouklis, P., Remaci, A., Gravier, C., Hare, J., Laforest, F., & Simperl,
E. (2018). T-rex: A large scale alignment of natural language with knowledge
base triples. Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018).
Etzioni, O., Cafarella, M., Downey, D., Kok, S., Popescu, A.-M., Shaked, T., Soderland,
S., Weld, D. S., & Yates, A. (2004). Web-scale information extraction in know-
itall: (preliminary results). Proceedings of the 13th international conference on
World Wide Web, 100–110.
Guu, K., Webson, A., Pavlick, E., Dixon, L., Tenney, I., & Bolukbasi, T. (2023). Sim-
fluence: Modeling the influence of individual training examples by simulating
training runs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08114.
Han, X., & Tsvetkov, Y. (2021). Influence tuning: Demoting spurious correlations via in-
stance attribution and instance-driven updates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03212.
Heaven, W. D. (2022). Language models like gpt-3 could herald a new type of search
engine. In Ethics of data and analytics (Pages 57–59). Auerbach Publications.
Hoffmann, J., Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Buchatskaya, E., Cai, T., Rutherford, E., de
Las Casas, D., Hendricks, L. A., Welbl, J., Clark, A., Hennigan, T., Noland,
E., Millican, K., van den Driessche, G., Damoc, B., Guy, A., Osindero, S.,
Simonyan, K., Elsen, E., … Sifre, L. (2022). Training compute-optimal large
language models.
Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger, O., Tun-
yasuvunakool, K., Bates, R., Žı́dek, A., Potapenko, A., et al. (2021). Highly
accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873), 583–
589.
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
50
Koh, P. W., & Liang, P. (2017). Understanding black-box predictions via influence
functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04730.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2017). Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6), 84–90.
Kudo, T., & Richardson, J. (2018). Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent
subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.06226.
LeCun, Y., & Cortes, C. (2010). MNIST handwritten digit database.
Leshno, M., Lin, V. Y., Pinkus, A., & Schocken, S. (1993). Multilayer feedforward net-
works with a nonpolynomial activation function can approximate any function.
Neural networks, 6(6), 861–867.
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettle-
moyer, L., & Stoyanov, V. (2019). Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pre-
training approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Luccioni, A., & Viviano, J. (2021). What’s in the box? an analysis of undesirable
content in the common crawl corpus. Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
182–189.
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K., & Galstyan, A. (2021). A survey
on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR),
54(6), 1–35.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013). Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 26.
Nair, V., & Hinton, G. E. (2010). Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann
machines. Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning
(ICML-10), 807–814.
Nguyen, E., Seo, M., & Oh, S. J. (May 31, 2023). A bayesian perspective on training
data attribution. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.19765
Park, S. M., Georgiev, K., Ilyas, A., Leclerc, G., & Madry, A. (2023). Trak: Attributing
model behavior at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14186.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin,
Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., Köpf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z.,
Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L., … Chintala, S.
(2019). Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library.
Petroni, F., Rocktäschel, T., Lewis, P., Bakhtin, A., Wu, Y., Miller, A. H., & Riedel, S.
(2019). Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066.
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
51
Pruthi, G., Liu, F., Kale, S., & Sundararajan, M. (2020). Estimating training data influ-
ence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33, 19920–19930.
Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I., et al. (2018). Improving
language understanding by generative pre-training.
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W.,
& Liu, P. J. (2020). Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
text-to-text transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1),
5485–5551.
Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2016). ” why should i trust you?” explain-
ing the predictions of any classifier. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 1135–1144.
Robertson, S. E., Walker, S., Jones, S., Hancock-Beaulieu, M. M., Gatford, M., et al.
(1995). Okapi at trec-3. Nist Special Publication Sp, 109, 109.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning representations
by back-propagating errors. nature, 323(6088), 533–536.
Schioppa, A., Filippova, K., Titov, I., & Zablotskaia, P. (May 26, 2023). Theoretical
and practical perspectives on what influence functions do. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2305.16971
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system
technical journal, 27(3), 379–423.
Shazeer, N., & Stern, M. (2018). Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear
memory cost. International Conference on Machine Learning, 4596–4604.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van Den Driessche, G.,
Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. (2016).
Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature,
529(7587), 484–489.
Søgaard, A., et al. (2021). Revisiting methods for finding influential examples. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.04683.
Taylor, W. L. (1953). “cloze procedure”: A new tool for measuring readability. Jour-
nalism quarterly, 30(4), 415–433.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser,
Ł., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30.
Wang, A., Pruksachatkun, Y., Nangia, N., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., &
Bowman, S. R. (2019). Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose
language understanding systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00537.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
52
Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., & Bowman, S. R. (2019). GLUE: A
multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understand-
ing [In the Proceedings of ICLR.].
Xue, L., Constant, N., Roberts, A., Kale, M., Al-Rfou, R., Siddhant, A., Barua, A.,
& Raffel, C. (2020). Mt5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text
transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11934.
==PAGE:60==
