==PAGE:1==
Transformer-based Multimodal
Representation Learning in Lymphoma
Christian Hinge
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
Master Thesis
June 30th, 2023
Author
Christian Hinge
MSc. Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors
Michael Riis Andersen
Associate Professor, Msc, Ph.D.
Dept. of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Claes Nøhr Ladefoged
Postdoc, MSc, Ph.D.
Dept. of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
Flemming Littrup Andersen
Associate Professor, MSc, Ph.D.
Dept. of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
Professor Barbara Malene Fischer
Professor, MD, DMSc, Ph.D.
Dept. of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
Censor
Søren Holdt Jensen
Professor, MSc, Ph.D.,
Principal Research Scientist
Chora A/S
Technical University of Denmark
Dept. of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
compute@compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Purpose
Treatment eﬀicacy of patients with malignant lymphoma is quantified by a Deauville
score (1-5), which currently is derived through time-consuming manual assessment of PET/CT
images. Despite recent successes of automated image classification models, machine learn-
ing methods remain challenged by the lack of strong labels in medical datasets. Leveraging
advancements in natural language processing, this thesis instead aimed to extract regional
abnormality labels directly from the Danish study reports accompanying lymphoma investiga-
tions. By then pretraining an image model on abnormality prediction, the aim was to decrease
the data requirements for a downstream Deauville classifier.
Methods
A total of 3008 PET/CT studies with text reports were acquired and prepro-
cessed at Rigshospitalet; 918 with Deauville scores and 2090 without. For each report, an
NLP model comprised of regular expressions and a BERT encoder was used to extract ab-
normal findings pertaining to 15 predefined anatomical regions. Classification sensitivity and
specificity was estimated on 57 manually annotated test reports which, in total, contained
1223 labelled findings. Using the NLP-generated labels, a 3D Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) and a 2D DenseNet were then trained to predict abnormality in each region based on
full PET/CT volumes and maximum intensity projected (MIP) images, respectively. Perfor-
mance was quantified by the area under the receiver operator characteristic (AUROC) averaged
over regions. Abnormality-trained and non-pretrained image models were then finetuned on
two-class Deauville classification (Deauville 1-3 vs. Deauville 4-5), and evaluated on 180 test
studies. Qualitative assessment of selected patients was performed to identify sources of errors
for both the NLP and image models.
Results
Using only 54 manually labelled training reports (< 2% of the dataset), the NLP
model achieved a high test set sensitivity of 90.0% and a specificity of 74.2%. Leveraging the
report-extracted noisy labels, the 3D abnormality prediction model obtained an 0.788 average
AUROC and AUROC ≥0.85 in three anatomical regions.
The abnormality-pretrained 2D
MIP model had the highest Deauville AUROC of 0.791, beating the non-pretrained variant by
6.8 percentage points. Although the model benefited from pretraining, it was challenged by
patients with inflammatory uptake and limited by the lack of access to prior patient scans.
NLP prediction errors stemmed from borderline abnormal findings and inconsistent annotations
that were made by a non-expert.
Conclusion
This work demonstrated the feasibility and benefit of pre-training image models
on labels extracted from Danish medical text. To strengthen the Deauville-classification, fur-
ther investigations should be made in the MIP data format, ways of distinguishing inflammation
from cancer, and the inclusion of prior scans in the model input.
ii
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:5==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at both the section for Clinically Applied
Artificial Intelligence, Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Rigshospitalet,
and at the section for Cognitive Systems, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Technical University of Denmark, DTU. This thesis serves as partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the Master of Science degree.
The workload of the thesis was 30 ECTS spanning the period of February 1st to June 30th,
2023.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, machine learning,
and deep convolutional neural networks.
Christian Hinge - s174173
Signature
Date
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to all of my supervisors: Michael Riis Ander-
sen, Claes Nøhr Ladefoged, Flemming Littrup Andersen, and Barbara Malene Fischer. I am
extremely grateful for your unparalleled commitment and investment of time in me and this
project. Your passionate guidance in all aspects of this thesis has truly been invaluable, and I
would not have come this far without you.
I would also like to thank the PET/CT scanner personnel, nuclear medicine physicians, and
radiologists at Rigshospitalet for producing the dataset of lymphoma patients, which made this
thesis possible.
Many thanks to everyone at the CAAI group for academic discussions and great company
during lunch.
Søren Holdt Jensen for your time in reading and evaluating this thesis.
My family and girlfriend for your unwavering support and encouragement throughout all of my
studies.
Lastly, a big thanks the Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine and the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science for providing me with this oppor-
tunity.
Christian
iv
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
ADAM
Adaptive moment estimation
AUROC
Area under the receiver operator characteristic
BERT
Bidirectional encoder representations from transformer
CLIP
Contrastive learning image pretraining
CNN
Convolutional neural network
CT
Computed tomography
DICOM
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
EANM
European Association of Nuclear Medicine
FDG
Fluorodeoxyglucose
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation
GPU
Graphical processing unit
HL
Hodgkins lymphoma
HU
Hounesfield Units
NHL
Non Hodgkins lymphoma
MAE
Mean absolute error
MBq
Mega Becquerel
MHA
Multiheaded attention
MIP
Maximum intensity projection
MLM
Masked language modelling
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
NER
Named entity recognition
NSP
Next sentence prediction
NIFTI
Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative
NLP
Natural Language Processing
OP-OSEM
3D Ordinary Poisson-Ordered Subset Expectation Maximization
PET
Positron emission tomography
PID
Personal Identifiable
PSNR
Peak Signal to Noise Ratio
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
RegEx
Regular expression
ReLU
Rectified linear unit
ROC
Receiver operator characteristic
ROI
Region of interest
sbPET
Synthetic baseline PET
SGD
Stochastic gradient descent
SUV
Standardized uptake value
SVC
Support vector classifier
VAE
Variational autoencoder
XLM
Cross Lingual Language Model
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Medical imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Lymphoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Deep learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Machine-assisted Deauville classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Data
13
3.1
Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Security and compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
External datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Splits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
PET/CT images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Methods
19
4.1
Pipeline overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Label extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Image feature engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Abnormality pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Deauville classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
Age estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Results
37
5.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Label extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Image feature engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Abnormality pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Deauville classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6
Age estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Discussion
51
6.1
Future perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
56
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
vii
==PAGE:10==
A
61
A.1
Data acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2
Example of parsed study report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.3
Normalization algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.4
Training of MIP DenseNet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
viii
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Lymphoma is a category of cancers arising from the lymphatic tissue of the body [1]. The
disease can be broadly categorized into Hodgings lymphoma (HL) and Non-Hodgkins lym-
phoma (NHL), which each comprise 10% and 90% of the approximately 1300 annual cases in
Denmark, respectively [2, 1]. The five year survival rate of NHL is 72% but varies substantially
by subtype, stage, and other patient characteristics such as age and symptoms. Thanks to
state of the art advances in combined chemo- and radiotherapy, HL is now considered highly
curable with a five year survival rate above 90% [3]. However, since such treatments have
significant side effects, effort is being put into personalized risk-adapted regimes that minimize
toxicity while maximizing cure rates [4, 3]. To ensure that the most aggressive of regimens are
administered only when necessary, accurate risk stratification and treatment assessment are of
utmost importance [4].
Combined Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and Computed Tomography (CT) imag-
ing has become an indispensable tool in both interim treatment assessment, and end-of-
treatment evaluation of lymphoma patients [5]. PET imaging with the sugar-analog tracer,
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), captures metabolically active regions of the body, such as tumors,
while contrast-enhanced CT offers anatomical context and soft tissue contrast. The findings of
each imaging study are transcribed to an image report by a radiologist and/or nuclear medicine
physician. In lymphoma, a key element of these reports is the Deauville score (1-5), which is
the standard evaluation method for treatment response in interim and end of treatment PET
[5]. The score is determined visually by comparison of the FDG activity in malignant lymph
nodes with reference levels in the mediastinal blood pool and liver. Albeit time-consuming, the
compilation of the Deauville score and other image findings lays the foundation for potential
treatment adjustments, making it a critical component in personalized lymphoma care [5].
In the past decade, machine learning has made remarkable strides in the medical domain
by automating or assisting in multiple clinical procedures, such as skin cancer detection and
automated patient monitoring in intensive care units [6, 7]. Deep Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNNs) have proven to be particularly adept in volumetric image-to-image tasks such
as PET attenuation correction and tumor segmentation [8, 9]. However, in scenarios with
sparse supervision signals, such as classification, training deep models remains challenging due
to the relatively large dimensionality of volumetric images compared to the number of training
instances [10].
To tackle this, researchers have investigated pretraining networks on auxiliary tasks that offer
more robust supervision signals, such as masked inpainting and rotation [11]. As biomedical
data is inherently multimodal, other studies have attempted to incorporate accompanying text,
timeseries, and tabular data in the training process [12]. Both of these strategies fundamentally
seek to improve the latent representation of the data prior to fine-tuning on the target task
[13]. One particular approach capitalizes on the recent advancements of transformers in natural
language processing (NLP) to perform contrastive learning image pretraining (CLIP) [14].
Zhang et al. employed this methodology in the medical domain, by using free-text radiology
reports as supervision signals for corresponding X-ray images [15].
In another study with
volumetric imaging, NLP was applied to extract weak annotations from medical reports in
the form of references to abnormal anatomical regions [10]. Said labels were then used to
pretrain a model for whole-body abnormality detection on a dataset of PET/CT studies.
Ultimately, this methodology helped lessen the data requirements for their final target task of
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
1
==PAGE:12==
mortality prediction [10]. A similar pipeline could be imagined for automated Deauville score
classification.
Aim
The aim of this thesis is to develop a methodology for extracting labels from Danish free-text
lymphoma investigation reports and use them to pretrain a neural network that can be fine-
tuned for Deauville score classification. To increase model emphasize on cancer tissue, the
thesis will also investigate alternative feature engineered representations of the imaging data.
If the Deauville classifier achieves high sensitivity and specificity, it may support personalized
care for lymphoma patients through more automated and eﬀicient image analysis.
2
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
Medical imaging
2.1.1
Computed Tomography
Computed Tomography is an imaging technique that enables three dimensional visualization of
anatomical structures [16]. To achieve this, the scanner performs X-ray projection imaging at
multiple angles by rotating a photon emitting source around the patient. Some of the emitted
photons will be attenuated, i.e. absorbed or scattered by the body, leaving only a portion to
be captured by a detector ring [16]. Importantly, different tissues will attenuate photons at a
different rates. The X-ray projection can thus be imagined as shining a light through a semi-
transparent body and seeing what comes out. Accordingly, two neighboring structures must
have different attenuation coeﬀicients if they are to be distinguished from one another [16].
Many soft tissue types are, however, similar in this regard, so contrast enhancing compounds
are often administered before the scan. Essentially, these chemical agents alter the attenuation
rates of certain organs and thereby increase their contrast with adjacent structures. At the
end of the scan, 2D axial slices (tomograms) are computed from the X-ray projected data as
the solution to an inverse problem. This gives a 3D grid of attenuation values measured in
Hounsfield Units [16].
Modern scanners can yield high-fidelity images with sub 1mm resolution, but there is a trade-off
between signal strength and X-ray dosage, since the radioactive exposure does slightly increase
the risk of developing cancer [17]. The clinical value of CT is, nevertheless, undisputed with
several applications in the diagnosis and treatment planning of many disorders. For instance,
in the accurate localization of tumors, blood clots, and fractures [11]. CT imaging is also
used to perform attenuation correction of other tomography-based image modalities, such as
Positron Emission Tomography [16].
2.1.2
Positron Emission Tomography
Positron Emission Tomography is an imaging technique that enables in vivo depiction of phys-
iological patterns [16]. To achieve this, the subject is administered an intravenous injection of
a radiopharmaceutical tracer. Each tracer tracer molecule is dispersed throughout the body
until eventually experiencing a positron-emitting radioactive decay. The positron then travels
a distance of up to several millimeters before undergoing annihalation with a freely moving
electron, which results in the release of a pair of opposite traveling gamma photons [16]. If
the scanner captures both of these within a defined timeframe, the photons are registered as
pair. The electron-positron site of annihilation usually lies somewhere on the line segment
connecting the two captured photons, and this information enables the construction of the
PET image. The half-life of most PET tracers range from minutes to hours, which means
that the characteristics of the final image are tightly linked with the spatial and temporal
distribution of the tracer molecule [16]. Specifically, the PET image will light up in regions of
tracer accumulation. Exploiting this, tracers are designed to mimic the properties of molecules
associated with the physiological process of interest [16]. For instance, the sugar analog Fluo-
rodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulates in cells that consume sugar, so the resulting image maps
the metabolic activity of the body. This makes the tracer useful at quantifying, for instance,
the activity of tumors in cancer and the degree of neuronal death in brain diseases [18, 1]. To
faciliate inter- and intrapatient comparisons, Standardized Uptake Value (SUV) normalization
is often employed to standardize the signal strength according to the patient size and tracer
dosage. Image quality is impacted by both photon attenuation, photon scattering, and by the
fact that positrons may travel several millimeters before annihilation [16].
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
3
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Lymphoma
Lymphoma is a heterogeneous category of cancers that arise from lymphocytes in certain stages
of maturation [19]. The diseases comprise 5% of all malignancies (cancers), and patients often
present with fatigue, fever, weight loss, and/or enlargement of lymph nodes in the armpits,
neck, or groin.
The diagnosis and disease subtype are determined by a tissue biopsy and
subsequent histopathological tissue analysis [19].
For the majority of lymphomas, the standard care includes a combination of chemo- and
radiotherapy [19]. These treatments may incur significant side effects, so the most aggressive
of regimens are only administered when necessary [4].
Identifying the patients at risk is,
however, challenging as the prognosis varies substantially by disease subtype, the number of
involved lymph nodes, and other risk factors [20]. Continuous assessment and monitoring of
patients is thus a critical component in lymphoma care [3].
2.2.1
Whole-body PET/CT investigations
Whole-body PET/CT with FDG has become an indispensable tool for tumor staging, treatment
planning, and treatment assessment in lymphoma [5]. FDG is particularly useful for cancer
investigations since malignant cells have a high proliferation rate and thus consume a lot of
sugar.
Figure 2.1: Whole-body CT (left) and FDG PET (right) of a patient with recently confirmed
lymphoma. CT values are shown in Hounesfield Units (HU), and PET uptake is quantified by
the Standardized Uptake Value (SUV). A coronal (frontal) and axial (cross-sectional) slice is
depicted for each modality. Several lymph nodes with high malignant uptake can be seens in
the left armpit (blue circles).
Figure 2.1 depicts coronal (frontal) and axial (cross-sectional) PET and CT slices of a newly
4
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:15==
diagnosed lymphoma patient. Several red glowing spots can be observed in the left arm pit
corresponding to FDG avid (FDG attracting) malignant lymph nodes. The brain, liver, bladder,
heart, and kidneys also exhibit high FDG accumulation, however, this is expected for these
regions, so it is important to interpret uptake in organs according their normal values [21].
Nevertheless, increased activity does not necessitate malignancy since multiple factors affect
tracer uptake. Chemo- and radiotherapy for instance, can cause an inflammatory response in
lymph nodes and bone marrow. Since inflammatory cells, such as macrophages, consume a
lot of sugar, FDG will accumulate in the affected areas. Other physiological factors like age,
temperature, and menstrual cycle may also confound the signal, thus making it challenging
to distinguish between normal and malignant uptake [22]. Findings on the CT scan, such as
bone fractures, can help remove ambiguity in certain cases. In general, contrast-enhanced CT
provides important anatomical context and soft tissue contrast to the PET observations [5].
In figure 2.1, the FDG-avid lymph nodes appear as slightly darker blobs on the CT image.
Importantly, the high CT resolution enables accurate measurements of tumors.
Deauville score
Interim and end of treatment PET/CT are particular important in risk stratification of patients,
since the findings can influence the future treatment plan [5]. Current clinical practice incorpo-
rates a 5-point scoring system for response assessment; 1 being the best and 5 being the worst
[5]. This so called Deauville score is visually determined by comparing the highest uptake
across malignant lymph nodes with reference values in the patient’s liver and mediastinum
(area surrounding the heart). The criteria for each score are defined as follows [5]:
1. No lymph node uptake
2. Lymph node uptake less than or equal to the mediastinum
3. Lymph node uptake greater than mediastinum but less than liver
4. Lymph node uptake moderately higher than liver
5. Lymph node uptake markedly higher than liver and/or new lesions (malignant lymph
nodes) have appeared
Note that comparison with the previous scan is sometimes required to asses whether new
tumors have appeared (Deauville 5). The Deauville score and other PET/CT findings are
compiled and transcribed by a radiologist and/or nuclear medicine physician to a PDF study
report.
Study Report
Figure 2.2 illustrates an example study report with four main sections highlighted.
The leading indication section states the reason for the PET/CT investigation, for instance:
”finished chemotherapy, wish to assess effect of treatment”
The description section has two parts; PET findings, usually written by the nuclear medicine
physician, and CT findings, usually written by the radiologist.
The PET findings include
descriptions and interpretations of the FDG uptake in lymph nodes and organs - sometimes in
relation to previous PET/CT investigations. For instance:
”Aktivitetsophobning i lymfeknuder på begge sider af halsen, tolkes [reaktivt/inflamma-
torisk/malignt]” (activity in lymph nodes on both sides of the neck, interpreted as [reac-
tive/inflammatory/malignant]).
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: An example report of a lymphoma investigation. The report consists of four major parts. 1: The indication (reason) for the scan. 2: PET
and CT findings by the nuclear medicine physician and radiologist. 3: Optionally one or more tables with selected tumors. 4: A joint conclusion.
6
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:17==
”Der sammenholdes med 1. jan. 2020. Uændret ses FDG-optagelsen i de på CT beskrevne
restlymfomer.” (Compared to the previous scan January 1st 2020, no change is observed in
the FDG uptake in the residual lymphomas described on the CT scan).
Note that to properly interpret the last sentence, additional information is required from the CT
section and from the PET findings of the previous scan. That is, the information contained
in a single study is often incomplete. Clarification is sometimes provided in the conclusion
section.
The CT description typically includes organ dimensions, incidental findings, and the sizes and
locations of active or previously active tumors. Certain negative findings are often included in
both the PET and CT descriptions, such as the absence of bone metastases (cancer spreading
to the bones) and lung infiltrates.
As an extension to the CT descriptions, there may be a table with malignant and/or previously
malignant lymph nodes. The sizes and locations of nodes are noted, however, the table is not
exhaustive, and sometimes lymph nodes of previous scans are included despite being invisible
on the current scan.
The conclusion section contains a summary of the study’s findings, the names of the radiologist
and nuclear medicine physician, and if relevant, a Deauville score.
2.3
Deep learning
During the past decade, deep learning has revolutionized the field of machine learning and
enabled the automation of several tasks essential to society. Recent use-cases include targeted
drug discovery, art generation, and question-answering chatbots like ChatGPT [23, 24, 25].
The deep learning term refers to a spectrum of machine learning methods that are based on
many-layered artificial neural network architectures [26]. The success of these models may
partly be attributed to their human-like ability to learn from experience and their proficiency
in discovering complex non-linear patterns [26, 27].
A neural network model M with parameters θM is trained by feeding it data examples, x,
from a dataset D. The predicted output is then evaluated against a desired target y via a loss
function L. More specifically, the training process calculates parameter gradients in a process
called back-propagation and performs gradient descent optimization to minimize the expected
loss on the dataset [26]:
θ∗
M = arg min
θM Ex,y∼D [L(M(x), y)]
When the target y corresponds to a ground truth label, the training is said to be ”super-
vised” [26]. Obtaining suﬀicient amounts of labelled data to avoid over-fitting can, however,
be expensive as it often requires domain-specialized humans to annotate each example [10].
Addressing this, unsupervised learning seeks to learn patterns from the input data without the
need of labels [27]. For instance, given a dataset of animal pictures, an unsupervised learning
scheme could be to remove a square of pixels from the image and then ask the network to
recover them. Although of little use by itself, this training can be used to prime the model’s
understanding of the diverse patterns in animal pictures, thus lessening the data requirements
for later supervised learning [27]. Consequently, unsupervised learning can be interpreted as a
representation learning technique [27].
2.3.1
Deep representation learning
Representation learning is a machine learning paragdime that seeks to transform raw input
data into a representation that makes a particular downstream task easier to solve [27]. The
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
7
==PAGE:18==
technique deviates from feature engineering in that the representations are not predetermined
but instead learned from the data, which poses a challenge as some representations may be
more useful than others. Thus the goal lies in designing a representation learning problem that
if to be solved, requires the model to learn a data representation of value to the downstream
task [27]. Continuing with the animal pictures, the unsupervised in-painting could be of value
to a supervised animal species classifier, since the representation needed to successfully in-paint
a missing part of a horse, must somehow capture the features unique to a horse. Therefore,
these same general features could likely be used to distinguish horses from other depicted
animal species.
There are multiple approaches to representation learning, however, paired image-text supervi-
sion has seen recent success due to the abundance of images and image-captions on the web
[27, 28, 14]. Some methods use the text as a raw supervision signal by tasking image networks
to predict the caption of a given image [29]. More successful architectures use separate image
and text encoders to obtain latent embeddings for each modality [28, 14]. A ”contrastive” loss
function then encourages the two embeddings to be similar, if the caption and image belong
together. Using this Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) technique, researchers
obtained an image representation so powerful that they were able to beat the famous ResNet50
on the ImageNet challenge without any prior finetuning to the dataset [14]. Similar models
have been tried in the medical domain by pairing chest X-ray images with radiologist descrip-
tions [15]. Unfortunately, these so called zero-shot learners rely on enormous datasets with
100.000 or more samples, thus rendering the technique less applicable in certain scenarios [15,
14].
As an alternative approach, ”weakly” supervised representation learning can be performed by
directly extracting labels from the text and training the image network in a normal supervised
fashion [27]. The labels could for example indicate the presence of certain social media hashtags
or certain pre-determined words [30]. Such labels may be noisy, i.e. less precise, compared to
the stronger human annotations, but this is usually offset by the increase in dataset size [27].
Eyuboglu et al. employed this methodology in the analysis of 8144 whole-body PET/CT studies
[10]. They extracted 26 binary labels from the free text in each study report corresponding to 26
anatomical regions and organs. Each label indicated whether the report contained abnormal
findings in the corresponding region, such as tumors, hemorrhages, and fractures. A deep
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was trained simultaneously on the 26 classification tasks,
and later finetuned via transfer-learning to predict whether the patient would pass away within x
days of the scan. The study found that weakly supervised pretraining significantly improved the
performance on the downstream task. Similar to some of the previously mentioned multimodal
representation learning techniques, Eyuboglu et al, relied on transformer-based architectures
to perform Natural Language Processing (NLP) [10].
2.3.2
Transformers
The transforme is a highly scalable, hardware parallelizable, and flexible neural network archi-
tecture that has remained state of the art in multiple NLP tasks since its introduction in 2017
[31, 32]. The architecture addresses several of the shortcomings of Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) that process words (x1, x2, . . .) in a recurrent fashion from left to right via a network,
F [27]:
ht+1 = F(ht, xt)
here ht is a hidden state variable that encodes a high-level representation of all the words
up until word t. The cyclic dependency makes the training diﬀicult to parallelize, and it may
8
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:19==
lead to exploding or vanishing gradients [27]. Furthermore, the limited size of the hidden
state means that important information from distant tokens may eventually be overwritten,
which is problematic for tasks with long-range dependencies. Consider for instance the task of
predicting the next word in the following sentence:
Denmark is located in Scandinavia. The population is approximately 5 million and the oﬀicial
language is ...
The defining word, Denmark, lies several words back, so there is a risk that this information
has vanished from the hidden state, thus making it diﬀicult to correctly predict Danish as the
next word.
The transformer addresses this by using an attention operator, that looks at all words in the
text simultaneously (figure 2.3) [32].
Figure 2.3: The flow of information in a transformer and a Recurrent Neural Network. To
accurately predict the word ”Danish” the RNN must remember the word ”Denmark” during
multiple model passes, while the transformer can simply see all other words of the sentences
at any point of time. Figure inspired by [27]
To better understand the transformer mechanism, one must keep in mind that the hidden
activations, z, of most ordinary neural networks are a linear combination of the previous
activations, x, followed by a nonlinearity, ϕ [27]:
z = ϕ(W T x)
The attention mechanism differs in that the weights, W, are not fixed, but are instead a
function of the activations, W(x) [27]:
z = ϕ(W(x)T x)
This improved flexibility has proven particularly useful in natural language modelling, as it
allows the model to selectively choose which words to pay attention to [27]. This mechanism
will now be formalized.
Given an embedding dimension, dv, a max sequence length N, and stacked activations,
(x1, x2, . . .) = X ∈RN×dv, one can compute query Q ∈RN×dk, key K ∈Rn×dk, and
value V ∈RN×dv matrices as follows [32]:
Q = XWQ
K = XWK
V = XWV
Here, WQ ∈Rdk×N, WK ∈Rdk×N, and WV ∈Rdv×N are learned weight matrices, and dk is
the dimension of key and query vectors. Scaled dot-product attention is then defined by [32]:
Z = Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
9
==PAGE:20==
The query and key inner product can be interpreted as a sort of lookup operation. If query
vector qi is similar to key vector kj, their inner product will be large, so the new latent vector
zi will be influenced heavily by the value vector vj. Z is thus a weighted average of the value
matrix, with weight coeﬀicients calculated by the query-key interactions.
The original article stacks attention heads in parallel, to obtain a multiheaded attention (MHA)
module [32]. Several MHA are put in sequence with residual skip connections, layer normal-
izations and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) nonlinearities to form an encoder-only transformer.
Please see Vaswani et al. for details [32]. The original work also incorporates a decoder to en-
able model training on machine translation tasks. A year later in 2018, Devlin et al. presented
a representation learning approach to training the encoder by itself [33].
2.3.3
BERT
The Biderectional Encoder Representations from Transformer (BERT) is a transformer model
that obtained state-of-the-art scores on several NLP benchmarks in question-answering and
language understanding [33].
The BERTBASE model consists of 12 encoder-only transformer blocks with hidden dimension
dv = 764, sequence length N = 512, and 12 attention heads per MHA, resulting in a total of
110 million trainable parameters. Note that BERT uses WordPiece tokenization to split words
into smaller components [33]. For example, the word ”jumping”, is split into the tokens ”jump”
and ”##ing”, and overall this shrinks the vocabulary size (number of unique words/tokens)
from 1.000.000 English words to just 30.000 tokens [27].
The work comprised two novel representational learning approaches that enabled the encoder
to be trained in isolation on a large cohort (3300M words) of unlabelled text data [33].
Masked Language Modelling (MLM) is a technique similar to the animal inpainting example,
but with text instead of images. During MLM training, 15% of tokens are randomly selected
and replaced by empty ”[mask]” tokens [33]. Using a linear classification head and cross-
entropy loss, BERT then seeks to infer the missing tokens based on the surrounding context.
MLM differs from next word prediction in that tokens can attend to other tokens in both
directions, hence the term ”bidirectional” [33].
Secondly, BERT is trained via Next Sentence Prediction (NSP), which is the task of predicting
whether a given sentence A is naturally followed by a sentence B.
During training, 50%
of examples consist of actual neighboring sentences, and 50% consist of randomly sampled
sampled sentences [33]. This can be interpreted as a contrastive learning approach as the
learned representation must convey some notion of sentence similarity/disimilarity [27].
After training with MLM and NSP, the encoder can be finetuned via supervision to several
NLP tasks by incoorporating task-specific model heads [33]. These heads usually comprise one
or more linear layers connected to the last transformer block. Downstream task can broadly
be categorized as either token-level classification, or text-level classification, [34]. An example
of token-level classification is the identification of named entities, and an example of text-level
classification is sentiment analysis of movie reviews [27].
Since its introduction, several BERT variants have been developed by varying the architecture
and training data. For example, ClinicalBERT is trained on a large corpus of English clinical
text, and DanBERT is trained on text scraped from Danish websites [35, 36].
2.4
Machine-assisted Deauville classification
Several studies have investigated the use of machine learning for staging, tumor-segmentation,
and risk-stratification of various cancers. However at the time of writing, little work has been
10
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:21==
conducted in automated Deauville classification.
In 2020, Bradshaw et al. trained a 2D EﬀicentNet CNN to predict Deauville score from a frontal
Maximum Intensity Projected (MIP) FDG-PET image [37]. A MIP is a 2D image generated by
keeping only the maximum of the PET voxel values along a certain dimension (figure 2.4). The
study turned the 5-class Deauville task into a binary classification task, by grouping patients as
either responding (Deauville 1-3) or non-responding (4-5). The term ”responding” means that
the treatment is effective. Patients were excluded, if their study report mentioned secondary
cancer, treatment induced inflammatory uptake, or if the physician expressed any ambiguity in
their findings. The method achieved an accuracy of 85%, a sensitivity of 90%, and a specificity
of 81% on a balanced test split of 249 patients.
Similarly in 2022, Huemann et al. used an EﬀicentNet on FDG-PET MIP images to predict
5-class Deauville score. They achieved a modest unbalanced accuracy of 48% on a test set of
50 patients. Note that 39% of the test patients had Deauville score 5 [38].
To the best the author’s knowledge, no study has investigated using volumetric PET/CT
images to predict Deauville score.
Figure 2.4: Frontal maximum intensity projection (MIP) of a volumetric PET image.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:23==
3
Data
3.1
Acquisition
The lymphoma dataset was curated at the Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear
Medicine, Rigshospitalet. Appendix A.1 details the particular inclusion and exclusion criteria
for each step of the acquisition.
To summarize, personal identification numbers (PID) of lymphoma patients were acquired
from the regional patient database, ”Sundhedsplatformen”. These were cross-referenced with
the imaging database of Rigshospitalet, which yielded 3703 studies distributed across 1426
patients. Each study consisted of a single PET image, a CT image, and a PDF report with
medical findings. Only studies conducted between 1/1/2017 and 31/09/2022 were considered,
and 695 studies were removed due to failing quality control or for having more than 600 axial
slices. The latter criteria was enforced since the later presented models would otherwise run
out of GPU memory. The final dataset comprised 3008 studies spread across 1310 patients.
The total dataset took 8 weeks to download, and it occupied 1.5 terabytes of storage. Table 3.1
summarizes the ages, weights, and heights of these patients. Evidently, there is an overweight
of men and most subjects are between 50 and 70 years old. Figure 3.1 shows the common
number of studies per patient, which is usually between one and three.
An additional 1462 PDF reports with medical findings were also acquired from the hospital
database. These reports belonged to lymphoma studies that, due to one reason or another,
did not make it into the main dataset. The sole reason for collecting these reports, was to
strengthen the later presented NLP models. More specifically, these models needed as much
Danish clinical text as possible to prevent over-fitting during training.
Figure 3.1: The frequency of the number of studies pr. patient. 84% of patients have three
studies or fewer.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
13
==PAGE:24==
Men (n=1702 studies)
Women (n=1306 studies)
Attribute
mean
min
25%
75%
max
mean
min
25%
75%
max
Weight [kg]
81.5
41.9
71.0
90.0
326.
69.0
37.0
58.0
76.0
187.
Height [m]
1.79
1.47
1.74
1.85
2.10
1.66
1.25
1.61
1.70
1.87
Age [yrs]
59.7
19.0
51.25
73.0
91.0
61.0
18.0
52.0
74.0
93.0
Table 3.1: Demographic summary statistics of the 3008 studies.
3.2
Security and compliance
Permission was granted by the national ethics committee to retrospectively collect and ana-
lyze data from lymphoma patients. The administration of personally identifiable patient data
adheres to the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which took effect on May 25th,
2018, for all European Union member states. In Denmark, compliance with the GDPR is mon-
itored by the Danish Data Protection Agency, which is an independent authority. As medical
imaging data is considered personally identifiable information, all data underwent thorough
pseudo-anonymization before acquisition. Note that the PDF files could not be acquired in
pseudo-anonymized format, as the documents themselves included names and PIDs of patients
and investigators. Instead the PDF text was extracted and cleaned for personal identifiable
information. The original PDF files were subsequently deleted, and any personally identifiable
information used to query the database was also completely erased. Subjects were assigned
a unique alpha-numeric ID for reference in the developed models. A single ID-to-PID conver-
sion key was retained to allow clinicians to intervene in case of incidental findings. This file
was securely stored on a separate hard drive in accordance with Rigshospitalet’s regulations.
Rigshospitalet’s servers were used to store and analyze all data.
3.3
External datasets
The PET Challenge dataset is a publicly available dataset with 1000 whole-body PET/CT
studies. 500 of these come from healthy controls and 500 come from patients with histologically
proven malignant melanoma, lymphoma or lung cancer [39]. Of particular intereset, the dataset
also includes manual segmentations of all tumors. This enabled the training of a later presented
tumor segmentation model.
3.4
Splits
This thesis included multiple interconnected machine learning models for image analysis and
natural language processing.
To ensure an unbiased and fair evaluation of these models,
a universal hold-out test split was created that contained approximately 20% of the 3008
lymphoma studies. All the presented methods were tested simultaneously on this hold-out
split at the end of the thesis. The remaining 80% of the dataset was used for both training
and validation, but the exact validation scheme varied from model to model. Note that the
test split was performed at patient-level such that all studies from the same patient resided in
either the test split or the training/validation split.
Figure 3.2 gives an overview of the data cohorts and the splits.
14
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: An overview of the data used in the thesis. *There was no isolated validation
split. Instead the validation was performed on the combined training and validation (blue)
split, with a validation scheme that varied between model types. The NLP methods utilized
10-fold cross-validation and the deep learning image models used a simple hold-out validation
split. Final model evaluation was performed on the separate hold-out test split (green).
3.5
PET/CT images
3.5.1
Acquisition
A total of 3008 whole body PET/CT images were acquired from the lymphoma patients. Sub-
jects were injected with an average of dosis of 262 Mega Becquerel (MBq) FDG, (inter quantile
range [211, 306]) followed by a 60 minute post injection time to allow for the radiopharmaceu-
tical to distribute. Patients were placed head first supine in a combined PET/CT scanner and
scanned in accordance with the European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM) guidelines
for tumor imaging. Table 3.2 summarizes the different acquisition parameters. Only the axial
image dimensions (x, y) are stated, as the third z-dimension varied between studies. All CT
images had 512 × 512 pixels per axial slice. Given that different PET reconstruction methods
cause notable variations in image appearance, all PET images were reconstructed using the
same overall method; Ordered Subset Expectation Maximization (OSEM) with a Point Spread
Function (PSF) [40]. The particular characteristics of this method are not important to know
in context of this thesis.
Scanner model
PET Reconstruction
PET axial pixels
Count
Biograph64 Vision 600
PSF+TOF 4i5s
440 x 440
1260
Biograph64 mCT
PSF+TOF 2i21s
400 x 400
968
Biograph128 Vision 600 Edge
PSF+TOF 4i5s
440 x 440
299
Biograph64 TruePoint
PSF 3i21s
336 x 336
279
Biograph40 TruePoint
PSF 3i21s
336 x 336
11
Biograph64 mCT 4R
PSF+TOF 2i21s
400 x 400
84
Other combination
7
Table 3.2: The 3008 PET/CT studies of the lymphoma cohort, grouped by scanner model,
PET reconstruction methods, and PET axial dimension. ”PSF+TOF 4i5s” stands for Point
Spread Function modeling plus Time-of-Flight (TOF) reconstruction using 4 iterations and 5
subsets.
3.5.2
Image preprocessing
All PET and CT images were resampled to a near isometric (2.04 × 2.04 × 2.00 mm)
resolution, which is identical to the native PET resolution of the Biograph64 mCT scanner
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
15
==PAGE:26==
(table 3.2). All images were then cropped to obtain a standard 246 × 246 axial size. Figure
3.3 depicts the z-dimension sizes of the postprocessed images. Note that images with a z-
dimension smaller than 350 or greater than 600 were excluded from the cohort due to quality
and memory considerations.
Figure 3.3: The distribution of the number of axial slices (z-dimension) for the postprocessed
images.
For use in later models, organ and tissue masks were extracted using TotalSegmentator (figure
3.4) and a rough whole-body mask was obtained by smoothing and thresholding each PET
image.
Figure 3.4: Organ and tissue masks from TotalSegmentor
16
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:27==
3.6
Reports
3.6.1
Preprocessing
Both tables and free text regions were extracted from the PDF reports. Identifying the table
areas was important for two reasons.
Firstly it ensured that tabular data was not parsed
as free text, and secondly, it provided a long list of anatomical terms common to PET/CT
investigations. Tables were extracted with the python package ”tabula” and saved to CSV
files. For later NLP tasks, a readable free text version of each table was also created (see
figure 3.5).
Figure 3.5: The steps involved in extracting and formatting tables. Tabular areas are identified
in the PDF files, extracted to CSV, and formatted to text.
The indication, description, and conclusion sections were extracted to JSON files via the
Python package ”pdfminer”, using simple heuristics to identify the start and end of each
section. Great effort was put into removing personal identifiable information. In particular, the
conclusion section proved challenging, since the names of the investigating physicians often
appeared in-line with other text. To address this, names were identified and removed using a
Danish BERT model pretrained for Named Entity Recognition (NER) [41]. In addition, a final
regular expression (RegEx) function was applied to remove any PID numbers. Once the text
had been extracted, the original PDF files were deleted.
The report tables and paragraphs contained several medical abbreviations such as c. (cancer),
lm (lymph node), and ve. (left). These abbreviations were removed and instead written out
in full.
The pdfminer package used optical character recognition to parse each PDF to standard text.
Occasionally, this method mistook common characters for other obscure characters, such as
Chinese letters. To fix this, all non-common characters removed from parsed reports.
Appendix A.2 contains the parsed text corresponding to the report in figure 2.2.
3.6.2
Deauville
Deauville scores were extracted from the description and conclusion sections of the parsed
reports via a regular expression model. The model was designed to handle the various ways
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
17
==PAGE:28==
of Deauville scores, such as ”deauville iii”, ”dv. kriterium 5”, and others. Ambiguous cases
were evaluated manually, and instances with undecided scores, such as ”Deauville 4/5”, were
removed. As a quality check, 20 reports with Deauville and 50 reports without were verified
manually, and the regular expression model was correct in all cases. Figure 3.6 shows the label
distribution for the 918 studies in which valid scores were identified. Evidently, the distribution
is skewed towards the lower scores.
Figure 3.6: The distribution of deauville scores in the lymphoma cohort
18
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:29==
4
Methods
4.1
Pipeline overview
The end goal of this thesis was to obtain a model that could predict a Deauville score from a
PET and CT image. In addition to the benefits of representation learning mentioned in section
2.3.1, there were some data specific reasons that made representation learning an important
factor in reaching the final goal.
Figure 4.1: An overview of the three major tasks in the thesis; label extraction, feature engi-
neering, and Deauville classification. Each grey container corresponds to a machine learning
model. Arrows indicate where image data (green) or labels (red) take part in a particular
model stage (blue).
Although the dataset did contain Deauville labels, a model trained from scratch might be
prone to overfitting as a consequence of the small dataset size (900 studies), the ”weak”
single-scalar supervision signal, and the high dimensionality of input images [10]. Furthermore,
such an approach would not make use of the 2000 lymphoma studies that, albeit having no
Deauville score, still contained labels in the form of free-text findings. Finally, such a model
might struggle to identify the few voxels of relevance to the prediction since a single tumor of
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
19
==PAGE:30==
size 1cm³ comprises less than 0.001% of the total signal, yet can change a Deauville 1 to a
Deauville 5.
Overcoming these challenges, this thesis proposes an extensive pipeline of label extraction,
feature engineering, and pretraining inspired by Eyuboglu et. al. [10]. Figure 4.1 depicts the
major pipeline steps and the accompanying machine learning models.
In the first step, 15 binary ”abnormality” labels were extracted from each free text study report
using transformer-based NLP models. Each label indicated whether or not the report included
abnormal findings pertaining to a particular anatomical region, e.g. liver, lungs, bone-tissue,
etc.
In the second step, two ”feature-engineering” models with strong supervision signals were
trained. The idea was to obtain meaningful data representations that could aid the final model
in identifying tumorous tissue. The synthetic baseline PET (sbPET) model predicted, based on
the CT, what the patient’s PET would look like, assuming that the patient was without active
tumors. If successful, active tumors could then be identified as regions of deviation between
the actual PET and sbPET images. The second model was trained for tumor segmentation
on the challenge dataset and then used to infer tumor masks on the lymphoma dataset.
Both of these engineered representations then enter as feature channels in a final classification
model along with the PET and CT images. The model was first pretrained to predict the 15
abnormality labels and later finetuned to predict Deauville score.
The following subsections go into detail with each step.
4.2
Label extraction
The goal of the label extraction was to derive structured labels from the raw study reports, to
be used for supervised pretraining of later image models.
4.2.1
Overview of NLP methods
The study reports contained unstructured labels to the PET/CT images in the form of free-
text findings. Since such findings mostly concerned the size, location, and activity of various
tumors, the task of predicting the text content may be considered very similar to that of
predicting the Deauville score. Thus it was theorized that these text findings would be good
candidates for supervision signals in the pretraining of Deauville classifiers.
Zhang et. al succesfully utilized contrastive language-image pretraining for anomaly identifi-
cation in X-ray images. However, this approach relied on both 100.000+ image-text pairs and
a domain specific BERT model pretrained on clinical text. Since no equivalent BERT weights
were available for Danish medical text, this representation learning technique was deemed
infeasible.
Instead, this thesis adopted a more direct approach of label extraction.
More specifically,
binary abnormality labels were inferred for 15 common anatomical regions. These regions were
chosen based on lymphoma literature, the work of Eyboglu et. al, and preliminary analysis of
the tumor tables [10, 19]. Figure 4.2 shows the 15 regions as a directed tree graph. Each
parent anatomical region ”contains” all of its children regions. For instance, the ”chest” and
”abdominopelvic” (stomach area) regions are contained within the ”full body” region. The
strength in this tree representation will become apparent later.
Figure 4.3 summarizes the major steps in condensing each report down to the 15 binary labels.
Anatomic references were first identified using a custom regular expression model that matched
certain words with certain anatomical regions. Next, an NLP model determined whether the
20
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.2: Left: Anatomical ontology consisting of 15 hierarchically ordered anatomical re-
gions. An arrow from a region A to a region B indicates that region B is a part of region A.
Right: CT slice with selected anatomical regions highlighted.
anatomic reference appeared in context of a normal or abnormal finding.
Consider as an
example the two sentences: ”nothing suspicious in the spleen” and ”multiple active foci in the
spleen”. In both cases, the regular expression model should identify the word ”spleen” as an
anatomical reference to the ”abdominopelvic” region. However, the word ”spleen” appears in
context of a ”normal” finding in the first sentence, but in context of an ”abnormal” finding in
the second sentence. The task of the NLP model was to distinguish such cases based on the
surrounding text. Lastly, the word-level abnormality predictions were condensed to a per-region
binary label indicating whether there were any abnormal findings in said region.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3: The full label extraction pipeline. 1) A RegEx identified anatomical references in
the description, conclusion and table sections. 2) A BERT model then extracted token-level
features. 3) A support vector classifier predicted whether the anatomical region appeared in
context of a normal or abnormal finding. 4) Finally, the token-level predictions were aggregated
to a per-region binary anomaly label.
22
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:33==
4.2.2
Anatomy model
The model responsible for detecting anatomical references consisted of more than 250 hand-
crafted regular expression rules. Although online databases of anatomical terms exist, a data-
driven approach was deemed necessary since the report text exhibited domain-specific abbre-
viations and a mix of Danish, English, and Latin spelling.
Entries in the ”Organ” column of the earlier extracted tumor tables (figure 3.5) helped identify
anatomical terms common to lymphoma investigations. A total of 6365 anatomical terms
were identified and cleaned for prepositional words and non-alphabetic letters. Next, the most
frequent appearing term was identified and matched with one of the 15 anatomical regions. For
instance, the term ”lungeunderlap” was matched with the ”Lungs” region. A regular expression
was then constructed to match inflections of the word in a way that avoided collisions with
previously constructed regular expressions (figure 4.4). For instance, the term ”maxil” (a skull
bone) was initially wrongly matched to the ”Axillary” (armpit) region due to a conflicting
regular expression. The cycle of matching terms with anatomical regions was repeated until
96% of all 6365 entries were matched.
Figure 4.4: The iterative scheme used in developing the RegEx model.
When a term referred to an area spanning multiple anatomical regions, the parent anatomical
region that fully enclosed it was selected. For instance, the term ”fordøjelseskanel” (digestive
tract) refers to an area between the mouth and rectum, so it was paired with the ”Full body”
region. A sanity check was performed by applying the anatomical labels and manually reading
through 30 reports. Unlabelled anatomical references discovered during this process were also
added to the model.
Anatomical labels were then generated for each study report, by applying the finished regular
expressions to the full text. For instance the sentence:
CT skanning af thorax viser pleurale ansamlinger
Would have anatomic word-level labels:
[−, −, −, whole-body, −, lungs, −]
(4.1)
Evaluation method
Due to the lack of a ground truth, no quantitative evaluation was performed of the anatomy
model.
Instead, the frequency of identified terms was stated, and false positive and false
negative examples of a single study were evaluated qualitatively.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
23
==PAGE:34==
4.2.3
Manual abnormality labelling
To automatically classify anatomical references as normal or abnormal, a small subset of the
references was first manually annotated by me (the author). This provided a labelled dataset,
which could be used for training an abnormality classifier. To facilitate the manual annotation,
a simple Jupyter notebook labelling program was developed, as depicted in figure 4.5. During
labelling, each anatomical reference was highlighted in the color corresponding to its anatomical
region, and the user would input either ”0” for normal or ”1” for abnormal. An automatic
label of ”-” was given to words that were not part of an anatomical mention. For example,
the sentence:
Figure 4.5: A screenshot from the labelling tool used to annotate anatomical mentions. Left:
An anatomical mention was highlighted in the color corresponding to its anatomical region.
Next, the user input either 0 for ”normal” or 1 for ”abnormal”. Right: After annotating all
references, the user was prompted to confirm the labels.
Abnormal uptake in left lung and normal uptake in the liver
would be labelled word-wise as follows:
y = [−, −, −, −, 0, −, −, −, −, −, 1]
(4.2)
By the end of each report, the user was prompted to reconfirm their choices, and then the
labels were saved to JSON. I had no prior training in lymphoma investigations, but a standard
set of guidelines was established to ensure consistency.
For an anatomical reference to be classified as abnormal, it had to appear in context of a
finding relating to active cancer or other major disease. For instance, if a lymphoma patient
only contained inactive tumors, they would be in a state of ”complete remission”, by definition.
Complete remission means that all signs of cancer have disappeared as a result of treatment.
24
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:35==
Consequently, a large inactive tumor would be classified as a normal finding. For a region to
be deemed abnormal, the finding also had to occur within said region. For instance:
multiple active foci above the diaphragm
is in fact a normal finding with respect to the diaphragm. Usually such a finding was followed
by sentences detailing the exact locations of the abnormalities. Nevertheless, there were several
ambiguous or borderline cases that required subjective decision-making. For example, degen-
eration of bone density was considered normal while benign (non-malignant cancer) kidney
cysts were deemed abnormal.
A total of 55 reports in the training set and 57 reports in the test set were manually annotated,
corresponding to a combined 4% percent of all 3008 lymphoma studies. Each report contained
an average of 20 anatomical references, and the labelling took approximately 10 working hours.
4.2.4
Abnormality classifier
Using the manually labelled data, a classifier was trained to automatically categorize anatomical
references as either normal, y = 0, or abnormal, y = 1. The goal of this was to obtain a model,
that could label the remaining 96% percent of the dataset. Figure 4.6 depicts the classification
model, which consisted of a BERT encoder and a classification head. Each report was first
processed to wordpiece tokens, (x1, x2, x3, . . .) using a BERT tokenizer, T :
T (report-textk) = (x1, x2, x3, . . . xn)
The wordpiece tokens, were then fed trought a pretrained BERT model, F, with parameters
θF, to extract last layer activations, (z1, z2, z3, . . .):
F(x1, x2, x3, . . . ; θF) = (z1, z2, z3, . . .)
This latent token representation acted as features for a classification head, M. This model
was tasked at predicting whether a token belonged to a normal or abnormal finding:
M(z1, z2, . . . ; θM) = (ˆγ1, ˆγ2, . . .)
Here, ˆγi denotes the abnormality prediction for token i.
Due to the nature of BERT tokenization, each anatomical reference usually consisted of mul-
tiple tokens. Consequently, a majority vote was applied to obtain per-mention abnormality
predictions, (ˆy1, ˆy2, ˆy3, . . .). Letting Aj denote the index set of wordpiece tokens belonging
to anatomical mention j, the reconciliation of token predictions to word predictions can be
formalized like so:
ˆyj = arg max
c∈{0,1}
X
i∈Aj
I(ˆγi = c)
BERT encoders
Four BERT models were investigated to see which would provide a representation most suitable
for the classification head.
• DaBERT: A standard BERT model pretrained on Danish language. This model was
trained by Certainly on approximately 420GB of Danish text from wikipedia, ”hestenet-
tet”, and other online sources [42].
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.6: The abnormality classification model. Report text is tokenized and fed through a
BERT encoder to extract latent features. The features of the wordpiece tokens that belong
to anatomical references, are passed to a classification head, which predicts abnormality on a
token level. A majority vote is applied to tokens of the same anatomical mention.
• RoBERTA: A cross-lingual language model (XLM) pretrained on 2.5 TB of multilingual
text [43].
• ClinicalBERT: A BERT model pretrained on a large corpus of medical text [44]. Although
this model was not pretrained on Danish language, it was theorized that it might give
better representations of the many latin and medical terms appearing in the reports.
• LymBERT A BERT model pretrained on the lymphoma report text.
Huggingface provided weights and tokenizer models for both DaBERT, RoBERTA, and Clini-
calBERT. Previous studies have showed good performance of the DaBERT on multiple Danish
NLP tasks. However, since the model was trained on everyday Danish text, it might lack
the experience needed to properly understand the highly domain-specific medical text. More
formally, the medical text represents a distributional shift in input which could impair gener-
alization of the model to the lymphoma reports. Overcoming this, large language models are
often fine-tuned on the domain-specific text via Masked-Language Modelling and next sen-
tence prediction [10]. In practice this improves the latent representation of the medical text,
which by extension, improves the performance on the downstream language task.
Motivated by this, the LymBERT model was initialized with weights from the best of the other
three BERT models and then finetuned via MLM on the medical report text. Training was
performed on a Titan V graphics card, using a batch size of 64 randomly sampled 512-token
chunks, a learning rate of 10−4, and a masking probability of 20%. Text stemming from reports
in the test-set were not used, but the 1462 separate reports were included in the training set.
A 10% percent hold-out validation split was performed to monitor loss convergence and enable
early stopping.
26
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.7: Splitting of long reports with more than 512 tokens into overlapping 512-token
chunks of text. The two squares ”with” and ”many” represent the 30-word chunk overlap.
The first chunk (green) is responsible for the latent representation of the first 15 overlapping
words. The last chunk (magenta) is responsible for the latent representation of the last 15
overlapping words.
Feature extraction
The token level classification head was tasked at distinguishing between normal and abnormal
anatomical references.
Although the non-anatomical tokens provided vital context for the
anatomical tokens in the BERT encoder, they were unimportant for the classification task.
Therefore, the last layer activations were extracted only for tokens belonging to anatomical
references.
The BERT model was limited to sequences of 512 tokens, yet several reports contained well
above 800 tokens. A simple solution could be to split the tokens in intervals of 512, and
then pass the chunks individually thought the encoder. However, this might remove important
context from anatomical references at the splitting border. Consider for instance the following
split:
[...] multiple malignant lymph nodes in
 the mediastinum. [...]
Without the preceding context, one can only guess whether ”mediastinum” is part of a normal
or abnormal finding. Addressing this a 30-word overlap was introduced to the splits as depicted
in figure 4.7. This ensured that extracted anatomical references were encoded with a suﬀicient
amount of surrounding context.
All BERT encoders had a last layer dimension of 768 and with 55 training reports manually
annotated, the training and validation set contained approximately N = 3400 anatomical
mentions.
Note that the exact number of tokens varied slightly depending on the BERT
variant due to differences in tokenizers. All-together this yielded a training set of latent token
features, Z, and token labels Γ:
Z ∈RN×768
Γ ∈{0, 1}N×1
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
27
==PAGE:38==
Classification head
Several classification heads were investigated for the task of predicting abnormality from the
token features:
• SVC: A support vector classifier (SVC) with a radial basis function.
• LogReg: A logistic regression classifier.
• BERT NER: A standard BERT classification head for Named Entity Recognition (NER).
The named entity recognition task was adapted for token-level abnormality classification.
Note that the previously described feature extraction was not performed for BERT NER as
the training of this model relied on simultaneous BERT encoding and token-level prediction.
For BERT NER, a custom training objective function was used to ignore wordpiece tokens not
part of an anatomical mention. Given cross-entropy loss function L, the BERT encoder and
classifier parameters {θF, θM} were optimized according to the following objective:
{θ∗
F, θ∗
M} = arg min
θF,θM
K
X
k=1
1
nk
nk
X
i=1
I
h
γ(k)
i
∈{0, 1}
i
L

γ(k)
i
, ˆγ(k)
i

Here, nk denotes the number of anatomical mentions in report k and the term I[γk
i ∈{0, 1}]
ignores tokens that are not part of an anatomical reference. As mentioned at the start of section
4.2.4, token-level predictions were consolidated to word-level predictions using majority voting.
Evaluation scheme
It was diﬀicult to directly evaluate and compare the quality of the representations provided by
the four different BERT encoders. Instead, the BERT encoders were assessed by how they
influenced the classification head accuracy.
Five-fold cross-validation was performed on the training set to first select the best BERT
encoder and then the best classification head. Furthermore, a few-shot-learning evaluation was
conducted by training the models on dataset subsets that progressively decreased in size. The
goal of this was to further compare the representations provided by different BERT encoders.
A majority voting baseline model was implemented, which simply predicted most frequently
occurring class (either ”normal” or ”abnormal”) for all anatomical references. The final classi-
fication performance was quantified on the 57 manually annotated test set reports in terms of
accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. Selected examples of failures were qualitatively evaluated.
4.2.5
Label extraction
The combined anatomy and abnormality NLP model was used to automatically annotate the
remaining 2896 reports. Each report text was now accompanied by a list of anatomical labels
(example 4.1) and a predicted abnormality score for each label, (example 4.2). The word-level
abnormality scores, yi, were then consolidated to a single report-level abnormality label, ¯yt, for
each anatomical region, t. These labels reflected whether there were any abnormalities within
their respective regions or any of their child regions (figure 4.4). For instance, a report with
an abnormal finding in the lung would result in the following report-level labels:
¯ylung = ¯ychest = ¯ytotal-body = 1
This label propagation between nested regions was performed to account for the fact that
an anatomical region contains all of its descendant regions. From a logical perspective, an
abnormal finding within the lungs is also an abnormal finding within the chest. In practice,
this might enable later models to predict abnormality at different levels of granularity. Let At
28
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:39==
denote the set of word indices for anatomical references for region t or any of t’s child regions.
The binary report-level label may then be defined by:
¯yt = 1 −
Y
i∈At
(1 −yi)
To summarize, the combined NLP methods resulted in 15 binary abnormality labels for each
of the 3008 lymphoma studies:
¯y = (¯ylungs, ¯ychest, ¯yaxillary, . . .)
4.3
Image feature engineering
The goal of image feature engineering, was to derive tumor-emphasizing data representations
that would help the later image models identify image areas of importance.
4.3.1
Motivation
Deep learning has surpassed manual feature engineering as the de facto tool in several image
tasks, such as image classification and segmentation [26]. One reason for this success is that
neural networks can automatically ”learn” appropriate feature representations of the images.
However, since deep representation learning often requires a lot of data, feature engineering
remains useful in scenarios with sparse datasets. In short, feature engineering allows one to
manually construct certain representations of the data, that one expects to be of value for the
downstream task.
Whether a dataset is large enough for supervised CNN training often comes down to the number
of model parameters, the image dimensions, and the characteristics of the supervision signal
[45, 27]. Classification models, for example, rely on a rather weak single-scalar supervision
signal, and so several thousands of samples are typically required. Deep image-to-image models,
on the other hand, utilize a much stronger supervision signal in the form of an image, so fewer
samples are needed to obtain good results.
Exploiting this, two deep CNN models were trained on auxillary image-to-image tasks. These
models were then used to extract full-volume features for all lymphoma studies. It was theorized
that the inclusion of these features could help alleviate the shortcomings of training Deauville
classifiers on a small dataset. Since Deauville score is determined from tumor activity, both
features were designed to aid in tumor localization.
4.3.2
Healthy Baseline PET model
Motivation
Although PET images differ from patient to patient, there are several recurring patterns. For
instance, each patient will have a spleen in the left side of the body and that spleen will
typically exhibit homegenous FDG activity in some intensity range. Such normal physiological
patterns account for most of the variance in each image, but they are of little relevance to the
Deauville classification task at hand. This is partly due to the fact that the CT image already
provides anatomical context, such as the sizes and locations of organs. If one were able to
remove the normal physiological patterns from the PET signal, pathological patterns, such
as FDG-avid tumors, may stand out more clearly. This technique of ”detrending” the data
has a large history in signal processing and has recently been applied for anomaly detection
in medical images [46, 47, 48]. In short, the methods synthesize a PET image that reflects
healthy FDG uptake. Anomalies may then be identified by areas where this healthy ”baseline”
PET disagrees with the actual PET.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
29
==PAGE:40==
Motivated by this, a healthy baseline PET (sbPET) model was designed to predict healthy FDG
uptake based on the CT image. The model was trained only on patients with Deauville score
1 to encourage the prediction of healthy physiological uptake. Figure 4.9 depicts the U-Net
architecture of the image-to-image deep CNN, which was inspired by the generator of Hinge
et al. [46]. CT image and organ segmentations were provided as input and SUV-normalized
PET images were the targets.
Patches
Image-to-image models can generate an entire PET image from a single pass on the CT image.
However, an alternative approach known as the split-and-stitch method also exists. These so-
called patch-based models are trained on fixed-size 3D patches sampled from the full images
(figure 4.8). At inference time, the synthesized patches are combined to form a complete
PET image. A cubic patch of size X ∈R192×192×64 was used, which significantly reduced the
memory requirements of the deep learning model. During training, patches were only sampled
from areas of the image that showed parts of the body.
Figure 4.8: Patch-based training and inference. Patches (green) were extracted from the CT
volume and passed through the UNet generator, G, to obtain a predicted sbPET patch. During
training, patches are sampled randomly, and during inference, patches are sampled from a grid
and stitched to a full sbPET volume.
Training
To enhance the training process and prevent overfitting, data augmentation was implemented in
the form of random aﬀine transformations. CT images were preprocessed by first clamping voxel
values to [-500, 600] and then rescaling them to the interval [0, 2]. The clamping operation
was performed to enhance the contrast of soft-tissue voxels. The training objective consisted
of a custom L1 loss, which ignored voxel predictions outside the body. Voxel predictions in the
bladder and the brain were also ignored as these regions exhibited both high uptake and high
variance. The loss masking was done via the extracted organ segmentation, and the overall
intent was to make the model focus more on the tissues of actual relevance to lymphoma.
30
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.9: The UNet architecture for the sbPET model. Figure is modified from [49].
The model was trained on (N = 181) PET/CT studies with Deauville 1 from the training set,
for 70.000 step using batch size 4. The initial learning rate of 10−4 was decayed 10-fold at
step 40.000. A total of 10 studies were used for validation and early stopping.
Inference
At inference, CT patches, X, were extracted with a 32 slice overlap, fed through the genera-
tor, G, and averaged to a final full sbPET image ˜Y . In general, the ground truth PET signal
intensity is influenced not only by the patients’ metabolism but also by the FDG dosis, patient
weight, and patient tissue composition. SUV normalization intends to adjust for these con-
founding factors but the procedure is imperfect. Pessimistically, the predicted images, G(X),
may therefore at best be proportional to the SUV ground truth, Y :
G(X) ∝Y
To remediate this, synthetic images were re-scaled by a per-study calculated specific constant,
c:
˜Y = c · G(X)
c ≈
E[Y ]
E[G(X)]
In the above, E[Y ], denotes the sample mean of the pixels in the true PET image, Y . In
short, this post-normalization moved the mean value of the sbPET closer to that of the true
PET. The constant was calculated in a way that tried to reduce the influence of tumorous
uptake when estimating the mean. Appendix algorithm 2 details the exact calculation of the
constant.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
31
==PAGE:42==
Evaluation method
Image quality was quantified in terms of peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR) on the (N = 56)
test studies with Deauville 1.
PSNR = 10 · log10
MAX2
I
MSE

here , MAXI defines the maximum signal intensity across the PET and sbPET images.
Selected subjects were qualitatively evaluated, to assess model behaviour at tumorous tissue.
Later sections will assess the value of the sbPET image as input features.
4.3.3
Tumor segmentation model
Manual tumor segmentation is a very labour intensive process. Having tumor masks is, how-
ever, valuable in the quantified analyses of cancer patients.
Given perfect segmentations,
Deauville score could be calculated automatically, by comparing the signal intensity in seg-
mented tumors with the signal intensity in the liver and mediastinal blood pool.
Motivated by this, an ”nn-UNet” model was trained to perform tumor segmentation on
PET/CT images. nn-UNet is a well-known and widely used framework specifically designed
for training medical image segmentation models [50]. It employs patch-based training, a cus-
tomized UNet architecture, deep supervision, and ensembled predictions. For more compre-
hensive information, please refer to the original article by Isensee et al. [50]. As the lymphoma
dataset lacked ground truth tumor masks, the model was instead trained on the Grand PET
Challenge dataset, which comprised 1000 studies with delineated tumors [51].
Five models were trained; one for each of the folds in a five-fold data split and a dice coeﬀicient
was estimated from the validation splits. Given the number of true positive (TP), false positive
(FP), and false negative (FN) pixel predictions, the Dice coeﬀicient is calculated by:
DICE =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
The five trained models were ensembled, and used to infer tumor masks for the 3008 lymphoma
studies. Selected studies were qualitatively evaluated to assess the robustness of the model.
4.4
Abnormality pretraining
The goal of the abnormality pretraining was to utilize the NLP-extracted labels to pretrain deep
learning models for predicting abnormality from the PET, CT, and feature engineered images.
This pretraining was theorized to be of benefit to the later presented model for Deauville
classification.
4.4.1
Multitask learning
Multiple studies have benefited from multitask learning in settings with sparse labels [10, 30,
27]. The framework allows one to pretrain a network on auxillary tasks, before finetuning
on the downstream task of interest.
In this thesis a scan model was trained on 15 tasks
simultaneously, namely the prediction of anomalies in 15 anatomical regions. To facilitate this,
the NLP-extracted labels were utilized as a ”noisy” supervision signal. The presented methods
were largely inspired by Eybogule et al. [10].
The model inputs consisted of full PET and CT volumes as well as sbPET volumes and tumor
masks, and organ segmentations; X ∈R5×246×246×l, where l is the number of axial image
slices. The images were passed through a shared CNN encoder module, F, with parametrs
θF. This compressed the image channels to a smaller latent representation, Z ∈R64×4×4×l/60.
32
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:43==
The latent tensor then entered T = 15 task-specific decoders, {D1, D2, . . . DT }, which had
parameters: {θD1, θD2, . . . θDT }. Decoder Dt was tasked to predict abnormality in anatomical
region, t. This can be expressed formally:
˜yt = Dt(F(X; θF); θDt)
Where ˜yt denotes the predicted probability of region t being abnormal.
The encoder and
decoders were trained simultaneously, by averaging the cross-entropy loss, L, of each decoder:
θ∗= {θ∗
F, θ∗
D1 . . . θ∗
DT } = arg min
θ∗
1
N
N
X
k=1
1
T
T
X
t=1
L(¯y(k)
t
−˜y(k)
t
)
st.
˜y(k)
t
= Dt(F(X(k); θF); θDt)
∀t, k
Here, ¯y(k)
t
, denotes the abnormality label for region t, which was extracted by the NLP model.
4.4.2
Model architecture
Figure 4.10 depicts the model architecture used for multitask learning.
Figure 4.10: The 3D CNN encoder and decoder. Each blue rectangle represents a layer of
feature channels. Note that the number of input channels depends on the inclusion/exclusion
of sbPET and mask features. Arrows represent (strided) convolutions, instance-norms, Leaky
ReLUs, and Dropout. Layers with identical dimensions comprise a block. *Dropout rate in
each block from left: 0.1, 0.3, 0.4, 0.4, 0.3, 0.3, 0.
The encoder consisted of 20 3D convolutions with leaky ReLU activation, instance norm,
and dropout. The encoder outputted a latent representation with 64 feature channels: Z ∈
R64×4×4×l/60. This tensor may be interpreted as a small ”volume”, in which each voxel has
64 features; zi,j,k ∈R64.
Note that the last dimension, varied in size depending on the
original number of image slices, l. To account for this, each decoder employed a soft-attention
mechanism to turn the Z tensor into a single 64-dimensional vector, a. The soft attention
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
33
==PAGE:44==
began with an inner product between the latent tensor and a learned vector key, w ∈R64×1:
si,j,k = wT zi,j,k
This yielded an attention score, si,j,k, for each compressed voxel. A softmax was applied on
the scores across all dimensions to obtain scaled attention coeﬀiecients that summed to one:
αi,j,k = softmax(si,j,k)
These were used to obtain a weighted linear combination of the latent features:
a =
X
i,j,k
αi,j,kzi,j,k.
This attention mechanism effectively allowed each decoder to attend to certain ”voxels” in the
compressed representation. For instance, the decoder associated with the head region, might
pay extra attention to the voxels located at the ”top” of the volume. Different to ordinary
attention, the 64-dimensional feature, zi,j,k, acts as both key and value vector.
As a final step, the decoder passed the condensed representation, a ∈R64×1, through a
final linear layer with sigmoid activation. This yielded a probability of abnormality for the
corresponding anatomical region.
4.4.3
Training
CT images were preprocessed similarly to the sbPET model. PET and sbPET images were
normalized to the mean activity of the patient’s liver. Since the uptake in this organ is an
important element of the Deauville criteria (section 2.2.1), the normalization was thought to
aid later Deauville finetuning. Of the 2409 in the train-val studies (figure 3.2), 2101 were used
for training and 308 for validation loss monitoring and early stopping. The model was trained
on an A40 GPU (46GB memory) with a batch size of 1 for 100.000 steps (∼50 epochs). This
corresponded to roughly 6 days of continuous training. The small batch size was a consequence
of the GPU memory required by the large input images. Optimization was performed using
Adaptive Moment Estimation (ADAM) and a learning rate of 10−4, which was decayed 10-fold
at step 60.000.
4.4.4
Baseline model
A 2D DenseNet CNN was employed as a baseline model, M2D [52]. The network was initialized
with weights from ImageNet, and finetuned to multitask classification, using 15 classification
heads. The input consisted of frontal MIP images generated for each PET images. Appendix
A.4 includes details on data augmentation and model training. Please see figure 2.4 for an
example of a MIP image.
4.4.5
Evaluation method
Two 3D scan model variants were trained and evaluated:
• MPETCT had input consisting of PET/CT images,
• MFeatures had input consisting of PET/CT images, sbPET images, predicted tumor
segmentations, and organ masks.
Multi-task performance was evaluated on the test set for the manually labeled studies (N = 40)
via Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves and Area Under ROC (AUROC) scores, for
each anatomical region. The same metrics were also calculated for the remaining NLP-labeled
studies (N = 579) of the test set.
34
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:45==
4.5
Deauville classification
This section presents the image models developed for Deauville classification. The benefit of
abnormality pretraining and feature engineering will be investigated.
Initial model experiments revealed Deauville prediction to be challenging problem. Therefore
it was decided to turn the five-class problem into a two-class problem.
In clinic, patients
with Deauville 1-3 are said to be ”responding” to treatment, while Deauville 4-5 are ”non-
responders”. The transition from Deauville 3 to 4 is particularly significant, as it often entails a
change in treatment. Therefore, studies with Deauville 1-3 were grouped in one class, ydv = 0,
and those with Deauville 4-5 were grouped in another, ydv = 1.
4.5.1
Model architecture
The Deauville prediction model used the same architecture as the abnormality-scan model,
however, the 15 multitask decoders were replaced by a single decoder, Ddv for Deauville
prediction.
The Deauville decoder had parameters θDdv and, similar to previous decoders,
consisted of a soft attention layer, a linear layer and a sigmoid activation.
4.5.2
Training
The optimization objective was identical to the multi-task model, however this time, it incor-
porated only the cross-entropy loss of the Deauville head:
θ∗= {θ∗
F, θ∗
Ddv} = arg min
θ∗
1
N
N
X
k=1
L(¯y(k)
dv −˜y(k)
dv )
st.
˜y(k)
dv = Ddv(F(X(k); θF); θDdv)
∀k
Several model variants were trained to investigate the benefit of the feature representations,
and the pretraining:
• MPETCT : The classifier was trained from scratch using PET and CT as input
• MFeature: The classifier was trained from scratch using PET, CT and feature engineered
representations.
• MFeature+Pretrain: The classifier was initialized with encoder weights from the multi-
task model. All model parameters were frozen, except from the decoder and the last
convolutional layer of the encoder.
The total dataset was imbalanced as 72% of the studies with Deauville had scores 1, 2 or 3
(ydv = 0), while only 28% had Deauville 4 or 5 (ydv = 1). Stratified sampling was employed to
increase the probability of sampling from the underrepresented ydv = 1 class during training.
This was done to discourage the model from solely predicting the majority class.
The model was trained with the same optimizer, data preprocessing and data augmentations
as the multi-task model. N = 664 studies were used for training and N = 74 studies were
used for validation monitoring and early stopping. A maximum of 40.000 training steps was
set, however, some model variants were stopped earlier to avoid overfitting. The learning rate
was set to 10−4 and reduced 10-fold at step 20.000.
4.5.3
Baseline model
A 2D DenseNet model was used as a baseline Deauville predictor. MIP images were used as
input, similar to the multi-task baseline. Two baseline variants were tested:
• M2D A 2D DenseNet pretrained on ImageNet and finetuned on Deauville classification
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
35
==PAGE:46==
• M2D+Pretrain A 2D DenseNet pretrained on ImageNet and the abnormality prediction
task before being finetuned on Deauville classification.
4.5.4
Evaluation method
The performances of the two-class Deauville classifiers were quantified on the test studies that
had Deauville scores (N = 180) in terms of a AUROC score. To better compare the results with
Bradshaw et al. sensitivity and specificity scores were calculated by thresholding the predictions
at ˜y > 0.5 [37]. Inspired by Wood et al., the model was deployed for automated triaging [45].
In short, it may be important to quickly identify non-responders such that a new and harsher
treatments can be begun. Addressing this, a hypothetical queue could be imagined, where
PET/CT images are assessed by clinicians in an order determined by the classifier-predicted
risk of being a non-responder. This way, critically ill patients may be assessed first.
Finally, selected mis-classified patients were qualitatively evaluated to investigate sources of
error.
4.6
Age estimation
To further investigate the benefit of pretraining, a second downstream task of age-estimation
was also tested. In contrast to Deauville score, patient age was expected to be more discon-
nected from the abnormality pretraining, since signs of aging is related more to bone density
and tissue composition than to tumors. This age estimation experiment could therefore yield
insights on the extent to which the benefits of abnormality pretraining could apply broadly
across diverse downstream tasks.
Since the metadata of each PET/CT study included the patient age in years, all 3008 lymphoma
studies had age labels. Similar to the Deauville model, a portion of studies were used for
validation loss monitoring and early stopping. Test performance was quantified on the 579
test patients in terms of mean absolute error (MAE) in years, and the fraction of explained
variance.
Four model variants were tested; M2D, M2D+Pretrain, MFeatures, and MFeatures+Pretrain.
Note that in contrary to the Deauville task, all layers of MFeatures+Pretrain remained unfrozen
during age finetuning. This allowed the network to prioritize image features important for age
estimation that might have previously been ignored in abnormality prediction.
36
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:47==
5
Results
5.1
Overview
The presented pipeline comprised three largely independent tasks; extraction of labels from
study reports, tumor-emphasizing feature engineering, and prediction of abnormality, Deauville,
and age from image data. First, the label extraction method was evaluated on the manually
labelled test set of 57 study reports, which contained a total of 1223 mentions. The trained
model was then used to extract 15 binary labels from all reports that had not been manually
annotated. Next, feature engineered synthetic baseline PET images and tumor segmentations
were generated for all lymphoma studies.
Finally using the extracted labels, a CNN was
pretrained on predicting abnormality in the 15 regions. The input to the model consisted of a
PET image, a CT image, and, for some model variants, also the two extracted features. By
changing the decoder head of the CNN, the model was then finetuned on Deauville classification
and age estimation. A variant without abnormality pretraining was also evaluated.
5.2
Label extraction
5.2.1
Anatomical references and manual labelling
The regular expression model identified more than 60.000 anatomical mentions in the 3008
PET/CT study reports. Table 5.1 lists the frequency of mentions for each of the 15 anatomical
regions. The abdominopelvic region had the most mentions, averaging 5.5 per report and
appearing at least once in 98% of all studies.
By comparison, the lung hilars were only
mentioned in 14% of the reports.
Figure 5.1 depicts an example report with anatomical
mentions discovered and categorized by the RegEx model. All but four references were correctly
identified: ”ilica”, ”retrucruralt” (misspelled), ”collumn femoris”, and ”marvhulen”.
Region
Avg. mentions
% studies w.
pr. study
≥1 mention
Abdominopelvic
5.5
98%
Chest
2.2
84%
Full body
2.1
94%
Neck
1.9
77%
Lungs
1.8
75%
Mediastinal
1.7
59%
Bone
1.5
83%
Liver
0.9
50%
Retroperitoneal
0.8
37%
Axillary
0.7
35%
Head
0.4
17%
Inguinal
0.4
24%
Iliac
0.4
19%
Extremeties
0.3
15%
Lung hilars
0.2
14%
Table 5.1: Distribution of anatomical mentions for all 3008 study reports.
Table 5.2 summarizes the number of normal and abnormal findings in the 112 manual an-
notation reports. Approximately half of all anatomical references appeared in context of an
abnormal finding.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.1: Example study report with anatomical references identified and categorized by the
regular expression model.
38
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.2: A manually labelled yet incorrectly labelled test subject. The subject has multiple
malignant nodes in the neck and axillary regions. However, the report does not mention the
axillary region explicitly, so by default, it is given the incorrect label of ”normal”
Figure 5.2 depicts a patient with widespread cancer in the upper body, and the accompanying
report showcases a general flaw with labelling scheme.
Although the report clearly states
”multiple malignant lymph nodes almost everywhere”, the text had no explicit mentions of the
axillary region that could be labelled as abnormal. When later consolidating the manual labels
to 15 binary scores, the axillary region would thus obtain a ground truth label of ”normal”,
which is incorrect.
Assigned label
Train (55 studies)
N = 1209 mentions
Test (57 studies)
N = 1223 mentions
Abnormal (y = 1)
640 (53%)
628 (51%)
Normal (y = 0)
569 (47%)
595 (49%)
Table 5.2: Distribution of labels from the manually labelled study reports. Each study contains
multiple anatomical references (mentions).
5.2.2
Abnormality classification
Utilizing the manually labelled reports, NLP models were trained to classify anatomical men-
tions as either normal or abnormal. Table 5.3 shows the 10-fold cross-validation accuracy of
various encoder and classification head combinations. As mentioned previously, it was diﬀicult
to directly evaluate and compare the quality of the encoder-provided representations in isola-
tion. Instead, the encoders were paired with an SVC classification head, and evaluated on the
classification task. The representations of the ClinicalBERT model led to the highest classifi-
cation accuracy (81.2%) of the three initial encoders, so the fourth encoder, LymBERT , was
initialized with ClinicalBERT weights and trained via MLM as detailed in section 4.2.4. The
LymBERT representations did, however, not improve the accuracy (79.3%), so the standard
ClinicalBERT model was selected as the best encoder. Note that MLM did improve accuracy
by 1-2 percentage points, when performed on the DanBERT and RoBERTa models (results
not shown).
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
39
==PAGE:50==
Performance of Encoder
Model
Val. accuracy
10-fold avg.
LymBERT+SVC
0.793 ± 0.012
ClinicalBERT+SVC
0.812 ± 0.018
DanBERT+SVC
0.780 ± 0.017
RoBERTa+SVC
0.734 ± 0.023
Performance of Classification Heads
Model
Val. accuracy
10-fold avg.
ClinicalBERT+SVC
0.812 ± 0.018
ClinicalBERT+LogReg
0.793 ± 0.016
ClinicalBERT+BERT NER
0.771 ± 0.017
Baseline
0.531 ± 0.028
Table 5.3: Validation accuracy of different BERT encoders (left) and classification heads (right)
on the task of predicting abnormality/normality in N = 1209 anatomical mentions. 10-fold
averages and std. errors are listed for combinations of encoders and classification heads.
With the ClinicalBERT encoding, only a few manually annotated examples were needed to
obtain decent classification head accuracy. Figure 5.3 depicts the effect of training size on
SVC classification head accuracy. Note that accuracy increased with the number of training
examples, but that some encoder representations led to significantly better few-short learners
than others. With only 9 labelled reports, the ClinicalBERT+SVC model achieved the same
accuracy as the RoBERTa+SVC model with 50 labelled reports (77%).
Figure 5.3: Effect of increasing the number of labelled reports used for training the classification
head. The average validation accuracy of 10 simulations is shown and the error bars denote
±1 standard error of the mean.
Table 5.3 (right) states the validation accuracy of the ClinicalBERT encoder with different
classification heads. The SVC classifier achieved the highest accuracy, beating the LogReg,
BERT NER, and Baseline models. The ClinicalBERT model finetuned for token-level clas-
sification (BERT NER), suffered significantly from overfitting despite use of aggressive 50%
dropout (results not shown).
Summing up, the ClinicalBERT encoder and SVC classification head achieved the best vali-
dation accuracy, and this combination was therefore selected for further analysis. Figure 5.4
depicts the validation set and test set confusion matrices. The model achieved higher sensitivity
(90%), but a lower specificity (74%) than Eyuboglu et al. (table 5.4) [10].
40
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Left: Validation confusion matrix for classifying anatomical references as nor-
mal/abnormal. 10-fold cross-validation was performed, and the validation predictions from
each fold were extracted and combined. Right: Confusion matrix on the test set.
Model
Split
N
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
ClinicalBERT+SVC
Val∗
1.209
88.1%
73.1%
81.1%
ClinicalBERT+SVC
Test
1.223
90.0%
74.2%
81.8%
Eyuboglu 2022
Test
16.000∗∗
87.0%
82.2%
−
Table 5.4: Validation and test metrics of the selected ClinicalBERT+SVC model. *Using
predictions from each of the validation 10 folds.
**Estimated by assuming 20 anatomical
mentions per study (800 studies).
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.5 shows the predictions of the model on three hand-picked text snippets of the test
set. In snippet A, the terms ”stationer” and ”milten” are correctly predicted to be abnormal
(red) while ”diapgragma”, ”lever”, and ”knogler” are correctly classified as normal (green).
In snippet B, the ”galdeblæren” mention has ground truth ”normal” but is predicted to be
abnormal. During manual labelling the finding of gall bladder stones (”konkrementer i galde-
blæren”) was not deemed abnormal or malignant enough to warrant an ”abnormal” label. On
the other hand, the presence of adenoma (a tumor that is not cancer) was deemed suﬀiciently
abnormal to warrant a label of ”abnormal”. Sentence C includes two additional examples of
false positives. The two tumors in the mediastinum and heart are visible on the CT scan, but
since the patient is Deauville 1, then by definition, both tumors must be inactive. As stated
in section 4.2.3, the presence of inactive tumors falls under ”normal” findings.
Figure 5.5: NLP model predictions in three text snippets from the test-set. Each anatomical
mention is predicted to be either normal (green) or abnormal (red). A) Correct predictions
in all anatomical mentions. B) The NLP model mistakenly predicts the gall-bladder to be
abnormal. C) Visible tumors are present in the mediastinum and heart, but since the patient
has Deauville 1, the tumors are inactive and thus the findings are ”Normal”.
The ClinicalBERT+SVC model was then deployed to classify anatomical mentions for the
remaining 96% of unlabelled study reports. In each report, the word-level predictions were
consolidated to 15 binary labels - one for each anatomical region. To reiterate, a whole region
was deemed abnormal if there was at least one abnormal mention of the region or of any of its
child regions (figure 4.2). Figure 5.6 depicts the class distribution of model-generated labels.
Regions like the ”Chest”, ”Mediastinum” are often abnormal while ”Extremeties” and ”Head”
regions are mostly normal.
42
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.6: The fraction of studies with abnormal findings in each of the 15 anatomical regions.
Orange: Abnormal findings within the the region itself. Blue: Abnormal findings in the region
or in any of its child regions.
5.3
Image feature engineering
Two feature engineering models were investigated: the sbPET model and the tumor segmen-
tation model.
The synthetic accuracy of the sbPET model was evaulated on the N = 56 test studies with
Deauville 1, where it achieved an average explained variance of 0.678 ± 0.019 and PSNR of
22.5 ± 0.33. The trained model was then used to infer synthetic healthy PET images for all
studies. Figure 5.7 depicts the PET and sbPET of a patient with multiple malignant lymph
nodes. The sbPET images appear similar to the actual PET image in most organs, however,
there is a stark contrast between the two in malignant lymph nodes. Having been trained on
only patients with inactive lymph nodes, the sbPET image shows little to no FDG activity in
the malignant tumors. The relative difference map (green) makes this difference more clear.
The out-of-the-box tumor segmentation pipeline achieved a 5-fold dice score of 0.67 on the
challenge dataset, which is comparable to other studies but worse than state of art methods
lying at 0.76 [53, 54]. The trained model was then used to perform zero-shot inference on
the lymphoma PET/CT images, which yielded tumor segmentation masks for each study.
Although no ground truths were available for this dataset, a manual qualitative inspection
showed a decent segmentation sensitivity with a significant disposition towards false positives.
Figure 5.8 depicts inferred masks for such two cases, where inflammatory uptake is incorrectly
identified as cancer.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.7: PET and Synthetic Baseline PET (sbPET) for a lymphoma patient with multiple
malignant nodes. The sbPET shows no uptake in the nodes which enables a simple relative
difference map (green) to identify areas with abnormal FDG activity.
Figure 5.8: Zero-shot transfer learned tumor segmentations (green) on the lymphoma dataset.
Two common causes of false positives: bone marrow activation due to chemotherapy (left)
and inflammatory uptake caused by other disease (right).
44
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:55==
5.4
Abnormality pretraining
Using the labels extracted by the NLP pipeline, image models were trained on the PET/CT
data to predict abnormality in the 15 anatomical regions. Table 5.5 contains AUROC test
scores averaged over the 15 anatomical regions for the three investigated models; the 2D MIP
DenseNet (M2D), the 3D PET/CT model (MPETCT ), and the 3D PET/CT Model with
feature engineering (MFeatures). Note that the test score was divided according to the studies
that were manually annotated (N = 57) and those that were not (N = 522). Evidently,
the model agreed more with the manually labelled ground truths than with the noisy NLP-
generated ground-truths.
Abnormality Prediction, avg. AUROC
Model
Manually labelled, N = 57
Auto-labelled, N = 522
M2D
0.764
0.695
MPETCT
0.700
0.634
MFeatures
0.788
0.701
Table 5.5: Performance of the models on the abnormality pretraining task. The test split
(N = 579) performance is quantified by the area under the receiver operator characteristic
score, averaged over the 15 anatomical regions. N = 57 test studies have manually annotated
labels, and the other has labels generated by the NLP pipeline.
The model demonstrated significant performance across all anatomical regions as shown in
figure 5.9. MFeatures achieved an AUROC> 0.8 in nine regions: the top regions being the
iliac (0.86), inguinal (0.85) and axillary (0.85). The bone (0.64), lung (0.69), and Extremeties
(0.73) achieved the lowest scores.
Figure 5.9: Region-wise area under receiver operator characteristic (AUROC) scores on the
test set. The test split contains both manually labelled (N=57) and NLP-labelled (N=552)
ground truths.
The addition of the sbPET and tumor segmentation features significantly increased the average
AUROC of the volumetric model (0.700 to 0.788), however, the 2D DenseNet also scored high
(0.764). The average AUROC of this model was diminished by poor performance in the head
(0.52) and ingunial (0.57) regions. Interestingly, these regions are in the proximity to the two
organs with the highest physiological uptake; the brain and bladder (more on this later). Figure
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
45
==PAGE:56==
5.10 depicts the ROC curves of the three models for the head and chest regions.
Overall, the average AUROC of the MFeatures model (0.788) is comparable to that of Eyuboglu
et al. (0.803), although it should be noted that the latter study employed 26 anatomical regions
and a larger dataset (N = 8144).
Figure 5.10: Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves for abnormality prediction in the
Head (left) and Chest (right). Top row: N = 57 manually labelled test studies. Bottom row:
N = 522 NLP-labelled test studies.
Figure 5.11 depicts the 15 regional predictions for a cherry-picked test-subject with multiple
malignant nodes. By thresholding each prediction at ˜y > 0.5, the model correctly classified all
but one region.
46
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.11: Abnormality predictions of 15 anatomical regions for a single test subject. The
prediction is thresholded at ˜y = 0.5 to obtain a normal (N) or abnormal (A) prediction for
each region. Malignant lymph-nodes are circled in selected axial slices.
5.5
Deauville classification
For the two-class Deauville classification, each model type was trained three times with different
seeds to obtain a single ensembled prediction per test study (N = 180). The abnormality
pretrained 2D DenseNet model, M2D+Pretrain, beat the 3D models, achieving an AUROC
test score of 0.791. With a threshold of ˜y > 0.5, this corresponded to a sensitivity of 76%
and a specificity of 69% in distinguishing responders (Deauville 1-3) from non-responders
(Deauville 4-5). This is less than Bradshaw et al., who achieved a 90% sensitiviy and 81%
specificity on the same task. It should however be noted, that the patient inclusion criteria of
this thesis differs significantly from that of Bradshaw et al.
Two-Class Deauville Prediction
Model
N
AUROC
Sensitivity
Specificity
M2D
180
0.729
63%
69%
M2D+Pretrain
180
0.791
76%
68%
MPETCT
180
0.577
54%
53%
MFeatures
180
0.549
58%
45%
MFeatures+Pretrain
180
0.718
66%
60%
Table 5.6: Performance of the different models on the two-class Deauville prediction task. The
test split performance (N = 180) is quantified in terms of the area under the receiver operator
characteristic (AUROC) and the sensitivity and specificity when using a threshold of ˜y > 0.5.
Each model of this thesis was trained three times with different seeds and combined to obtain
ensembeled predictions.
Figure 5.12 depicts the ROC curve for the M2D+Pretrain model on the test set and the
risk-prioritized assessment queue. As mentioned previously, it is important to quickly identify
non-responders such that a new and harsher treatment may be administered. A hypothetical
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
47
==PAGE:58==
queue could be imagined, where PET/CT studies are assessed in an order determined by the
model-predicted risk of being a non-responder. By doing this, physicians would be able to
identify more than 55% of the Non-responders after having assessed just 20% of all awaiting
patients.
Figure 5.12: Analysis of the M2D+Pretrain model on the two-Class Deauville classification task.
Left: Receiver Operator Characteristic for the test set N = 280. Right: Queue simulation
where patients are sorted by the model-predicted risk of being a Non-Responder (Deauville
4-5). By prioritizing PET/CT assessments according to this queue, physicians would be able
to identify more than 55% of the Non-responders after having assessed just 20% of all patients.
Figure 5.13 depicts the most pronounced false positive (ˆy = 0.87, y = 0) and false negative
(ˆy = 0.14, y = 1) of the test set. The false positive subject has large FDG-avid area near
the right kidney which the report states is not cancer, but instead an effect of recent surgery.
The false negative patient has responded to treatment in all previously active lymph nodes.
However, a new small tumor has appeared in the spleen, which makes the patient Deauville
5 by definition since this particular tumor was not visible on the previous scan. Motivated by
this last case, the study reports of all Deauville 5 test studies (N = 32) were manually read.
In 17 (53%) of the studies, the finding of new malignant nodes was the single reason, or a
contributing reason for Deauville 5. Among these reports, four made it clear, that the presence
of new nodes since the last scan was the only reason for Deauville 5. Had the nodes not been
new, these patients would have been Deauville 1-3. By removing those four studies from the
test set, the M2D+Pretrain obtained 0.820 AUROC (before 0.791), 81% sensitivity (before
0.76%) and unchanged specificity of 68%.
48
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.13: Left: The most pronounced false positive (ˆy = 0.87). A large FDG-avid area is
visible close to the right kidney. The study report states that this is due to recent surgery.
Right: The most pronounced false negative (ˆy = 0.14). All malignant lymph nodes from the
previous scan now have activity less than mediastinum. However, a new tumor has appeared
in the spleen, so the patient is Deauville 5.
5.6
Age estimation
Models were trained to predict patient age from the imaging data, to further investigate
the benefit of pretraining and the tradeoffs between 2D and volumetric imaging. Table 2.1
quantifies the test performance (N = 579) in terms of the MAE in years and the fraction
of explained variance. The 3D CNNs significantly outperformed the 2D DenseNet, achieving
an MAE of 5.9 years and an explained variance of 79.9%. Note that both model variants
benefited from abnormality pretraining.
Age Prediction
Model
N
MAE [yrs]
Explained Variance
M2D
579
12.3
25.9%
M2D+Pretrain
579
11.7
30.6%
MFeatures
579
6.7
73.3%
MFeatures+Pretrain
579
5.9
79.9%
Table 5.7: Performance of the different models on the age prediction task. The test split
performance (N = 180) is quantified in terms of the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of years and
explained variance.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:61==
6
Discussion
This thesis proposed an extensive pipeline of label-extraction, feature engineering, model pre-
training, and model finetuning for the multimodal analysis of lymphoma patients. By utilizing
free-text medical reports as noisy labels, it was possible to pretrain convolutional neural network
models on PET/CT images, which led to a better overall performance in two downstream tasks;
two-class Deauville classification and age estimation. Since medical data often lacks strong
supervision signals, this core idea of representation learning and weak supervision may be of
benefit to other machine learning tasks in clinic.
Representation learning techniques may be key to achieving clinically applicable deep learning
models. The lack of labelled training datasets is widely recognized as major barrier in medical
machine learning [55, 10, 56]. One problem is that clinical populations are inherently heteroge-
nous, which necessitates larger dataset sizes to ensure adequate patient representation. Even
when limited to a specific disease, some patients may have a rare disease subtype or suffer from
secondary illnesses. Unless accounted for, machine learning models may thus perform poorly
on important subsets of patients [55]. Obtaining this many labels for volumetric imaging is of-
ten infeasible, as the annotation process requires skilled labor [10]. Addressing these problems,
this thesis instead used representation learning to obtain useful representations directly from
the raw data. More specifically the multimodal nature of medical data was exploited to use
clinical reports as supervision signals for 3008 PET/CT studies. Although the NLP-extracted
labels were noisy, the model achieved a AUROC scores above 0.8 in 9 of the 15 regions (figure
5.9).
The abnormality pretraining was especially strengthened by feature engineering. More specif-
ically, the custom sbPET and tumor mask features aided the model in identifying abnormal
regions of interest, leading to a 0.088 increase in the average AUROC (0.700 to 0.788) (table
5.5).
The NLP pipeline may be a universally cheap method for extracting structured labels from
unstructured text. Using handcrafted regular expressions and a BERT encoder, it was possible
to classify anatomical findings as either normal or abnormal with a high sensitivity of 90% and
a specificity of 74 % (table 5.4). Importantly, the model was trained on only 52 non-export
annotated reports, which makes the methodology easily applicable in other domains. Interest-
ingly, the ClinicalBERT encoder led to the best representations, despite it not being trained on
Danish text. One possible explanation could be that the DanBERT and RoBERTa models are
simply not equipped to process the complex medical terminology of clinical reports. One ob-
servation in support of this is that the Danish wordpiece tokenizer would often split anatomical
terms into very small pieces (figure 4.6). On the other hand, the ClinicalBERT model, which
was trained on English medical terminology, may have benefited from the fact that Danish
and English medical terms are often spelled identically, e.g: ”mediastinum”, ”cancer”, ”tu-
mor”, ”remission”, ”progression”, and ”inflammation”. Figure 5.3 conveys another key finding;
namely that good representations can lead to few shot learners. With only 14 labelled reports
the ClinicalBERT+SVC combination achieves almost 80% cross-validation accuracy.
In context of two-class Deauville classification, the proposed MIP DenseNet showed potential
in distinguishing responders (Deauville 1-3) from non-responders (Deauville 4-5). Importantly,
the CNN benefited significantly from the abnormality-pretraining, which increased the AUROC
from 0.729 to 0.791 (table 5.6). Interestingly, the volumetric models performed worse than the
MIP DenseNet (AUROC 0.718 vs 0.791). Although the MIP contains less information than its
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
51
==PAGE:62==
PET counterpart, the dimensionality reduction may have several benefits. Most importantly,
the MIP preserves the voxels with highest FDG uptake, which in lymphoma investigation, often
coincide tumorous tissue. Consequently, malignant pixels occupy a larger percentage of the
signal compared to in the volumetric image. Furthermore, the 2D image modality enabled the
use of a DenseNet model that was already pretrained on ImageNet. The main limitation of the
MIP format, is that tumors located behind organs of high physiological uptake, such as the
brain and bladder, may be invisible on the MIP image. This exact phenomena was observed
in the abnormality pretraining, where the MIP model performed the worst in the head and
inguinal regions (figure 5.10).
Automated Deauville classification is an inherently diﬀicult task, since the image model must
be able to accurately identify the infiltrated lymph nodes and distinguish between malignant
and reactive FDG uptake. Tumor identification in itself is challenging, with state-of-the art
segmentation models only achieving dice scores around 0.76 [53, 54]. This is problematic,
since a single false positive or false negative tumor-segmentation can be the difference between
Deauville 1 and Deauville 5. To aid the manual investigation, radiologists and nuclear medicine
physicians will often look at previous scans and patient records, to better locate lymph nodes
and to factor in whether the patient has undergone recent surgery or chemotherapy. The image
model is at a disadvantage since it cannot access and benefit from any of this information.
Without the previous scan, for instance, one may only guess whether a tumor is new or not.
The subject in figure 5.13 (right), is an example of this as the small spleen tumor is in fact new,
thus resulting in Deauville 5. Following the removal of just four studies that had Deauville
5 attributed to new nodes, the model sensitivity increased from 0.76 to 0.81 confirming the
detrimental affect of not knowing whether or not a tumor is new. Bradshaw et al. alleviated
some of these problems, by simply excluding all studies that contained any mention of surgery,
secondary cancer, or ambiguous FDG activity [37].
Although this may have increased the
sensitivity and specificity of their model, the training and test cohorts no longer resembled
realistic clinical populations, which makes their results diﬀicult to compare with the work of
this thesis.
Representation learning through weakly supervised pretraining may universally benefit multiple
downstream tasks in medical imaging. This is exemplified by the age-estimation task, for which
the pretraining lowered the MAE by almost a year (table 5.7). In contrast to the Deauville
task, the volumetric models far outperformed the MIP DenseNets (5.9 vs 11.7 years MAE).
This may be due to the fact that aging often manifest as patterns of reduced FDG intensity,
which are not readily captured by the maximum intensity projections [57]. The volumetric CT
image also enabled the model to asses other age-related features like bone-density and the
ratio between fat and muscle tissue.
Some studies have investigated other ways of using representation learning and cross-modality
supervision on raw medical image data. Tang et al. used masked volume inpainting, image
rotation, and other auxillary tasks to pretrain a patch-based network on CT images [11]. Their
model was later finetuned on organ segmentation where it achieved state of the art scores
on two benchmarks.
Zhang et al.
employed contrastive learning on 2D radiographs and
accompanying study reports [15]. After pretraining on 250.000 image-text pairs, their method
only required a fraction of labelled data to be finetuned on four classification tasks.
The
proposed methods of the thesis differs from these studies in two core aspects. Firstly, the scan
model does not employ patches but instead analyzes a full whole-body PET/CT volume in a
single pass. This is important for tasks like Deauville classification, where all tumors of the
body must be assessed before an ultimate prediction can be given. Secondly, the pretraining
task may in itself be useful, since the abnormality predictions could be a way for clinicans to
double-check their findings.
52
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:63==
This thesis contained several limitations, especially in the labelling pipeline. Firstly, only words
identified by the regular expressions could be labelled, so the framework failed to correctly
parse misspelled anatomical references and statements like: ”tumors everywhere”. Secondly,
the manual annotations for both the train and test set were performed by a single non-expert,
who had to subjectively decide whether a finding was normal or abnormal. Certain borderline
cases such as benign tumors, cysts, and age-conditioned loss of bone density may not have
been assigned consistent labels, so the ”ground truth” is an estimate at best.
The whole-body PET/CT images also comprised a limitation, as the sheer data size restricted
the network depth and slowed model iteration. With a batch-size of one and a maximum
image dimension of 246 × 246 × 246, it was possible to train the volumetric CNN on a single
A40 GPU with 46 GB of RAM. However, since it took the model six days to converge on
the pretraining task and two days to converge on the the Deauville task, it was diﬀicult to
try different model architectures, do hyperparameter optimization, and perform k-fold cross-
validation. One solution could be to use down-sampled images in the development phase, and
only later use the full resolution.
The deep CNN models for feature engineering, pretraining, and finetuning all struggled with
distinguishing malignant FDG uptake from inflammatory uptake, which is evident in figures
5.13 and 5.8. The likely explanation is that, unlike clinicians, the models cannot access vital
information regarding previous scans and ongoing treatments. This is perhaps the main limiting
factor in context of the tumor segmentation, and Deauville classification. Other studies have
addressed similar problems by incoorporating multimodal data directly in the model input [38].
The CNN model could for instance receive text from the ”Indication” section of the study
report, as this section usually states whether the patient has had recent chemotherapy.
Despite the limitations of the labelling pipeline, the NLP-extracted labels were of suﬀicient
quality to facilitate the training of an image model for whole-body abnormality prediction
in 15 regions. Although the presence of inflammatory uptake posed a significant challenge
in Deauville classification, the trained MIP model may still be applicable in identifying and
prioritizing the assessment of patients that have a high risk of being non-responders. The age
estimation task further confirmed the benefit of pretraining and the potential of volumetric
images over 2D MIPs. Ultimately, this methodology may supersede the need for expensive
expert annotations in medical machine learning.
6.1
Future perspectives
To address the borderline abnormal findings in the study reports, it could be beneficial to
introduce a ”malignant” class as an extension to the existing ”normal” and ”abnormal” classes.
Thus incidental or less critical findings, such as kidney stones and minor fractures, could fall
under the ”abnormal” category, while significant cancer-related findings would be labeled as
”malignant”. To determine ultimate feasibility of such an approach, the full test set should be
annotated by expert clinicians.
Several aspects relating to the input data should be investigated to strengthen the Deauville
classification. While the MIP data format was promising, the 2D approach suffered in scenarios
where tumors were located in front or behind of the brain and bladder. A possible solution
could be to utilize multiple MIPs projected from different patient angles as suggested by Girum
et al. [58]. The model input could further be augmented by scans from prior studies to enable
the network in distinguishing between new and existing nodes.
Finally, instead of predicting Deauville score, a more individualized method could be imagined
for treatment planning and risk quantification.
By pairing the image data with treatment
records and patient outcomes, a forecasting model could be trained to predict how a specific
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
53
==PAGE:64==
patient would respond to a specific regimen. Such a prognostic model could then be used to
optimize the treatment plan for each patient, leading to more data-driven decision-making in
lymphoma.
54
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to develop a methodology for extracting labels from Danish free
text lymphoma investigation reports and use them to pretrain a neural network that could
be finetuned for Deauville score classification. This was achieved through an extensive multi-
modal pipeline which deployed a large language model, two feature engineering models, and
convolutional neural networks to make predictions based on PET and CT images. The re-
sults showed that it is possible to automatically extract structured labels and that these may
be used to pretrain a model on whole-body abnormality detection. Although the Deauville
classification results were modest, the Deauville task and a secondary age estimation task con-
sistently benefited from the pretraining. Ultimately, the use of automatic label extraction may
be a cost-effective alternative to expert annotations, the lack of which currently impedes many
tasks in medical machine learning. To strengthen the Deauville-classification, further investi-
gations should be made in alternate data representations, model architectures, and pretraining
schemes.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
55
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
R Frood et al. “Baseline PET/CT imaging parameters for prediction of treatment out-
come in Hodgkin and diffuse large B cell lymphoma: a systematic review”. eng. In:
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging 48.10 (2021). Publisher:
Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH, pp. 3198–3220.
[2]
Bente Arboe et al. “The danish national lymphoma registry: Coverage and data quality”.
eng. In: Plos One 11.6 (2016). Ed. by Pei-Yi Chu. Publisher: Public Library of Science,
e0157999.
[3]
Satish Shanbhag and Richard F Ambinder. “Hodgkin lymphoma: A review and update
on recent progress”. eng. In: Ca Cancer Journal for Clinicians 68.2 (2018). Publisher:
Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 116–132.
[4]
Peter M Anderson et al. “Strategies to mitigate chemotherapy and radiation toxicities
that affect eating”. eng. In: Nutrients 13.12 (2021). Publisher: MDPI, p. 4397.
[5]
Sally F Barrington et al. “Role of imaging in the staging and response assessment of
lymphoma: Consensus of the international conference on malignant lymphomas imaging
working group”. eng. In: Journal of Clinical Oncology 32.27 (2014). Publisher: American
Society of Clinical Oncology, pp. 3048–3058.
[6]
G Gutierrez. “Artificial Intelligence in the Intensive Care Unit”. eng. In: Annual Update in
Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine 2020 (2020). Publisher: Springer International
Publishing ISBN: 3030373223, 3030373231, 9783030373221, 9783030373238, pp. 667–
681.
[7]
A. Esteva et al. “Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural net-
works”. In: Nature 542.7639 (2017), pp. 115–118.
[8]
C.N. Ladefoged et al. “A multi-centre evaluation of eleven clinically feasible brain PET/MRI
attenuation correction techniques using a large cohort of patients”. In: NeuroImage 147
(2017), pp. 346–359.
[9]
Chenyi Zeng et al. “Review of Deep Learning Approaches for the Segmentation of Mul-
tiple Sclerosis Lesions on Brain MRI”. In: Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 14 (2020), p. 55.
url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fninf.2020.610967.
[10]
Sabri Eyuboglu et al. “Multi-task weak supervision enables anatomically-resolved abnor-
mality detection in whole-body FDG-PET/CT”. In: Nature Communications 12.1 (Dec.
2021). Publisher: Nature Research.
[11]
Yucheng Tang et al. “Self-Supervised Pre-Training of Swin Transformers for 3D Medical
Image Analysis”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition 2022- (2022). Publisher: IEEE Computer Society
ISBN: 1665469463, 9781665469463, pp. 20698–20708.
[12]
Julián N. Acosta et al. “Multimodal biomedical AI”. In: Nature Medicine (Sept. 2022).
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-022-01981-2.
[13]
Hong Yu Zhou et al. “Generalized radiograph representation learning via cross-supervision
between images and free-text radiology reports”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 4.1
(Jan. 2022). arXiv: 2111.03452 Publisher: Nature Research, pp. 32–40.
[14]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Su-
pervision”. In: CoRR abs/2103.00020 (2021). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
[15]
Yuhao Zhang et al. “Contrastive Learning of Medical Visual Representations from Paired
Images and Text”. In: (Oct. 2020). arXiv: 2010.00747. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.
00747.
56
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:67==
[16]
Jerry L. Prince and Jonathan Links. Medical Imaging Signals and Systems. Publication
Title: ISBN 0-13-065353-5. 2014.
[17]
Chun-Feng Cao et al. “CT Scans and Cancer Risks: A Systematic Review and Dose-
response Meta-analysis”. In: BMC Cancer 22.1 (Nov. 2022), p. 1238. url: https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12885-022-10310-2 (visited on 06/16/2023).
[18]
V. Garibotto et al. “Clinical validity of brain fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission to-
mography as a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease in the context of a structured 5-phase
development framework”. In: Neurobiology of Aging 52 (2017), pp. 183–195.
[19]
Ayesha Jamil and Shiva Kumar R. Mukkamalla. “Lymphoma”. eng. In: StatPearls. Trea-
sure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2023. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK560826/ (visited on 06/16/2023).
[20]
Hongyu Gao and Zimu Gong. “Beyond international prognostic index: Risk stratification
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma”. eng. In: Translational Cancer Research 6.S1 (2017).
Publisher: AME Publishing Company, S210–S216.
[21]
Abass Alavi et al. “Potential and Most Relevant Applications of Total Body PET/CT
Imaging”. en-US. In: Clinical Nuclear Medicine 47.1 (Jan. 2022), p. 43. url: https://
journals.lww.com/nuclearmed/Fulltext/2022/01000/Potential_and_Most_Relevant_
Applications_of_Total.7.aspx (visited on 05/18/2023).
[22]
Niamh M. Long and Clare S. Smith. “Causes and imaging features of false positives
and false negatives on 18F-PET/CT in oncologic imaging”. In: Insights into Imaging
2.6 (Sept. 2011), pp. 679–698. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3259390/ (visited on 06/16/2023).
[23]
Carrie Arnold. “Inside the nascent industry of AI-designed drugs”. en. In: Nature Medicine
(June 2023), pp. 1–4. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-023-02361-0
(visited on 06/20/2023).
[24]
Robin Rombach et al. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models.
arXiv:2112.10752 [cs]. Apr. 2022. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752 (visited on
06/20/2023).
[25]
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs]. Mar. 2023. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/2303.08774 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[26]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[27]
Kevin P. Murphy. Probabilistic Machine Learning: Advanced Topics. MIT Press, 2023.
url: http://probml.github.io/book2.
[28]
Chao Jia et al. Scaling Up Visual and Vision-Language Representation Learning With
Noisy Text Supervision. arXiv:2102.05918 [cs]. June 2021. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
2102.05918 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[29]
Ang Li et al. Learning Visual N-Grams from Web Data. arXiv:1612.09161 [cs]. Aug.
2017. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.09161 (visited on 06/29/2023).
[30]
Dhruv Mahajan et al. Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining. arXiv:1805.00932
[cs]. May 2018. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.00932 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[31]
Tianyang Lin et al. “A survey of transformers”. en. In: AI Open 3 (Jan. 2022), pp. 111–
132. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666651022000146
(visited on 06/20/2023).
[32]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs]. Dec. 2017. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[33]
Jacob Devlin et al. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding. arXiv:1810.04805 [cs]. May 2019. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
04805 (visited on 06/20/2023).
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
57
==PAGE:68==
[34]
Diksha Khurana et al. “Natural language processing: state of the art, current trends and
challenges”. en. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 82.3 (Jan. 2023), pp. 3713–3744.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-13428-4 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[35]
Kexin Huang, Jaan Altosaar, and Rajesh Ranganath. ClinicalBERT: Modeling Clinical
Notes and Predicting Hospital Readmission. arXiv:1904.05342 [cs]. Nov. 2020. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05342 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[36]
Kenneth Enevoldsen, Lasse Hansen, and Kristoffer Nielbo. DaCy: A Unified Framework
for Danish NLP. arXiv:2107.05295 [cs]. July 2021. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.
05295 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[37]
Tyler Bradshaw et al. “Automatic image classification using labels from radiology text
reports: predicting Deauville scores”. In: Journal of Nuclear Medicine 61.supplement 1
(2020). Publisher: Society of Nuclear Medicine, p. 1410. url: https://jnm.snmjournals.
org/content/61/supplement_1/1410.
[38]
Zach Huemann et al. “Multimodal learning and natural language processing for inter-
preting PET images and reports in lymphoma”. en. In: Journal of Nuclear Medicine
63.supplement 2 (June 2022), pp. 3345–3345. url: https://jnm.snmjournals.org/
content/63/supplement_2/3345 (visited on 06/20/2023).
[39]
Sergios Gatidis et al. “A whole-body FDG-PET/CT Dataset with manually annotated
Tumor Lesions”. en. In: Scientific Data 9.1 (Oct. 2022), p. 601. url: https://www.
nature.com/articles/s41597-022-01718-3 (visited on 06/30/2023).
[40]
Yoshie Kurita et al. “The value of Bayesian penalized likelihood reconstruction for im-
proving lesion conspicuity of malignant lung tumors on 18F-FDG PET/CT: comparison
with ordered subset expectation maximization reconstruction incorporating time-of-flight
model and point spread function correction”. en. In: Annals of Nuclear Medicine 34.4
(Apr. 2020), pp. 272–279. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12149-020-01446-x (visited
on 06/28/2023).
[41]
Maltehb/danish-bert-botxo-ner-dane · Hugging Face. June 2023. url: https://huggingface.
co/Maltehb/danish-bert-botxo-ner-dane (visited on 06/30/2023).
[42]
Beatrice Carraro. Certainly has trained the most advanced Danish BERT model to
date. en. May 2021. url: https://certainly.io/blog/danish-bert-model/ (visited on
06/30/2023).
[43]
Alexis Conneau et al. “Unsupervised Cross-lingual Representation Learning at Scale”. In:
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020, pp. 8440–8451. url:
https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.747 (visited on 06/30/2023).
[44]
medicalai/ClinicalBERT · Hugging Face. url: https://huggingface.co/medicalai/
ClinicalBERT (visited on 06/30/2023).
[45]
David A Wood et al. “Deep learning models for triaging hospital head MRI examinations”.
In: Medical Image Analysis 78 (2022), p. 102391. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1361841522000433.
[46]
Christian Hinge et al. “A zero-dose synthetic baseline for the personalized analysis of
[18F]FDG-PET: Application in Alzheimer’s disease”. eng. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience
16 (2022). Publisher: Frontiers Media S.A., p. 1053783.
[47]
Hongyoon Choi et al. “Deep learning only by normal brain PET identify unheralded brain
anomalies”. In: EBIOMEDICINE 43 (May 2019), pp. 447–453.
[48]
Zhaohua Wu et al. “On the trend, detrending, and variability of nonlinear and nonstation-
ary time series”. en. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104.38 (Sept.
2007), pp. 14889–14894. url: https://pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.0701020104
(visited on 06/30/2023).
58
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:69==
[49]
Christian Hinge. “MR-to-PET Synthesis Based on Deep Learning”. PhD thesis. DTU,
2020. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5fe1e2b0d9001d016c292f2a (visited on
06/28/2023).
[50]
Fabian Isensee et al. “nnU-Net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomed-
ical image segmentation”. en. In: Nature Methods 18.2 (Feb. 2021), pp. 203–211. url:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-020-01008-z (visited on 06/30/2023).
[51]
FDG brain analysis, regions, Ian Law.
[52]
Gao Huang et al. Densely Connected Convolutional Networks. arXiv:1608.06993 [cs].
Jan. 2018. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.06993 (visited on 06/29/2023).
[53]
Lars Heiliger et al. AutoPET Challenge: Combining nn-Unet with Swin UNETR Aug-
mented by Maximum Intensity Projection Classifier. en. Sept. 2022. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2209.01112v2 (visited on 06/26/2023).
[54]
Hengzhi Xue et al. 3D PETCT Tumor Lesion Segmentation via GCN Refinement. en.
Feb. 2023. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.12571v1 (visited on 06/26/2023).
[55]
Luke Oakden-Rayner et al. Hidden Stratification Causes Clinically Meaningful Failures
in Machine Learning for Medical Imaging. en. Sept. 2019. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1909.12475v2 (visited on 06/26/2023).
[56]
Jared Dunnmon et al. Cross-Modal Data Programming Enables Rapid Medical Ma-
chine Learning. en. Mar. 2019. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.11101v1 (visited on
06/26/2023).
[57]
Kenji Ishibashi et al. “Longitudinal effects of aging on 18F-FDG distribution in cognitively
normal elderly individuals”. In: Scientific Reports 8 (Aug. 2018), p. 11557. url: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6070529/ (visited on 06/26/2023).
[58]
Kibrom B. Girum et al. “18F-FDG PET Maximum-Intensity Projections and Artificial
Intelligence: A Win-Win Combination to Easily Measure Prognostic Biomarkers in DL-
BCL Patients”. en. In: Journal of Nuclear Medicine 63.12 (Dec. 2022), pp. 1925–1932.
url: https://jnm.snmjournals.org/content/63/12/1925 (visited on 06/29/2023).
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
59
==PAGE:70==
60
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:71==
A
A.1
Data acquisition
Based on figure A.1, the inclusion and exclusion steps were as follows:
Step 1
Patients satisfying the below criteria were included (Figure A.1):
• At least one lymphoma diagnosis (ICD10 C81-C85) diagnosed by a department in Region
Hovedstaden, between 1/1/2017 and 31/09/22.
• At least 18 years of age at the time of diagnosis.
Step 2
Patients were excluded if they had no data in the imaging database of Rigshospitalet. The
remaining patients had one ore more studies in the database, where a study is defined as a
collection of data ”instances” (images, reports, etc.) acquired on the same date.
Step 3
The meta-data exclusion criteria was performed on both data instance level and study level.
The instance level exclusion criteria were:
• PET: The ”Description” field has no key-word that indicates use of a Point Spread
Function (PSF) in image reconstrunction.
• CT: The ”Description” field has no key-word that indicates that it is a diagnostic CT.
• PET and CT: ”Description” field indicates that the scan is not of the whole body.
The study level exclusion criteria were:
• The study date is prior to the patient turning 18.
• The study does not contain at least one instance of each of the types PET, CT, and
DOC (PDF report).
In studies with multiple instances of the same type, the instance with the earliest timestamp
was selected.
Step 5
During the development of the NLP and image analysis methods, some studies were excluded
for reasons relating to data quality and hardware limitations, such as:
• The PDF preprocessor failing to extract any of the following main sections from the
PDF: ”Indication”, ”Description” or ”Conclusion”.
• The postprocessed images exceeding a height of 600 voxels (1.2 meters). This was due
to GPU memory limitations.
• Failed PET reconstruction.
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.1: Data acquisition overview. The bulletpoints define the data associated with each
step. *In step 3, 767 studies were excluded due to missing a specific PET reconstruction type.
The reports of these particular studies and of the studies excluded in step 4 and 5 were still
acquired to bolster the NLP task. Consequently, a total of 4470 PDF reports were used in the
NLP methods.
62
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:73==
A.2
Example of parsed study report
Indication
Indikation: Biopsiverificeret follikulært lymfom fra lymfeknude submandibulært på højre side.
Description
Beskrivelse: PET-scanning: Flere foci med patologisk moderat til kraftigt øget FDG-optagelse
i/i relation til glandula subman- dibularis bilateralt - tolkes som lymfom. Patologisk kraftigt
øget FDG-optagelse i flere lymfeknuder beliggende på venstre side såvel subpektoralt som i
aksillen. Lille focus med øget FDG-akkumulation i venstre halsrod, som vurderes at være be-
liggende i et kar. Derudover ingen foci med patologisk FDG-optagelse. CT-scanning: Helkrops
CT-skanning med intravenøs og peroral kontrast sammenholdt med CT-skanning af collum,
thorax og abdomen fra X: Der er normale forhold intrakranielt. Der kan ikke med sikkerhed
uddifferentieres nogen lymfomer på halsen, specielt ikke i relation til glandula submandibu-
laris. Der er flere patologiske lymfeknuder subpektoral på venstre side og i venstre aksil (se
tumor skema). Der er lette kroniske lungeforandringer basalt men ingen samlede infiltrater
eller pleurale forandringer. Der er normale forhold i mediastinum. Abdominalt genfindes flere
simple cyster i leveren, et knap 3 cm stort blæredivertikel og divertikler i colon sigmoideum.
Organerne er i øvrigt normale. I retroperitoneum omkring aorta genfindes uændret fra tidligere
øget antal ikke enkeltvis forstørrede lymfeknuder. Der er stationært maksimalt 3 cm i diameter
stort infrarenalt aortaaneurisme. Der er ingen malignitetssuspekte skeletale forandringer.
Tables
IMA tumor tabel: Tumor nummer 1: IMA slice nummer 270, organ: Kranielt i venstre axil,
centimetermål: 1,5 x 1,2. Tumor nummer 2: IMA slice nummer 275, organ: Kaudalt venstre
axil, centimetermål: 1,3 x 1,3. Tumor nummer 3: IMA slice nummer 275, organ: Venstresidigt
subpektoralt, centimetermål: 2,0 x 0,8.
Conclusion
Konklusion: Malignitetssuspekte lymfeknuder i/i relation til glandula submandibularis bilateralt
samt på venstre side såvel subpektoralt som i aksillen. Ingen tegn på involvering af milt, lever
eller knoglemarv.
A.3
Normalization algorithm
Algorithm 2 Postnormalization of sbPET images.
Require: y, ˆy, m, ϵ, maxiter
1: cprev ←0
2: for i ←1 to maxiter do
3:
δ ←y −ˆy
4:
mnorm ←m & |δ < 1|
5:
c ←E[y[mnorm]]
E[ˆy[mnorm]]
6:
if |cprev −c| < ϵ then
7:
exit
8:
end if
9:
ˆy ←ˆy · c
10:
cprev ←c
11: end for
12: return c
A.4
Training of MIP DenseNet
The MIP baseline model utilized a DenseNet121 with default weights from ImageNet pre-
training [52]. Data augmentations included color jitter, horizontal flip, elastic deformations
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
63
==PAGE:74==
and aﬀine transformation with up to 10 degrees rotation, 0.05% translation, and 10% scaling.
Images were rescaled to (224,224) and intensity normalized with the same constants as the
original paper [52]. All parameters were frozen, except from the last denselayer, normaliza-
tion layer and classification layer, and the model was trained with ADAM optimization using a
learning rate of 10−4 and a batch size of 32. Stratified sampling was employed for the Deauville
classifier and a validation split was used for loss monitoring and early stopping - similar to the
volumetric models.
64
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
==PAGE:75==
Transformer-based Multimodal Representation Learning in Lymphoma
65
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
