==PAGE:1==
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of
electrolysers under uncertainty in
electricity markets
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electric-
ity markets
Master Thesis
June, 2023
By
Marcel Solé Àvila
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Matematiktorvet, Building 303B, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Dynamical Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering in
Sustainable Energy.
The reader is assumed to have basic knowledge of mathematical modelling and electricity
markets.
Marcel Solé Àvila - s212783
June 16, 2023
ii
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Water electrolysis to produce hydrogen is expected to have rapid growth in the following
years in order to achieve the decarbonisation of different sectors. Therefore, the optimal
integration of such a technology is a problem to solve.
The present thesis gives an overview of the different main water electrolysis technolo-
gies available at the moment: alkaline, polymer electrolyte membrane and solid oxide.
The fundamentals of hydrogen production are analysed in detail in order to present the
characteristics of an electrolyser: how hydrogen is produced, how temperature affects the
operation, and how the eﬀiciency curve behaves. The chosen technology is alkaline water
electrolysis due to its maturity and the focus of the thesis is put on its operation phase in
the day-ahead and balancing electricity markets.
The present work presents different mathematical models to achieve the optimal opera-
tion phase of an electrolyser. The first mathematical model consists of the base model
of an electrolyser, i.e., it models the inputs and outputs of the technology itself without
considering yet electricity markets. The model is capable of describing hydrogen produc-
tion properties, the state transitions (among on, standby and off states) and the reusable
heat derived from the hydrogen production. The second proposed model is an extended
model that includes the participation of the electrolyser in the day-ahead and balancing
electricity markets. The uncertainty of the day-ahead electricity price is taken into ac-
count via stochastic programming, and the balancing market is discussed under different
approaches: perfect foresight and completely unknown information about the direction
and price of the imbalance.
The mathematical models are applied to the electrolyser installed at GreenLab Skive, in
Jutland, Denmark. The electrolyser parameters are fully described as well as the Nord
Pool electricity markets, under which the electrolyser operates.
Results for the first model show the correct modelling of its behaviour and the advantages
of considering three stages as well as the consideration of reusable heat. The extended
model shows that most of the power is bought in the day-ahead electricity market and
how the balancing market is used to buy the missing power to fulfil the minimum demand.
Under perfect foresight, the profit is increased due to the ideal conditions, while in the
unknown information case, it is concluded that the outcome of the operation will depend
on the dominating imbalance direction for the given time horizon studied.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
The present thesis has been a great opportunity to apply the knowledge I have obtained
during my studies at DTU and broaden them, especially in the field of water electrolysers,
the main topic of this MSc thesis.
I would like to express my gratitude to Dominik Franjo Dominkovic, supervisor of this
thesis. His support and guidance have been key to completing the present work. I would
also like to show my sincere appreciation to my co-supervisors Mohsen Banaei and Amos
Schledorn for helping me through the MSc thesis and giving me a hand when I ran into
complications. Likewise to the colleagues at DTU Compute, who have helped me whenever
I needed them.
Last but not least, I much appreciate the support of my friends and family through all of
my master’s studies. Moltes gràcies.
iv
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review and scope of the project
3
2.1
Prior work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Empirical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Impact – innovation and application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Water electrolysis
11
3.1
Alkaline electrolysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Study case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Electricity Market
17
4.1
Day-ahead market
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Intraday market
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Balancing markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.1
Regulating power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.2
Manual reserve market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Forward and futures market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Scenario generation for electricity prices
23
6
Heat
27
6.1
Why model residual heat? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
District heating in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Heat demand and its uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Hydrogen delivery
29
7.1
Hydrogen contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
Hydrogen storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.3
Hydrogen price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Mathematical model
31
8.1
Base electrolyser model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.1.1
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.1.2
Mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8.2
Electrolyser bidding model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8.2.1
Perfect foresight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.2.2
Second stage mathematical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2.3
No prior information of the balancing market . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2.4
The balance direction in known . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
v
==PAGE:8==
9
Results
47
9.1
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
9.2
Base electrolyser model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.2.1
Flexible demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.2.2
Fix demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.2.3
Limits on the heat supplied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9.3
Bidding model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.3.1
Perfect foresight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.3.2
No prior information of the balancing market . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
10 Discussion
71
11 Conclusion
75
12 Future work
77
Bibliography
79
A Flow diagram of the mathematical models
85
B Base model additional results
90
C Bidding modelling additional results
91
C.1 Perfect foresight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.2 No prior information of the balancing market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
D Acronyms
95
vi
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
To mitigate climate change and climate degradation the European Green Deal was pre-
sented in December 2019 by the European Union [1]. Among different actions, it endorses
the implementation of hydrogen technology by its strategy proposal of 8 July 2020. Hy-
drogen implementation is suitable because it can power sectors that are not best fit for
electrification, such as transport, and provide storage to balance variable renewable en-
ergy (VRE) flows.
In [2] a detailed description of hydrogen applications and its storage forms is given. Hydro-
gen is identified as the basic constituent of many chemical compounds with high industrial
and societal value. Combined with nitrogen from the air, hydrogen can be converted to
ammonia—a fertiliser, refrigerant, and key compound for a large variety of pharmaceuti-
cals and chemicals. Combined with carbon dioxide, ammonia gives urea, another valuable
fertiliser which is generally produced today in a polluting and non-sustainable manner.
Hydrogen combined with carbon dioxide can yield methanol. Also, other synthetic fuels
such as diesel or gasoline can be produced by hydrogenation of carbon dioxide, making it
possible to develop a cleaner transportation sector for road vehicles. It is contemplated
that fuel cell vehicles will become widely available in the coming decades. This will require
a major increase in hydrogen demand, for example, by hundreds of millions of tonnes an-
nually. Upgrading of heavy oil and oil sands is another need for hydrogen, as well it is for
steel production, plastics and construction materials.
Storage balance of VRE via hydrogen production can be done in different ways depending
on the storage size needed. For large-scale storage, applied in the vicinity of industrial
producers of hydrogen, it can be injected into exhausted oil wells, underground cavers, or
salt domes. For medium-size storage, it is more indicated to store it in other chemical
products, such as ammonia, urea or methanol. In small-scale storage, indicated for vehicles
or similar small-scale applications, storage is diﬀicult. Different methods exist such as
cryogenic liquid storage at standard pressure, compressed gas at standard temperature
and high pressure, physical binding of hydrogen molecules in a solid material matrix, and
chemical binding to synthesise a denser chemical that can later release hydrogen.
The anticipated applications and storage capabilities of hydrogen are projected to facilitate
its integration into the energy system and facilitate its decolonisation. For this reason,
the European Green Deal plans to build at least 6 GW of renewable hydrogen electrolysis
in the EU, and the production of up to one million tones of renewable hydrogen until
2024. From 2025 to 2030, the capacity is expected to grow to at least 40 GW and the
production should achieve ten million tons of renewable hydrogen, in the EU. From 2030
to 2050, renewable hydrogen technologies should reach maturity and be deployed at large-
scale across all hard-to-decarbonise sectors [3]. Denmark is following this trend and plans
to build an electrolysis capacity between 4 GW and 6 GW by 2030, as approved in March
2022 [4].
The expansion of renewable hydrogen comes with uncertainty since it will be powered
mainly by VRE, especially by solar PV and wind energy. If the electrolyser is connected
to the grid, hydrogen production has its main costs in electricity purchased [5], but it
also produces excess usable heat. Therefore, different operational strategies for running
electrolysers might have a significant influence on their profitability. For these reasons
being able to predict and operate accordingly to the intrinsic variable nature of these
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
1
==PAGE:10==
sources is crucial for the correct integration of the technology into the grid and energy
system.
Hydrogen production from water electrolysis is not yet a mature technology as described
in the European Green Deal. Different types of electrolysers exist and multiple operation
strategies are applied in order to run them, e.g. to maximise profitability or renewable
hydrogen production. Consequently, further research is needed to improve its implemen-
tation, which is relevant since it can be applicable to the upcoming hydrogen projects that
are planned, both at the Danish and European scales.
2
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review and scope of the
project
2.1
Prior work
Extensive research exists on electrolysers and it is increasing due to the plans on expanding
the technology as mentioned in the previous chapter. Next, the state of the art is reviewed
and the research gap is identified.
Work presented on [6] analyses different degrees of modelling complexity of electrolyzers.
Models with three and two states are considered, each one with levels of linearization
ranging from 1 to 12 piece-wise linear function for hydrogen production. It is concluded
that the most exact model (three states and 12 linearization segments) should be used for
operational problems, which do not lead to excessively high computational burden. This
work does not take into account the heat output of the electrolyser when evaluating the
different models and how it impacts it.
In [7] different bidding strategies for alkaline electrolysis cells (AEC) and polymer elec-
trolyte membrane electrolysis cells (PEMEC) are analysed for the Nord Pool electricity
market. A forecast based on neural network (NN) is used to determine day-ahead elec-
tricity prices, and both the operational and economic performance of the electrolysers
are analysed. Results show that price-independent order (PIO) to control H2 production
helped to avoid the purchase of expensive and carbon-intense electricity during peak loads,
but it also reduced the total number of operating hours compared to price-dependent or-
der (PDO). For this reason, PDO resulted in a lower levelised cost of hydrogen (LCOH),
and better economic performance in terms of cashflows and net present value (NPV). Even
though this better economic performance, the PIO bidding strategy is proven to perform
better with unexpected hourly price behaviour. The bidding strategies presented only
consider electricity from the spot market of the Nord Pool power exchange in a day-ahead
trading scheme (planned purchasing of large volumes) and from the regulated market
(purchasing smaller volumes during system downtime), electricity from VRE such as wind
and solar PV is not considered. Storage and low-temperature waste heat (60 °C) recovery
are considered; a fixed price for heat sales is used. Oxygen revenues are excluded because
market saturation could occur with the expansion of this technology. An improvement
would be to incorporate uncertainty on the heat revenues instead of assuming that all heat
can be delivered at a fixed price.
In [8] a grid-connected electrolyser is analysed. The study shows how the operational and
economic performance of an electrolyser is affected if a simultaneous factor with VRE is
imposed. I.e., hydrogen production is constrained to VRE electricity availability. The
focus of this factor is to avoid producing hydrogen with high-intensive carbon electric-
ity. Results show that if policymakers introduce a simultaneity obligation two goals are
weighted: ramping up the hydrogen market in the long term and preventing emissions
from the power sector in the short term.
A low simultaneity, or even the absence of
such an obligation, is in favour of a more dynamic hydrogen market ramp-up, while a
strict simultaneity ensures to mitigate emissions, but may lead to less investment. It is
also concluded that other emission abatement measures, like the EU emissions trading
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
3
==PAGE:12==
system (ETS), might overcome the simultaneous obligation and make it obsolete. Thus,
incorporating a simultaneity factor is not seen as a primordial factor in the model but
emissions should be considered as they might play an important role in the future.
Work presented in [5] introduces a state-of-the-art model of an electrolyser with a high
level of detail. The model takes into account the varying eﬀiciency, the temperature vari-
ation and the state transitions (between three states). GreenLab Skive (GLS) electrolyser
is used as a reference. The model operation is validated in the day-ahead market and
further research on the operation of the electrolyser in balancing and reserve markets is
needed. Also, further work is needed on how to incorporate the presented model into
studies concerning the development of different operation strategies, e.g. green hydrogen
production vs. price-driven vs. revenue stacking, and how to hedge risks associated with
intermittent renewables and energy prices for operation and planning control.
The article [9] uses the model presented in [5]. The work proposes a decision-making frame-
work, which is based on data-driven robust chance constrained programming (DRCCP).
This framework also includes multi-layer perception neural network (MLPNN) for wind
power and spot electricity price prediction. Such a DRCCP-based decision framework
(DDF) is then applied to make the day-ahead decision for a wind/hydrogen system. Re-
sults show how the daily operation using this method leads to lower operation costs. The
method is applied to the operation of the electrolyser for a time window of 30 days. Pos-
sible future work includes the consideration of participation in intra-day and real-time
markets for such a system. This will make the optimisation a multi-stage problem. The
prediction will be continually updated, and a rolling optimisation or model predictive
control method can be adopted. Ancillary services to the grid could also be considered
to obtain extra revenue for a wind/hydrogen system. In another aspect, a probabilistic
prediction is relevant to the data-driven method. Another improvement of this work is
to replace the deterministic prediction with a probabilistic prediction for better decision-
making.
Work in [10] presents the integration of an electrolyser with waste heat recovery to an
active distribution network (ADN) (network with VRE and loads) and a district heat-
ing network (DHN) supplied by combined heat and power (CHP) units. This leads to a
min-max robust optimisation model. Its objective is to minimise the excess energy in the
system and the total trade cost in the aspect of the system operator, which consists of
three terms: (i) electricity cost, (ii) natural gas cost, and (iii) income for sold hydrogen.
This work shows how advantageous is to use waste heat from electrolysers in order to
reduce CPH usage and, therefore, avoid excess electricity to the grid when the CPH units
use heat demand as the set point. Even though a robust optimisation is proposed, its
objective is not the bidding of the electrolyser, but rather the whole grid operation. Thus,
proposing a model that only controls the electrolyser rather than the whole system but at
the same time considering a DHN or waste heat management, would be a unique approach.
Work presented in [11] analyses the impact of using different power sources on the cost
of production and the carbon intensity of hydrogen produced by a Power-to-X system.
GLS, the world’s first industrial facility with Power-to-X integrated into an industrial
symbiosis network, has been used as a case study. Results show that the wind/PV/grid-
connected electrolyser for hydrogen and electricity production can reduce operational costs
4
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:13==
and emissions, and have a net present value (NPV) twice higher than a grid-connected
electrolyser. In addition, the carbon emission coeﬀicient for this configuration is lower
than Steam Methane Reforming (SMR). A sensitivity analysis shows the optimal capac-
ity ratio between the renewables and the electrolyser. A plateau is identified for carbon
emission performance, suggesting a wind/grid-connected electrolyser setup with a wind
farm three times the size of the electrolyser. Results demonstrate that hydrogen cost is
not competitive yet with the electricity, suggesting an investment cost reduction but can
be competitive with the current hydrogen price if the wind capacity is less than three times
the electrolyser capacity. Further work based on this paper is to explore future scenarios
with increased renewable penetration in the Danish electricity market and how this may
potentially affect emissions and revenues over the lifetime of the GLS plant.
Authors
identify further stochastic analyses as appropriate to identify the impact of these factors
on the outcomes.
Work in [12] presents different future business models for a multi-megawatt alkaline water
electrolyser. For the analysis, current and future spot market prices are calculated using
a fundamental simulation approach and reserve market prices using an agent-based simu-
lation. Results show that high spreads between the spot market and hydrogen market are
harnessed in the most eﬀicient and flexible way with cross-commodity arbitrage trading,
making cross-commodity arbitrage trading slightly more promising than the provision of
positive aFRR or mFRR. This work considers cross-commodity arbitrage between elec-
tricity and hydrogen but disregards the revenue from residual heat, thus a contribution
would be to incorporate it and analyse how cross-commodity arbitrage is affected by it.
The MSc thesis [13] analysis the participation of an electrolyser in the Danish electricity
market, with a focus on the Danish day-ahead market and regulating power markets, in
2016. Intraday and financial markets are not considered in this thesis. Also, no investiga-
tion on how much flexibility is available from different hydrogen customers is made. The
electrolyser model uses a constant eﬀiciency, which is a simplistic approach to electrolyser
modelling. Also, no heat is contemplated. Thus, a more detailed model for the electrolyser
and heat revenues is a contribution to this work.
Work presented in [14] analyses the optimal planning of a hydrogen refuelling station par-
ticipating in the electricity and balancing markets. The problem proposed is a mix integer
non-linear problem (MINLP) that investigates the optimal operational plans considering
the nonlinear behaviour of an electrolyser and grid costs calculation model. Results show
that participation in the reserve market increase revenues and reduces the hydrogen break-
even price. A contribution would be the implementation of the analysis but using a MILP
instead of a MINLP.
In [15] an electricity allocation strategy for on-site hydrogen refuelling stations in the for-
ward and spot markets is presented. Four different participation modes are considered
to be available for the on-site hydrogen refuelling station (OHRS): (i) participate in the
spot market and future market, (ii) only participate in the spot market, (iii) adopt time of
use (TOU) rates, and (iv) adopt an electricity tariff. The model presented is a two-stage
stochastic optimisation model, initially MINLP but relaxed to a MILP but making the
thermodynamics of the electrolyzer linear. The results show that participating in multiple
markets can usually achieve the lowest LCOH. The model is tested with a numerical ex-
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
5
==PAGE:14==
periment on the actual data of Jiangsu Province, China. For the OHRS with an Alkaline
electrolysis (AEL), increasing both the capacity of the electrolyser and the storage is ben-
eficial. A larger electrolyser is more economical when adopting the TOU price mechanism.
A contribution to this work would be the incorporation of heat revenue. Moreover, the
approach presented differs from the proposed one since refuelling stations modelling is not
considered, so no dispenser is modelled.
Work in [16] studies the optimal heat recovery during polymer electrolyte membrane elec-
trolysis. The main aim of this paper is to develop an optimal control model, which max-
imises the removal of the undesired heat from the polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM)
water electrolysis and transferring it to the hot water storage tank (HWST), whilst en-
suring suﬀicient hydrogen is being produced. The second aim of the study is to assess
how the control model can yield a prolonged membrane lifespan, by controlling its op-
erating temperature, which is one of the highest cost items in this type of system. The
optimal solution is achieved by using the Solving Constrained Integer Programs (SCIP)
solver in the optimisation toolbox in MATLAB. The objective function has two principal
terms weighted by two respective factors; the first one is the priority set to maximise the
hydrogen production, while the second weighs the priority to maximise the storage tank
temperature. The PEM water electrolysis system only considers two states (on/off), no
stand-by mode is implemented in the model. For the study case, an electrolyser coupled
with solar PV panels and a high-pressure hydrogen vessel is assumed as part of the system.
The electrolyser is installed in a stand-alone house with two occupants. Heat recovery is
used for household applications while hydrogen production might be used to refuel a car.
This study differs from others because the electrolyser considered is not a multi-megawatt
one, but rather an electrolyser that could be installed in a household and be powered only
by solar PV. Thus, analysing the megawatt system equivalent is an improvement to the
presented work.
In [17] a two-stage stochastic optimisation methodology for the operation of a chloralkali
electrolyser under variable day-ahead market and frequency containment reserves (FCR)
market prices. The uncertainty which is introduced in the study is due to the forecast of
market prices and not due to bid acceptance, either by the day-ahead or FCR market.
Even though this study does not focus on water electrolysis for hydrogen production, it
presents interesting models to predict FRC and day-ahead market prices. Among other
points, the study concludes that two-stage stochastic modelling can serve as a solution to
the introduced uncertainties. Including the uncertainty of the bid acceptance is a contri-
bution to this work.
In [18] the crucial performance of electrolysers fed by variable and intermittent renewable
electricity is studied to assess green hydrogen production. The study focuses on 2019 data
for a 100 MW onshore wind plant and a 12.5 MW solar plant, both in the south of Italy.
This setup is compared to the simulated feeding of an electrolyser from two separate plants
through the network, one 50 MW wind and the other 50 MW solar. It is shown that it
has no great differences in the great variability in the feeding power as compared to the
performance of actual plants. The authors state that data on cold or hot starting times,
the ability to follow steep up-or-down ramps, and the minimum safe operating power below
which the operation is stopped, are lacking. Also, they mention it is diﬀicult to find data
on the possible degradation of performances for this operation with variable input power
with respect to the usual experience of electrolysers fed by a strong network. Conclusions
6
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:15==
are based on the diﬀiculty to define a successful, long-lasting and cost-eﬀicient operation
of the current electrolysers fed by dedicated wind and/or solar plants not connected to
the power grid. Thus, proposing such a model would be a contribution in order to fill this
gap.
In [19] it is presented how optimal operation strategies can be incorporated into investment
planning for wind/electrolyser systems. The study presents a two-layer multi-objective op-
timisation. The inner layer focuses on the system operation strategies using MILP, while
the outer layer solves the multi-objective problem concerning system planning and optimal
operation. To solve it a non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGAII) is utilised.
The main indicators to analyse the trade-off between operational and system planning
optimisation are the internal rate of return (IRR), and NPV. How these two indicators
change is analysed based on the optimal electrolyser and hydrogen tank capacity, under
two different strategies: (i) maximisation of profits, (ii) maximisation of green hydrogen
production. Results are based on the GreenLab Skive configuration, AEC electrolyser.
They show how under the first strategy the electricity spot price is the most determining
factor, while in the second strategy, the availability of wind energy is the limiting factor.
The sensitivity analysis on the influence of sizing reveals that both the increase of the
electrolyser installed capacity and hydrogen storage size result in enhanced system perfor-
mance irrespective of the chosen objective. Nevertheless, the capacity installed for both
reaches an optimum where further capacity supposes a reduction of the IRR even though
economic profits or green hydrogen production increases. It depends on the stakeholders
to decide if the additional benefit is worth having a lower IRR. Further research based
on this work can be analysing additional revenues from added flexibility (e.g., from the
balancing market) and how sustainability can play a role if a green hydrogen premium is
considered (which is not in the work presented but stated as an option).
Work in [20] presents a techno-economic model of plants with PV sources connected to
electrolysis in a self-consumption regime that considers the dynamics of electrolysis sys-
tems. The model calculates the optimal dispatch of the electrolyser tanking into account
three states (production, standby and idle), the load factor production, and the energy im-
ports and exports to the grid. The study case is applied to a solar PV plant of 6 MW and a
2 MW PEM electrolyser. The model presented does not include a detailed specification of
the electrolyser (i.e., a simplified model is used) but all the economic aspects are included
in the optimisation. It consists of a MINLP which is solved for a determined time window
using GAMS and a branch-and-cut method to break the non-linear problem (NLP) model
into a list of subproblems. The self-consumption regime is imposed by a set of constraints
to ensure that VRE is used to produce hydrogen. This can be dropped in order to sell
the VRE to the grid. An important emphasis is made on solar PV seasonality and how
it will affect the economic performance of the plant, and how the electrolyser needs to be
sized accordingly. The article concludes that the model is a useful decision-support tool
to operate hydrogen production facilities like the one presented. A contribution to this
work would be to use a completely linear model to ensure a global optimal.
The article [21] presents optimal planning for an electricity-hydrogen integrated energy
system considering power to hydrogen and heat and seasonal storage.
An electricity-
hydrogen integrated energy system (EH-IES) robust planning model is proposed with
the considerations of generation-load uncertainty, unit N-1 contingency, and electricity-
hydrogen flexible conversion process, forming a three-layer model (min-max-min) with
binary recourse variables, which can provide a feasible planning result for the energy sys-
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
7
==PAGE:16==
tem with ultra-high renewable energy penetration. Moreover, a power to hydrogen and
heat (P2HH) model that includes both the thermoelectric process and the startup/shut-
down operation constraints for the electrolysis device (ED) is developed to achieve the
flexible outputs of hydrogen and heat energy. A hybrid energy storage model with two
operating modes is established in the EH-IES to achieve both intraday and interday energy
complementary. The selected electrolyser technology is AEC, and the model is solved us-
ing a nested column-and-constraint generation algorithm. This model presents advantages
and effectiveness compared to other models after applying it to a study case. Even though
the approach of this work is complete it considers a limited electricity and heat grid with
a limited number of loads. I.e., it does not approach the electrolyser as a participant in
the electricity market and in the heat supply grid. Thus, being able to develop a model
that considers both in a general way would be an improvement.
After analysing the literature the contributions of the present work can be established
Contributions to the literature are:
• Model the participation of the electrolyser in the day-ahead market.
• Model the electrolyser performance in the balancing market.
• Consider the reusable heat of the electrolyser and how it can affect its operation.
• Study of different bidding strategies based on the state-of-the-art model of an elec-
trolyser.
• Model the participation of the electrolyser in the power and heat grid in a general
way so the model can be applied to different electrolyser configurations.
2.2
Problem statement
The MSc thesis aims to solve the following problems.
• How can the operation of water electrolysis units be optimised under different sources
of uncertainty?
• How operation of water electrolysis units is optimised when considering both elec-
tricity and heat?
• How do different operation strategies perform under market conditions?
2.2.1
Research goals and methods
To solve the research question the objective of the proposed MSc thesis is the definition
of a mathematical model that optimises the operation phase of a water electrolysis unit.
The model implements different sources of uncertainty:
• day-ahead electricity prices
• heat demand
The methods used are stochastic programming and MILP. Commercial solvers will be used
to solve the model. No algorithm is proposed.
It is relevant to note that the proposed model focuses on the operation plan that the owner
of the electrolyser would apply. Optimisation of the whole system where the electrolyser
is integrated is not considered, neither the capacities of the considered technologies. Only
the electrolyser unit and its inputs and outputs flows are considered.
I.e., the model
8
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:17==
presented is intended to be for private economic assessment rather than a socioeconomic
assessment. Note also that the proposed MSc thesis is theoretical and no experiments will
be conducted on a real electrolyser, the corresponding electrolyser model is used in order
to avoid them.
2.2.2
Empirical considerations
Although the MSc thesis focuses on a mathematical model of an electrolyser, it is based
on the system configuration present at GreenLab Skive, where a hybrid power plant with
solar PV and wind energy is coupled with an industrial park, where among other facilities,
and electrolyser is installed. Present literature that has studied the GLS system makes
available data about the technology used. Contact with GLS has also been established
and it is considered as another source of data. Data regarding other aspects like electricity
and heat prices can be found online from the corresponding market operators or TSO (e.g.
NoordPool, ENTSO-E). It is expected to use some assumptions regarding the electrolyser
unit since it is not yet a completely mature technology, meaning data is not fully available.
2.2.3
Impact – innovation and application
The main contribution of this MSc thesis is to propose a mathematical model that can
improve the operational planning of a water electrolysis unit under different scenarios
and strategies. The impact of the model is expected to be broad since electrolysers are
expanding in order to decarbonise the energy system. Moreover, the model is expected to
be applicable in already existing configurations of electrolysers plus VRE, like the one in
GLS.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:19==
3
Water electrolysis
Renewable hydrogen production is obtained via an electrolyser which decomposes water
into hydrogen and oxygen via electrical power. The overall water-splitting reaction, as
introduced in [2], is the following:
H2O + 2F →H2(g) + 1
2O2(g)
(3.1)
Where F represents 1 mol of electric charge defined by the Faraday constant F = NAe,
where NA = 6.022·1023 is the Avogadro’s number and e = 1.602·10−19C is the elementary
charge; thus F = 96, 490 C mol−1. Equation (3.1) states than an electric charge of 2F is
needed for electrolising 1 mol of water.
This reaction can be obtained using different technologies, but a general layout for all of
them can be presented, as in fig. 3.1. It shows how an electrolyser consists of two electrodes
(anode and cathode) and an electrolyte, which are connected to a direct current (DC)
power supply.
Figure 3.1: General electrolyser layout [2]
The three main technologies for water electrolysis are: alkaline electrolysis cells (AEC),
polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis cells (PEMEC) or for short polymer electrolyte
membrane (PEM), and solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOEC). A brief introduction for each
technology from [22] and [23] is summarised next.
Alkaline electrolysis is a mature technology, which has been applied for large-scale hydro-
gen production at the MW-scale at the beginning of the 20th century. The cell operates
between 65 °C and 90 °C and can work at either atmospheric pressure or pressurised at up
to 35 bar. The electrodes are immersed in a liquid electrolyte separated by a diaphragm.
The electrolyte is usually a 25–30% aqueous KOH solution. It is circulated for the re-
moval of product gas bubbles and heat either by pumps or by natural circulation due
to temperature gradients and buoyancy of the gas bubbles. The electrolyte is stored in
two separate drums for each product gas (O2 and H2) which serve also as a gas-liquid-
separator. The product gas quality after drying is typically in the range of 99.5–99.9% for
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
11
==PAGE:20==
H2 and 99–99.8% for O2. Critical contamination (flammable mixture) in partial loading
has to be avoided by proper control of the lye circulation. This critical point supposes
that a minimum operating partial load of 15% - 20% needs to be assured.
PEM electrolysis was introduced by General Electrics in the 1960s. They use a proton ex-
change membrane that separates the two half-cells, and the electrodes are usually directly
mounted on the membrane forming the membrane electrode assembly.
The corrosive
acidic regime provided by the proton exchange membrane requires the use of noble metal
catalysts like iridium for the anode and platinum for the cathode. Water is supplied at the
anode (partly transported to the cathode side due to the electroosmotic effect). The poly-
mer electrolyte membrane features a very low cross-permeation, yielding hydrogen with
higher purity than AEC, typically greater than 99.99% H2 after hydrogen drying. PEM
electrolysis features a compact module design due to the solid electrolyte and high current
density operation compared to AEC. The structural properties of the solid electrolyte also
allow a high differential pressure between the hydrogen and the oxygen side, currently up
to 350 bar.
SOEC development began in the USA in the 1970s by General Electric and Brookhaven
National Laboratory, followed by Dornier in Germany. In recent years, SOEL has at-
tracted increasing interest due to the progress in solid-oxide fuel cells and the motivation
of carbon-neutral energy scenarios. SOEC operates at temperatures of 700–900 °C. High-
temperature operation results in higher eﬀiciencies than AEC or PEM but implies a re-
markable challenge for material stability. The eﬀiciency advantages result from improved
kinetics, thermodynamics favouring internal heat utilisation at higher temperatures and
the conversion of steam.
Alkaline electrolysis is chosen due to its maturity and because it is expanding fast in real-
case scenarios. For example, in GLS an alkaline electrolyser of 12 MW has been installed
and it is planned to scale the project to 100 MW [24, 25]. Moreover, due to its maturity,
more data is available for AEC.
3.1
Alkaline electrolysis
Further characteristics of AEC are introduced next to give an overview of the chosen
technology.
During the operation of the electrolyser, three states can be distinguished.
1. On state: production of hydrogen takes place in this state where the electrolyser
operates within its load range. The power set point depends on the temperature
and current. The minimum power in this state is around 15%-20% of the nominal
power [6].
2. Standby state: hydrogen is not produced in this state. The electricity consumption
of the electrolyser is required to maintain the temperature and pressure of the elec-
trolyser to go in on state without any major ramping time. It is estimated that a
warm start-up takes between 60 and 300 seconds [23].
3. Off state: the electrolyser is completely turned off and the power consumption is
almost non-existing. Anti-freezing systems and other control systems are the only
demand points in this state; due to their low demand power, they are disregarded.
From this state, a start-up takes up to 2 hours, since temperature and pressure drop
after turning off the asset [23].
The current-voltage curve of an electrolyser is one of its most important characteristics.
12
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:21==
It describes the voltage change with increasing current density within the cells. In [26]
a widely used empirical model is introduced describing such a relationship taking into
account voltage, current density and operating temperature. In order to take pressure
effects into account it was modified in [27]. For a given temperature and pressure the cell
voltage can be described as:
Ucell = Urev + K1i + K2log(K3i + 1)
(3.2)
where Ucell is the cell voltage as a function of the current density i, in A m−2. The term
Urev refers to the voltage when the density current is zero, i.e., the open-circuit voltage
which is also called reversible voltage. Its calculation is empirical [5]:
Urev = 1.5184 −1.5421 · 10−3T + 9.523 · 10−5T ln (T) + 9.84 · 10−8T 2
(3.3)
where T is the temperature (in °C). The parameters K1, K2 and K3 are constants from
experimental data presented in [27]. K1 and K3 are a function of the temperature, while
K2 is considered as constant.
K1 = r1 + r2T
(3.4)
K3 = t1 + t2
T + t3
T 2
(3.5)
The values are shown in table 3.1
Table 3.1: Parameters for the Ucell function
Coeﬀicient
Value
Unit
r1
4.45153 · 10−5
Ωm2
r2
6.88874 · 10−9
Ωm2°C−1
K2
0.33824
V
t1
0.01539
m2A−1
t2
2.00181
m2°CA−1
t3
15.24178
m2°C2A−1
The power consumed by the electrolyser, pe can be calculated as:
pe = UcelliA
(3.6)
where A is the total area of the cells of the electrolyser, in m2. The hydrogen production
is linked to the power consumption via the current consumption, as the Faraday law
calculates [6, 5]:
h = 3600ηfMH2iA
2F
(3.7)
where h is the hydrogen production in kg/h, ηf is the Faraday eﬀiciency, and MH2 is the
molar mass of hydrogen in kg/mol. Note that the current, I, is described as I = iA.
Faraday’s eﬀiciency can be expressed by [27]:
ηf =
(
i2
f1 + i2
)
f2
(3.8)
where f1 and f2 are functions of the temperature, proportional to a set of constants, see
table 3.2. ηf represents the relation between the hydrogen production and the theoretical
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
13
==PAGE:22==
hydrogen production that could be produced under the same conditions. This relation is
close to one for high-density currents, but it decreases significantly for partial loading [27].
f1 = f11 + f12T
(3.9)
f2 = f21 + f22T
(3.10)
Table 3.2: Faraday’s eﬀiciency constants
Coeﬀicient
Value
Unit
f11
478645.74
A2m−4
f12
−2953.15
A2m−4°C−1
f21
1.03960
−
f22
−0.00104
°C−1
The eﬀiciency of the electrolyser depends on the produced hydrogen given the input power.
Note that this relation depends on the input density current (i).
ηE = h
pe
(3.11)
The eﬀiciency curve is shown in fig. 3.2. It shows that it is higher with a low current load.
Also, increasing temperature lowers the cell voltage raising the eﬀiciency, and therefore
is preferred for operation. The maximum eﬀiciency is obtained at a rather low operating
point, at 32.02 % of the nominal power.
This non-linear behaviour is kept because a
constant ratio between input electricity and hydrogen production is not assumed and
because Faraday’s eﬀiciency is not assumed to be 1 for all the load range, as it is done
in [5]. Note that this graph has been generated for the parameters of the electrolyser
installed at GLS.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.6
0.62
0.64
0.66
90°C
80°C
70°C
60°C
40°C
Power (MW)
Efficiency (%)
Figure 3.2: Electrolyser eﬀiciency based on temperature
Moreover, AEC is characterised to usually operate at low temperatures, up to 90 °C and
at a pressure up to 35 bar [23]. The eﬀiciency values from fig. 3.2 are in line with the values
presented in [23], where for a 100% input electric power, 66.5% corresponds to hydrogen
production.
It also specifies that the rest of the input electric power corresponds to:
14
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:23==
12.1% to the difference between hydrogen high heating and low heating values, 16.4% to
recoverable heat, and 5% to unrecoverable heat. The reusable heat temperature is around
50 °C.
The non-linearity also appears between power and hydrogen production, which also de-
pends on the electrolyser’s temperature. Figure 3.3 shows the actual relation between
them, where the black line indicates the ideal linear profile. Work presented in [6] com-
pared how the number of segments of a piece-wise linearization curve of the hydrogen
production affected the results. The model that is presented is taken as a reference point
for the present work, keeping this way an electrolyser model that is linear.
2
4
6
8
10
12
50
100
150
200
90°C
80°C
70°C
60°C
40°C
Linear 40°C
Power (MW)
H2 production (kg/h)
Figure 3.3: Electrolyser eﬀiciency based on temperature
3.2
Study case
In fig. 3.4 the study case with the elements of the electrolysis system considered is pre-
sented.
H2O
H2  storage 
H2  sold
Oxygen
Electrical grid
Heat grid
Compressor
Expansion 
valve
Figure 3.4: System overview. Icons from [28].
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:25==
4
Electricity Market
The electricity market in Denmark is operated by Nord Pool, which also operates in 15
other countries. The electricity market in Denmark is split in two, DK1 and DK2, as can
be seen in fig. 4.1.
Figure 4.1: DK1 and DK2 [29]
There are various markets with different products in the power sector, they can be classified
as capacity markets, energy markets, and ancillary service markets. The focus of this
project is on the energy markets, which are described next.
4.1
Day-ahead market
In the day-ahead market, electricity can be sold or bought for the following 24 hours in a
closed auction. Orders are matched to maximise social welfare while taking into account
the network constraints imposed by the TSO.
The closed auction is run daily. At 10:00 CET the available capacities on interconnectors
and in the grid are published. Until 12:00 CET buyers and sellers have time to submit
their final bids to Nord Pool for the auction of delivery of the following day. Then, sub-
mitted orders are matched in the pan-European marker coupling process using a common
algorithm called Euphemia. In the matching process, the single price for each hour and
each bidding zone is set where the curves for the selling price and buy price meet, taking
into account network constraints. Hourly market clearing prices are typically announced
to the market at 12:45 CET or later [30].
Note that the electrolyser is considered a price-taker in the day-ahead market since it does
not have any market power. I.e., its participation in the market will not change the market
outcome because the offered power does not make an impact if the market is considered
big enough.
There are several order types that can be made in the day-ahead market [31], described
next.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
17
==PAGE:26==
Single hourly order
This type constitutes the largest share of the day-ahead trading orders. The purchase
and/or sale volume for each hour is specified and it can vary between a price-independent
order (PIO) and a price-dependent order (PDO).
Single hourly orders need to be defined with at least two price steps, minimum price (-500
€) and maximum price (4000 €). PIO are orders where buy or sell volume will be placed
at the extremes of the two steps for all the intended hours. A schedule of delivery for the
placed volume is received for the given hour regardless of the price level.
On the other hand, PDO can be defined with several steps. In these orders, a certain
volume is matched with a certain price. Nord Pool makes a linear interpolation of the
volumes between adjacent pair of submitted price steps to find the correct traded volume
for that member.
Block Orders
A block order consists of a specified volume and price for a certain number of consecutive
hours within the same day. There are four types of block orders: regular, linked, curtailable
and profiled.
These orders are used by power plant operators to run the facilities continuously for a
certain amount of hours and avoid start-up and shutdown costs. They are usually used
by CHP operators, but their application to electrolysers is limited since the start-up costs
and ramping constraints are not as unfavourably as CHP or other similar technologies.
Regular block orders
Regular block orders are either fully accepted or fully rejected. They represent the most
common block order used in the market.
To determine its acceptance or rejection the price is compared with the average day-ahead
price for the hours to which the block order applies. The criteria for purchased blocks are
the following:
• if the order price of a purchase block is higher than the average day-head price during
the specified block period, then the block is fully accepted,
• if the order price of a purchase block is lower than the average day-ahead area price
during the specified block period, then the block will be fully rejected and,
• if the order price of a purchase block is exactly the average day-ahead area price
during the specified block period, then the block can either be fully accepted or fully
rejected.
For sales block orders the first two criteria change. For the block order to be accepted the
order price needs to be lower than the average; if higher, the sales block will be rejected.
Linked block orders
Block orders can be linked together, i.e., one block order acceptance can be made depen-
dent on the acceptance of other block orders.
This type of order is useful when fixed costs are high. If these costs are covered, the
producer can produce at a low marginal cost. Therefore, the mother block is priced high
and if accepted, then the child blocks can be priced cheaper to allocate the extra volume
with low marginal cost. Note that the child blocks can only be accepted if the mother
block is accepted.
18
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:27==
Curtailable block orders
Curtailable orders offer more flexibility than regular block orders via a user-defined minimum
acceptance ratio (MAR). This ratio indicates how much of the block order can be cur-
tailed. Thus, a block order with MAR=1 is a regular block order, while a block order with
MAR=0 can be fully curtailed. It is important to note that MAR is constant for all the
hours of the block and that curtailable blocks can be linked.
Profile block orders
In this order, volume can differ over the entire time span of the block. In Denmark, the
minimum order duration is three hours. The start and stop times of the block order are
user-defined. Profile block orders can be linked and they may be curtailable, with the
same MAR for all periods. The volume-weighted average price over the duration of the
order is used to determine its acceptance. The price is compared with the block volume
weighted average day-ahead price for the periods for which the block is defined.
Note that it is forbidden to have both buy and sell volumes in the same block.
Handling of blocks
The selection of block orders is done by price. Sale orders with the lowest price precede,
and purchase orders with the highest price precede.
Nord Pool chooses a combination of block orders that maximises social welfare. This might
lead to a situation where a block order with an acceptable price level is not accepted (also
known as a paradoxically rejected block). It is also specified, by Nord Pool, that if two
block orders are identical, but only one can be accepted, the selection is done randomly.
Also, blocks with the same price but higher volume do not necessarily precede.
4.2
Intraday market
The trade in the intraday market differs from the day-ahead market because it is contin-
uous. I.e., it runs 24h a day, 365 days a year. There is no auction since it is a market
paid-as-bid; market participants trade sell and purchase orders continuously and as soon as
a buy and sell order matches, the trade is executed [32]. The intraday market in Denmark
is cleared by Nord Pool.
Electricity can be traded up to one hour before delivery (in some cases right up until the
delivery hour) and through different products: block, hourly, half-hourly or quarter-hourly
contracts. This allows for a high level of flexibility, which market participants use to make
last-minute adjustments and to balance their positions closer to real-time in order to not
incur penalties for not delivering the corresponding electricity bid in the day-ahead market.
Cross-border trading is essential in intraday trading, and European intraday markets are
connected via the Single Intraday Coupling (SIDC) solution. The SIDC creates a single
EU cross-zonal intraday electricity market, enabling market participants all over Europe
to work together to trade electricity continuously. The trading is limited by the capacity
available determined by the TSOs after the flow results of the day-ahead auction are known
[33, 34].
4.3
Balancing markets
4.3.1
Regulating power
The energy balancing market (or regulating power energy market) is used to always make
generation equal demand. This market is cleared by the system operator, Energinet in
Denmark, instead of the market operator, Nord Pool. It is needed because there might
be supply-demand imbalances in the power system, for example, due to errors in the
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
19
==PAGE:28==
forecast of renewable and loads, unexpected failures of generation (or transmission assets),
transmission limits, etc. Therefore, the balancing market takes over from the day-ahead
and intraday market one hour before the operation hour.
The basic functioning of the balancing market is the following: in case there is a power
deficit in the system (e.g. a generator fails), then upregulation is needed, i.e., increased
production by the generation side and/or reduced consumption by the demand side. On
the other hand, if there is a power excess (e.g., overproduction by renewable generators)
downward regulation is needed, i.e., reduced production by the generation side and/or
increased consumption by the demand side.
Bids into the regulating power market can be submitted or modified up to 45 minutes
before operation. A bid must include a minimum of 5 MW and a maximum of 50 MW, it
can cover either one plant or a group of smaller plants. The bid must be fully activated
within a maximum of 15 minutes since its activation signal by Energinet.
The regulating power energy market settles under the one price scheme, i.e., all units are
paid the price of the most expensive bid which is called following a merit-order curve. The
upregulation bids are characterised by having a minimum price as low as the day-ahead
spot price, while the downregulation bids have their maximum value at mentioned spot
price. The price limits of the regulating power market differ from the day-ahead market,
the maximum and minimum offer for energy bids is ± 10,000 €/MWh. Note that these
limits are dynamic if the intraday price exceeds the quantity of ± 9,999 €/MWh. In that
case, the upregulation and downregulation maximum and minimum price bids would be
set to the intraday price.
The regulation power market can have multiple bids activated within the same hour with
different balance directions. I.e., within an hour there can be upregulation and downregu-
lation periods. The sum of the bids of each direction will determine the overall direction of
the market for such hour or if there was regulation at all. If both up and downregulation
bids are activated during an operating hour, both types are settled at the marginal price,
i.e., the settlement price of the regulating market.
In the case that the activation of a given bid lasts less than 10 minutes, the bid in question
is to be paid at the offered price (paid-as-bid). The same happens for special regulation
bids, which are bids selected by Energinet that do not follow the price order curve [35].
Based on the functioning of the regulating market, a series of assumptions are made:
• The electrolyser is assumed to be part of a portfolio with more assets in the same
bidding area so that a minimum offer of 5 MW can be made at all times.
• The electrolyser is a price taker in the regulating power market. I.e., it receives the
price set by the marginal unit at each hour and its bid can not modify the regulating
power price.
• The bidding price of the electrolyser is the day-ahead price. I.e., the minimum price
for upregulation bids and the maximum price for downregulation bids. This ensures
that the electrolyser is first dispatched in the regulating market in case of imbalance.
• If the electrolyser is activated in the balancing market, it is done for the whole hour
of operation. There is no public data on how long activation lasts for each bid, so
this is considered the best approach.
• The electrolyser is scheduled in accordance with the dominating direction of the
imbalance for the given hour of operation. Bids that go in the opposite direction are
20
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:29==
not considered possible.
4.3.2
Manual reserve market
The manual reserve market is a capacity market set up by Energinet to ensure there
is enough capacity to keep the functioning of the regulation power market. Energinet
announces the expected reserve need, stated in MW, for the upcoming day of operation
at its website no later than 9.00 on the day before the day of operation. Bids can be
submitted at the latest at 9.30 h the day before operation. They need to be upregulation
or downregulation and they are given as €/MW or DKK/MW, and between 5 MW and
50 MW.
Energinet sorts the bids for upward and downward regulation capacity according to the
price per MW and covers its need by selecting bids according to increasing price. Upreg-
ulation bids are paid all the same price, which is determined by the highest bid accepted.
The same goes for downregulation bids. At 10.00 h., Energinet informs regarding the bids
acceptance and the availability payment that is received accordingly.
Once a bid is accepted, there are two obligations for the market participant:
1. the market participant must subsequently submit a bid for activating all the capacity
for which an availability payment is obtained. I.e., a bid into the regulating power
market needs to be made so the capacity that is paid in the mFRR market can be
activated accordingly,
2. the capacity must be available.
The first obligation only concerns the hours for which an availability payment is made.
The market participant can submit bids for the activation of capacity in excess of the
capacity for which availability is obtained, but never in deficit, otherwise, penalties occur.
E.g., if 2 MW are bid in the mFRR market (assuming both up and downregulation), at
least a bid of 2 MWh needs to be submitted in the regulation power market (also for both
directions), but a higher energy bid (MWh) can also be submitted. The second obligation
means that no availability payment will be made if the capacity is not available [36].
It is important to distinguish the regulating power market and the mFRR market. The
first is the market that remunerates the energy volumes (MWh) for balancing the grid,
while the latter remunerates for the availability of capacity (MW). The participation of
the electrolyser in the mFRR market is not analysed in this project.
4.4
Forward and futures market
Both are financial contracts used for price hedging and risk management. The contracts
can have different lifespans of up to 10 years. They also cover daily, weekly, monthly,
quarterly and annual contracts.
Differently from the other markets, there is no physical delivery of electricity for financial
power market contracts. Thus, technical conditions such as grid congestion and access to
capacity are also not taken into account in this type of contract.
Note that forward contracts are privately negotiated between a buyer and a seller, as such,
they don’t trade on an exchange. It is an over-the-counter contract. This allows for more
flexibility on the terms and conditions of the contract. It has a higher risk than a future
contract since the counter-party is responsible for remitting the payment. On the contrary,
a future contract is a standardised contract that trades on stock exchanges. The risk is
low since they guarantee payment on the agreed-upon date [37].
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:31==
5
Scenario generation for electricity
prices
The electrolyser operation is done under an uncertain framework because of the unknown
electricity prices. Even though they are uncertain, certain trends are followed. Thus, if
uncertainty is taken into account in the model the decisions made with it are less sensitive
to the unknown data.
The functioning of the electricity market is well known, but this does not make it certain.
The energy prices are known after producers sell offers and consumers’ buying offers are
matched; because of this, it is not possible for the operator of the electrolyser to make a
fully informed bid on the volume and price of its asset. Moreover, there is a time gap of
one day between the market agreement and the actual delivery of electricity which needs
to be faced with a certain degree of uncertainty since the availability of the power source
can change unexpectedly.
As mentioned, the electrolyser is a price-taker in the market. This makes it possible to
consider the electricity price as an uncertain parameter.
I.e., the market price is not
dependent on the electrolyser bid.
The electricity price is a continuous random parameter. It can take any value between
-500 €/MWh and 4000 €/MWh [38]. This makes the stochastic problem also continuous,
where all the possible combinations are infinite. Therefore, an approximation based on a
discrete stochastic program is needed. The approximation consists of having a set of N
possible realisations with their corresponding probability of occurrence. These scenarios
need to perform as close as possible to the optimal solution of the continuous process,
which is impossible to calculate because, as said, it contains an infinite number of combi-
nations. The quality of the discrete representation can be evaluated taking into account
sample stability, i.e., having an optimal solution with the minimum difference possible
when changing scenario sets [39].
The chosen method to create the mentioned set of scenarios is bootstrapping with re-
placement. It is a statistical procedure that resamples a single dataset to create many
simulated samples. This allows for the calculation of statistical properties (e.g. mean)
[40]. This approach is preferred in front of the large sample approach, where a unique
sample is taken from the population, or the Monte Carlo sampling since an assumption of
the distribution of the data is not needed.
Bootstrapping consists of picking a sample, S, of size n. Then, the sampling distribution
is created by resampling observations with replacement from S, m times, with each resam-
pled set having the same amount of observations of the original set, i.e., n observations.
If sampled appropriately, S is representative of the population. Apart from calculating
statistical properties of the underlying data, bootstrapping can be used for scenario gener-
ation if each sample is used as a scenario with an equiprobable probability of occurrence.
Although this is a common method used, it has a main disadvantage when used in time
series, like electricity prices: the autocorrelation information of the data is lost because of
the replacement.
The autocorrelation information refers to the pattern that can be observed in electricity
prices. These are daily and seasonal. Daily patterns are based on the hours most people
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
23
==PAGE:32==
are home (mornings and evenings), and seasonal patterns vary between countries based
on the weather. Losing this information would not resemble the original continuous data
and the purpose of a discrete representation would not be reached. Thus, a variation of
bootstrapping is used: block bootstrapping. This method consists of splitting the time
series into non-overlapping blocks and then sampling the blocks instead of the individual
observations. In this case, the non-overlapping blocks are chosen as 24-hour blocks, which
are sampled instead of the hourly prices, which are the individual observations. The sample
size is set to 2000. They are two types of blocks considered, blocks corresponding to work
days (Monday-Friday) and blocks corresponding to the weekends (Saturday-Sunday). This
is done because it is known that usually, the consumption follows the same pattern at the
weekends but at a lower level of consumption.
The generated electricity price scenarios are based on prices ranging from 2017 until 2019,
and prices from 2022. Where data from the ENTSO-E Transparency Platform is used [41].
Note that the years considered do not include macroeconomic effects like the pandemic
COVID-19 and the following energy crisis. It is not considered suitable to include these
macroeconomic effects because the market prices are already decreasing, confirming that
it was a temporary behaviour of the market to have such high prices.
The next step after scenario generation is scenario reduction. It is needed since a large
number of scenarios increase the complexity of the stochastic program as well as its com-
putational time. Therefore, the objective is to reduce the generated scenario to a set of
representative ones.
The technique used is clustering, where each cluster needs to group scenarios with a high
degree of similarity while having different clusters as dissimilar as possible. There are two
centroid-based clustering algorithms, the centroid and the cluster centre.
• k-means clustering: clusters the data into k clusters where the centroid is the mean
of all the data objects in the cluster.
• k-medoid clustering: data is grouped into clusters where the centroid is chosen from
the data objects.
The method of k-medoids is preferred since k-means leads to less volatile scenarios because
each time period is averaged. I.e., it results in scenarios with a smoothed electricity price
curve, which deviates from reality. On the other hand, k-medoids returns original scenarios
by selecting the most representative ones.
The k-medeoids algorithm is explained next. To initialise the clustering the number of
desired clusters, k, is set arbitrarily. Then, k data points from all data, D, are set as
medoids, M. Next, the distances between the medoids and the other data points are
calculated, and each point is assigned to the cluster of its nearest medoid.
The total
distance is calculated, and the medoids are swapped. If the swap results in a lower distance,
a new swap is made. If not, the algorithm has converged and the final medoids have been
found. Note that different distances can be used, e.g., euclidean, Manhattan. For the
present study, the euclidean distance is used.
The scenario reduction modifies the probabilities of each scenario. The starting point was a
large set of scenarios with equal probability of occurrence. When clustered, a redistribution
of probabilities occurs and the cluster probability is the sum of the probabilities of scenarios
in the cluster. In this case, since the original scenarios were equiprobable, the probability
of each cluster depends only on the number of scenarios assigned to it. The more scenarios
assigned, the higher probability of the occurrence.
24
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:33==
The number of scenarios used is 200. The reasoning behind this is found in chapter 9
since the number of scenarios is selected based on the performance of the model and the
results that are obtained when changing them. Moreover, scenarios are not depicted in a
graph because of their large number. Having 200 electricity price profiles in a graph would
not be clear, but the scenarios have to be visualised as the 200 most representative price
profiles given the data considered.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:35==
6
Heat
This chapter introduces the necessity of considering residual heat, the heat prices, demand
and uncertainty that are considered in the electrolyser operation.
6.1
Why model residual heat?
The residual heat of AEC electrolysers is usually discarded in many research papers since
it is not being used in AEC installations. Newer publications have started modelling the
residual heat in electrolysers since sector coupling is viewed as a necessity to achieve the
green transition and avoid CO2 emissions [5, 7, 42].
The technology data catalogue of renewable fuels from the Danish Energy Agency and
Energinet calculates that the recoverable heat of AEC is 16.4% of the input electric power.
This percentage could be seen as a low value, meaning that heat could be dissipated to
the ambient, but when analysing the electrolyser’s evolution from a few kW to 12 MW at
GreenLab Skive, and a projection to build an electrolyser of 100 MW, it becomes relevant
to use this waste heat.
The amount of heat usable from the electrolyser will be modelled later on, and this section
focuses on other relevant aspects concerning heat.
6.2
District heating in Denmark
District heating in Denmark is the preferred method of heating. In 2020, around 65% of
the residential buildings had district heating as a heat supply. Moreover, the tendency is
increasing, since in 1980 only around 35% used it [43].
Heat is characterised by not having spot prices like electricity, i.e., there is not a common
market where bids and purchases are met. Its ownership is based on cooperatives (typically
AMBA), municipal ownership, and private ownership. Each of one supplied 34%, 60% and
6% respectively. The final price of district heating is based on the ’non-profit principle’,
which states that the final price of heating for the end user comprises the total and
accumulated costs of providing heat supply, i.e., the total cost of fuels and fuel transport,
heat distribution networks and storage facilities, investments, maintenance, operations
and management, service, workspace and oﬀices, and legal advice and consulting [43].
In 2019 heat price was 97 €/MWh [43], and the current 2023 price for private consumers is
610.40 DKK/MWh, or 81.94 €/MWh (1 DKK = 0.1342 €) [44]. Other price references can
be found in the literature indicating that the revenue from residual heat is much smaller.
The work in [7], from 2020, uses 25 €/MWh as a fixed price for heat sales. Moreover, work
in [42], from 2022, uses a heat price that stays rather constant around 10 €/MWh but no
specific source is given, just that it is a value from a district heating operator in Denmark.
From the 1st of January 2022 the Danish Energy Agency is responsible for setting a price
ceiling for excess heat [45]. The executive order that lays down rules on a price ceiling
for excess heat, indicates that the facility that utilises and delivers excess heat must have
a capacity of 0.25 MW or more to be considered under such regulation [46]. This is the
case with the present electrolyser; its delivery of excess heat goes up to around 2 MW.
The price ceiling is set 50% based on the production of a 6 MW wood chip boiler and
50% on the production of a 10 MW air-to-water heat pump. The production costs will
be fixed based on data from the technology catalogue of the Danish Energy Agency and
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
27
==PAGE:36==
the socio-economic assumptions it makes. For 2023 the price ceiling is set to 93 DKK/GJ
[47], i.e., 334.8 DKK/MWh (44.93 €/MWh). This price is taken for the heat revenue of
the electrolyser, but since it is a price cap, any lower price would also be correct.
6.3
Heat demand and its uncertainty
Heat demand is not included as a demand profile in this work because heat is not the
main product of the electrolyser, but as will be seen in the mathematical model, heat
demand is included to be covered daily between a minimum and maximum value of heat
(MWh). This upper bound is included because it is expected that electrolysers can deliver
their residual heat into the district heating grid at a fixed price but with a limitation (to
not saturate the heat grid). Thus, if the limit of heat is reached, the electrolyser needs
to stop operating, use the heat for in-site demands (if any), or dissipate the heat to the
atmosphere (if allowed).
For the present work, it is assumed that the heat can only be delivered to the district heat-
ing grid, and it is analysed how different heat limitations affect the electrolyser operation.
Note that these heat limitations do not compromise the minimum hydrogen production
to fulfil the demand. I.e., the heat cap is never low enough to make the electrolyser go in
an idle state before the minimum hydrogen demand is reached.
The heat uncertainty is limited to the boundaries given for heat production of the elec-
trolyser. A more detailed analysis could be made using real district heating demands or
actual heat delivery contracts for electrolysers. There is a lack of data for these cases
because public data is not available as in electricity markets, thus its application is out of
the scope of the project.
28
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:37==
7
Hydrogen delivery
This chapter introduces how hydrogen can be delivered in the study case considered. It
also introduces the hydrogen price used in this thesis.
7.1
Hydrogen contracts
Hydrogen contracts can be divided into two main types: flexible and fixed.
Flexible
contracts are those agreements where a certain amount of hydrogen has to be supplied
within a time window and the delivery is flexible within this time window. On the other
hand, fixed delivery contracts are based on meeting a hydrogen demand at a certain hour,
and no flexibility is possible.
In the latter, if flexibility is needed by the electrolyser
operator a hydrogen storage tank can be used to gain it. This option will be discussed
further later on.
Flexible hydrogen contracts are common when their delivery is done via compressed tanks
via trucks or similar methods. On the contrary, fixed delivery contracts are common when
hydrogen production is done in the place where the demand is, i.e., in coordination with
a hydrogen-demanding facility, like an ammonia production plant.
For the study case, both types are considered. For the flexible contract the time window
within the hydrogen needs to be supplied is 24h. This time window is chosen because it
corresponds to the bidding time span of the day-ahead market, in which the electrolyser
participates. Regarding the fixed demand, the contract used is based on actual data from
the GreenLab Skive hydrogen demand. This data is presented in [11] and states that a
25% of the hydrogen maximum production is needed between 1h-8h and 18h-24h while
the maximum production is needed the rest of the hours, i.e., 9h-17h. The demand profile
can be observed in fig. 7.1.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
0
25
50
75
100
Hours
Hydrogen demand (%)
Figure 7.1: Fixed hydrogen demand
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
29
==PAGE:38==
7.2
Hydrogen storage
Hydrogen storage is usually installed along electrolysers in order to give flexibility to
hydrogen production. By its implementation, the electrolyser operator can meet the min-
imum demand (either variable or fixed) and avoid producing during high electricity price
periods, if production has been high enough during low price hours.
The present study uses the hydrogen tank installed at GreenLab Skive as the chosen
technology, which is defined in [5]. It consists of a tank with a size of 5000 kg of compressed
hydrogen. The daily hydrogen demand of GreenLab Skive is 2737 kg, which is equivalent
to producing hydrogen at a nominal capacity for 12.75 hours. Thus, the storage can cover
1.8 days of demand or around 23 hours of operation at nominal power. The energy yield
of the maximum hydrogen stored is 166.7 MWh, considering a low heating value of 33.33
kWh/kgH2.
7.3
Hydrogen price
Currently, there are no spot prices for hydrogen.
Usually, the contracts of hydrogen
are related to the costs of the natural gas plus other fixed and variable costs and profit
margins. This connection exists because most of the hydrogen produced uses natural gas as
feedstock, called grey hydrogen and is produced via SMR. If carbon capture systems (CCS)
are used during production, it is called blue hydrogen. To be precise, in 2022, 96% of
hydrogen produced in Europe was from natural gas [48].
For the period of ten years
before the COVID-19 pandemic, the price of natural gas ranged between 10-30 €/MWh.
Assuming this price the cost of grey hydrogen is 0.9-1.9 €/kgH2, while the cost of blue
hydrogen is 1.1-2.2 €/kgH2 [49]. These costs do not include CO2 taxes. Regarding green
hydrogen, until a benchmark price for hydrogen is adopted in the market, contract prices
might follow also a formula based on natural gas or electricity prices to determine its price
[50].
This lack of spot price and benchmark price makes the hydrogen price a relevant parameter
to choose when modelling an electrolyser. The study presented in [49] does a detailed
analysis of AEC and SOEC technologies and their costs, thus it is taken as a reference
to determine the hydrogen price. For the present technology chosen, i.e., AEC, the study
presented considered low-temperature alkaline water electrolysis at 80 °C and at a pressure
of 30 bar. For it, it calculates the cost of hydrogen to be 2.9 €/kg in 2020, 2.65 €/kg in
2030 and, 2.00 €/kg in 2050. These values are in the same line as other publications, which
assume the cost of hydrogen as 2.1 €/kg [6]. For the present study, the value of 2020 is used,
i.e., 2.9 €/kg. This value is between two and three times higher than the grey and blue
hydrogen, depending on the natural gas price. Thus, a hydrogen demand facility might
be discouraged to pay a higher price when the difference resides in the CO2 emissions. If
taxes are applied on emissions, the price of SMR hydrogen would increase, making green
hydrogen more competitive. Although the tax on emissions has seen favourable effects, it
is uncertain how they will develop [51]. Their application resides outside of the scope of
the project, but it is important to know that cheaper hydrogen is available in the market
compared to green hydrogen.
30
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:39==
8
Mathematical model
8.1
Base electrolyser model
This chapter introduces the base mathematical model of an AEC. This base model refers
to the electrolyser model that does not consider bidding into the electricity market, and
thus, is the base for later on developing a model that optimises its bidding strategy. The
present model is based on work presented in [6].
8.1.1
Nomenclature
Sets
Table 8.1: Sets of the base model
t ∈T
Hours of the time horizon
s ∈S
Segments of the hydrogen production linearization
n ∈N
Time subset of the time horizon T , N ⊆T
Parameters
Table 8.2: Parameters of the base model
|T |
Number of hours in the time horizon
|S|
Number of linearization segments
|N|
Number of time horizon subsets
Hn
Hours in the subset n
λH2
Hydrogen price
λQ
t
Heat price
λin
t
Electricity price
λsu
Cost of a cold start-up
CE
Electrolyser capacity
CC
Compressor nominal power
CS
Hydrogen tank capacity
P sb
Standby power
P e,min
Minimum power of the electrolyser when on
P, P
Linearization breakpoints
ηFL
Electrolyser eﬀiciency at full load
ηe
s
Electrolyser eﬀiciency within the linearization segment s
Sout
Maximum hydrogen output by the tank
Dmin
n
Minimum hydrogen demand
Qmin
n
Minimum heat demand
Qmax
n
Maximum heat demand
ηc
Compressor mechanical eﬀiciency
P in
Compressor inlet pressure
P out
Compressor outlet pressure
γ
Isotropic exponent
T in
Electrolyser temperature
as
Slope of the segment s
bs
Intercept of the segment s
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
31
==PAGE:40==
Variables
Table 8.3: Variables of the base model
pin
t
Power withdrawn from the grid (MWh)
ht
Hydrogen production (kg/h)
dt
Hydrogen sold at a fixed price (kg/h)
hd
t
Hydrogen production directly to demand (kg/h)
sin
t
Hydrogen stored in the tank (kg/h)
sout
t
Hydrogen used from the tank (kg/h)
SOCt
State of charge of the hydrogen tank (kg)
pe
t
Electrolyser power (input, all electricity, MW)
pes
t,s
Electrolyzer power in the active piecewise-linearization segment s (MW)
pc
t
Compressor power (MW)
zsu
t
Binary. 1 if the electrolyser is started up, 0 otherwise.
zon
t
Binary. 1 if the electrolyser is in production state, 0 otherwise.
zoff
t
Binary. 1 if the electrolyser is in an idle state, 0 otherwise.
zsb
t
Binary. 1 if the electrolyser is in a standby state, 0 otherwise.
zh
t,s
Binary. 1 if the segment s is active, 0 otherwise.
qt
Recoverable heat from the electrolyser (MW)
yt,s
Auxiliary variable to linearize the heat production
8.1.2
Mathematical model
Objective function
The objective function maximises the electrolyser profit.
Its revenue is based on the
hydrogen and heat sold, while its costs are the electricity bought from the grid and the
cost of having a cold start-up.
Max
∑
t∈T
dtλH2 + qtλQ
t −pin
t λin
t −zsu
t λsu
(8.1)
Power balance
The power balance indicates that the power bought from the grid pin
t is the power required
for the electrolyser, pe
t and the compressor pc
t.
pin
t = pe
t + pc
t
∀t ∈T
(8.2)
Hydrogen production
The non-linear hydrogen production presented in section 3.1 is linearized as shown in
eq. (8.3), using 12 segments following the procedure shown in [6]. The power allowed in
each segment, pes
t,s, needs to be contained between the segment boundaries, which are P
and P, as shown in eq. (8.4). The binary variable zh
t,s is used to have only one segment
active at each time step. This condition is forced by eq. (8.5), which makes sure that one
segment is active when the electrolyser is in production mode, i.e., zon
t
= 1. The binary zon
t
is used because is the only state that allows for hydrogen production. In idle or standby
state, zoff
t
, zsb
t , hydrogen can not be produced. Equation (8.6) ensures that the power of
the electrolyser, pe
t, takes the right value depending on its state. Note that if in on state
the power is the sum of all linearization segments, out of all possible segments only one
will take a value. If in standby, this sum takes the value of zero because zh
t is forced to
zero by eq. (8.5), and thus pes
t,s has its lower and upper bounds to zero in eq. (8.4). If in
off state, both right terms take the value of zero, forcing pe
t to be zero, as expected when
32
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:41==
the electrolyser is off. Equation (8.7) states that the hydrogen production, ht is divided
between the hydrogen delivered directly to the demand, hd
t , and the hydrogen stored in
the hydrogen tank, sin
t . Moreover, eq. (8.8) indicates that the demand, dt, can be covered
by the direct supply, hd
t plus the hydrogen extracted from the tank, sout
t
.
ht =
∑
s∈S
aspes
t,s + bszh
t,s
∀t ∈T
(8.3)
zh
t,sP s ≤pes
t,s ≤P szh
t,s
∀t ∈T, s ∈S
(8.4)
∑
s∈S
zh
t,s = zon
t
∀t ∈T
(8.5)
pe
t =
∑
s∈S
pes
t,s + P sbzsb
∀t ∈T
(8.6)
ht = hd
t + sin
t
∀t ∈T
(8.7)
dt = hd
t + sout
t
∀t ∈T
(8.8)
Heat production
The modelization of heat production is a contribution to the model presented in [6] since
it is not considered. Before introducing the equations that model it, a few remarks are
needed.
The heat production by the electrolyser in this work does not take into account the tem-
perature change of the electrolyser based on the cell voltage.
It is assumed that the
electrolyser temperature remains constant at 90 °C. This is a simplification because the
hydrogen eﬀiciency changes based on the temperature level, as shown in fig. 3.2. To avoid
making an oversimplification, as the one proposed in [23], where a fixed ratio of the in-
put power is taken as the reusable heat available, this ratio is linked to the electrolyser
eﬀiciency. Note that this relation between reusable heat and eﬀiciency is done for one tem-
perature when the idea relation would imply relating also the eﬀiciency with the actual
temperature of the electrolyser. Reference [23] considers that 48.96% of the input power
that is not converted into hydrogen is reusable heat. This is assumed for a standard ef-
ficiency of 66.5% and a recoverable heat of 16.4% of the input power. If the eﬀiciency is
taken into account, the heat generated at lower eﬀiciency is greater than when eﬀiciency
is at its maximum. And this is captured by the following equation, based on [42].
qt = (1 −ηe)rhpe
t
(8.9)
Where qt is the recoverable heat, etae
t is the electrolyser eﬀiciency, rh is the recoverable
heat percentage of the output energy not used for hydrogen production, which is 48.96%;
and pe
t is the electrolyser power. Note that this equation is non-linear because the elec-
trolyser eﬀiciency and its power depend on each other. Thus, a linearization technique is
applied. For it, the eﬀiciency of the electrolyser is assumed as a parameter in the form of
a step function divided by the same number of segments used in the hydrogen production
linearization.
In fig. 8.1 a comparison between the real eﬀiciency curve, the linearized curve, and the
step function of the linearized curved with the mean value of each segment as step value
is shown.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
33
==PAGE:42==
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0.6
0.62
0.64
0.66
Linearized
Real
Mean
Power (MW)
Efficiency (%)
Figure 8.1: Electrolyser eﬀiciency based on temperature
If now the eﬀiciency is a parameter based on the segment, it is needed to know which
segment is active, information indicated by the binary zh
t . Thus, the nonlinear product
of ηe
t pe
t now becomes into zh
t,spes
t,s. Note that since the eﬀiciency is segmented defined,
the power used is also the one related to the segment. The linearization technique is the
following. If x1 is the binary variable, and x2 a continuous one, for which holds 0 ≤x2 ≤u,
the auxiliary variable y is introduced to replace the product y = x1x2, which is forced by
the next constraints.
y ≤ux1
(8.10)
y ≤x2
(8.11)
y ≥x2 −u(1 −x1)
(8.12)
y ≥0
(8.13)
If applied to the existing problem, the resulting constraints are the following.
qt = rh(
pe
t −
∑
s∈S
ηe
syt,s
)
∀t ∈T
(8.14)
yt,s ≤CEzh
t,s
∀t ∈T, s ∈S
(8.15)
yt,s ≤pes
t,s
∀t ∈T, s ∈S
(8.16)
yt,s ≥pes
t,s −CE(1 −zh
t,s)
∀t ∈T, s ∈S
(8.17)
Note that if the binary zh
t,s is zero (electrolyser in standby of idle state), it means that
qt is zero, since pe
t = 0 and yt,s = 0. If one segment is active, then y = pes
t,s. The term
∑
s∈S ηe
syt,s will only take a value for that segment s that pes
t,s is nonzero, enforcing that
only one segment ηe
s is taken into account.
Storage constraints
The next constraints model the hydrogen tank and its behaviour. Equation (8.18) limits
the hydrogen that can be output from the tank during one time step t. Equation (8.19)
ensures that the maximum capacity of the storage, in kg, CS, is not exceeded. Finally,
eq. (8.20) and eq. (8.21) model the input and output flows of the tank.
There is no
constraint on the terminal SOC, i.e., the level of the storage at the end of the simulation.
34
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:43==
It could be included if extra benefits from depleting the storage are not desired.
sout
t
≤Sout
∀t ∈T
(8.18)
SOCt ≤CS
∀t ∈T
(8.19)
SOCt = SOCt−1 + sin
t −sout
t
∀t ∈T\{1}
(8.20)
SOCt = Sini + sin
t −sout
t
T = 1
(8.21)
Hydrogen and heat demand constraints
Demand can be set to hourly or daily. I.e., fixed or variable. This is done by the eq. (8.22)
and eq. (8.23), where N is a subset of the time horizon T . In this case, N corresponds
to the days, and Hn are the hours in each day. If the demand is set to be hourly, then N
and T become the same set.
Dmin
n
≤
∑
t∈Hn
dt
n ∈{1, ..., N}
(8.22)
Qmin
n
≤
∑
t∈Hn
qt ≤Qmax
n
n ∈{1, ..., N}
(8.23)
Electrolyser, compressor and state constraints
The next equations model the electrolyser power and its states. Equation (8.24) states
the upper boundary of the electrolyser depending on its state. Equation (8.25) defines the
lower boundary. If in production mode, the power can not go below the minimum power,
and if in standby mode, there is a minimum power consumption to maintain the electrol-
yser warm and pressurised. Equation (8.26) ensures that only one state can happen at a
time, while eq. (8.27) and eq. (8.28) defines that a cold start-up can only happen between
off and on state and that the there is no start-up at the first time step. Equation (8.29)
ensures that the transition between off and standby state is not possible, because it would
overpass the cold start-up cost. Finally, eq. (8.30) indicates that the compressor power
is proportional to the hydrogen input to the tank, and the proportionality is defined by
eq. (8.31), which is a parameter since all its values are fixed.
pe
t ≤CEzon
t
+ P sbzsb
t
∀t ∈T
(8.24)
pe
t ≥P e,minzon
t
+ P sbzsb
t
∀t ∈T
(8.25)
zon
t
+ zoff
t
+ zsb
t = 1
∀t ∈T
(8.26)
zsu
t
≥zon
t
−zon
t−1 −zsb
t−1
∀t ∈T\{1}
(8.27)
zsu
t
= 0
T = 1
(8.28)
zoff
t−1 + zsb
t ≤1
∀t ∈T\{1}
(8.29)
pc
t = αsin
t
3600
∀t ∈T
(8.30)
α =
RT in
2(γ −1)ηc
[(P out
P in
) γ−1
γ
−1
]
(8.31)
Non-negativity and binary variables
All the non-binary variables of this first model are non-negative.
pin
t , ht, dt, hd
t , sin
t , sout
t
, SOCt, pe
t, pes
t,s, pc
t, qt, yt,s ∈R+
(8.32)
zsu
t , zon
t , zoff
t
, zsb
t , zh
t,s ∈{0, 1}
(8.33)
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
35
==PAGE:44==
8.2
Electrolyser bidding model
This chapter introduces the mathematical model that considers an AEC that bids into
the day-ahead and the balancing electricity market. It is based on the model presented in
section 8.1. Some equations are the same for both models. The objective of this model is
to model the participation in the electricity markets and see how it affects the electrolyser
operation.
The model consists in a two-stage stochastic model that is solved separately. The first
stage considers the day-ahead market while in the second stage, the balancing market is
considered. The solution is made in two steps because the balancing market is highly
unpredictable. Although it is common in the literature to consider a set of scenarios for
the balancing market, where a prediction on the balancing price is made, along with the
direction of the balancing [52], this method is not considered adequate. This is based
on the fact that the balancing market is not as predictable as the day-ahead market,
where tendencies exist and electricity prices are correlated with other commodities, like
gas prices, making it possible to consider a set of scenarios or use forecasting techniques.
The balancing market has a higher degree of uncertainty and its prediction is not as
reliable as the day-ahead market [17].
Nowadays, work on predicting its behaviour is
being conducted, for example by the company ENFOR [53], where a forecast up to a
couple of hours wants to be made available. Notice how this unpredictability will never
be fully solved, because if the unbalance can be predicted beforehand, then it would be
covered a priori by the day-ahead market and therefore never happen.
There are three possible approaches regarding the balancing market.
1. Perfect foresight of the balancing direction and price. In this case, the balancing mar-
ket is completely known for the studied time horizon and the direction and imbalance
price are known beforehand. This case is not realistic since this is not achievable in
reality but it represents the best possible outcome since up and downregulation can
be used to their full extent to maximise the profit.
2. No prior information of the balancing market. In this approach the balancing market
is unknown. It is used to buy the missing power from the day-ahead market (if any).
The strategy is to buy the missing power during the optimal hours assuming that
the imbalance price will be the actual day-ahead price. This is done based on the
assumption that normally there is no imbalance in the system and therefore the
imbalance price is the day-ahead price. Because of this, buying the missing power
based on the actual day-ahead curve tries to maximise the profit in case there was no
imbalance. If there is an imbalance event, losses will occur when the missing power is
bought during an upregulation event. The contrary could also happen, the missing
power is bought during a downregulation event and savings are made. Notice how in
this approach ancillary services are not offered and only extra power is drawn from
the grid using the balancing market.
3. The balance direction in known. For this approach, a certain amount of capacity
is bid into the mFRR market (capacity market), which will allow bidding in the
regulating power market (energy market). The capacity bid needs to be made before
9.00 the day before operation, which is earlier than the day-ahead market, which
closes at 12.00 the day before operation. Therefore optimising the reserved capacity
for the balancing market becomes a challenge. It is not the focus of this work so an
arbitrary capacity for the mFRR market can be taken. Based on this capacity the
upregulation bid is the whole capacity dispatched in the day-ahead market, and the
downregulation bid is the difference between the power dispatched in the day-ahead
36
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:45==
market and the nominal capacity of the electrolyser. The downregulation bid can
always be assured because an increase in power is always technically possible for the
electrolyser. On the contrary, the upregulation bid can only be fulfilled if the power
dispatch in the day-ahead market is at least as large as the capacity reserved for the
balancing market. Otherwise, in case of upregulation, the power set point can not
be reduced to the amount bid in the mFRR market, which will not cover the bid
and penalties would apply [36]. There are two alternatives to solve this situation
and avoid penalties:
(a) ensure that the reserved capacity for the mFRR market is always accepted in
the day-ahead market
(b) not submit upregulation bids
For item 3a this would mean that the power reserved for the balancing market is
bid in the day-ahead at the maximum price this market accepts. This is not seen
as a good option because it means that some electricity, based on the reserved
capacity, would always be bought no matter the price, increasing the costs in a
way that might be unnecessary because maybe no hydrogen production was needed
in that period and no upregulation event happened so no advantage can be made.
Therefore, item 3b is chosen as the best approach and only downregulation bids
should be made for this case. It is said that the information about the direction of
the balancing market is known only for the next hour based on the assumption that
the electrolyser bids the day-ahead price for downregulation. The balancing event
can be known 15 minutes in advance because the bid will be activated by Energinet
(since it is the most expensive for the downregulation event). The price of the event
will be known once it finishes and it can not be anticipated based on this assumption.
Note that also for this case capacity available payments could be considered since
Energinet remunerates the capacity offered in the mFRR market. Since the price
for capacity made available is most of the times 0.00 €/MW [13] for downregulation,
only considering the revenue from the regulating power market is enough.
Based on this, the functioning of each approach is the following:
• Perfect foresight of the balancing direction and price
1. In the first stage only the day-ahead market is considered. Based on the un-
certainty a step bidding curve is defined based on the stochastic model. For
each chosen step power its bidding price is optimised to maximise the expected
profit.
2. The day-ahead market clearance supposes the unveiling of the uncertainty.
Based on the realisation the bids made in the first stage are either accepted or
rejected in the day-ahead market.
3. In the second stage the accepted power in the day ahead market is considered
in order to offer the up and downregulation in the balancing market. Based on
this availability the up and downregulation are optimised. It is also considered
the event of withdrawing power from the grid even if there is no regulation
event since it is always possible to consume more power. This second stage is
deterministic.
• No prior information of the balancing market
1. In the first stage only the day-ahead market is considered. Based on the un-
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
37
==PAGE:46==
certainty a step bidding curve is defined based on the stochastic model. For
each chosen step power its bidding price is optimised to maximise the expected
profit.
2. After the day-ahead market is cleared the uncertainty is revealed. Based on
the realisation the bids made in the first stage are either accepted or rejected
in the day-ahead market.
3. In the second stage the accepted power in the day ahead market is considered
as an input parameter for the base electrolyser model, defined in eqs. (8.1)
to (8.33). The same model is applied substituting eq. (8.2) by eq. (8.34).
pm
t + pDA
t
= pin
t
∀t ∈T
(8.34)
Where pm
t
is the missing power to fulfil the demand and pDA
t
is the power
accepted in the day-ahead market after the uncertainty is revealed. Hereinafter
this is called base model modified. After the model is run, the output of interest
is the profile of the missing power. This missing power has the actual cost of
the imbalance price, which is calculated and summed to the result minus the
cost of the missing power at the day-ahead price level. This second stage is
deterministic, both day-ahead and imbalance prices are known.
• The balance direction in known
1. As in the other approaches, in the first stage only the day-ahead market is
considered. Based on the uncertainty a step bidding curve is defined based on
the stochastic model. For each chosen step power its bidding price is optimised
to maximise the expected profit.
2. The day-ahead market clearance reveals the uncertainty. Based on the reali-
sation the bids made on the first stage are either accepted or rejected on the
day-ahead market.
3. In the second stage the accepted power in the day ahead market is considered
in order to offer the downregulation in the balancing market. The base model
modified is run to know the initial amount of missing power to fulfil the demand,
pm
ini. This missing power will be initially bought based on the lowest day-ahead
prices. Then the base model is once again modified to include the power increase
that can happen in the downregulation event. Equation (8.2) is modified by
eq. (8.35).
pDA
t
+ pDR
t
= pin
t
∀t ∈T
(8.35)
Where pDA
t
is the power accepted in the day-ahead market and pDR
t
is the
downregulation power. Note that here pDR
t
takes the function of accounting
for the missing power to fulfil the minimum demand. The model is then solved
purely for one time step, i.e., one hour. The value that pDR
t
takes is subtracted
from the total missing power, and the model moves to the next time step. The
variable pDR
t
will only take a value if there is a downregulation event, i.e., the
imbalance price is lower than the day-ahead price. This is done until the last
time step. It could be the case that the downregulation events are not enough
to buy all the missing power. In that case, the missing power can be bought
at the last time step at whatever price, or a penalty cost for the non-delivered
hydrogen can be included. Note how in this approach it is necessary to run
38
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:47==
the first stage model (once), then the base model modified (once), and then the
second modification of the base model (for every time step of the time horizon).
The constraints that define this behaviour are:
– missing power bought:
pm
t = pm
t−1 −pDR
t
∀t ∈T\{1}
(8.36)
pm
t = pm
ini −pDR
t
T = 1
(8.37)
– if the downregulation bid is activated:
pDR
t
= CE −pDA
t
∀t ∈T
(8.38)
– else:
pDR
t
= 0
∀t ∈T
(8.39)
8.2.1
Perfect foresight
Sets
Table 8.4: Sets for the first stage model
t ∈T
Hours of the time horizon
s ∈S
Segments of the hydrogen production linearization
n ∈N
Time subset of the time horizon T , N ⊆T
ω ∈Ω
electricity price scenario
p ∈P
power bid steps
This model includes a set for the day-ahead electricity price scenarios generated, which is
how the uncertainty is taken into consideration. The bidding strategy proposed by this
model is based on a step bid curve, i.e., different power steps are bid into the day-ahead
electricity market at a certain price. This is considered by the additional set p, which
indicates each power step.
Additional parameters
The parameters in table 8.5 are added to the ones from the model in section 8.1. One
parameter to highlight is the power step bidding parameter, P step
p
. This parameter corre-
sponds to a vector of values indicating the value of each power step that is bid into the
day-ahead market. Its sum can be as large as the nominal power of the electrolyser, CE,
but it can also be lower if some capacity is deliberately reserved for the balancing market.
According to Nord Pool regulations, the minimum power of each step is 1 MW, and the
maximum number of steps in a bidding curve is 32 [54]. The present model considers
the quantity of each step as a predefined parameter. In the power quantity of each step
wants to be optimised along with its bidding price, the mathematical formulation becomes
non-linear. This optimisation of the step bidding power is out of the scope of this project,
but it is important to take into account if the present model wants to be applied to other
electrolysers where the number of power steps at minimum power resolution does not cover
all the electrolyser’s nominal capacity. E.g., if the electrolyser had a capacity of 100 MW,
steps of 1 MW would only cover 32 MW out of the 100 MW. Then, the quantity of each
step should be changed to consider more power in order to reach 100 MW. This could be
done in an optimal manner, which is non-trivial because of the discussed non-linearity.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
39
==PAGE:48==
Table 8.5: Additional parameters for the first stage model
|Ω|
Number of electricity price scenario
|P|
Number of step bids
πω
Probability of each scenario ω
λmkt
t,ω
Electricity market price scenario
δ
Price threshold
P step
p
Power of each step bid p
P bid,max
Maximum power that can be bid
λmin,mkt
Minimum price day-ahead market
λmax,mkt
Maximum price day-ahead market
M
Big M value
Variables
The variables of the first stage model are similar to the base model but they depend on
the scenario, ω.
Table 8.6: Variable for the first stage model
ht,ω
Hydrogen production (kg/h)
dt,ω
Hydrogen sold at fix price (kg/h)
hd
t,ω
Hydrogen production directly to demand (kg/h)
sin
t,ω
Hydrogen stored in the tank (kg/h)
sout
t,ω
Hydrogen used from the tank (kg/h)
SOCt,ω
State of charge of the hydrogen tank (kg)
pe
t,ω
Electrolyser power (input, all electricity, MW)
pes
t,ω,s
Electrolyzer power in the active piecewise-linearization segment s (MW)
pc
t,ω
Compressor power (MW)
zsu
t,ω
Binary. 1 if there is a started-up, 0 otherwise.
zon
t,ω
Binary. 1 if the electrolyser is in production state, 0 otherwise.
zoff
t,ω
Binary. 1 if the electrolyser is in an idle state, 0 otherwise.
zsb
t,ω
Binary. 1 if the electrolyser is in a standby state, 0 otherwise.
zh
t,ω,s
Binary. 1 if the segment s is active, 0 otherwise.
qt,ω
Recoverable heat from the electrolyser (MW)
yt,ω,s
Auxiliary variable to linearize heat production
pDA
t,ω
Power bid in the day-ahead electricity market
zm
t,ω,p
Binary. 1 if the bid p is accepted in scenario ω, 0 otherwise.
za
t,ω,p
Binary. 1 if λbid ≥λmkt, 0 otherwise.
zb
t,ω,p
Binary. 1 if λbid ≤λmkt, 0 otherwise.
zc
t,ω,p
Binary. 1 if λmkt −δ ≤λbid ≤λmkt + δ, 0 otherwise.
λbid
t,p
Bid price
First stage mathematical model
Objective function
The present objective function maximises the expected profit of the electrolyser taking
into account all the scenarios considered. Notice how its value is an expected one, i.e.,
it is not the actual cost of running the electrolyser because the electricity prices for the
40
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:49==
day-ahead are not certain.
Max
∑
t∈T
∑
ω∈Ω
πω
(
dt,ωλH2 + qt,ωλQ
t −zsu
t,ωλsu −pDA
t,w λmkt
t,ω
)
(8.40)
Bid acceptance
The electrolyser is a market participant that buys electricity from the grid. This supposes
that a bid is accepted if its bidding price is higher than the market price (λbid ≥λmarket).
I.e., if the willingness to pay is higher than the actual cost of the electricity. If it is lower,
then the bid is rejected and no electricity delivery is done, because the electrolyser is left
out of the market after it is cleared (λbid ≤λmarket). In the event that the bidding price
is the market price, it means that the demand required by the electrolyser is met by the
marginal generator of the system. In this case, the bid is accepted (λbid = λmarket). To
model this behaviour three binary variables are introduced.
The first one, za
t,ω,p takes the value of 1 if the bid is accepted into the market, i.e., if
λbid
t,p ≥λmkt
t,w −δ. This is enforced by eq. (8.41) and eq. (8.42). Notice how a δ is introduced,
this is necessary to model the case where the bid price is the market price. It is also relevant
to observe that the bid price only depends on the time step and the bid segment, it is
non-dependent based on the scenario. This is a requirement since the bid curve that can
be delivered to Nord Pool needs to be unique, it can not be scenario dependent as it is not
allowed in the submission of bids. Since the actual market price is unknown when running
the model, it is replaced by the scenario market price, λmkt
t,ω .
The binary zb
t,ω,p models the contrary, i.e., the rejection of the bid (λbid
t,p ≤λmkt
t,w + δ).
This is enforced by eq. (8.43) and eq. (8.44).
Note how without the δ both binaries
could take either the value of zero to fulfil the constraints when λbid
t,p = λmkt
t,w . This is
why the δ is introduced. The eqs. (8.41) to (8.44) imposes that za
t,ω,p = zb
t,ω,p = 1 when
λmkt
t,ω −δ ≤λbid
t,p ≤λmkt
t,ω,p + δ. The binary zc
t,ω,p takes the value of one when this happens,
as shown in eq. (8.45). This formulation approximates λbid = λmarket by the factor of δ.
But if its value is chosen small enough it does not affect the bid curve. This is because
the resolution of the bids made to NordPool is 0.01 €/MWh [54]. Thus the optimal price
deviates from this value if bidding to the expected market price. After rounding the bid
price to two decimal positions, this difference is lost.
To make the model more readable the binary zm
t,ω,p is introduced in eq. (8.46). It takes
the value of one if the bid is accepted, without distinguishing if it is done by the marginal
generator or not, and the value of zero if it is rejected.
Mza
t,ω,p ≥λbid
t,p −λmkt
t,w + δ
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, p ∈P
(8.41)
M(1 −za
t,ω,p) ≥λmkt
t,w −λbid
t,p −δ
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, p ∈P
(8.42)
Mzb
t,ω,p ≥λmkt
t,w −λbid
t,p + δ
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, p ∈P
(8.43)
M(1 −zb
t,ω,p) ≥λbid
t,p −λmkt
t,w −δ
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, p ∈P
(8.44)
zc
t,ω,p ≥za
t,ω,p + zb
t,ω,p −1
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, p ∈P
(8.45)
zm
t,ω,p = za
t,ω,p + zc
t,ω,p
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, p ∈P
(8.46)
Step power bids
As mentioned, the electrolyser power is bid in a step-wise manner. Equation (8.47) makes
sure that the sum of the accepted power does not exceed the nominal power of the elec-
trolyser. When fully dispatch this constraint becomes an equality constraint, and at the
same time makes sure that the nominal power is not exceeded in the event of a wrong
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
41
==PAGE:50==
definition of the parameter P step
p
where the sum of its values is greater than the nominal
power of the electrolyser.
For each time step and scenario, the day-ahead power accepted in the market is the sum
of all the power steps accepted, as shown in eq. (8.48). On the other hand, eq. (8.49)
imposes that the bid price is within the price range of the day-ahead market, i.e., the
maximum and minimum price that the market offers. Finally, eq. (8.50) forces the bids to
have a descending price, as required by the NordPool bid submission. This last constraint
is purely used to sort the bids in decreasing order.
∑
p∈P
zm
t,ω,pP step
p
≤P bid,max
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.47)
pDA
t,ω =
∑
p∈P
zm
t,ω,pP step
p
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.48)
λmin,mkt ≤λbid
t,p ≤λmax,mkt
∀t ∈T, p ∈P
(8.49)
λbid
t,p+1 ≤λbid
t,p
∀t ∈T, p ∈P\{p|T|}
(8.50)
Power balance
The power consumed by the electrolyser and the compressor, for each time step and
scenario, can be as high as the power accepted in the day-ahead market, as eq. (8.51)
shows.
pin
t,ω ≤pDA
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.51)
Equations (8.52) to (8.77) are the same as in section 8.1 with the necessary modifications
to make them scenario dependent. Their functioning is the same explained but for every
scenario.
Hydrogen production
ht,ω =
∑
s∈S
aspes
t,ω,s + bszh
t,ω,s
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.52)
zh
t,ω,sP s ≤pes
t,ω,s ≤P szh
t,ω,s
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, s ∈S
(8.53)
∑
s∈S
zh
t,ω,s = zon
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.54)
pe
t,ω =
∑
s∈S
pes
t,ω,s + P sbzsb
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.55)
ht,ω = hd
t,ω + sin
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.56)
dt,ω = hd
t,ω + sout
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.57)
Heat production
qt,ω = rh(
pe
t,ω −
∑
s∈S
ηe
syt,ω,s
)
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.58)
yt,ω,s ≤CEzh
t,ω,s
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, s ∈S
(8.59)
yt,ω,s ≤pes
t,ω,s
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, s ∈S
(8.60)
yt,ω,s ≥pes
t,ω,s −CE(1 −zh
t,ω,s)
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω, s ∈S
(8.61)
42
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:51==
Storage constraints
sout
t,ω ≤Sout
∀t ∈Tω ∈Ω
(8.62)
SOCt,ω ≤CS
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.63)
SOCt,ω = SOCt−1,ω + sin
t,ω −sout
t,ω
∀t ∈T\{1}, ω ∈Ω
(8.64)
SOCt,ω = Sini + sin
t,ω −sout
t,ω
T = 1, ∀ω ∈Ω
(8.65)
Hydrogen and heat demand constraints
Dmin
n
≤
∑
t∈Hn
dt,ω
n ∈{1, ..., N}, ω ∈Ω
(8.66)
Qmin
n
≤
∑
t∈Hn
qt,ω ≤Qmax
n
n ∈{1, ..., N}, ω ∈Ω
(8.67)
Electrolyser and state constrains
pe
t,ω ≤CEzon
t,ω + P sbzsb
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.68)
pe
t,ω ≥P e,minzon
t,ω + P sbzsb
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.69)
zon
t,ω + zoff
t,ω + zsb
t,ω = 1
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.70)
zsu
t,ω ≥zon
t,ω −zon
t−1,ω −zsb
t−1,ω
∀t ∈T\{1}
(8.71)
zsu
t,ω = 0
T = 1, ∀ω ∈Ω
(8.72)
zoff
t−1,ω + zsb
t,ω ≤1
∀t ∈T\{1}, ω ∈Ω
(8.73)
pc
t,ω = αsin
t,ω
3600
∀t ∈T, ω ∈Ω
(8.74)
α =
RT in
2(γ −1)ηc
[(P out
P in
) γ−1
γ
−1
]
(8.75)
Non-negativity and binary variables
Note how the variable λbid
t,p is not included among the non-negative variables.
This is
because the bid price in the NordPool market can take negative values. The rest of the
variables are either non-negative or binary as shown.
ht,ω, dt,ω, hd
t,ω, sin
t,ω, sout,ω
t
, SOCt,ω, pe
t,ω, pes
t,ω,s, pc
t,ω, qt,ω, yt,ω,s, pDA
t,ω ∈R+
(8.76)
zsu
t,ω, zon
t,ω, zoff
t,ω , zsb
t,ω, zh
t,ω,s, zm
t,ω,p, za
t,ω,p, zb
t,ω,p, zc
t,ω,p ∈{0, 1}
(8.77)
8.2.2
Second stage mathematical model
The second stage is a variation of the deterministic model shown in section 8.1. The sets
required are the same as the base model.
Additional parameters
The parameters and variables used in this model are the same ones as shown in section 8.1
plus the additional ones shown next.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 8.7: Additional parameters for the second stage model
pDA
t
Power bid accepted in the day-ahead market (€/MWh)
λDA
t
Day-ahead electricity prices after the market clearance (€/MWh)
λDR
t
Downregulation price (€/MWh)
λUR
t
Upregulation price (€/MWh)
λNR
t
Imbalance price when no regulation event happens (€/MWh)
zDR
t
Binary, 1 if downregulation is the dominating direction, 0 otherwise
zUR
t
Binary, 1 if upregulation is the dominating direction, 0 otherwise
zNR
t
Binary, 1 if there is no regulation event, 0 otherwise
The parameter pDA
t
is obtained from comparing the solution of the first stage with the
revelation of the uncertainty. I.e., the for each time step, all steps of λbid
t,p are compared
with the actual day-ahead price. If the bid price is equal to or higher than it, the bid is
actually accepted in the day-ahead market, if not it is rejected. The parameter pDA
t
is the
sum of all the steps that are actually accepted in the market.
Additional variables
To account for the power in the balancing market three variables are introduced.
Table 8.8: Additional variables for the second stage model
pDR
t
Downregulation power (MW)
pUR
t
Upregulation power (MW)
pNR
t
No regulation power (MW)
Objective function
The objective function now maximises the profit of the electrolyser operation taking into
account the realisation of the day-ahead market and the balancing market. The term for
downregulation takes a negative sign because it means that an increase of the electrolyser
power is done (drawing more electricity from the grid that needs to be paid for). On the
contrary, the upregulation takes a positive sign, because it is revenue for reducing power
consumption.
Finally, the term pNRλNR accounts for the situation when there is no
imbalance but the electrolyser consumes electricity from the grid anyway. This is possible
because nothing prevents physically the connected electrolyser to consume more power.
Note that an electrolyser of several MW could provoke an imbalance, which might produce
an upregulation event (more generation is needed in the system), which will probably lead
to a high price for the upregulation event in the next time step. There is no penalty in
Denmark for this situation where more power is drawn from the grid since the markets
are considered to be eﬀicient enough that no profit can be made if the balancing market
deviates in any of its directions.
Max
∑
t∈T
dtλH2 + qtλQ
t −pDA
t
λDA
t
−zsu
t λsu
−pDR
t
λDR
t
+ pUR
t
λUR
t
−pNRλNR
t
(8.78)
Balancing market
The power available in the balancing market depends on the power accepted in the day-
ahead market. The increase of power that can be provided in the downregulation event
is the difference between the nominal power of the electrolyser and the power accepted
44
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:53==
in the day-ahead market, if a downregulation situation happens, which is indicated by
the binary parameter zDR
t
, as shown in eq. (8.79). For the upregulation event, the power
decrease of the electrolyser is as high as the power accepted in the day-ahead market
(eq. (8.80)). Since the upregulation power is linked directly with the electrolyser power, it
can provoke a change of state for the electrolyser. I.e., if pUR
t
is high enough it can make
the electrolyser go to standby mode or even in off mode. Finally, the power increase that
can be done anytime there is no actual imbalance is reflected in eq. (8.81), which is the
same constraint as eq. (8.79) but for all the periods there is no imbalance (zNR
t
= 1).
pDR
t
≤(P e,max −pDA
t
)zDR
t
∀t ∈T
(8.79)
pUR
t
≤pDA
t
zUR
t
∀t ∈T
(8.80)
pNR
t
≤(P e,max −pDA
t
)zNR
t
∀t ∈T
(8.81)
(8.82)
Power balance
The power consumed to produce and store hydrogen, by the electrolyser and the compres-
sor, is related now to the day-ahead power and the power from the regulating market, as
shown in eq. (8.83).
pin
t ≤pDA
t
+ pDR
t
−pUR
t
+ pNR
t
∀t ∈T
(8.83)
The rest of the model consists of the eqs. (8.3) to (8.33).
8.2.3
No prior information of the balancing market
This approach uses the following structure:
• First stage. Solved by applying eqs. (8.40) to (8.77)
• Second stage.
Solved by applying eq. (8.1) subject to eq. (8.34) and eqs. (8.3)
to (8.33). After the second stage is solved a post optimization calculation of the
actual cost of running the electrolyser is needed, where the results are used. It is
described by eq. (8.84).
Z =
∑
t∈T
dtλH2 + qtλQ
t −pin
t λImbalance
t
−pDA
t
λDA
t
−zsu
t λsu
(8.84)
Where λImbalance
t
is the imbalance price at each hour. It can correspond to upreg-
ulaion, downregulation or to no regulation, i.e., day-ahead price. Z represents the
profit.
8.2.4
The balance direction in known
To solve this case for the balancing market the structure followed is:
• First stage. Solved by applying eqs. (8.40) to (8.77)
• Second stage.
The initial missing power pm
ini is calculated by applying eq. (8.1)
subject to eq. (8.34) and eqs. (8.3) to (8.33).
Then each time step is solved by
applying eq. (8.1) subject to eqs. (8.35) to (8.39) and eqs. (8.3) to (8.33)
Due to the lack of time, no further analyses are done with this model, but it would be
interesting to analyse the results since it is a more accurate representation of the balancing
market behaviour than an electrolyser would take with respect to the other approaches.
In appendix A diagrams for each model discussed are included to give a better under-
standing of them and their differences.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:55==
9
Results
The mathematical models presented in this work constitute a general method that can
be applied to different electrolyser configurations. This is considered a nice feature of the
model since the electrolyser capacities are expected to grow in the near future.
This chapter presents the results for both the base electrolyser model and the bidding
model. Although the bidding model is the main contribution of this work, the results of
the base electrolyser model are shown to present its well functioning.
9.1
Input data
The study case chosen to apply the presented method is the electrolyser installed at
GreenLab Skive [55]. It is located in Jutland, Denmark. Its participation in the electricity
market is done in the market of DK1, operated by NoordPool. The input data used is
described next and in table 9.2.
The time horizon for simulation, T , is fixed to be 72 hours in order to keep results for the
first 48 hours. This is done to avoid unusual optimal results at the end of the simulation
time. E.g. if the time horizon is set to 48 hours, in the last hours of the time horizon
the electrolyser might be turned off because the demand is covered by the storage, when
in reality the next day a new demand needs to be met. This turning off would make the
operation of the electrolyser incur the cost of a cold start-up, which might not be necessary
if a longer time horizon is used, as is the case. Moreover, the time horizon is set to be three
days because it is considered that having representative scenarios ahead of three days is
not accurate. Making a prediction of the day-ahead electricity market longer than three
days is more diﬀicult and the probability of it being correct decreases.
The linearization segments, S, count up to 12, which is the maximum number of segments
presented in [6]. The 13 breakpoints, defined by P and P are the following:
• P e,min
•
1
2
(
P e,min + 1
2
(
P e,min + P e,opt))
•
1
2
(
P e,min + P e,opt)
•
1
2
(
P e,opt + 1
2
(
P e,min + P e,opt))
• P e,opt
•
1
2
(
P e,opt + 1
2
(
P e,opt + 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE)))
•
1
2
(
P e,opt + 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE))
•
1
2
( 1
2
(
P e,opt + 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE))
+ 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE))
•
1
2
(
P e,opt + CE)
•
1
2
( 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE)
+ 1
2
( 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE)
+ CE))
•
1
2
( 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE)
+ CE)
•
1
2
( 1
2
( 1
2
(
P e,opt + CE)
+ CE)
+ CE)
• CE
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 9.1: Values for ηe
s
Step
Eﬀiciency
Step
Eﬀiciency
Step
Eﬀiciency
1
61.72
5
65.73
9
62.53
2
64.29
6
65.16
10
61.66
3
65.43
7
64.33
11
60.82
4
65.84
8
63.43
12
60.03
The number of horizon subsets, N, is the number of days that are present in the time
horizon, T , i.e., |N| = 3. Therefore, the hours in each of these subsets, described by Hn,
correspond to the 24 hours there are in a day. Note that for the case where demands are
defined hourly, i.e., a fixed hourly demand needs to be met, |N| = 1, meaning Hn = |T |.
Moreover, the step function used to include the eﬀiciency of the electrolyser, see fig. 8.1,
take the following values for each segment, table 9.1.
Electricity prices from the day-ahead market and balancing market correspond to data
from NordPool, which is accessed via [41, 56]. The minimum and maximum demand for
heat changes depending on the simulation, it is described in each accordingly.
Regarding the bidding model, the number of price scenarios, Ω, is chosen to be 200. This
number is the highest number of scenarios that are executed within a reasonable time.
More scenarios would approximate in a better way the optimal value since it would be
closer to the theoretical run of infinite scenarios, but including more scenarios extends the
running time in favour of small differences in the objective value, therefore it lacks sense to
increase this number. The number of step bids, P, changes through the simulations done,
but the starting value is 12 steps in order to bid the whole power of the asset. Note that
for the studied electrolyser the maximum number of 32 steps does not suppose a problem
because using the minimum resolution of 1 MW the nominal capacity is reached without
exceeding it (12 out of 32 steps are used at most).
On the other hand, the probability of each scenario, πω, is determined by the number of
samples assigned to it. Each scenario has a set of λmkt
t,ω
based on the sample data. The
rest of the parameters are described in table 9.2.
Table 9.2: Input data
λH2
Hydrogen price
2.9 €/kg
λQ
t
Heat price
44.93 €/MWh
λsu
Cost of a cold start-up
600 €[57]
CE
Electrolyser capacity
12 MW
CC
Compressor nominal power
0.21 MW
CS
Hydrogen tank capacity
5000 kg
P sb
standby power
1% of CE
P e,min
Minimum power of the electrolyser when on
15% of CE
ηFL
Electrolyser eﬀiciency at full load
17.89 kgH2/MWh
Sout
Maximum hydrogen output by the tank
CEηFL
Dmin
n
Minimum hydrogen demand
See fig. 7.1
ηc
Compressor Mechanical eﬀiciency
0.75
P in
Compressor inlet pressure
30 bar
P out
Compressor outlet pressure
200 bar
48
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:57==
γ
Isotropic exponent
1.4
T in
Electrolyser temperature
90°C
ηe,opt
Maximum eﬀiciency of the electrolyser
32.02%
P e,opt
Power of the electrolyser at max. eﬀiciency
3.84 MW
δ
Price threshold
10−5 €/MWh
P step
p
Power of each step bid p
1.02 MW
P bid,max
Maximum power that can be bid
CE + CC
λmin,mkt
Minimum price day-ahead market
-500 €/MWh
λmax,mkt
Maximum price day-ahead market
4,000 €/MWh
M
Big M value
λmax,mkt −(λmin,mkt + δ)
9.2
Base electrolyser model
9.2.1
Flexible demand
The first run is made with electricity prices for the first three days of April of 2023, flexible
daily demand, and no heat bounds that limit the electrolyser behaviour.
Figure 9.1 shows how the electrolyser is set to its nominal power when the price is low
enough, as it happens between 00h-16h, 22h-06h, 08h-16h. Between 17h-21h during the
first day the electrolyser is both partially scheduled and put in standby, at 18h, as it can
be seen in fig. 9.2. The partial scheduling and the standby by mode are caused by the spike
in electricity prices, which reaches the maximum at 18h, reason to put the electrolyser in
standby. It is remarkable to say that an increase in electricity price of around 5 €/MWh
between 20h and 21h of the first day is enough to change the power set point from 9.96
MW to 6.90 MW. Figure 9.1 also shows the expected behaviour regarding the storage.
During the cheaper hours, that is 02h-06h and 11h-16h for the 1st of April, and 12h-16h
for the 2nd of April, the compressor is used to store hydrogen in the tank. This leads to
consume the maximum power from the grid, i.e, 12.21 MW.
During the final hours of the 2nd of April, since 17h, the electrolyser is turned off. This is
due to the increase in the electricity price, over 100 €/MWh. It is important to remember
that the simulation is done for three days, meaning that the electrolyser goes off state
because it is not worth to go in standby. This is because the electricity prices maintain
high values during enough hours to turn off the electrolyser. The storage here also plays
an important role; since it is charged at 2737 kg at the end of the second day, the need
to produce hydrogen for the 3rd of April does not exist, since the demand is also 2737 kg.
This means that hydrogen will only be produced in the following hours if the electricity
price is low enough, otherwise the electrolyser is better off in order to not incur in a loss.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
49
==PAGE:58==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Electricity price
Grid power
Electrolyser power
Compressor power
Hours
Power (MW)
Price (€/MWh)
Figure 9.1: Power of the grid, electrolyser and compressor along with electricity prices
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
On
Standby
Off
Hours
Figure 9.2: State of the electrolyser
In fig. 9.3 it is seen how the hydrogen production is distributed in each time step. Notice
how most of the time steps the hydrogen sold is directly the hydrogen produced that is
delivered directly to the demand. The periods when this does not occur are because the
50
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:59==
hydrogen is stored in the tank, as can be seen in fig. 9.4. The hydrogen storage is filled at
over half its maximum capacity during the mentioned periods with lower electricity prices.
During the first two days, there is no discharge of the tank, which will probably occur on
the third day if electricity prices were to maintain a high value.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
50
100
150
200
Production
Sold
Direct Demand
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
Figure 9.3: Hydrogen flows
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Storage in
Storage out
SOC
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
SOC (kg)
Figure 9.4: Hydrogen storage input, output and SOC
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
51
==PAGE:60==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Hours
Efficiency (p.u.)
Figure 9.5: Eﬀiciency
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
Heat
Heat efficiency adjusted
Hours
Heat power (MW)
Figure 9.6: Reusable heat comparison
Finally, for this first run, the heat generated is analysed. Figure 9.6 shows the comparison
between taking into account a fixed ratio for the recoverable heat, as assumed in [23],
and taking into consideration the electrolyser’s eﬀiciency when calculating this recoverable
52
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:61==
heat. It can be seen that for the lowest values of eﬀiciency, at nominal power, the difference
of the reusable heat between the two methods is greater than when compared to a power
set point close to maximum eﬀiciency (e.g. 17h of the 1st of April), see fig. 9.5 for the
detailed values. The difference between both will be zero if the electrolyser is scheduled
at its maximum eﬀiciency, i.e., 3.84 MW. When the difference of heat is at its maximum,
it takes a value of around 0.4 MW, while for the minimum it is only about 0.03 MW.
The total heat delivery for the adjusted method is 89.04 MWh while for the simplistic
approach is 74.96 MWh, which supposes a 15.81% lower value. This difference might seem
not that significant, but taking into account that electrolysers are expected to grow in
installed capacity, it might become relevant to grasp this difference, as this model does.
Figure 9.7 shows the accumulated profit based on hourly results. It is negative, meaning it
is a loss instead of a profit, and it increases more rapidly when electricity prices are high,
as expected. The results shown in the figure correspond to the profit for the operation
of the first 48 hours without taking into account the stored hydrogen, which has a value.
Therefore, its value needs to be added in order to know the total profit at the end of the
second day.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
−3500
−3000
−2500
−2000
−1500
−1000
−500
0
Hours
Profit (€)
Figure 9.7: Hourly accumulated profit
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
53
==PAGE:62==
Table 9.3: Results from the 1st run
Solver
Relative GAP
0
Execution time (s)
9.96
Model
Hydrogen stored at 48h (kg)
2737.42
Value of hydrogen stored (€)
7,938.52
Profit at 48h without storage (€)
-3,252.73
Total profit (texteuro)
4,865.78
Electricity from the grid (MWh)
459.83
Table 9.3 presents the different results. It can be seen how the relative GAP of the solver
is zero, meaning that the found solution is the best one. The execution time is within the
expected behaviour taking into account the execution time described in [6]. It is worth
noticing the power drawn from the grid, as it will be used in future comparisons.
9.2.2
Fix demand
A second run is made maintaining the same parameters as in the first run but changing
the demand profile to be fixed. I.e., a minimum hydrogen demand needs to be covered
following GreenLab Skive profile, see fig. 7.1. Under these conditions, the electrolyser does
not go on standby at any moment, as it can be seen in fig. 9.8 and fig. 9.9. There is no
difference regarding the time the electrolyser is turned off compared to the conditions with
flexible demand, it is turned off at 17h of the 2nd of April.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Electricity price
Grid power
Electrolyser power
Compressor power
Hours
Power (MW)
Price (€/MWh)
Figure 9.8: Power of the grid, electrolyser and compressor along with electricity prices
54
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:63==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
On
Standby
Off
Hours
Figure 9.9: State of the electrolyser
Figure 9.10 shows clearly how the pattern of the demand is the same as the hydrogen
sold. The hydrogen production that is not used to fulfil directly the demand is all stored
in the tank, as seen in fig. 9.11.
This is a clear change with respect to the first run,
where the tank was charged following a totally different pattern that was based on the
electricity price curve. Here it is seen how a fixed demand changes this behaviour and
although the price curve is somehow still followed, it is limited by the minimum demand
that needs to be met at all times. Figure 9.11 also shows how the tank is charged to a
greater degree, overpassing the 3000 kg barrier, and how it is discharged during the hours
when the electrolyser is off. This is due to the same reason for meeting the minimum
demand. It was not the case for the first run since demand could be met earlier due to its
flexibility.
The residual heat of the electrolyser follows the expected patterns based on the power
schedule. No significant differences are encountered with respect to the first run. Results
are displayed in fig. 9.12, and results for the eﬀiciency can be consulted in appendix B.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
55
==PAGE:64==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
50
100
150
200
Production
Sold
Direct Demand
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
Figure 9.10: Hydrogen flows
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Storage in
Storage out
SOC
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
SOC (kg)
Figure 9.11: Hydrogen storage input, output and SOC
56
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:65==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
Heat
Heat efficiency adjusted
Hours
Heat power (MW)
Figure 9.12: Reusable heat comparison
Regarding the profit, seen in fig. 9.13 it turns out to be negative, meaning that it is a
loss. The accumulated profit has a positive slope when the hydrogen demand is at its
fullest, and also when the electrolyser is off and the minimum demand is met by the tank,
basically because there are no electricity costs and selling hydrogen from the tank is all
profit, no costs are associated to it.
This is a clear example of how a hydrogen tank
provides flexibility to the operation in order to avoid producing hydrogen when electricity
prices are high. The values from table 9.4 show the same, the values are almost identical
to in the first run, meaning that although the hydrogen stream patterns are different, the
overall performance does not change substantially in monetary terms.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
57
==PAGE:66==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
−7000
−6500
−6000
−5500
−5000
−4500
−4000
−3500
−3000
−2500
−2000
−1500
−1000
−500
Hours
Profit (€)
Figure 9.13: Hourly accumulated profit
Table 9.4: Results from the 2nd run
Solver
Relative GAP
0
Execution time (s)
10.00
Model
Hydrogen stored at 48h (kg)
2737.42
Value of hydrogen stored (€)
7,938.52
Profit at 48h without storage (€)
-3,347.81
Total profit (texteuro)
4,590.71
Electricity from the grid (MWh)
459.63
9.2.3
Limits on the heat supplied
The present run assumes that hydrogen demand can be supplied in a daily manner. The
GreenLab Skive daily demand is 2737.42 kg of hydrogen. This equals around 12.75 hours
at nominal capacity. As mentioned before, the heat limits are imposed in a way that they
don’t limit the hydrogen demand minimum production, otherwise, it could not be covered.
This is done because all the reusable heat is expected to be input into a district heating
grid. In the case that the heat cap could limit hydrogen production, the extra heat should
be dissipated or used locally in order to keep the electrolyser running until the minimum
demand is met. The present run assumes a minimum heat demand of 3.94 MWh and a
maximum supply of 27.55 MWh. This value corresponds to 4 and 14 hours of nominal
operation considering a constant ratio for reusable heat production [23]. The scheduling
of the electrolysers is affected by these heat limits. In order to not exceed the maximum
heat, the standby mode is activated for 10 hours and the nominal capacity is almost never
58
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:67==
reached, see fig. 9.15 and fig. 9.14.
Figure 9.16 shows how under these conditions all the hydrogen production is sent directly
to the demand except for 13h 1st April, when the tank is slightly charged, and the 6h
2nd April, when it is partially discharged, see fig. 9.17. The limited usage of the storage,
imposed mainly by the maximum heat that can be produced, is the cause of keeping the
electrolyser in standby mode from 17h 2nd April. The storage level is not high enough
to avoid high electricity prices for a long period and only pay for the startup cost. It is
better to keep the electrolyser warm to produce hydrogen when needed without incurring
the startup cost.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Electricity price
Grid power
Electrolyser power
Compressor power
Hours
Power (MW)
Price (€/MWh)
Figure 9.14: Power of the grid, electrolyser and compressor along with electricity prices
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
59
==PAGE:68==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
On
Standby
Off
Hours
Figure 9.15: State of the electrolyser
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
50
100
150
200
Production
Sold
Direct Demand
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
Figure 9.16: Hydrogen flows
60
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:69==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Storage in
Storage out
SOC
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
SOC (kg)
Figure 9.17: Hydrogen storage input, output and SOC
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
Heat
Heat efficiency adjusted
Hours
Heat power (MW)
Figure 9.18: Heat
Figure 9.18 shows how the heat is also limited following the same pattern as the power
of the electrolyser, in order to not exceed the given limits. Notice again how the reusable
heat is greater than the simplified approach when the power dispatch is greater and the
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
61
==PAGE:70==
eﬀiciency decreases as it happens between 12h-16h 2nd April. The eﬀiciency curve is shown
in appendix B. The eﬀiciency-adjusted heat takes a value of 55.1 MWh, which means that
the daily cap of 27.55 MWh is reached every day. This confirms that the maximum heat
demand is in fact a constraining factor on the scheduling of the electrolyser.
In fig. 9.19 the accumulated profit can be seen. Here it takes positive values, meaning
it is actually a profit from the sold hydrogen and heat. Table 9.5 shows the rest of the
results. Notice how the heat maximum heat that can be supplied provokes a decrease in
consumption of around 159 MWh compared with the two other runs, i.e., a 35% decrease.
Moreover, it might seem that this heat cap is actually favourable compared to the other
runs. A detailed comparison is discussed in chapter 10.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
Hours
Profit (€)
Figure 9.19: Hourly accumulated profit
Table 9.5: Results from the 3rd run
Solver
Relative GAP
0
Execution time (s)
9.95
Model
Hydrogen stored at 48h (kg)
125.27
Value of hydrogen stored (€)
363.27
Profit at 48h without storage (€)
4,574.14
Total profit (texteuro)
4,937.31
Electricity from the grid (MWh)
300.53
62
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:71==
9.3
Bidding model
The runs done on the base electrolyser model demonstrate how the electrolyser model
behaves as expected. There are three possible approaches for the balancing market. All
of them share the first stage model, which is run for a time horizon of three days but only
the results for the first day are kept. This is done to avoid keeping unexpected oscillations
that can happen at the end of the time horizon when solving the optimisation problem.
An example of this would be discharging completely the hydrogen tank. The first stage
results are the set of bids to submit for the entire day. Then the uncertainty is revealed:
the actual day-ahead electricity prices are known. This allows for the selection of the bids
that are accepted. This selection supposes part of the input data for the second stage
model, which is solved for the given day kept from the first stage model.
For all the simulations regarding the participation in the day-ahead and balancing markets,
it is assumed that the hydrogen demand can be covered in a flexible way and that there
are no heat caps that limit the electrolyser dispatching, i.e., the heat demand constraints
are relaxed so they are always fulfilled.
9.3.1
Perfect foresight
The perfect foresight model is applied for the first two days of April 2023. As explained,
the balancing market information is completely known and it also corresponds to the first
two days of April 2023. The model is applied to a time horizon of two days. This supposes
running the first stage for a total of six days, since its time horizon is 72 hours but only
the first 24 hours are kept.
The first important result is the bidding curve that is submitted to Nord Pool, for each
time step there is a curve, meaning that a total of 48 curves are obtained from the first
stage model. To keep the visualisation simple fig. 9.20 only shows the bidding curve for
00h and 01h for the 1st of April.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Bidding curve 00 h
Biddding curve hour 01 h
Power (MW)
Price (€/MWh)
Figure 9.20: Bidding curves
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
63
==PAGE:72==
The first stage maximises the expected profit, which takes the following values for each
day, table 9.6.
Table 9.6: Expected profit
Day
Expected profit (€)
1st April
8,502.95
2nd April
8,607.45
Total
17,110.39
After the clearance of the day-ahead market, the power accepted in it is known. Figure 9.21
shows the power accepted and the actual power of the electrolyser. The difference between
the two corresponds to the power from the balancing market. An accepted power profile
similar to the one presented in fig. 9.1 was expected, but the accepted power turns out to
be less in many of the time steps. This is attributed mainly to the under-representation
of the electricity prices done by the scenarios. This is confirmed by the expected profit,
see table 9.6, since the total profit is almost four times larger than the actual profit the
electrolyser would make if it was always accepted in the market, which was 4,865.78 €.
This is addressed further in chapter 10.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Electrolyser power
Accepted power
Hours
Power (MW)
Figure 9.21: Power accepted in the day-ahead market and electrolyser power
Figure 9.22 shows the direction of the imbalance, or if there is even an imbalance and
fig. 9.23 shows the power from the balancing market, along with its price. It can be seen
how knowing beforehand the behaviour of the balancing market is advantageous because
the power required to fulfil the demand is always bought in downregulation events or
when there is no imbalance as it happens at 17:00 2nd April. Moreover, upregulation is
also offered in periods when the upregulation price is more favourable than producing
64
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:73==
hydrogen at the day-ahead price. This happens from 08:00 until 10:00 1st April, when
the upregulating price takes a value around 90 €/MWh, and even though the electrolyser
was scheduled in the day-ahead, see fig. 9.21, its power is reduced by offering upregulation
because it is more profitable.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
Downregulating
Upregulating
No regulating
Hours
Figure 9.22: Imbalance market dominating direction
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
10
20
0
50
100
150
200
Upregulating power
Downregulating power
No regulation power
Imbalance price
Hours
Power (MW)
Price (€/MWh)
Figure 9.23: Power and price from the balancing market
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
65
==PAGE:74==
It is important to notice that in fig. 9.23 there is only one imbalance price shown. This is
because the upregulation, downregulation and no regulation prices are contained in this
profile. The imbalance price will be up, down or no regulation depending on the dominat-
ing imbalance direction, shown in fig. 9.22. It is true that for every hour there is an up and
downregulation price because up and downregulation bids can both be activated within
the same hour for different time spans. But since it is considered that the electrolyser
considers always the dominating direction as its bid, these curves are not shown.
The economic results for this implementation are seen in fig. 9.24. Notice how under these
conditions there is a profit for almost every hour and how the end profit is 10,710.86 €.
The hydrogen stored is zero so there is no need to add its value. The hydrogen streams
and storage level results can be found in appendix C. This profit is more than twice
the value obtained for section 9.2.1, meaning that if it would be possible to know the
balancing market behaviour, it will be more favourable to participate in it rather than
only participating in the day-ahead market assuming that dispatching always occur.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1k
2k
3k
4k
5k
6k
7k
8k
9k
10k
11k
Hours
Profit (€)
Figure 9.24: Hourly accumulated profit
Table 9.7 shows the relevant results of the optimisation. Is relevant to notice how to solve
the two-stage problem the execution time has increased from around 10 seconds to more
than 18 minutes. This is because stochastic programming makes the problem larger with
the number of scenarios considered. Notice also how the power accepted in the day-ahead
market is only 65.44% of the power that is consumed by the electrolyser. The missing
power is obtained from the downregulation and no regulation situations, being the latter
an extra consumption at day-ahead price. The upregulation power is much lower than
the downregulation, meaning that the decrease in consumption for the given two days
was only favourable for a limited amount of hours. If more power was accepted in the
day-ahead market upregulation could take larger values because a power decrease would
be possible.
66
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:75==
Table 9.7: Results from the perfect foresight run
Solver
Relative GAP
0
Execution time (min:s)
18:24
Model
Hydrogen stored at 48h (kg)
0
Value of hydrogen stored (€)
0
Profit at 48h without storage (€)
10,710.86
Total profit (€)
10,710.86
Electricity from the day-ahead market (MWh)
247.45
Electricity consumed (MWh)
378.12
Downregulation electricity (MWh)
151.91
Upregulation electricity (MWh)
34.99
No regulation electricity (MWh)
14.20
9.3.2
No prior information of the balancing market
For this approach, the results of the first stage are not included since they are the same.
Figure 9.25 shows the power accepted in the day-ahead market, which follows the same
pattern as before, and the electrolyser power, which has changed. This change occurs
because in this approach only the missing power to cover the demand is added to the
accepted power in the day-ahead market. Since the balancing market is unknown when
scheduling this missing power, it can not be known if increasing it (like it is done when
perfect foresight is considered) will be beneficial or incur a loss, therefore it is kept to the
minimum to fulfil the demand. This is clear if fig. 9.25 and fig. 9.21 are compared, e.g.,
00:00 and 06:00 2nd April. With perfect foresight and knowing a downregulation event
will happen for those hours, it is beneficial to set the power to the maximum, at 12 MW,
which will enable to cover the demand at a lower price than day-ahead. On the other
hand, if this information is unknown, the required power to cover demand is bought based
on the relatively low day-ahead price of those hours, which later on will be known to be
even cheaper. But since it is unknown, it lacks sense to set the power to its maximum of
12 MW.
Figure 9.26 indicates the missing power to cover the minimum demand along the day-
ahead prices, to confirm how the missing power is scheduled during the lower prices of
the day-ahead market. Missing power is bought 37 hours out of the 48 hours considered,
table 9.8 shows in which balancing direction it is bought.
From fig. 9.25 is also relevant to see how the electrolyser power goes close to zero during
17:00 1st April. It also happens several other times during the time horizon if observed
carefull. This low power set points correspond to the standby consumption, for a detailed
graph see appendix C. As it can be seen the standby mode is used quite often in this
case, which suggests that its modelization is appropriate and discarding it would lead to
a model that does not reassembles that accurately the reality.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
67
==PAGE:76==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Electrolyser power
Accepted power
Hours
Power (MW)
Figure 9.25: Power accepted in the day-ahead market and electrolyser power
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
10
0
50
100
150
Missing power
Day-ahead price
Hours
Power (MW)
Price (€/MWh)
Figure 9.26: Missing power and day-ahead price
The hydrogen streams, electrolyser state and storage behaviour results are included in
appendix C since they do not bring additional information apart from the well functioning
of the hydrogen-related constraints.
68
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:77==
Figure 9.27 shows the hourly accumulated profit. There is no hydrogen stored at the end
of the time horizon so the represented profit is the actual profit. This graph shows how
the profit is also continuous for all the time steps, only in a few hours there is a decrease in
the accumulated profit meaning there was a loss. Although the profile looks similar to the
perfect foresight situation, in this case, the profit is constant during more hours because no
extra profit can be achieved from the upregulation and downregulation balancing market
due to the lack of information. Table 9.8 includes the total profit achieved of 6,983.36 €.
The execution time is quite similar since no bid changes are introduced into the modelling.
The relative GAP is zero, which refers that the solver has found the best optimal solution.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Hours
Profit (€)
Figure 9.27: Hourly accumulated profit
Table 9.8 also shows how the missing power is obtained and why a higher profit is ob-
tained compared to the base run 1. The missing power is bought 27 out of 37 times in a
downregulation situation. Its amount corresponds to 71.88% of the missing 93.38 MWh.
The upregulation amount accounts for 25.70% and the no regulation situation for 2.42%.
Buying the majority of the power during downregulation is what makes the situation of
buying it advantageous. As mentioned, it could be the contrary, which would be probably
seen if different days were chosen or a longer run was made.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
69
==PAGE:78==
Table 9.8: Results from the perfect foresight run
Solver
Relative GAP
0
Execution time (min:s)
18:06
Model
Hydrogen stored at 48h (kg)
0
Value of hydrogen stored (€)
0
Profit at 48h without storage (€)
6,983.36
Total profit (€)
6,983.36
Electricity from the day-ahead market (MWh)
247.45
Electricity consumed (MWh)
340.83
Downregulation electricity (MWh)
67.12
Downregulation occurrences
26
Upregulation electricity (MWh)
24.00
Upregulation occurrences
7
No regulation electricity (MWh)
2.26
No regulation occurrences
4
70
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:79==
10
Discussion
A summary of the three runs made with the base model is presented to evaluate how the
different configurations differ.
Table 10.1: Comparison of the results from the base model
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Profit at 48 h (€)
-3,252.73
-3347.81
4574.14
SOC at 48 h
2737.42
2737.42
125.27
SOC (%)
54.75
54.75
2.51
Value SOC (€)
7,938.52
7,938.52
363.27
Total profit (€)
4,865.78
4,590.71
4,937.41
From these results, it could be inferred that producing only the hydrogen that needs to
be supplied, like it is done for most of the hours in run 3 is the best option to maximise
the profit. Although it is true that the maximum profit occurs for this run, it has a major
drawback, which is flexibility. While run 1 and 2 maintain a SOC at 54.75% at the end
of the second day, run 3 has a SOC as low as 2.51%. The first two runs can cover the
demand of a full day with their level, while run 3 can barely provide any demand for the
following day. This means that the conditions for run 3 enforce the electrolyser to produce
hydrogen no matter the electricity price the following day because of the lack of storage.
This does not happen for runs 1 and 2; hydrogen production will occur if the price is low
enough, otherwise, the hydrogen in the tank can be used to cover the day’s demand.
It is also relevant to emphasise that a shadow price for the production of hydrogen is
diﬀicult to establish based on the results of section 9.2 because there is more than one
revenue stream in the system: hydrogen and heat. Being able to sell the excess heat implies
that hydrogen can be produced at a higher electricity price compared to the situation
where no excess heat is monetised. This is because the profit from selling heat can be used
to buy more expensive electricity. Moreover, having a storage tank makes it diﬀicult to
know when hydrogen is produced; it might be because the electricity price is low enough
or because the electricity price is expected to be higher in the following hours so it is
better to produce more during the present hour and store it, even though the price is not
favourable, i.e., minimising the loss.
It is important to discuss how relating the recoverable heat with the actual eﬀiciency of the
electrolyser is a significant improvement. In section 9.2.1 a difference of 0.4 MW is shown
to occur at nominal power between the present model and a model that uses a constant
ratio for the recoverable heat. This difference, scaled to an electrolyser of 100 MW turns
out to be 3.33 MW. Which is a non-negligible quantity. One hour of this difference on
reusable heat, i.e., 3.33 MWh, is almost the yearly heat demand for one person, that is
3420 kWh, taking into account that the average consumption is 75 kWh/m2 [58] and the
average area per person on a house is 45.6 m2 [59]. Simultaneously factors make this a
rough estimation since heat and consumption might not happen at the same time. The
advantage of heat is that the district heating grid can behave as storage since heat is not
like electricity where generation and demand need to be met continuously. The heat grid
can be heated up to a certain point for later use. Nevertheless, the comparison between
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
71
==PAGE:80==
the possible missed heat and the annual consumption of heat by an individual is relevant
to put into perspective how important it is to model reusable heat appropriately.
Regarding the bidding model, the first stage model results have shown how capturing
the uncertainty of the day-ahead electricity prices via scenarios is not the best approach.
The scenarios used include data from low price periods, 2017 until 2019, and high price
periods, 2022. This tries to capture all the possible values that could happen in 2023 for
the same time period, i.e., April, and also tries to keep in mind the tendency of increasing
prices over the years.
The performance was not as good as expected.
Therefore, the
block bootstrapping technique and the scenario implementation could be substituted by
a probabilistic forecasting technique. Then a forecast of three days could be used in the
same way as the scenarios used in the present work. The forecast should be updated every
day taking into account the cleared day-ahead prices. An example of possible alternatives
for the implementation are the ARIMA (autoregressive integrated moving average) or
SARIMA (seasonal ARIMA) models.
For the first approach of the balancing market, assuming perfect foresight, the idealistic
behaviour is noticeable. Upregulation and downregulation are taken advantage of when
it is more suitable, knowing what will happen in the next hours. In reality, as discussed,
only the next hour can be assumed as known for the balancing market. Moreover, being
able to provide always upregulation assumes that an equivalent bid for that power was
submitted at the maximum price in the day-ahead market. This way, the power used for
upregulation is actually dispatched in the day-ahead, being it available for upregulation.
As discussed in section 8.2 this is not actually possible, since this bid at maximum price
should be submitted for every hour because it can not be predicted when an upregulation
event will happen. This would reduce the profit of the perfect foresight model, because
this maximum bid price bid is only done for the hours when there is upregulation, avoiding
buying expensive electricity for a fixed power in the other time steps.
The second approach, when no prior information about the balancing market is known,
is more realistic. In this case, the electrolyser participates in the regulation power market
but without actively offering balancing services, and only downregulation is actually done.
The imbalance price is taken for the missing power already scheduled before the day of
operation based on the day-ahead price realisation. This approach comes with a high risk
if the scheduled power in the day-ahead differs substantially from the power needed to
cover the demand. The greater this difference the more risk there is. This risk exists
because the missing power, in the worst case, can be bought during an upregulation
event, which supposes a greater cost than the day-ahead price. It could also be beneficial
if the period is downregulation, but its unpredictability is where the risk resides. For
example, during hour 08:00 the electrolyser is scheduled 10 MW in the day-ahead market.
It turns out that to meet the daily demand the power set point at 08:00 should be 12 MW.
Therefore 2 MW extra are consumed during this hour. At the end of the hour, Energinet
determines the imbalance price based on the bids activated. The first 10 MW are paid at
day-ahead level, while the 2 MW extra are paid at the imbalance price, which would be
worse than day-ahead if the hour was upregulation, better if it was upregulation, or equal
if no imbalance occurred (or they where fully covered by balancing bids at the day-ahead
price). Under this approach a bad scenario configuration, or bad forecast if implemented,
has the effect of increasing the risk of the electrolyser operation. Moreover, buying the
missing power in the balancing market is not likely to disturb the system for a 12 MW
electrolyser, but an imbalance in the next hour could be induced by buying missing power
if the electrolyser had more capacity, as it is expected in the future, e.g. 100 MW or even
250 MW. Activating such a big-demand asset would require an increase in production
72
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:81==
as large, thus, the next hour would likely be an upregulation event, since the change in
demand-production was not expected. This upregulation price is not favourable for the
electrolyser operation because most likely the next hour is also used to buy missing power,
therefore a high price for electricity would be paid and less profit made.
It is interesting to compare both approaches for the balancing market, along with the re-
sults when no balancing market is considered, see table 10.2. Base run 1 is the appropriate
run to consider when only the day-ahead market wants to be taken into account because
it has the same conditions as the runs done considering the balancing market, regarding
hydrogen demand and heat bounds. Taking into account that the perfect information
approach is the best optimal result one can get, it makes sense for the unknown informa-
tion approach to have a lower value. The consideration of the balancing market without
information, which is the most realistic approach from which results are obtained, seems
to perform better than the base run 1. This might lead to the assumption that buying
less power in the day-ahead market and waiting for the balancing market is beneficial, but
this is not always the case. It is this way for the given two analysed days since downreg-
ulation imbalances occur more often or in a higher manner than upregulation imbalances
during the periods when missing power is bought. Said in another way, the missing power
is bought mainly at a lower price than the day-ahead price because it was scheduled to
be bought in hours that later on turned out to be downregulation. The contrary could
also happen with the same probability, as the balancing direction is highly unpredictable.
If during the hours when missing power is bought the imbalance was upregulation, the
cost of obtaining the power from the balancing market would have been greater than the
day-ahead market, meaning that the result for the no information case would have been
lower than the base run 1.
Table 10.2: Comparison of the results for the base run 1 and the balancing market ap-
proaches
Base run 1
Perfect foresight
Unknown information
Consumption (MWh)
459.83
378.12
340.83
Downregulation (MWh)
-
151.91
67.12
Upregulation (MWh)
-
34.99
24
No regulation (MWh)
-
14.2
2.26
Profit (€)
4,865.78
10,710.86
6,983.36
From table 10.2 is also relevant to notice that consumption changes between runs. For
base run 1, the consumption corresponds to the consumption used to cover the demand
but also to charge the hydrogen tank as much as possible to maximise the profit. In the
perfect foresight run the consumption decreases because it is limited by the accepted power
in the day-ahead market. It is a limitation because from the day-ahead accepted power,
in the second stage, the missing power to fulfil demand is bought along with the extra
power (not needed to cover the demand) in downregulation hours that are profitable since
the price is lower than the break-even price. This extra power is limited to the number of
downregulation events, this is why the consumption is less than in the base run 1. For the
run with unknown information, the consumption corresponds to the one that covers the
minimum demand, since missing power is bought from the balancing market. It could be
the case that there was enough power accepted in the day-ahead market to take advantage
of low prices and charge the tank, but it is not the case and that is why the consumption
of 340.83 MWh is only used to fulfil the demand.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
73
==PAGE:82==
The third approach of the balancing market is not analysed, but it is expected that it
could perform in between the perfect foresight and the unknown information approach.
This is because the energy bought in the balancing market would be constrained to down-
regulation hours, meaning that the 7 upregulation periods where electricity is bought in
the unknown information case would be avoided. It can be assured that the performance
would be between the two considered approaches because the price of the imbalance is not
known. This is because if it is known that in the next hour, the price is lower, then the
power bought in the balancing market would be the maximum possible in order to cover
the missing power, mainly because no other hour is guaranteed to have a lower price; so
the present situation is taken advantage of at its maximum. This is done consecutively for
each downregulation event. This upper boundary reached by the downregulation power is
done indifferently to the downregulation price; which means that it would be of great ben-
efit if the downregulation price diverges largely from the day-ahead price (e.g. 25% lower
price), but not so profitable if the difference is minimum (e.g. 2% lower price). It could
be the case that the approach with unknown information schedules most of the missing
power in hours that are downregulation with great differences in price. This would lead
to a better solution that the third approach. This possible best solution comes at the cost
of higher risk since it would only perform better by chance, since neither upregulation,
downregulation or no regulation at all can be guaranteed when scheduling most of the
missing power.
74
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:83==
11
Conclusion
The number of electrolysers connected to the power grid is expected to increase in the
following years. Their modelling and optimisation are crucial to make the most out of this
technology.
In the present thesis, a detailed mathematical model of alkaline water electrolysis is pre-
sented. The model takes into account the non-linearities that are present in hydrogen
production in order to represent as close as possible its real behaviour. Reusable heat is
also included in the model, varying with the electrolyser eﬀiciency, in order to account for
the expected sector coupling that electrolysers can proportionate.
The base model simulation in the day-ahead electricity market for the first two days of
April 2023 under different conditions shows the correct implementation of the electrolyser
model. Under flexible hydrogen demand and non-constraining heat demand, the electrol-
yser makes a profit by taking advantage of low day-ahead electricity prices in order to fulfil
the demand and charge the hydrogen tank. The same happens when hydrogen demand
is fixed hourly; the hydrogen flows distribution change because hydrogen delivery needs
to match demand, but the overall performance is similar since the profit only decreases
by 5.65%. Having similar profits is possible because a hydrogen tank is used. It provides
flexibility to the system and enables the possibility to avoid operation under high electric-
ity prices. The simulation with constraining heat demand shows how in case of maximum
heat delivery to the district heating grid the electrolyser operation needs to be limited.
Energy consumption decreases by 3.5% with respect to the first run, which might not seem
enough, but is suﬀicient to decrease the hydrogen stored at the end of the time horizon
by 95.42%. I.e., under tight heat constraints, the flexibility that the hydrogen tank gives
to the system can not be utilised. This leads to the conclusion that if further heat could
be utilised such limitation would not occur. This simulation demonstrates how heat flows
are important to take into account. The heat analysis presented also demonstrates how
using a variable power-to-heat factor that takes the electrolyser eﬀiciency into account is
beneficial; by using it, it has been seen how underestimation of 15.81% is avoided and how
important that is, because one hour of underestimation makes up for around one year of
heat consumption for the average Dane.
The electrolyser model is then modified to model its participation in the day-ahead and
balancing electricity markets. The uncertainty present in the day-ahead prices is modelled
via stochastic programming and the bid acceptance in the day-ahead market is considered
uncertain. The stochastic programming results provide the electrolyser operator with a set
of power step bidding curves with an optimised price to bid for each power step. Results
for the first two days of April 2023 show that this method has its downsides because only
65.44% of the power is bought in the day-ahead market, and a higher rate was expected
because this increases the risk of the electrolyser operation. The increased risk is due
to the fact that more power needs to be bought in other markets, like the balancing, at
uncertain prices. Nevertheless, the bid acceptance is seen to perform correctly according
to the given data which is crucial for the correct modelling of the participation in the
day-ahead market.
Moreover, balancing market integration is identified to be possible under different ap-
proaches.
The first approach presented considers a perfect foresight of the balancing
direction and price. The second considers both as unknown, and the third considers that
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
75
==PAGE:84==
direction can be known 15 minutes before the operation at an unknown price. Results for
the first case show how the profit made increased by 54.72%, while for the second case,
the increase is contained at 30.32%, with respect to the base model where participation in
the day-ahead market is guaranteed. These results show how beneficial the ideal approach
of perfect foresight would be since profit could be increased significantly, but it is not
realistic since this foresight is not available. The second approach reassembles more of
what would happen in reality, and it is also discussed how a lower profit could have been
obtained under a different balancing market behaviour for the same given days. The third
model has not been analysed but it is expected that it would lead to the most realistic
result.
76
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:85==
12
Future work
In the base electrolyser model, the temperature was assumed to be fixed at 90 °C. Although
this is a common approach, it would be interesting to include the temperature variation
that the electrolyser shows when the power changes. I.e., the linearization done between
power and current could be broadened to a multidimensional linearization that would
include power, current and temperature. By doing so the model would be more accurate
since the temperature has an effect on the hydrogen production.
Temperature dynamics could be studied further by incorporating the model of a heat
exchanger. It would be an interesting addition since the reusable heat power could be
analysed as a volumetric water flow (m3/h) at a certain temperature, which might be
more suitable when integrating the electrolyser in a district heating grid.
Moreover, the present model only considers the optimisation of the price for the step bids
submitted in the day-ahead market. Further research could be made to optimise both the
quantity of power and price of these step bids. As discussed before, this would be useful
for large electrolysers whose capacity can not be covered with the number of steps and the
minimum power for each step that Nord Pool offers at the moment.
In the bidding model, it has also been seen how the scenario generation technique supposes
a downside of the model because it does not reflect as expected the behaviour of the day-
ahead market making the success rate of the bids low, around 2/3. It is been discussed
that a probabilistic forecast of the day-ahead electricity prices is expected to raise this
success rate, and further research could be made by implementing different forecasting
techniques.
Moreover, further research could be made on the shadow prices of the proposed system.
For it, an analysis of the dual problem would be adequate.
It would give additional
information on the cost of producing hydrogen for the studied system. Also, the effect of
different heat prices could be analysed to see the amount of buffer this revenue gives in
relation to the acceptable electricity price to break even.
Finally, further analysis could be made taking input data for different seasons and running
the model for longer time horizons. This would probably show changes in the operation of
the electrolyser between seasons due to different electricity prices, both for the day-ahead
and the balancing market.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
77
==PAGE:86==
78
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
A european green deal. Accessed: 31-01-2023. url: https://commission.europa.eu/
strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en.
[2]
Greg F. Naterer, Ibrahim Dincer, and Calin Zamfirescu. Hydrogen production from
nuclear energy. Vol. 9781447149385. Cited by: 98; All Open Access, Green Open
Access. 2013, pp. 1–492. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-4938-5. url: https://www.scopus.
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84945662232&doi=10.1007%5C%2f978-1-4471-
4938-5&partnerID=40&md5=8d9e4f3f047ca36e23ba724d9dcd4261.
[3]
Powering a climate-neutral economy: Commission sets out plans for the energy
system of the future and clean hydrogen. Accessed: 31-01-2023. url: https://ec.
europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_1259.
[4]
Bred milliardaftale sætter turbo på nye grønne brændstoffer. Accessed: 31-01-2023.
url: https://kefm.dk/aktuelt/nyheder/2022/mar/bred-milliardaftale-saetter-turbo-
paa-nye-groenne-braendstoffer.
[5]
Yi Zheng et al. “Optimal day-ahead dispatch of an alkaline electrolyser system
concerning thermal–electric properties and state-transitional dynamics”. In: Applied
Energy 307 (2022), p. 118091. issn: 0306-2619. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2021.118091. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261921013751.
[6]
Manuel Tobias Baumhof et al. Optimization of Hybrid Power Plants: When Is a
Detailed Electrolyzer Model Necessary? 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2301.05310.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.05310.
[7]
Leandro Janke et al. “Optimizing power-to-H2 participation in the Nord Pool elec-
tricity market: Effects of different bidding strategies on plant operation”. In: Re-
newable Energy 156 (2020), pp. 820–836. issn: 0960-1481. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.renene.2020.04.080. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960148120306121.
[8]
David Schlund and Philipp Theile. “Simultaneity of green energy and hydrogen pro-
duction: Analysing the dispatch of a grid-connected electrolyser”. In: Energy Policy
166 (2022), p. 113008. issn: 0301-4215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2022.
113008. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421522002336.
[9]
Yi Zheng et al. “Data-driven scheme for optimal day-ahead operation of a wind/hy-
drogen system under multiple uncertainties”. In: Applied Energy 329 (2023),
p. 120201. issn: 0306-2619. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.120201.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261922014581.
[10]
Jiarong Li et al. “Operation Optimization of Power to Hydrogen and Heat (P2HH)
in ADN Coordinated With the District Heating Network”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Sustainable Energy 10.4 (2019), pp. 1672–1683. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2018.2868827.
[11]
Ilaria Sorrenti et al. “Low-carbon and cost-eﬀicient hydrogen optimisation through
a grid-connected electrolyser: The case of GreenLab skive”. In: Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews 171 (2023), p. 113033. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.113033. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1364032122009145.
[12]
L. Lück et al. “Economic potential of water electrolysis within future electricity
markets”. In: 2017 14th International Conference on the European Energy Market
(EEM). 2017, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/EEM.2017.7981950.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
79
==PAGE:88==
[13]
Janus Bundsgaard Mosbæk Tougaard. “Participation of an electrolyser in the Danish
electricity market, Deltagelse af en electrolyser i det Danske elmarked”. und. 2016.
[14]
Akbar Dadkhah et al. “On the optimal planning of a hydrogen refuelling station
participating in the electricity and balancing markets”. In: International Journal of
Hydrogen Energy 46.2 (2021), pp. 1488–1500. issn: 0360-3199. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.10.130. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0360319920339781.
[15]
Sirui Wu et al. “Electricity allocation strategy for on-site hydrogen refueling sta-
tions in the forward and spot markets”. In: IET Renewable Power Generation
16.12 (2022). Cited by: 0; All Open Access, Gold Open Access, pp. 2532–2546.
doi: 10.1049/rpg2.12406. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=
2 - s2 . 0 - 85124911879 & doi = 10 . 1049 % 5C % 2frpg2 . 12406 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
c4670eaf65f9e2470b89dfc6e097cb03.
[16]
J. Siecker, K. Kusakana, and B.P. Numbi. “Optimal heat recovery during polymer
electrolyte membrane electrolysis”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
47.76 (2022), pp. 32692–32706. issn: 0360-3199. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2022.07.169. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360319922032220.
[17]
Jens Baetens et al. “A Two-Stage Stochastic Optimisation Methodology for the
Operation of a Chlor-Alkali Electrolyser under Variable DAM and FCR Market
Prices”. In: Energies 13.21 (2020). issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en13215675. url:
https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/13/21/5675.
[18]
Samuel Furfari and Alessandro Clerici. “Green hydrogen: the crucial performance
of electrolysers fed by variable and intermittent renewable electricity”. In: European
Physical Journal Plus 136.5 (2021). Cited by: 14. doi: 10.1140/epjp/s13360-021-
01445-5. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85105598358&
doi=10 .1140 %5C% 2fepjp% 5C%2fs13360- 021- 01445- 5&partnerID=40&md5=
4c714f0dbc38947039a5a2ba8c9388de.
[19]
Yi Zheng et al. “Incorporating Optimal Operation Strategies into Investment Plan-
ning for Wind/Electrolyser System”. In: CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems
8.2 (2022), pp. 347–359. doi: 10.17775/CSEEJPES.2021.04240.
[20]
G. Matute et al. “Optimal dispatch model for PV-electrolysis plants in self-
consumption regime to produce green hydrogen: A Spanish case study”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Hydrogen Energy 47.60 (2022), pp. 25202–25213. issn: 0360-3199.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.05.270. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0360319922024727.
[21]
Guangsheng Pan et al. “Optimal Planning for Electricity-Hydrogen Integrated En-
ergy System Considering Power to Hydrogen and Heat and Seasonal Storage”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 11.4 (2020), pp. 2662–2676. doi: 10.1109/
TSTE.2020.2970078.
[22]
Alexander Buttler and Hartmut Spliethoff. “Current status of water electrolysis for
energy storage, grid balancing and sector coupling via power-to-gas and power-
to-liquids: A review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 82 (2018),
pp. 2440–2454. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.003.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136403211731242X.
[23]
Danish Energy Agency and Energinet. Technology Data – Renewable fuels. Tech. rep.
0009. Danish Energy Agency, Apr. 2022.
[24]
GreenLab to be catalyst for global P2X market. Accessed: 28-02-2023. url: https:
//www.greenlab.dk/knowledge/greenlab-to-be-catalyst-for-global-energy-market-
within-p2x/.
80
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:89==
[25]
GreenHyScale project enters grant agreement preparation phase. Accessed: 28-02-
2023. url: https://www.greenlab.dk/knowledge/greenhyscale-project-enter-grant-
agreement-preparation-phase/.
[26]
Øystein Ulleberg. “Modeling of advanced alkaline electrolyzers: A system simulation
approach”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 28.1 (2003). Cited by: 572,
pp. 21–33. doi: 10.1016/S0360-3199(02)00033-2. url: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-0037207612&doi=10.1016%5C%2fS0360-3199%5C%
2802%5C%2900033-2&partnerID=40&md5=097534f5feea41022a13b8134f659cc7.
[27]
Mónica Sánchez et al. “Semi-empirical model and experimental validation for the
performance evaluation of a 15 kW alkaline water electrolyzer”. In: International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 43.45 (2018). Cited by: 71, pp. 20332–20345. doi: 10.
1016/j.ijhydene.2018.09.029. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-
s2.0-85054454056&doi=10.1016%5C%2fj.ijhydene.2018.09.029&partnerID=40&md5=
0c107c9c2cca3e4d4b2ea7db81d7e94d.
[28]
Icons8. Icons, illustrations, photos, music, and design tools Icons. https://icons8.
com/. Accessed: 10-02-2023.
[29]
Oversigt over systemydelser. Accessed: 01-04-2023. url: https://energinet.dk/el/
systemydelser/introduktion-til-systemydelser/oversigt-over-systemydelser/.
[30]
Day-ahead market. Accessed: 01-04-2023. url: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/
the-power-market/Day-ahead-market/.
[31]
Order types. Accessed: 01-04-2023. url: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/trading/
Day-ahead-trading/Order-types/.
[32]
Basics of the power market. Accessed: 02-04-2023. url: https://www.epexspot.com/
en/basicspowermarket.
[33]
Intraday Market. Accessed: 02-04-2023. url: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/
the-power-market/Intraday-market/.
[34]
Single Intraday Coupling (SIDC). Accessed: 02-04-2023. url: https://www.entsoe.
eu/network_codes/cacm/implementation/sidc/.
[35]
Regulation C2 - The balancing market and balance settlement. https://energinet.dk/
regler/el/elmarked/. Accessed: 24-04-2023.
[36]
Tender conditions for ancillary services. https://en.energinet.dk/electricity/ancillary-
services/tender-conditions-for-ancillary-services/. Accessed: 24-04-2023.
[37]
Single Intraday Coupling (SIDC). Accessed: 02-04-2023. url: https : / / www .
nordpoolgroup.com/en/the-power-market/.
[38]
Day-ahead: New harmonised maximum clearing price from delivery day Wednesday
11th May. Accessed: 13-04-2023. url: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/trading/
Operational-Message-List/2022/04/day-ahead-new-harmonised-maximum-clearing-
price-from-delivery-day-wednesday-11th-may-20220411122700/.
[39]
Antonio J Conejo, Miguel Carrion, and Juan M Morales. Decision making under
uncertainty in electricity markets. en. 2010th ed. International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science. New York, NY: Springer, Nov. 2012.
[40]
Bootstrapping Statistics. What it is and why it’s used. Accessed: 11-04-2023. url:
https://towardsdatascience.com/bootstrapping-statistics-what-it-is-and-why-its-used-
e2fa29577307.
[41]
entsoe Transparency Platform. Accessed: 11-04-2023. url: https : / / transparency .
entsoe.eu/.
[42]
Chunjun Huang et al. “Economic model predictive control for multi-energy system
considering hydrogen-thermal-electric dynamics and waste heat recovery of MW-
level alkaline electrolyzer”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 265 (2022).
Cited by: 10; All Open Access, Green Open Access, Hybrid Gold Open Access. doi:
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
81
==PAGE:90==
10.1016/j.enconman.2022.115697. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-85130472754&doi=10.1016%5C%2fj.enconman.2022.115697&partnerID=
40&md5=b03907c6145ae760d2d26d92d64ce710.
[43]
Katinka Johansen and Sven Werner. “Something is sustainable in the state of Den-
mark: A review of the Danish district heating sector”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 158 (2022), p. 112117. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rser.2022.112117. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1364032122000466.
[44]
The price of district heating 2022 for private customers. Accessed: 03-05-2023. url:
https : / / www . hofor . dk / privat / priser - paa - forsyninger - privatkunder / prisen - paa -
fjernvarme-2022-for-privatkunder/.
[45]
The first price ceiling for excess heat has now been set. https://presse.ens.dk/news/
det-foerste-prisloft-for-overskudsvarme-er-nu-fastsat-440233?utm_campaign=send_
list. Accessed: 02-05-2023.
[46]
The Surplus Heat Executive Order. BEK nr 2652 af 28/12/2021. https://www.
retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2021/2652. Accessed: 02-05-2023.
[47]
The Danish Energy Agency confirms the price ceiling for excess heat for 2023. https:
//ens.dk/presse/energistyrelsen-bekraefter-prisloft-overskudsvarme-2023. Accessed:
02-05-2023.
[48]
EU Energy systems integration: hydrogen. Accessed: 03-05-2023. url: https://energy.
ec.europa.eu/topics/energy-systems-integration/hydrogen_en.
[49]
Hossein Nami et al. “Techno-economic analysis of current and emerging electrolysis
technologies for green hydrogen production”. In: Energy Conversion and Manage-
ment 269 (2022). Cited by: 20. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2022.116162. url: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85134119324&doi=10.1016%2fj.
enconman.2022.116162&partnerID=40&md5=713a5a9999cdbf913772ac6179728247.
[50]
Negotiating Hydrogen Contracts. Accessed: 03-05-2023. url: https : / / www .
projectfinance.law/publications/2021/february/negotiating-hydrogen-contracts/.
[51]
Klavdija Zirngast, Zdravko Kravanja, and Zorka Novak Pintarič. “The influence
of variable CO2 emission tax rate on flexible chemical process synthesis”. In: Pro-
cesses 9.10 (2021). Cited by: 3; All Open Access, Gold Open Access. doi: 10 .
3390 / pr9101720. url: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 -
s2 . 0 - 85116062207 & doi = 10 . 3390 % 5C % 2fpr9101720 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
67340152187a12f42720f710188048cb.
[52]
Meng Song and Mikael Amelin. “Purchase bidding strategy for a retailer with flexible
demands in day-ahead electricity market”. In: 2017 IEEE Manchester PowerTech.
2017. doi: 10.1109/PTC.2017.7980863.
[53]
Energy Forecasting and Optimization for the Energy Sector. ENFOR. Accessed: 03-
05-2023. url: https://enfor.dk/.
[54]
Rules and regulations. https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/trading/Rules- and-
regulations/. Accessed: 01-04-2023.
[55]
GreenLab Skive. https://www.greenlab.dk/. Accessed: 01-02-2023.
[56]
Regulating information per area. Accessed: 21-05-2023. url: https : / / www .
nordpoolgroup.com/en/Market-data1/Regulating-Power1/Regulating-Power--Area1/
DK1/Norway/?view=table.
[57]
Christopher Varela, Mahmoud Mostafa, and Edwin Zondervan. “Modeling alkaline
water electrolysis for power-to-x applications: A scheduling approach”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Hydrogen Energy 46.14 (2021). Cited by: 59, pp. 9303–9313. doi:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.12.111. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
82
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:91==
eid=2-s2.0-85098997662&doi=10.1016%5C%2fj.ijhydene.2020.12.111&partnerID=
40&md5=d63544612d67f417c705850cb79109ac.
[58]
Compare your heat consumption. Andel Energi. https://andelenergi.dk/kundeservice/
forbrug/gennemsnitsforbrug/varmeforbrug/. Accessed: 01-06-2023.
[59]
Statistics Denmark. Housing. https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/borgere/
boligforhold. Accessed: 01-06-2023.
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
83
==PAGE:92==
84
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:93==
A
Flow diagram of the mathematical
models
In fig. A.5, H refers to the first hour of operation for a given day, and T to the time
step. Consequently, H-23:00 refers to the moment when the day-ahead market prices are
announced for the day of operation since they are announced 1 hour after market clear-
ance, approximately. Finally, the term H-00:15 refers to the moment when the balancing
direction is revealed, i.e., 15 minutes before operation.
Output
•
Optimal dispatch
•
Power consumption
•
Hydrogen production
•
Hydrogen stored
•
Reusable heat
•
Profit
Day-ahead 
electricity prices
Electrolyser and 
demand parameters
•
Electrolyser capacity
•
Temperature
•
Hydrogen tank size
•
etc.
Base electrolyser model
•
Deterministic
•
Dispatch in the day-ahead 
market guaranteed
•
No bidding considered
Figure A.1: Diagram for the base model
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
85
==PAGE:94==
Day-ahead 
electricity prices
scenarios
Electrolyser and 
demand parameters
•
Electrolyser capacity
•
Temperature
•
Hydrogen tank size
•
etc.
2nd stage
Output
•
Step bid curve for each 
hour of the time horizon
•
Expected profit
Uncertainty revealed
•
Cleared day-ahead prices
Output
•
Accepted power in the 
day-ahead market based 
on the bids
1st stage model
•
Stochastic
•
Dispatch in the day-ahead 
market is not guaranteed
•
No bidding in the day-ahead 
market
Figure A.2: Diagram for the first stage model
86
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:95==
Output
•
Optimal dispatch
•
Power consumption
•
Hydrogen production
•
Hydrogen stored
•
Reusable heat
•
Profit
•
Upregulation power
•
Downregulation power
•
No regulation power
Electrolyser and 
demand parameters
•
Electrolyser capacity
•
Temperature
•
Hydrogen tank size
•
etc.
2nd stage: perfect 
foresight
•
Deterministic
•
Up-, down- and no-
regulation is known a priori
Accepted power in the 
day-ahead market
Day-ahead 
electricity prices
Imbalance price
Figure A.3: Diagram for the perfect foresight of the balancing market model
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
87
==PAGE:96==
Electrolyser and 
demand parameters
•
Electrolyser capacity
•
Temperature
•
Hydrogen tank size
•
etc.
Accepted power in the 
day-ahead market
Day-ahead 
electricity prices
Imbalance price
Output
•
Missing power 
to fulfil demand
•
Optimal 
dispatch
•
Power 
consumption
•
Hydrogen 
production
•
Hydrogen stored
•
Reusable heat
•
Profit
2nd stage: unknow 
information
Base electrolyser 
model modified I
Post 
processing
Final cost
Figure A.4: Diagram for the unknown balancing market information model
88
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:97==
Electrolyser and 
demand parameters
•
Electrolyser capacity
•
Temperature
•
Hydrogen tank size
•
etc.
Accepted power in the 
day-ahead market
Day-ahead 
electricity prices
Imbalance 
direction is known
Output
•
Missing power 
to fulfil demand
T = T+1
2nd stage: known 
imbalance direction
Base electrolyser 
model modified I
T = H-23:00
T = H-00:15
Base electrolyser 
model modified II
•
Solved for one 
hour only
Figure A.5: Diagram for the partial information model: imbalance direction is known
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
89
==PAGE:98==
B
Base model additional results
For runs 2 and 3 the eﬀiciency curves that are not included in chapter 9 because of their
redundancy are shown next.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Hours
Efficiency (p.u.)
Figure B.1: Eﬀiciency for the base run 2
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Hours
Efficiency (p.u.)
Figure B.2: Eﬀiciency for the base run 3
90
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:99==
C
Bidding modelling additional results
C.1
Perfect foresight
The results regarding the hydrogen flows and the storage level are displayed next.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
100
200
300
Production
Sold
Direct Demand
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
Figure C.1: Hydrogen flows
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Storage in
Storage out
SOC
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
SOC (kg)
Figure C.2: Hydrogen storage input, output and SOC
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
91
==PAGE:100==
C.2
No prior information of the balancing market
The results regarding the hydrogen flows, storage level, and electrolyser state for the
second approach of the balancing market are shown next.
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
100
200
300
Production
Sold
Direct Demand
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
Figure C.3: Hydrogen flows
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
50
100
150
200
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Storage in
Storage out
SOC
Hours
Hydrogen (kg/h)
SOC (kg)
Figure C.4: Hydrogen storage input, output and SOC
92
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:101==
00:00
Apr 1, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Apr 2, 2023
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
0
1
On
Standby
Off
Hours
Figure C.5: Electrolyser state
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
93
==PAGE:102==
94
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:103==
D
Acronyms
AEC
alkaline electrolysis cell
VRE
variable renewable energy
GLS
GreenLab Skive
NPV
net present value
NN
neural network
PIO
price independent order
PDO
price dependent order
SMR
Steam Methane Reforming
LCOH
levelised cost of hydrogen
NPV
net present value
ETS
EU emissions trading system
ADN
active distribution network
DHN
district heating network
CHP
combined heat and power
MINLP mix integer non-linear problem
DRCCP data-driven robust chance constrained programming
MLPNN multi-layer perception neural network
DDF
DRCCP-based decision framework
OHRS
on-site hydrogen refuelling station
TOU
time of use
AEL
Alkaline electrolysis
AEC
alkaline electrolysis cells
PEMEC polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis cells
SOEC
solid oxide electrolysis cells
PEM
polymer electrolyte membrane
HWST hot water storage tank
SCIP
Solving Constrained Integer Programs
FCR
frequency containment reserves
NSGAII non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm
IRR
internal rate of return
NLP
non-linear problem
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
95
==PAGE:104==
EH-IES electricity-hydrogen integrated energy system
ED
electrolysis device
DC
direct current
P2HH
power to hydrogen and heat
PIO
price-independent order
PDO
price-dependent order
MAR
minimum acceptance ratio
CCS
carbon capture systems
96
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
==PAGE:105==
Multi-stage bidding optimisation of electrolysers under uncertainty in electricity markets
97
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Matematiktorvet, Building 303B
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
