==PAGE:1==
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforce-
ment Learning Techniques
Master Thesis
Junyi Wang
2023
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
By
(s212633) Junyi Wang
Advisor(s)
Lazaros Nalpantidis, Professor at the Electrical and Photonic Engineering Department of
DTU
Aljaz Kramberger, Associate Professor at the Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Institute of SDU
Robotics
Education
Master Thesis
Programme
Autonomous syetsms
Period
27 February 2023 to 27 July 2023
ECTS
30
Copyright:
Junyi Wang 2023
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Christian Andersen, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Electrical and
Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of robotics and reinforcement
learning.
Junyi Wang - s212633
Signature
Date
ii
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Industrial robots have been widely deployed in many conventional manufacturing lines, e.g.,
assembly of components. The deployment aims to relieve workers of manual and repetitive
work. Most of the robots are pre-programmed to work in a fixed environment, however,
they would not obtain the ideal performance if dynamic changes happen during the oper-
ations, e.g., the pose change of the objects. Workers have to program the robot again
or adjust the target pose to complete tasks, thus it does not reduce the manufacturing labor.
Learning plays an important role in robotic solutions especially in assembly tasks by
providing adaptability and flexibility, facilitating human-robot collaboration, and enabling
continuous improvement. Therefore, it empowers robots to handle complex assembly
processes and reach higher-quality results. The thesis focuses on improving the learning
capacities of the 7 degrees of freedom (DoF) Franka Emika Panda Arm robot using two
reinforcement learning (RL) techniques, which are proximal policy optimization (PPO) and
soft actor-critic (SAC) for assembly work in the simulated environment. The assembly
work is divided into three different sub-tasks, i.e., the pick, place, and insertion tasks. Each
sub-task is trained successfully with proper controllers, i.e., impedance control, position
control, and admittance control methods, respectively. They are trained to learn optimized
policies with 128 Franka robots in parallel for 6 hours on average, with 1024 training
epochs. All the tasks could be completed stably and reach a 100% success rate after RL
training. From the experimental results, the converge speed of PPO is faster by 13.04%
and 4.19% than SAC in the pick and place tasks but it is slower by 25.52% than SAC in
the insertion task. In terms of the performance of training stability, the variance of PPO is
smaller than SAC in all tasks. The PPO variances of pick, place, and insertion tasks are
6.13, 7.64, and 7.38, and the SAC variances are 17.92, 10.58, and 21.95.
According to the results of this project, PPO with impedance control is fit for the peg
pick task, PPO with position control is good for the peg place task, and SAC with admit-
tance control is beneficial for the peg insertion task. All these strategies work with a 100%
success rate in the simulated robotic assembly work.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Junyi Wang, MSc. Autonomous Systems, Electrical and Photonic Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Lazaros Nalpantidis, Professor, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Supervisor
Aljaz Kramberger, Associate Professor, Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Institute of SDU
Robotics
Supervisor
iv
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Project Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
5
2.1
RL in Assembly Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Assembly Control Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Parts of Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Model Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Controller Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.5
Pseudocode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Experiments
21
4.1
Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Discussion
37
5.1
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6
Conclusion
43
6.1
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Bibliography
45
A Appendix
49
A.1 Project Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In conventional manual assembly, workers are responsible for performing repetitive and
intricate tasks such as component positioning, fastening, and quality inspection. However,
manual assembly is susceptible to human errors, inconsistencies, and physical strain.
These limitations can lead to production bottlenecks, increased rework, and compromised
product quality. Additionally, the manual assembly process may not be able to meet
the growing demands of high-volume production requirements. With the introduction
of Industry 4.0, the manufacturing industry has witnessed significant advancements in
automation and robotics, transforming traditional manual assembly processes into highly
efficient and accurate operations. Robotics assembly work leverages the capabilities of
robotic systems to perform complex assembly tasks with precision, speed, and reliability.
The robots have been widely deployed in assembly lines, following desired trajectories for
performing assembly tasks [1, 2]. Robotics assembly work offers numerous advantages
over traditional manual assembly, including increased productivity, improved quality control,
and enhanced worker safety.
Simulation software plays a crucial role in robotics assembly work as it enables engi-
neers and researchers to create virtual environments that almost accurately replicate
real-world assembly scenarios. These software packages provide comprehensive tools for
modeling robotic systems, defining assembly tasks, and simulating robot behavior. The
advantages of utilizing simulated robotics assembly work are numerous. First, it allows for
rapid prototyping and design iteration in the simulation environment. Engineers can quickly
create virtual representations of robotic systems and assess their performance before
physical implementation, e.g., digital twins. This significantly reduces development time
and costs associated with building and modifying physical experiments. Second, simulated
assembly work provides a safe and controlled environment for debugging and testing.
Therefore, it supplies a good place to evaluate robot trajectories, verify collision avoidance
strategies, and optimize motion planning algorithms. Furthermore, advanced Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs) enhanced the feasibility of simulation software and boosted
the computation speed. They excel at parallel processing tasks and can handle complex
physics calculations, render high-quality graphics, and simulate large-scale environments
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
1
==PAGE:10==
with real-time responsiveness.
Robotics assembly mostly works for those easy tasks which are fixed motion trajec-
tories, however, it often struggles to adapt to complex scenarios. By creating simulation
environments that allow for robotics training with reinforcement learning (RL), the agents
usually learn a proper policy for one task after millions of trials. Thanks to the development
of GPUs, RL agents enable the generation of large amounts of training data, which can be
used to accelerate the learning process and improve the agents performance.
Assembly work encompasses a wide range of tasks, each with its unique challenges
and requirements. From picking up components and inserting objects, assembly tasks
demand precision, dexterity, and careful coordination. Among these tasks, one of the
most classical and widely studied is the peg-in-hole (PiH) assembly. This task involves
inserting a peg-shaped object into a corresponding hole with accuracy and efficiency. The
PiH assembly is a fundamental benchmark in robotics and automation research due to its
complexity and practical relevance. As such, the focus of this thesis will be on exploring
and using RL techniques for PiH assembly, dividing it into three tasks: pick the peg, place
the peg, and insert the peg in the simulated robotic assembly task.
1.2
Objectives
The primary objective of this thesis is to leverage RL techniques to accomplish simulated
robotic assembly work. To achieve this, the following objectives are proposed:
1. Design the accurate CAD files such as task board, and components accordingly to
the actual needs;
2. Implement the proper and stable controller for robotic arm manipulation;
3. Learn to assemble with a state-of-the-art RL algorithm and test an assembling policy
in Isaac Sim;
1.3
Limitation
Issac Sim is a powerful simulation platform that offers high-fidelity physics simulation and
realistic rendering, making it an ideal choice for robotics assembly work. However, due to
hardware constraints 1, I have had to explore alternative options. As a result, I have opted
to utilize Issac Gym, a simulation environment that provides a simplified version of the
Issac Sim capabilities while offering compatibility with my laptop’s specifications. Although
Issac Gym may not provide the same level of realism and fidelity as Issac Sim, it still offers
a suitable environment for conducting experiments and evaluating RL algorithms in the
context of robotics assembly tasks.
1.4
Project Diagram
The diagram of this project is shown in Figure 1.1. The assembly work is divided into three
tasks, which are peg pick, peg place, and peg insertion tasks. The control strategies are
chosen position control, impedance control, and admittance control. The RL techniques
are utilized two state-of-the-art algorithms: PPO and SAC.
1.5
Thesis Outline
The section outlines the structure of the thesis and provides a brief introduction to the
content of each chapter. The structure is as follows:
1https://docs.omniverse.nvidia.com/app_isaacsim/app_isaacsim/requirements.html
2
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.1: Project diagram
• Chapter 2: Related work focuses on the relevant previous research progress on the
control strategies and learning methods. The research mainly involves pick-place
and PiH work.
• Chapter 3: Methodology introduces the procedures in the project, referring to
related state-of-the-art work. The section includes the following parts, e.g. set up of
the simulation environment, the principles of selected control methods, and detailed
key procedures of RL techniques.
• Chapter 4: Experiments describes how to apply the mentioned methods in the
simulation environment. The experimental results of different control strategies and
RL techniques are shown with plots, which reflect the performance of control and
learning.
• Chapter 5: Discussion compares the experimental results of the project and ana-
lyzes the controller, learning speed, and learning stability.
• Chapter 6: Conclusion summarizes the current work, explains some deficiencies
in the project, and new aspects which are expected to be implemented in the future.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
2.1
RL in Assembly Work
There are many factors that lead to the implementation of RL, such as the limited adapt-
ability of the conventional algorithms [3], complex online optimization [4], and manually
redesigning the optimization process and parameters of similar new tasks [5]. It can be
considered a great success when applying RL methods in solving problems from playing
pixel games [6, 7] to robotics manipulation [8, 9, 10]. RL is usually divided into model-based
RL methods and model-free methods. The model-based RL methods require less data
but need a transition model of the environment to interpret the rewards and actions [11,
12]. Levine et al. developed a state-of-the-art model-based RL algorithm called Gradient
Policy Search (GPS) for solving contact-rich tasks [13]. Although the methods improve
the sample efficiency, they may be stuck in local optimum by their formulation, and are not
suitable for high precision tasks.
In contrast, the agent learns the assembly policy directly without knowing a model in
the model-free based RL methods. Xin et al. proposed a novel algorithm named Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient with Base Controllers (DDPGwB) to utilize several controllers
to learn challenging robotics tasks in a safe method [14]. When the agent starts exploring
the environment randomly, it will lead to a low exploration efficiency case when the
high continuous action and state space. Li et al. presented an Augmented Curiosity-
driven Experience Replay (ACDER) method, which leverages a curious-driven method
to set dynamic initial states to improve the robotics manipulation sample efficiency [15].
Theodorou et al. introduced Policy Improvement with Path Integrals (PI2) to improve the
gradient-based policy performance and make high-dimensional robotics control become
more stable [16]. Singh et al. proposed an algorithm named Connecting Skills via Offline
RL for Generalization (COG) to reuse the experience of the previous task to extend new
assembly work skills [17]. Similarly, a contextual off-policy optimization method called
LAtent-Movements Policy Optimization (LAMPO), which can leverage gradient estimation
to reuse prior skill by self-normalized importance sampling, was developed by Tosatto et
al. [18].
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.1
RL in PiH
It also has been a popular trend to make research contact-rich tasks in assembly work by
traditional RL methods. Currently, PiH is the most typical work in assembly processes,
accounting for 56% [19]. Therefore, many researchers have studied this field from the
following aspects such as different peg shapes, number of pegs, and tolerance. Beltran et
al. trained SAC to accomplish PiH tasks and other electronic insertion work with over 60%
accuracy [20]. Xu et al. researched double PiH tasks successfully with DDPG although
the success rate would be dropped after changing the initial start position [21]. Wang
et al. utilized a big arm and fine hand motions to finish more different peg objects with
learning by demonstration but need more improvement for the tolerance of 4.2 mm and
67% accuracy [22]. Kim et al. trained a successful policy for the square-shaped PiH with
less tolerance of 0.04 mm [23]. Zhao et al. reached a success rate of up to 87% with 0.02
mm tolerance [24]. Park et al. also used PPO to learn intelligent gripping policies [25].
Different from using a single robot arm, Marven et al. demonstrated a dual-arm method to
finish PiH [26]. However, almost all these PiH tasks are implemented with a fixed peg in
the gripper, which means if the peg is not within the gripper, the task of PiH will become
harder than before and may decrease the expected experimental results.
2.2
Assembly Control Methods
Since different controllers of robots fit specific tasks, the selection of controllers is one of the
crucial parts of robotics assembly work [27]. After the long development of robotics control
strategies, it can be classified into four categories, i.e., passive compliance mechanisms,
active compliance control, auxiliary technologies, and machine learning algorithms [28].
The passive compliance mechanisms methods are usually designed for specific assembly
works, so they show poor adaptability and limited use [29]. Auxiliary devices have been
used to improve robotics flexibility in assembly work. For example, Fukukawa et al.
developed a manipulator with parallel 3-fingers to improve the ring-type assembly work [30]
but auxiliary devices are normally expensive and sophisticated. Learning by demonstration
is one of the most typical machine learning methods to guide robots to learn new behaviors
in assembly work [31]. Nemec et al. designed a novel algorithm that used a dynamic
movement primitives framework as PiH task representation [32]. Although the algorithm
can reach a high accuracy and reduce environmental noise, it focuses on a single task
manually and depends on robotics kinematics. Active compliance control applications are
broad since they can provide the contact force/torque and position data to generate the
desired robot end effector trajectories, especially force control is more widely used than
other control methods in most assembly work [33]. To control the contact forces during
insertion work, impedance control [34], admittance control [35], and hybrid force/position
control [36] are common methods. Wang et al. proposed a hybrid force/position control
strategy that merges the vision and force sensor to improve the control [37], however,
the design of the hybrid controller is difficult in the hardware system because the force
control has to be integrated with the strategy searching hole process. Impedance control is
efficient for robot force control as its low computational complexity and strong robustness
feature [38, 39]. Mol et al. proposed a nested admittance/impedance control method
for decreasing the effects of geometric misalignment in PiH, but their trajectory tracking
performance is worse than pure impedance control [40].
6
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:15==
3
Methodology
3.1
Parts of Methodology
The present project aims to use RL techniques to solve the assembly work with robots.
To realize it, the whole task can be divided into several parts, involving building models,
controller design, and RL training. The model part includes creating models of assembly
components and how to set up the simulation environment. For the controller part, position
control and force control methods are designed and applied in different assembly tasks.
And in the RL part, two state-of-the-art RL methods are utilized in the training process.
3.2
Model Setup
Building a good environment is an essential prerequisite before experiments. It affects the
performance of the whole experiment or even the conclusions. In this project, the simulation
software Isaac Gym [41] is applied within the PhysX [42] physics engine. It enables
thousands of simulation work in parallel on one workstation and supports the calculation
of physics simulation runs on GPU. These excellent features promise the simulation work
close to reality and save the sampling time when training RL. The simulation environment
includes Franka Emika robots, tables, and assembly components.
3.2.1
Franka Emika Panda Arm
Figure 3.1 shows Franka Emika Panda Arm model in RViz. RViz is a powerful 3D visualiza-
tion tool, which allows users to view and analyze robot models. This helps in visualizing the
kinematics and dynamics of the robot during planning and control. It is designed for 7 DoFs
to handle payloads with high precision and maintain safety in collaborative environments
under force and torque control. To finish assembly works, a franka hand with two fingers is
usually equipped at the end effector of the Panda Arm, making it suitable for applications
such as assembly, manipulation, and human-robot interaction. The following analysis
focuses on arm joints. Table 3.1 describes the Panda Arm the ranges of joints position
and the limits of joints velocity and torque. They are tested in the RViz and added as limit
attributes in the Franka Arm Unified Robot Description Format (URDF) file.
3.2.2
Assembly Table and Components
Since PiH assembly work is the main content of this project, the models of peg and hole are
both created in Onshape [44], which is one of the excellent computer aid design software,
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1: Franka Emika Panda Arm joints. Joints 1-7 are revolute type and joints 8-9
are prismatic type located in the arm finger.
Table 3.1: Panda joints limits [43]
Name
Joint 1
Joint 2
Joint 3
Joint 4
Joint 5
Joint 6
Joint 7
Unit
qmax
2.8973
1.7628
2.8973
-0.0698
2.8973
3.7525
2.8973
rad
qmin
-2.8973
-1.7628
-2.8973
-3.0718
-2.8973
-0.0175
-2.8973
rad
vmax
2.1750
2.1750
2.1750
2.1750
2.6100
2.6100
2.6100
rad
s
τ
87
87
87
87
12
12
12
N · m
shown in Figure 3.2. The heights of the peg and the hole components are 50 mm and 9
mm, respectively. The diameter of the peg is 16 mm and the hole diameter is set to 16.5
mm. The Panda Arm is set on a table with 0.4 m height. All the friction coefficients of
simulated models are set to 0.5.
3.3
Controller Strategy
The controller selection work is based on specific assembly work purposes. Position control
is usually used for those tasks, which need extremely high accuracy, such as precise
positioning, and trajectory tracking. However, when it comes to rich-contact tasks, like
object grasping, and object insertion, force control is better at responding and adjusting its
movements under the external reaction. Hence, selecting a proper controller is important
to accomplish assembly work.
3.3.1
Inverse Kinematics and Jacobian Matrix
When planning trajectories in Cartesian Space, the actuators in the joint are the actual
controlled objects. Therefore, to transfer the task space coordinates into joint space,
inverse kinematics, and the Jacobian matrix J are two key elements in this process. J
results from the velocity relationship between each joint and end effector, so the 7 DoFs
Panda Arm J∈R6×7.
Since the number of joints is greater than the dimension of the end effector position
and orientation (i.e., the Jacobian is non-square), the Jacobian matrix is not directly in-
vertible. The pseudo-inverse matrix is used to approximate the inverse of the non-square
Jacobian, allowing solving the inverse kinematics problem. Inverse kinematics usually
8
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:17==
(a) peg
(b) hole
Figure 3.2: The component models of peg and hole
brings multi-solutions to reach the target position in Cartesian space, so the damped
least-squares method, also known as Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) algorithm, is used to
provide a numerically stable method of choosing joints [45]. Equation 3.1 introduces how
to calculate ∆x in joint space ∆q, respectively.
∆q = JT 
JJT + λ2I
−1
∆x
(3.1)
where λ is 0.1, which is a non-zero damping constant; I is identity matrix.
3.3.2
Position Control, Impedance Control, and Admittance Control
As the controlled object is joint, the key difference between position control and force
control is the purpose of control. Position control focuses on the accuracy of the target
position, but force control emphasizes on the soft-control, which means the generated
torque/force will be accordingly with the real joint position. The end effector will keep
moving to the target position although it encounters the obstacle in the position control.
It is usually harmful to the robot arm in this case, therefore, if the precision of the task
is primary, prefer choosing position control; if existing rich-contact interaction task, force
control will be better though the stopped position may be not an expected one. The relevant
experimental results in this project are also introduced in Chapter 4.
Position Control
PID is one of the most popular and classical methods in the control field but it is not widely
used for all controllers. In practice, integral control is normally not added to the controller
because the environmental noise can affect its robustness and stability [46]. Thus, position
control consists of proportional and differential control to keep stable control. Figure 3.3
shows the position control diagram in this project:
Figure 3.3: Position control diagram; xr and xs, denote the end effector the reference
position, and the actual position in Cartesian space
τ = Kp∆q + Kv∆˙q
(3.2)
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
9
==PAGE:18==
where Kp and Kv represent the proportional and differential gains, according to the Panda
Arm authority demo [43], Kp and Kv are set to 100 and 40; ∆q and ∆˙q represent the
changes of each joint status and velocity.
Impedance Control
Each DoF of the robot can be asked to render particular mass, spring, and damper
properties in the force control, e.g., mimicking the mass, stiffness, and damping properties
of a virtual DoF in contact with the virtual environment [47], shown in Figure 3.4.The
rendered one-dof robot dynamics can be written in Equation 3.3:
K
D
M
F
Figure 3.4: A robot creating a one-dof mass-spring-damper virtual environment
M ¨x + D ˙x + Kx = F
(3.3)
where x is the position, m is the mass, D is the damping, k is the stiffness, and F is the
applying force. The equation of motion of the mass can be described in Equation 3.4:
m ¨xs = F + Fext
(3.4)
where Fext is an external force of the environment. The aim of force control is to add a
control force F that establishes a relationship between Fext and the displacement deviation
from a desired trajectory.
There are two typical force control methods, which are impedance control and admit-
tance control. The main difference between these two methods is input. The input of
impedance control is usually the desired joint position while the input of admittance control
is the desired force. Thus, it brings another obvious difference that admittance control
relies on the force feedback with a force sensor. Since the control strategy also focuses
on the joint space, the inverse kinematics part is utilized like position control but omitted in
Equation 3.5. The diagram of impedance control is shown in Figure 3.5:
τ = K∆q + D∆˙q + τG
τG = JT
l0Gl0 + JT
l1Gl1 + ... + JT
l6Gl6 + JT
l7Gl7
(3.5)
where K and D are called stiffness and damping skew-symmetric matrix in impedance con-
trol; the diagonal values of K and D are chosen as 40 and 8 after fine-tuning, respectively;
from Jl0 and Gl0 to Jl7 and Gl7 denote each arm link jacobian matrix and gravity; τG is the
gravity compensation of joint torque matrix.
10
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.5: Impedance control diagram
Admittance Control
Figure 3.6 introduces the admittance control diagram. As the system is assembled with a
force sensor, it is easy to detect the external force and real-time feedback. The desired
pose xr and measured external force/torque Fext are input to the admittance control block,
which generates the reference pose xd for the PD position control.
Figure 3.6: Admittance control diagram
F = kp(xd −xs) −kd ˙xs
Fext = M( ¨xd −¨xr) + D( ˙xd −˙xr) + K(xd −xr)
(3.6)
where xs is the actual displacement of the end effector; M, D, and K represent the mass
inertia, damping, and stiffness values, respectively; kp and kd are PD position control
gains.
3.4
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Figure 3.7 describes the diagram of RL, made of the agent and the environment. Once the
agent receives a state St and a reward Rt from the environment, it will output an action At
based on St. After executing At in the environment, the new state St+1 and reward Rt+1
are generated again. RL is a standard Markov Decision Process (MDP), which is defined by
the tuple (S, A, P, R), where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions, P is the transition
function and R is the reward function. Through interacting with the environment, a series
of trajectories are generated as o in Equation 3.7. The interaction cycle between the agent
and the environment will be continued until satisfying the termination condition. Therefore,
the core question in RL is how to maximize agent rewards in the whole trajectory.
o = {s1, a1, r1, s2, a2, r2, · · · , st, at, rt}
(3.7)
3.4.1
Policy-based and Value-based Methods
The policy means how to act as a strategy in each of the states of the MDP. If it is determin-
istic, the action chosen will be always the same under a state, i.e., a = π(s). Conversely,
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.7: RL diagram
the stochastic policy π (a|s) will choose the actions based on a probability distribution. The
optimal policy π∗aims to find the highest cumulative rewards in Equation 3.8:
π∗= max Eπ[
∞
X
t=0
γtRt]
(3.8)
where γ ∈(0, 1) is the discount factor, which determines the importance of future rewards
in comparison with the immediate reward.
The state value function V (s) evaluates the quality of being in a state s ∈S while the action
value function Q(s, a) reflects the performance of executing the action a ∈A. Equation 3.9
expresses the sum of all possible collected rewards from the single state s following the
policy π:
V π(s) = Eπ[
∞
X
t=0
γtRt|St = s]
(3.9)
Equation 3.10 introduces how to calculate the sum of all possible next states value function
V π(S):
V π(S) =
X
s′∈S
p(s
′|s, a)(R(s, a) + γV π(s
′))
(3.10)
where p(s
′|s, a) represents the transition probability of next state s
′; R(s, a) is the instanta-
neous reward.
Similarly, the actor value function Q with respect to the expected reward obtained by
following policy π in Equation 3.11:
Qπ(s, a) = Eπ[
∞
X
t=0
γtRt|St = s, At = a]
(3.11)
The expected return obtained by the best action in this state is equal to the state value
achieved under the optimal policy π∗, i.e., the optimal value function satisfies the Bellman
Equation. Therefore, the problem becomes solving the Bellman Equation for all states and
actions results to find the optimal MDP solution. Equation 3.12 shows the optimal state
value function V ∗(s) and action value function Q∗(s, a) in the optimal greedy policy π∗,
which selects the action with the highest value in each state. In Equation 3.12, a′ indicates
12
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:21==
an action taken in the next state s′:
V ∗(s) = max
a∈A
X
s′∈S
p(s
′|s, a)(R(s, a) + γV ∗(s
′))
Q∗(s, a) =
X
s′∈S
T
 s′, s, a
 
R(s, a) + γ max
a′
Q∗ s′, a′
(3.12)
Value-based methods are utilized to estimate the policy through the value function while
the policy can be directly sought if applying policy-based methods. The value function
is estimated as the experience of the value-based methods function and generates the
policy consequently. It corresponds to the expected accumulated reward starting from st.
To explore the optimal policy without any experience at the start, a very popular strategy
called ϵ-greedy policy is used in the value-based methods. The probability ϵ ∈(0, 1) is a
hyperparameter of the policy π. If the policy π with probability ϵ, the agent will follow a
random policy, and sample random action as well; If the policy π with probability 1 −ϵ, the
agent will mostly select the action with the highest Q(s, a).
In policy-based methods, the policy π that maps state-action pairs is learned by the
process of gradient ascent. It corresponds to the expected accumulated reward of taking
action at in the state st. The purpose of using gradient ascent is to find a series of network
parameters θ to maximize the performance of the policy in Equation 3.13:
∇¯Rθt ≈E[
Tn
X
t=1
R (τ n) ∇log pθ (an
t | sn
t )]
θt+1 ←−θt + η∇¯Rθt
(3.13)
where using log pθ aims to avoid the data underflow case. It would transfer the origin
possibility pθ interval [0, 1] to the (−∞, 0], greatly expand the boundary of data and boost
the convergence speed; η is a learning rate when updating the parameter θt. Selecting
η is a challenge because it decides how much the policy update [48]. To estimate the
performance gradient under unknown state distribution updates, the policy gradient [49] is
used. Although they are unbiased without the need for the value function and more directly
learn the policy π than value-based methods, they usually converge to local optimum, are
sample-inefficient, and have high variance. For example, Figure 3.8 shows two equal
Euclidean parameter distance plots. It is obvious that the left distribution will be affected
more than the one in the right if considering updating the equal weight updates.
3.4.2
Actor-critic Methods
Combining the advantages of the value-based function and policy-based method, the
actor-critic method learns a policy, i.e. actor, acting entity, and a value function, i.e. critic,
to evaluate the performance of the actor and make relevant adjustments. ˆV (s) is also one
of the common methods to represent the baseline. Since the V πθ(st) is the expected return
of Qπθ(st) and the difference between V πθ(st) and Qπθ(st, at) is the advantage function,
Equation 3.13 will be rewritten in Equation 3.14 to adjust the policy parameter θ of the
actor-critic algorithm.
∇¯Rθt ≈E[
Tn
X
t=1
(Qπθ(sn
t , an
t ) −V πθ(sn
t ))∇log pθ (an
t | sn
t )]
θt+1 ←−θt + η∇¯Rθt
(3.14)
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) heavily update
(b) slightly update
Figure 3.8: Normal distribution pairs comparison example, which represents the change
degree in one policy update; both of the Euclidean distance is 1; x and y axis represent
natural values without units
3.4.3
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
PPO [50], typically is the PPO_clip. is one of the popular on-policy actor-critic RL algorithms
based on policy gradient and trust-region optimization method, which is derived from
the Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [51]. PPO aims to improve the policy by
constraining each update difference between the new policy and the old one to prevent
large variances. The agent performance may be ruined when the parameters of the
policy are updated greatly and that will usually cost more training time for the agent to
recover a good policy. To measure how much a policy πθ changes due to an update, the
Kullback-Leibner (KL) divergences are introduced in Equation 3.15:
DKL (πθ, πθ+∆θ) =
X
x∈X
πθ(x) log

πθ(x)
πθ+∆θ(x)

(3.15)
where DKL is used to constrain the optimization problem in TRPO, so the loss function is
shown in Equation 3.16:
LTRPO(θ) = E[ πθ (at | st)
πold (at | st)
ˆAt −βDKL [πold (at | st) | πθ (at | st)]]
(3.16)
where ˆAt is the advantage function which represents the differences between the Qπθ(st, at)
and V πθ(st) estimation. β is a scaling factor. The KL constraint might not be satisfied
because it relies on the Talor approximate expansions of its theoretical objective function.
Due to the expensive computation of DKL, PPO replaces the KL divergence with a simple
clipping of the magnitude of the policy update, shown in Equation 3.17:
LPPO(θ) = E[min( πθ (at | st)
πold (at | st)
ˆAt −clip( πθ(at | st)
πold(at | st), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ))]
(3.17)
where ϵ is the clipping coefficient, set as 0.2, which determines the policy maximum
changes update. Figure 3.9 shows the PPO network diagram. The input of the actor and
critic network is a current state st. The critic network will estimate value function V (st)
under st and output an advantage function At, which is a part of the actor network loss
function in Equation 3.17. For the actor network, it will combine the st and At to generate
an action Gaussian probability distribution with µ and σ after the clipping operation. The
action at will be sampled according to the Gaussian distribution and the agent also interact
with the environment to formulate an experience (st, at, rt), saving in the experience buffer.
Since PPO is an on-policy algorithm that uses the current policy to improve, all experience
data in the buffer will be clear after each updating actor network.
14
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:23==
State
Actor
Critic
Clip
(μ,σ)
loss 
update 
update 
loss 
Action
Figure 3.9: PPO diagram
3.4.4
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
SAC [52] also corresponds to an actor-critic strategy that adds a measure of the policy
entropy into the reward to encourage exploration. Thus the policy consists in maximizing
simultaneously the expected return and the entropy in Equation 3.18:
JSAC(θ) =
T
X
t=1
Eπθ[R (st, at) + αH (π (· | st))]
(3.18)
where H is the entropy term that measures the policy πθ, its detailed contents are shown
in Equation 3.19; α is a temperature coefficient that determines the relative importance of
the entropy, set as 0.1.
H (πθ(. | s)) = −
X
at∈A
πθ(at) log πθ(at | st)
(3.19)
SAC consists of an actor network and four critic networks which are one value-based
function V , a target value-based function Vtarget, and two action-based functions Q0,
Q1. The value-based network V is used to estimate the state value V (s). However, the
estimation value is normally higher than the actual one, Vtarget is used in SAC to reduce
the estimation errors. Vtarget network provides the real current state value Vtarget(s), so it
is a good baseline in the Mean Square Error (MSE) loss function to update the other three
networks, shown in Equation 3.20:
Lloss_V = E(st,at,rt)∈B[V (st) −Vtarget (st)]2
Qtarget (st, at) = Rt + γVtarget (st+1)
Lloss_Q = E(st,at,rt)∈B[Q (st, at) −Qtarget (st, at)]2
(3.20)
where Lloss_V and Lloss_Q are the MSE functions of value-based function and action-based
function, respectively; B represents a batch of experience from the buffer. For those two Q
network structures are the same to prevent the overestimation of Qtarget, thus the output
of Q networks is the smaller one as well. The update of actor network is similar to PPO but
existing two differences: add an entropy item and the experience selection. The entropy
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
15
==PAGE:24==
item in the actor loss function improves the ability of exploration greatly, as shown in
Equation 3.21:
Lactor = E(st,at,rt)∈B[Eat∼π(·|st)[Q0(st, ´at) −α ln π(´at|st)]]
(3.21)
where ´at represents all predicted action by actor network. E(st,at,rt)∈B reflects the selected
experience from buffer. They are selected randomly and will be reused in the training, so
SAC is an off-policy algorithm. The simplified diagram of SAC is shown in Figure 3.10:
State
Actor
Critic(V)
Clip
(μ,σ)
loss 
update 
Action
Entropy
Critic(Q1)
Critic(Q0)
Critic(TargetV)
min[Q0,Q1]
Figure 3.10: SAC diagram
3.4.5
Action and Observation Space Vectors
RL process consists of two other important parts, the action space vector, and the ob-
servation space vector. The action space can be set as each joint space. However, this
method brings high action dimension which is long training and hard to converge. Thus
the action vector using the current Franka Arm fingertip Cartesian pose and each joint
angle will be solved by inverse kinematics. The detailed peg pick and peg place action
space table is shown in Table 3.2:
Table 3.2: The action space of peg pick and place tasks
Symbol
Description
[X, Y, Z]
desired fingertip Cartesian coordinates
[α, β, γ]
desired fingertip Euler angle
Since the admittance control is applied in the peg insertion task, the desired force/torque
information is added to the action space, shown in Table 3.3:
The observation vector from the environment provides current states after each action
execution. The proper observation information is also helpful for the design of the reward
function. In the assembly tasks, the vectors of actual end effector pose and velocity
are important to reflect the controlled arm real states. To facilitate constructing the next
reward function, the relative pose information is calculated in each task, i.e., the difference
16
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.3: The action space of peg insertion task
Symbol
Description
[X, Y, Z]
desired fingertip Cartesian coordinates
[α, β, γ]
desired fingertip Euler angle
[Fx,Fy, Fz, τx, τy, τz]
desired force and torque
between the target pose and the real pose. Table 3.4, Table 3.5 and Table 3.6 show the
observation space vector of peg pick, peg place, and peg insertion task, respectively:
Table 3.4: The observation space of peg pick task
Symbol
Description
[Xs, Ys, Zs]
actual fingertip Cartesian coordinates
[vx, vy, vz]
actual fingertip linear velocity
[wx, wy, wz]
actual fingertip angular velocity
[w, x, y, z]
actual fingertip quaternion
[xs, ys, zs]
the relative position between the gripper and peg
[qws, qxs, qys, qzs]
the relative quaternion between the gripper and peg
Table 3.5: The observation space of peg place task
Symbol
Description
[Xs, Ys, Zs]
actual fingertip Cartesian coordinates
[vx, vy, vz]
actual fingertip linear velocity
[wx, wy, wz]
actual fingertip angular velocity
[w, x, y, z]
actual fingertip quaternion
[xs, ys, zs]
the relative position between the peg and hole
[qws, qxs, qys, qzs]
the relative quaternion between the gripper and peg
3.4.6
Rewards Shaping
Almost all RL algorithms are sensitive to the rewards function, which may be the most
critical part of learning a stable policy. If designing a simple sparse reward function, which
only generates a fixed reward or penalty from episodes, it would most likely lead to failure
when working in the real environment, as it cannot guide the agent to reach positive
rewards easily. Conversely, overly complex and specific reward functions, consisting of nu-
merous reward items, can also pose challenges in the learning process. To address these
issues and enhance the learning process, adding a dense reward based on the original
reward, which represents a certain potential energy function, can significantly accelerate
the convergence of the RL algorithm [53]. By incorporating this dense reward, the agent
gains valuable guidance and feedback, leading to more efficient and successful learning
in the given environment. Therefore, a key points reward based on relative distance is
used in this project, shown in Figure 3.11:
Instead of the typical expression of using objects center of mass (C.O.M.), the four key
points represent the object and the target position and orientation. Because the single pair
of C.O.M. can only describe how is the distance close to the target rather than detailed
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
17
==PAGE:26==
Table 3.6: The observation space of peg insertion task
Symbol
Description
[Xs, Ys, Zs]
actual fingertip Cartesian coordinates
[vx, vy, vz]
actual fingertip linear velocity
[wx, wy, wz]
actual fingertip angular velocity
[w, x, y, z]
actual fingertip quaternion
[xs, ys, zs]
the relative position between the peg and hole
[qws, qxs, qys, qzs]
the relative quaternion between the gripper and peg
[Fxs, Fys, Fzs]
actual force from fingertip
Figure 3.11: The scheme of key points of the gripper, peg, and hole, respectively
orientation, the provided orientation would avoid the possible opposite direction case and
express more concrete information in the assembly work. The reward function highly
depends on the key points distance reward but also considers the success reward and
failure penalty, therefore, the total reward function is shown in Equation 3.22:
Rtotal = mi ∗Rdist_task + mj ∗Rfailure + mk ∗Rsuccess
(3.22)
where the design of each task reward function is the same but the contents of Rdist_task,
Rfailure, and Rsuccess are different with the specific purposes. mi, mj, and mk are three
factors that are changed accordingly with tasks. Their values determine the importance
of distance reward in the overall reward function. In the peg pick and peg place tasks,
since the initial position is a bit far away from the target position, the distance reward item
Rdist_task plays a more important role to estimate the distance error, thus mi is set to 3.
Different from the former two tasks, mi is set to 1 in the insertion task. Either Rfailure or
Rsuccess is set to 1 or 0 relying on if the agent finishes the task, especially mk is all set to 10
as a positive reward for the good policy. In the insertion task, failure has been defined in
many forms, such as small insertion depth, large force, and peg drop, therefore, it focuses
on how to avoid the failure, and mj is set to 3 while it is set to 1 in the other two tasks.
Detailed success or failure definitions of each task will be demonstrated in Table 3.7. The
18
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:27==
expanded Rdist_task are shown in Equation 3.23:
Rdist_pick = −
T
X
t=0
[D(k1 −k1a) + · · · + D(k4 −k4a)]
Rdist_place = Rdist_insert = −
T
X
t=0
[D(k1a −k1b) + · · · + D(k4a −k4b)]
(3.23)
where the symbols of four key points k1, k1a, k4, and k4a in the function are the same
meaning as the symbols in Figure 3.11.
3.4.7
Success and Failure
To train a reliable policy for each task, a series of constraints should be set for learning
the right policies quickly by agents. If the agents met failure or success cases, they would
learn the penalties or rewards from the reward function. No matter whether the results are
good or not, they would guide gradually the agents learn toward a successful policy. The
detailed success or failure definitions are introduced in Table 3.7, and the success rate ϱ
is calculated from the percentage of successful agents Nsuccess in one epoch, shown in
Equation 3.24:
ϱ = Nsuccess
Ntotal
(3.24)
where Ntotal is the total number of agents, which are trained in parallel.
Table 3.7: The definition of tasks success and failure
Task
Success
Failure
pick
peg C.O.M. is over 0.1m
above the table
1. peg fall/drop
2. max step still failed
place
P Dplace(keypoints)<0.15m
1. peg fall/drop
2. max step still failed
3. move too far/high/low
insertion
insertion depth
h >=7 mm
1. peg fall/drop
2. max step still failed
3. move too far/high/low
4. insertion depth h <7mm
5. detected force F >50 N
3.5
Pseudocode
To help the readers understand the training process, the pseudocodes of the control and
learning process in this project are listed in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, respectively:
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
19
==PAGE:28==
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of Control
1: Input: desired pose Xr: (xr, yr, zr, αr, βr, γr); time steps TS
2: Initialize end effector pose Xi: (x, y, z, α, β, γ)
3: Set step counter ts to 1
4: Interpolate waypoints as Xrts
5: for ts ∈{1, 2, · · · , TS} do
6:
Get actual end effector pose Xsts and ∆Xts= Xrts-Xsts in task space
7:
Calculate ∆qts using LM method in joint space
8:
Output τts to each joint accordingly with chosen controller
9: end for
Algorithm 2 Pseudocode of learning process
1: Input: end effector pose (x, y, z, α, β, γ); train episodes T; sample episodes SE; time
steps TS
2: Initialize the policy parameters πθ; Environment E; Replay buffer R = {}
3: Set episode counter ep to 1
4: for ep ∈{1, 2, · · · , T} do
5:
Set step counter ts to 1
6:
Observe initial state sts from E and output action ats ∼πθ
7:
while ep ≤SE do
8:
for ts ∈{1, 2, · · · , TS} do
9:
Observe sts+1, calculate reward rts and done signal dts
10:
Store the transition tuple (sts, ats, rts, dts, sts+1) in R
11:
end for
12:
end while
13:
for ts ∈{1, 2, · · · , TS} do
14:
Sample a batch tuple data from R
15:
Calculate Loss and update policy πθ
16:
Select optimized ats and store the new transition tuple in R
17:
end for
18:
Save episode reward Rep = PTS
ts=1 rts
19: end for
20
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:29==
4
Experiments
4.1
Approaches
Since Isaac Gym supports the excellent rendering feature, which enables thousands of
high-quality environments to run in parallel on a single workstation [41], 128 Franka Arms
are trained at the same time in this project. In order to verify the assembly work learned
by RL methods in the simulator, the Franka Arm is selected and all the assembly tasks
are trained separately. The experiments run on a Ubuntu 20.04 laptop with graphic card
RTX3060. Each training work, which consisted of 1024 epochs, would cost approximately
6 hours for a single task. The assembly work can be divided into three parts, i.e., peg pick,
peg place, and peg insertion. All of the experiments are implemented and trained with
different controllers and RL algorithms in the Isaac Gym, respectively. Concretely, peg
pick and peg place tasks are tested with a position controller or impedance controller, for
the contact-rich peg insertion task, the controllers are chosen an impedance controller
or admittance controller, therefore, a simulated force/torque sensor is equipped on the
Franka to detect the feedback force in the insertion task. The RL algorithms are selected
as PPO and SAC for all tasks, shown in Table 4.1:
Table 4.1: The experiments for the use of RL algorithm and controller in different tasks
Task
RL Algorithm
Controller
pick
PPO/SAC
Position/Impedance
place
PPO/SAC
Position/Impedance
insertion
PPO/SAC
Impedance/Admittance
According to the procedures of experiments, PPO is used first to train Franka Arm with
different controllers to determine which control method is better for each task. Then, the
same tasks with better controllers will be trained with SAC to compare with the results of
PPO. After both PPO and SAC reach convergence in all tasks, the successful trial of joint
status, joint torque, end effector trajectories, and insertion details will be saved and shown
in the following results part, respectively.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
21
==PAGE:30==
4.1.1
Simulated Assembly Tasks
The section introduces how the assembly tasks work in the simulator. Figure 4.1, Figure 4.2,
and Figure 4.3 show a series of screenshots, which are captured from completing a single
successful pick, place, or insertion task process. The sequence of screenshots is from (a)
to (d). Specifically, the initial coordinates of the peg, the hole, and the end effector are
uncertain and generated randomly in each episode.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1: Peg pick task screenshots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.2: Peg place task screenshots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.3: Peg insertion task screenshots
4.2
Results
The following results reflect the learning process, joint key information, trajectories, etc.
as the basis of later discussion and analysis. All of the joint and trajectories results are
22
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:31==
validated with the trained policy.
4.2.1
Learning Results with PPO
The rewards are one of the significant indicators that evaluate the learning algorithm per-
formance. If the value of rewards can converge to an approximate value after long epochs
of training, that means the policy has been generated. The values normally represent the
policy performance, therefore, with a higher convergent reward value, the policy is better.
Additionally, the success rate is also another indicator to assess the learned policy. If the
rewards converge to a high value but the success rate is low, it would be a bad policy that
is learned by agents, then the agents need more exploration in action space to seek a
better policy that can improve the success rate. Each training epoch consists of 100 steps
in pick and place tasks while the value of the step is set as 200 to provide more exploring
times for the rich-contact task, and each task is trained in 1024 epochs, respectively. All
the learning results are visualized by TensorBoard toolkit 1 [54].
Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5 show that both these two control methods can converge -
26.13 and -59.37, respectively, and both can reach a 100% success rate as well. However,
the rewards curve in Figure 4.5 drops off a bit, up to a 20% reduction in success rate in the
middle of training, although it still returns to the converged value after the whole training.
Besides that, the max and average rewards with impedance control are higher than the
ones with position control, thus the impedance control method is better in the peg pick task.
(a) rewards training curve with impedance control
(b) success rate with impedance control
Figure 4.4: Peg pick task training with impedance control under PPO; x-axis values
represent the training epochs, the same as the x-axis values in the following screenshots
1The screenshots would become blurred if changed into vector format, so leave them in .png format
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) rewards training curve with position control
(b) success rate with position control
Figure 4.5: Peg pick task training with position control under PPO
Figure 4.6 shows that position control is more suitable for the peg place task than impedance
control. The two curves of rewards converge to -33.29 and -37.82 with the position con-
trol and impedance control method, respectively. These two control methods also can
complete the peg place task with a 100% success rate. Nevertheless, the fluctuation of
learning curves in Figure 4.6 (a) and (b) is much bigger than the curves in Figure 4.6 (c)
and (d). The smooth learning curves usually reflect a stable training process and good
policy.
Impedance control and admittance control methods are utilized in the peg insertion learn-
ing task, shown in Figure 4.7. It is clear that the performance of admittance control is
better than impedance control methods from the following aspects: converged rewards,
convergence speed, success rate, etc. The rewards would converge to -173.51 using
impedance control while the value of applying admittance control decreased to almost half
of the former one. Therefore, impedance control is not good for searching for a good policy
to complete the rich-contact task. Moreover, the agents cannot learn a 100% success rate
with impedance control in this task, and reach convergence with a low speed.
From the previous PPO results, impedance control, position control, and admittance
control are fit for the different assembly work. The following SAC learning results are got
by applying respective better control strategies in the different tasks.
24
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:33==
(a) rewards training curve with impedance control
(b) success rate with impedance control
(c) rewards training curve with position control
(d) success rate with position control
Figure 4.6: Peg place task training with impedance control under PPO
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
25
==PAGE:34==
(a) rewards training curve with impedance control
(b) success rate with impedance control
(c) rewards training curve with admittance control
(d) success rate with admittance control
Figure 4.7: Peg insertion task training with two controllers under PPO
26
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:35==
4.2.2
Learning Results with SAC
For a fair comparison of different RL methods, the parameters of control strategies, training
episodes, and training steps are utilized the same as the ones in PPO. Note that the SAC
learning strategy is a bit different from PPO since SAC is an off-policy algorithm. The
first 10 training episodes are used for randomly collecting and storing the replay buffer
data. After storing the first exploration data in the SAC replay buffer, the agent would start
learning the policy with the previous experience.
Figure 4.8 shows the curves of the rewards learning and success rate. The agents
can accomplish the pick task with a 100% success rate and reach stable rewards at -28.74,
trained by the SAC method, even though the learning curve is not stable as PPO learning.
(a) rewards training curve with impedance control
(b) success rate with impedance control
Figure 4.8: Peg pick task training with impedance control under SAC
The other two assembly work with SAC learning results are demonstrated in Figure 4.9.
Both of them can reach a 100% success rate and the value of a stable reward. The peg
place task obtains the convergence reward of -38.14 at the 237th iteration and the peg
insertion task achieves a reward of -91.88 at the 335th iteration. Compared with the results
of PPO, the stable performance of SAC is worse than PPO since the variance of SAC
learning curves is more than PPO ones. From the speed of convergence aspects, SAC is
slower than PPO in the peg pick and peg place task, but it is faster than PPO in the peg
insertion task. The detailed comparison would be shown in Table 5.2 and Table 5.2.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) peg place rewards training curve with position control
(b) peg place success rate with position control
(c) peg insertion rewards training curve with admittance control
(d) peg insertion success rate with admittance control
Figure 4.9: Peg place and insertion tasks training under SAC
28
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:37==
4.2.3
Joint Space Results
The information on the joint state, and joint torque is essential for analyzing the robot
system in joint space, and it would be crucial for considering the future design of real
robotic experiments. In addition, the status and torque curves of the joint are proof of
generating policy performance. The following joint results show the generated policies are
reliable since all the curves are smooth and continuous without much jitter. Through the
prior PPO learning work, the proper controllers are determined for each task, so they are
also trained with SAC. From DoF 1 to DoF 7 correspondingly with Franka Arm joint 1 to
joint 7, shown in Figure 3.1 before.
The joint status change in the peg pick task is shown in Figure 4.10. The majority of
the joints stop at the 80th step in one episode, which means the peg pick task would be
completed in 80 steps, applying the two RL methods. Figure 4.12 show the joint torque
changes in the peg pick task. The max values of torque are respective -14.39 Nm and
10.06 Nm for PPO and SAC learning at DoF 2 and all joint torque would return to 0 after
the end effector reaches the expected Cartesian position.
Figure 4.10: The joint status change with different RL in successful peg pick task
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.11: The joint torque change with different RL in successful peg pick task
Figure 4.12 introduces the joint position change in the peg place task. The most joint
position would stop at the 70th step, so usually the duration of successful policy which
agents in the peg place task learn is 70% of the one episode. From the torque aspect,
both generated policies are stable without sudden shaking in Figure 4.12 (b). The largest
joint torque is 10.03 Nm at DoF 1 with SAC learning while the max value is 11.89 Nm
at DoF 2 applying with PPO. The agents could find a smooth path to complete the task
utilizing both PPO and SAC methods.
Figure 4.13 describes the joint status and torque changes of the insertion task. The
period of completing a single task is about 75 steps, and then almost all the joints would
keep a stable position. The largest torque is 21.32 Nm, which occurs at joint 2 applying
PPO while the largest torque is around -13.91 Nm when using SAC to learn the insertion
policy, shown in Figure 4.13 (b). The two RL methods could guide the agents to learn a
stable and quick policy to solve the complex rich-contact task. All generated joint space
results, i.e., joints status, and joints torque values are in the limits range.
30
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:39==
(a) The joint status change
(b) The joint torque change
Figure 4.12: The joint status and torque change with different RL in peg place task
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) The joint status change
(b) The joint torque change
Figure 4.13: The joint status and torque change with different RL in peg insertion task
32
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:41==
4.2.4
Task Space Results
Besides the analysis of joint space, the information in the task space is also important
since the robot arm end effector is the actual executor in each task, thus the researchers
often focus on the end effector in Cartesian space, also called task space. The trajectories
results and detected force are demonstrated here. The force sensor is a requirement
item to achieve admittance control, therefore, the detected force would be provided in
the feedback control loop Figure 4.17. The end effector trajectories provide visualization
in the task space. The points shown in the following plots represent the middle position
between the left finger and right finger of the Franka Arm hand. The Cartesian trajecto-
ries would help the researchers design future physical experiments, determining each
axis boundary of the robot arm motion to avoid collision and guarantee experimental safety.
The following plots show the successful trials of peg pick, peg place, and peg inser-
tion. Both learned policies are smooth to complete each task. The robot arm starts running
from the upper right corner to the bottom left corner in Figure 4.14. In the place and inser-
tion tasks, the start point is both from top to bottom desired position, shown in Figure 4.15
and Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.14: The end effector trajectories in the peg pick task; left is trained by PPO; right
is trained by SAC
Figure 4.17 shows the detected force from the force sensor. The measured peak of the
Z-axis force is -18.67 N in SAC learning. Similarly, the PPO learning biggest force value is
also in the Z-axis, which is -6.95 N. The range of detected force in the X-axis is between
-2 N and 2 N for PPO algorithm learning while the X-axis force range of SAC learning is a
bit larger than the PPO range. And the Y-axis force range is the smallest within 0.4 N for
both learning methods.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.15: The end effector trajectories in the peg place task; left is trained by PPO;
right is trained by SAC
Figure 4.16: The end effector trajectories in the peg insertion task; left is trained by PPO;
right is trained by SAC
34
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.17: The detected force change in the insertion task
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:45==
5
Discussion
5.1
Comparison
The comparison part focuses on the different control strategies in PPO learning in Table 5.1
and the training performance of different RL training for varied tasks in Table 5.2. All of the
data are from the previous chapters and plots. In Table 5.1, the indicators of ”Max Rewards
in Total” and ”Max Success Rate in Total” represent the max rewards and success rate
which are obtained by the agent during the whole training process. They fully show the
performance of controllers. The item ”When Reach Max Rewards” can be used to compare
the time of reaching max rewards, reflecting the exploitation capacity of the strategy. The
rest of the two indicators are similar to the first ones but they emphasize the first 100
epochs of training, representing the slope of the convergence speed. In Table 5.2, the
meanings of the first three indicators are similar to the items in Table 5.1, using stable
values instead of the maximum values because a stable training process is more useful
for learning comparison. Moreover, they show the performance of the trade-off exploration
and exploitation abilities. Since the learning process of the first 100 epochs is fast from the
previous learning graphs, could be seen an approximately linear relationship between the
rewards and epochs, and the RL converged speed is reflected by the slope of the linear
relationship. ⋆means a better control strategy or RL method in Table 5.1 and Table 5.2.
5.1.1
Comparison of the Controllers
When applying different control strategies with PPO learning, impedance control, position
control, and admittance control is better than the other control method in the pick, place,
and insertion tasks, respectively, shown in Table 5.1. In the peg place task, the two control
policies can reach a 100% success rate while position control is a bit quicker and more
stable than the impedance control effect. From the other two tasks convergence speed
aspect, a better controller can boost the training convergence speed and improve the
successful completion rate of the tasks greatly. The obtained max rewards in the first 100
epochs are almost twice bigger than the ones that worse controllers could reach. All the
indicators such as max rewards, convergence speed, and exploration capacity would be
better if choosing the proper control methods in each task. Additionally, a good control
strategy with PPO would search for the high-valued policy more quickly, referring to fewer
episodes to reach max rewards.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 5.1: Comparison of Control Strategies
Task
Control
Strategies
Max Rewards
in Total
Stable Success
Rate in Total
When Reach
Max Rewards
Max Rewards
in
First 100 Epochs
Max Success Rate
in
First 100 Epochs
pick
Position
-56.42
100%
1014th
-63.11
69.17%
Impedance ⋆
-23.98
100%
545th
-31.26
98.75%
place
Position ⋆
-30.16
100%
976th
-36.57
100%
Impedance
-34.09
100%
1020th
-48.99
80.06%
insertion
Impedance
-161.32
90.07%
918th
-268.96
11.23%
Admittance ⋆
-83.64
100%
556th
-216.85
60.15%
5.1.2
Comparison of Learning
Table 5.2 compares the two RL learning performances in specific tasks, which are trained
by good control strategies, respectively. First, the agent would finish all the tasks with a
100% success rate policy after the training of PPO and SAC. The final convergent rewards
are close, nevertheless, the learning converged speed is different. For the pick and place
tasks, PPO is faster by 13.04% and 4.19% than SAC. However, in the rich-contact insertion
task, it is slower by 25.52% than SAC, referring to Equation 5.1. Furthermore, the training
of PPO is more stable than SAC, which is less fluctuation of rewards when learning the
assembly work policy. The variances of PPO are smaller than SAC in all three tasks,
shown in Figure 5.2. In terms of the capacity for trade-off exploration and exploitation in
two RL algorithms, SAC explores more but receives similar good results with PPO results,
so PPO is more effective and fit for varied tasks.
Table 5.2: Comparison of PPO and SAC learning methods
Task
RL
Methods
Stable Rewards
in Total
Max Success
Rate in Total
When Reach
Stable Rewards
Rewards
in
the 100th Epoch
Max Success Rate
in
First 100 Epochs
pick
PPO ⋆
-26.12
100%
189th
-31.67
98.75%
SAC
-28.74
100%
367th
-41.39
25.48%
place
PPO ⋆
-33.29
100%
90th
-36.38
100%
SAC
-38.14
100%
237th
-43.98
67.96%
insertion
PPO
-97.26
100%
141th
-217.85
60.15%
SAC ⋆
-91.88
100%
335th
-130.94
95.04%
Since the previous learning plots indicate that the success rate curves positively cor-
respond with the rewards curves, the algorithm would search for a good policy quickly if the
high reward occurs early in the whole training. Additionally, the relationship between the
rewards and epochs could be seen as linear, thus the slope of it represents the capacity of
converging speed. From the data of Table 5.2, a symbol ρ can be defined in Equation 5.1,
evaluating the RL algorithms convergence speed. If ρ is bigger, the converged rate would
be faster.
1
ρ = R100
Rstable
(5.1)
where R100 and Rstable represent the 100th episode rewards and the stable values of the
converged rewards. Figure 5.1 shows the comparison of RL methods converged speed,
which PPO is better than SAC in all trained tasks. Another important index that evaluates
learning performance is stability. The symbol δ represents the variance of the RL rewards
training curve, shown in Equation 5.2. If the variance is smaller, the stability of RL would
38
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:47==
be better. The plot of variance comparison is demonstrated in Figure 5.2.
δ =
Pn
i (Ri −Rstable)2
n −i + 1
(5.2)
where n and i represent the total episode value and the first episode that reaches converged
rewards, thus i is determined by different assembly tasks. Ri refers the ith episode reward.
Figure 5.1: The comparison of convergence speed
Figure 5.2: The comparison of variance
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
39
==PAGE:48==
5.2
Analysis
5.2.1
Analysis of Controller
Different control strategies are applied based on the specific requirements and character-
istics of each task, thus impedance control, position control, and admittance control are fit
for pick, place, and insertion tasks, respectively. The proper control strategy could ensure
task execution stably and improve task efficiency.
In the previous research on pick-place tasks, position control is widely utilized to reach
precise positioning and alignment. This would be a good strategy if there is no contact in
the tasks, the same as the peg place task in this project, so position control of the robot
enables the robot arm to accurately reach and maintain a desired pose for the object place-
ment. However, position control is not a perfectly fit for the pick task from the experimental
results. Both two control methods can be successfully applied to learning and reach a
100% success rate while the training performance of position control is worse. During the
pick task, the robot needs to interact with the peg and grasp it securely. Impedance control
would allow the robot to properly regulate the interaction force with the peg, ensuring
a stable grasp. It also provides robustness and stability during the grasping process.
Position control may not grip the peg with great force because of the accuracy of reaching
coordination.
For the rich-contact task, i.e., insertion, researchers usually choose force control to solve
it since it does not rely on high precision but rather much interaction with the environment.
Impedance control and admittance control both work for the insertion task but admittance
control offers advantages by force/torque sensor. The desired force could be adjusted
directly in the insertion task, referring to the detected force data. The robot adjusts its
motion to ensure smooth and compliant insertion by monitoring the force feedback from the
environment, actively responding to external forces, and adapting its motion to complete
the task. Therefore, it enables the robot to handle uncertainties, such as the hole position
or interaction between the hole and peg, resulting in successful and controlled insertions.
5.2.2
Analysis of Learning
PPO and SAC are both popular algorithms in the RL field, but they differ in their approach
to policy optimization. PPO optimizes the objective function by iteratively updating the
policy based on the currently collected trajectories. On the other hand, SAC learns a soft
value-based function and a stochastic off-line policy by an actor-critic framework.
The converged speed of PPO exhibits faster than SAC in all tasks since the different
updates of the training process. PPO uses a clipped trust region approach to ensure
small policy changes, limiting the deviation from the previous policy. It prompts stable
and incremental learning and allows PPO to converge more rapidly to an optimal policy.
Conversely, SAC employs a maximum entropy item, which encourages exploration and
stochastic policy. The mechanism may be beneficial for learning in complex environments
or lead to a slower convergence rate compared to PPO.
When it comes to training stability, PPO is also better than SAC on average in this project.
Thanks to the trust region, the conservative policy updates contribute to preventing large
updates. It is especially good for the high variance of rewards environments. Since the
initial points are far away from the desired endpoints in the pick task and place task, the
changes of Rdist would be more than the distance reward in the insertion task and the
PPO learning variance of pick task and place task is smaller than SAC learning variance.
40
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:49==
In contrast, the entropy regularization of SAC introduces additional sources of variance,
which can impact the learning process stability.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:51==
6
Conclusion
The thesis successfully uses two RL methods and different controllers in training robotic
assembly work, i.e., peg pick, peg place, and peg insertion tasks, demonstrating their
results in simulated experiments. By carefully selecting the proper controller and imple-
menting the RL method, the robot could learn an optimal policy to accomplish the complex
task with high accuracy and efficiency.
The main findings of this thesis are two aspects, which are control and learning. From
the perspective of control, the force control methods are better than the pure position
control in contact tasks no matter if it is just a simple pick contact with the peg or the rich
contact between the peg and the environment. For the task that does not exist any contact,
position control is obviously more accurate than force control. To improve the rich-contact
tasks’ success rate and boost the training process, admittance control, which adjusts the
desired force directly to reach a satisfying result, is better than impedance control.
The two selected algorithms, PPO and SAC are SOTA on-policy and off-policy algo-
rithms, respectively. From the experimental results in this project, PPO is better than
SAC from the converged speed, iterative training stability, and converged value aspects in
the pick and place tasks while worse than SAC in the insertion task from those aspects.
Additionally, the designed reward function does not rely on the object C.O.M. distance
but rather a vector which is consisted of four key points to reduce the time of finding an
optimized policy and adjusts the weights of distance reward varied with the task to boost
the converged speed.
In conclusion, the findings of the project may contribute to the robotics assembly growing
field and enhance robotic automation and dexterity by using RL techniques.
6.1
Future works
The work and results of this project fit the simulated environment, however, it is a worthy
thought whether the simulated results could be transferred to the real robots. Even if the
simulated environment could be extremely similar to the real one, a series of existing
objective cases that cannot be avoided have to be considered, e.g., the friction force,
sensor noise, and delay of data transition. Moreover, simulated environments typically rely
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
43
==PAGE:52==
on simplified physics models and assumptions while real-world assembly tasks usually
involve complex dynamics, hence these differences between simulation and reality can
lead to robot behavior discrepancies. Based on these challenges, the physical experiments
are scheduled to do in the future, to evaluate the feasibility of deploying the simulated
learning results.
44
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Jörg Krüger, Terje K Lien, and Alexander Verl. “Cooperation of human and machines
in assembly lines”. In: CIRP annals 58.2 (2009), pp. 628–646.
[2]
S Jack Hu et al. “Assembly system design and operations for product variety”. In:
CIRP annals 60.2 (2011), pp. 715–733.
[3]
Fengming Li et al. “Robot skill acquisition in assembly process using deep reinforce-
ment learning”. In: Neurocomputing 345 (2019), pp. 92–102.
[4]
Tadanobu Inoue et al. “Deep reinforcement learning for high precision assembly
tasks”. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS). IEEE. 2017, pp. 819–825.
[5]
Jianlan Luo et al. “Deep reinforcement learning for robotic assembly of mixed de-
formable and rigid objects”. In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE. 2018, pp. 2062–2069.
[6]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[7]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning”. In:
International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2016, pp. 1928–1937.
[8]
Vikash Kumar, Emanuel Todorov, and Sergey Levine. “Optimal control with learned
local models: Application to dexterous manipulation”. In: 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2016, pp. 378–383.
[9]
Sergey Levine et al. “End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies”. In: The Journal
of Machine Learning Research 17.1 (2016), pp. 1334–1373.
[10]
Peter Englert and Marc Toussaint. “Learning manipulation skills from a single demon-
stration”. In: The International Journal of Robotics Research 37.1 (2018), pp. 137–
154.
[11]
He Ba et al. “Critic PI2: Master Continuous Planning via Policy Improvement with
Path Integrals and Deep Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning”. In: 2021 6th IEEE
International Conference on Advanced Robotics and Mechatronics (ICARM). IEEE.
2021, pp. 716–722.
[12]
Yevgen Chebotar et al. “Combining model-based and model-free updates for trajectory-
centric reinforcement learning”. In: International conference on machine learning.
PMLR. 2017, pp. 703–711.
[13]
Sergey Levine and Pieter Abbeel. “Learning neural network policies with guided policy
search under unknown dynamics”. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems 27 (2014).
[14]
Minjian Xin et al. “Achieving Sample-Efficient and Online-Training-Safe Deep Rein-
forcement Learning with Base Controllers”. In: arXiv e-prints (2020), arXiv–2011.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
45
==PAGE:54==
[15]
Boyao Li et al. “ACDER: Augmented curiosity-driven experience replay”. In: 2020
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2020,
pp. 4218–4224.
[16]
Evangelos Theodorou, Jonas Buchli, and Stefan Schaal. “Learning policy improve-
ments with path integrals”. In: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings.
2010, pp. 828–835.
[17]
Avi Singh et al. “Cog: Connecting new skills to past experience with offline reinforce-
ment learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14500 (2020).
[18]
Samuele Tosatto, Georgia Chalvatzaki, and Jan Peters. “Contextual latent-movements
off-policy optimization for robotic manipulation skills”. In: 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2021, pp. 10815–10821.
[19]
Marcel Panzer and Benedict Bender. “Deep reinforcement learning in production
systems: a systematic literature review”. In: International Journal of Production
Research 60.13 (2022), pp. 4316–4341.
[20]
Cristian C Beltran-Hernandez et al. “Variable compliance control for robotic peg-
in-hole assembly: A deep-reinforcement-learning approach”. In: Applied Sciences
10.19 (2020), p. 6923.
[21]
Jing Xu et al. “Feedback deep deterministic policy gradient with fuzzy reward for
robotic multiple peg-in-hole assembly tasks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics 15.3 (2018), pp. 1658–1667.
[22]
Fei Wang et al. “Joining force of human muscular task planning with robot robust
and delicate manipulation for programming by demonstration”. In: IEEE/ASME
Transactions on Mechatronics 25.5 (2020), pp. 2574–2584.
[23]
Young-Loul Kim, Kuk-Hyun Ahn, and Jae-Bok Song. “Reinforcement learning based
on movement primitives for contact tasks”. In: Robotics and Computer-Integrated
Manufacturing 62 (2020), p. 101863.
[24]
Xin Zhao et al. “Model accelerated reinforcement learning for high precision robotic
assembly”. In: International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications 4 (2020),
pp. 202–216.
[25]
JoungMin Park et al. “GadgetArm—Automatic Grasp Generation and Manipulation
of 4-DOF Robot Arm for Arbitrary Objects Through Reinforcement Learning”. In:
Sensors 20.21 (2020), p. 6183.
[26]
Marvin Alles and Elie Aljalbout. “Learning to centralize dual-arm assembly”. In:
Frontiers in Robotics and AI 9 (2022).
[27]
Kuangen Zhang et al. “Jamming analysis and force control for flexible dual peg-
in-hole assembly”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 66.3 (2018),
pp. 1930–1939.
[28]
Jingang Jiang et al. “State-of-the-Art control strategies for robotic PiH assembly”. In:
Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing 65 (2020), p. 101894.
[29]
Pascal D Labrecque et al. “uMan: A low-impedance manipulator for human–robot
cooperation based on underactuated redundancy”. In: IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics 22.3 (2017), pp. 1401–1411.
[30]
Tomoya Fukukawa, Junji Takahashi, and Toshio Fukuda. “Precise assembly of ring
part with optimized hollowed finger”. In: Robomech Journal 3 (2016), pp. 1–8.
[31]
Aljaž Kramberger. “A comparison of learning-by-demonstration methods for force-
based robot skills”. In: 2014 23rd International Conference on Robotics in Alpe-Adria-
Danube Region (RAAD). IEEE. 2014, pp. 1–6.
46
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:55==
[32]
Bojan Nemec et al. “Transfer of assembly operations to new workpiece poses by
adaptation to the desired force profile”. In: 2013 16th International Conference on
Advanced Robotics (ICAR). IEEE. 2013, pp. 1–7.
[33]
Juan C Perez Ibarra and Adriano AG Siqueira. “Impedance control of rehabilitation
robots for lower limbs, review”. In: 2014 Joint Conference on Robotics: SBR-LARS
Robotics Symposium and Robocontrol. IEEE. 2014, pp. 235–240.
[34]
Neville Hogan. “Impedance control: An approach to manipulation: Part II—Imple-
mentation”. In: (1985).
[35]
Vijaykumar Gullapalli, Roderic A Grupen, and Andrew G Barto. “Learning reactive
admittance control.” In: ICRA. Citeseer. 1992, pp. 1475–1480.
[36]
Marc H Raibert and John J Craig. “Hybrid position/force control of manipulators”. In:
(1981).
[37]
Ker-Jiun Wang. “Fuzzy sliding mode joint impedance control for a tendon-driven robot
hand performing peg-in-hole assembly”. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO). IEEE. 2016, pp. 2087–2092.
[38]
Hee-Chan Song, Young-Loul Kim, and Jae-Bok Song. “Automated guidance of peg-
in-hole assembly tasks for complex-shaped parts”. In: 2014 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE. 2014, pp. 4517–4522.
[39]
Hyunchul Cho et al. “Cartesian sensor-less force control for industrial robots”. In:
2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE.
2014, pp. 4497–4502.
[40]
Nicky Mol et al. “Nested compliant admittance control for robotic mechanical assem-
bly of misaligned and tightly toleranced parts”. In: 2016 IEEE international conference
on systems, man, and cybernetics (SMC). IEEE. 2016, pp. 002717–002722.
[41]
Viktor Makoviychuk et al. “Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simula-
tion for robot learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470 (2021).
[42]
NVIDIA. NVIDIA PhysX SDK. 2022. URL: https://github.com/NVIDIAGameWorks/
PhysX.
[43]
Franka Emika GmbH. parameters. 2017. URL: https://frankaemika.github.io/docs/
control_parameters.html.
[44]
Onshape. Onshape. 2014. URL: https://www.onshape.com/.
[45]
Samuel R Buss. “Introduction to inverse kinematics with jacobian transpose, pseu-
doinverse and damped least squares methods”. In: IEEE Journal of Robotics and
Automation 17.1-19 (2004), p. 16.
[46]
Kevin M Lynch and Frank C Park. Modern robotics. Cambridge University Press,
2017.
[47]
Carl Sisemore and Vı́t Babuška. The Science and Engineering of Mechanical Shock.
Springer, 2020.
[48]
Sham M Kakade. “A natural policy gradient”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 14 (2001).
[49]
Richard S Sutton et al. “Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with
function approximation”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 12
(1999).
[50]
John Schulman et al. “Proximal policy optimization algorithms”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347 (2017).
[51]
John Schulman et al. “Trust region policy optimization”. In: International conference
on machine learning. PMLR. 2015, pp. 1889–1897.
[52]
Tuomas Haarnoja et al. “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep rein-
forcement learning with a stochastic actor”. In: International conference on machine
learning. PMLR. 2018, pp. 1861–1870.
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
47
==PAGE:56==
[53]
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. “Policy invariance under reward
transformations: Theory and application to reward shaping”. In: Icml. Vol. 99. Citeseer.
1999, pp. 278–287.
[54]
Martín Abadi et al. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous
Systems. Software available from tensorflow.org. 2015. URL: https://www.tensorflow.
org/.
48
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
A.1
Project Schedule
The project expected schedule is shown in Figure A.1:
Figure A.1: Project Schedule
Simulated Robotic Assembly using Reinforcement Learning Techniques
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
