==PAGE:1==
Master thesis of Biomedical Engineering
Title: Modeling scoliosis in children
Author: Mathilde Ferrari
==PAGE:2==
Author
Mathilde Jeanne Ferrari
s213865@dtu.dk
MSc Student, Biomedical Engineering
Department of Health Technology,
Technical University of Denmark
Main Supervisor
Marie Sand Traberg
msene@dtu.dk
Associate Professor
Department of Health Technology,
Technical University of Denmark
Co-Supervisor
Søren Ohrt-Nissen
ohrtnissen@gmail.com
Spine Surgeon - MD, PhD
Rigshospitalet,
University hospital, Copenhaguen
Place of Education
DTU Health Tech, Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 349
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This report addresses the results of the master’s thesis Modelling Scoliosis in Children.
This is a 35 ECTS master thesis, to be undergone from the 23rd of January 2023 to
the 23rd of July 2023. It concludes the Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
attended at DTU. This project is tutored by Marie Sand Traberg and Søren Ohrt-
Nissen, and takes place at the Department of Health Technology.
Scoliosis is a pathology of the spine, where it grows twisted and with a curvature.
The most common one is Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS), where idiopathic
means that the cause is unknown.
To help doctors estimate the eﬀiciency of treatments, predict the outcome of the
spine growth and AIS development, the spine biomechanics has to be analyzed. CAD
models have been developed for this purpose. To predict the AIS development in a
patient, a growing spine model is essential.
This work focuses on the study and replication of a growing functional unit of
the spine, comprising a single vertebra and its inter-vertebral disc.
Two distinct
approaches were employed to achieve this goal: the first involved a simplified geomet-
rical representation to test the growth programming, while the second utilized the
importation of a patient’s CT scan to create a realistic vertebra geometry.
In order to simulate growth, growth plates (GPs) were added to the top surface
of the vertebra. The load-sensitive GP, located at the top, is expected to experience
a longitudinal stress (SP1 - First Principal Stress) of 0.5 MPa. A lower stress value
is associated with faster growth, posing an increased risk for the development of
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS). This situation may lead to Hueter-Volkmann’s
vicious circle of growing wedged vertebrae, where lower stress on one side of the
vertebra due to tilting causes that side to grow faster and increase the wedge angle.
The CT scan vertebra exhibited an average SP1 of 0.349 MPa in the load-sensitive
GP, while the simple geometry model showed an average SP1 of 0.0899 MPa. These
results are consistent with findings from the literature review.
Consequently, the
growth model parameters need to be adjusted to accommodate the stress outcomes
in both models. A two-vertebrae functional unit was successfully grown with the
simplified geometry, giving a one-year growth of 5.47 cm in a 10-year-old girl’s upper
body (when setting the sensitivity parameter β = 0.5 MPa−1 and the growth baseline
at 0.5 mm.year−1).
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
A special thanks to my tutors, Søren and Marie for accompanying me all along the
way, giving me ideas, supporting mines, helping me build and plan the project, and
checking on the advances and the report. The weekly meetings greatly helped to
advance the thesis step by step. Their interest and kindness kept my motivation up
through the six months.
Thanks to COMSOL support for answering my multiple questions, especially
about my CT scan model meshing.
Thanks to Saima Tabasam Ali for building the first spine models and answering
my questions about it.
Thanks to my friends and family for their continuous support, particularly my
roommates Anna and Lucie. Thanks to them for discussing the thesis, for giving
ideas, and especially to Marion and Esther who read through the report.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AIS
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis
BC(s)
Boundary Condition(s)
CAD
Computer-Aided Design
CT
Computerized Tomography
FU
Functional Unit
GP(s)
Growth Plate(s)
IVD(s)
Inter-Vertebral Disc(s)
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
SP (1, 2, 3)
Principal Stress (First, Second or Third)
VM stress
Von Mises stress
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Definition and Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Innovations and Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
The Spine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
A Single Functional Unit (FU)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
The Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Growth Biomechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
The Growth Plates (GPs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Growth Models in the Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Mechanical & Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Cauchy’s Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.2
Constitutive Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.3
Different Types of Stresses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.4
Values for the Materials Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
23
3.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Building the Geometrical Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Boundary Conditions (BCs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.3
Growth Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Static Analysis of the Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
The Growing Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4
Model 2: The CT Scan Model
47
4.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.1
Building the Geometrical Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.2
Boundary Conditions (BCs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.1.3
Growth Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
The Vertebra Without Any GP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.2
Vertebra With the GPs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Comparison and Discussion
69
5.1
The Benefits of a Simple Geometry Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
Comparison of the Biomechanical Properties of the Models
. . . . . .
70
5.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.3.1
Multiple Parameters & Multi-Factorial Pathology . . . . . . . .
71
5.3.2
Sensitivity Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.3.3
Meshing & Automation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.3.4
High Stress in Corners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Conclusion & Future Prospects
75
Bibliography
77
Appendices
83
Spinal Growth Modeling in the Literature: a Comparison of Papers
85
Materials Properties: a Comparison of Papers
87
Model 1: Cylindrical Model
89
Technical Drawings of the Cylindrical Functional Units
. . . . . . . . . . .
89
Corner Aberration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Plotting Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
Model 2: CT Scan Vertebra
95
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Other BCs that could have been implemented . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The overviews of Weinstein et al. (2008) [1] and Akbarnia et al. (2016) [2] define
Scoliosis as a pathology of the spine, where it grows twisted and with a curvature. The
starting point of this project is Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS), where idiopathic
means that the cause is unknown. The AIS accounts for 80% of the scolioses [1]. To
treat it, two cases are studied: if the child has growth potential, or not. In the first
case, the treatment (brace, tethering) will block the curvature growth by applying
tension on the convex part of the curvature. Thus, when the spine grows, the curve
should flatten itself. In the second case, the spine has to be surgically fused. The
adolescent is then losing all degree of freedom where the surgery happens.
It is preferable to detect scoliosis early for the patient’s benefit [3]. If the curvature
is severe, a brace or tethering may be applied. However, the outcome of tethering
is unpredictable. Some patients experience curvature correction, while others do not
see any change. To make informed decisions about treatment, doctors require a spine
model that can predict its growth and assess if further curvature worsening is likely,
especially if the spine still has significant growth potential. Additionally, a model with
the treatment procedure, such as tethering, is necessary in the second phase. The
challenge lies in creating a universal model that can adapt to each patient, considering
that the growth of the spine in terms of speed and curvature is highly individualized.
1.1
Problem Definition and Goals
Two spine models have already been developed as part of Saima Tabasam Ali’s bach-
elor thesis [4]: one being a healthy spine while the other one is a lumbar scoliotic
spine. Those existing models should serve as a starting point for the development of
a growing spine model. Those models possess simplified geometry, with cylindrical-
shaped vertebrae. Additional research by Shi et al. [5] and Driscoll et al. [6] utilized
a cylindrical model too, while Abolaeha et al. [7] explored a more intricate shape.
Alternatively, several methods utilize patients’ CT scans to obtain the geometric
data, as in the following articles: Naoum et al., 2021 [8]; Balasubramanian et al.,
2022 [9]; Sylvestre et al., 2007 [10]; Villemure et al., 2002 [11]; Kamal et al., 2019 [12].
The materials (vertebrae, ligaments, muscles...)
properties differ following the
type of tissue, the age, and sex of the patient [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12].
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
The accuracy of the spine model’s growth prediction improves as more details are
incorporated, such as including ligaments, muscles, rib-cage, varying properties of
the vertebrae based on their position in the spine, accounting for the inter-vertebral
disc (IVD) regions, refining the geometry. However, increasing the complexity of the
model also results in longer simulation times for both model construction and execu-
tion. Therefore, compromises must be made to deliver a functional model by the end
of the master’s thesis.
Several studies have already investigated and compared the growth modeling of
the spine using patient data: Abolaeha et al.
(2012) [7], Balasubramanian et al.
(2022) [9], Sylvestre et al. (2007) [10], Villemure et al. (2002) [11], Villemure et al.
(2004) [13], Kamal et al. (2019) [12]. These studies obtained the geometry of the
spine from patient data, enabling the validation of the resulting models. Additionally,
some studies aimed to comprehend the biomechanics of spine growth using simplified
geometry: Driscoll et al. (2009) [6] and Shi et al. (2011) [5]. The properties of the
materials used in these studies varied across the literature. The growth algorithm for
the child’s spine involved periodically extending all the vertebrae while considering
the stress applied to each vertebra.
The objective of this master thesis is to reproduce a growing spine Functional
Unit (FU) model, a FU being the union of a vertebra and its IVD.
1.2
Innovations and Challenges
This thesis introduces several novel aspects:
• The use of thoracic vertebrae instead of lumbar ones. This choice allows for a
closer inspection of the area where most cases of AIS occur.
• The incorporation of a different mix of material properties in the model com-
pared to those used in the literature review.
• A unique approach to importing and meshing the vertebrae, which is not exten-
sively detailed in the literature review.
• A comprehensive comparison of the growth model’s parameters, shedding light
on their significant influence on the model’s outcomes.
The ideal outcome would be to have an application giving the fully grown spine of
a child, needing as input the CT scans (and a growth potential number determined
by the usual clinical exams: hand bones age, puberty evolution). This would allow
the doctor to see if the child needs a treatment, and which one, according to the sta-
bility and severity of the final curvature. From this ”universal application” (contrary
to most of the actual literature where the researchers develop one model based on a
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Innovations and Challenges
3
patient CT scan, this application could give the specific outcome for every patient,
without rebuilding the model each time), one could add the treatments’ effect.
This work highlights several challenges that need to be addressed:
• The first significant challenge is the automation of the procedure, particularly
the meshing of different patients’ spines. Automating this process has not been
attempted before and requires overcoming the complexity and intricacy of the
meshing, which often involves extensive manual tweaking.
• The second challenge involves selecting the appropriate growth model parame-
ters, even within the range identified in the literature review. Creating a new
spine model always necessitates a parameter study.
• This raises the fundamental question of whether it is feasible to develop a uni-
versal model that can accurately represent all patients’ spines.
With the proposed structure, this report initially provides an overview of spine
biology and the current state-of-the-art in spine growth models in Chapter 2. Subse-
quently, it presents the methods and results of two distinct approaches to explore the
spine biomechanics: (i) utilizing a cylindrical FU and (ii) extracting a vertebra from
patient CT scans, in Chapters 3 and 4 respectively. Following that, both methods
and their results will be thoroughly discussed in the combined Chapter 5. Finally,
Chapter 6 concludes on the work that has been conducted and lays out the future
prospects.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In order to apprehend the project and correctly define its objectives, the spine physi-
ology, the AIS, and growth modeling will be presented in the following.
2.1
The Spine
The spine, or backbone, connects the head and the trunk, supporting the weight of
the upper body. As the central axis of the body, it is essential to human mobility,
giving the body structure and flexibility. By granting humans a fully upright posture,
the spine has been the subject of much research and writing. This short introduction
will summarize the two first sections ”Human Spine” and ”Biomechanics of Spinal
Tissues” of the ”Biomechanics of the Spine” (2005) book, providing an overview on
the subject while presenting a wide range of sources [14].
Figure 2.1. Human vertebral column, decomposed in segments, from the different anatom-
ical views [15].
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
It encloses the spinal cord (see it on the top view of the vertebra in Figure 2.3).
Along with the brain, the spinal cord composes the central nervous system (CNS). It
is the information pathway, transmitting the stimuli to the sensory cortex and the
induced action signal from the motor cortex to the muscles.
The spine is made of vertebrae and inter-vertebral discs (IVDs) stacked upon each
other. It is divided into five segments shown in Figure 2.1: the cervical, thoracic, and
lumbar segments, which are piling up the functional units (one vertebra and its IVD),
plus the sacrum and coccyx segments which are made of fused vertebrae.
The spine has an S-shape in the side view, with lordosis in the neck and lower
back, and kyphosis in the thoracic segment (report to the lateral view of the spine in
Figure 2.1).
2.1.1
A Single Functional Unit (FU)
One FU is a vertebra and its IVD, as Figure 2.2 illustrates. The vertebra and the
IVD have a softer inner part to absorb the shock energy (trabecular bone and nucleus
pulposus respectively), and a harder outside part to protect it and give the spine
structure (cortical bone and annulus fibrosus respectively) [4].
Figure 2.2.
How the IVD is encased between two vertebrae, as long as the inner and
outside materials [16].
The structural geometry of the vertebra, shown in Figure 2.3, is composed of a
body (anterior part), an arch, and the processes (posterior part). The vertebral body
is the one bearing the weight. The arch creates a hole to enclose the spinal cord. The
spinous and transverse processes assure the ligaments and muscles’ attachment to the
spine. The para-spinal muscles are responsible for movements like leaning to the side,
arching the back, bending forward, and twisting.
In between two adjacent bodies are the IVDs, to buffer shocks and transmit
smoothly the load through the spine.
They are also connected to each other by
the facet joints, sliding to allow the spine to bend. Figure 2.4 below is illustrating
that.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 The Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS)
7
Figure 2.3. Vertebra structure: body, processes, arch enclosing the spinal cord, facets [17].
Figure 2.4. Examples of facet joints [18].
2.2
The Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS)
Based on [1], this section offers a summary of the current state of the art in Adolescent
Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) research, leveraging the expertise and significant contribu-
tions of Stuart L. Weinstein, a renowned pediatric orthopedic surgeon specializing in
spinal deformities and hip problems. Supported by additional relevant studies, this
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
section benefits from Dr. Weinstein’s prominent position and extensive knowledge in
the field.
Causes:
The causes of AIS are complex and involve multiple factors that contribute
to the development and progression of spinal curvature. As its name may suggest
(idiopathic scoliosis), there is not one universally accepted theory for the etiology, but
studies have helped to shed light on the factors that underlie the pathogenesis of AIS,
including:
• Growth Asymmetry: AIS is thought to be caused by an imbalance of growth
between the vertebral bodies on either side of the spine. This growth asymmetry
can lead to a curvature of the spine as the body tries to compensate for the
uneven growth.
This is the extension of the Hueter–Volkmann principle to
scoliosis, stating that a different loading of growth plates will lead to a different
growth pattern [6].
The different loading can come from an asymmetry in
the vertebra or spine, different weights, different postures, etc. Stokes is the
first to quantitatively model the loading asymmetry in AIS spine growth to
test Hueter-Volkmann theory adapted to the spine [5]. Kamal et al. [12] are
building on the Stokes model, as most of the articles of the state of the art in
Part 2.3.2.1. They are detailing that the growth is accelerated when the loading
is reduced compared to normal values, and slowed down when it is increased.
As in a scoliotic spine, the compression is lower than normal on one side, then
the growth is accelerated on this side, leading to deformity of the vertebra (see
Figure 2.5).
• Genetic Factors: Studies have shown that AIS has a genetic component, with
several genes identified that are associated with the development of the condi-
tion. The genetic factors are believed to influence the growth and development
of the spine and contribute to the biomechanical changes seen in AIS [1].
For instance, Kesling et al. [19] investigated AIS occurrence among monozy-
gotic and dizygotic twins, and found a concordance between the twins of 73%
and 36% in the respective cases, proving the genetic factors influence. Indeed,
monozygotic twins share exactly the same genome as they come from the same
egg and same sperm, while dizygotic ones share half of their genome as any
other siblings, as they come from two separate eggs and two different sperms,
during the same pregnancy. Furthermore, Lowe et al. [20] and Miller [21] have
drawn an overview of the current knowledge about genetic influence. If the ex-
act causes of AIS remain unknown, it can at least be said that there are multiple
ways of inheritance, which are also often multi-factorial: autosomal dominance,
maternal factors, multiple genes, and X-linked. The X-linked inheritance could
explain why the disease is preponderant among girls. For non-important sco-
liosis of less than 10◦, there is no difference in repartition between boys and
girls. However, for severe scoliosis, above 30◦, there is a ratio of ten girls for
one boy [22].
==PAGE:19==
2.2 The Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS)
9
• Environmental Factors: Environmental factors such as posture, spinal loading,
and muscle activity have also been implicated in the development and progres-
sion of AIS [23] [24]. Prolonged sitting or standing postures, heavy backpacks,
and asymmetrical sports such as tennis can increase the risk of developing AIS.
• Spinal Muscle Activity: Changes in the activity of the spinal muscles have
been observed in AIS patients. According to the overview of Alves et al. [25]
on ”Muscles Disorders in AIS”, biomechanical studies have shown that spinal
curvature in AIS is associated with altered muscle activity patterns, with some
muscles becoming overactive, and others becoming underactive.
• Spinal Segmental Motion: Changes in spinal segmental motion have also been
observed in AIS patients. The spinal curvature in AIS is associated with changes
in the range of motion (ROM) and stiffness of the affected spinal segments [26]
[27] [28]. Muscle can be shortened on the concave side of the curve, or the
stiffness of the muscle could also decrease the ROM, which seems to be a factor
for AIS.
Figure 2.5.
Illustration of Hueter-Volkmann principle: an excessive compressive force
(arrows) while the child is growing may produce changes in the shape of the vertebrae,
giving them a wedge shape where the curve is significant. Image taken from [29].
The biomechanical factors involved in AIS are interrelated and can contribute to
the development and progression of the condition. Understanding the biomechanics
of AIS is important for developing effective treatment strategies that can help to
prevent or slow the progression of spinal curvature and improve the patient’s quality
of life. Bracing and surgical interventions aim to restore the balance of forces on the
spine and improve spinal function and overall well-being.
That is what is motivating this project: aiming to provide a growing spine model
that could help spine surgeons to determine which treatment would be the most
effective, or at first, explore the biomechanics of the children’s spine.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
Pathology:
AIS is a spinal deformity that typically occurs in children aged 10-16
and has no known cause, i.e.: other and rarer causes of scoliosis such as neuromuscular
disorder or vertebral malformation have been cleared away. The curvature of the
spine is usually ”S” or ”C” shaped and affects the thoracic or lumbar regions of
the spine: the spine is curved in the frontal view (Figure 2.1 is showing a healthy
straight spine in the anterior view, but Figure 2.6 is highlighting the curvature in the
frontal view). The degree of curvature varies among individuals. When the curvature
of the spine becomes excessively pronounced or continues to worsen, it poses a risk
of causing physical deformities, experiencing pain, and encountering limitations in
normal bodily functions.
Diagnosis:
The diagnosis of AIS typically involves a physical examination and may
also include imaging techniques such as X-rays, CT scans, or MRI. To quantify the
curvature, the Cobb angle is measured. The Cobb angle is determined by identifying
the two most tilted vertebrae on an X-ray image and measuring the angle formed
between them (see Figure 2.6).
Figure 2.6. Cobb angle measurement on a patient X-ray (frontal view of the spine). Three
zones are identified as curved compared to the normal spine. The blue lines show how the
angle is measured. The region that has the highest angle will determine the Cobb angle.
Image taken from [30].
==PAGE:21==
2.2 The Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS)
11
The objective of the treatment is to drastically reduce the curvature if it is too
significant (above 45◦), or to stop its possible progression [1] [3] [31].
The progression risk is then estimated. The doctor takes into account the growth
potential of the child by assessing the height growth rate, sexual maturity, and skele-
ton maturity [32]. The latter is measured by the ossification of the bones, for instance
on hand-wrist radiographs or by the Risser sign [31] [32] [33] [34]. As Søren Ohrt-
Nissen precised, the Risser sign is not really used anymore, because the scoliosis
development burst happens mostly during the last stage of the criterion (see the dif-
ferent stages of the Risser sign in Figure 2.7). Instead, the Tanner-Whitehouse-III
RUS score is used, correlating better with the curve acceleration phase [31]. It is giv-
ing a score based on the appearance of the growth plates of the wrist bones (radius,
ulna) and the hand on the radiograph shown in Figure 2.8. Combining the evaluated
stages with the Cobb angle measure gives then a table of surgery probability [31].
Figure 2.7. The Risser sign: the progress of cartilage becoming bone on the pelvis, graded
from 0 (no growth plate - no bone ossification) to 5 (growth plate fused to the ilium - full
ossification) [33]. Schema coming from [35].
Figure 2.8. The hand and wrist are radiographed to assess skeletal maturity. Image gotten
from [34], with the order of appearance of the individual carpal bones noted from 1 to 8.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
Treatment:
The treatment of AIS depends on the degree of curvature and the age
of the patient (or more precisely, the body maturity), which would give the curva-
ture progression estimation. Mild cases (Cobb angle inferior to 20◦) may not require
treatment and may be monitored with regular checkups. In more severe cases (Cobb
angle between 20 and 40◦), a brace may be used to prevent further progression of
the curvature, if there is still some growth potential. In cases where the curvature
is severe (Cobb angle above 45 ◦) and affecting the patient’s quality of life, surgery
may be necessary to straighten the spine, by fusing the spine or applying the teth-
ering [1] [31]. The type of surgery depends also on the child’s growth potential: the
studies suggest that tethering is eﬀicient on skeletally immature patients [36] [37].
2.3
Growth Biomechanics
In the literature, spine growth modeling is an iterative process that seeks to answer
key questions, such as:
• Which components of the spine undergo growth?
• How fast does this growth occur?
• In what direction does the growth take place?
2.3.1
The Growth Plates (GPs)
The growth of long bones and vertebrae is carried out by GPs located at the top and
bottom ends of the bone (see Figure 2.9) [38] [39]. They are also called epiphyseal
and epiphysial plates, or physis [40]. They are made of cartilage cells, which are the
chondrocytes. When these GPs close, they transform into harder material (trabecular
or cortical bone) and fuse with the bone. It signifies the completion of bone growth.
This process is crucial for estimating skeletal maturity, as discussed earlier in Part 2.2.
Three zones, illustrated in Figure 2.9, have been identified and used in the spine
models [7] [10] [12]:
• The resting zone, also called load-sensitive. It is composed of round chondro-
cytes.
• The proliferating zone, newly formed bone, or growth area. There, the round
chondrocytes differentiate into flat (and proliferating) ones that organize them-
selves into columns, giving the direction of propagation, i.e.: longitudinal.
• The hypertrophic zone, but also transition or mineralized area. The cells are
growing bigger and bigger (hence hypertrophy).
They stop proliferating to
transform into bone and bone marrow.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Growth Biomechanics
13
Figure 2.9. GP on top of the femur. The three zones of the GP, as well as the trabecular
and cortical bones, are represented. Schema coming from M. Wuelling and A. Vortkamp
(2019) [38].
2.3.2
Growth Models in the Literature
For this question in particular, several articles have been selected as a source of in-
spiration, most of them incorporating a growth plate model. These articles, namely
Shi et al. (2011) [5], Driscoll et al. (2009) [6], Abolaeha et al. (2012) [7], Balasub-
ramanian et al. (2022) [9], Sylvestre et al. (2007) [10], Villemure et al. (2002) [11],
Villemure et al. (2004) [13], and Kamal et al. (2019) [12], provide valuable insights
and analysis related to the biomechanics and simulation of vertebral growth plates.
The model comparison is summarized in the Table in the Appendix 6.
The growth is the most significant along the longitudinal direction (in this work,
z-direction, perpendicular to the GP), thus most of the paper neglects the growth that
is tangential to the GP, except Balasubramanian et al. [9] and Villemure et al. [11].
The posterior part of the vertebra is already fully grown before ten years old,
while the vertebral body’s growth is undergone during puberty [12]. Therefore, only
vertebral growth is studied in those articles.
2.3.2.1
Growth Model Based on a GP
All of the above articles differentiate the three regions of the GP mentioned in Part
2.3.1, except for Villemure et al. (2002) [11] which defines only one region. The GPs
are on top and at the bottom of the vertebra.
The growth models examined in the literature review induce growth in the GPs.
They utilize a strain increment, which is applied to the GPs at each step of the
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
growth process. The different ways of defining this strain increment are described in
this section.
Stokes’s Model:
All of these articles have the same type of equation. They derive
from the original Stokes model (2.1) [41], where the deformation increment δεi in
the i = x, y, z direction is proportional to a sensitivity factor βi (in MPa−1), the
internal stress σi (in MPa) and the baseline growth along the longitudinal direction
δGz (in mm · year−1). The type of stress, denoted as σi, is not explicitly specified
in the context provided. However, given that it is scalar and not further clarified,
it is assumed to represent the longitudinal stress in the z-direction, applied at a
microscopic level within the material.
δεi = βi · σi · δGz, with i = x, y, z
(2.1)
Villemure et al.’s Model:
In a linear elastic material, the GP mechanical proper-
ties Ei, called young modulus when i = z and shear modulus in the other directions,
is defined by Ei = σi
ϵ = Fi/A
l/dl . Hence, Villemure et al. [11] can calculate the internal
force increment δFi due to growth modulation δεi in (2.2):
δFi = βi · (Ei · Fi) · δGz, with i = x, y, z
(2.2)
Kamal et al.’s Model:
In Kamal et al.’s method, they similarly define in Equation
(2.3) the strain increment ∆εz, being proportional to the baseline growth in the
longitudinal direction Gm, and to (1 + β.σz). So the increment depends also of the
internal longitudinal stress σz, but with a different sensitivity parameter β = 17.1%
than the previous Equation (2.2). This sensitivity parameter quantifies how sensitive
is the bone growth modulation to the internal longitudinal stress (in every model
detailed in this Part 2.3.2.1).
It was determined by adding a longitudinal stress
∆Stress = 0.1 MPa in a traction and compression scenario, noting the obtained
strain increment ∆Growth-Rate, and calculating its ratio (2.4).
∆εz = Gm · (1 + β · σz)
(2.3)
Sensitivity = ∆Growth-Rate
∆Stress
(2.4)
The sensitivity parameter influence was tested for this model, for a range from
0.4 MPa−1 to 1.71 MPa−1, and the results were obtained selecting the baseline growth
∆Gz = 1.1 mm · year−1 and sensitivity β = 1 MPa−1.
Predominant Model:
All the other articles base their model on 2.5, which relies on
the same principle, with the strain increment or actual growth ∆εz being proportional
to the same baseline growth Gm than in the previous Equations (2.2) and (2.3), and
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Growth Biomechanics
15
(1 −β · (σz −σm)). The sensitivity parameter has the same function but is adjusted
to this equation because it is the difference between the actual longitudinal internal
stress σz and the normal longitudinal internal stress σm that is evaluated.
∆εz = Gm · (1 −β · (σz −σm))
(2.5)
Note that all of those formula can give a different growth rate along the top face
of the vertebra if the stress is different in different local areas; hence allowing the
researchers to evaluate if the top surface of the vertebra is growing with an angle,
quantify it, then conclude if it leads to a scoliosis, and quantify the Cobb angle. For
this work, the average of the First Principal Stress (SP1), which corresponds to the
normal stress on the top surface, is considered as the longitudinal internal stress σz.
It is taken within the load-sensitive GP [42].
2.3.2.2
Other Growth Model
Balasubramanian et al.
(2022) [9] do not implement the growth in the GPs but
directly in the vertebra, step by step, comparing it to the patient’s vertebra increment.
The target strain εi,target, i.e.: the real child growth gotten from the CT scans (2.6), is
compared to the model strain εi,model (with i the number of growth iterations) (2.7).
This gives a strain error εi,error (2.8).
εtarget =


(L1,x−L0,x)
L0,x
(L1,y−L0,y)
L0,y
(L1,z−L0,z)
L0,z

· ∆t
(2.6)
With L0, [x, y, z] and L1, [x, y, z] are the distances between the marked points in
the FE model, before and after growth iteration.
εi,model =


αi,x
αi,y
αi,z

· ∆T
(2.7)
εi,error = εi,model −εi,target
(2.8)
The thermal expansion parameters αi,j (with i the growth number iteration, and
j the direction) are adjusted at each step with this strain error εi,error (2.9).
αi+1 = αi −αi · εi,error
(2.9)
However, this is not a model that could predict the patient’s growth as it is com-
paring the growth of the model to the real one at every step of the process. This
growth model was not chosen for this reason. The α coeﬀicients could be used in an-
other model though, if it could be shown that the two patients grow at the same speed.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background
The chosen model is the predominant one (2.5), but the parameters still have to
be tested before selecting it. This will be explained later in Part 3.1.3.
Additionally, note that only the vertebral body growth is considered in the articles
of the state-of-the-art, as the processes are already grown before puberty, but not the
vertebral body [43]. MRI studies have shown that the longitudinal growth of the AIS
patients’ vertebral bodies is higher than the same-age and same-sex group average,
whereas the circumferential growth is lower [1] [13] [43]. Focusing on only the vertebral
body growth is also justified by the fact that almost 90% of the axial compressive
stress is transmitted within the vertebral body [44].
2.3.2.3
Children and Adults Differences
The growth rate calculation is not the only parameter to take into account to model
the children spine growth. Other differences between the child and adult’s spine and
vertebrae play a role [11] [45]:
• In terms of the development of the overall shape of the spine, the lordosis and
kyphosis, i.e.: the exact S-shape in the lateral view, is not yet completed and
can be at a different stage for same-age children. This will be neglected.
• The shape of the vertebrae influences the loading [11], meanwhile the shape
changes while growing [46]. Besides, the pedicle asymmetry could also lead to
scoliosis [47]. That is why a patient-specific model is very relevant.
• Moreover, the material properties differ for children’s vertebrae and adults’,
being softer for the children’s spines [9].
2.4
Mechanical & Material Properties
The vertebra is studied under the solid mechanics hypothesis, a branch of continuum
mechanics, dealing with the analysis of how solids deform and move under the influ-
ence of external forces. The continuum mechanics hypothesis is respected, meaning
that the characteristic length of the micro-structure (cell and extracellular matrix
holes) is much smaller than the characteristic length of the problem of interest (ver-
tebra size) [48].
The Parts 2.4.1, 2.4.2, 2.4.3 are summarizing Marie Sand Traberg’s ”Tissue and
Movement Biomechanics” Course [48] to introduce the solid mechanics theory adapted
to this problem. The choice of material properties and parameters is then discussed,
based on the literature review.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Mechanical & Material Properties
17
2.4.1
Cauchy’s Equation
COMSOL is the software used to solve the biomechanics problem and display the
stress distribution over the vertebra after simulating the biological loading on it. It
is solving Cauchy’s equation of motion, which is the Second Law of Newton (Force =
mass · acceleration), applied to a continuous medium undergoing small deformations.
Cauchy’s equation of motion is then:
∇· ¯¯σ + ρ⃗g = ⃗0
(2.10)
with the stress tensor ¯¯σ (a 3×3 symmetric tensor), ρ the density at a given point,
⃗g the gravity, and ∇the differential operator nabla.
The following Figure 2.10 illustrates the stress tensor and Cauchy’s traction com-
ponents, introduced in this section.
Figure 2.10. Illustration of the stress tensor and Cauchy traction’s components on a small
volume, in an orthonormal coordinate system.
The stress tensor can be written with its eigenvalues σ1 ≤σ2 ≤σ3, where σ1 is
the normal stress (SP1 - First Principal Stress), σ2 and σ3 the shear stresses (SP2 &
SP3 - Second & Third Principal Stresses).
Indeed, when trying to find a vector ⃗n for which we can simplify Cauchy’s stress
formula (2.11), the problem is equivalent to finding a solution to (2.12).
A non-
trivial solution exists only if (2.13) has a solution, which is then solving an eigenvalue
problem.
⃗t = ¯¯σ · ⃗n = λ⃗n
(2.11)
¯¯σ · ⃗n = λ⃗n ⇔(¯¯σ −λ¯¯I) · ⃗n = ⃗0
(2.12)
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Background
det(¯¯σ −λ¯¯I) = 0
(2.13)
Where ⃗t is the Cauchy traction vector, λ is a scalar to determine (eigenvalue), and
¯¯I is the identity matrix.
2.4.2
Constitutive Relations
The constitutive relation is a mathematical relation characterizing how a material
responds to applied loads under specific conditions.
The vertebra and IVD are considered Linear Elastic Homogeneous Isotropic (LEHI)
in this work, while the GPs are considered Linear Elastic Homogeneous Orthotropic
(LEHO) (as justified in Part 2.4.4).
A material is said to be Linear when the stress response is proportional to the
strain (and inversely) when subjected to small extensions because these strains do not
induce permanent changes in the microstructure. The stress σ and strain ε respect
σ = E · ε, with the proportionality factor E being Young’s modulus.
A material is considered Elastic when the material body returns to its original
configuration after the applied loads are removed. Elastic behavior implies that the
material responds instantaneously to an applied load.
A material is classified as Homogeneous if its behavior remains consistent regard-
less of the position within the material body.
In the case of infinitesimal deformation, a linear elastic homogeneous constitutive
relation is:
¯¯σ = C¯¯ε
(2.14)
where C is the stiffness tensor, a 4th order tensor, ¯¯σ the stress tensor, and ¯¯ε the
strain tensor.
Material symmetries can simplify this stiffness tensor, which has 36 independent
components due to both ¯¯σ and ¯¯ε being symmetric.
An Orthotropic material has
three orthogonal planes of material symmetry, the mechanical properties differing
along each axis. An Isotropic material has the same properties in all directions.
These properties are translated into 3D constitutive relations, for the LEHO model
in (2.15) and for the LEHI one in (2.16).
(2.16) is the simplest 3D constitutive
equation, known as the generalized Hooks law.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Mechanical & Material Properties
19


σ11
σ22
σ33
σ12
σ13
σ23


=


C1111
C1122
C1133
0
0
0
C2211
C2222
C2233
0
0
0
C3311
C3322
C3333
0
0
0
0
0
0
C1212
0
0
0
0
0
0
C1313
0
0
0
0
0
0
C2323




ε11
ε22
ε33
ε12
ε13
ε23


(2.15)


σ11
σ22
σ33
σ12
σ13
σ23


=


2µ + λ
λ
λ
0
0
0
λ
2µ + λ
λ
0
0
0
λ
λ
2µ + λ
0
0
0
0
0
0
2µ
0
0
0
0
0
0
2µ
0
0
0
0
0
0
2µ




ε11
ε22
ε33
ε12
ε13
ε23


(2.16)
where µ and λ are the Lamé constants, linked to Young’s modulus E, Poisson’s
ratio ν, and the bulk modulus
K in (2.17).
λ =
Ev
(1 + v)(1 −2v) =
2µv
1 −2v ,
µ =
E
2(1 + v),
K =
E
3(1 −2v)
(2.17)
2.4.3
Different Types of Stresses
Different types of stress are used to analyze the model biomechanics.
The SPs (Principal Stresses) have been introduced in Part 2.4.1, they are the
stress tensor components along the three principal stress directions.
The stresses
could be expressed also in the orthonormal Cartesian system, that is (x, y, z) (see the
referential in Figure 3.1). For instance, the z-stress is the stress in the longitudinal
direction.
The Von Mises (VM) stress is an overall measure, allowing one to evaluate the
failure risk of a material for instance. This is calculated by comparing the SPs σi
(with i = 1, 2, 3) in (2.18).
σMises =
1
√
2
√
(σ1 −σ2)2 + (σ2 −σ3)2 + (σ1 −σ3)2
(2.18)
2.4.4
Values for the Materials Parameters
Once the constitutive equations are defined, the materials parameters have to be set.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Background
Vertebra and IVD:
The vertebra and IVD properties used in this CAD model
of the spine FU were derived from Gunasekaran et al. [49], building upon Saima
Tabasam Ali’s selection [4]. However, the latter selection considered the vertebra to
be composed solely of cortical bone, which is significantly harder compared to the
material equivalent to the combination of cortical bone and cancellous bone seen
in the literature.
Moreover, Young’s modulus of the equivalent vertebra material
exhibits significant variability across different sources, including the overview by Gu-
nasekaran et al. [49], the table in the appendix of the overview, and Saima Tabasam
Ali’s overview, posing challenges during the selection process. Subsequently, Young’s
modulus of the cortical bone was adjusted after the initial COMSOL simulations and
ultimately determined to be 1200 MPa based on Balamurugan et al. [50], which is
part of the overview provided by Gunasekaran et al. [49]. To determine the density
value, Guan et al. [51] were referenced.
GPs:
In all the aforementioned articles [5] [6] [7] [9] [10] [11] [13], the GPs are
considered to be linear elastic and isotropic, except in Kamal et al. [12], where the
mineralized and growth areas are assumed to be orthotropic. The GPs are relatively
softer materials compared to bone but not as flexible as the IVD. Consequently, their
Young’s Modulus is slightly lower than that of the vertebrae but still higher than that
of the IVD.
The material properties for the three GP zones were obtained from Kamal et
al. [12], although the article does not specify the properties of the other materials
used.
The one GP parameters were the same ones as in the three GPs model, the GP
being assimilated as the load-sensitive GP.
The density of the GPs was assumed to be the same as the vertebra.
For a comprehensive overview of all the material parameters used in the current
model, please refer to Table 2.1. Additionally, Appendix 6 contains the table sum-
marizing the various choices for the GP zones, while the vertebra and IVD properties
were built upon Saima Tabasam Ali’s overview [4].
In order to simplify the modeling process, some simplifications were made regard-
ing the material properties. The overall properties were considered, without further
dissecting into sections with different properties such as interior and exterior regions
with varying levels of softness or hardness (Young’s Modulus), nor taking into account
the findings of Driscoll et al. [6], where different bone densities in convex and concave
regions of the spine and IVD degeneration were identified as factors influencing the
curve progression.
With the background established, the focus shifts to the modeling phase, where
two distinct approaches were pursued. In the subsequent chapter, the first model,
which employs a simplified geometrical representation, will be presented.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Mechanical & Material Properties
21
Properties
Young Modulus
(MPa)
Shear Stress
(MPa)
Poisson’s
Ratio
Density
(kg/m3)
Material
Vertebra
1200
0.3
1830
Disc
4.2
0.45
1000
GP
(Mineralized area)
Ex = 401
Ey = 767
Ez = 1157
Gxy = 20.4
Gxz = 24
Gyz = 24
0.12
1830
GP
(Prolific area)
Ex = 401
Ey = 767
Ez = 1157
Gxy = 20.4
Gxz = 24
Gyz = 24
0.12
1830
GP
(Load area)
23.8
Gxy = 10.6
Gxz = 10.6
Gyz = 10.6
0.4
1830
Table 2.1. Summary table of the properties of the materials of one vertebra unit used in
the COMSOL model.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Model 1: The
Cylindrical Model
To build a model of a child’s spine, the first step is to have a FU: one vertebra and
one IVD. The growth model can be tested on one FU. At first sight, the best idea
seemed to import the patient’s data to get the vertebra geometry, as the geometry
plays a very important role in stress distribution (for instance, a wedged vertebra will
enhance and be enhanced by the Hueter-Volkmann principle [41]). However, building
the complex geometry model and getting results is quite long and fastidious. In order
to advance faster, explore the biomechanics of the FU, the material properties, the
boundary conditions (BCs), and test the different growth models, their parameters,
before integrating them into a more complex model; a simple model was developed.
3.1
Methods
There, the vertebra, IVD, and GPs are cylinders on top of each other, as in Shi et
al. [5] and Driscoll et al.’ [6] studies.
3.1.1
Building the Geometrical Model
The first step of the modeling is to get a functional unit of the spine, ie: one vertebra,
one IVD, and the GPs at both ends of the vertebra.
The vertebra, IVD, and GPs material properties are given in Part 2.4.
Different models were created to build the FU step by step and compare with the
CT scan model that was created along: one vertebra, one FU, two vertebrae around
one IVD, with 1 GP or 3 GPs. Having a ”two vertebrae unit” would allow to test
a hemivertebra influence, to do the first tests of the tethering procedure, or other
treatment procedures.
As the geometry is simple, it was directly built on COMSOL. Figure 3.1 is il-
lustrating the component built on COMSOL. The sizes of the models are shown by
technical drawings in the Appendix 6, gotten by exporting the COMSOL geometry
and importing it in Fusion.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
Figure 3.1.
Cylindrical model of two vertebrae on top of each other, with one IVD in
between, and the GPs divided into the three regions. Screenshot of COMSOL geometry.
The chosen vertebra is T1 (and T2 to complete the two vertebrae model), to start
building the thoracic segment. It was chosen to focus on the thoracic segment because
it is the main location of AIS. In addition, this would bring novelty to the literature,
as most of the models focus on the lumbar segment [10] [11] [12].
Note:
A comparison of z-stress and VM stress distribution was done on the rounded
corner geometry in Saima Tabasam Ali’s work [4] and simple cylinder geometry, in
order to choose the one used in this work.
The former geometry, characterized by rounded corners, leads to elevated stress
levels at the transition point. Notice the occurrence of high stress at the junction
of two filters (rounded corners) of an IVD and a vertebra in this model (z-stress
distribution in Figures 3.2(b), VM-stress distribution in Figures 3.3(a) and 3.3(b)).
Therefore it was decided to use simple cylinders, ensuring a smoother continuity.
There is still high stress in the simple cylinder (see Figure 3.2(a) below, and in the
Appendix 6 Figures 1, 2, 4). However, the range of values for the z-stress decreases
from 59 MPa in Figure 3.2(b) to just 0.113 MPa in Figure 3.2(a), or from a range
of VM stress of 24 MPa in Figure 3.3(b) to a range of 0.010 MPa in Figure 4 in
Appendix 6.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Methods
25
((a)) Cylindrical model of T1 with 3 GPs on top (zoom of Figure 1)
((b)) Rounded cylindrical spine model from [4]. The overall z-stress distribution
is displayed in Figure 3. The legend color scale has been reduced to be able to
see the distribution trends.
Figure 3.2. Comparison of z-stress distribution on both models. Screenshot of COMSOL
geometry. High peak of z-stress at the filters junction.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
((a)) Volume distribution.
((b)) Side view slice.
Figure 3.3. Rounded cylindrical spine model from [4]. Screenshot of COMSOL geometry.
High peak of VM stress at the filter junction.
3.1.2
Boundary Conditions (BCs)
Over the literature review (see Table in the Appendix 6), all of the articles have the
same definition for the BCs. Saima Tabasam Ali’s method to implement the BCs in
COMSOL is reused in this work [4]. The top BC is a boundary load, and the weight
has to be distributed manually on every vertebra of the spine, while the bottom BC
is a spring foundation. Saima Tabasam Ali´s model was a full spine model, but it
can be adapted to the one or two top vertebra(e) model.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Methods
27
3.1.2.1
Boundary Load
The vertical compression of the person’s weight, when they are standing straight, has
to be modeled.
The top vertebra cannot move in any direction except in the longitudinal direction,
also called z-direction. The load is applied on the top of the vertebra as a pressure,
equally distributed on the top (see Figure 3.4) [4].
Figure 3.4.
The top BC is a pressure uniformly distributed over the top surface of the
vertebra.
For the physiological load distribution in the spine, the chosen approach relied
on Driscoll et al. [6] and Abolaeha et al.’s [7] work. The spinal loading, TX%, is
14% of the body weight BW at T1, and it increases by 2.6% for each vertebra. A
10-year-old girl weighs on average BW = 32 kg [52]. Thus, the spinal loading TXN
in each vertebra is calculated with (3.1), and the numerical value is given in Table
3.1:
TXN = BW · 9.81 · TX%
100
(3.1)
The pressure P to apply on the area A of the top of the vertebra is deduced from
that:
P = TXN
A
(3.2)
The area Acylinder = 4.91 cm2 is directly retrieved from COMSOL measurement.
It is the same for T1 and T2.
T1
T2
Load TXN
(in N)
43.93
52.37
Pressure Pcylinder
(in MPa)
8.95 · 10−2
1.02 · 10−1
Table 3.1. Numerical applications of Equations (3.1) and (3.2) in T1 and T2
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
3.1.2.2
Spring Foundation
The existing literature suggests that either the pelvis or the L5 vertebra should be
fully constrained. However, in Saima Tabasam Ali’s work, the full constraint was
replaced with a spring foundation at the L5 bottom when observing abnormal stress
concentration [4].
While the literature lacks specifics on how the constraint was
implemented, the utilization of a spring foundation seems logical. The bottom of the
vertebra is not fixed indefinitely hard, bolted down in steel. The below vertebrae,
as the Sacrum at the bottom of the spine in Saima Tabasam Ali’s study [4], can be
considered as a stiff spring.
Furthermore, it is reasonable to assume that the mechanics of a spring foundation
in L5 would correlate with a spring at the bottom of T2 as well.
Thus, a spring foundation node was implemented in this cylindrical FU, at the
bottom of T2, using the vertebra parameters (Evertebra = 1200 MPa) and a spring
thickness of 5 cm. The thickness of the spring is what brings stiffness to it, allowing
the vertebra bottom to yield just a little.
3.1.3
Growth Implementation
In order to incorporate the growth of the upper part of the spine (T1 and T2) into the
model, periodic geometry increments were implemented in COMSOL. The loading de-
scribed in Part 3.1.2.1 is applied, resulting in an average z-stress in the load-sensitive
GP. This z-stress average is reported in a sheet, the local growth is governed by this
GP [42]. To determine the strain increment, Equation (2.5) from the predominant
growth model is used. The strain increment is then employed to grow the vertebrae
and GPs, being distributed proportionally to their initial size.
The IVD remains
fixed in size throughout the process. This process is repeated for different period
increments: 5 months, 1 year, 1 year and a half, and 2 years of growth.
Except
from the sizes of the cylinders, nothing else is changed in COMSOL. A static study
is performed at each period increment.
Initially, the growth outcome was unsatisfactory, necessitating adjustments of the
sensitivity parameter and growth baseline. Subsequently, a parameter analysis was
conducted to examine the model’s growth over one year (refer to Part 3.2.2.1). The
selected parameters are summarized in Table 3.2.
Sensitivity
(in MPa−1)
Growth Baseline
(in mm · year−1 )
Normal stress value
(in MPa)
1
0.5
0.5
Table 3.2. Chosen parameters after running a parameters study
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Results
29
3.2
Results
This cylindrical model results are presented in this section, starting by analyzing
the biomechanical properties of one vertebra & GPs, of the two vertebrae unit, then
highlighting the test of the parameters on this simple model, and finally its growth.
3.2.1
Static Analysis of the Models
While building the model component by component, its properties were analyzed to
keep building on it.
3.2.1.1
One Vertebra and GPs
The cylindrical model was built starting with T1, to compare it with the extracted
vertebra from the CT scan (refer to Part 4.1). One GP (1 GP) and three GPs (3
GPs) models are tested to compare with the CT scan vertebra model while it was
built.
3.2.1.2
Volume overall stress distribution
To have a first overview, the VM stress is plotted on the 3D volume, for the 1 GP
model (see Figure 3.5) and the 3 GPs one (see Figure 3.6).
Figure 3.5. VM stress distribution on one vertebra. Volume overview. 1 GP Model.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
Figure 3.6. VM stress distribution on one vertebra. Volume overview. 3 GPs Model.
At first sight, looking at Figures 3.5 and 3.6, the distribution of VM stress appears
similar in both the 1 GP and 3 GPs models, exhibiting values within the same range.
The minimum stress area is located at the top and center of the GP region, with
a minimum that barely differs by 1%, of 0.0284 and 0.0287 MPa respectively. The
highest VM stress is concentrated below the upper GP, at the frontier, specifically
at the surface of the cylinder. It reaches a peak of 0.169 and 0.228 MPa for the
1 GP and 3 GPs models, respectively.
This represents a substantial difference of
26% when comparing the values of the 3 GPs model to that of the 1 GP model.
Notably, the highest stress is an order of magnitude greater than the minimum stress.
Additionally, the vertebral body appears to experience a VM stress of approximately
0.1 MPa in both models, as confirmed by Table 3.3, which shows a negligible 2%
disparity between the average VM stress values in the vertebrae. Conversely, when
comparing the GPs, a significant difference emerges. The average stress in the entire
GP region, as reported in Table 3.3, exhibits a 57% disparity between the 1 GP and
3 GPs models, increasing from 0.0358 MPa (1 GP model) to 0.0825 MPa (3 GPs
model).
VM stress average (in MPa)
Component
Model 1 GP
Model 3 GPs
Difference
(% of model 2
value)
GP (unic or three regions)
0.0358
0.0825
57%
Vertebra
0.0914
0.0897
2%
Difference
(% of VM stress in the
vertebra)
61%
8%
Table 3.3.
Average VM stress in the different parts of the 1 GP and 3 GPs models.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Results
31
3.2.1.3
Slices stress distribution
To see through the cylinder, the z-stress is plotted on vertical slices (see Figures 3.7)
and horizontal slices (see Figures 3.8).
((a)) 1 GP Model.
((b)) 3 GPs Model.
Figure 3.7. z-stress distribution on one vertebra. Vertical slice.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
((a)) 1 GP Model.
((b)) 3 GPs Model.
Figure 3.8. z-stress distribution on one vertebra. Horizontal slices.
At first sight, looking at Figures 3.7 and 3.8, the distribution of z-stress appears
similar in both the 1 GP and 3 GPs models, exhibiting values within the same range.
The highest VM stress is concentrated below the upper GP, at the frontier, specifically
at the surface of the cylinder. It reaches a peak of 0.14 and 0.12 MPa for the 1 GP
and 3 GPs models, respectively. This represents a substantial difference of 14% when
comparing the values of the 3 GPs model to that of the 1GP model. The minimum
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Results
33
stress area is located below the upper GP region (or just the GP in the 1GP model)
just before the cylinder exterior surface (and highest stress area), with a minimum
that differs of 13%, of 0.0672 and 0.0759 MPa respectively. Notably, the highest stress
is around double the minimum stress. Additionally, the vertebral body appears to
experience a VM stress of approximately 0.09 MPa in both models, as confirmed
by Table 3.4, which shows no disparity between the average z-stress values in the
vertebrae. Similarly, when comparing the GPs, no difference emerges.
z-stress average (in MPa)
Component
Model 1 GP
Model 3 GPs
Difference
(% of model 2
value)
GP (unic or three regions)
0.0895
0.0895
0%
Vertebra
0.0895
0.0895
0%
Difference
(% of z-stress in the
vertebra)
0%
0%
Table 3.4.
Average z-stress in the different parts of the 1 GP and 3 GPs models.
3.2.1.4
Stresses analysis over vertical and horizontal lines
The principal stresses are plotted along lines belonging to the (y, z) plan, used to plot
the vertical slice in Figure 3.7(b).
Vertical lines (y = ...):
Vertical lines are used to examine the impact of material
changes on the response to the load within the GPs and the top of the vertebra. The
definition of these vertical lines in COMSOL is depicted in Figures 5.
The principal stresses are plotted in Figures 3.9 in Appendix 6. Let L be the arc
length. Here is a reminder of the regions:
• the top GP cover L = 0 to L = 0.03 cm,
• the prolific one L = 0.03 to L = 0.08 cm,
• the mineralized L = 0.08 to L = 1.1 cm,
• the top of the vertebra L = 1.1 to L = 1.14 cm.
In addition, three different types of materials are defined here: the load-sensitive
GP (the softest), the other two GPs (similar and harder), and the vertebra (the hard-
est).
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
Figure 3.9. Principal stresses distribution on vertical lines, from the center of the vertebra
(y = 0 cm) to the exterior (y = 1.24 cm). Arc length: 0 cm is the top of the load-sensitive GP
- 0.03 cm top of prolific GP - 0.08 cm top of mineralized GP - 1.1 cm bottom of mineralized
GP.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Results
35
Analysis of the plots in Figures 3.9 reveals the following:
• In general, there is a significant discontinuity at the interface between two dif-
ferent materials, especially at the frontier between the load-sensitive GP and
prolific GP. Here, the shear stresses SP2 and SP3 transition from their maxi-
mum value of 0.06 MPa to their minimum value (typically 0, but can go down
to -0.13 MPa). Furthermore, SP1 shows a notable discontinuity at the exterior
of the cylinder (y = 1.24 cm), decreasing from 0.118 MPa to 0.106 MPa, cor-
responding to a 10% drop in value. A smaller gap is observed at the interface
between the mineralized GP and the vertebra, primarily near the surface of the
cylinder, where the gap can reach 0.005 MPa for SP1 at y = 1.15 cm, or SP2
at y = 1.15 or y = 1.24 cm.
• SP1 remains relatively constant inside the cylinder (with a negligible varia-
tion observed when transitioning between materials). It maintains a value of
0.09 MPa. Notably, there is a higher stress region at y = 1.24 cm (region in
red in Figure 3.7(b)), and a lower stress region before the cylinder surface at
y = 1.15 cm (region in blue on the same slice). The highest stress peak occurs at
the cylinder surface (y = 1.24 cm) and the frontier between the load-sensitive
and prolific GPs (L = 0.03 cm), located adjacent to the lowest stress points
(y = 1.15, L = 0.03 cm).
• There is a high shear stress within the load-sensitive GP (top layer, which comes
into contact with the IVD and induces shear stress). It reaches 0.6 MPa at the
center of the vertebra for SP2 and SP3, and decreases towards the exterior of
the cylinder. SP2 at the cylinder surface (y = 1.24 cm) is increasing toward
the frontier with the prolific GP. In the other GPs and the vertebra, the shear
stress is negative and its magnitude remains below 0.025 MPa (one-third of the
magnitude inside the load-sensitive GP), except at the exterior of the cylinder
(y = 1.24 cm) and the frontier between the top GP and the prolific GP, where
it can reach -0.13 MPa. This is why the VM stress is the highest at the frontier
between the top GP and the prolific GP, as it is the difference of the three
principal stresses to the square (2.18), all of which reach their peak absolute
values at this interface, with opposing signs. The shear stresses especially have
a huge gap there, going from the positive maximum to the negative minimum.
The VM stress is generally high in the load-sensitive GP because SP1 remains
constant, and the shear stress is consistently high in absolute value within that
region.
Horizontal lines (z = ...):
Horizontal lines are also plotted inside the GPs and
on top of the vertebra to check how continuous is the stress among the same mate-
rial. The Figures 6 in Appendix 6 illustrates how the horizontal lines were defined
on COMSOL.
The principal stresses are plotted in Figures 3.10. Let l be the arc length, ranging
from y = 1.25 cm (exterior of the cylinder) to y = 0 cm (center). The plots are
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
analyzed below:
• Overall, there is a noticeable stress variation within a perimeter of 0.2 cm (up
to 0.3 cm for SP1) before the cylinder exterior surface.
The curves remain
relatively flat towards the interior.
For all the components, all the stresses
undergo changes just before the exterior surface (before l = 0.2 cm).
• Particularly noteworthy is the convex curve exhibited by SP1 between l = 0 cm
and l = 0.2 cm, followed by a smaller one between l = 0.2 cm and l = 0.5 cm
(concave curve for the load-sensitive in the second interval though).
• The prolific and mineralized GPs display almost identical curves (especially
for SP1, less so for SP3, even though the SP3 converge too towards the same
value in the center of the cylinder in Table 3.5) as they are the same material
stacked on top of each other. Any differences might arise from their interaction
with neighboring materials, which could explain the disparities in shear stresses.
These GPs absorb most of the SP1 variations, exhibiting the maximum SP1
peak of 0.117 MPa at l = 0 cm and the minimum peak of 0.075 MPa closely
inside at l = 0.1 cm. This gives the quantitative tendency showcased by the red
and blue regions in the z-stress slice 3.7(b).
• On average, the load-sensitive GP demonstrates higher SP1 values compared to
the vertebra.
• It is confirmed that the load-sensitive GP experiences high shear stress, with
values of 0.06 MPa for SP2 and SP3 beyond the 0.2 cm deviation point, which
correspond to two-thirds of the value of SP1 (which remains constant at 0.9
MPa globally after 0.2 cm). The values of the stresses at the vertebra center
are reported in Table 3.5.
• The prolific GP has the second highest shear stresses in absolute value, being
the GP just below. Note that the sign is opposite here. The other materials
display low absolute values and negative shear stresses as a response to the
shielding effect from the layers above.
Inside stress value for the component:
Principal Stresses
(in MPa)
Load-sensitive
GP
Prolific
GP
Mineralized
GP
Vertebra
SP1
0.090
0.090
0.090
0.090
SP2
0.058
-0.002
-0.002
-0.005
SP3
0.058
-0.010
-0.010
-0.008
Table 3.5. Converging values of stress inside the cylindrical components of the model.
The 3 GPs model provides a smoother transition and a biologically more accu-
rate representation, making it preferable to use. Additionally, the effect of material
changes is successfully demonstrated using the 3 GPs model, and the same observa-
tions apply to the 1 GP model. Since the integration of the 3 GPs into the CT scan
vertebra was successful, the analysis in this report will continue with the examination
of the 3 GPs model.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Results
37
Figure 3.10. Principal stresses distribution on horizontal lines, from the top of the GPs
(z = 1.25 cm) to the interior of the vertebra (z = 1.11 cm). Arc length: from y = 1.25 cm
(exterior of the cylinder) to y = 0 cm (center).
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
3.2.1.5
Two Vertebrae
To evaluate the growth model process, a two-vertebrae unit, positioned in a sandwich
configuration around the IVD, is constructed and analyzed throughout the growth
process.
3.2.1.6
Volume overall stress distribution
The VM stress distribution is plotted in Figure 3.11 to get a first overview of the
model.
Figure 3.11. VM stress distribution on two vertebrae, GPs and IVD. Volume overview.
At first sight, the VM stress is at its lowest in the IVD, followed by the thoracic
vertebra T1 vertebra, and then reaches its highest level in the T2 vertebra which
bears more weight.
The highest VM stress appears to be concentrated in the mineralized and prolific
GPs, as in Figure 3.6.
3.2.1.7
Slices stress distribution
To evaluate the stress distribution inside the model, the slices shown in Figure 3.12
are examined.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Results
39
Comparing from Table 3.6 the average SP1 values in T1 (9.04 · 10−2 MPa), the
IVD (9.43 · 10−2 MPa), and T2 (1.97 · 10−1 MPa), there is a clear elevation in SP1
stress in T2 compared to both T1 and the IVD. Specifically, the SP1 stress increases
by 5% in the IVD compared to T1, and it is doubled in T2 relative to T1 (a 118%
increase in T2’s SP1 compared to T1’s SP1).
Due to the presence of a softer material positioned between two harder materials,
there is a decrease in SP1 (compared to T2) but an increase in shear stresses. This
effect is particularly evident in the IVD within the two-vertebra unit slices. Quanti-
fying the difference of magnitude of SP2, it is noted that the SP2 is 7.0 times higher
in magnitude in the IVD than in T1, and thus T2 too (see Table 3.6). Besides, the
shear stress exhibits an opposite trend between the IVD and the vertebrae.
At the exterior surfacic part of the IVD, both shear stresses and normal stress are
reduced. This can be attributed to the material deformation and extension in this
region, which helps to alleviate the pressure. On the contrary, at the corner between
the IVD, the load-sensitive GP, and the cylinder surface, high stresses arise as the
soft material is attached to a harder material, preventing it from deforming itself.
The behavior of the GPs, which has been extensively analyzed in the single-
vertebra model, demonstrates a similar pattern when two vertebrae are stacked on top
of each other. SP1 is the same for both prolific and mineralized GPs (less than 0.1%
of difference), only the shearing stresses differ. The load-sensitive GP experiences
higher values of SP1 (at least 0.5% higher, up to 2% higher), and generally higher
values for SP2 and SP3 as well, as confirmed by the stress values provided in Table
3.6. Their shear stresses are of opposite sign to the other cortical bone materials, the
load-sensitive GPs align with the IVD or the BCs. The shearing appears precisely at
the frontier between the load-sensitive GP and the prolific one.
It should be noted that the aberrations observed at the corners persist in this
cylindrical model, particularly in the corners near the IVD.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
Figure 3.12. SPs distribution on the two vertebrae cylindrical model. Vertical Slice.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Results
41
Component
Stresses (in MPa)
VM
SP1
SP2
SP3
load-sensitive GP
3.42 · 10−2
8.99 · 10−2
5.73 · 10−2
5.47 · 10−2
prolific GP
1.00 · 10−1
8.97 · 10−2
−5.48 · 10−3
−1.44 · 10−2
mineralized GP
9.35 · 10−2
8.96 · 10−2
−2.60 · 10−4
−7.10 · 10−3
T1
1.02 · 10−1
9.04 · 10−2
−8.47 · 10−3
−1.47 · 10−2
mineralized GP
1.29 · 10−1
9.41 · 10−2
−2.66 · 10−2
−4.22 · 10−2
prolific GP
1.63 · 10−1
9.42 · 10−2
−5.22 · 10−2
−8.11 · 10−2
load-sensitive GP
6.24 · 10−2
1.02 · 10−1
4.97 · 10−2
3.36 · 10−2
IVD
4.08 · 10−2
9.43 · 10−2
5.89 · 10−2
5.00 · 10−2
load-sensitive GP
9.59 · 10−2
2.05 · 10−1
1.18 · 10−1
1.03 · 10−1
prolific GP
2.82 · 10−1
1.99 · 10−1
−6.05 · 10−2
−9.95 · 10−2
mineralized GP
2.40 · 10−1
1.99 · 10−1
−2.86 · 10−2
−5.25 · 10−2
T2
2.09 · 10−1
1.97 · 10−1
−8.04 · 10−3
−1.51 · 10−2
mineralized GP
2.02 · 10−1
1.96 · 10−1
1.08 · 10−3
−1.19 · 10−2
prolific GP
2.11 · 10−1
1.96 · 10−1
−6.32 · 10−3
−2.20 · 10−2
load-sensitive GP
7.27 · 10−2
1.97 · 10−1
1.27 · 10−1
1.22 · 10−1
Table 3.6. Table of the stress values in the different components in the two vertebrae model,
from the top to the bottom.
3.2.2
The Growing Model
The growing model is tested on the two vertebrae unit. A parameter study is per-
formed first.
After running the growth process with the chosen parameters, the
model’s biomechanical properties are analyzed through the growth.
3.2.2.1
Test the parameters of the model
The parameters used in the literature review are recapitulated in Table 3.7 to get an
overview of them. The growth baseline is generally in the range of [0.8; 1.1] mm·year−1
but it can be reduced down to 0.2 mm·year−1, the sensitivity parameter in the range
of [0.4; 1.71] MPa−1, and the normal value of stress is generally set to 0.5 MPa.
Kamal
Abolaeha
Driscoll
Shi
Growth baseline
(in mm/year)
0.2 - 1.2
0.8 - 1.1
0.8 - 1.1
0.8 - 1.1
Sensitivity
(in MPa−1)
0.4 - 1.71
1.3
1.7
0.4
Stress
(in MPa)
0.5
0.002 - 0.1
0.5
Table 3.7. Overview of the parameters used in the literature study.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
The predominant growth model (refer to Part 2.3.2.1) is tested on the two ver-
tebrae unit with GPs divided in one or three regions, for different parameters. The
z-stress is used in the model equation. The total growth in the upper body after one
year is used as criterion to select the parameters. The results are listed in Table 3.8.
Parameters
z-stress
invest.
Model:
Cylinders
β
(MPa−1)
Growth
baseline
(mm/year)
Normal
stress
value
(MPa)
T1 size
after
5 months
(cm)
T2 size
after
5 months
(cm)
Total growth
in the
upper body
in 1 year
(cm)
1
1GP Predomin.
1
1.1
0.5
1.20
1.29
12.00
2
1GP Predomin.
1
1.1
0.1
1.38
1.47
19.50
3
1GP Predomin.
1
0.5
0.5
1.05
1.12
5.47
4
1GP Predomin.
0.4
0.5
0.5
1.10
1.16
7.29
5
1GP Predomin.
0.7
0.5
0.5
1.08
1.14
6.38
6
1GP Predomin.
0.7
0.8
0.5
1.17
1.24
10.20
7
1GP Predomin.
1
0.8
0.5
1.13
1.20
8.75
8
3GP Predomin.
1
1.1
0.5
1.24
1.33
12.00
9
3GP Predomin.
1
1.1
0.1
1.41
1.50
19.50
10
3GP Predomin.
1
0.5
0.5
1.10
1.17
5.47
11
3GP Predomin.
0.4
0.5
0.5
1.15
1.21
7.29
12
3GP Predomin.
0.7
0.5
0.5
1.13
1.19
6.38
13
3GP Predomin.
0.7
0.8
0.5
1.21
1.28
10.20
14
3GP Predomin.
1
0.8
0.5
1.17
1.25
8.75
Table 3.8. Predominant growth model tested on the cylindrical model (two vertebrae +
IVD) for different parameters. The z-stress is used in the model equation. The last column
gives the total growth in the upper body after one year: the color goes from red to green,
enhancing how improbable to how likely the growth is.
It is notable at first sight how the upper body growth is sensible to the change
of the parameters. Keeping the same sensitivity and growth baseline, but changing
the normal stress value from 0.5 to 0.1 MPa in tryouts 1 and 2 of Table 3.8, increases
the total growth by 62% of its initial value (from 12 cm to 19.5 cm). Besides, the
total growth being inversely dependent of the sensitivity, the total one-year-growth
is reduced of 0.910 cm when the sensitivity parameter is increased of 0.3 MPa−1 in
tryouts 3 to 5, i.e.: respectively 12% and 14% of the value of case 4 and 5. The
growth baseline was also tested here, and as seen in tryouts 6 and 7, the smallest
growth baseline of Abolaeha, Driscoll and Shi’s studies gives high total growth.
In the end, it was decided to continue with parameters in the ranges of Kamal’s
article: a sensitivity of 0.5 MPa−1, a growth baseline of 0.5 mm · year−1, and a nor-
mal stress value of 0.5 MPa as in the three other studies of Table 3.7.
Note that the GPs being divided into one or three regions does not change the
growth results, as in the 3 GPs model the z-stress average is taken in the load-sensitive
GP, and matches the z-stress average in the GP of the 1 GP model.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Discussion
43
The model was also tested using SP1 instead of the z-stress in Table 3.9, because
it was not so clear in the literature review was using one or the other when talking
of ”longitudinal stress” or ”local load”.
Parameters
SP1
invest.
Model:
Cylinders
β
(MPa−1)
Growth
baseline
(mm/year)
Normal
stress
value
(MPa)
T1 size
after
5 months
(cm)
T2 size
after
5 months
(cm)
Total
growth
in the
upper body
in 1 year
(cm)
Difference
of growth
over
a year
(%)
3
1GP
Predom.
1
0,5
0,5
1,05
1,12
5,48
0,18%
9
3GP
Predom.
1
0,5
0,5
1,10
1,18
5,49
0,37%
Table 3.9.
Predominant growth model tested on the cylindrical model (two vertebrae
+ IVD) with the first principal stress used in the model equation, to see how the results
diverge from the ones gotten in Table 3.8 when using the z-stress. *abbreviation: Predom.
(Predominant), Invest. (Investigation), β (Sensitivity)
Seeing a difference of less than 1% (respectively 0.18 and 0.37% with tryouts 3
and 9), it is admitted that the difference induced by z-stress or first principal stress
does not matter in comparison to how sensitive the model is to the choice of the
parameters.
3.3
Discussion
The results are now discussed and compared, to conclude on the utility of separating
the GP in three regions, and if the growth model can support multiple vertebrae.
3D Study: Comparison of VM Stress - 1 GP vs. 3 GPs.
There is a notable
difference in stress distribution between the GPs in the 1 GP and 3 GPs models,
while the stress in the vertebra remains similar. This discrepancy is logical, as the
GPs are the only elements that differ between the models.
In the 3 GPs model,
the transition between the vertebra and the GPs is more continuous, evidenced by a
smaller difference in average VM stress compared to the 1 GP model (refer to Table
3.3).
The top layer of both models (the GP in the 1 GP model or the load-sensitive GP
in the 3 GPs model) exhibits low stress. This is because the material in this region
is softer, allowing it to absorb shocks more effectively.
Below the top layer, there is a broader band of high VM stress under the GP in the
1 GP model compared to the 3 GPs model. This can be attributed to the presence
of the prolific and mineralized GPs, which act as transition layers with properties
intermediate between the extremes.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Model 1: The Cylindrical Model
2D Study: z-Stress on Slices:
The z-stress is equivalent to SP1 in the cylinder, as
the normal to the surface is z-direction and also the direction of the applied pressure.
This correlation is less accurate for SP2 and SP3, they are not specifically in x and y
directions, as they are the directions that maximize the second and third stresses in
the (x, y) plan.
Notably, there is a smoother difference in z-stress within the 3 GPs model, indi-
cating a more coherent stress distribution in this model than in the 1 GP model.
An interesting observation is the high stress in the external circle just below the
top GP region (load-sensitive or the only GP), followed by the lowest stress just inside
of it. This abnormality resembles corner aberrations observed in other cases, such
as in Saima Tabasam Ali’s study [4]. One possible explanation is the way the top
boundary condition is defined, where the pressure is concentrated at the edge rather
than being distributed over a surface.
1D Study over Lines:
The vertical lines at y = 1.15 and y = 1.24 cm are within
the first 0.2 cm of the horizontal curves, within the 0.2 cm periphery of the cylindrical
surface. They confirm an opposing behavior and highlight the corner aberration with
high stress and low stress concentration at the same place.
At first sight on the VM volume overview, the VM stress appears higher at the
surface of the prolific and mineralized GPs (both in the single-vertebra and two-
vertebra models). However, for the internal part (which is not clearly visible in the
overview of VM stress figures), it is the load-sensitive GP that experiences more VM
stress (particularly shear stresses). This highlights the importance of plotting and
analyzing the internal region in detail.
Two Vertebrae vs.
One Vertebra:
The behavior of the GPs demonstrates a
similar pattern when two vertebrae are stacked on top of each other, even the values
do not differ much for T1. Reported in Table 3.3, the GPs in the one vertebra model
have a VM stress average of 0.0825 MPa, while the VM stress decreases of 3% in the
GPs of T1 in the two vertebrae model (VM stress of 0.0803 MPa). The same goes for
the z-stress in the GPs that stays the same (0.0895 vs. 0.0897 MPa). The vertebra
itself sees more changes, with a VM stress increasing of 11% (0.0897 VS 0.102), but a
z-stress increasing of less than 1% (0.0895 vs. 0.0904 MPa). The shear stress is thus
changed in the two vertebra model, which is coherent as the IVD is stretching and
pulling the bottom of the vertebra. However, the growth model relies on the z-stress,
so this is the one that should be taken the most care of.
In the end, T1 behaves similarly on its own and stacked upon the IVD and T2: the
assumption that the bottom BC can be used at the bottom of any model, constituted
of one vertebra, two or more, seems to hold.
The Growing Model:
The growth of 5.47 cm in just one year is remarkably high,
particularly when considering that the growth baseline is relatively low compared to
the range reported in the literature (0.5 mm.year−1).
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Discussion
45
Literature Review Comparison:
This model is intended to be compared with
the cylinder models presented in the literature by Driscoll et al. [6] and Shi et al. [5].
However, since Driscoll et al. did not provide any stress distribution results, we won’t
be able to compare our model with theirs.
Regarding Shi et al., they reported a VM stress of 0.080 ± 0.005 MPa in the
load-sensitive GP of T1 (averaging the values from the right and left sides of the GP,
with uncertainty derived from reading Figure 3 of the article). In our two vertebrae
model, the average VM stress in the load-sensitive GP of T1 is 0.0899 MPa (see Table
3.6). Our model’s value is only 6% above the upper limit of Shi’s result interval. This
close agreement can be explained by the fact that the sensitivity parameters chosen
in our model are close to those used by Shi et al (see Tables 3.8 and 3.7).
Conclusion:
In summary, the simple cylindrical model demonstrates the effective-
ness of dividing the GP into three regions. Its ease and speed of implementation
allowed for the inclusion of different components and testing of various growth model
parameters. It demonstrated the model’s sensitivity and adjustability, highlighting
its potential for fine-tuning. However, this also raises the question of whether it is
possible to anticipate growth when the origin of the sensitivity parameter is unknown.
Despite this, the most significant finding is that the results obtained from this model
were coherent and comparable to the cylindrical models found in the literature review.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Model 2: The CT Scan
Model
Most of the studies relies on a patient-specific geometry by importing data from
patient CT scans [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [53]. Indeed, the AIS spine development seems
to depend on different factors, that could be different for the patients (see Part 2.2).
The biomechanical instability can stem from the initial or induced geometry of the
vertebra, as well as changes in material properties. Therefore, having a more refined
geometric model is crucial in understanding these complexities.
4.1
Methods
The growth process for the CT scan vertebra model follows a similar approach to the
cylindrical model. However, the complexity is increased due to the more intricate
geometry involved. Overcoming challenges such as importing the CT scan geometry
into COMSOL, meshing it, adding GPs on top of the CT scan vertebra, and defining
the boundary condition areas are key aspects to be addressed.
4.1.1
Building the Geometrical Model
Two models have been created: first, one single vertebra from the imported patient’s
data, and then, the vertebra with 3 GPs on top.
4.1.1.1
T1 Vertebra
The CT scans of an 11-year-old girl with scoliosis were obtained from a collaborator.
The process of transforming the patient data into a COMSOL vertebra is outlined
in the flowchart depicted in Figure 4.2, and further explained in the subsequent
paragraph (that refers to the figures in better quality in the Appendix 6). The DICOM
files were imported into 3D Slicer, which provided a 3D volume representation of the
thorax. By applying a grey threshold ranging from 150 to 300 Hounsfield units (HU),
only the spinal bones were isolated. Figure 7 in Appendix 6 illustrates the complete
spine extracted from the DICOM files using 3D Slicer.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
From this extracted spinal structure, the T1 vertebra was isolated by removing
unwanted material, smoothing the surface, and filling gaps using the capabilities of
the 3D Slicer software. Figure 4.1 presents the finalized vertebra within its overall en-
vironment, alongside the DICOM files, providing various views of the CT scans. The
resulting vertebra was exported as a .nii file from 3D Slicer, which needed to be con-
verted to a .stl file for importing into COMSOL. Initially, the mesh was uploaded to
Fusion, where it was transformed into a surface and then into a solid body. However,
the mesh contained an excessive number of triangles, and the surfaces intersected
with each other. To overcome these issues, a dichotomy approach was employed to
reduce the mesh complexity to 25%. Subsequently, the mesh was quadrified using
3Ds Max, as Fusion worked more effectively with a quadrified mesh. Finally, the
mesh was successfully converted into a solid body (see Figure 8 in Appendix 6) and
exported as an .stl file for utilization in COMSOL (see Figure 8 in Appendix 6).
Figure 4.1. 3D slicer workspace: (A) Top view of the spine, cut through T1 (in green).
DICOM image. (B) T1 vertebra extracted in the workspace. (C) Front view of the spine,
illustration of the patient’s AIS, T1 in green. DICOM image. (D) Lateral view of the spine,
T1 in green. DICOM image.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Methods
49
Figure 4.2. Flowchart: from DICOM files to a COMSOL vertebra
Additionally, the T1 vertebra was 3D-printed to obtain a quick overview of its size
and facilitate reference during file import and geometry-related operations. This was
helpful because transferring files from Fusion to COMSOL often resulted in a scale
mismatch, which the 3D-printed model helped to address.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
Figure 4.3. T1 imported in Cura to be 3D printed
4.1.1.2
The GPs
To incorporate the GPs onto the CT scan-based vertebra, the components were cre-
ated on Fusion, and imported in COMSOL. The flowchart in Figure 4.4 is illustrating
the following steps:
• 1. A cylinder block was positioned within the vertebra to serve as a foundation
for designing the GPs.
• 2-5. The simple cylinder was partitioned using the shape of the vertebra. This
involved splitting the cylinder into three sections, so that the top and bottom
of the GP are the same as the vertebra’s top surface.
• 6. This process was repeated to create a total of three GPs.
• 7.
Finally, the GPs were positioned on top of the vertebra, completing the
geometrical model.
By following these steps the GPs were successfully integrated onto the CT scan-
derived vertebra, facilitating further analysis and modeling within COMSOL. After
re-meshing the entire geometry, working on Fusion and defining the GPs as sepa-
rate body objects enabled the assignment of distinct properties to each GP within
COMSOL.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Methods
51
Figure 4.4. Flowchart: How to add GPs on top of the CT scan vertebra.
4.1.2
Boundary Conditions (BCs)
Before introducing the GPs into the model, it is important to conduct initial tests on
the boundary conditions using a single vertebra.
4.1.2.1
Boundary Load
For the single vertebra model:
To define the top surface area for applying the
load, the vertebra was partitioned since directly selecting the surface was not possible.
To ensure accurate modeling, a second mesh was created on top of the vertebra
using an ellipse to define the desired top surface area.
It is important to avoid
performing boolean operations on geometries created from a mesh, as this complex
operation is prone to failure. Instead, it is recommended to perform the operation
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
during the meshing sequence, which provides a more robust approach due to simpler
face parametrization [54,55].
The mesh quality remains high even after reducing the number of triangles and
quadrifying the mesh. The minimum element quality, measured on a scale of 0 to 1,
is 0.2, surpassing the 0.1 threshold considered as low quality by COMSOL Blog [56].
For the model vertebra & 3 GPs:
In this model, there is no need to explicitly
define the top surface for applying the load. COMSOL allows direct selection of the
load-sensitive GP’s top surface.
The applied force on this top surface represents a vertical pressure load simulat-
ing the weight of the head on the top vertebra, as described in Part 3.1.2.1. The
pressure value is almost quadrupled here (PCT scan = 0.393 MPa) since the area
ACT scan defined here for the load application is almost a quarter of the cylinder sur-
face (ACT scan = 1.27 cm2 = 25.9% · Acylinder), and they are inversely proportional.
4.1.2.2
Spring Foundation
To define the bottom surface area, a similar approach was employed as the one used
for the top surface: by partitioning the vertebra, the desired bottom surface area was
established. It should be noted that the bottom surface is intentionally larger than
the top surface to ensure that the entire bottom region is adequately supported by
the modeled spring. This ensures that the bottom surface is effectively ”cushioned”
and allows for a more comprehensive representation of the boundary conditions in
the simulation.
The bottom BC is a spring foundation as in Part 3.1.2.2.
More advanced BCs could have been implemented, but in a matter of eﬀiciency,
those BCs were kept. Refer to Appendix 6 to read a summary of how the BCs could
be detailed.
4.1.3
Growth Implementation
A static simulation is performed.
As remeshing the growing CT scan vertebra is
time-consuming, the growth modeling is excluded from this model.
To assess the eﬀiciency of the approach, a comparison between the models obtained
with the two methods (in Parts 3.1 and 4.1) from the first growth iteration will
be conducted, focusing on any difference and whether the results justify the effort
involved in the CT scan data importation and remeshing.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Results
53
4.2
Results
In this section, the results of the CT scan model are presented, showcasing the stress
distribution within a single vertebra both with and without the inclusion of the GPs.
4.2.1
The Vertebra Without Any GP
First, the stress distribution is analyzed on the CT scan vertebra alone.
4.2.1.1
Overall Volume Stress Distribution
The first result displayed in Figure 4.5 is the VM stress distribution on a CT scan
vertebra, fully made of cortical bone, with a pressure load equivalent to the head
weight for the top boundary condition and a spring foundation for the bottom of the
vertebra.
Figure 4.5. 3D visualisation of the VM stress distribution in T1, obtained by CT scans
importation.
The stress is distributed throughout the vertebra body, and the processes experi-
ence negligible VM stress, measuring around the minimum of 4.31 · 10−8 MPa, which
is six orders of magnitude lower than the VM stress average in the volume, recorded
at 0.0445 MPa. This is attributed to the load being applied to the top surface of the
body, and the shape of the vertebra seems to inhibit stress propagation in the pro-
cesses. The VM stress is particularly concentrated in the middle of the body, where
the stress can reach its maximum of 0.290 MPa, as most of the stress is absorbed by
the inner part.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
Due to the vertebra’s non-cylindrical and not perfectly symmetrical shape, the
stress distribution is not entirely symmetric. There is a higher stress concentration
on the left side of the vertebra, likely resulting from its geometry and the load surface
not being perfectly centered relative to the vertebra.
It is worth noting a slight displacement of the bottom surface, caused by the spring
foundation boundary condition.
4.2.1.2
Slices Stress Distribution
To get an insight into the stress distribution, the SPs are plotted on horizontal and
vertical slices in the middle of the body.
Vertical Slice:
A vertical slice is built in the middle of the body, as shown in Figure
4.6.
Figure 4.6. Plotting the vertical slice at y = 1.8 cm, i.e.: middle of the vertebra.
The SPs are presented in Figures 4.7. On this slice, the average SP1 is 1.29 · 10−1
MPa, SP2 is 6.88 · 10−3 MPa, and SP3 is −1.46 · 10−2 MPa.
SP1 reflects the load pressure applied to the top surface. Just below, the region
is experiencing the highest SP1, which reaches a maximum value of 0.253 MPa at
the corner of the BC. An interesting observation is the presence of corner aberration,
with the highest stress point located next to the lowest-stressed region on the top
corners of the vertebra, at the boundary of the load surface. The minimum SP1 is
even negative, measuring -0.0104 MPa (approximately the same magnitude as the
average SP1 in the slice). It means that the upper corners of the vertebra go up in
reaction to the bottom boundary condition blocking the downward movement. As we
move down within the vertebra, SP1 decreases. The lack of exact symmetry around
the center axis is due to the vertebra’s inherent asymmetry.
Shear stresses are observed at the boundary conditions, particularly at the bottom
corners of the vertebra where the downward movement is restrained, and at the top
surface, especially at its periphery. This top BC periphery exhibits shear stresses
reaching values of 0.172 MPa and 0.128 MPa, respectively for SP2 and SP3.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Results
55
Figure 4.7. Principal stresses distribution on one vertebra. Vertical slice.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
Horizontal Slice:
A horizontal slice is built in the middle of the body, as shown
in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8. Plotting the horizontal slice at z = 8.95 cm, i.e.: approximately three fifth of
the vertebra height.
The SPs are presented in Figures 4.9. On this slice, the average SP1 is 6.05 · 10−2
MPa, SP2 is −1.00 · 10−3 MPa, and SP3 is −9.63 · 10−3 MPa. The shear stresses are
on average one order of magnitude below SP1.
SP1 reflects the load pressure applied to the top surface. The stress distribution
exhibits a disc-shaped pattern, with the highest stress (0.182 MPa) at the center,
gradually decreasing as we move away from the center of the load surface. Outside of
the body, there is minimal stress, and the processes experience negligible SP1, except
for the pedicles, which may see slightly higher stress. As the slice is in the middle
of the height of the body, far from the load surface, there are no corner aberrations
observed.
Shear stresses are present within the body and are negligible in the processes. SP2
exhibits a circular stress distribution, changing signs around the center of the body,
with a peak at the beginning of the pedicle. On the other hand, SP3 is negative
throughout the body, with a stress concentration near the hole.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Results
57
Figure 4.9. Principal stresses distribution on one vertebra. Horizontal slice.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
4.2.2
Vertebra With the GPs
The GPs are added on top of the CT scan vertebra, and imported in COMSOL. This
section analyses the stress distribution.
4.2.2.1
Volume Overall Stress Distribution (3D)
The VM stress is plotted on the full volume in Figure 4.10 to get a first overview.
Figure 4.10. 3D visualisation of the VM stress distribution in T1 with GPs.
The stress is distributed throughout the vertebra body, and the processes experi-
ence negligible VM stress, measuring around the minimum of 7.56 · 10−8 MPa, which
is six orders of magnitude lower than the VM stress average in the overall volume,
recorded at 5.55 · 10−2 MPa.
The average in all the GPs, 0.300 MPa, is more than five times the VM stress
average in T1. The average values for the various stresses in the different components
of the CT scan model are presented in Table 4.1. The stress is notably concentrated in
the GPs, including the VM stress and the SPs, which are all at least three times higher
than those in T1. Specifically, the VM stress in the load-sensitive GP is three times
higher than in T1, while the shear stresses are different by two orders of magnitude.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Results
59
Stresses (in MPa)
Component
VM
SP1
SP2
SP3
load-sensitive
1.49 · 10−1
3.49 · 10−1
2.13 · 10−1
1.92 · 10−1
prolific
3, 72 · 10−1
3.54 · 10−1
2.43 · 10−2
−4.66 · 10−2
mineralized
3.29 · 10−1
3.56 · 10−1
4.29 · 10−2
1.43 · 10−2
T1
5.31 · 10−2
4.86 · 10−2
1.25 · 10−3
−7.75 · 10−3
Table 4.1.
Table of the stress values in the different components of the CT scan vertebra
model.
4.2.2.2
Slices Stress Distribution (2D)
Vertical and horizontal slices will allow to have an insight into the stress distribution
inside the vertebra.
Vertical Slice:
A vertical slice is plotted in the middle of the body, as for the CT
scan vertebra without the GPs in Figure 4.6.
The SPs are presented in Figures 4.11. On this slice, the average SP1 is 1.45·10−1
MPa, SP2 is 7.42 · 10−3 MPa, and SP3 is −1.26 · 10−2 MPa.
SP1 reflects the load pressure applied to the top surface. Just below, the region
is experiencing the highest SP1, which reaches a maximum value of 1.23 MPa at the
corner of the BC. The same can be said about the corner aberration in the simple CT
scan vertebra, with a negative minimum SP1 of the same size order (-0.0268 MPa,
compared to -0.0104 MPa in Figure 4.7), but a maximum SP1 five times bigger (1.23
MPa, compared to 0.253 MPa in Figure 4.7). The aberration is increased. As in the
simple vertebra, as we move down within the vertebra, SP1 decreases.
Shear stresses are evident in the GPs, particularly in the top GP, which exhibits
shear stresses one order of magnitude higher than those in the prolific and mineralized
GPs, and over one order of magnitude higher than those in the vertebra (refer to
Table 4.1). It is worth noting that SP3 changes sign at the boundary between the
load-sensitive and prolific GPs. Additionally, there is a significant concentration of
shear stresses at the periphery of the border between the mineralized GP and the
vertebra.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
Figure 4.11. Principal stresses distribution on one vertebra. Vertical slice.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Results
61
Horizontal Slice:
Three horizontal slices are plotted within the GPs, ranging from
the lowest at z = 2.70 cm (just below the mineralized GP) to the highest at z = 2.78
cm, as illustrated in Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12. Plotting the horizontal slices at z = 2.70 and z = 2.75 cm. The third one
(not shown here) is at z = 2.78 cm.
The SPs are plotted in Figure 4.13, and in Figures 12 and 13 in Appendix 6. These
horizontal slices capture the GPs’ curvature under the load pressure, as observed in
Figure 4.11. The lowest GP is visible at the periphery of the ”GP ellipse” (black
ellipse on the graphs), while the GPs positioned on top are visible in the center of the
ellipse. In Figure 4.13, representing the lowest slice of the three, the three different
colors (more noticeable on the shear stresses plots) correspond to the mineralized GP,
the prolific GP, and finally, the load-sensitive GP, arranged from the periphery to the
center of the ellipse. In the higher slices, as seen in Figures 12 and 13 in Appendix 6,
the two bottom GPs remain visible, while the load-sensitive GP is replaced by a hole
due to its position lower than the slice.
These slices at different levels illustrate that SP1 is higher in the GPs than in
the vertebra, and the shear stresses are predominantly located within the GPs (be-
ing negligible in the vertebra). Furthermore, the shear stresses exhibit variations in
magnitude and sign within the GPs.
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
Figure 4.13. Principal stresses distribution on one vertebra. Horizontal slice at z = 2.70
cm.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Results
63
4.2.2.3
Stresses analysis over lines (1D)
To get a more quantitative approach than with the previous slices, the SPs are plotted
over lines in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14. Principal stresses distribution on one vertebra & GPs, over lines.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
The horizontal and vertical lines construction is shown in Appendix 6, in Figures
10 and 11. They are cutting through the vertebral body and GPs.
As observed previously, in the vertebral body, SP1 is the highest in the center and
decreases towards the exterior. The shear stresses are negligible (less than 0.02 MPa
in magnitude).
At the bottom of the GP, the horizontal line does not present continuous stresses as
multiple GPs are visible: the mineralized one exhibits high SP1 at the border (corner
aberration), higher shear stress at the corner aberration point; the load-sensitive GP
has the same SP1 than the prolific GP, but higher shear stresses.
The vertical line exhibits an increase of SP1 from the bottom (when the arc length
l is null) towards the GPs (when l = 1.5 cm). The shear stresses are continuous inside
the vertebral body, rising in magnitude towards the boundaries, and showing high
discontinuities inside the three different regions of the GP, peaking inside the load-
sensitive GP.
4.2.2.4
Stress analysis on a point (1D)
On COMSOL, it is possible to plot the stress distribution over the surface of a small
sphere, which was used to show the stress in a point in Figure 4.15.
The stress
distribution is continuous on this sphere, showcasing a small VM stress variation (of
0.1 kPa, i.e.: 5% of the maximum value of 1.82 kPa).
Figure 4.15. Surface point evaluation: on the left, location of the sphere; on the right, VM
stress distribution over its surface.
4.3
Discussion
After presenting the results, a discussion is necessary to compare the stress distribu-
tion over the vertebrae and within the GPs with the literature. This comparison will
lead to conclusions regarding the potential usefulness and feasibility of incorporating
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Discussion
65
the GP.
There is some difference between z-stress and SP1 in the CT scan model, as
the normal to the surface of the GP and the z-direction are not exactly the same,
contrary to the cylindrical model. This is due to the top surface curvature and the
overall vertebral body geometry. That is why only the SPs have been investigated
with the CT scan model.
One vertebra vs. one vertebra & GPs:
The stress distribution remains consis-
tent in both models, with and without GPs, showing higher stress concentrations in
the center of the vertebral body and the top surface, gradually decreasing towards
the exterior or the bottom.
Upon adding the GPs, the VM stress in T1 increases by 19% (from 0.0445 to
0.0531 MPa, see Part 4.2.1.1 and Table 4.1). Comparing the vertical slices in both
models (see Parts 4.2.1.2 and 4.2.2.2), and the average SPs, we observe a 12% increase
in SP1 (from 1.29 · 10−1 to 1.45 · 10−1 MPa), a 13% increase in SP2 (from 6.88 · 10−3
to 7.42 · 10−3 MPa), and a 14% decrease in SP3 (from −1.46 · 10−2 to −1.26 · 10−2
MPa), all while retaining the same signs and orders of magnitude. Overall, there is
a general increase in stresses, possibly due to the same load being distributed over
the smaller volume of the GPs rather than being directly distributed through the
vertebra.
The difference in stress between GPs and the vertebra is notably pronounced in
the CT scan vertebra: the stresses are higher by one order of magnitude in general
(see Table 4.1). This may be attributed to the lack of continuity in geometry. Another
possible reason could be that the GPs represent half of the surface area of the top
vertebra, leading to the higher stresses observed in the GPs.
The presence of high stress in ”corners” when adding the GPs is evident again, par-
ticularly at the peripheries of the load-sensitive and mineralized GPs. This indicates
a concentration of constraint on the boundaries. If the GPs were to circumfer the
entire top surface, this aberration might be smoothed down, but further investigation
and testing are required.
The addition of GPs introduces complexity to the shear stress distribution, as
the GPs shield against each other. This modeling of the biological phenomenon is
important in preparing for the transition towards the IVD.
Literature Review Comparison:
In the growth model (2.5), SP1 in the load-
sensitive GP is compared to a healthy SP1 of 0.5 MPa in the same GP (see Part
2.3.2.1). A lower SP1 value indicates faster growth. In the CT scan model with GPs,
the average SP1 in the load-sensitive GP is 0.349 MPa (see Table 4.1). This suggests
that the child will experience faster growth, which poses a risk for scoliosis, especially
since the patient already has a significant scoliosis of 30◦.
In Sylvestre and Villemure’s paper [10], the VM stress distribution in the growth
plates shows a maximum VM stress ranging from 0.2 MPa to 3.4 MPa, depending on
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Model 2: The CT Scan Model
the applied boundary conditions (flexion, compression, bending). In Figure 4.16, the
compression case is displayed, which seems to be closer to the top boundary condition
used in this work (simulating the weight, although also considering it in Sylvestre’s
paper). The maximum VM stress observed in the GPs is 1.52 MPa in Figure 4.10,
which is a 27% decrease compared to the maximum observed in the prolific GP in
Sylvestre’s model. This difference is likely acceptable, considering that Sylvestre’s
model is subjected to additive load due to compression, which would increase the
stress in the GPs. Additionally, the geometry of the models, particularly of the GPs,
could also play a role in the observed variations.
Figure 4.16.
VM stress distribution (in MPa) in the GPs in Sylvestre et Villemure’s
study [10], for the compression test.
The prolific GP top view is shown, and the three
regions are presented on the lateral view.
Another comparison can be made with Kamal’s article [12], which examines in-
tradiscal pressures at the L3-L4 and L4-L5 levels of a scoliotic spine, showing values
of 0.30 MPa and 0.36 MPa, respectively. These values are comparable to the max-
imum VM stress of 0.29 MPa at the top of T1 without GP in our model. Kamal’s
article also presents a VM stress distribution map on the load-sensitive GPs of L1 to
L4 vertebrae, with the maximum mean VM stress in the GP of L1 being 0.49 ± 0.08
MPa. In contrast, our model’s average VM stress in the load-sensitive GP is 0.300
MPa (see Table 4.1), which is 35% lower than the lowest value within the interval
reported in Kamal’s article. Nonetheless, this discrepancy may still be acceptable
since the T1 vertebra bears less weight load and should consequently experience less
stress compared to the lumbar vertebrae.
Conclusion:
The inclusion of GPs in the model is crucial for simulating growth,
as it would be challenging to make this complex vertebra geometry directly without
them.
The results may not perfectly match those of the models in the literature review,
but they still provide meaningful insights considering the differences in patient geome-
try, and boundary conditions. Moreover, the decision to work on the thoracic vertebra
instead of a lumbar vertebra adds novelty to the literature review and contributes to
the observed variations in stress distribution.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Discussion
67
Figure 4.17. VM stress distribution (in MPa) in the load-sensitive GP in Kamal et al.’s
study [12].
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5
Comparison and
Discussion
In this chapter, a comparison and discussion will be presented for the two models
developed in this thesis, as presented in Chapters 3 and 4. First, the benefits of the
simple geometry model will be examined. Subsequently, the results of both models
will be discussed in parallel, followed by an exploration of their limitations.
5.1
The Benefits of a Simple Geometry Model
Testing parameters on a simple model proves to be an eﬀicient approach for evalu-
ating material properties, the BCs, validating the growth model and process, before
implementing it in the more complex CT scan model, which requires more time and
effort.
The simple model provided a quick and straightforward method for testing sensi-
tivity parameters (see Table 3.2). Growth in this model involved adding strain to the
GPs and vertebrae, which was much easier to implement compared to the complex
CT scan geometry. In the CT scan model, introducing GPs on top of the vertebra
could involve increasing only the height of the GPs, a relatively straightforward task
in Fusion. Alternatively, each component (GPs and vertebra) could be extended in
the longitudinal direction using a scale factor in Fusion. Yet, incorporating these
changes into the CT scan vertebra would require remeshing and re-partitioning the
bottom surface, making the process more time-consuming compared to the simple
model, especially since meshing in COMSOL requires a certain level of expertise (as
described in Part 5.3.3).
Besides, the results drawn from this testing revealed that the choice of parameters,
even among those found in the literature review, can significantly impact the growth
outcome. In fact, the upper body’s growth in one year can vary from 5.47 cm to
19.5 cm depending on the chosen parameters. The growth model demonstrates high
sensitivity to these parameters, which is why articles often include graphs depicting
growth and scoliotic development as functions of these parameters [12].
Initially, one might have assumed that the sensitivity and growth parameters used
in the cylindrical model could be directly applied to the CT scan model. However,
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Comparison and Discussion
given the considerable sensitivity of the cylindrical model to these parameters and
the quantitative difference in SP1 between the cylindrical and CT scan models (as
evaluated in the following section), such an assumption is no longer considered viable.
5.2
Comparison of the Biomechanical Properties of
the Models
The stress distribution for both approaches is compared for the vertebra & GPs be-
fore growth iteration.
The Tables 3.6 and 4.1 are reproduced below to compare the stresses average from
the cylindrical two vertebrae model and the CT scan vertebra.
Component
Stresses in the cylindrical T1 (in MPa)
VM
SP1
SP2
SP3
load-sensitive GP
3.42 · 10−2
8.99 · 10−2
5.73 · 10−2
5.47 · 10−2
prolific GP
1.00 · 10−1
8.97 · 10−2
−5.48 · 10−3
−1.44 · 10−2
mineralized GP
9.35 · 10−2
8.96 · 10−2
−2.60 · 10−4
−7.10 · 10−3
T1
1.02 · 10−1
9.04 · 10−2
−8.47 · 10−3
−1.47 · 10−2
Table 5.1. Table of the stress values in the different components in the top vertebra of the
two vertebrae cylindrical model.
Stresses in the CT scan T1 (in MPa)
Component
VM
SP1
SP2
SP3
load-sensitive
1.49 · 10−1
3.49 · 10−1
2.13 · 10−1
1.92 · 10−1
prolific
3, 72 · 10−1
3.54 · 10−1
2.43 · 10−2
−4.66 · 10−2
mineralized
3.29 · 10−1
3.56 · 10−1
4.29 · 10−2
1.43 · 10−2
T1
5.31 · 10−2
4.86 · 10−2
1.25 · 10−3
−7.75 · 10−3
Table 5.2.
Table of the stress values in the different components of the CT scan vertebra
model.
The analysis begins by focusing on SP1, which plays a crucial role in the growth
process. As previously mentioned, a healthy SP1 value is 0.5 MPa in the load-sensitive
GP. In the CT scan model, the average SP1 in the load-sensitive GP is 0.349 MPa
(see Table 5.2), whereas, in the cylinder model, it is only 0.0899 MPa (see Table
5.1). When the stress is lower than the healthy SP1, the vertebra grows faster. Since
the SP1 in the cylinder model is significantly smaller than in the CT scan model, it
results in a much faster growth rate. The cylindrical model gives a 5-month growth
of 5.47 cm in a 10-year-old girl’s upper body (when setting the sensitivity parameter
β = 0.5 MPa−1 and the growth baseline at 0.5 mm.year−1). This is the most probable
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Limitations
71
growth obtained when tweaking the parameters among the literature review ranges,
which is still remarkably high, particularly when considering that the growth baseline
is relatively low compared to the range reported in the literature. Thus, the CT scan
model’s growth appears to be more plausible, having three times higher SP1 than the
cylindrical model, and comparable results to the literature review CT scan models.
Note that the sensitivity parameters for the CT scan model would differ from those
of the cylinder model.
The difference between the GPs and the vertebra is more pronounced in the CT
scan vertebra compared to the cylinder model. In the simple model, SP1 varies by
less than 1% among the GPs and the vertebra, while in the CT scan model, it is one
order of magnitude higher in the GPs compared to the vertebra. This discrepancy
may be attributed to the lack of continuity in geometry.
Moreover, stresses in the CT scan GPs are generally one order of magnitude higher
than in the cylindrical model due to the same load being applied to a smaller area.
The high corner aberration could also be explained by the smaller size of the GPs
compared to the vertebra’s surface, while a similar weight is applied.
Additionally, there is a greater difference between the z-stress and SP1 in the CT
scan model compared to the cylindrical model, as the normal to the surface of the
GP and the z-direction are not exactly the same.
Regarding shear stress, it is observed in both the IVD and the GPs. The difference
in material properties contributes to the observed shear stress; the IVD acts as a
cushion, stretching and pulling the vertebra, while the GPs experience tear due to
their proximity to the IVD.
5.3
Limitations
Both geometry models have pros and cons, trying to reproduce a complex biological
component - the spine -, to explain and treat an idiopathic pathology.
5.3.1
Multiple Parameters & Multi-Factorial Pathology
The first challenges lay in identifying the essential parameters leading to the AIS and
integrating them into a CAD model.
Numerous additional factors can be taken into account to enhance the model’s
realism and accuracy:
• Ligaments, muscles, and ribs: Incorporating the effects of ligaments, muscles,
and ribs is crucial for a more realistic representation of spinal biomechanics.
These soft tissues play significant roles in stabilizing and supporting the spine,
and their interactions with the vertebrae are essential to consider. For instance,
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Comparison and Discussion
Villemure et al. [11] simulate the spinal ligaments and muscles by adapting the
weight on the vertebra. Kamal et al. [12] have taken the muscles into account
too. Balasubramanian et al. [9] have integrated ligaments, ribs, sternum, and
pelvis into the model.
• Environment: Accounting for the external environment’s influence, such as ex-
ternal loads and activities, can help simulate the real-life conditions that impact
the progression of AIS. The simulation’s accuracy can be enhanced by consider-
ing the daily activities, postures, and loading patterns experienced by patients.
Sylvestre and Villumure have explored the different types of loads effect on the
GPs stress distribution [10].
• Boundary Conditions: The facet joints, responsible for intervertebral motion,
should be able to slide to reflect their actual behavior during spinal movements
[12]. This could be implemented when the full scoliotic is developed and may be
tweaked to simulate a spine that could bend more or less easily. Indeed, some
scoliosis can become stiffer, and this could impact the treatment effect.
• Variable Growth Rates: Growth rates vary among individuals and change over
time, particularly during adolescence. Accurately capturing and modeling these
variations in growth rates for each patient is essential for personalized simula-
tions and realistic predictions of spinal development.
• Patient-Specific Geometry: Each patient’s spinal geometry is unique, making it
challenging to develop a one-size-fits-all model.
5.3.2
Sensitivity Parameters
The model is personalized by importing the CT scan geometry and fine-tuning the
sensitivity parameter β and the growth line rate. Since the pathology of scoliosis de-
pends on multiple parameters (as discussed in Part 2.2), the model tends to be highly
patient-specific. In the literature, various models adjust the growth parameters to
match the patient’s individual spine. For example, Abolaeha et al. [7] dynamically
change the parameters during each growth iteration to mimic the patient’s spine de-
velopment. Similarly, Villemure et al. [13] and Kamal et al. [12] demonstrate different
spine outcomes based on the chosen parameters. This raises the question of whether
a universal model capable of predicting the growth of every patient is achievable.
A potential avenue to explore is the use of a sensitivity parameter calculated
similarly to the estimated height found with BoneAge software, as described in the
manual guide [34]:
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Limitations
73
Predicted Final Height = Height Coeﬀicient × Present Height (cm)+
Age Coeﬀicient × Chronological Age (years)+
Bone Age Coeﬀicient × Bone Age (years)+
Constant
In this equation, coeﬀicients are used to estimate the influence of parameters like
Present Height, Chronological Age, and Bone Age. A new sensitivity parameter could
be derived based on identified parameters that influence the development of AIS.
While these influencing parameters are numerous and not all have been identified yet,
one could consider a machine learning approach to determine which parameters are
linked to the pathology’s development and identify their associated coeﬀicients. This
could potentially lead to a more comprehensive and universally applicable scoliosis
model in the future.
5.3.3
Meshing & Automation
Another approach to achieve a patient-specific and universal model would be to au-
tomate the meshing process of the CT scan vertebra to obtain the patient’s spine
geometry.
However, automating the entire growth process is not currently feasible. While
it is possible to set up a Matlab file to lock the COMSOL study, automating the
meshing process is not yet possible due to the complex geometry of the vertebra.
Additionally, importing the mesh into COMSOL requires the use of multiple different
software tools (such as 3D slicer, 3D max, Fusion 360, and COMSOL). It remains
uncertain whether a Matlab or Python script could effectively handle and connect
all these different software tools. This task may require the expertise of a software
engineer to develop a seamless integration.
As of now, creating a patient-specific model in real-time when a patient presents
themselves at the hospital would be too time-consuming and resource-intensive. It
might require having a trained engineer dedicated to this task in the ER (Emergency
Room).
During the project, the meshing process for one vertebra was already quite compli-
cated and required manual intervention. Navigating through various CAD software
tools and learning how to modify the geometry effectively was a crucial step. Import-
ing the geometry into COMSOL was challenging, as it is not primarily a CAD tool.
It was found that simplifying the geometry before importing it into COMSOL and
then addressing local remeshing issues proved to be a more effective approach [57].
The meshing process, along with using COMSOL, consumed a significant portion of
the time and required several iterations to get it right.
In conclusion, automating the entire growth process and meshing remains a com-
plex task, and it may require further collaboration with software engineers and the
use of specialized tools to streamline the process.
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Comparison and Discussion
5.3.4
High Stress in Corners
High stress in the GPs exterior peripheries is observed in both cylindrical and CT scan
models, at the frontier load-sensitive/prolific GP for the cylinder, in the load-sensitive
GP and at the frontier mineralized GP/vertebra for the CT scan model.
Having the GPs covering the whole surface seems to decrease the stress concen-
tration. Nonetheless, stress aberrations are still visible even in the simple cylinder.
A solution could be to have a smaller cylindrical area to apply pressure on it. It
was done in the CT scan vertebra without the GPs, where the BC area had to be
partitioned on the top surface. Corner aberrations persist in Figure 4.7, with the
same patterns, but the highest stress is highly decreased compared to Figure 4.11,
where the GPs are added. In fact, SP1 peaks at 0.253 and 1.23 MPa (multiplied by
five), SP2 at 0.172 and 0.379 MPa (more than doubled), SP3 at 0.128 and 0.285 MPa
(more than doubled), respectively for the model without the GPs and with it.
The models show room for improvement but have also revealed both their utility
and consistency with coherent results. They hold promises for future applications.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion & Future
Prospects
In conclusion, both models have demonstrated their utility and provided relevant
results.
The CT scan model offers appealing advantages. Importing the patient’s geometry
from the CT scan seems fast and provides the real anatomy of the vertebra, allowing
for the consideration of wedging and other small deformities (pedicles, proportions
of the vertebral body) that may influence AIS development. Moreover, given the
complexity of this multi-factorial pathology, one might be inclined to opt for the most
sophisticated model. Although the literature review provides examples of patient-
specific geometry, this approach has proven to be time-consuming due to challenging
boundary conditions, manual mesh repairs, and the need to build GPs and IVD
separately.
On the other hand, the simplified geometry model achieved the objective of sim-
ulating the growth of a functional unit, enabling material and growth model testing.
It also highlighted the model’s sensitivity to parameters.
Comparing the stress outcomes, the CT scan vertebra exhibited an average SP1 of
0.349 MPa in the load-sensitive GP, while the simple geometry model showed an av-
erage SP1 of 0.0899 MPa. These results align with findings from the literature review.
Consequently, the growth model parameters need to be adjusted to accommodate the
stress outcomes in both models.
The simplified geometry successfully simulated a two-vertebrae functional unit’s
growth, revealing a significant 5.47 cm growth in just one year for a 10-year-old girl’s
upper body, with a sensitivity parameter β = 0.5 MPa−1 and a growth baseline of 0.5
mm.year−1. The growth remains very high due to the very low SP1 in the cylindrical
load-sensitive GP. More biologically relevant results can be obtained using the SP1
values from the CT scan vertebra.
This thesis lays the foundation for future applications and advancements in spine
and scoliosis biomechanics:
• Testing a hemi-vertebra impact on the stress distribution and FU’s growth is
possible on a simple geometry FU or a CT scan one.
==PAGE:86==
76
6 Conclusion & Future Prospects
• Having a first FU growing is a first step towards a full spine and scoliotic spines
that grow in order to analyze the AIS spine biomechanics.
• Exploring pre-existing spine models in other software libraries to investigate
their compatibility with COMSOL or other biomechanics software.
• Efforts should also be directed towards automating the modeling process, mak-
ing it more accessible and eﬀicient for use in clinical settings.
• These models at different scales and with different geometries present an oppor-
tunity for testing and optimizing various treatment solutions like tethering for
instance
• Embracing machine learning techniques and leveraging a large dataset of patient
parameters can potentially lead to predictive models, aiding in personalized
treatment planning.
Further investigations into the underlying causes of scoliosis may be necessary.
Fortunately, the developed model can offer valuable insights into understanding these
causes. This mutual relationship between the model and our understanding of scolio-
sis creates a virtuous circle, where the model aids in identifying potential causes, and
in turn, a deeper understanding of the causes refines and improves the model. This
dynamic interplay between knowledge and modeling can pave the way for significant
advancements in unraveling the complexities of scoliosis etiology.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
S. L. Weinstein, L. A. Dolan, J. C. Cheng, A. Danielsson, and J. A. Morcuende,
“Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” The lancet, vol. 371, no. 9623, pp. 1527–1537,
2008.
[2]
B. A. Akbarnia, M. Yazici, G. H. Thompson, and R. El-Hawary, The growing
spine: management of spinal disorders in young children. Springer, 2016.
[3]
A. Dimeglio, F. Canavese, and Y. P. Charles, “Growth and adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis: when and how much?,” Journal of Pediatric Orthopaedics, vol. 31,
pp. S28–S36, 2011.
[4]
S. T. Ali, “Modelling scoliosis in children - bachelor thesis,” DTU Health Tech,
January 2023.
[5]
L. Shi, D. Wang, M. Driscoll, I. Villemure, W. C. Chu, J. C. Cheng, and C.-
E. Aubin, “Biomechanical analysis and modeling of different vertebral growth
patterns in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis and healthy subjects,” Scoliosis, vol. 6,
pp. 1–8, 2011.
[6]
M. Driscoll, C.-E. Aubin, A. Moreau, I. Villemure, and S. Parent, “The role of
spinal concave–convex biases in the progression of idiopathic scoliosis,” European
spine journal, vol. 18, pp. 180–187, 2009.
[7]
O. A. Abolaeha, J. Weber, and L. Ross, “Finite element simulation of a scoliotic
spine with periodic adjustments of an attached growing rod,” in 2012 Annual In-
ternational Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
pp. 5781–5785, IEEE, 2012.
[8]
S. Naoum, A. V. Vasiliadis, C. Koutserimpas, N. Mylonakis, M. Kotsapas, and
K. Katakalos, “Finite element method for the evaluation of the human spine: A
literature overview,” Journal of Functional Biomaterials, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 43,
2021.
[9]
S. Balasubramanian, C. R. D’Andrea, G. Viraraghavan, and P. J. Cahill, “De-
velopment of a finite element model of the pediatric thoracic and lumbar spine,
ribcage, and pelvis with orthotropic region-specific vertebral growth,” Journal
of Biomechanical Engineering, vol. 144, no. 10, p. 101007, 2022.
==PAGE:88==
78
Bibliography
[10] P.-L. Sylvestre, I. Villemure, and C.-É. Aubin, “Finite element modeling of the
growth plate in a detailed spine model,” Medical & biological engineering &
computing, vol. 45, pp. 977–988, 2007.
[11] I. Villemure, C. E. Aubina, J. Dansereau, and H. Labelle, “Simulation of progres-
sive deformities in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis using a biomechanical model
integrating vertebral growth modulation,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 124, no. 6,
pp. 784–790, 2002.
[12] Z. Kamal, G. Rouhi, N. Arjmand, and S. Adeeb, “A stability-based model of
a growing spine with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a combination of muscu-
loskeletal and finite element approaches,” Medical engineering & physics, vol. 64,
pp. 46–55, 2019.
[13] I. Villemure, C. Aubin, J. Dansereau, and H. Labelle, “Biomechanical simulations
of the spine deformation process in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis from different
pathogenesis hypotheses,” European spine journal, vol. 13, pp. 83–90, 2004.
[14] R. J. Kowalski, L. A. Ferrara, and E. C. Benzel, “Biomechanics of the spine,”
Neurosurgery Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 42–59, 2005.
[15] Britannica,
“Vertebral
column.”
https://www.britannica.com/science/
vertebral-column. Accessed: 2023-20-04.
[16] K. Weible, “Disc injury? here’s what you need to know..” https://themotiveaz.
com/disc-injury-heres-what-you-need-to-know/, 2020. Accessed: 2023-23-
04.
[17] W.
Maish,
“The
vertebral
column.”
https://geekymedics.com/the-
vertebral-column/. Accessed: 2023-23-04.
[18] N. J. S. Medecine and Surgery, “What is facet joint syndrome and how
can it be treated?.” http://www.njsms.net/2016/10/facet-joint-syndrome-
can-treated/. Accessed: 2023-03-03.
[19] K. L. Kesling and K. A. Reinker, “Scoliosis in twins: a meta-analysis of the
literature and report of six cases,” Spine, vol. 22, no. 17, pp. 2009–2014, 1997.
[20] T. G. Lowe, M. Edgar, J. Y. Margulies, N. H. Miller, V. J. Raso, K. A. Reinker,
and C.-H. Rivard, “Etiology of idiopathic scoliosis: current trends in research,”
JBJS, vol. 82, no. 8, p. 1157, 2000.
[21] N. H. Miller, “Spine update: genetics of familial idiopathic scoliosis,” Spine,
vol. 25, no. 18, pp. 2416–2418, 2000.
[22] J. W. Roach, “Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” Orthopedic Clinics of North Amer-
ica, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 353–365, 1999.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
79
[23] C. Jang and K. Jeon, “Analysis of factors implicated in adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis using a logistic regression model,” Iranian Journal of Public Health,
2022.
[24] W. J. Wang, H. Y. Yeung, W. C.-W. Chu, N. L.-S. Tang, K. M. Lee, Y. Qiu, R. G.
Burwell, and J. C. Y. Cheng, “Top theories for the etiopathogenesis of adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis,” Journal of Pediatric Orthopaedics, vol. 31, pp. S14–S27,
2011.
[25] D. P. L. Alves and B. d. Araújo, “Muscle disorders in adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis: literature review,” Coluna/Columna, vol. 15, pp. 73–77, 2016.
[26] J.
Ratz,
“The
biomechanical
mechanisms
behind
adolescent
idiopathic
scoliosis.” https://www.physio-pedia.com/The_Biomechanical_Mechanisms_
Behind_Adolescent_Idiopathic_Scoliosis. Accessed: 2023-19-06.
[27] P. Mahaudens, X. Banse, M. Mousny, and C. Detrembleur, “Gait in adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis: kinematics and electromyographic analysis,” European spine
journal, vol. 18, pp. 512–521, 2009.
[28] K. Eyvazov, D. Samartzis, and J. P. Y. Cheung, “The association of lumbar
curve magnitude and spinal range of motion in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a
cross-sectional study,” BMC musculoskeletal disorders, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–9,
2017.
[29] L. J. Rowe, Yochum, Maola, and Kettner, “Scoliosis.” https://radiologykey.
com/scoliosis-2/. Accessed: 2023-19-06.
[30] Y. Wu, K. Namdar, C. Chen, S. Hosseinpour, M. Shroff, A. S. Doria, and
F. Khalvati, “Automated adolescence scoliosis detection using augmented u-
net with non-square kernels,” Canadian Association of Radiologists Journal,
p. 08465371231163187, 2023.
[31] J. O. Sanders, J. G. Khoury, S. Kishan, R. H. Browne, J. F. Mooney III, K. D.
Arnold, S. J. McConnell, J. A. Bauman, and D. N. Finegold, “Predicting scolio-
sis progression from skeletal maturity: a simplified classification during adoles-
cence,” JBJS, vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 540–553, 2008.
[32] S. J. Korde, P. Daigavane, and S. Shrivastav, “Skeletal maturity indicators-review
article,” Int. J. Sci. Res, vol. 6, pp. 361–370, 2015.
[33] D. G. Little and M. D. Sussman, “The risser sign: a critical analysis,” Journal
of Pediatric Orthopaedics, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 569–575, 1994.
[34] V. Gilsanz and O. Ratib, Hand bone age: a digital atlas of skeletal maturity,
vol. 1. Springer, 2005.
==PAGE:90==
80
Bibliography
[35] Isico,
“The risser sign,
growth and scoliosis:
let’s clear a few things
up.”
https://en.isico.it/2021/12/02/the-risser-sign-growth-and-
scoliosis-lets-clear-a-few-things-up/. Accessed: 2023-20-04.
[36] G. Mariscal, J. Morales, S. Pérez, P. A. Rubio-Belmar, M. Bovea-Marco, J. L.
Bas, P. Bas, and T. Bas, “Meta-analysis on the eﬀicacy and safety of anterior ver-
tebral body tethering in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” European Spine Journal,
vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 140–148, 2023.
[37] D. G. Hoernschemeyer, M. E. Boeyer, M. E. Robertson, C. M. Loftis, J. R.
Worley, N. M. Tweedy, S. U. Gupta, D. L. Duren, C. M. Holzhauser, and V. M.
Ramachandran, “Anterior vertebral body tethering for adolescent scoliosis with
growth remaining: a retrospective review of 2 to 5-year postoperative results,”
JBJS, vol. 102, no. 13, pp. 1169–1176, 2020.
[38] M. Wuelling and A. Vortkamp, “A newly discovered stem cell that keeps bones
growing,” 2019.
[39] E. Razmara, A. Bitaraf, H. Yousefi, T. Nguyen, M. Garshasbi, W. Cho, and
S. Babashah, “Non-coding rnas in cartilage development: An updated review,”
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 20, 09 2019.
[40] J. Parvizi and G. K. Kim, “Chapter 103 - growth plate,” in High Yield Or-
thopaedics (J. Parvizi and G. K. Kim, eds.), pp. 213–214, Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders, 2010.
[41] I. A. Stokes, R. G. Burwell, and P. H. Dangerfield, “Biomechanical spinal
growth modulation and progressive adolescent scoliosis–a test of the’vicious cy-
cle’pathogenetic hypothesis: Summary of an electronic focus group debate of the
ibse,” Scoliosis, vol. 1, pp. 1–21, 2006.
[42] J. Price, B. Oyajobi, and R. Russell, “The cell biology of bone growth.,” European
journal of clinical nutrition, vol. 48, pp. S131–49, 1994.
[43] X. Guo, W.-W. Chau, Y.-L. Chan, and J.-Y. Cheng, “Relative anterior
spinal overgrowth in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: results of disproportionate
endochondral-membranous bone growth,” The Journal of bone and joint surgery.
British volume, vol. 85, no. 7, pp. 1026–1031, 2003.
[44] V. K. Goel and J. D. Clausen, “Prediction of load sharing among spinal com-
ponents of a c5-c6 motion segment using the finite element approach,” Spine,
vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 684–691, 1998.
[45] S. Kumaresan, N. Yoganandan, F. A. Pintar, D. J. Maiman, and S. Kuppa,
“Biomechanical study of pediatric human cervical spine: a finite element ap-
proach,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 122, no. 1, pp. 60–71, 2000.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
81
[46] C. A. Miller, S. J. Hwang, M. M. Cotter, and H. K. Vorperian, “Cervical vertebral
body growth and emergence of sexual dimorphism: a developmental study using
computed tomography,” Journal of Anatomy, vol. 234, no. 6, pp. 764–777, 2019.
[47] A.-M. Huynh, C.-E. Aubin, T. Rajwani, K. M. Bagnall, and I. Villemure, “Pedicle
growth asymmetry as a cause of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a biomechanical
study,” European spine journal, vol. 16, pp. 523–529, 2007.
[48] M. S. Traberg, “22475 - tissue and movement biomechanics,” DTU Health Tech,
2022.
[49] K. Gunasekaran, K. S. Basaruddin, N. A. Muhayudin, and A. R. Sulaiman,
“Corrective mechanism aftermath surgical treatment of spine deformity due to
scoliosis: A systematic review of finite element studies,” BioMed Research Inter-
national, vol. 2022, 2022.
[50] S. Balamurugan, K. Pandey, S. R. Iyer, A. Krishnan, and S. Patil, “A biome-
chanical study on post-scoliotic deformity correction,” in IOP Conference Series:
Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 912, p. 022020, IOP Publishing, 2020.
[51] T. Guan, Y. Zhang, A. Anwar, Y. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Determination of three-
dimensional corrective force in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis and biomechanical
finite element analysis,” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, vol. 8,
p. 963, 2020.
[52] D. World, “Average height to weight chart: Babies to teenagers.” https://www.
disabled-world.com/calculators-charts/height-weight-teens.php.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-02-07.
[53] C. Aubin, J. Descrimes, J. Dansereau, W. Skalli, F. Lavaste, and H. Labelle,
“Geometrical modeling of the spine and the thorax for the biomechanical analysis
of scoliotic deformities using the finite element method,” in Annales de chirurgie,
vol. 49, pp. 749–761, 1995.
[54] H. Gothäll, “Editing and repairing imported meshes in comsol multiphysics,”
2022-06-06.
[55] COMSOL, “Stl import tutorial series.” https://www.comsol.com/model/stl-
import-tutorial-series-30951. Accessed: 2023-10-05.
[56] H. Gothäll, “How to inspect your mesh in comsol multiphysics,” 2022.
[57] W. Frei, “Comsol blog: Improving your meshing with partitioning.” https://
www.comsol.com/blogs/improving-your-meshing-with-partitioning/. Ac-
cessed: 2023-01-05.
==PAGE:92==
82
Bibliography
[58] B. Pei, D. Lu, X. Wu, Y. Xu, C. Ma, and S. Wu, “Kinematic and biomechanical
responses of the spine to distraction surgery in children with early onset scoliosis:
A 3-d finite element analysis,” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology,
p. 1257, 2022.
==PAGE:93==
Appendices
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
Spinal Growth
Modeling in the
Literature: a
Comparison of Papers
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
==PAGE:98==
Materials Properties: a
Comparison of Papers
==PAGE:99==
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
==PAGE:102==
Model 1: Cylindrical
Model
Technical Drawings of the Cylindrical Functional Units
FU 1GP and FU 3GPs pdf
Corner Aberration
Figure 1. Cylindrical model of T1 with 3 GPs on top. Screenshot of COMSOL geometry.
Slice in (y,z) plan, i.e.: side view
==PAGE:103==
90
Appendix Model 1: Cylindrical Model
Figure 2. Cylindrical model of T1 with 3 GPs on top. Screenshot of COMSOL geometry.
Slices in (x,y) plan, i.e.: top view.
Figure 3. Rounded cylindrical spine model from Saima’s work. Screenshot of COMSOL
geometry. Full spine z-stress distribution. *The legend color scale has been reduced to be
able to see the distribution trends.
==PAGE:104==
Appendix Corner Aberration
91
Figure 4. Cylindrical model of T1 with 3 GPs on top. Screenshot of COMSOL geometry.
==PAGE:105==
92
Appendix Model 1: Cylindrical Model
Plotting Lines
((a)) Interior lines
((b)) Exterior lines
Figure 5. How to get the vertical lines in COMSOL, from the center of the vertebra (y = 0
cm) to the exterior (y = 1.24 cm). Arc length: from z = 1.26 cm (top of the GPs) to z =
1.12 cm (0.03 cm mm below the mineralized GP).
==PAGE:106==
Appendix Plotting Lines
93
Figure 6. How to get the horizontal lines in COMSOL, from the top of the GPs (z = 1.25
cm) to the interior of the vertebra (z = 1.11 cm). Arc length: from y = 1.25 cm (exterior
of the cylinder) to y = 0 cm (center).
==PAGE:107==
94
==PAGE:108==
Model 2: CT Scan
Vertebra
Methods
Figure 7. Full spine extracted in 3D slicer, with the vertebrae being referred.
==PAGE:109==
96
Appendix Model 2: CT Scan Vertebra
Figure 8. T1 solid body in Fusion (left image) & T1 mesh in COMSOL (with GPs on top)
(right image)
Other BCs that could have been implemented
Processes:
Kamal’s article [12] addresses constraints by fixing the process of each
vertebra, while most of the articles fix only the bottom of L5 [4] [7] [9] [11].
The rationale behind Kamal’s approach is to fully fix the vertebra on the trans-
verse process (refer to Figure 9) [12]. Conversely, Pei assumes sliding facet joints
between vertebrae, taking this into account bending effects [58].
In Kamal’s method, a force is applied on top of the vertebra to simulate its weight
(modeled as a single point force, not a pressure as in Part 3.1.2.1). This reaction
force (F CoR) at the Center of Rotation (CoR) is shifted by a distance DCoR from the
center of the IVD in the case of scoliosis. The reaction moment M CoR is calculated
as the product of F CoR and DCoR. Contact is imposed on the bottom of the vertebra
too, and the vertebra is fixed via the transverse process.
While fixing the process on a FU seemed unnecessary, as the spring foundation
appeared suﬀicient, it is possible that for a larger number of FUs piling up, fixation
at each vertebra and at the biological location may be required.
==PAGE:110==
Appendix Results
97
Figure 9. The vertebra has a fixed constraint on the transverse process in Kamal’s article
[12].
Spinal muscles/ligaments:
The discrepancy in stiffness originates from the in-
volvement of spinal muscles and ligaments.
Numerical values can be found in [50].
Results
Figure 10.
Horizontal lines construction: the ones in the middle of the vertebral body.
(y,z) plan on the left image; (x,y) plan on the right.
==PAGE:111==
98
Appendix Model 2: CT Scan Vertebra
Figure 11. Vertical lines construction: the ones in the middle of the vertebral body. (y,z)
plan on the left image; (x,z) plan on the right.
==PAGE:112==
Appendix Results
99
Figure 12. Principal stresses distribution on one vertebra. Horizontal slice at z = 2.75 cm.
==PAGE:113==
100
Appendix Model 2: CT Scan Vertebra
Figure 13. Principal stresses distribution on one vertebra. Horizontal slice at z = 2.78 cm.
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
