==PAGE:1==
Optimal control of space heating using
existing data sources
Master Thesis
DTU Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Energy and Services
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
Master Thesis in Architectural Engineering
July, 2023
By
César Delafargue
Supervisor: Kevin Michael Smithv
Co­supervisors: Christian Anker Hviid, Michele Tunzi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Section of Energy
and Services, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
Cover photo:
AI generated image from Microsoft AI’s DALL­E 2
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Energy and Services,
Department of Mechanical and Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, Architectural
Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and thermo­
dynamics.
César Delafargue ­ s212834
Signature
Date
ii
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
30/07/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As the District Heating industry embarks on its transition towards more sustainable heat
production methods, symbolized by 4th generation district heating, the need to reduce
operating temperatures becomes increasingly urgent. Indeed, this would allow the use of
renewable heat sources, operating at low temperatures, while also reducing losses due
to distribution in the pipes. This thesis explores the possibility of reducing supply temper­
atures in existing buildings while preserving indoor comfort. For this purpose, a model
that determines the lowest possible supply temperatures has been developed. Among
other things, this model is based on the estimation of a building­specific heat transfer
coefficient, which can be estimated from existing data under certain radiator operating
conditions, and on a linear regression to predict the heat demand. It is also based on a
high­flow/low­cooling strategy, enabling supply temperatures to be further reduced. This
method was tested on three educational buildings at DTU Lyngby campus, primarily com­
prised of offices, constructed in the 1960s and 70s, and equipped with 1­string heating
systems, operating without distinct supply and return pipes. New weather compensa­
tion curves were developed and compared with the existing ones. The newly formulated
curves presented improvements and were shifted down by some degrees compared to
the original ones. It was shown that the newly plotted curves would be under the threshold
of 55°C in supply temperature imposed for low temperature district heating during 100%,
83% and 36% of the heating season for each building, showing that while these modi­
fications are certainly positive, they may not be sufficient in certain cases. The results
also indicated potential impacts on thermal comfort, as the reduced supply temperatures
were paired with lower energy consumption. This reduction could be attributed to several
factors, including reduced heat loss during distribution. However, it could also be due to
the space heating system’s constraints with lower supply temperatures, which potentially
result in less heat production and hence lower temperatures than previously experienced.
Overall, the method outlined in this research appears successful in decreasing the supply
temperatures in the target buildings. However, its impact on thermal comfort and energy
consumption needs further assessment.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Kevin Michael Smith, Christian Anker
Hviid, and Michele Tunzi, for their continuous support and guidance throughout this re­
search journey. Their readiness to answer my questions and the interest they put in my
project was greatly appreciated. Their mentorship, emphasizing the importance of a sci­
entific method, has also been a great source of learning.
I would also like to thank the two bachelor students who collaborated with me on this
project, Mireya Torres and Daniel Raventos Jensen. Our mutual advice and constructive
criticism has led to significant improvements and valuable information sharing.
My sincere thanks also go to Enrico Ghidoni, Ph.D. researcher at the Section for Energy
and Services, who showed interest in my research and provided help and support when
possible.
I must acknowledge the campus services at DTU, for sharing with me valuable information
about the building management, as well as developing a convenient API for accessing the
data I needed.
Lastly, my thanks go to my supportive friends and family. Your encouragement and back­
ing have been important during this journey.
In conclusion, this thesis would not have been possible without each one of you. I deeply
appreciate your support and contributions.
iv
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Prior Work
5
2.1
Low temperature district heating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Fault detection in district heating substations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Heat demand forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Study case
9
3.1
Buildings description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Building operation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Summary statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Methodology
17
4.1
Calculation of the optimal supply temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Prediction of heat demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Estimation of the system­specific heat transfer coefficient . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Estimation of the maximum flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Analysis and Results
27
5.1
Buildings’ heat demand analysis and prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Heat transfer coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Maximal flow and minimal cooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Weather compensation curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Discussion
54
6.1
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6.2
Limitations and future work perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
59
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
v
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms
• SH Space Heating
• DHW Domestic Hot Water
• DH District Heating
• 4GDH 4th Generation District Heating
• LTDH Low Temperature District Heating
• WCC Weather Compensation Curve
• LMTD Logarithmic Mean Temperature Difference
• CHP Combined Heat and Power
• ANN Artificial Neural Network
• TRV Thermostatic Radiator Valve
• HDD Heating Degree Day
• HDH Heating Degree Hour
vi
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Environmental context
Buildings consume a significant amount of energy. In 2020, they were responsible for over
42% of the total final energy consumption across all sectors in Europe, positioning them as
the main contributor to greenhouse gas emissions [1]. As depicted in Figure 1.1, space
heating (SH) and domestic hot water (DHW) accounted for over three­quarters of the
total energy demand in European buildings in 2020. This consumption has a significant
environmental impact: in 2022, space and water heating were responsible for 2,450 Mt of
direct CO2 emissions worldwide [2]. Indeed, despite the growing role of efficient and low­
carbon heating technologies, fossil fuels still meet more than half of the heating energy
demand.
Figure 1.1: Final energy uses across EU households in 2020 Source: European Environ­
ment Agency[1]
District heating (DH) emerges as a potential solution. As a matter of fact, every scenario
aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 incorporates it as an essential
component [1],[3], [4]. In 2018, the DH final energy consumption across the EU­27 was
around 445 TWh, accounting for 12% of the final energy consumption for space heating
and hot water in the residential and services sectors. The most significant contributions
in terms of DH supply within the residential sector are found in Scandinavian and Baltic
countries. For instance, in Denmark, 46% of the space heating and domestic hot water
demand is provided through district heating, with an even larger share in urban areas [4].
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: EU­27 District heating supply fuel mix in 2018 Source: European Commission
2022 [4]
However, according to the International Energy Agency, the progress in the area of district
heating is considered “not on track” in terms of aligning with the Net Zero Emissions sce­
nario for 2050, and it requires “significant efforts to rapidly improve the energy efficiency
of existing networks, switch them to renewable heat sources, integrate secondary heat
sources, and to develop high­efficiency infrastructure in areas with dense heat demand.”
[3] Fossil energy still represent a larger share of DH supply fuel mix, and the main sources
of renewable energy in Europe remain biomass and renewable municipal waste, signaling
a need for more advanced renewable technologies as seen Figure 1.2. Denmark, pos­
sessing the most extensive DH market in terms of trench length [4] and with a DH supply
catering a large portion of its citizens, holds a pivotal position in this transition to more
sustainable heat sources.
1.1.2
4th Generation District Heating
The aforementioned transition is embodied by the notion of 4th Generation District Heat­
ing (4GDH), as opposed to the current 3rd Generation District Heating. Defined by H.
Lund et al. in 2014, 4GDH is “a coherent technological and institutional concept, which by
means of smart thermal grids assists the appropriate development of sustainable energy
systems” [5], smart thermal grids referring to advanced district heating and cooling sys­
tems that use digital technology and advanced infrastructure to optimize energy efficiency.
In particular, 4GDH systems are characterized by lower supply and return temperatures,
allowing for an increased use of renewable energy. Indeed, in the near future, district
heating companies will need to broaden their sources of heat by incorporating renewable
heat sources, such as heat pumps or recycled heat. The success of these investments
will largely hinge on the supply temperature in the district heating networks, as these new
sources cannot deliver the very high temperatures used in most current networks, such
as those provided by combined heat and power (CHP) facilities operating on fossil fuels.
The main challenge in implementing this new technology is therefore to reduce the oper­
ating temperatures of new and existing district heating networks, with typical new target
temperatures for average supply and return temperatures of 55­60 °C and 25­30 °C re­
spectively [6], during most of the heating period. In addition to being an vital aspect of
4GDH, this reduction could lead to drastic energy savings, not only for residential build­
ings, but also for campuses like DTU heated through district heating. It could also be
2
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:11==
valuable on an economical point of view, as research indicates that reducing the operat­
ing temperatures in the networks could result in substantial annual savings of 14 billion
euros throughout the EU, given the projected annual EU heat sales of 950 TWh for 2050
[7], and 200­300 million euros in Denmark [8].
In parallel to 4GDH, a 5th generation district heating and cooling (5GDHC) is in devel­
opment. 5GDHC takes a step further by focusing on combined heating and cooling. It
operates using a collective network close to ambient temperature levels, serving as a
common heat (or cold) source for building­level heat pumps. This approach ensures less
heat loss within the district heating network by transmitting ultra­low temperature heat,
which requires local boosting to achieve the required temperature level at the end­user.
Despite its advanced features, 5GDHC is seen as a complementary technology that may
coexist in parallel with other 4GDH technologies, rather than a direct successor [9].
1.1.3
Building operation for low­temperature district heating
To achieve low­temperature district heating (LTDH), there are numerous levers for action,
both from the point of view of the network (primary side) and from that of the buildings
themselves (secondary side). A non­exhaustive list, regarding space heating only, could
include reducing heat loss through transmission, preventing faults and malfunctions in dis­
trict heating substations, renovating buildings to reduce heat demand, improving heating
systems, etc [7]. In particular, one of this levers is a better control of supply temperature
values in DH substations in existing buildings.
The existing building stock’s poor energy performance acts as a barrier to LTDH, com­
pelling the district heating operators to increase the supply temperatures beyond what is
strictly required to ensure that the end users are comfortable. This approach guarantees
that even the least energy­efficient buildings receive sufficient heat, preventing user com­
plaints. Furthermore, certain user behaviors, such as treating thermostats radiator valves
(TRV) as simple on­off switches or frequently opening windows [10], are compensated
by these higher network temperatures. However, greater insights into the capacities of
each building’s energy system, for example sourced from substation data, can pave the
way for smarter temperature control. This approach would allow for the reduction of sup­
ply temperatures to the bare minimum required for maintaining user comfort. Besides
enabling the incorporation of new energy sources, it would promote more responsible
heating practices among users. As the system would no longer compensate for misuse,
any imprudent use would directly impact user comfort.
Additional research conducted by D.S. Østergaard and S. Svendsen reveals that a ma­
jority of heating systems are oversized, indicating that lower supply and return tempera­
tures can still effectively heat buildings [11]. Their calculations establish that the heating
systems’ designed heat output at supply and return temperatures of 70°C and 40°C ex­
ceeds the anticipated heat load demand. This highlights the potential for implementing
low­temperature district heating, even in older buildings, eliminating the need for radiator
replacements.
1.2
Aim and scope
To control supply temperatures, typical DH systems are equipped with a controller capable
of performing weather­compensated control. Weather compensation curves (WCC) de­
fine what will be the supply temperature of a DH substation for each outdoor temperature.
This allows for the supply temperatures of the heating system to decrease as outdoor
temperatures rise and heating demands fall. The aim of this study is therefore to develop
a method to calculate a WCC that optimizes supply temperatures to the minimum required
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
3
==PAGE:12==
to maintain indoor comfort. This calculation will be carried out using data collected by the
building management system’s various sensors, as well as physical knowledge about the
building itself. This will not only prove the feasibility of LTDH on this example case, but it
will also provide a directly applicable method to improve the energy performance of the
specific buildings studied.
On top of modelling the ideal temperatures, another goal of this study is to analyze ex­
isting data from selected buildings to assess the impact of a change in supply and return
temperature on thermal comfort and energy savings, and evaluate the degree of flexibility
that building operators have in regards to district heating temperatures. This will be done
by studying changes that have already been done by building operators, and measuring
their impact through different indicators obtained from the available data.
This report will focus on answering the following research questions:
• How can data from district heating substations be used to calculate optimal weather
compensation curves?
• What is the best strategy to adopt in regard to space heating (temperatures, flow,
night setbacks, etc)?
• What would be the impact of such measures on thermal comfort and energy con­
sumption?
• Are these changes feasible in practice, or are there other obstacles to consider?
1.3
Report structure
This report is structured as follows. First, the introduction chapter will aim to present
the background of the thesis, discussing the environmental context and the concepts of
4th Generation District Heating and Low Temperature District Heating. Then, the second
chapter aims to review existing research on the topic and on the methods used in this
thesis. The third chapter describes the buildings under study, their operation, and the
data used for the research. The fourth chapter explains the methods used to calculate
the optimal supply temperature, and the methods used to estimate all the necessary pa­
rameters for its calculation. The fifth chapter presents the results obtained from applying
the methods on the studied buildings, and puts them in perspective, compared to other
methodologies or existing data. Lastly, the last two chapters give some reflection about
the thesis and some of its limitations, and finally conclude the work.
4
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:13==
2
Prior Work
2.1
Low temperature district heating
Low temperature district heating is currently under a lot of research, as it will be a necessity
for the 4th generation district heating, bound to replace fossil fuel based industrial heat­
ing before 2050. The article Low­temperature operation of heating systems to enable 4th
generation district heating: A review [6] sets the basis for low temperature district heating
by showing that lower supply and return temperatures are achievable, and by review­
ing the different existing bottlenecks and proposing solutions to make its implementation
feasible. It states that current operating temperatures in district heating networks are way
higher than necessary, even for older radiators and without renovation. The article indeed
presents a weather compensation curve (plotting the supply and return temperatures as
a function of outdoor temperature) with average return and supply temperatures of 41.2
°C and 35.5 °C respectively. In most of the cases, such temperatures can be reached if
there are no faults in the heating system operation. The installation of mechanical ven­
tilation with heat recovery can be a solution to achieve these temperatures in the worse
performing buildings.
Researchers from DTU have already tried to test continuous low temperature district heat­
ing by comparing it to an intermittent heating with night setbacks for the same building,
in the article Energy and cost savings with continuous low temperature heating versus
intermittent heating of an office building with district heating [12]. Indeed, night setbacks
are not compatible with low temperature district heating as they require an important peak
of heating in the morning, requiring high supply temperatures. They managed to calculate
a weather compensation curve that would allow to satisfy thermal comfort with lower sup­
ply temperatures, staying below 50°C for every outdoor temperature over ­10°C. Through
testing and simulation, they proved the feasibility of using such low temperatures while
maintaining high enough indoor temperature, and measured an energy saving of 11%, on
top of reaching lower return temperatures. The energy savings were however approxi­
mately the same for intermittent heating.
Moreover, the article Demand side digitalisation: A methodology using heat cost allocators
and energy meters to secure low­temperature operations in existing buildings connected
to district heating networks [13] proposes an innovative methodology that employs heat
cost allocator data, that was previously only used for billing, to identify uneven heat distri­
bution in buildings. By doing so, it is possible to pinpoint critical flats with the highest heat
demand and calculate the corresponding minimum supply temperature. This pragmatic
approach allows for a more accurate calculation of the minimum temperature required to
ensure indoor comfort. This study thus shows that by using heat cost allocator data, or
any other indoor thermal comfort meter, it is possible to adapt the supply temperature
in real­time and operate the district heating in an optimal way. However, this method is
highly dependent on the performance of the aforementioned critical building, since its ef­
ficiency alone impacts the temperatures of the entire network. This underlines the need
in some cases to carry out renovations to mitigate the negative impact of older buildings.
2.2
Fault detection in district heating substations
Detecting operational faults in DH substations is a fundamental aspect of LTDH. Such
faults lead to higher operating temperatures, thereby compromising the system’s potential
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
5
==PAGE:14==
for temperature reduction. Hence, fault detection is the initial step to be taken before
implementing the method described in this report. Indeed, these faults not only diminish
the potential energy savings introduced by this method, but they also alter the data and
thereby generate inaccuracies when deploying the statistical methodologies discussed in
this study (incorrect measurements, overestimated energy consumption, unpredictable
operation of valves, etc.). This could consequently lead to a wrong estimation of the
minimal achievable supply temperature. It is therefore necessary to develop data analysis
methods for the detection and resolution of these faults. These methods also offer diverse
approaches for analyzing data from DH substations, which could be adapted to analyze
the network of the DTU campus in this study.
Various types of faults can occur within district heating substations:
• Construction faults:they are less common nowadays due to the employment of pre­
fabricated substations, which are typically standardized and quality­checked during
the manufacturing process.
• Component faults: they can occur when components deteriorate or cease to function
over time. These can include critical components such as pumps, valves, or heat
exchangers.
• Operational faults: they appear when operation settings are altered inadvertently or
deliberately, leading to malfunctioning systems.
However, a large share of the observed faults are attributed to malfunctioning or broken
valves actuators, incorrect control curves for space heating, and inappropriate domestic
hot water temperature controls. [14]
The study Automated Statistical Methods for Fault Detection in District Heating Customer
Installations [15] presents an algorithm using different performance ’signatures’ of sub­
stations (indirectly connected to the main network), to classify them as well­performing or
not. Substations are classified according to their ’overflow’, i.e. the difference between
their actual flow and their flow calculated with an ideal fixed ∆T. The best­performing
buildings, having the lowest overflow, are then used as a reference, against which the
other substations are compared. This study is based on 3 signatures: energy consump­
tion, return temperature and water cooling. These signatures are basically a graphical
representation of the data as a function of outdoor temperature, on which a linear regres­
sion with an interval of confidence is performed. Substations having values outside of this
interval of confidence, meaning that their data deviates too far from these signatures for
the reference case, are then considered outliers, and therefore designated as badly per­
forming. As a result, of the 3,000 substations examined, 1,273 were classified as poorly
performing.
Another method for detecting poorly performing buildings uses annual heat load descrip­
tive parameters [16] in order to detect anomalies. These parameters are the annual rel­
ative daily variation and the annual relative seasonal variation. The annual relative daily
variation is the variation in heat load compared to the daily mean heat load, mainly caused
by social heat loads (DHW, ventilation) and physical heat loads (wind, solar incident radi­
ation, and daily outdoor temperature variations). The annual relative seasonal variation is
the consequence of large variations in outdoor temperature between winter and summer
while indoor temperatures remain constant. These parameters are defined mathemati­
cally in order to provide measures independent of building size and of the magnitude of
each heat demand. Substations can then be analyzed by comparing these variations with
their type of use: well­functioning multi­dwelling buildings should have a continuous heat
6
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:15==
load pattern with low daily heat load variations, while in public or educational buildings,
time clock operation is expected to shut off ventilation during nights and weekends, result­
ing in high daily heat load variations. Low daily variations could indicate that ventilation
is only reduced to a small extent or shut off in parts of the building. Low seasonal heat
load variations indicate low correlation between outdoor temperature and heat demand,
and in a building with mainly space heating demand, could indicate heating being turned
on even when it is not needed. These signatures can then also be used within clustering
machine learning models to automate this analysis [17].
2.3
Heat demand forecasting
An essential part of the method proposed in this report is the prediction of energy demand,
which will directly influence the supply temperatures required to heat the building. It is
therefore necessary to know which methods are used in existing literature for this purpose.
In this particular case, the aim is to predict energy consumption as a function of outdoor
air temperature.
A simpler approach than the one used in this report, which does not use complex statistical
methods, is the one introduced in reference documents [12] and [13], presented in 2.1.
This method involves calculating a heating demand coefficient L in kW/K for a substation,
which can then be used to calculate the heat demand Q(Tout) in kW required for each
outdoor temperature between ­12°C and 12°C as such:
Q(Tout) = L · ∆T(Tout)
Where ∆T(Tout) here is the difference between the indoor average temperature, chosen
to be 17°C in Denmark, and the outdoor temperature: ∆T(Tout) = Tin −Tout.
To calculate this coefficient, this method uses the concept of Heating Degree Days (HDD)
and Heating Degree Hours (HDH). The heating degree days are calculated by multiplying
the previously defined ∆T(Tout) for each temperature between ­12°C and 12°C by the
number of days during the studied year in which that specific temperature corresponded
to the daily average outdoor air temperature. The heating degree days are then summed
and multiplied by 24 hours, to obtain the total HDH for the year. Finally, the heating
demand coefficient L is obtained by dividing the total energy use E in kWh for that year
by the total HDH.
L =
E
HDH where HDH =
12°C
X
Tout=−12°C
∆T(Tout) · ndays(Tout) · 24
This method has the advantage of being relatively straightforward and requiring little com­
putation. It may therefore be more suitable for use by building operators without requiring
extensive statistical skills. However, it uses averaged temperatures and is therefore less
accurate overall, and does not take extreme data into account. It may therefore underes­
timate critical demand periods for buildings, which may then not be heated sufficiently on
the coldest days. A comparison between this method and the one used int this report will
be presented in 5.1.5.
For enhanced precision in predicting energy consumption, employing more sophisticated
models, such as those based on machine learning methods, can be beneficial. Typical
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
7
==PAGE:16==
techniques include artificial neural networks (ANN), support vector machines, genetic al­
gorithms, and linear regression, each offering distinct strengths and weaknesses based
on the complexity of the problem and the volume of available training data. For instance,
ANNs can provide a substantial training potential, enabling them to handle intricate non­
linear problems. They are particularly suitable for short­term energy forecasting, such as
predicting energy consumption based on the time of day [18].
However, the problem addressed in this study revolves around one target parameter (heat
demand) and a single input parameter (outdoor air temperature), which are subject to a lin­
ear relationship [19]. Consequently, a linear regression model is adequate for accurately
predicting energy consumption in this scenario. Compared to many other models, it offers
the benefit of producing a regression function that encapsulates the model, facilitating a
physical interpretation of the results [20].
An enhanced version of the linear regression model, the Multiple Linear Regression, could
potentially yield more precise results. This model would utilize multiple parameters as
input variables such as solar radiation, wind speed, relative humidity, in addition to the
outdoor temperature used in this study [21]. However, the weather compensation curve in
DTU’s building management system only uses outdoor temperature as its control param­
eter. This limits the potential for further enhancing the prediction model using additional
parameters.
8
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:17==
3
Study case
This study concentrates exclusively on the district heating network of the Lyngby campus
at the Technical University of Denmark. The campus is equipped with its own central­
ized district heating plant, with each building connected to it through one or more heating
substations. These substations are either directly connected to the network or indirectly
connected via a heat exchanger. The supply temperature going out of each substation
is weather controlled, adjusting the supply temperature based on external weather con­
ditions. Each substation is using its own weather compensation curve, which determines
the supply temperature as a function of outdoor air temperature.
Given the sheer quantity and diversity of buildings (in terms of age, size, and use), there is
an extensive array of data available for analyzing the efficiency of district heating substa­
tions across various scenarios. However, in order to develop a WCC calculation model,
it was essential to narrow our focus to a select number of buildings for which the requisite
data were readily available.
This chapter of the report provides a description of these buildings and their heating sys­
tem, as well as a description of the data that will be used later in the model. Finally, it
offers some context about the way the buildings are managed and the different energy
measures that have been implemented in the recent past.
3.1
Buildings description
Our attention is particularly directed towards three specific buildings, the details of which
are outlined in Table 3.1. These buildings are among the earliest built on the DTU Lyngby
campus, adhering to the same building regulation (BR61), hence sharing similar design
constraints, including their heating systems. Their sizes are comparable, and their func­
tions are identical, serving as office buildings. This similarity in characteristics enables
the application of comparable methodologies across all three, facilitating their direct com­
parison.
Table 3.1: Building Data
Building
Construction
year
Area (m2)
Yearly energy consumption
per m2(kWh/m2) 1
118
1970
5269
59
201
1966
6815
51
301
1964
5926
75
Each of the three buildings examined is equipped with individual district heating (DH) sub­
stations, which regulate the supply of district heating water from the primary network. The
buildings possess two separate substations each, servicing the North and South facades
of the structure. These substations are all directly connected to the heating network, which
is typical for older buildings on the DTU campus. It means that the hot water flows directly
from the district heating network into the building’s heating system. In contrast, newer
1For the year 2022
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
9
==PAGE:18==
constructions receive heat from the DH network through a heat exchanger. A description
of that system can be seen Figure 3.1.
Additionally, all three buildings employ a single­string heating system on the secondary
side, connecting the DH substation to the radiators. Modern systems frequently utilize a
two­pipe configuration, where a flow pipe transports heated water from the pump to each
radiator’s supply valve, ending at the final radiator in the circuit. A separate return pipe
retrieves the cooled water from the radiators, bringing it back to the DH substation for
reheating. On the contrary, the older single­string system used in these buildings permits
the hot water to circulate sequentially through each radiator before being returned to the
DH substation through the same pipe, resulting in a loss of heat at each stage. As a result,
radiators located closer to the end of the circuit are supplied with lower temperature, and
should be designed accordingly. A diagram illustrating a single­string heating loop with
direct connection is provided in Figure 3.1. The radiators in these specific buildings are
finned tube convectors.
Figure 3.1: Layout for a 1­string heating system with direct connection to DH network
Inspired from reference [6]
The space heating substation is fitted with a controller (A) capable of implementing weather
control of the supply temperature. It receives information from temperature sensors T1
and T2, measuring the outdoor air temperature and the supply temperature in the sec­
ondary loop respectively. These temperature measurements allow it to control the supply
temperature according to the set­point defined by the WCC. This is achieved by mixing
the space heating return water into the supply through a non­return valve (F). When the
space heating supply temperature exceeds the chosen set­point, an actuator closes the
control valve (D) on the district heating pipe, thereby reducing the amount of warm water
entering the space heating system. Conversely, if the space heating supply temperature
falls below the set­point, the actuator opens the valve to add more warm water to the mix.
A differential pressure controller (E) may be placed across the control valve to guarantee
optimal operating conditions for the valve. [6].
On the secondary side of the heating circuit, a pump (B), also controlled by the controller,
defines the flow of water through the system. The water then flows through the main
pipe and through the radiators, according to the opening of the Thermostatic Radiator
Valves (TRV) located in (C). The temperature set­points of the TRVs are defined by the
10
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:19==
building users, and the valve of the radiators will open according to the heat difference
between those set­points and the room temperature. The water that does not go through
the radiator is by­passed and keeps going down the main pipe. The return water from the
radiators also comes back to the main pipe as explained before. After going through all
the radiators, a part of the water goes back to the DH network according to the opening
of the control valve (D), while the rest re­enters the heating circuit.
3.2
Building operation
In response to the unfolding energy crisis in Europe, the Danish Minister for Energy and
Climate, Dan Jørgensen, announced during a press conference that the government
would introduce new heating guidelines for public buildings. This new regulation requires
building operators to reduce indoor temperature set­points to 19°C in public buildings and
schools, down from around 22°C previously [22]. This regulation comes amidst financial
pressures at DTU, and the director Claus Nielsen underscored in a university bulletin the
urgent need to significantly reduce the institution’s total energy consumption.
Encouraged by this new context, DTU’s building operators took steps to lower network
temperatures and adjust heating schedules. The implemented changes, as obtained from
discussions with campus services, include:
• Reduced weather compensation curves: the curves have been shifted downwards
by a certain number of degrees.
• Decrease in temperature set­points for buildings equipped with digital thermostats
• Change of operating hours for mechanical ventilation: from 7am­5pm to 8am­4pm
for non laboratory buildings.
• Removal of night setbacks in certain cases
Nonetheless, these changes were made without proper preliminary analysis, so their im­
pact is uncertain and needs to be quantified. These changes, however, present a valuable
opportunity to study the effects of adjusting weather compensation curves on energy con­
sumption. This would allow for a comprehensive analysis of such changes on a campus­
wide level and aid in formulating future strategies.
3.3
Data description
DTU Lyngby campus is equipped with an extensive Building Management System, which
is gathering an extensive amount of data on various aspects of the building, such as heat­
ing, electricity, ventilation, or indoor climate for the more recent buildings. Data is collected
via physical sensors placed at various locations, as well as virtual sensors, which offer
values computed from readings of other sensors. This study mainly uses sensors placed
inside district heating substations, measuring various values described below. These val­
ues correspond to the values on the primary side of the heating network, and only take
into account space heating, as domestic hot water and other uses of the heating network
are measured via other sensors. For most buildings, the data points have a time interval
of 15min. The data is usually available from the end of 2020, depending on the build­
ing. This study will mainly focus on the data from the last two heating seasons: Winter
2021­2022 and Winter 2022­2023, taken from November to March.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
11
==PAGE:20==
Table 3.2: Available DH substation data, primary side
Meter name
Description
Unit
Q
Power provided during the time interval
W or kW
Qtot
Cumulative total energy (aggregated data from the
first measured point)
kWh or MWh
FL
Flow provided during the time interval (only from
the DH network)
L/s or m3/s
FLtot
Cumulative total volume of water (aggregated data
from the first measured point)
m3
TT101
Supply temperature (measured at T4 on Fig 3.1)
°C
TT201
Return temperature (measured at T5 on Fig 3.1)
°C
Data from Table 3.2 is accessible for every building on the DTU Lyngby campus. The
main value of interest in this context is the provided power, denoted as Q, since it can be
employed to analyze each building’s energy consumption. The return temperatures vary
for each building, and are influenced by the unique parameters of the respective heating
systems. In contrast, supply temperatures are primarily determined by the position of
each building in the network, and are roughly equal for all of them. The water flow values
presented here hold limited significance, as our focus of study is primarily the flow within
the secondary system, rather than the flow originating from the district heating network.
Nevertheless, the model developed in this study requires data corresponding to the sec­
ondary side of the network, in addition to these values. This is because the temperatures
circulating in the heating network of each building are different from the supply and re­
turn temperatures of the primary network. To study the heat transfers taking place within
buildings, it is therefore necessary to also know the supply and return temperatures of the
heating network internal to each building. Following the principle of energy conservation,
the heat circulating through the system will be equal to the heat supplied by the district
heating network. Additionally, these values will facilitate the computation of the flow within
the secondary heating loop, as outlined in section 4.4.2.
Table 3.3: Available DH substation data, secondary side
Meter name
Description
Unit
TT101
Supply temperature (measured at T2 on Fig 3.1)
°C
TT201
Return temperature (measured at T3 on Fig 3.1)
°C
MV
Percentage of valve opening (valve D on Fig 3.1)
%
Additional data utilized in this study was sourced from the climate station situated in build­
ing 118 at DTU. While this station collects a broad range of meteorological data, the pri­
mary variable of interest for this study is the outdoor air temperature. This is because the
weather compensation procedure for buildings at DTU is carried­out solely based on this
parameter.
12
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:21==
3.4
Summary statistics
This section aims to provide an overview of the important data that will be used to apply
the method developed in this report. It is divided into an overview of data from the primary
side and one corresponding to the secondary side.
3.4.1
Primary side
Table 3.4 presents statistics that depict the functioning of the six substations under con­
sideration, specifically focusing on parameters relevant to the primary side, i.e., data orig­
inating from the district heating network. These statistics have been calculated over two
separate five­month periods, namely Winter 2021­2022 and Winter 2022­2023. This dual­
period analysis facilitates a comparison of the data pre and post the modifications imple­
mented in response to the energy crisis discussed earlier.
Table 3.4: Key values for each substation, Primary side
Tsup (°C)
1
Tret (°C)
1
∆T (°C)
1
Etot (MWh)
E/HDH (kW/K)
Substation
21­
22
22­
23
21­
22
22­
23
21­
22
22­
23
21­
22
22­
23
21­
22
22­
23
118, North
68.8
71.2
49.9
50.0
18.9
21.2
127
112
2.76
2.69
118, South
68.8
71.0
48.9
46.1
19.8
24.9
117
104
2.56
2.46
201, North
68.7
70.3
55.1
46.5
13.6
23.8
153
106
3.33
2.56
201, South
68.5
70.2
46.6
47.0
21.9
23.2
103
87
2.24
2.08
301, North
69.1
71.3
55.3
53.7
13.7
17.6
140
130
3.06
3.12
301, South
69.0
71.1
54.6
53.4
14.4
17.7
153
140
3.33
3.38
All temperature statistics are computed using an energy­weighted average, which gives
higher significance to temperatures observed during periods of increased energy use.
This can provide a more representative single value for the system’s overall temperatures,
especially in scenarios where energy fluctuates significantly over time, compared to a
simple time­average. The corresponding equation is:
Tavg =
PN
i=1 Ei · Ti
PN
i=1 Ei
(3.1)
Where:
• Tavg is the energy­weighted average temperature,
• Ei is the energy at the ith time point,
• Ti is the temperature at the ith time point.
The total energy value represents the cumulative energy consumption over the entire pe­
riod under investigation, which spans five months from November to March. However, to
facilitate a meaningful comparison of consumption from one heating season to another,
1Energy­weighted average
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
13
==PAGE:22==
it was necessary to normalize the data with respect to the prevailing weather conditions
during each season. This was achieved by dividing the total energy consumption calcu­
lated earlier by the number of Heating Degree Hours for each season, as described in
2.3.
In the first heating season, the Heating Degree Hours amounted to 46 thousand K · h, as
compared to 41 thousand in the second heating season. Therefore, it is anticipated that
the total energy consumption in the first heating season will be slightly higher. As such,
any observed reduction in energy consumption cannot be attributed solely to modifications
in temperature control.
There are a few interesting observations to be made about this data. Yet, the intention
here is not to delve into exhaustive detail; in the results section, a deeper exploration
of energy consumption in 5.1 and of weather compensation curves in 5.4 will offer more
comprehensive insights.
• Firstly, we can see that the average supply temperatures for each substation in
the same building, and also globally, are very close. This confirms the fact that
these temperatures are decided at supplyer level, and are therefore more or less
independent of the building, especially in a network as small as that of DTU. These
temperatures have risen by an average of 2.2°C from one season to the next, but
this is independent of building operation.
• Return temperatures have changed: they have decreased for 4 of the 6 substations.
This may be due to the change in WCCs. In fact, the reduction in supply tempera­
tures on the secondary side also leads to a direct reduction in return temperatures,
which is reflected in the return temperatures of the DH network. Temperature differ­
ences also decrease accordingly.
• It can be seen that energy has decreased year­on­year for each substation. How­
ever, in terms of normalized temperature, only building 201 seems to have reduced
its consumption significantly, particularly for the South substation. This may mean
that the reduction in supply temperatures has not resulted in any real reduction in
energy consumption for these buildings. However, a more detailed analysis of en­
ergy consumption will be carried out in 5.1, using energy curves as a function of
outside temperature.
3.4.2
Secondary side
Table 3.5 focuses on statistics from the secondary side, i.e., data originating from the
space heating system of the buildings. The different temperature averages are calculated
following the exact same method as for the primary side. Indeed, due to energy conserva­
tion, the energy transmitted from the DH network to the water from the secondary heating
system is the same as the one transferred by the heating system to the building. The
energy­weighting is thus still relevant. This energy can also be used to calculate the last
parameter of this table, which is the volume flow of water circulating in the secondary
circuit, as in equation 3.2. This flow was also averaged over the period.
˙V =
Q
ρ · cp · ∆T
(3.2)
Where:
• ˙V : Volumetric Flow Rate (m³/s)
14
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:23==
• Q: Heat Transferred (W)
• ρ: Density of water (kg/m³)
• cp: Specific heat capacity of water (J/kg∙K)
• ∆T: Cooling of the water (K)
Table 3.5: Key values for each substation, Secondary side
Tsup (°C)
Tret (°C)
∆T (°C)
˙V (l/s)
Substation
21­22
22­23
21­22
22­23
21­22
22­23
21­22
22­23
118, North
48.2
47.9
46.0
46.1
2.2
1.9
4.09
4.52
118, South
48.8
46.0
43.8
41.4
5.1
4.6
1.61
1.60
201, North
59.1
49.6
51.5
43.7
7.6
5.9
1.38
1.25
201, South
49.5
49.3
46.6
47.0
2.8
2.3
2.78
3.02
301, North
58.6
56.0
54.4
52.4
4.1
3.6
2.38
2.42
301, South
57.7
55.7
53.6
52.1
4.1
3.5
2.53
2.67
The following observations can be made from this table:
• Supply temperatures do indeed seem to have decreased, but this is varying in sig­
nificance from one substation to another. We can see that the South substation of
building 118, and the North and South substations of building 301, have reduced
their average supply temperature by 2 to 3 degrees. The most significant change
is seen in building 201 North, which also corresponds to the greatest reduction in
energy consumption previously observed.
• We can also see that for buildings that have changed their supply temperature, the
return temperature has also decreased. This shows that for buildings such as these,
equipped with a 1­string system, a reduction in supply temperatures also leads to a
reduction in return temperatures. On the other hand, water cooling is reduced, but
this can be beneficial in the case of a 1­string system to ensure that each radiator
receives a sufficient supply temperature. This point will be developed in section
4.4.1.
• Return temperatures on the secondary side are lower than on the primary side.
However, according to the diagram in Figure 3.1, they should be equal because
the T3 and T5 sensors measure the same temperature. This may be due to a by­
pass valve between the supply and return of the DH network, which keeps return
temperatures above a certain level.
• Finally, the volume flow of water has changed relatively slightly from one year to
the next. This corresponds to the operation of a 1­string system, with a constant
circulation pressure applied by the pump. The building operators do not seem to
have changed the pump parameters to compensate for the reduced temperature
difference. This point will be developed further in part 4.4.2.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:25==
4
Methodology
This chapter details the procedure used to calculate the optimum supply temperature as
a function of the outdoor temperature. The method is divided into 4 main parts. First, it is
necessary to estimate how much energy will be required to heat the building sufficiently for
each outdoor temperature. Next, we need to estimate the system­specific heat transfer
coefficient, to assess how much heat the heating system is capable of producing. Finally,
the maximum flow that can circulate in the system is evaluated from the data, and the
minimum cooling of the water circulating in the system is deduced. All these parameters
are then sufficient to accurately calculate the supply temperature.
In this section, to illustrate the chosen methods, a few examples of typical values and
data visualizations will be given, based on the studied substations. More results will be
presented in the following section.
4.1
Calculation of the optimal supply temperature
The first equation of interest used to determine the supply temperature is the empirical
radiator equation 4.1 given below:
Q = K · LMTDn
(4.1)
where the variables are:
Q: heat transfer rate (W)
K: constant that depends on the specific radiator’s characteristics such as its material,
shape, and size. This constant incorporates all factors that are not changing within the
system (W/(°C)n)
LMTD: Logarithmic Mean Temperature Difference. Logarithmic average of the temper­
ature difference between the hot and cold feeds at each end of the heat exchanger (re­
spectively water and air for a radiator) (°C)
n: dimensionless factor reflecting the exponential relationship between the mean tem­
perature difference and the heat emitted from the radiator. For an hydraulic radiator, it is
typically n = 1.3. [23]
This equation describes the heat transfer between a radiator and the indoor air. Assuming
the heat transfer coefficient K is known, then it is possible to determine the temperature
difference required to satisfy the heat demand.
The LMTD can be calculated from the supply and return temperature of the water, as well
as the indoor temperature as follows in equation 4.2,
LMTD =
Ts −Tr
ln

Ts−Ti
Tx−Ti

(4.2)
where:
Ts: Supply temperature entering the radiator (°C)
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
17
==PAGE:26==
Tr: Return temperature going out of the radiator (°C)
Ti: Room air temperature (°C)
Introducing a parameter ∆T = Ts −Tr corresponding to the cooling of the district heating
water, that is supposedly known, the equation becomes:
LMTD =
∆T
ln

Ts−Ti
Ts−∆T−Ti

(4.3)
Finally, by isolating Ts in the equation and combining both equations, we obtain:
Ts = ∆T ·
e∆T·( K
Q )1/n
e∆T·( K
Q )1/n −1
+ Ti
(4.4)
The value of Ti depends on the required indoor temperature. It was set to 21°C in this study
to correspond to usual thermal comfort setpoints. It can be deduced from the equation that
the supply temperature is directly dependent on the indoor temperature, following a linear
relationship with a slope of 1. The target indoor temperature is therefore an important
factor in reducing district heating supply temperatures.
As the heat demand Q and the cooling ∆T are both dependent on the outdoor tempera­
ture, the calculation process must be repeated for different outdoor temperatures to obtain
the weather compensation curve. In this study, the temperature range was picked from
−12 to 12 °C. Indeed, buildings require very little heat above the upper threshold of 12
°C, and the lower threshold of −12 °C corresponds to an extreme cold weather for winter
times in Denmark.
The challenge for the next stage is to use the available data to determine the values of
heat capacity K and energy demand Q, which are specific to each building. In addition,
it will be necessary to determine the optimum ∆T value achievable for each building.
4.2
Prediction of heat demand
In order to calculate the supply temperature, it is necessary to estimate the energy demand
for each outdoor temperature. This method is based on existing consumption data from
the district heating substation.
Firstly, energy data is calculated using the dataset, based on power values averaged over
the duration of a time interval. For this calculation, energy was calculated over intervals
of one hour. Only data corresponding to winter periods was taken into account. Energy
consumption data is then aggregated with weather data. The weather data comes from
the DTU climate station, located on the Lyngby campus. It is therefore highly reliable in
representing actual conditions at the time the sensors captured the data. The average
outdoor air temperature over the same time interval is then calculated, and the evolution
of energy consumption as a function of outside temperature can be plotted.
It is reasonable to assume a linear relationship between the predictor (Tout) and the target
variable (Q), as an approximation for the underlying pattern in the data. Even though
more elaborated machine learning methods could be used, linear regression gives a fair
accuracy, and has the advantage of being easy to use and quick to compute [21]. Using
a linear regression model, it is therefore possible to estimate energy consumption for any
18
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:27==
outdoor temperature. This would give an expression for energy demand Q(Tout) of the
following form:
Q(Tout) = β0 −β1 · Tout
(4.5)
where β0 and β1 are the linear regression parameters.
The linear regression model aims to find the best­fitting line that minimizes the overall
difference between the observed data points and the predicted values. The model is built
using the method of ordinary least squares (OLS), which estimates the model coefficients
that minimize the sum of squared residuals. The residuals represent the vertical differ­
ences between the observed values and the corresponding predicted values, serving as
a measure of the model’s ability to explain the data. The problem can be summarized as
follows:
Minimize
β0,β1
n
X
i=1
(Qi −(β0 −β1 · Tout,i))2
(4.6)
where Qi is the observed value, (β0 −β1 ·Tout,i) is the predicted value and the sum is over
all observations.
However, this expression for Q(Tout) is not sufficient to guarantee that the estimated con­
sumption is sufficiently high. In fact, energy consumption over a given hour depends
on many factors, and can vary for the same outside temperature (thermostat settings by
users, opening of windows, solar radiation, etc.). As can be seen from the graph, a large
number of points lie above the regression line in black, and consumption would therefore
be underestimated in those cases.
Figure 4.1: Prediction of heat demand as a function of outdoor temperature (Building 201
­ Substation 1)
To overcome this problem, it is therefore necessary to add a safety margin, and to over­
estimate this consumption in most cases, in order to be certain that the energy produced
will be sufficient to heat the building. In this case, a safety margin based on the standard
deviation of the residuals was incorporated. This measure reflects the dispersion of the
residuals around the regression line and provides an estimate of the typical deviation from
the true values.
The residuals can be calculated as:
ei = Qi −(β0 −β1 · Tout,i)
(4.7)
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
19
==PAGE:28==
Which allows to compute their standard deviation:
σ =
v
u
u
t
1
n −2
n
X
i=1
(ei)2
(4.8)
The standard deviation is calculated using n −2 instead of n on the denominator of the
fraction, in order to obtain an unbiased estimator [24]. This number corresponds to the
number of degrees of freedom of the data vector, β0 and β1 being fixed. This is however
of very little impact due to the large amount of data points.
To incorporate a safety margin into the predictions, the predicted values are shifted up­
wards by a certain factor multiplied by the standard deviation of the residuals, as seen in
the following equation, k being the multiplication factor. A larger factor corresponds to a
larger safety margin, allowing for a greater degree of conservatism in the predictions. It
can therefore be chosen according to the building operator’s desired strategy: higher if
the aim is to ensure user comfort, lower if the aim is to limit maximum consumption and
encourage users to heat their rooms wisely. For this study, it was mostly chosen to be
k = 1.
Q(Tout) = β0 −β1 · Tout + k · σ
(4.9)
It is interesting to note here that this method would not be compatible with the use of night
setbacks, for instance with a stoppage of flow during the night, which can sometimes
be employed in office or education buildings (it is the case for several DTU buildings for
instance). Indeed, this type of operation create peak loads of heating in the morning, as
the building needs to be re­heated. In consequence these points would lie way above the
trend line, and increasing the margin to include those points would be detrimental to the
possible gains in supply temperature from this method. However, no setback was used
for the buildings studied in this report on the last two heating seasons.
The main drawback of this method is that it is based on actual building consumption data,
which is not necessarily optimal. Indeed, if the building is not operating at maximum effi­
ciency (radiators off, wrong settings, fully open valves, etc.), then this consumption will be
overestimated and will not correspond to consumption in an optimal usage scenario. How­
ever, this remains an effective method of estimation, and it is a commonly used method
in energy consumption forecasting. [20]
4.3
Estimation of the system­specific heat transfer
coefficient
4.3.1
Calculation method
To estimate the minimum supply temperature, we need to know the specific heat transfer
coefficient of the building. At any point in time, it can be calculated from the following
equation, which is directly deduced from the radiator equation 4.1:
K =
Q
LMTDn
(4.10)
The K value can therefore be calculated from any point in time where data is available for
energy consumption, as well as supply and return temperatures. However, one unknown
factor is the indoor temperature, appearing in the LMTD equation, which is not measured
20
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:29==
for most buildings. It can be assumed to be equal to 21°C, but a more detailed analysis
of its impact on the result will be carried out below.
This radiator equation is generally valid for a single radiator, with each radiator having its
own heat transfer coefficient K. However, since the data is only available at the level of
the building as a whole, it is necessary to consider the heating system of the building as
one single radiator, and calculate a single transfer coefficient corresponding to the whole
building. This coefficient can therefore be expected to fluctuate over time, depending on
the local use of the building’s radiators, but also on solar radiation levels for example.
As shown in this distribution graph 4.2 based on data from one example substation, K
values are distributed around a central value, following a pattern similar to a normal dis­
tribution. However, it may not be appropriate to use the mean value of this distribution as
an estimate of K, because the desired value is the maximum capacity achievable by the
building, corresponding to the best possible utilization scenario. The maximum measured
value cannot be used either, as it would likely be an overestimate of the actual value. In
this study, the 3rd quartile of the values was finally chosen as the value for K, as can be
seen with the red line on 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Distribution of the calculated heat transfer coefficient K for the first substation
of building 118, with a chosen K value of 617 W/°Cn
4.3.2
Limitations and improved data selection
Nonetheless, this method has its limitations, and the values obtained may underestimate
the actual heat transfer coefficients of the buildings. Indeed, as illustrated in Figure 3.1, if
the Thermostatic Radiator Valve (TRV) is not fully open, some water might be by­passed
and will not enter the radiator. This water then mixes with the outflow from the radiator,
which means the return temperature from the radiator could be lower than what is mea­
sured in the main pipe. If no water was bypassed, the return temperature of the main pipe
would be lower, since a larger proportion would be used for heating. Consequently, the
LMTD of the whole circuit would decrease as the return temperature gets closer to room
temperature, thereby reducing the average temperature difference. This would increase
the heat transfer coefficient K according to equation 4.1. Therefore, the K value obtained
using this method could be an underestimate of the actual heat transfer occurring inside
the rooms, as the calculated LMTD values do not correspond to the real temperatures in
the radiators.
To address this issue, building operators could adjust all the building’s TRVs to their maxi­
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
21
==PAGE:30==
mum setting for a short period of time when the building is unoccupied. This would ensure
that the TRVs are fully opened, allowing for the maximum heat transfer coefficient of the
building to be calculated based on the data collected during that interval. This method was
partially employed on Building 118 for a previous study, where all thermostats were set to
the 3rd position (20­22°C) for testing during unoccupied days due to a sanitary lockdown.
Although this does not necessarily guarantee that TRVs are fully open, it is sufficient to
provide a significantly higher estimate of the heat transfer coefficient K. The data distri­
bution for normal building usage and for this specific period is shown in Figure 4.3. The
graph illustrates that the data collected during this specific period varies around a central
value, which is substantially higher, moving from 580 to 726 W/°Cn. This demonstrates
the importance of setting the thermostat to high values and fully utilizing the building’s
heating capacity to obtain accurate K values.
Figure 4.3: Distribution of K values for 2 different calculation periods, with normal and
high TRV settings, Building 118, Substation 2
However, this high TRV setting was not implemented for the other buildings considered
in this study. Thus, it was necessary to extract the maximum value from the existing data.
The proposed solution in this method involves selecting a specific week when the building
is occupied, outdoor temperatures are low, and solar radiation is minimal. In practice, this
scenario is closest to an optimal usage scenario, where users would set all radiators to
thermostat 3, and most of the heating would come directly from the radiators. In this case,
the K value obtained from this period would be a reliable estimate of the building’s actual
heat capacity.
4.3.3
Sensitivity to indoor temperature
A key variable in determining the heat transfer coefficient K is the indoor temperature.
This variable is used to calculate the LMTD, but is not continually measured and hence not
directly accessible. Therefore, it needs to be estimated. Throughout the winter season,
thermostats are typically set to level 3. According to the data sheet for the thermostats
employed in these buildings, this level corresponds to temperatures between 20 and 22°C
[25]. The said thermostat is a proportional thermostat, meaning that the valve will be fully
open if the indoor temperature drops below 20°C, and closed if it surpasses 22°C. Thus,
an average indoor temperature of 21°C is a fair estimation for the calculation.
To understand the potential impact of this assumption on the final value, a sensitivity
analysis was conducted. For the two substations in building 118, the K values evolved
as depicted in Figure 4.4. It is clear that the supply temperature escalates linearly with
the indoor temperature selected for the calculation of K. A cautious choice of a lower
22
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:31==
temperature of 20°C would lead to a decrease of around 5%, while a potentially inflated
choice of 22°C would result in an increase of the same amount.
Figure 4.4: Evolution of K with the chosen indoor temperature
4.4
Estimation of the maximum flow
4.4.1
High­flow strategy
In order to achieve the lowest possible supply temperature, it is necessary to reduce water
cooling in the district heating system to a minimum. Indeed, this reduction corresponds
to a high flow/low temperature strategy, where a more important amount of water is nec­
essary to achieve the needed heating transfer, as temperatures are lower. On the other
hand, if the aim was to work with high temperatures, a lower flow rate would be sufficient,
and the water would be more cooled. This can be proved mathematically as follows.
Differentiating the equation Ts with respect to ∆T, taking α = ( K
Q )
1
n , we obtain:
dTs
d∆T = eα∆T (eα∆T −1 −α∆T)
(eα∆T −1)2
(4.11)
This function can be shown to be strictly positive. The supply temperature therefore in­
creases with the selected temperature difference. Since the aim is to minimize the supply
temperature, it is necessary to try to reduce water cooling to a minimum. The temperature
difference is inversely proportional to flow, as shown in Equation 4.12, derived from the
heat transfer equation between the water in the pipes and the radiator element. The lim­
itation will therefore be the maximum flow achievable by the system. If the water can be
circulated at this maximum speed, it will be possible to reduce the temperature difference
to a minimum.
∆T =
Q
ρ · ˙V · cp
(4.12)
Where:
• Q: heat transferred (W)
• ˙V : volume flow (m3/s)
• cp: specific heat capacity of water (J/(kg · ◦C)
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
23
==PAGE:32==
• ρ: density (kg/m3)
Although a low­flow strategy can achieve the lowest possible return temperatures in 2­
string systems, and is preferable in order to maximize network efficiency and limit pumping
and pipe sizing costs [14], a high­flow strategy may be preferable in the case of a 1­
string system like the one of the studied buildings. In exchange for slightly higher return
temperatures, the high­flow strategy reduces temperature losses in the water circuit, and
is less sensitive to network faults such as open valves or by­passes [26]. Moreover,
high flows can be a good way to ensure that the last radiator in the system still receives
sufficient heat, which is essential for a 1­string system. Finally, as explained in 3.4, primary
network return temperatures in this kind of system are directly dependant on the return
temperature from the secondary side, so the reduction of the supply temperature, even
with a relatively low cooling, will eventually allow for lower return temperatures in the
network. These lower temperatures are important for increasing heat recovery from gas
condensation for 3GDH, but also for 4GDH by increasing the efficiency of low­temperature
heat production technologies [7].
4.4.2
Estimation from the data
The maximum flow accessible in the system depends mainly on the capacity of the pump
used, and the diameter of the circuit pipes. However, the aim of this study is to use the
available data to define the best strategy to adopt in the current case. No attempt has
been made to modify the current system parameters, but only to estimate the maximum
flow achievable in this operating context. A higher level of improvement may be possible
if these parameters are modified.
In a 1­string circuit such as the one in the buildings studied, the water flows continuously
at a relatively constant rate. This can be seen in Figure 4.5, which shows all the flows
calculated over the two winter periods, in descending order. The flow is calculated from
the same equation as 4.12, isolating the volume flow, and using existing data, as it was
done in 3.4. We can see that, despite the presence of a few extreme values, flow is
relatively constant between 1.5 and 2 l/s.
Figure 4.5: Secondary side flow, ordered by descending order (winter months only) (B118
substation 2)
It might be tempting to use the maximum values measured as the maximum flow achiev­
able by the system. However, these measurements correspond to times when the valve
24
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:33==
controlling the amount of water coming from the primary side is wide open, often in the
morning when the building needs to be reheated in case of night­setback. The circuit is
therefore subjected to high pressures from the district heating network, which consider­
ably increases the flow on the secondary side. However, this does not correspond to the
values achievable under normal day­to­day use.
The solution proposed in this study is to select from the data the days when the flow is
relatively constant, and to choose the maximum average daily value. A day is considered
to have a constant flow if its relative variation is less than 10%. The coefficient of variation
is calculated by dividing the standard deviation by the mean. A day is therefore taken into
account if from its calculated flow data we have: cv = σ
µ < 0.1 .
Figure 4.6: Secondary side flow on 27­12­2020, with a mean value of 1.82 l/s (B118
substation 2)
For the same substation as in the previous figure, we obtain an average flow of 1.82 L/s
as in Figure 4.6, measured on a winter day. This flow is high and can be maintained over
a full day, thus appearing to be a good candidate for selecting the flow value to be used
in the model.
4.4.3
Calculation of the necessary cooling
For each outdoor temperature, it is then possible to calculate the minimum cooling by
by entering the predicted heating and the maximum flow previously obtained in Equation
4.12. An overview of these cooling values ∆T for one example substation can be seen
in Figure 4.7. They decrease as a function of outdoor temperature, following a linear
evolution, just like the heat demand Q in the numerator of the equation.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.7: Cooling of the DH water as a function of outdoor temperature, Building 118,
substation 1 (North)
26
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:35==
5
Analysis and Results
This chapter outlines the findings gathered through the application of the methodology
described in the previous section. Given the considerable amount of data visualization re­
quired for this methodology, this section will also aim to extract meaningful insights about
the buildings and provide relevant commentary. Whenever feasible, the results will be an­
alyzed, compared to other methodologies, or contrasted with existing data. This chapter
is split into four main sections, each focusing on a different aspect of the methodology.
Firstly, it will explore the energy consumption of the buildings and execute the prediction
algorithm. Subsequently, it will delve into the computation of the specific heat transfer
coefficient K and contrast these figures with those obtained using the design values of
the building’s heating elements. Following that, the calculation of the maximum flows
and corresponding minimum cooling will be detailed. Lastly, the weather compensation
curves, the principal objective of this methodology, will be plotted and juxtaposed with the
curves currently employed by building operators.
5.1
Buildings’ heat demand analysis and prediction
5.1.1
Heat demand visualization
As described in section 4.2, the hourly energy consumption was calculated from the data
for each building. The evolution of this consumption throughout the data collection period
can be seen Figure 5.1. From these graphs, it can be seen that the energy used by
each substation of the same building follow a similar pattern. However, the data seems
to present outliers, with several ’spikes’ in the data with very high consumption values.
This can either come from periods where the building needs to be quickly reheated, or
from errors in the data. For a small period of time in February 2022, the energy of the first
substation of building 201 is very high: this corresponds to an error in data collection by
the substation energy meter, and these values were ignored for the rest of the analysis.
Figure 5.1: Hourly energy use in kWh as a function of time, Building 118
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.2: Hourly energy use in kWh as a function of time, Building 201
Figure 5.3: Hourly energy use in kWh as a function of time, Building 301
The energy consumption follows a standard pattern, with a significant increase in con­
sumption reaching an average of 40 kW in winter, and reducing to about zero in the sum­
mer. However, there are noticeable consumption peaks in the summer, which are clearly
outliers. Therefore, the remainder of the analysis will focus only on the winter periods.
To get a better view of the evolution, and in order to compare each season accurately,
it is necessary to relate this energy usage to the outdoor temperature values for each
hour during which this energy is measured. This is also the data that the liner regression
will be executed on, as the main input for the determination of minimal supply tempera­
tures is the outdoor temperature, not the time. Thus, by merging the energy data with the
weather data, the energy as a function of outdoor air temperature was plotted, resulting
in the following graphs.
28
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:37==
(a) Substation 1
(b) Substation 2
Figure 5.4: Substation energy consumption as a function of outdoor air temperature, col­
ored by heating season, Building 118
From the initial two graphs, corresponding to the two substations in building 118, several
observations can be drawn.
• Primarily, consumption has decreased for each outdoor temperature, and there are
two distinct curves depending on the heating season, differing by 6 kWh for the first
substation, and 7 kWh for the second. Numerous factors could account for these
changes, but the most plausible seems to be the change in WCCs operated by the
building operators mentioned in part 3.2. This hypothesis will be examined further
in the following section.
• Furthermore, the energy does seem to demonstrate a linear dependence on outdoor
temperature, as hypothesized in part 4.2. Two trendlines were plotted to illustrate
this. Note also that their slopes are similar, and that energy consumption has only
been offset downward for each outdoor temperature.
• However, for the first substation, at extremely low temperatures, the actual values
appear to drop below this trendline and follow a less steep slope. While in some in­
stances, energy versus outdoor temperature can be modeled using piecewise linear
regression [27] (a linear regression where the slope changes at one or two points)
to represent these slope changes, simple linear regression still seems fitting. This
is because this observation only applies to this particular substation, and there are
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
29
==PAGE:38==
not enough data points at these low temperatures to guarantee that the alternative
slope would be accurate.
• It is interesting to note that for the first substation, energy consumption increased
again at the end of the second heating season. These points have not been added
to the graph for clarity, but this could mean that this new energy consumption was
insufficient to heat the building efficiently and that the building operators were forced
to re­modify the WCCs. We will attempt to validate this hypothesis in section 5.4.
(a) Substation 1
(b) Substation 2
Figure 5.5: Substation energy consumption as a function of outdoor air temperature, col­
ored by heating season, Building 201
A similar pattern can be observed for building 201:
• The first substation underwent a clear reduction, by 14kWh (at an outside temper­
ature of 0°C). However, this time the slope was slightly reduced, from ­2.3 kWh/°C
to ­1.6 kWh/°C.
• The second substation also underwent a reduction, but only by 4 kWh in average.
However, we can see that the values below 0°C are very inconsistent, and difficult to
explain. This may be due to a malfunction in the substation, with points alternating
between high and low values, even in the middle of the day. It seems that the control
valve closes regularly, and that consumption then increases again when the valve
is opened to compensate for the time when it was closed. This issue should be
30
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:39==
fixed before attempting to improve the operating temperatures, but it is still possible
to perform linear regression on the data and to predict the low temperature points
following the slope of the accurate data points.
(a) Substation 1
(b) Substation 2
Figure 5.6: Substation energy consumption as a function of outdoor air temperature, col­
ored by heating season, Building 301
Finally, this pattern is still apparent, but seems less clear for building 301.
• Firstly, there is a lack of data on the second heating season for the first substation,
which makes it difficult to draw any conclusions. Following the trend lines, however,
the curve seems to have dropped by 5 kWh (at an outside temperature of 0°C).
• For the second substation, a decrease can be observed, but it is limited to 2 kWh.
‘
5.1.2
Electricity consumption analysis
In order to validate that the observed changes are due to changes in building operation,
the electrical consumption of the buildings was complementarily analyzed. Electricity con­
sumption has a direct influence on building heating, in the form of internal gains. It is also
a good indicator of building occupancy, with periods of reduced electricity consumption
corresponding to periods when the buildings are not in use. This is the case for week­
ends and nights, for instance, but the end of sanitary restrictions may also have led to
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
31
==PAGE:40==
an increase in building occupancy. This occupancy rate is also a source of internal gains
through the body heat released by users. An increase in electricity consumption could
therefore lead to an increase in internal gains from these two factors, and thus reduce the
amount of energy needed for heating.
However, by summing the electricity consumption over each winter period (5 months, from
November to December), for buildings 118 and 201 (electrical data was unavailable for
building 301), results show that the electrical energy consumption mostly decreased or
stagnated, with a reduction of less than 1% for building 118 and around 8% for building
201. However, we can see from the time curves Figure 5.7 that it is the power con­
sumption of the unoccupied building that has fallen, as the weekend curve shows a step
decrease for building 201 from June 2022. It is less clear for building 118, but a reduc­
tion in electricity consumption can also be seen on weekends and at night. This could be
linked to the deactivation of certain electrical devices outside occupancy hours that were
previously left on, but the question was not pursued further in this study.
Figure 5.7: Building 118 electrical energy consumption as a function of time
Figure 5.8: Building 201 electrical energy consumption as a function of time
In addition, electricity consumption outside nights and weekends was therefore also ana­
lyzed. While this consumption varied by less than 1% for building 118, it increased by 9%
32
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:41==
for building 201, corresponding to a difference of 7,400 kWh over the period, or 50 kWh
per day in average, and thus a power output of 4 kW each hour (working hours only). This
change may have been due to an increase in the use of electrical devices, and may also
reflect an increase in building occupancy with more electrical equipment switched on. It
may therefore have contributed to the heating of the building, and partially explain the
downward change observed in the energy curves in relation to the outside temperature,
that was particularly large for building 201. It is however of a smaller order of magnitude
in terms of kW compared to the difference of approximately 18 kW in power consumption
for the two substations of building 201 combined.
However, it is difficult to estimate exactly what impact this change in electrical power
consumption has on the heating of the building, and internal gains could occur in areas
that are unoccupied or do not require heat (data­centers in the basement, laboratories,
etc.). Moreover, the heat demand of building 118 has also decreased, even though its
electricity consumption has remained unchanged. It is therefore assumed in the rest
of the analysis that this observed difference is at least partly due to the modification of
weather compensation curves.
5.1.3
Observed changes analysis
The modification of weather compensation curves is expressed in the form of a a down­
ward shift of several degrees Celsius in the supply temperature for each outdoor tem­
perature. The primary objective of this change was to decrease supply temperatures,
however, without detrimentally affecting the thermal comfort within the building. This an­
ticipated stability in thermal comfort was to be facilitated by the building’s radiator ther­
mostatic valves, which would theoretically allow a greater flow of heat into the radiators
to compensate for the reduced supply temperature.
Following the modification, review of the data revealed a decrease in the building’s en­
ergy consumption. This suggests that less heat was supplied to the building post­curve
alteration. The phenomenon can be interpreted in several ways:
• The indoor temperatures may have fallen due to a limitation imposed by the lowered
supply temperatures. This would imply that the thermostatic valves were sometimes
already fully opened, and could not provide additional heat to compensate. Thermal
comfort may have generally remained satisfactory, but certain critical rooms could
be receiving inadequate heat.
• The building might have been receiving more heat than purely necessary prior to
the adjustment, potentially due to high settings or faulty operation of thermostats by
users, or also frequent window opening. The reduction in supply temperature may
now force occupants to exercise greater care with heating, as misuse could lead to
sub­optimal indoor temperatures.
• Lower operating temperatures in the circuit may have reduced distribution heat
losses in the pipes. In fact, the temperature difference between the room and the
water in the pipes is smaller, so less heat is transferred. This can be especially true
if the valves on some radiators are closed, with more water circulating in the circuit
without passing through the radiators.
• In response to the ongoing energy crisis and high energy prices, DTU adopted aus­
terity measures including an energy­saving campaign. The campaign promotes
small habit changes and local initiatives, such as reducing standby consumption and
hosting energy­saving workshops. Campus Services projects these efforts could
potentially cut 10­15% off DTU’s total energy consumption [28]. This incentive could
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
33
==PAGE:42==
have paid off, with building users making significant efforts to reduce their heating
consumption, thus leading to this reduction.
The actual cause of this observation still remains unknown, and may be a combination of
several of these reasons. In the first two scenarios, the reduction in energy consumption
likely indicates that the supply temperatures were lowered to their maximum possible ex­
tent, or perhaps even excessively. If the temperature decrease was optimal, the energy
consumption would theoretically remain unchanged. This evaluation underscores the crit­
ical balance between energy efficiency and thermal comfort in building heating systems.
5.1.4
Future heat demand prediction
To predict the building’s energy demand, the upper curve, which corresponds to the en­
ergy used before the WCCs were adjusted, was utilized. Indeed, as previously discussed,
it is uncertain whether the reduced energy consumption effectively ensures thermal com­
fort in every room. Moreover, the objective is to lower the operating temperatures of the
substations during their standard operation, not after improvements have already been
implemented. This approach also allows for comparison between theoretically calculated
WCCs and those newly applied by building operators. Consequently, this will enable
an evaluation of the impacts of these modifications, and determine whether there is still
potential for further improvement, or if temperatures have been decreased beyond theo­
retical projections.
Applying the method described in 4.2, we obtain the following linear regressions. Each
graph shows the curve corresponding to the linear regression in black, and above it in red
the curve corresponding to the linear regression to which is added the standard deviation
multiplied by a factor k. The coefficient k was chosen around 1 for each substation, but
could be visually adjusted to include more points under the prediction curve or if the margin
was too large. The final equation (corresponding to the red curve) used to predict energy
consumption is shown below each graph, along with the coefficient of determination R2,
evaluating the quality of the linear regression (it should be as close to 1 as possible).
Figure 5.9: Result of the linear regression, B118, Substation 1: Q = 49 −2.1 · Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.84
34
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.10: Result of the linear regression, B118, Substation 2: Q = 47 −1.6 · Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.63
Figure 5.11: Result of the linear regression, B201, Substation 1: Q = 54 −2.3 · Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.91
Figure 5.12: Result of the linear regression, B201, Substation 2: Q = 46 −1.9 · Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.58
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.13: Result of the linear regression, B301, Substation 1: Q = 52 −1.7 · Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.72
Figure 5.14: Result of the linear regression, B301, Substation 2: Q = 51−0.93·Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.47
5.1.5
Comparison with the Heating Degree Days method
In order to validate the use of this method for predicting building energy consumption, it
was compared with a method already applied in the literature for the same purpose. This
method uses Heating Degree Days to evaluate heating demand over the period studied,
and is described in 2.3.
It will only be detailed here for building 118, as the results are very similar for each building.
Dividing the building’s total consumption by the number of corresponding HDHs over the
period (here the heating season 2021­2022), we obtain heating coefficients L1 = 2.76
kW/K and L2 = 2.56 kW/K for substations 1 and 2 respectively. These results correspond
to the normalized energy presented in Table 3.4. The resulting heat demand then deduced
from equation: Q(Tout) = L · (17 −Tout).
After developing the equation, it leads to two linear functions for the heat demand, that
vary slightly from the functions obtained with linear regression:
• QHDD,1 = 46.9 −2.76 · Tout kW
• QHDD,2 = 43.5 −2.56 · Tout kW
These functions were then plotted against the ones obtained with linear regression, ob­
taining the following curves.
36
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:45==
(a) Substation 1
(b) Substation 2
Figure 5.15: Comparison of the two heat demand prediction methods, Building 118
This comparison shows that the results are relatively similar for both methods. How­
ever, the curve using the HDD method has a steeper slope, implying that temperature
decreases more rapidly with air temperature. In addition, the intercept of the HDD curve
is lower, at 2.5°C and 3°C for substations 1 and 2 respectively. As a result, it tends to
predict higher consumption at very low temperatures, but this trend reverses when the
two lines cross, at around ­4°C outdoor temperature for both substations.
The same pattern also appears for the other two buildings, with the difference that the
point of intersection corresponds to slightly higher temperatures (0°C for building 201 and
2°C for building 301).
5.2
Heat transfer coefficient
5.2.1
Estimation from the data
Following the method described in 4.3, the coefficient K was calculated for every hour
based on the available data period. The result on the full period can be seen Figure 5.16.
It can be seen that the values are incoherent outside of heating season, with K reaching
very high values. However, this value remains quite constant during heating seasons. As
a solution, only winter month (December, January, February) were kept for the rest of the
analysis. Every building studied showed a similar pattern.
Figure 5.16: Heat transfer coefficient K evolution with time
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
37
==PAGE:46==
Nevertheless, the values for the heat transfer coefficient K were still spread out due to
local radiator use variation as explained before. The distribution plots for those values for
every substation can be seen below. Each plot represents two distributions, one of the
data for both winter periods, and one only for one particularly cold week where K values
are maximal for the substations of buildings 201 and 301, and as described in 4.3 for
building 118.
Figure 5.17: Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 1 (North),
Building 118
Figure 5.18: Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 2 (South),
Building 118
Figure 5.19: Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 1 (North),
Building 201
38
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.20: Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 2 (South),
Building 201
Figure 5.21: Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 1 (North),
Building 301
Figure 5.22: Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 2 (South),
Building 301
Below is a summary of all the values obtained for K following this method. It is clear that
the method used on building 118 gives a higher percentage of increase than the one only
based on existing data, without a specific thermostat setting by the building operators. For
the rest of this study, the values in the column Kimproved will be used as the heat transfer
coefficient for each substation.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
39
==PAGE:48==
Table 5.1: K values for each substation
Building
Substation
Koriginal
(W/°Cn)
Kimproved
(W/°Cn)
% Increase
B118
North
560
756
35
South
562
700
25
B201
North
515
569
10
South
422
470
11
B301
North
406
431
6
South
410
462
13
5.2.2
Comparison with design values
To provide a critical assessment of these calculated values, it can be worthwhile to con­
trast these results with theoretical figures derived from the design specifications of the
building’s heating elements. This comparison can be achieved using the method outlined
in the article Energy and cost savings with continuous low temperature heating versus
intermittent heating of an office building with district heating [12], which was applied to
building 118 on the DTU campus. The aim here is not to exhaustively detail this method,
but rather to establish a reliable basis for comparison.
The method involves using the radiator dimensions and manufacturer’s design sheets
to determine the design heating capacity of each radiator, which are then aggregated to
provide a total for the entire building. Moreover, the heat losses from the pipes, which
also contribute to heating the room, are accounted for each radiator.
Following the methodology outlined in the document mentioned above, we get a thermal
capacity value of 370 W/m for the finned tube convectors installed in the three buildings
studied, at the reference temperature set of 70/55/20 °C (respectively supply,return and
room temperatures). This method leans on design data from the Spiral company [29],
subsequently adjusted to match the systems’ geometry. For the type of pipe employed
in these buildings, heat losses are approximated at 30 W/m, based on the results from a
simulation software .
Consequently, using values derived from the convector drawings presented in the ap­
pendix, it is possible to estimate the thermal capacity of each heating element.
• For Building 118, with a convector width of 2800 mm and a pipe length of 2016 mm
per radiator, the resulting heating capacity for a single element is:
Pradiator = 370 W/m × 2.800m + 30 W/m × 2.016m = 1096 W
This value was then multiplied by the total number of radiators in the building to
yield the overall thermal capacity. Building 118 has 204 heating elements, so the
total heat capacity is:
P118 = 204 × Pradiator = 223 kW
40
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:49==
• For Building 201, with a convector width of 3000 mm, a pipe length of 2016 mm, and
176 heating elements, the heat capacity computed using the same methodology is:
P201 = 206 kW
• For Building 301, no precise drawing of the heating elements was available. Hence,
the thermal capacity was estimated based on the data for building 201, which was
constructed just two years later. The capacity of building 201 was thus scaled ac­
cording to the surface area of building 301. Thus, the total heat capacity for building
301 is estimated to be: P301 = 179 kW.
Finally, to obtain the heat transfer coefficient K, according to equation 4.10, it is necessary
to divide this heat capacity by the LMTD at exponent n, calculated from the reference
temperatures 70/55/20. The results thus obtained are shown in Table 5.2. They are
compared with the summed values of the heat transfer coefficient of the two substations
for each building.
Table 5.2: Comparison of K values between method and design
Building
Kdata
(W/°Cn)
Kdesign
(W/°Cn)
Ratio (%)
118
1456
1727
84
201
1039
1596
65
301
893
1386
64
The results therefore show that the value found using the method presented in this study
is lower than the value corresponding to the design of the heating elements. It represents
around 85% of the design value for building 118, and 65% for the other two buildings.
This aligns with what was described earlier, since the value for building 118 was obtained
by ensuring that all thermostats were set to a value of 3, while this was not the case for
the other two. If the same method was implemented on these buildings as well, a higher
outcome could potentially be expected.
Finally, it was foreseeable that the design values would exceed the values coming from the
data, as the design value calculation procedure assumes that all radiators are operating at
their maximum design capacity at the same time, which would correspond to a perfectly
equitable distribution of heat load between each radiator. Moreover, the design value
does not account for the water being potentially being by­passed, so it corresponds to
a scenario where the TRVs would be fully opened, which was not necessarily the case
for the previous calculation procedure. The estimated value in this report is hence more
conservative but is also more likely to represent a real usage scenario.
5.3
Maximal flow and minimal cooling
5.3.1
Maximal flow
As outlined in section 4.4.2, the objective of this method is to identify days where the
flow reaches the highest value possible while maintaining a coefficient of variation lower
than cv = 0.1. The mean value for that day is then chosen as the maximal flow for each
specific substation. The mean value and the coefficient of variation are only calculated for
working hours (6:00­18:00), as the flow might get lower during the nights because of lower
heat demand. In addition, the resulting flow curves were also visually assessed to verify
the absence of unexpected peaks. This helps to confirm that such a flow can feasibly be
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
41
==PAGE:50==
sustained on a daily basis. The maximum flows determined in this manner are showcased
in Table 5.3, and their corresponding graphical representations are shown in the following
figures, along with the mean value and the coefficient of variation.
Figure 5.23: Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 1, B118
on 18­02­2023, mean = 7.65 L/s, cv = 0.09
Figure 5.24: Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 2, B118
on 27­12­2020, mean = 1.82 L/s, cv = 0.03
Figure 5.25: Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 1, B201
on 23­01­2023, mean = 1.31 L/s, cv = 0.04
42
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.26: Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 2, B201
on 08­11­2022, mean = 3.57 L/s, cv = 0.09
Figure 5.27: Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 1, B301
on 23­12­2021, mean = 2.57 L/s, cv = 0.02
Figure 5.28: Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 2, B301
on 01­01­2023, mean = 2.84 L/s, cv = 0.05
However, flow is a crucial point in the WCC calculation, and high flow is important in
order to achieve T values such as explained 4.4.1. An improvement to this method could
therefore be to manually change the circuit pump settings to increase the flow if possible.
In fact, although this method makes it possible to obtain the maximum flow from the flows
that have already been operated in the circuit, it does not prove that a higher flow could
not be obtained by changing the settings.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 5.3: Final chosen flow values
Building
Flow substation
1 (L/s)
Flow substation
2 (L/s)
118
7.65
1.82
201
1.31
3.57
301
2.57
2.84
5.3.2
Minimal cooling
Following equation 4.12, the corresponding cooling of the water ∆Tmin can be calculated
from the previously determined maximum achievable flow. It is directly dependent on the
predicted heat demand Q, and will thus also follow a decreasing affine function. Its slope
will be directly proportional to the one of Q, but attenuated from a factor ρ · cp · ˙Vmax. The
cooling values as a function of outdoor air temperature for each substation are plotted
below.
Figure 5.29: Minimal DH water cooling at each outdoor temperature, Building 118
Figure 5.30: Minimal DH water cooling at each outdoor temperature, Building 201
44
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.31: Minimal DH water cooling at each outdoor temperature, Building 301
These figures validate the mathematical analysis conducted earlier. Specifically, sub­
stations with lower flows exhibit significantly higher minimum cooling values than those
with larger flows. This trend is notably apparent in building 118, where the substations
exhibit considerable variation in flow rates. Substation 1 possesses a flow rate that is
4 times higher than the one of substation 2. The corresponding cooling values for sub­
station 1 fluctuate between 0.7°C to 2.3°C for external temperatures ranging from 12 to
­12°C. Meanwhile, for substation 2, these values span from 3.3 to 8.5°C. These figures
accurately represent the flow ratio of approximately 4 between the two secondary heating
circuits (although the energy demand for both substation is not identical).
For the first substation of building 201, the values of cooling seem extremely high, due to
a low flow paired with a high consumption. At 0°C of outdoor temperature for instance,
the cooling of the water is over 9°C. This can be a clear issue for a 1­string system like
this one, as this means that the last radiator of the system will be receiving at its supply
valve a temperature approximately 9°C lower than the supply temperature of the system.
Moreover, if the building’s heating system is operating at its maximum capacity, with the
TRVs being fully open for all the radiators, the TRVs of the critical radiators will not be
able to compensate for the lower supply temperatures by allowing more flow to enter the
radiator. If there is no way to increase the flow of these substations, this might pose a
limitation to the method previously described to calculate the heat transfer coefficient K
in section 4.3, as this kind of space heating operation may not ensure that all rooms are
receiving sufficient heat.
These results also expose another significant limitation of the method employed in this
report, which is that it solely rely on existing data. No attempts have been made to mod­
ify the current system parameters, but merely to estimate the maximum achievable flow
within this operational context. A higher level of improvement might be possible if these
parameters are adjusted. Furthermore, it is highly probable that higher flows could be
circulated in certain substations. Such discrepancies within the same building are sur­
prising, given that the two substations, as well as the two heating circuits, were designed
in a somewhat similar manner. The remaining challenge would be to estimate the poten­
tial electricity losses that would offset this improvement in supply temperatures.
5.4
Weather compensation curves
Finally, by combining all the parameters previously calculated in equation 4.4, we can
calculate the minimum supply temperature for each outdoor temperature. This results in
the WCCs presented below. These results are overlaid with the actual temperature points
measured at the entrance of the secondary heating circuit. These points correspond to
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
45
==PAGE:54==
the WCCs used by the building operators, as these are not directly accessible. Moreover,
using the actual points allows for the consideration of potential differences between the
outdoor temperatures measured by DTU’s climate station and the temperatures used by
the heat exchanger controller of the substation. These points are color­coded accord­
ing to their heating seasons—with orange representing the 2021­2022 season, and blue
indicating the 2022­2023 season. This differentiation helps highlighting the noticeable
difference in WCC between each season.
5.4.1
Building 118
In the case of building 118, it is clear that the curves developed using the methodology
outlined in this report lie significantly beneath the curves used by the building operators
over the same time period (Winter 2021­2022, represented in blue on the graphs). For
instance, at an outdoor temperature of 0°C, the new weather compensation curve sug­
gests a supply temperature of 45.4°C for substation 1, and 48.0°C for substation 2. These
temperatures are approximately 7.5°C and 5.0°C lower than those suggested by the ini­
tial curves for each substation, respectively. This implies that the methodology has been
successful in calculating lower supply temperatures for these substations.
Figure 5.32: Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B118 sub­
station 1
Figure 5.33: Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B118 sub­
station 2
46
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:55==
It is also interesting to compare these curves with the newly implemented ones by the
building operators for the heating season of 2022­2023. For the first substation, the opti­
mal curve calculated appears to be lower by approximately 1.3°C than the one employed
by building operators after set­points were adjusted. This could suggest that building
operators might have been able to reduce supply temperatures even further. Yet, as ex­
plained earlier in 5.1, this reduction in supply temperatures corresponds to a decrease in
energy consumption. The methodology in this report, however, bases itself on the actual
energy consumption of the building, so it should not significantly alter the building’s energy
consumption, expected from the reduction of heat losses that occur with lower operating
temperatures. Hence, it was previously concluded that this change could have led to a
decline in thermal comfort, indicating that the newly calculated curve might not offer suf­
ficiently high temperatures to maintain the same comfort level as before. This theory is
supported by the fact that building operators re­adjusted the curve upwards following the
change, as visible in green on the graphs for the final two months of the heating season.
It remains unclear why this adjustment was made, particularly as the third curve seems
to exceed even the initial curve. However, it is plausible that it was altered in response to
complaints from building users, thus affirming that the new curve was too low.
The fact that the calculated curve is too low could come from the fact that the maximal flow
calculated, which was notably high for this substation (see Table 5.3), does not match the
actual flow running through the pipes. Thus, the building is unable to achieve such low
cooling values, and the supply temperatures calculated are thus insufficient to heat the
building properly. Furthermore, this reduction in energy does not necessarily imply that
occupants are experiencing cold. It could also suggest that the lower supply temperatures
have now forced occupants to exercise greater care with heating, as misuse now leads to
reduced thermal comfort. As explained previously in this report, the purpose of reducing
supply temperatures is also to prevent heating overuse by only setting it to what is needed
for thermal comfort.
In the case of the second substation, however, the calculated curve is slightly above the
new curve from the building operators, by about 1.5°C. Furthermore, for this substation,
the new curve has remained constant since the change, suggesting that it has been suf­
ficient to meet users’ needs. The fact that the calculated curve is slightly higher could
indicate more room for improvement, or it could also mean that the building operators
reduced the temperature too much. However, their closeness implies that the curve cal­
culated with this methodology is sufficient for providing heat to the building and could be
utilized in this context.
Finally, it is worth noting that the calculated optimal curves appear to follow a linear trend
1. They also seem to align with the slopes of the curves actually employed in the building,
suggesting that the method successfully predicts the decrease in heat demand as out­
door temperatures rise. Yet, for substation 1, the building operators employ a curve with
a break­point at 5°C, and setting the supply temperature to be at 20°C for an outdoor tem­
perature of 20°C. This allows for the supply temperatures to decrease more rapidly when
outdoor temperatures rise, during periods when building heat losses can be more readily
offset by other factors such as internal or solar gains. Therefore, it might be interesting to
apply a similar approach to the newly calculated curve, and to increase the slope after a
certain break­point.
1Not strictly linear according to equation 4.4, but can be approximated to it within this interval
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
47
==PAGE:56==
5.4.2
Building 201
For building 201, the improvement is less obvious. Firstly, for the first substation, the
calculated curve falls between the building operators’ curves for each heating season.
Indeed, at an outdoor temperature of 0°C, the calculated supply temperature is 56.5°C,
which corresponds approximately to a 3°C difference from both the above and below
curves. The method has thus successfully lowered the supply temperatures, but it ap­
pears that further reductions might have been possible. However, this substation also
represents the one with the most noticeable difference in energy consumption from one
year to the next, as seen Figure 5.5. Therefore, it is possible that the building operators
have decreased the supply temperature too much, having a significant impact on comfort.
Alternatively, the initial energy consumption might have been too high, resulting in a clear
overestimation in the prediction of energy demand used for calculating this curve.
Figure 5.34: Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B201 sub­
station 1
Figure 5.35: Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B201 sub­
station 2
For the second substation, it is evident that the WCC has not changed from one year to
the next. Moreover, the calculated optimal curve almost exactly matches the one actually
used in the building, with a supply temperature of 53.1°C at 0°C outdoor temperature,
which aligns with the real curve with a difference of less than 1°C. This curve is approx­
48
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:57==
imately at the same level as the one used for the 2022­2023 season for the other sub­
station, which may explain why it has not been changed. These results therefore seem
to suggest that there is little room for further improvement on this substation. This also
aligns with what is observable in the energy curves in Figure 5.5, where the alteration
in energy consumption is small compared to other buildings. However, a change is still
present, which supports the hypothesis that the change in energy consumption is not
solely attributable to the modification in the the WCC.
Finally, one last point to note, which is true for the substations of buildings 201 and 301,
is that when calculating the heat transfer coefficient K, as explained in 4.3, the method
used is not optimal because we cannot ensure that the thermostatic radiator valves are
fully open. Consequently, these coefficients may have been underestimated, reducing
the potential for improvement and explaining why the actual observed improvements are
better than those calculated using this method.
5.4.3
Building 301
A preliminary observation from the graphs of building 301 is that for the 2021­2022 heat­
ing season, there appears to be two distinct WCCs for each substation. It was initially
assumed that this observation was due to a night setback, which would operate by reduc­
ing supply temperatures during the night. However, these two curves do not correspond to
a day/night pattern. They also do not align with two distinct periods, and seem to alternate
even within the same day without a clear explanation. Moreover, for the first substation,
the second period lacks data compared to other substations, with many missing points.
Hence, the results from this substation are more challenging to trust.
Figure 5.36: Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B301 sub­
station 1
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.37: Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B301 sub­
station 2
Nevertheless, the newly calculated WCCs seem to have effectively reduced the supply
temperatures for these two substations. Indeed, referring only to the upper curve for the
2021­2022 period, the supply temperature decreased by 2°C for substation 1, and by 5°C
for the second one (at an outdoor temperature of 0°C). Moreover, the new curves appear
to match almost perfectly with those used by the building operators for the 2022­2023
period. We measure a difference of less than 1.5°C on average for both substations.
Furthermore, as seen in Figure 5.6, the energy curves for this building have changed little.
This could be due to the fact that temperatures were alternately controlled the previous
season, but it also shows that the indoor comfort has changed little or not at all after the
WCC change. This validates the method for this building, which succeeded in finding
lower supply temperatures without altering the indoor temperatures.
5.4.4
Comparison with LTDH thresholds
The goal of this study is to enable LTDH by reducing supply temperatures. Therefore,
it is interesting to compare the obtained values with the thresholds generally imposed in
the literature for LTDH. This threshold is typically 55°C, and sometimes slightly higher
up to 60°C in installations where it might be necessary for safely delivering DHW [6].
For each substation, the outdoor temperature below which this threshold is exceeded
has been noted. To put this value into perspective, the percentage of actual outdoor
temperature points measured by the DTU climate station during the 2021­2022 heating
season that fall below this temperature has also been calculated. Thus, it is possible
to determine if this threshold is exceeded for a significant part of the year or if it only
corresponds to a limited duration. It was also done for the 60°C threshold as a matter
of comparison. Finally, the average supply temperature that would have been circulated
with the optimal WCC on the heating season 2021­2022 was calculated, along with its
corresponding return temperature, computed from the minimal cooling values previously
estimated. The collected results are compiled in Table 5.4.
50
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:59==
Table 5.4: Key values for the optimal WCC of each substation
Substation
Tout so that
Ts < 55°C
% < 55°C
% < 60°C
Ts,avg (°C)
Tr,avg (°C)
B118, North
­12
100
100
40.6
39.4
B118, South
­9.2
100
100
43.5
38.6
B201, North
1.2
83
99
50.8
43.1
B201, South
­1.7
98
100
48.2
45.8
B301, North
5.4
36
85
56.2
52
B301, South
5.1
39
99
55.5
51.6
From this table, it can be seen that only building 118 completely respects these values with
the newly calculated curves. Indeed, below 9°C, which is an extremely rare temperature
in Denmark, the supply temperatures are below 55°C and would theoretically work with
4GDH. Moreover, 100% of the points measured during the winter of 2021­2022 would
have required a supply temperature below this limit. The average supply temperatures
for this substation are slightly above 40°C.
For building 201, the results are also very encouraging. The second substation performs
very well, with a supply temperature exceeding 55°C only 2% of the time, for temperatures
below ­1.7°C. The first, however, is slightly less performant, exceeding this value 17% of
the time, for all temperatures below 1.2°C. However, the threshold of 60°C is almost never
reached throughout the season. The average supply temperatures are of approximately
50°C for these substations.
Nevertheless, building 301 is a weaker performer, with an average already above 55°C
for both substations. This was predictable: it can be seen in Figures 5.36 and 5.37 that
the values previously used in this building were particularly high, and the improvement is
then not sufficient. Thus, the supply temperature exceeds 55°C as soon as the outdoor
temperature goes under 5°C, which occurs during more than 60% of the heating season.
For the threshold of 60°C, it is more encouraging, but it is still exceeded for 15% of the
season for substation 1. This kind of building is a major issue for LTDH. Indeed, being
part of the same DH network as the others, it will greatly limit the potential gains of the
entire network, as its minimum supply temperature will also be the one received by the
other buildings.
Lastly, for all the substations, the average return temperatures remain relatively high,
and significantly above the 25­30°C threshold required for LTDH [6]. However, this was
expected, due to the strategy used in this method, which seeks a minimal cooling of the
water. Lower return temperatures with higher cooling would actually be detrimental for
such a circuit composed of a single pipe. The best solution to reduce these temperatures
seems to be to reduce the supply temperature to the maximum, as it can be seen that it
is also building 118, which has the lowest supply temperatures, that has the lowest return
temperatures.
5.4.5
Sensitivity analysis
Finally, to gain an understanding of the influence of each parameter estimated from the
data on the final result, a sensitivity analysis was conducted. This is valuable because it
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
51
==PAGE:60==
may reveal if one parameter significantly impacts the final result more than others, sug­
gesting a need to refine the method for that specific parameter. This analysis was only
performed on the results from substation 2 of building 118, which produced relatively un­
derstandable and interesting results.
In this instance, the goal is to understand how variations in the parameters: heat demand
Q, heat transfer coefficient K, and maximum flow ˙V influence the output supply temper­
ature Ts. Initially, the results of the previously presented method for this substation are
taken as baseline values for the parameters (these baseline values are for an outdoor
temperature of 0°C). These are the initial values around which the parameters will vary.
Each variable is then modified while the other variables remain constant, and the result­
ing supply temperature is calculated each time, along with its variation from the baseline
value. In this analysis, a range of ­10% to +10% of the baseline values is used. The
results of this analysis are presented in Figure 5.38, where the x­axis represents the per­
centage change in the input value, and the y­axis depicts the resulting change in supply
temperature.
Figure 5.38: Sensitivity analysis of the influence of parameters on the Supply Temperature
From these results, it is logical to see that while an increase in flow or heat transfer coeffi­
cient K tends to decrease the supply temperatures, an increase in heat demand tends to
raise them. The heat demand Q and heat transfer coefficient K have significant impacts,
with a 10% change in their value from the baseline averaging a difference of 2°C in the
resulting supply temperatures. It appears that flow has less impact on the final value,
as the same change of 10% will only alter the supply temperature by 0.3 °C to 0.4°C.
Nonetheless, it is worth noting that the change in flow value between different substa­
tions can be substantial, as it was observed in the two substations of building 118 where
the flow increased by a factor of four. So, even if the sensitivity of the supply temperature
in regards to flow appears low, such an increase of 300% could lead to a decrease of
12°C in supply temperature, if the variation is assumed to remain linear. In conclusion,
52
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:61==
all three parameters have a significant impact on the method’s output. However, for a
more thorough understanding, it could be useful to perform the same analysis on other
substations, and to widen the range of variation.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
53
==PAGE:62==
6
Discussion
The results have already been analyzed and critiqued individually in the previous chapter.
The aim of this section is thus to provide a brief reflection on the method as a whole, and
to present its limitations and the points that could be developed in future work.
6.1
Reflection
The operating context of the buildings, with the change in temperatures between the last
two heating seasons, was a great opportunity to evaluate the performance of the model.
The results are good, and the model accurately generated lower temperatures, which do
not seem incoherent and appear achievable for real building operation. These results will
thus provide valuable feedback for DTU’s building operators, who can use this information
to guide future building controls. Moreover, the method is potentially reproducible, at least
in part. The calculation of the heat transfer coefficient K in this manner is novel, and could
likely be implemented by building operators for use in other buildings.
However, it is also somehow difficult to predict what effects such a change in tempera­
ture control will have, for instance on energy consumption and thermal comfort. Indeed,
the parameters significantly influence one another: for instance, a decrease in the supply
temperature can potentially lead to a drop in energy. But this could mean that the energy
then needs to be recalculated based on this new temperature, and so on iteratively. This
would however require real implementation of these curves and can not be computed,
as the impact of supply temperature reduction on energy is difficult to quantify. Further­
more, the complexity of the models, in addition to the occasional incomprehensibility of
measured values that seem incoherent, or whose context is unknown, often makes the
interpretation of the results difficult. While quantitative values were calculated whenever
possible, it is often hard to link causes with effects, and many of the conclusions drawn in
this report are based on assumptions. This intricate interplay of parameters underscores
the need for a holistic understanding and careful interpretation of the model’s output.
6.2
Limitations and future work perspectives
The methodology and results of this study, while promising, are thus subject to several
limitations:
1. Experimental validation: The weather compensation curves calculated in this study
have not been experimentally tested. Therefore, it is challenging to assert if these
curves are too high or too low, and to quantify their impact on energy consumption
and thermal comfort. Future work should include experimental validation to ensure
the accuracy of these curves. This is also the case for the estimation of the heat
transfer coefficient K. Even if a calculation procedure, involving setting all the ther­
mostats to their maximal value, was described, this method has not been directly
implemented on a building, and was only tested through existing data.
2. Local temperature needs: The study considers the building as a whole and does
not account for local temperature needs. This applies to both energy prediction and
heat transfer coefficient calculation. As such, while the computed minimal temper­
ature might be enough if we consider the building as a single room with a large
radiator, it could potentially be too low to ensure adequate heating in all rooms, par­
ticularly those in more thermally challenging conditions. One way to address this
54
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:63==
issue could be to multiply the heat demand by a safety factor accounting for critical
rooms. These critical rooms might be identified as those located furthest from the
space heating substation, and those with the largest external wall area, constituting
the most ”thermally vulnerable” rooms in the building. By accounting for these more
demanding scenarios, the model could potentially offer a more nuanced output, en­
hancing its utility in real­world building operation.
3. Bias in prediction from existing data: The prediction heat demand and other
parameters is based on historical data, which may not correspond to optimal building
use. This might lead for instance to an overestimation of heat demand. This point
highlights the fact that existing faults in the system must be fixed before optimizing
the supply temperatures, in order to reduce the potential for estimation based on
skewed or inaccurate data.
4. Overestimation of heat demand: The heat demand is mostly overestimated as
the curve representing it is the upper limit of the confidence interval. It could be
argued that this is unnecessary and that the instances where the heat is insufficient
may indicate sub­optimal building use, such as windows being left open or incorrect
thermostat settings.
5. System specificity: The study is specific to a one­string system directly connected
to the district heating network. The methodology would need to be adapted for
different systems. For instance, in a two­string system, low cooling could pose a
problem for return temperature, and the high­flow strategy should be questioned.
6. Unpredictable heat loads: The buildings studied have specific heat loads that can
be affected by various factors such as the presence of laboratories and fluctuating
occupancy. Therefore, even though this study attempts to draw conclusions from
the data, the unpredictability of these factors makes it challenging to ensure the
correctness of the interpretations. It would be worthwhile to apply this method on
buildings with more consistent data sources, such as multi­residential dwellings.
In these structures, data fluctuation tends to be minimized because the building
usage remains relatively constant. Furthermore, it could allow to study optimization
strategies for a broader range of building types.
7. Potential variability and uncertainty in estimates: The maximum flow and heat­
ing transfer coefficient used in this study might be lower than the actual maximum
that the building could provide, as we only take the maximum from the data. This
suggests that there might be even more potential for improvement. On the other
hand, it is also possible that the maximum values derived from the data are not actu­
ally achievable, or not sustainable on the long­term, implying that the estimates thus
made are erroneous. In general, numerous decisions have been made through­
out this analysis, some leaning towards conservatism, others less so. Future work
could involve determining a confidence interval for the supply temperature, calcu­
lated based on a range from the less conservative choices to the more conservative
ones. This would provide a measure of the uncertainty associated with these de­
cisions and provide a more nuanced understanding of their potential impact on the
final results.
These limitations highlight areas for further research and potential improvements to the
methodology. Despite these limitations, the study provides valuable insights into the op­
timal control of space heating using existing data sources.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusion
In order to allow greener energy production solutions within district heating fuel mix, it is
crucial to lower the operating temperatures of existing district heating systems, especially
their supply temperatures. This necessitates the reduction of temperatures used for space
heating within buildings as a preliminary step. The primary objective of this thesis was
therefore to optimize these temperatures, calculating the minimal supply temperature that
should be delivered to the buildings from the district heating network, while still ensuring
occupant comfort.
This optimization was conducted on data from 3 educational buildings located at DTU Lyn­
gby campus. These buildings, mostly composed of office spaces and constructed in the
1960s and 70s, are equipped with identical heating systems. This system is composed
of two heating substations, directly connected to the district heating network, which dis­
tribute hot water to fine tube convectors located within the rooms via a one­string system.
While the study was conducted on these specific buildings, the goal was also to develop
a model than could be reproducible on other buildings.
The data of these buildings comes in particularly interesting context, as in response to the
ongoing energy crisis, building operators were pushed to modify the weather compensa­
tion curves of the substations, controlling the supply temperature as a function of outdoor
temperature. An initial data analysis indeed showed that the energy­weighted average
supply temperatures were effectively reduced by 2­3°C for some substations between
the winters of 2021­2022 and 2022­2023.
Further insight on this operation change was gathered through analysis of energy as a
function of outdoor temperature curves. These displayed a clear drop of 2 to 14 kW
depending on the substation, suggesting that the new weather compensation curve did
introduce a reduce in energy consumption. However, the question of comfort remains,
as a decrease in energy consumption likely implies lower indoor temperatures as well.
Nevertheless, some reserves were made on these statements, as other sources such as
a very high electrical consumption leading to internal gains or an important reduction of
distribution heat losses, could have also influenced energy values.
A linear regression was then performed on these energy curves, in order to predict the
heat demand as a function of outdoor temperature, necessary to calculate the optimal
cooling. A confidence margin was added to the predicted values in order to ensure that
the heat load would be sufficient to heat the building in any scenario. This prediction gave
fairly good results, as visual inspection showed that most of the points were effectively
below the trend­line. Moreover, another established method employing Heating Degree
Days proved to yield similar results.
Following this, the system­specific heat transfer coefficient was calculated from the avail­
able data. However, the resulting value was fluctuating in time, probably due to variation
in radiator usage in the buildings. In consequence, it was proposed that, for an accurate
calculation of this parameter in future methodologies, the data should be derived from a
specific time interval during which all building thermostats are set to a level of 3 or to their
maximal value, in order to ensure that each radiator is working a its maximum capacity.
The method still managed to obtain values ranging from 64 to 85% of the design values.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
57
==PAGE:66==
The maximal flow that could be circulated through the 1­string system was also a nec­
essary input to calculate the minimal cooling of the water necessary to provide the heat
demand. The flows were calculated for winter days, during which they were high and
consistent. There was a significant discrepancy between the 6 substations, with flows
ranging from 1.3 to 7.6 L/s. However, it remains unclear whether higher flows could be
achieved by adjusting the pump settings.
Finally, the optimal weather compensation curves were plotted, and compared to the ac­
tual weather compensation curves used in the buildings. The plotted curves consistently
indicated an improvement over the old curve from Winter 2021­2022 and were slightly
higher or equal to the new curves applied during the last heating season.
This sug­
gests that the method was successful in optimizing the supply temperatures based on
this dataset. However, it might also have impacted the thermal comfort as the energy
consumption was reduced when using the new curves. Consequently, there appears to
be little room for further improvement, as it seems the buildings have reached their maxi­
mum capacity.
The new supply temperature values derived from this method meet the requirements for
low­temperature district heating for one building, with values under 55°C for the build­
ing’s entire operation during winter. For a second building, this requirement is met 83%
of the time. Although further improvement might be necessary, the results are promising,
demonstrating that LTDH can be achieved even in older buildings like these. Neverthe­
less, a third building still does not meet the requirements after optimization, with only 36%
of operation during winter being below 55°C. This building might require refurbishment
before successfully using lower temperatures.
In conclusion, the method described in this report successfully managed to reduce the
supply temperatures from the target buildings. The strategy to adopt in this case is a
high­flow/low­cooling strategy, with continuous heating of the building at low supply tem­
peratures. However, assessing the impact of such measures on thermal comfort and
energy consumption is challenging without proper physical testing of the new settings.
58
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
European Environment Agency. “Decarbonising heating and cooling : a climate im­
perative.” In: (2022). ISSN: 2467­3196 ­. DOI: 10.2800/515288.
[2]
IEA Paris. IEA (2022), Heating. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/heating.
[3]
IEA Paris. IEA (2022), District Heating. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/district-
heating.
[4]
European Commission et al. District heating and cooling in the European Union :
overview of markets and regulatory frameworks under the revised Renewable En­
ergy Directive. Publications Office of the European Union, 2022. DOI: doi/10.2833/
962525.
[5]
Henrik Lund et al. “4th Generation District Heating (4GDH): Integrating smart ther­
mal grids into future sustainable energy systems”. In: Energy 68 (Apr. 2014), pp. 1–
11. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENERGY.2014.02.089.
[6]
Dorte Skaarup Østergaard et al. “Low­temperature operation of heating systems to
enable 4th generation district heating: A review”. In: Energy 248 (June 2022). ISSN:
03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2022.123529.
[7]
Kristina Lygnerud and Sven Werner. IEA DHC Annex TS2 Final Report Implemen­
tation of Low­Temperature District Heating Systems. 2021.
[8]
Henrik Lund et al. “The status of 4th generation district heating: Research and re­
sults”. In: Energy 164 (Dec. 2018), pp. 147–159. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: 10.1016/
J.ENERGY.2018.08.206.
[9]
“Perspectives on fourth and fifth generation district heating”. In: Energy 227 (July
2021). ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2021.120520.
[10]
Gesche Margarethe Huebner, Justine Cooper, and Keith Jones. “Domestic energy
consumption ­ What role do comfort, habit, and knowledge about the heating system
play?” In: Energy and Buildings 66 (2013), pp. 626–636. ISSN: 03787788. DOI:
10.1016/J.ENBUILD.2013.07.043.
[11]
Dorte Skaarup Østergaard and Svend Svendsen. “Are typical radiators over­dimensioned?
An analysis of radiator dimensions in 1645 Danish houses”. In: Energy and Build­
ings 178 (Nov. 2018), pp. 206–215. ISSN: 0378­7788. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENBUILD.
2018.08.035.
[12]
Theofanis Benakopoulos et al. “Energy and cost savings with continuous low tem­
perature heating versus intermittent heating of an office building with district heat­
ing”. In: Energy 252 (Aug. 2022). ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2022.
124071.
[13]
Michele Tunzi et al. “Demand side digitalisation: A methodology using heat cost al­
locators and energy meters to secure low­temperature operations in existing build­
ings connected to district heating networks”. In: Energy 264 (Feb. 2023). ISSN:
03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2022.126272.
[14]
Henrik Gadd and Sven Werner. “Achieving low return temperatures from district
heating substations”. In: Applied Energy 136 (Dec. 2014), pp. 59–67. ISSN: 03062619.
DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.09.022.
[15]
Sara Mansson et al. “Automated statistical methods for fault detection in district
heating customer installations”. In: Energies 12 (1 Jan. 2019). ISSN: 19961073.
DOI: 10.3390/en12010113.
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
59
==PAGE:68==
[16]
Henrik Gadd and Sven Werner. “Heat load patterns in district heating substations”.
In: Applied Energy 108 (2013), pp. 176–183. ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.
apenergy.2013.02.062.
[17]
Puning Xue et al. “Fault detection and operation optimization in district heating sub­
stations based on data mining techniques”. In: Applied Energy 205 (Nov. 2017),
pp. 926–940. ISSN: 0306­2619. DOI: 10.1016/J.APENERGY.2017.08.035.
[18]
Zeyu Wang and Ravi S. Srinivasan. “A review of artificial intelligence based building
energy prediction with a focus on ensemble prediction models”. In: Proceedings ­
Winter Simulation Conference 2016­February (Feb. 2016), pp. 3438–3448. ISSN:
08917736. DOI: 10.1109/WSC.2015.7408504.
[19]
Hantao Wang et al. “Identifying the correlation between ambient temperature and
gas consumption in a local energy system”. In: CSEE Journal of Power and Energy
Systems 4.4 (2018), pp. 479–486. DOI: 10.17775/CSEEJPES.2017.00260.
[20]
Aurélie Foucquier et al. “State of the art in building modelling and energy perfor­
mances prediction: A review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 23
(July 2013), pp. 272–288. ISSN: 1364­0321. DOI: 10.1016/J.RSER.2013.03.004.
[21]
Hai Xiang Zhao and Frédéric Magoulès. “A review on the prediction of building en­
ergy consumption”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 16 (6 Aug.
2012), pp. 3586–3592. ISSN: 1364­0321. DOI: 10.1016/J.RSER.2012.02.049.
[22]
“Energikrise: Offentlige bygninger skal skrue ned for varmen og spare på belysnin­
gen”. In: ING (Sept. 2022). URL: https : / / ing . dk / artikel / energikrise - offentlige -
bygninger-skal-skrue-ned-varmen-og-spare-paa-belysningen.
[23]
Michele Tunzi et al. “Method to investigate and plan the application of low temper­
ature district heating to existing hydraulic radiator systems in existing buildings”. In:
Energy 113 (Oct. 2016), pp. 413–421. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENERGY.
2016.07.033. URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/method-to-investigate-and-
plan-the-application-of-low-temperature.
[24]
Morten Mørup Tue Herlau Mikkel N Schmidt. Introduction to Machine Learning and
Data Mining. 2022.
[25]
Danfoss. Thermostatic sensors type RA 5060 data sheet. URL: https : / / assets .
danfoss.com/documents/108076/AI025186450962en-010201.pdf.
[26]
Theofanis Benakopoulos et al. “Improved Control of Radiator Heating Systems with
Thermostatic Radiator Valves without Pre­Setting Function”. In: Energies 2019, Vol.
12, Page 3215 12 (17 Aug. 2019), p. 3215. ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
EN12173215. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/12/17/3215/htm%20https:
//www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/12/17/3215.
[27]
“Estimating regression models with unknown break­points”. In: Statistics in Medicine
22 (19 Oct. 2003), pp. 3055–3071. ISSN: 1097­0258. DOI: 10.1002/SIM.1545. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/sim.1545%20https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sim.1545%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.
1002/sim.1545.
[28]
Claus Nielsen. “University Director: Important to save energy”. In: DTU Newsletter
(2023). URL: https://akm.email.dtu.dk/7HJE-2O5F-8B71FAC2338B9F83U1MY47ED31E4C8054BB11/
cr.aspx.
[29]
Brenner. SPIRAL RA1­W Design sheet. URL: https://brenner.dk/img/pdf/RA1v.pdf.
60
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:69==
List of Figures
1.1
Final energy uses across EU households in 2020 Source: European Envi­
ronment Agency[1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
EU­27 District heating supply fuel mix in 2018 Source: European Commis­
sion 2022 [4]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.1
Layout for a 1­string heating system with direct connection to DH network
Inspired from reference [6]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.1
Prediction of heat demand as a function of outdoor temperature (Building
201 ­ Substation 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Distribution of the calculated heat transfer coefficient K for the first substa­
tion of building 118, with a chosen K value of 617 W/°Cn
. . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Distribution of K values for 2 different calculation periods, with normal and
high TRV settings, Building 118, Substation 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Evolution of K with the chosen indoor temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Secondary side flow, ordered by descending order (winter months only)
(B118 substation 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Secondary side flow on 27­12­2020, with a mean value of 1.82 l/s (B118
substation 2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.7
Cooling of the DH water as a function of outdoor temperature, Building 118,
substation 1 (North)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.1
Hourly energy use in kWh as a function of time, Building 118
. . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Hourly energy use in kWh as a function of time, Building 201
. . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Hourly energy use in kWh as a function of time, Building 301
. . . . . . . . 28
5.4
Substation energy consumption as a function of outdoor air temperature,
colored by heating season, Building 118 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.5
Substation energy consumption as a function of outdoor air temperature,
colored by heating season, Building 201 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.6
Substation energy consumption as a function of outdoor air temperature,
colored by heating season, Building 301 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.7
Building 118 electrical energy consumption as a function of time
. . . . . . 32
5.8
Building 201 electrical energy consumption as a function of time
. . . . . . 32
5.9
Result of the linear regression, B118, Substation 1: Q = 49−2.1·Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.84 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.10 Result of the linear regression, B118, Substation 2: Q = 47−1.6·Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.63 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.11 Result of the linear regression, B201, Substation 1: Q = 54−2.3·Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.91 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.12 Result of the linear regression, B201, Substation 2: Q = 46−1.9·Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.58 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.13 Result of the linear regression, B301, Substation 1: Q = 52−1.7·Tout (kW),
R2 = 0.72 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.14 Result of the linear regression, B301, Substation 2: Q = 51 −0.93 · Tout
(kW), R2 = 0.47 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.15 Comparison of the two heat demand prediction methods, Building 118 . . . 37
5.16 Heat transfer coefficient K evolution with time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
61
==PAGE:70==
5.17 Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 1 (North),
Building 118 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.18 Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 2 (South),
Building 118 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.19 Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 1 (North),
Building 201 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.20 Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 2 (South),
Building 201 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.21 Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 1 (North),
Building 301 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.22 Distribution of K values for each calculation period at Substation 2 (South),
Building 301 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.23 Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 1, B118
on 18­02­2023, mean = 7.65 L/s, cv = 0.09 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.24 Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 2, B118
on 27­12­2020, mean = 1.82 L/s, cv = 0.03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.25 Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 1, B201
on 23­01­2023, mean = 1.31 L/s, cv = 0.04 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.26 Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 2, B201
on 08­11­2022, mean = 3.57 L/s, cv = 0.09
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.27 Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 1, B301
on 23­12­2021, mean = 2.57 L/s, cv = 0.02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.28 Substation water flow for day with highest regular flow at Substation 2, B301
on 01­01­2023, mean = 2.84 L/s, cv = 0.05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.29 Minimal DH water cooling at each outdoor temperature, Building 118 . . . . 44
5.30 Minimal DH water cooling at each outdoor temperature, Building 201 . . . . 44
5.31 Minimal DH water cooling at each outdoor temperature, Building 301 . . . . 45
5.32 Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B118 sub­
station 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.33 Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B118 sub­
station 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.34 Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B201 sub­
station 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.35 Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B201 sub­
station 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.36 Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B301 sub­
station 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.37 Optimal weather compensation curve compared to actual data, B301 sub­
station 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.38 Sensitivity analysis of the influence of parameters on the Supply Temperature 52
62
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
==PAGE:71==
List of Tables
3.1
Building Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Available DH substation data, primary side
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Available DH substation data, secondary side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Key values for each substation, Primary side
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5
Key values for each substation, Secondary side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.1
K values for each substation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.2
Comparison of K values between method and design . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Final chosen flow values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.4
Key values for the optimal WCC of each substation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Optimal control of space heating using existing data sources
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
