==PAGE:1==
Collaboration and conflict in online communi-
ties
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
Master Thesis
July, 2023
By
Bartłomiej Jan Granat
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk/english
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This M.Sc. thesis has been prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in the period of January
to July 2023. It corresponds to 30 ECTS credits and it was part of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in HumanCentered Artificial Intelligence. The project was
supervised by Sune Lehmann (Associate Professor, DTU Compute) and was conducted
in Copenhagen, Denmark
Bartłomiej Jan Granat - s213043
Signature
Date
ii
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
14.07.2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With the increasing amount of data collected on people a lot of research in recent years
has been focused on creating valuable insights from large-scale analyses of anonymized
data. A particular case is large social platforms with little or no restrictions on content
creation and interactions between their users like Wikipedia, Reddit or Q&A platforms.
Analysing data from these platforms is a challenging task due to high volumes of data
and because they are complex systems, meaning systems that are difficult to model as
they are comprised of a large number of interdependent elements.
In the thesis, we focus on a unique social experiment called ”r/place” conducted on the
Reddit platform in 2017 and 2022. This experiment allowed users to collaboratively edit a
canvas by repainting pixels, resulting in both creative artwork and conflicts. The dataset
from the experiment provides an excellent case study for analyzing user behaviour. Pre-
vious research on r/place focused on single-method analyses, highlighting the need for a
comprehensive multi-method approach.
We propose three methods for defining and comparing collaborations and conflicts within
the r/place data. We identify potential conflicts through single-pixel analysis by utiliz-
ing pixel conflict score (PCS) and extend the method by analyzing pixel neighbourhoods
and calculating region conflict score (RCS). We further propose a dynamics-capturing
approach to merging the conflict areas. Additionally, we try to capture the global depen-
dencies in the data by utilising a graph-based approach.
In the second stage of the research, the thesis connects the pixel placement data and
conflicts with the comments on the Reddit platform. It analyzes the text of users involved
in the interest areas, examines word clouds to identify common words, and applies sen-
timent analysis to reveal similarities among different groups of users.
The thesis presents the available datasets, explains the methods employed, and show-
cases the results through visualisations and analyses. It discusses the strengths and
limitations of the methods used and concludes by suggesting potential areas for further
research.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Bartłomiej Jan Granat, MSc Student, DTU Compute
Author of the thesis
Sune Lehmann, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Main supervisor
Louis Boucherie, PhD Student, DTU Compute
Technical supervisor
iv
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Datasets
5
2.1
r/place data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Reddit comments and submissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Pixel user data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Canvas images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
r/place Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Large data handling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.7
Colours mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methods and results
9
3.1
Single pixel analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Conflict area detection and merging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Graph-based communites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Text analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.5
Multi-method analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.6
Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Discussion
33
5
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
A Colour mapping
39
B Atlas tool
40
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the increasing amount of data collected on people a lot of research in recent years
has been focused on creating valuable insights from large-scale analyses of anonymized
data [1]. A particular case is large social platforms with little or no restrictions on content
creation and interactions between their users like Wikipedia, Reddit or Q&A platforms.
Analysing data from these platforms is a challenging task due to high volumes of data
and because they are complex systems, meaning systems that are difficult to model as
they are comprised of a large number of interdependent elements [2].
Identifying conflicts and collaborations between users on these platforms is a particu-
larly interesting task. This often demand to understand user behaviour to prevent future
conflicts or enhance cooperation. A group of researchers takes a closer look at gate-
keeping on Wikipedia [3]. They focus on determining which social factors explain the
deletion of text on the platform and find dependencies between text deletion and factors
like the editor’s standing in the community, attribution to content-related groups, and past
interactions. A group of researchers from Stanford University studied intercommunity in-
teractions on the Reddit platform [4]. They first defined conflicts between communities
by analysing content sentiment and created a novel model to prevent future conflicts.
Another important aspect is taking a closer look at individual users. People are also inter-
ested in the detection of, so-called, trolls, and users that have a particular impact or are
the main reason for unusual events occurring on the platform. In 2018 a specific dataset
on Russian troll tweets became popular that was a result of suspicion that the Russian
government was impacting in this way the U.S. presidential elections in 2016. Research
related to this dataset involved both the classification of troll and non-troll accounts using
a machine learning approach [5], and classification of different types of trolls by analysing
their Twitter posts [6].
The complex structure of real-world data makes it particularly hard to study conflicts and
collaborations in social setups. An interesting case of a social system with almost no
restrictions and a simple structure is an experiment called ”r/place” introduced on the
Reddit platform in 2017 and 2022. [7]. Over the course of a few days, users were allowed
to edit a canvas of first 1000 by 1000 pixels, and then 2000 by 2000 pixels. They could
choose one pixel and repaint it to one of the limited, given colors. The only restriction
was that no user could edit a pixel more often than every 5 to 20 minutes depending on
the stage of the experiment. This resulted in multiple communities collaborating to create
beautiful artwork, flags, logos, and other things. However, the limited space also resulted
in conflicts of different types. The experiment in 2022 resulted in over 160 million pixel
edits by over 10 million unique users over 4 days and the data containing every user action
was published by Reddit making it a perfect case to analyse. The official final state of the
canvas before the users were only allowed to put white pixels and the experiment was
closed can be seen in Figure 1.1
In recent years multiple research groups used r/place data to analyse users’ behaviour.
The base for multiple further analyses was Atlas [8] where a large number of Reddit users
manually labelled artworks on the canvas marking their position, and description, and of-
ten participating Reddit communities. In [9] they look into collaborative patterns in the
r/place data by analysing latent representations of each user taking into account both
their direct actions and actions happening in close proximity to their areas of interest.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: The official final state of the r/place 2000 by 2000 pixels canvas at the end of
the experiment. Source: https://placedata.reddit.com/data/final_place_4x.png
Furthermore, they propose a predictive method to determine the future state of the draw-
ing canvas and provide an interpretable representation of the social structure. In the work
being the main inspiration for this thesis, the authors define exact areas of conflict by us-
ing their own ”pixel conflict score (PCS)” formula and associate it with subreddits leading
to analysis of text related to people engaging in conflicts [4]. Furthermore, they calculate
the odds of specific communities winning a conflict leading to the conclusion that a larger
number of users gives higher chances of overtaking a specific area on the canvas. An-
other article [10] performs a case study focusing on a single art creation on the canvas,
which is the replica of the Mona Lisa painting. They identify visual artefacts coming from
the image itself, and social artefacts related to content posted on the Reddit platform.
The conclusion based on the case study is that social interactions in online communities
can be examined as a dialectic process, and compared metaphorically to the biological
evolution processes.
Large-scale social data analysis is still actively researched and growing in popularity with
the growth of social media [11]. Thus, complex research in the area of collaboration
patterns and user characteristics is in high demand. As most of the previous contributions
related to r/place are focused on a single-method analysis there is a large potential in using
the r/place data to first define and compare multiple methods of collaboration and conflict
definition, and further connect the identified user interactions and dependencies with the
content on the Reddit platform to outline their characteristics. An exhaustive multi-method
analysis is still missing in the field. The goal of this thesis is to utilize a specific case of
an isolated social experiment that happened on the Reddit platform. Its unique properties
allow us to analyse real-user behaviour in terms of collaboration making ground for further
research on more complex platforms like Wikipedia or Q&A platforms. Furthermore, the
aspect of r/place being an art piece allows us to verify different approaches to the topic
visually. This gives an easy way to prove the added value of the proposed research.
2
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:11==
First, we analyse single pixels by looking at activity related to them, and the colours that
were used on them through time. We use the score definition of pixel conflict score (PCS)
and create a new use case for its value [12]. Then, we extend the pixel conflict score (PCS)
methodology and take into account the neighbourhood of the pixel in the calculation of
the region conflict score (RCS). We use a threshold for RCS values to detect potential
pixels of interest. As the score is being calculated in time windows we develop a novel
method for merging conflict areas based on their size and intersection between areas in
consecutive periods. Further to detect global dependencies between the users we define
a bipartite graph where one group of nodes is representing pixel-colour pairs and the other
group represents users. Edges are created between users and each node that refers to
a specific node being coloured by them using a specific colour. We apply the stochastic
block model which is a generative process based on the notion of groups of nodes to
divide the graph into communities [13]. Therefore we can highlight groups of users that
performed similar actions without any restriction on the specific area of the canvas that
was present in the previous two methods. We then look into connecting.
In the second stage of the thesis, we connect pixel placement data and detected conflicts
with the data containing comments and submissions on the Reddit platform. We look at
the users that were doing edits to the interest areas and analyze their text individually
and by subreddits they were part of. First, we utilize wordcloud package in python [14] to
create word clouds for the content giving a general overview of the most common words
used. Then, we use a compound score of VADER rule-based model for general sentiment
analysis [15] to further show similarities between the users performing certain actions.
As the last step, we combine the proposed method into a single multi-method framework
for analysing potential conflict areas and present analysis generating advanced insights
and conclusions.
This thesis is divided into five chapters: Chapter 2 presents the main datasets of r/place
official data, r/place Atlas data, and Reddit dataset of comments and submissions as well
as several smaller datasets used in the study, Chapter 3 explains the specific methods
used across the thesis and presents their results for interest areas detection using single
pixel, pixel neighbourhood, global canvas analyses followed by word clouds and senti-
ment analyses of text from the Reddit platform and a multi-method analysis of potential
conflicts, Chapter 4 contains the discussion around the results and methods used consid-
ering their pros and cons, Chapter 5 concludes the work also proposing areas for further
research.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:13==
2
Datasets
This chapter focuses on the datasets utilized in this study. They play a fundamental role
in reaching the research objectives stated in Chapter 1. Selection and preprocessing are
essential to create valuable insights across several datasets and reach desired results.
In this chapter, we present and overview of all the datasets used during the study. Ad-
ditionally, we described how we handled large datasets, and how we reduced number of
original pixel colours to reduce the noise in the data.
As discussed in Chapter 1 the key research objectives of this study revolve around finding
the most important areas on the r/place canvas and connecting the detected areas with
their corresponding editors. In the second step we connect the editors to their content
posted on the Reddit platform and analyze it’s wordings and sentiment. To reach the goals
we use three main datasets: r/place data of all the pixel placements, r/place raw data with
pixel placements and usernames, and Reddit comments and submissions dataset.
2.1
r/place data
The main dataset used in the study is r/place pixel placement data. The developers shared
files in a csv (Comma-Separated Values) format with the following columns:
• Timestamp - the UTC time of the tile placement
• User_id - a hashed identifier of each user
• Pixel_color - a joined value for the pixel coordinate and the edit colour
The dataset consists of over 160 million placements from over 10 million users with 32 dif-
ferent colours used to edit the pixels. The preprocessing and compression of this dataset
were described in detail in Section 2.6 of this chapter.
2.2
Reddit comments and submissions
Data allowing us to analyze content posted on the Reddit platform by users is historic data
from Pushshift API. The files are shared for each month in zst (Zstandard compressed file)
files. We use the comments for the period of our conflict analyses. The data from 17:00
on the 1st of April until 16:00 on the 2nd of April consists of almost 7 million comments.
We are using the following fields from the data:
• author - the username of the comment author
• author_fullname - the unique identifier associated with the comment author’s ac-
count
• created_utc - the timestamp of the comment’s creation.
• body - the actual content of the comment.
• subreddit - the name of the subreddit where the comment was posted.
• subreddit_id - the unique identifier associated with the subreddit where the com-
ment was posted.
• parent_id - the unique identifier of the parent comment or post to which the current
comment is a reply.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
5
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Pixel user data
The r/place 2022 details raw data comprises pixel author information obtained from the
GraphQL action ”r/replace:get_tile_history” (PixelMessageData) and was available through
Internet Archive [16]. The dataset was used to connect pixel edits with the actual users
that performed the actions. It was not possible to use only the initial dataset described
in 2.1. It could not be used instead of the before mentioned dataset as it did not have
information about the colours used to edit the pixels. The data itself is stream data in
the form of JSON arrays for each timestamp. The timestamp is representing when the
request response was received, not when the action actually happened on the canvas.
2.4
Canvas images
The CanvasPNG dataset is a part of r/place raw data dump available in Internet Archive
[16]. This dataset includes images of canvas states through time. The images consist
of both differential frames and full frames, providing a comprehensive representation of
the canvas content. The dataset offers timestamps obtained from the WebSocket’s cur-
rentTimestamp property, which correspond to the timestamps embedded in the filenames
of the images. The images are encoded in base64-encoded PNG format. We use this
data to visualise the relation between detected interest areas and actual artworks on the
canvas.
2.5
r/place Atlas
The r/place Atlas is a web tool developed to interactively explore the canvas through time.
It contains manually labelled areas for the majority of the artworks with their descriptions
and participating Reddit communities [8]. In this study, the tool was used to visually verify
the results of different proposed methods. Additionally, it was used to draw conclusions
and to find the most interesting time windows to use in the examples. The Atlas tool
screenshot can be seen in Appendix B
2.6
Large data handling
The pixel placement dataset was shared as a single CSV file that was 22GB after de-
compression. Additionally, it was not sorted by timestamp and had some of the pixel
placements duplicated. As that size exceeded standard personal computer memory we
cleaned the data and saved it into Parquet file format following an approach of Medium
article authors [17]. Parquet is a column-oriented data file format optimized for compres-
sion which was our main goal [18]. To further reduce the size of the file and speed up
processing we followed all the steps from the article which contained:
• Mapping long string user ids to numeric values
• Mapping hex colour to an integer value
• Splitting coordinate value into separate integer columns
• Sorting the data based on the timestamp
Cleaning the data and saving it as a parquet file resulted in a size reduction to just 1.5GB
from the initial 22GB.
The Reddit comments dataset for April was a 24 GB file in the ZST compressed format.
As the period of our study was 23 hours within the first two days of April we did not perform
preprocessing of the dataset. The data was not used as a single table at any point in the
study so we were only required to load a subset of those comments based on the users
detected as potential conflict or collaboration participants.
6
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:15==
The r/place raw data was downloaded in multiple chunks of various sizes. It was stream
data saved as arrays of dictionaries compressed using LZMA algorithm. Similarly to the
previous dataset we loaded only pixel placements that were part of our interest area and
stored in memory only small chunks of the data. We were cleaning the data during the
reading process.
2.7
Colours mapping
Another issue occurring in the data turned out to be a number of colours that had a small
representation in the overall edits compared to other colours as shown in Figure 2.1. We
decided to manually map similar colours in a way that none of them was used less than
1% of the time. This resulted in new colours distribution as seen in Figure 2.1. The exact
mapping can be found in Appendix A.
Figure 2.1: Piecharts of colours present in the r/place pixel placements dataset before
and after the mapping performed to reduce the number of colours in the data.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:17==
3
Methods and results
The main objective of this study is to define areas on the r/place canvas where potential
conflicts or collaborations happened during the experiment. In the second step, the goal is
to identify content on the Reddit platform related to those areas and analyze their wording
and sentiment.
We achieved the objectives stated above by analysing the pixel placements on three
different levels. The first level was single-pixel analysis where we find specific pixels that
are characterized by particularly large activity in a given time window. The second level
was pixel neighbourhood analysis where we calculated a conflict score for each pixel in
a given time window taking into account the scores of their neighbouring pixels. The
third level was based on a bipartite graph of user interactions with pixels and a stochastic
block model for community detection that divided users into groups that could be spanning
globally over the whole canvas. As the next step, we used the Wordclouds method for
examining the content posted by the participants of detected conflicts and collaborations.
As the canvas of 2022 r/place was expanding by 1000 by 1000 pixels areas after each day
of the experiment we limited the study to the first 1000 by 1000 area before any expansions
and grouped similar pixel colours together to reduce the noise in the data. By making
those restrictions we anticipated the results to be consistent between time windows and
reproducible in similar use cases. To keep the analysis consistent and comparable we
define a time window of 1 hour for all of the used methods and propose a solution to merge
the areas between those time windows.
During the study, all of the code was written in Python programming language due to its
wide range of data processing and visualisation libraries [19].
In this chapter, we describe the tools used to preprocess the large datasets described
in Chapter 2, and explain in detail each of the methods used to detect interest areas on
the canvas. We also provide a detailed description of the text analysis methods used
in the study. For each method, we present example results and their advantages and
disadvantages compared to other methods. In the last part of the chapter we present an
approach to combining all of the used methods and showcase how we apply them to case
studies.
3.1
Single pixel analysis
The first method developed for detecting potential areas of interest on the canvas was
investigating single pixels based on the pixel placement data. We wanted to base the
importance of a pixel in a given time window on the number of edits and to give higher
weight to pixels that were often edited with the same colours through time.
We took inspiration from PCS (Pixel Conflict Score) calculation defined in existing re-
search [12]. The formula for calculating PCS was as follows: PCS = (1.5 ∗#swaps) +
(#non−swaps) where swaps were defined as an action of recolouring a pixel to its penul-
timate colour (e.g. white -> red ->white), and non-swaps are all other pixel edits. The
formula aligned with the assumptions made for the single-pixel analysis. Following the
calculation we sorted the results by the PCS value and visually analysed the pixels with
the highest scores within a given time window.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
9
==PAGE:18==
To showcase the results of single-pixel analysis using PCS values we present a list of
10 pixels with the highest scores across 3 different time windows in Table 3.1. The time
window value n represents the 1h hour window from the nth hour of the experiment to the
n + 1th hour of the experiment with the experiment start date on 1st of April 2022 12:00
(e.g. time window 5 represents the time range between 1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022
18:00). Looking at the pixel coordinates we can see high scores among corner pixels of
(0,0) and (999,999) across all time windows.
Time Window
5
12
17
x
y
PCS VALUE
859
766
1897.5
3306.0
1461.0
860
766
1794.5
3122.5
1441.5
359
564
1308.0
1205.0
1039.0
0
0
1302.0
896.5
701.5
999
999
1235.5
1033.0
805.0
349
564
947.5
956.5
700.5
633
728
717.0
867.0
764.5
617
731
679.0
–
–
612
510
669.5
–
–
967
729
649.5
–
–
929
159
–
1122.0
–
972
786
–
865.0
–
868
766
–
830.0
619.5
384
323
–
–
862.5
104
768
–
–
690.5
Table 3.1: The table shows 10 pixels coordinates with the highest PCS scores for three
different time windows. Time window values represent the number of hours since the start
of the experiment. We can see that across all of the listed time windows 7 out of 10 same
pixels were present in the top 10 PCS values. No PCS value listed indicates that the
pixel wasn’t among the 10 highest scores for the given time window. The high disparity
between PCS scores proves that the activity was not constant between time windows and
dividing the analysis can lead to more conclusions.
To further investigate the highest-scored pixels in Table 3.1 we show their coordinates
on the canvas and the colours that were used to edit them within the time window. In
Figure 3.1 we can see 3 different pixels that were within the top 10 highest PCS values
for the time window 5. In the first example, we can see clearly a conflict within a single
pixel between two groups of users. One of them wanted to create a web address for their
website, and the other group tried to change it into a swear word. There are 2 colours
that were dominating within the edits proving 2 clear opposite goals within the interaction
with the same pixel. The second pixel with a high PCS value is a different type of conflict.
Based on the colours once again we see 2 dominating values. However, this conflict
emerged around the centre of the skull eye. Some of the users wanted to have it coloured,
while the other group tried to keep the skull eyes black. In this example, the conflict might
have happened within the same community unlike in the first example. The third example
in Figure 3.1 is a clear example of, so-called, troll activity where the main community tried
to create the United Kingdom flag, and the opposite group of users where putting different
colours in the centre of the flag without a clear rule around the colour itself.
The method is validated visually by comparing the results to the actual activity on the
10
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:19==
canvas and turned out to work as expected identifying pixels with the structured patterns in
pixel edits and high activity within the time window. However, it does not capture regional
aspects of conflicts that are clearly seen on the canvas. To further utilize PCS we studied
Region Conflict Score based on the PCS values and describe the method and its results
in the next section of this chapter.
3.2
Conflict area detection and merging
To reach the research goal of finding conflict and collaboration areas on the canvas we
further utilize single-pixel analysis outcomes and apply a method that takes into account
the neighbouring pixels and creates chains resulting in conflict areas.
To define conflict areas we take inspiration from RCS (Region Conflict Score) approach
described in previous research [12]. We divided the data into 1 hour time windows. For
each time window, we performed 4 steps to outline a potential conflict region:
• Step 1 - Compute PCS (Pixel Conflict Score). The formula for calculating PCS was
as follows: PCS = (1.5∗#swaps)+(#non−swaps) where swaps were defined as an
action of recolouring a pixel to its penultimate colour (e.g. white -> red ->white), and
non-swaps are all other pixel edits. This formula gave higher weight to structured
pixel edits patterns while still increasing the score with a growing number of pixel
edits in general.
• Step 2 - Compute RCS (Region Conflict Score). The RCS was calculated by sum-
ming over the PCS scores matrix using a 5x5 convolution window, where we added
to the original PCS score of the pixel, shrunk values of PCS scores of its neighbours
distant by 1 and 2 pixels. The exact values of weights can be seen in Figure
• Step 3 - Apply threshold. To acquire a binary indication of a conflict region we apply a
threshold for RCS matrix, where the threshold value is equal to the 90th percentile of
RCS values in the time window. As the users’ activity varied across the time windows
we aimed at achieving a similar number of conflicts in each of them. Thus, setting
the threshold to be a time window-based percentile results in a similar number of
positive conflict responses.
• Step 4 - Define regions as contiguous chains of pixels with positive conflict value,
where contiguous means that each pixel in a chain has a direct neighbouring pixel
with a positive response. Additionally, to reduce the noise, we removed all the re-
gions that have less than 25 pixels following the approach from previous research
[12].
Having the conflict areas defined in each time window, we developed our own method for
merging them. The goal of this method was to identify overlapping conflict areas in two
or more time windows as the same, unique conflict. To achieve this result we proposed
a method based on intersection between pixel regions. The method can be described in
the following steps:
• Step 1 - Assign a unique id to each of the regions detected for the first time window.
The definition of conflict regions guarantees that they do not overlap within the same
time window.
• Step 2 - For each time window following the first one we compared regions in the
current window t with the last conflict area assigned to each unique conflict, which
occurred in time window t_last. We flag conflict areas as overlapping if the fraction
of pixels in the smaller region of the two c1 that are present in the bigger region c2 as
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Figure showing the location and edit colour distribution of 3 different pixels
within the top 10 pixels with highest PCS values for the time window 5. We see 3 different
types of conflicts based on both the pixel location and the colours used. The first one
emerges around changing a website address to a swear, the second one involves conflict
about whether the skull on the canvas should have a blue pixel in the middle of the eye or
not, and the third one is a conflict that aims at changing the middle pixel of a flag to any
colour that is not correct.
12
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:21==
well is larger than 0.75. The number guaranteed that the smaller conflict c1 would
not overlap with two larger conflict regions in the same time window.
• Step 3 - Divide overlapping regions from Step 2 into three distinctive cases:
– Case 1 - Two or more conflict regions in the current time window are overlap-
ping with the same past conflict. This case represented a large conflict that
was split in the following time window into two or more smaller regions. We
merge those disjoint regions and assign them the id of the larger region from
the past.
– Case 2 - Two or more conflict regions from the past time windows are over-
lapping with the same conflict from the current time window. In this case, we
perform a backward merging of the smaller conflicts into the large one that oc-
curred in the current time window and are assigned the same conflict id. This
covers an example where two or more smaller regions were in conflict before
merging into a single large one.
– Case 3 - A conflict in the current time window does not overlap with any of the
past conflict regions. In this case, we assign this region a new unique id.
The above algorithm results in a dictionary where each unique conflict id consists of an-
other dictionary with key, value pairs defined as time_window : conflict_area.
We used the method on 1-hour time windows between 1.04.2022 at 17:00 when most
of the initial artworks were ready and 2.04.2022 at 16:00 when the canvas got extended
for the first time. This resulted in detecting 5684 conflict regions. By using the merging
method proposed in this section individual conflicts were detected in multiple time win-
dows. For most of them, 3808 conflicts were only detected in a single time window, and
79 were chained in all 23 consecutive intervals. The largest region had an area of 39501
pixels for conflict with id 298 in the time window 26. The minimal size of the conflict region
was set to 26 as stated in the method description with the average area being equal to
214.9 over all of the detected conflicts. More detailed statistics for each of the time win-
dows analysed during our study can be seen in Table 3.2. For each time window studied
in this work, the table includes the values of the number of conflicts, average conflict area,
minimal conflict area, and maximal conflict area. The statistics from the table have similar
values across all time windows with the highest variation in the maximal area of conflict.
As described earlier in this section we controlled for the number of pixels across the time
window labelled as conflict based on their RCS values. This allowed us to achieve similar
conflict statistics across different intervals despite the high variance in the total number of
edits of the canvas over time.
To validate the method in detecting conflicts we plotted conflict areas over the actual
canvas for 3 chosen time windows. The results can be seen in Figure 3.2. The figure
shows the overall placement of conflict areas and how they evolve over time. Each conflict
is assigned a random colour. We can also identify the large conflict area around the flags
in the centre of the canvas. This specific area was unique in a way that multiple large
artworks were being created next to each other and resulting in the merging of the conflicts
around those areas. Thus, this explains the high variation in the maximal area of conflict
from Table 3.2. To further validate the method we looked closer at individual conflicts and
their desired properties.
In Figure 3.3 we show visual validation for the precision of the proposed method defined
in terms of how well the detected area is matching actions that occurred on the canvas.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
13
==PAGE:22==
Time Window
No. conflicts
Avg. Area
Min. Area
Max. Area
5
640
230.53
26
16723
6
657
224.07
26
16540
7
678
222.83
26
10092
8
689
228.60
26
13175
9
662
239.12
26
13511
10
620
247.54
26
16784
11
631
244.58
26
35074
12
656
231.87
26
30893
13
734
197.68
26
14883
14
743
194.41
26
13551
15
733
197.83
26
18621
16
714
206.61
26
23310
17
708
214.64
26
20882
18
692
212.37
26
24040
19
678
216.22
26
18520
20
709
206.88
26
24949
21
679
216.51
26
29360
22
703
210.12
26
14898
23
743
201.03
26
15532
24
768
195.77
26
22348
25
766
199.03
26
36850
26
711
219.38
26
39501
27
772
204.10
26
30664
Table 3.2: The table contains detailed statistics related to conflict areas detection using
the RCS approach. In the table, the columns are representing the time window of the ex-
periment, the number of conflicts detected within the time window, average, minimal, and
maximal area of conflicts given in pixels. It shows that the statistics are similar between
time windows with the highest variation around the maximal area of the conflicts.
Figure 3.2: Figure showing the detected conflicts using RCS method for time windows
5,12, and 19 over the full canvas states in respective time windows. There is a large
number of conflicts detected for each time window that outline existing artworks over time.
There are also a lot of dynamic changes in conflict areas through time but their colours
tend to stay the same indicating that they are identified as the same conflict occurring
through time.
14
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:23==
In this example, a community from a subreddit called r/ainbowroad decided to collabo-
rate to draw the Rainbow Road track from the Mario Kart video game [8]. However, the
Rainbow Road was crossing a lot of existing artworks and resulted in multiple conflicts.
Figure 3.3 show how the proposed method was capturing this event. In the first analysed
time window, Rainbow Road already existed in the centre part of the cropped canvas but
was contested by creators of the original artworks only in some places (e.g. Polish Flag).
In the second analysed time window, Rainbow Road was emerging on top of the Flag
of Ukraine and the conflict was very precisely identified at the intersection of the two art-
works. The most right image in Figure 3.3 shows that after 7 hours the Flag of Ukraine
was replaced by new artwork and the Rainbow Road was contested at the intersection
with another flag artwork, this time the Italian Flag. Once again the conflict was detected
exactly at the intersection of the two. In this single example, we visually validated how
the proposed method captures occurring conflicts on the canvas and how it captures the
dynamics on the canvas by identifying the conflicts only in the time windows, during which
they actually occurred.
Figure 3.3: Figure showing zoomed-in canvas at conflict around the Rainbow Road track
from the Mario Kart video game. The conflict area at time windows 5,12, and 19 shows
how the method was detecting conflicts when the creators were overwriting existing art-
work. We see that only some of the communities were resisting resulting in a conflict. The
detected areas are exactly highlighting intersections of the Rainbow Road with resisting
communities proving that the method is precisely capturing the events happening on the
canvas. Additionally, it is capturing the timeliness of the experiment by detecting conflicts
only in the time windows, in which they actually happened.
In Figure 3.3 we show visual validation for the conflict merging method between time
windows. The example shows an anime character’s face Eren Jaeger’s created by one of
the communities and was not overwritten throughout the whole duration of the experiment
[8]. For time windows 12 and 19 there is a part of the conflict area that is not directly
connected to the rest. However, the proposed merging method that was described earlier
in this section is proven to work as it has the same colour as the main conflict area meaning
that it was assigned the same conflict id. Additionally, we see that although 14 hours
have passed between the time window 5 and the time window 14 the conflict keeps being
identified as the same one.
In this section, we defined and validated the crucial method for the study. It resulted in
an accurate capturing of conflicts emerging through time on the canvas. However, the
method is limited to neighbouring areas on the canvas and would not be able to identify
communities that work in two different places. Because of that we further extend the anal-
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.4: Figure showing zoomed-in canvas at conflict around details of an anime char-
acter’s face Eren Jaeger’s. The conflict area at time windows 5,12, and 19 shows how
the conflict merging method is proved to assign the same conflict id over time to the same
conflict. Additionally, it shows how the merging method allowed to identify an area as part
of the main conflict even if they were not direct neighbours on the canvas.
ysis in this study with graph-based communities that allow to capture global dependencies
between the users.
3.3
Graph-based communites
In the previous sections of this chapter, we introduced methods focusing on pixel interac-
tions during the r/place experiment. In this section, we present a method that focuses on
the users and their actions that was not studied in any of the existing research related to
the r/place experiment. We propose a method in which we create a bipartite graph based
on user interactions with specific pixels using specific colours. Further, we fit the stochas-
tic block model, by minimizing its description length using an agglomerative heuristic to
acquire the partition of the users into communities [20].
3.3.1
Graph definition
To model the graph, we assigned a vertex for each colour that was used to edit every
pixel coordinate (x, y). This means that for each pixel, we created up to 13 vertices repre-
senting the 13 available colours in the data after we performed the mapping described in
Chapter 2.7. By connecting users to the respective vertex they interacted with over time,
we constructed a bipartite graph. Figure 3.5 provides a schematic illustration of this graph
structure.
This approach allows us to capture and analyze the interactions between users and the
canvas effectively. Using 13 separate vertices for each pixel ensures that actions using
different colours are distinguishable. If we were to represent each pixel with a single
vertex, it would be impossible to detect collaborations and conflicts among users due to
the lack of colour-specific information.
By employing this modelling technique, we can apply a community detection algorithm
suitable for bipartite graphs to group the users into communities and compare their joint
actions with the artworks on the canvas.
3.3.2
Community detection
To detect the communities in the bipartite graph we utilized the stochastic block model
[13] implemented in the graph-tool Python library [21]. The stochastic block model (SBM)
16
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.5: Schema showcasing methodology for creating the bipartite graph representing
user interactions on the canvas. White vertices represent unique users, and coloured
vertices represent pixel-colour pairs, where the numbers inside of the node are x,y canvas
coordinates of the pixel. Edges between user nodes and pixel-colour nodes exist if a
specific user edited the pixel with the colour at any time of the analysed time window.
is a popular generative model for random graphs that captures the community structure
present in networks. It assumes that nodes in the graph can be partitioned into different
latent communities or blocks, and the probability of an edge between two nodes depends
on the blocks to which they belong. The algorithm is inferring the modular structure of the
graph based on matrices of edge counts between groups using generative process [22].
It does not impose constraints on the kind of modular structure allowing for different graph
structures to be tested, which was particularly important in the case of this study.
In a bipartite graph, the nodes can be divided into two disjoint sets such that edges only
exist between nodes from different sets. The suitability of the SBM for bipartite graphs
arises from its ability to capture both within-block and between-block connectivity pat-
terns. Within each block, the probability of an edge between two nodes is typically higher
compared to the probability of an edge between nodes from different blocks. This reflects
the tendency of nodes within the same block to be more interconnected. At the same
time, the SBM allows for the modelling of varying degrees of connectivity between nodes
in different blocks. This is crucial in bipartite graphs, as it enables the representation of
different relationships or interactions between the two sets of nodes. What is most impor-
tant is the resulting communities for the bipartite graph do not overlap between partitions,
meaning that in our case we can further analyse the blocks that contain only the users’
partition of the graph.
To perform efficient graph analyses we researched Python libraries suitable for our case.
Graph-tool library [21] allows manipulation and statistical analysis of graphs with perfor-
mance comparable to pure C/C++ libraries as the core algorithms and data structures are
written directly in C++.
The library also provides an efficient implementation of an algorithm to fit the stochastic
block model for community detection on graphs called MCMC [13]. The complexity of
the algorithm is O(V log2 V ) where V is the number of vertices in the graph. This is a
very important factor as we expect our graph to be especially large and the quadratic
complexity would require larger computational power. We also considered an extended
version of this model called the nested stochastic block model [23]. It is more suitable
for large networks as it is able to detect small communities even when the graph is large.
However, the complexity for the fit algorithm is O(E log2 V ) where V is the number of
vertices in the graph and E is the number of edges. As we expected to have a significantly
larger number of edges than nodes it might be a serious constraint in terms of computation
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
17
==PAGE:26==
time. We also want to look at the largest communities so the benefits of this model are
not crucial to our approach.
We created a graph for each time window that was analysed in this study. To reduce noise
we removed the user nodes for the users that performed less than 3 pixel edits. Then,
using the graph-tool library we fit the stochastic block model to our graphs and extracted
the resulting block structure. We filtered out users and their assigned communities as we
did not have a direct representation of the pixels in the graph. The algorithm detected 43
distinct communities between the users. To visualise the resulting communities on the
canvas we counted the number of edits of each pixel by communities within an analysed
time window. Next, we assigned a random colour to each community and for each pixel
drew a semi-transparent point on top of it in the colour of the community with the most
edits of that pixel in a given time window. The result for time window 10 can be seen in
Figure 3.6. There are several areas where similar coloured pixels were intersecting with
artworks. However, most of the coloured pixels on top of the canvas are noisy and bring
no additional insight into the r/place underlying structure. We further investigated different
time windows and the method each time resulted in a low number of distinct communities
and noisy results. We decided to focus on the other methods outlined in this study and
discuss potential mistakes within the graph-based approach in Chapter 4.
Figure 3.6: Visualisation of the communities detection using the graph-based approach.
There are several areas where similar coloured pixels were intersecting with artworks.
However, most of the coloured pixels on top of the canvas are noisy and bring no additional
insight into the r/place underlying structure.
18
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:27==
3.4
Text analysis
After defining three different methods for detecting conflicts within the r/place canvas we
further focused on analysing individual conflicts and their characteristics. To achieve this
goal we utilized the dataset of Reddit comments described in Chapter 2. To draw con-
clusions from the text of the comments we perform two kinds of analyses. The first one
was creating word clouds[14] based on the frequency of occurring words. To get the most
consistent and reliable results for the word clouds analysis we used a number of prepro-
cessing steps to clean the comments text from all unnecessary elements. The second
proposed method is sentiment analysis of the text using VADER, which is a rule-based
model designed specifically for social media. In the case of VADER preprocessed text
was not used as the method is specifically designed to work with raw data.
3.4.1
Text preprocessing
To generate high-quality word clouds analysis we performed multiple steps using ad-
vanced Python libraries to clean the posts text. We followed the approach presented
in a related article [24]. The consecutive steps to achieve clean text were as follows:
1. HTML Tag Removal: As the dataset includes comments in the raw format with
links and HTML tags, we removed HTML tags from each sentence in the document
to eliminate any markup language that could interfere with subsequent analysis or
cause parsing issues.
2. Diacritics Replacement: The text in the comments could be in any language. We
did not perform text translation so we replaced diacritics (accent marks) in each
sentence with their corresponding non-accented characters. This step aimed to
ensure consistency and facilitate further processing. To perform the operation we
used Python function unidecode.
3. Contractions Expansion: We expanded contractions in each sentence, replacing
shortened forms (e.g., ”don’t” to ”do not”) to improve uniformity and standardization
of the text. To perform the operation we used contractions Python package [25].
4. Number Removal: We removed numbers from each sentence to focus on the tex-
tual content and minimize the influence of numerical values.
5. Typos Correction: We corrected typos in each sentence using pyspellchecker [26]
and TextBlob libraries. This step further increases the level of normalization in text.
6. Stopwords Removal: We removed stopwords from each sentence. Stopwords
are commonly used words (e.g., ”the,” ”and”) that do not carry significant semantic
meaning. Removing stopwords helps reduce noise and focus on more meaningful
content. The obtain the list of stopwords we used NLTK package [27].
7. Composite Lemmatization Process with Pre & Post Steps: We conducted a
composite lemmatization process for each sentence that included pre-processing
and post-processing steps. In the pre-processing step, we removed special charac-
ters from each sentence, except for periods, to eliminate noise and facilitate subse-
quent analysis. Then, we converted the text to lowercase for consistency. After that,
we performed lemmatization using WordnetLemmatizer from the NLTK package [27]
to obtain the base forms of words. In the post-processing step, we removed periods
and double spaces within each document to ensure text coherence and improve
readability.
By applying these text preprocessing steps to each sentence in each document, we
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
19
==PAGE:28==
achieved a cleaned and standardized textual dataset ready for further analysis and ex-
ploration.
3.4.2
Wordclouds
To visually represent the joint content of Reddit comments for particular conflicts, we opted
for the word cloud technique as a suitable visualization method. Word clouds are effective
in conveying the relative importance of words within a text corpus, making them well-suited
for our purpose.
Unlike other methods that may require complex algorithms or statistical measures, word
clouds offer a straightforward approach to highlighting the most important terms. The
simple approach of determining the word size by counting its occurrence resulted in low
computation times for large text corpora.
By creating a word cloud, we aimed to provide an intuitive and engaging possibility to
the collective comment data for different groups of users. This visualization technique
allows us to capture the most frequently occurring words in a visually appealing manner,
emphasizing their significance based on their size and placement in the cloud.
Furthermore, word clouds were useful in validating conflict detection methods described
in this study as we could validate whether the most significant words were related to the
artwork we could see on the canvas.
For the implementation of the world cloud visualisation we used WordClouds Python
package that enabled quick and easy implementation of the method [14]. An example
WordCloud based on the comments posted by the members of r/place subreddit between
1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022 18:00 can be seen in Figure 3.7. In the figure, we can
see that two words are much larger than the other ones. Those words are flag and make.
As r/place subreddit gathered people creating many different artworks on the canvas the
important terms are generic and do not provide insights into potential conflicts. However,
in the time window used to filter out the comments used in the word cloud Ukraine flag
was the biggest artwork present on the canvas supporting the importance of the word
flag, and the word Ukraine in the right corner of the figure. We created more specific word
clouds that were described later in this thesis.
The word cloud technique provides an effective means of visualizing the joint content of
Reddit comments. It simplifies the interpretation of the collective text by emphasizing the
most commonly used words and enabling easy identification of key themes.
3.4.3
VADER sentiment analysis
To reach the research goal of this thesis of analysing conflicts and collaborations occurring
during the duration of r/place analysis we decided to apply VADER method [15] on the
Reddit comments dataset described in Chapter 2. We used sentiment estimates for the
content posted by different users that were taking part in editing conflict areas defined in
previous sections. This allowed us to characterize subreddits that they were part of by the
sentiment of content posted within time windows of interest. Additionally, within the same
group of users we were able to identify positive and negative comments getting insights
into their potential conflicts and collaborations.
VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner) is a sentiment analysis tool
widely used for analyzing the sentiment expressed in text data, specifically trained to
handle social media content. Its suitability for social media text lies in its ability to han-
dle informal language, slang, and emoticons commonly found in online conversations.
20
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.7: Word cloud based on the comments posted by the members of r/place subred-
dit between 1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022 18:00. The most important terms are ”flag”
and ”make”. Ukraine flag was the biggest artwork present on the canvas in the given time
window justifying the importance of the word ”flag” and the word ”Ukraine” visible in the
top right corner of the figure.
VADER returns a value between −1 and 1 for input text where −1 indicates extremely
negative and 1 extremely positive content.
VADER is particularly well-suited for Reddit comments due to the following reasons:
• Contextual Understanding: Reddit comments often contain nuanced language
and sarcasm. VADER utilizes a pre-built sentiment lexicon that takes into account
the contextual meaning of words and phrases, enabling it to interpret sentiment in
a more accurate and context-aware manner.
• Emotion Handling: Reddit discussions can evoke a range of emotions, includ-
ing joy, sadness, anger, and humour. VADER incorporates an understanding of
emotion-strengthening words and intensifiers to better capture the emotional tone
present in the comments.
• Domain Adaptability: VADER has been trained on a wide range of textual data,
making it adaptable to different domains and topics of discussion on Reddit dur-
ing the duration of the r/place experiment. It can handle diverse subject matters,
ensuring reliable sentiment analysis across various subreddit communities.
VADER method was implemented as a Python package [15] that we used in this study.
The exact rules for obtaining sentiment scores from the text are as follows:
• Lexicon-based Approach: VADER relies on a sentiment lexicon that assigns a
sentiment score to each word or phrase. The lexicon contains words with their
associated sentiment polarities (positive, negative, or neutral) and intensity levels.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
21
==PAGE:30==
• Polarity Scoring: VADER analyzes the sentiment polarity of individual words and
considers their context within the sentence. It takes into account capitalization, de-
gree modifiers, punctuation, and emoticons to enhance the accuracy of sentiment
scoring.
• Sentiment Intensity Calculation: VADER computes the intensity of sentiment ex-
pressed in the text. It accounts for the presence of booster words that amplify or
diminish the sentiment, allowing for a more nuanced analysis of the overall senti-
ment strength.
• Aggregating Sentiment Scores: VADER combines the individual word-level senti-
ment scores to generate an overall sentiment score for the given text. The resulting
score indicates the compound sentiment polarity (positive, negative, or neutral) and
its intensity.
The VADER sentiment analysis algorithm is specifically designed to work with raw, un-
processed text, including social media text and informal language. Preprocessing steps,
such as tokenization, stemming, or stop word removal, can potentially alter the original
text and may lead to the loss of important sentiment-related features. Thus, in the case
of this analysis, we did not use preprocessed content but raw comments instead.
An example sentiment analysis using VADER based on the comments posted by the
members of r/place subreddit between 1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022 18:00 can be seen
in Table 3.3. The table presents 5 comments that were assigned the highest compound
sentiment score within the analysed time window and subreddit. The highest-scored com-
ment is an obvious advertisement that was most probably designed to be positive. The
other 4 positive comments all refer to some part of the action happening on the r/place
canvas. In Table 3.4 we can see 5 comments that were assigned the lowest compound
sentiment score in the same time window and all refer to the action on the r/place canvas.
We can identify multiple words generally assumed to be positive.
By utilizing this lexicon-based approach with contextual understanding and emotion han-
dling, VADER provides a reliable and efficient sentiment analysis solution for Reddit com-
ments. The provided example validates the implementation used in this study. More
specific examples were used for the case studies described later in this thesis.
3.5
Multi-method analysis
To reach the main research goal of complex analysis of the patterns and dynamics of
online collaborative communities we proposed an approach that combines methods de-
scribed earlier in this chapter. In this section, we describe step by step how we connected
the methods together, excluding the graph-based community detection that turned out to
give inconsistent results. Thus, we utilised a dataset containing stream data recorded
during the r/place experiment that contained usernames connected to pixels edited by
them through time. We described it in detail in Section 2.3.
Connecting users with their content on the Reddit platform was crucial to generate insights
based on the text analysis methods. However, the timestamp field in the dataset is the
time when the data was received, not when the action actually happened on the canvas
creating a mismatch with the main dataset. This meant that we could not perform a direct
join between the two datasets and had to propose a different method. We defined the
following framework to generate full conflict insights:
1. Choosing a conflict area of interest: In the first step we visually investigated can-
vas through time using Atlas tool [8]. Next, we were filtering out all the conflict areas
22
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:31==
Comment
Compound score
**I’m new and just found this subreddit, what now?**\n\nWelcome
to the community!
TagPro is a browser-based capture-the-flag
(CTF) game that is easy to learn and hard to master....
0.9956
I love how France puts up a heart as a sign of peace towards his
northern neighbour.
0.9169
Yes\n\nI’m proud of you all and thankful that I could watch some-
thing that entertaining
0.9081
Excellent! Since you clarified you’re here for the art help us out
clear all the red dots on the Greek flag on the canvas! \nPut your
money where your mouth is ;)
0.8881
LOL is that why they’re so efficient in protecting it?. I literally saw
it form before any other shape or flag, and it’s been vehemently
protected since then
0.8764
Table 3.3: The table contains 5 comments posted by the members of r/place subreddit
between 1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022 18:00 with the highest VADER sentiment com-
pound score. We can see that the first comment is clearly a commercial that was probably
designed to be as positive as possible, while remaining 4 comments refer to action hap-
pening on the r/place canvas in a positive way.
Comment
Compound score
I have no idea what Greendale is but I hate the OSU logo so hell
yea
-0.9513
Idk but we(Star Wars) fought a long battle with the Swiss and they
agreed to move over. So it’s possible we messed up their flag plans.
-0.9169
OMGScoots\n\n”The majority of uses of Pepe the Frog have been,
and continue to be, non-bigoted.”\n\n”It is important to examine
use...
-0.9169
Okay Libs lets take it slow...\n\nIf I’m ”ironically” racist.... then I’m
just racist...
-0.8156
Nah the fuck Putin section is ugly af. Clearly no thought went into
it because the blue and yellow sections aren’t equally spaced and
it’s taking up extra room...
-0.8126
Table 3.4: The table contains 5 comments posted by the members of r/place subreddit
between 1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022 18:00 with the lowest VADER sentiment com-
pound score. We can see that the comments include a lot of swear words and words
generally known to have negative meanings. They also refer to the action happening on
the r/place canvas.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
23
==PAGE:32==
detected using the RCS method over time for the chosen conflict.
2. Connecting single pixel analysis method: Having conflict areas for each time
window for our conflict of interest we utilised the fact that in the PCS values-based
method used for single pixel analysis, we calculated the scores for all the pixels on
the canvas for each time window. To highlight highly contested pixels within the
specific conflict we extracted 3 pixels with the highest PCS values within the conflict
area for each time window. This allowed us to see where the users put the most
attention in a given period of our conflict of interest.
3. Connecting pixel area with users: To acquire the usernames of people taking
part in the conflict we iterated over the dataset of raw stream data from r/place
experiment and filtered out all the users that were editing pixels within the conflict
area. This resulted in a list of conflict-active participants.
4. Comments filtering: Having the list of conflict participants we iterated over all Red-
dit comments within the time frames of our experiment and filtered out those, that
were posted by users from the list.
5. Text dataset: As our goal was not to analyse individual users but the communities
we divided the comments into text datasets by time windows and subreddits in which
the comments were posted.
6. Text cleaning: We applied the full-text preprocessing pipeline described in detail in
Section 3.4.1 to prepare the input for the word cloud visualisations.
7. Word cloud visualisations: We filtered out the preprocessed comments datasets
for subreddits that had the most comments within the analysed time window and
created word cloud visualisations for those that were common across different time
windows. The word cloud visualisation method is described in detail in Section 3.4.2.
8. VADER sentiment analysis: We filtered out the raw comments datasets for the
same subreddits that were used for the word cloud visualisations and performed
sentiment analysis using VADER method described in Section 3.4.3. We highlighted
the most positive and negative comments and calculated the average compound
score for the subreddits across the time windows.
We showed the results of this compound framework for in-depth analysis of r/place con-
flicts in the form of case studies described in Section 3.6. The case studies highlighted
the crucial steps of the method and allowed visual validation of the outcomes.
3.6
Case Studies
In this section, we present the results of the methods described in this chapter. The exact
framework for achieving the results in this section was described in detail in Section 3.5. To
validate achieving the research goal of conflicts and collaboration detection we performed
two case studies. We examined the r/place canvas over time using the Atlas tool [8] and
identified two pieces of artwork on the canvas. The first one was the Canada flag artwork.
The community around this piece was first struggling to finish the maple leaf inside of
the flag, and later faced a troll attack that kept changing the ”Canada” word to ”banana”.
The second case study showcased the results of the analysis focused on the artwork
of an anime character’s face Eren Jaeger’s. The area was barely modified with the main
activity happening around the details of the character’s face from the start to the end of the
experiment time period studied in this work. We have chosen easily recognisable conflicts
24
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:33==
to compare whether the proposed analysis method would lead to the same conclusions
without prior knowledge.
3.6.1
Canada flag conflict
The first performed case study was the analysis of the Canada flag artwork on the r/place
canvas. The high activity of users around the maple leaf in the centre of the flag was
easily recognisable throughout the duration of the experiment. Additionally, in the later
time windows of the period studied in this work, a conflict emerged around the ”Canada”
word at the top of the flag, which kept being replaced by the ”banana” word.
In the first step, following the proposed framework, we performed the RCS analysis on the
canvas and verified whether the method detected a potential conflict around the artwork
area. We plotted conflict areas over the original canvas. The results can be seen in
Figure 3.8. For visualisation purposes, we have arbitrarily chosen three-time windows
of 5 (between 1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022 18:00),12 (between 2.04.2022 00:00 and
2.04.2022 01:00) and 21 (between 2.04.2022 9:00 and 2.04.2022 10:00) to showcase the
dynamic nature of the experiment. Additionally, we marked with the red dots three pixels
with the highest PCS values within the conflict area. One of the conflict areas plotted
on the zoomed-in canvas was covering the Canada flag artwork on all of the 3 analysed
time windows. The red dots on the figure represent pixels with high PCS scores that
appeared to be in visually significant locations. It could be also seen that the state of the
original canvas during the time window 21 indicated conflict around the words ”Canada”
and ”banana”.
Figure 3.8: Figure showing conflict areas detected through RCS analysis for 3 arbitrarily
chosen time windows that are overlapping with the Canada flag over all 3 investigated
time windows. Additionally, the red dots represent pixels with the highest PCS values
within the conflict area.
In the next step, we performed steps 3-6 outlined in Section 3.5, meaning that we identified
users interacting with pixels within the detected conflict area, filtered the Reddit comments
data, created text datasets, and pre-processed the text for Wordclouds visualisation de-
scribed in detail in Section 3.4.2. For the chosen 3 time windows we retrieved a total
of 9666 Reddit comments that were posted by the identified users. Subreddits of place,
canada and placecanada were amongst the most commented by the users for all 3 time
windows so we decided to analyze the comments related to those subreddits. In Fig-
ure 3.9 we can see 9 word cloud plots. We can see multiple occurrences of large words
”flag”, ”people”, and smaller ”leaf”. For the time window 21 we can see different large
words than for the first two. ”Help” and ”banana” aligned with the conflict that happened
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
25
==PAGE:34==
during this time window.
Figure 3.9: Figure contains 9 word cloud visualisations. For each of the 3 analysed time
windows, there is a single word cloud plot for each of the subreddits. The size of each
word is determined by the frequency in which the specific word occurred in the comments.
We can see multiple occurrences of large words ”flag”, ”people”, and smaller ”leaf”. For
the time window 21 we can see different large words than for the first two. ”Help” and
”banana” align with the conflict that happened during this time window.
In the last step of the analysis, we performed VADER sentiment analysis on the raw com-
ments content within the same subreddits as for word clouds visualisations. For this
method, we analysed the comments within all 3 subreddits together. For each of the
time windows, we created a table with the 3 most positive and 3 most negative comments
in the data based on the compound score from the VADER method. The average com-
pound scores based on all the comments within time windows 5,12 and 21 were equal
26
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:35==
to 0.10, 0.05, and 0.09 respectively. In Table 3.5 the most positive and most negative
comments did not seem to be clearly related to the Canada flag artwork. However, in
Table 3.6 and Table 3.7 we could see both positive and negative comments about helping
Canadians and having wars around flags. In Table 3.7 the most positive comment in this
table contained several smile emotes that did not parse correctly but were still scored by
the VADER method.
Comments
Score
**I’m new and just found this subreddit, what now?**\n\nWelcome
to the community! TagPro is a browser-based...
0.9956
I love how France puts up a heart as a sign of peace towards his
northern neighbour.
0.9169
I’m so glad to hear this step moving forward. Many more to go, but
a great amount of progress.
0.9099
...
...
I have no idea what Greendale is but I hate the OSU logo so hell
yea
-0.9513
Idk but we(Star Wars) fought a long battle with the Swiss and they
agreed to move over. So it’s possible we messed up their flag plans.
-0.9169
OMGScoots\n\n”The majority of uses of Pepe the Frog have been,
and continue to be, non-bigoted....
-0.9169
Table 3.5: VADER sentiment analysis results table for Canada flag case study. The table
contains 3 most positive and most negative comments in the time window 5.
In this case study, we showcased the result of the multi-method approach to analysing
conflicts occurring on the r/place canvas. By utilising text analysis of Reddit comments
we showed insights related to users activity not only in the conflict area on the canvas but
also outside of the experiment.
3.6.2
Eren Jaeger’s face case
The second performed case study was the analysis of an anime character Eren Jaeger’s
face artwork on the r/place canvas. The piece was unique because it lasted almost un-
changed on the canvas throughout the period of analysis in this study. However, it con-
stantly changed around the details of the face such as eyes, nose, mouth, and hair [8].
There is no clear conflict occurring in the analysed time windows. We perform a case
study on this artwork to validate our method by comparing insights from the analysis of a
clear conflict in the first case study and a rather peaceful area in the second one.
In the first step, same as for the first case, we performed the RCS analysis on the can-
vas and verified whether the method detected a potential conflict around the artwork
area. We plotted conflict areas over the original canvas. The results can be seen in
Figure 3.10. For comparison purposes, we have chosen the same three-time windows
of 5 (between 1.04.2022 17:00 and 1.04.2022 18:00),12 (between 2.04.2022 00:00 and
2.04.2022 01:00) and 21 (between 2.04.2022 9:00 and 2.04.2022 10:00) as in the first
case. We also marked with the red dots three pixels with the highest PCS values within
the conflict area. Once again one of the conflict areas plotted on the zoomed-in canvas
was covering the details of the character’s face on all of the 3 analysed time windows.
The red dots on the figure represented pixels with high PCS scores. For the first anal-
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
27
==PAGE:36==
Comments
Score
I have been trying to help the Canadians with their flag, to be hon-
est. I will leave the flag war ...
0.9524
Not Canadian but I’m watching your progress with great interest.
Are you guys okay?
0.9493
I honestly was not expecting to see this in the canvas so it definitely
was a surprise...
0.9474
...
...
And you gotta be pretty dumb to think that any human being could
be dumb enough to think a little picture is going to stop the war...
-0.9493
It’s a flag. If the most inconvenience in your week is because a flag
destroyed some art to make a statement about a bigger picture ...
-0.9434
COOKIEZI 727 WTF ￿￿￿￿OSU￿￿HR ROCK 99.71% MON-
STER FULL COMBO ...
-0.9393
Table 3.6: VADER sentiment analysis results table for Canada flag case study. The table
contains 3 most positive and most negative comments in the time window 12.
Comments
Score
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
0.9538
Look guys my wife is a Canadian and I’m helping as much as I can
but please take some help...
0.9413
Yeah, they probably are true freedom loving patriots
0.9201
...
...
Ahahha u realize that it’s not about the flag. And the transteam just
destroyed everything on there way...
-0.9216
WAR. WAR NEVER CHANGES
-0.8316
Their words? you mean ”fuck putin!!!!!!!” spam.\n\nAt least try to do
some artwork.
-0.8002
Table 3.7: VADER sentiment analysis results table for Canada flag case study. The table
contains the 3 most positive and most negative comments in the time window 21. The
most positive comment in this table contained several smile emotes that did not parse
correctly but were scored by the VADER method.
28
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:37==
ysed time window, the pixels were positioned in the centre of the character’s eyes and
in the remaining two all 3 points were next to each other in the centre of the right eye. It
could be also seen that the face became more detailed over time but stayed in the same
place.
Figure 3.10: Figure showing conflict areas detected through RCS analysis for 3 time
windows that are overlapping with Eren Jaeger’s face over all 3 investigated time windows.
Additionally, the red dots represent pixels with the highest PCS values within the conflict
area and are located in the centre of the character’s eyes.
In the next step, again we performed steps 3-6 described in detail in Section 3.4.2. For the
chosen 3 time windows we retrieved a total of 2129 Reddit comments that were posted by
the identified users. Subreddits of place, titanfolk and ShingekiNoKyojin were amongst
the most commented by the users for all 3 time windows so we decided to analyze the
comments related to those subreddits. In Figure 3.11 we can see 9 word cloud plots. We
can see multiple occurrences of large words that were generally popular during this time
of the experiment like ”people” and ”ukraine”. However, most of the large words in the
word clouds were neutral not indicating any particular dependencies at first sight.
In the last step of the analysis, we performed VADER sentiment analysis on the raw com-
ments content within the same subreddits as for word clouds visualisations. For this
method, we analysed the comments within all 3 subreddits together. For each of the
time windows, we created a table with the 3 most positive and 3 most negative comments
in the data based on the compound score from the VADER method. The average com-
pound scores based on all the comments within time windows 5, 12 and 21 were equal to
0.15, 0.10, and 0.08 respectively. The average scores are higher than the ones in the first
case study for time windows 5 and 12, and similar for time window 21. In Table 3.8, Ta-
ble 3.9 and Table 3.10 we can see the most positive and most negative comments within
the analyzed subreddits. Most of the comments seem to concern different maters related
to the war in Ukraine. We do not identify comments related to the analysed artwork as
the ones with very high positive or negative sentiment.
In this case study, we showcased that the RCS approach detected a specific area as
a potential conflict due to the high activity around the pixels within Eren Jaeger’s face.
However, the results of a more complex analysis using multiple methods did not show
clear signs of a conflict and both the word clouds and sentiment analysis showcased
content unrelated to the artwork. Most of the insights were around Ukraine and war. The
Ukraine flag was a neighbouring artwork for the Eren Jaeger’s face.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.11: Figure contains 9 word cloud visualisations. For each of the 3 analysed time
windows, there is a single word cloud plot for each of the subreddits. The size of each
word is determined by the frequency in which the specific word occurred in the comments.
We can see occurrences of the common large words ”ukraine” and ”people”. Most of the
large words in the word clouds were neutral not indicating any particular dependencies at
first sight
30
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:39==
Comments
Score
&gt; Armin and Hange were fully on board with punching the world
in the face...
0.8975
It’s amazing! It’s actually beautiful!
0.8513
Yes yes yes!!!!
0.8507
...
...
You can support ukraine without covering people actual art with its
flag. Thats just a shitty move...
-0.9250
”Omg it shows that circle of hatred continues and war never ends
just like in real life so it makes sense...
-0.9102
Old habits die hard
-0.6486
Table 3.8:
VADER sentiment analysis results table for Eren Jaeger’s face case study.
The table contains the 3 most positive and most negative comments in the time window
5.
Comments
Score
Funny to see how it hasn’t been saved yet. Almost like how Amer-
icas government isn’t putting much effort to save its citizens from
inflation/gas prices/the rigged stock market. I wouldn’t want to save
the flag either.
0.9023
Lol amazing ￿￿
0.8591
Agreed! I hope the wings of freedom gets finished
0.8588
...
...
&gt; Or only conflicts in Europe are important?\n\nBasically yes.
Sorry to break it up to you but the ”western world” doesn’t give
much of a fuck about anything but what happens in Europe or North
America...
-0.9546
I thought they were obnoxious at first but fuck it they carved out
their own space and there’s way more obnoxious shit going on else-
where. \n\nIf anything now I’m pretty damn impressed with how well
they have their shit together.
-0.9419
Yup. The American people shouldn’t be punished for the things
the American government does. 3,000 innocent civilians dying isn’t
okay because some guy unrelated to them killed innocent civilians
too...
-0.8093
Table 3.9:
VADER sentiment analysis results table for Eren Jaeger’s face case study.
The table contains the 3 most positive and most negative comments in the time window
12.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
31
==PAGE:40==
Comments
Score
TF letters have been done for a little while, tho some people were
messing them up, kinda fucked up by starting them next to each
other...
0.9558
Hm i wasn’t planning on it i’ve never made a subreddit but if some-
one else wanted to id be down to join and help make totoro!! ...
0.9133
I agree i think a green background would look best too i just got this
image from the internet lol
0.8591
...
...
I dont support trans hate but holy shit, the amount of defacing I’ve
seen done to it over the last hours is insane
-0.8434
NOOO!!!!￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
-0.8110
I don’t mind the one who vandalize it with like random red or blue
that much but the one with grey, black and white is killing me
-0.7227
Table 3.10: VADER sentiment analysis results table for Eren Jaeger’s face case study.
The table contains the 3 most positive and most negative comments in the time window
21. The second most negative comment had several crying and skull emotes which did
not parse correctly but were analysed by VADER.
In this section, we showcased the results of the analysis performed using the multi-method
approach described in Section 3.5. Using RCS as the only method would effect in both of
the artworks being treated as a conflict due to the high activity around the pixels. However,
multiple methods gave additional insights and would lead to different conclusions which
we further discuss in Chapter 4.
32
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:41==
4
Discussion
In this chapter, we discuss the key findings of our research and their implications. We
comment on the choice of the datasets and how they determined the methods used and
results. Next, we comment on the methods used for defining conflicts and collaborations
within the r/place experiment and the methods used to perform Reddit comments analy-
sis related to the detected conflicts. We discuss the results they gave in relation to the
research aims that we defined at the beginning of this study. Additionally, we comment
on the results presented using case studies. The following sections provide a detailed
discussion of our findings and their significance.
Our research aimed at investigating the patterns and dynamics of online collaborative
communities, with a particular focus on conflicts and collaborations between, and within
the defined groups. To perform the study we investigated r/place social experiment. We
have chosen the r/place pixel placement data, the Reddit comments data, and the r/place
experiment raw stream data as the three core datasets to perform our analysis. Con-
necting those three large datasets created a vast range of opportunities in terms of the
methods that we were able to propose and the advanced insights that we were able to
provide through them.
In the work, we defined three different methods for detecting patterns occurring through
time on the r/place canvas. The first method focused on scoring single pixels on the
canvas using PCS values. Its results show that it is particularly successful in showcasing
a specific type of conflict that emerges around a single pixel. However, as we have shown
in the case studies it can be combined with different methods to provide additional insights
and conclusions. The downside of the method in the case of r/place was that it does not
utilize any information about the relative position of the pixel to other pixels on the canvas.
This property limited the use cases of the method. The second method for detecting
potential conflicts on the r/place canvas was based on the pixel neighbourhood analysis.
The results of the method were visually validated by comparison to the actual events
happening on the r/place canvas. The most important properties of the method were that
it was precise in detecting the conflict areas and that it was able to capture the dynamics
of the events. Capturing the dynamics was possible thanks to the merging algorithm that
allowed connecting the conflicts between different time windows through analysis of their
properties. We used the results of this method as the base for text analysis and connected
it to other proposed methods. The results have also shown a downside of the method.
It was not utilizing any global information in terms of the r/place canvas area and the
detected conflicts could not span over two distant areas.
At the beginning of the study, we were also inspired by the graph-based method for com-
munity detection. We defined a novel approach to creating a bipartite graph with user
nodes being connected by edges to pixel-colour pair nodes that they edited. Further, we
utilized the stochastic block model to retrieve the communities based on the graph struc-
ture. The initial tests on small subsets were promising and the visualisations outlined the
existing artworks on the r/place canvas. However, we wanted to capture the dynamics
of the r/place experiment by dividing the analysis into time windows and increasing the
canvas size to 1000 by 1000 pixels size. This resulted in a sparse representation of the
graph and a small amount of the resulting communities that outlined very few artworks on
the canvas. We decided to focus on the other methods studied in this work. We looked at
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
33
==PAGE:42==
the potential flaws in the methodology and defined potential possible reasons for the un-
expected results. The first hypothesis was that the definition of the graph was not correct
and creating just one single node for each pixel would yield better results. The second
one assumed that by removing the users that performed less than 3 edits of the pixels we
might have vastly reduced the number of nodes and edges in the graph in certain time
windows. The last hypothesis was that the reduction of the number of unique colours in
the data made the graph underlying structure too simple resulting in a small number of
communities.
Following the patterns detection we utilized two popular methods for text analysis in the
field of analysing online collaborative communities. We used word clouds to visualise
frequent words in the Reddit comments related to detected conflict areas. For the purpose
of word cloud visualisation, we developed an advanced pipeline for preprocessing the
text. Next, we described VADER sentiment analysis method specifically trained for social
media content.
The crucial method proposed in this thesis was the multi-method approach to analysing
r/place potential conflicts. By merging all of the used methods together we were able to
show their combined results in the form of case studies. The case studies have shown that
a single method can indicate a potential conflict as it is based on the activity around the
pixels. However, extending the analysing with additional methods might lead to different
conclusions when the initial hypothesis was the same.
The results have proven that bridging actions performed by users on the canvas to the
content that they have been posting on the Reddit platform throughout the duration of the
experiment can lead to additional valuable insights and conclusions. The results indicate
that the text analysis can lead to conclusions about which user groups collaborated with
each other, and which were in conflict around specific artwork. The results have also
shown that the methods we proposed successfully captured the dynamic nature of the
r/place.
In relation to the existing research, we have shown that by including more unconventional
datasets to the main data that came directly from the experiment we can provide additional
insights that lead to different conclusions than the initial ones. Our study took a lot of
inspiration from the work that first defined PCS and RCS metrics. However, we have
taken a different approach to the value they provide and have built a new solution on top
of the existing research.
34
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis has delved into the analysis of conflicts and collaborations in
social platforms, with a particular focus on the r/place experiment conducted on the Reddit
platform in the year 2022. Through the analysis of the r/place dataset and the exploration
of patterns emerging in the data, this research provided valuable insights into the study
of large-scale data from social platforms and developed a new multi-method approach to
the topic.
The findings from this thesis have significant practical implications for social platform de-
sign, content moderation, and community management. By understanding the dynamics
of conflicts and collaborations, social platforms can implement more effective conflict pre-
vention strategies, foster collaboration, and enhance user experiences. Highlighting the
negative actions might lead to better ways of avoiding them in the future.
From the social perspective, the subject of analysing collaborations and conflict is a crucial
area in the current general direction towards data privacy. Being able to retrieve valuable
insights from large-scale anonymised datasets is highly probable to be one of the main
areas of research in the upcoming years and any contributions to this field might make
the development faster.
Looking ahead, future research directions could extend the proposed methods to differ-
ent, more complex use cases where instead of pixel neighbourhood and action frequency-
based scoring we might use more advanced metrics and neighbourhood definitions. An-
other potential research direction would be to build on top of this study and propose quan-
titative methods of defining whether a particular pattern is a conflict or collaboration with
a binary result.
In summary, this thesis has contributed to the growing body of knowledge on conflicts and
collaborations in social platforms. By analyzing large-scale datasets and exploring collab-
orative patterns, this research has provided valuable insights and practical implications
for mitigating conflicts, enhancing cooperation, and improving the overall user experience
in online social environments. The findings underscore the importance of understanding
user behaviour and community dynamics to further develop online communities and grow
the basis of positive values.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Eric Horvitz and Deirdre Mulligan. “Data, privacy, and the greater good”. In: Science
349.6245 (2015), pp. 253–255. DOI: 10.1126/science.aac4520. eprint: https://www.
science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aac4520. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/
abs/10.1126/science.aac4520.
[2]
James Ladyman, James Lambert, and Karoline Wiesner. “What is a complex sys-
tem?” In: European Journal for Philosophy of Science 3 (June 2013). DOI: 10.1007/
s13194-012-0056-8.
[3]
Moritz Bürger, Stephan Schlögl, and Hannah Schmid-Petri. “Conflict dynamics in
collaborative knowledge production. A study of network gatekeeping on Wikipedia”.
In: Social Networks 72 (2023), pp. 13–21. ISSN: 0378-8733. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.socnet.2022.08.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0378873322000673.
[4]
Srijan Kumar et al. “Community Interaction and Conflict on the Web”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference. WWW ’18. Lyon, France: Inter-
national World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2018, pp. 933–943.
ISBN: 9781450356398. DOI: 10.1145/3178876.3186141. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3178876.3186141.
[5]
Mohammad Hammas Saeed et al. “TROLLMAGNIFIER: Detecting State-Sponsored
Troll Accounts on Reddit”. In: CoRR abs/2112.00443 (2021). arXiv: 2112 . 00443.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00443.
[6]
Darren L. Linvill and Patrick L. Warren. “Troll Factories: Manufacturing Specialized
Disinformation on Twitter”. In: Political Communication 37.4 (2020), pp. 447–467.
DOI: 10.1080/10584609.2020.1718257. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/10584609.
2020.1718257. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/10584609.2020.1718257.
[7]
Reddit. Reddit Place. Online forum. Reddit. 2022. URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/
place/.
[8]
Stefano Haagmans. Place Atlas 2022. Online resource. 2022. URL: https://place-
atlas.stefanocoding.me.
[9]
Jérémie Rappaz et al. “Latent Structure in Collaboration: the Case of Reddit r/place”.
In: CoRR abs/1804.05962 (2018). arXiv: 1804.05962. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1804.05962.
[10]
Kristina T. Litherland and Anders I. Mørch. “Instruction vs. emergence on r/place:
Understanding the growth and control of evolving artifacts in mass collaboration”.
In: Computers in Human Behavior 122 (2021), p. 106845. ISSN: 0747-5632. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106845. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0747563221001680.
[11]
Dave Chaffey. “Compilation of the Latest Social Media Statistics of Consumer Adop-
tion and Usage of Social Networking Platforms”. In: (2023). Online resource. URL:
https://www.smartinsights.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-strategy/new-
global-social-media-research/.
[12]
Prateek Vachher et al. “Understanding Community-Level Conflicts Through Red-
dit r/Place”. In: Conference Companion Publication of the 2020 on Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. CSCW ’20 Companion. Virtual
Event, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 401–405. ISBN: 9781450380591.
DOI: 10.1145/3406865.3418311. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3406865.3418311.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
37
==PAGE:46==
[13]
Tiago P. Peixoto. “Nonparametric weighted stochastic block models”. In: Phys. Rev.
E 97 (1 Jan. 2018), p. 012306. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.97.012306. URL: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.97.012306.
[14]
Andreas C Mueller. Wordcloud. Version 1.9.1. URL: https://github.com/amueller/
wordcloud.
[15]
C. Hutto and Eric Gilbert. “VADER: A Parsimonious Rule-Based Model for Sen-
timent Analysis of Social Media Text”. In: Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media 8.1 (May 2014), pp. 216–225. DOI: 10.1609/
icwsm.v8i1.14550. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/14550.
[16]
u/opl. r/place 2022 data (raw). https://archive.org/details/place2022-opl-raw. Reddit
dataset. Apr. 2022.
[17]
Devin Smith. “The r/place dataset: 22GB CSV -> 1.5GB Parquet”. In: Medium (2023).
URL: https://medium.com/@deephavendatalabs/the-r-place-dataset-bf4b0d70ce72.
[18]
Apache Parquet. Apache Parquet Documentation. https://parquet.apache.org/docs/
file-format/. Accessed 2023.
[19]
Guido Van Rossum and Fred L. Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. Scotts Valley,
CA: CreateSpace, 2009. ISBN: 1441412697.
[20]
Tiago P. Peixoto. “Efficient Monte Carlo and greedy heuristic for the inference of
stochastic block models”. In: Phys. Rev. E 89 (1 Jan. 2014), p. 012804. DOI: 10.
1103/PhysRevE.89.012804. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.89.
012804.
[21]
Tiago P. Peixoto. “The graph-tool python library”. In: figshare (2014). DOI: 10.6084/
m9.figshare.1164194. URL: http://figshare.com/articles/graph_tool/1164194 (visited
on 09/10/2014).
[22]
Paul W. Holland, Kathryn Blackmond Laskey, and Samuel Leinhardt. “Stochastic
blockmodels: First steps”. In: Social Networks 5.2 (1983), pp. 109–137. ISSN: 0378-
8733. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-8733(83)90021-7. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0378873383900217.
[23]
Tiago P. Peixoto. “Hierarchical Block Structures and High-Resolution Model Selec-
tion in Large Networks”. In: Phys. Rev. X 4 (1 Mar. 2014), p. 011047. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevX.4.011047. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.4.011047.
[24]
Srikanth Shenoy. “Elegant Text Pre-Processing with NLTK in sklearn Pipeline: Jump-
start your NLP code with a dose of component architecture”. In: Towards Data Sci-
ence (Nov. 2022). Published on November 9, 2022. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/elegant-text-pre-processing-with-nltk-in-sklearn-pipeline-d6fe18b91eb8.
[25]
PascalVKooten. Contractions. Accessed: July 14, 2023. 2019. URL: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//github.com/kootenpv/contractions%7D.
[26]
Tyler Barrus. PySpellChecker. Accessed: July 14, 2023. 2023. URL: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//pypi.org/project/pyspellchecker/%7D.
[27]
Steven Bird, Edward Loper, and Ewan Klein. Natural Language Processing with
Python. O’Reilly Media Inc., 2009.
38
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:47==
A
Colour mapping
Original Colour
Mapped Colour
#000000
#000000
#00756f
#009eaa
#009eaa
#009eaa
#00a368
#00cc78
#00cc78
#00cc78
#00ccc0
#009eaa
#2450a4
#2450a4
#3690ea
#2450a4
#493ac1
#2450a4
#515252
#898d90
#51e9f4
#009eaa
#6a5cff
#2450a4
#6d001a
#be0039
#6d482f
#6d482f
#7eed56
#7eed56
#811e9f
#b44ac0
#898d90
#898d90
#94b3ff
#009eaa
#9c6926
#6d482f
#b44ac0
#b44ac0
#be0039
#be0039
#d4d7d9
#898d90
#de107f
#de107f
#e4abff
#de107f
#ff3881
#be0039
#ff4500
#ff4500
#ff99aa
#de107f
#ffa800
#ffd635
#ffb470
#ffd635
#ffd635
#ffd635
#fff8b8
#ffd635
#ffffff
#ffffff
Table A.1: Colour mapping used to reduce the number of unique colours in the r/place
pixel placements dataset from 32 to 13.
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
39
==PAGE:48==
B
Atlas tool
Figure B.1: Screenshot of the r/place Atlas tool with manually labelled conflict areas and
a slider to browse the evolution of the r/place canvas through time.
40
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
==PAGE:49==
Collaboration and conflict in online communities
41
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk/english
