==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow 
using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and 
Proper Orthogonal Decompostion
Joshua Penrod Forrest
DTU Wind-M-0647
July 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0647 
July 2023
Project period: 
January - July 2023
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Jennifer Marie Rinker
Søren Juhl Andersen
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Joshua Penrod Forrest
Title:
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow 
using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and 
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Modern wind turbines require a controller for operation at rated and above-rated wind
speeds. These wind speeds are those for which turbines experience the highest ultimate
and fatigue loads, so minimizing these loads is key for designing less costly and material-
intensive turbines, and minimizing maintenance from damage.
Current controllers are
feedback controllers which update the operational state of the turbine according to feed-
back from the turbine response. Switching to feed-forward controllers would improve the
control scheme for wind turbines because the controller would be able to use information
from the incoming turbulence to anticipate the loads and minimize them. This requires
the ability to measure the incoming wind flow using LIDAR technology. LIDAR-assisted
inflow estimation using a turbine-mounted lidar for feed-forward turbine-mounted con-
trollers is becoming an increasing topic of interest in the wind energy industry.
This project aims to use a numerically simulated hub-mounted pulsed lidar to make incom-
ing wind measurements for the purpose of generating real-time input for a feed-forward
turbine controller. The application of proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) to lidar
data and a novel POD-based lidar-measurement-constrained inflow prediction method is
explored and analyzed using turbulence estimation error and comparisons of aeroelastic
simulations between the estimated and true turbulence in HAWC2.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I have many people to thank for support that enabled the completion of this thesis.
I would like to thank my advisor Jenni Rinker for her guidance, energy, and patience
throughout the project. To my advisor Søren Andersen I owe my gratitude for his support
and assistance with applying POD and the estimation algorith,. I am indebted to my
friend and workmate Esther Le Bougeant, whose company and collaboration bolstered me
through the long hours of the project. I would also like to express my appreciation for the
collaboration of Esperanza Andrea Soto Sagredo who also assisted in clarifying numerous
questions of mine throughout the project. I am lucky to have a wonderful community of
family and friends who have had my back in various ways the past six months. This thesis
is truly a product of all the people who have helped me along the way. It takes a village.
iv
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Wind turbine inflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Inflow measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
State of the Art
7
3.1
Inflow estimation for LIDAR assisted control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
The proper orthogonal decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Methodology
14
4.1
Turbulence generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Global modes basis formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Proper orthogonal decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Numerical LIDAR simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
Inflow estimation: Re-Orthogonalization of Modal Subset for Upscaling
. .
20
4.6
Mean absolute error and spatial mean absolute error . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Results
23
5.1
Proper orthogonal decomposition of Mann-generated turbulence . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Discussion
60
6.1
Turbulence and proper orthogonal decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Numerical LIDAR modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.3
Turbine response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Conclusion
63
7.1
Truncated turbulence reconstruction with POD and turbine response . . . .
63
7.2
Turbulence estimation and turbine response with ROMSU . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.3
Future work and open research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Acronyms
66
Bibliography
67
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
v
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The wind energy industry continues to expand globally as the technology matures, driving
down costs. An emerging capability that would continue this trend is feed-forward control.
Wind turbines have three general operational states, defined in terms of the rated wind
speed: below-rated operation, near-rated operation, and above-rated operation. These
three operational states are defined by the design of the turbine but enforced by the con-
troller, which uses the operational parameters of the turbine, including the wind speed,
rotor speed, electrical power, and blade pitch angle, among others, to determine the opti-
mum operational state for the turbine according to a set of predetermined instructions.
The two operational states of interest for a feed-forward controller are near-rated operation
and above-rated operation. In these two operational states, the controller is programmed
to reduce the thrust force of the rotor as much as possible, to minimize loading, while
producing constant rated power. In a turbulent state, this means that the controller is
actively pitching the blades to maintain the power produced, which results in a change in
the thrust. However, modern controllers are feedback controllers, which use the current
information about the turbine’s operation in order to update the future state, reactively.
This means that the turbine could see unnecessarily-high loads if the turbulence changes
faster than the controller can react. Feed-forward controllers would improve upon feed-
back controllers by being able to anticipate turbulence and resultant loads and adjust the
operational state of the wind turbine in advance, which has the potential for major reduc-
tion in the loads experienced in the turbine. This would reduce the design specifications
for turbine components, especially the tower, which would reduce costs.
The present challenge with employing feed-forward control is development of the capability
to obtain suitable information about the wind turbine inflow. Until the development of
remote sensing technologies, in particular light detection and ranging (LIDAR), measuring
the inflow upstream of a turbine to inform a feed-forward controller was not feasible [1].
LIDAR technology allows for remote sensing, and the measurement of multiple points in
space from a single vantage. To measure the wind in the inflow or the wake of a turbine,
it is easiest to mount a LIDAR on the turbine, typically on the nacelle, which many
researchers have measured from or simulated measurements from for various work [2]–
[9]. This works making downwind measurements, since the nacelle is situated behind the
turbine’s rotor while facing upwind. However, an upwind-facing nacelle-mounted LIDAR,
such as would need to be the case for informing a feed-forward controller, would have low
availability due to the passing of the blades in front of the sensor as the rotor turns.
Alternatively, a LIDAR system mounted on the hub of a turbine could face upwind unob-
structed. This project considers such a LIDAR, a pulsed LIDAR array of six total beams,
for the purpose of using the measurements to estimate the inflow of the wind coming into a
turbine for the purpose of feed-forward control. The LIDAR is only able to make a limited
number of measurements and does not provide enough information about the inflow in
the plane of turbulence coming into the turbine. Therefore, a supplemental estimation
method is required to be paired with the LIDAR measurements.
This project explores the use of the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) of turbulence
in order to eﬀiciently characterize the turbulent inflow based on the limited information
from the LIDAR. The project also introduces the Re-Orthogonalization of Modal Subset
for Upscaling (ROMSU) method, an estimation algorithm devised for this project using
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
1
==PAGE:7==
a reference set of POD modes. A simplified numerical version of a hub-mounted pulsed
LIDAR array is used to simulate LIDAR sampling to be used as input for ROMSU. The
analysis is performed on a turbulent inflow sized for the NREL 5 MW reference wind
turbine, which matches a typically-sized onshore wind turbine [10]. The NREL 5 MW
turbine response to the estimated turbulence is simulated in the HAWC2 aeroelastic solver
to further evaluate the validity of the estimation for reproducing turbine response. With
these developments, the project aims to answer the following research questions in the
development of estimation method for turbulent inflow for a feed-forward controller:
1. What is sensitivity of turbulence reconstruction accuracy to the number of included
POD modes?
2. What is the sensitivity of rotor speed, blade pitch angle, electrical power, and tower-
bottom fore-aft bending moment reconstruction accuracy to the number of POD
modes in an aeroelastic simulation?
3. How can POD be used for real-time inflow estimation using hub-mounted LIDAR
measurements?
4. How does the LIDAR’s sampling frequency and total sample point number capabil-
ities affect the accuracy of flow estimation?
This paper presents the work done to answer these core research questions, beginning
with a brief background in relevant technologies and a state-of-the-art of current research
in inflow estimation and characterization and proper orthogonal decomposition applied
to turbulence. Then, the methodology for the analysis procedure is presented, followed
by the results of the reconstruction and estimation of turbulent inflow using POD and
ROMSU using numerically simulated LIDAR measurements. These results include both
analysis of the error in the reconstructed or estimated turbulence, followed by the differ-
ence in the turbine response to the reconstructed or estimated turbulence from the base
case turbulence. The limitations of the project are presented succinctly afterward with
comments on the respective implications for the results of the study. Finally, conclusions
are drawn addressing the four core research questions presented here, and resulting open
research questions from the projected are formulated for future work.
2
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:8==
2
Background
This section briefly covers the background of how turbulence is characterized for wind
turbine inflow and also LIDAR sensing.
2.1
Wind turbine inflow
2.1.1
The atmospheric boundary layer
Wind turbines operate at the smallest scale of variability in the atmosphere, called the
micro-scale, characterized by variation in the scale of seconds and meters, dominated by
turbulence [1]. This puts turbines in the lowest part of the atmosphere, designated the
atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). The name of this part is derived from the influence
of the drag from the surface of the earth in the flow characteristics of the wind. The
atmospheric boundary layer is defined as the height below which the height at which the
wind, temperature, and humidity match the free atmosphere conditions [1]. The height
of the atmospheric boundary layer is not definite, and instead depends on the wind shear
and convection [11]. Wind shear occurs from the decrease of the wind velocity towards
zero as it approaches the ground. Convection occurs from the sun heating the surface,
which in turn radiates heat into the air just above the surface, which impacts the wind
shear profile [11].
The atmospheric surface (ASL) can be defined as the portion of the atmospheric boundary
layer closest to the ground level where the vertical flux of momentum and heat are nearly
constant, specifically less than 10% variation [11]. Consequently, the atmospheric surface
layer typically does not extend further than 100 m above ground level (AGL), as it occupies
just 10% of the atmospheric boundary layer, although this exact height will vary with the
site location and atmospheric conditions. In the surface layer, the wind profile is governed
primarily by surface drag and heat flux [11]. The surface layer is often modeled as having
neutral stability, meaning the mean wind velocity is assumed to be horizontal and to have
no variation in the stream-wise or transverse directions, which arises from neglecting the
influence of heat flux on energy transport in favor of just the prevailing wind direction
[11]. This project also assumes a neutral boundary layer profile in the generation of the
turbulence used, following the specifications of the international standards [12].
2.1.2
Turbulence in the wind
The largest effect of the surface drag on the wind is the creation of turbulence in the wind
[11].
Turbulence is an inherently chaotic phenomenon that escapes precise definition.
However, turbulence can be categorized into and behaves differently at different scales,
which vary in size both in time and space.
In classical fluid mechanics, these can be
broken up into three differing categories: the energy-containing range, the inertial sub-
range, and the dissipative range. The energy-containing range, also known as the integral
range, is composed of the largest eddies in terms of time- and length-scale, which are
then broken down as they lose energy through friction forces.
The inertial sub-range
is composed of smaller eddies than the integral range which have the relationship of a
-5/3 slope in the log-log plot of the energy content of the turbulence grouped by wave
number compared to wave number. The smallest scale of turbulence in the dissipative
range is characterized by a sharp drop-off in energy content as wave number increases due
to viscous forces dominating the flow scale [13]. The concern of this project is primarily
with the integral and inertial sub-ranges, those which contain the most energy in the flow
and have the largest effect on the loads response of the turbine [14].
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
3
==PAGE:9==
This discussion of turbulence can be used to further understanding of the turbulence in
the wind experienced by wind turbines. In wind engineering, the turbulence of the flow is
discussed in terms statistics to represent a period of turbulence, grouped into 10-minute
time windows [1], [12]. This follows a Reynolds averaging approach to representing the
wind, where the Navier-Stokes equations are time-averaged, which creates an extra term
in the equations to account for velocity fluctuations, dubbed the Reynolds Stress Tensor:
∂U i
∂t + U j
∂U i
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂P
∂xi
+ ν ∂2U i
∂xj∂xj
−∂uiuj
∂xj
.
(2.1)
Reynolds Stress Tensor
This allows for the representation of the wind to be represented as a tensor with a mean
and fluctuating component,
Ui = U i + ui,
(2.2)
which is how the turbulence statistics are analyzed in this project.
U i represents the
time-averaged component and ui represents the fluctuations around the mean. The sem-
inal paper proposing the Mann model for turbulence discusses in full detail the various
assumptions and tools used in order to create a spectral-based model that is easily gener-
ated and can be empirically fit to a flow case by tuning just three parameters is the basis
for the turbulence generation for this project [15].
2.2
Inflow measurement
2.2.1
Remote sensing: LIDARs
Wind LIDARs have become a prominent and important remote sensing technology for the
wind. The LIDAR used in wind speed measurement are coherent LIDARs, which measure
the Doppler shift in the back-scatter from aerosols from an infrared beam originating at
the LIDAR. Under the assumption that the aerosols are moving at the wind speed, which
holds due to the dominance of viscosity forces at the aerosol-referenced flow scale, this gives
the LIDAR an accurate measurement of the line-of-sight wind speed [1]. LIDARs have the
ability to make measurements of the wind speed at distances of several kilometers, which
presents a major advantage in cost saving for wind measurement campaigns compared
to the installation of multiple cup anemometers on meteorological masts at great heights
and/or in offshore conditions [1], [16]. However, LIDAR does require a reconstruction of
the wind from line-of-sight measurements from three ground-scanning LIDARs in order
to recreate the three componenets of turbulence, and in a single scanning position only
where the beams intersect [1], [17].
LIDARs make measurements by-time averaging their signal, but in very small time blocks,
on the order of 5 microseconds. The LIDAR performs a spatial averaging, given that it
is not actually measuring the wind speed at a infinitely small point in space, but rather
has a sizeable probe volume.
The LIDAR estimates the average wind velocity of the
probe volume by applying a spatial weighting function to the measurements, weighted
based on their position within the probe volume [1]. This is where coherent LIDARs can
be further subdivided into two types: continuous-wave LIDARs and pulsed LIDARs [1].
Continuous-wave LIDARs have a single focal length, so they can measure many points
continuously. However, the probe volume varies with the second power of the focus range
[1]. This gives the continuous-wave LIDAR a very high signal-to-noise ratio at very close
4
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: Example of probe volumes for three different continuous-wave LIDAR focal
lengths and a 60-meter length pulsed LIDAR beam with assumed weighting distributions,
from [3].
ranges, but much poorer signal at longer ranges. The increasing probe volume also reduces
the LIDAR’s accuracy of measurement of wind turbulence, since it reduces the resolution
of the measurement as seen in Figure 2.1 [3], [4]. Hence, the continuous-wave LIDAR’s
maximum applicability range is approximately 200 to 300 meters, limiting its use for
measuring multiple diameters upwind or downwind of large turbines that have diameters
exceeding 150 or 200 meters, particularly with the aim of inflow estimation [1], [17].
Pulsed LIDARs, by contrast, send out a pulse of specified length and use a time-of-
flight calculation to determine the Doppler shift at various distances along the beam
direction to sample multiple distances at once [1]. Pulsed LIDARs are limited in their
ability to measure short distances, only beginning to be able to make measurements at
50 meters distance or more, but can measure up to several kilometers without facing the
same probe volume increase issue that continuous-wave LIDARs have [1]. Pulsed LIDARs
also have the advantage of being able to take measurements at multiple range gates almost
simultaneously along a single line of sight, which opens up the possibility of measuring
turbulence evolution.
Turbine-mounted LIDARs offer the advantage of looking along the longitudinal axis of the
wind flow direction. There is a lot of interest presently in using turbine-mounted LIDARs,
specifically nacelle-mounted LIDARs, for various studies of the wind flow around turbines.
There are multiple studies using real or simulated nacelle-mounted LIDAR for investigating
wind turbine wakes [9] and wind turbine inflow [2]–[7], [18], the latter group with inflow
estimation in mind.
However, single turbine-mounted LIDARs suffer from the cyclops dilemma, where a single
nacelle- or spinner-based LIDAR system cannot measure a three-dimensional wind vector
since LIDAR can only measure the line-of-sight wind speed, as seen in Figure 2.2 [1]. There
are various assumptions that can be made about the inflow to overcome this obstacle, each
with its own limitations, to be discussed further.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: A visualization of the uncertainty of the longitudinal wind direction from a
scanning LIDAR, from [1].
6
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:12==
3
State of the Art
This section reviews the literature for inflow estimation and POD, summarizing the key
findings and their applications to the project. Limitations and gaps in the research that
are targeted in this project are also given.
3.1
Inflow estimation for LIDAR assisted control
Inflow estimation for LIDAR assisted control has become a topic of increased interest
recently in wind energy, following the increase in LIDAR capability and the rising desire for
feed-forward control to reduce loads on turbines [1], [5]–[7]. In particular, much focus has
been given to nacelle-mounted LIDARs pointing upwind, with the goal of inflow parameter
estimation to aid turbine control [2]–[5], [7], [18].
One noteworthy study investigating real-time inflow estimation is [7], where the authors
explore using nacelle LIDAR data to generate constrained turbulence boxes with the aim
of reducing the statistical uncertainty of turbine loads and power production. The con-
straints were imposed on u-turbulence only and the authors found the improvements from
constraining the other components of turbulence to be marginal. Twelve different LIDAR
sampling configurations are tested for sourcing the constraint points. These patterns in-
clude several fixed-point patterns, a pulsed LIDAR scanning a cross patter, and various
circular and Lissajous curve patterns. Six of the twelve patterns were chosen for the power
and loads response testing in HAWC2, an aerodynamics solver for wind turbines, based
on their effectiveness and also to include a pattern of each type. Their results show that
constraining turbulence generated in a random Gaussian field using the Mann turbulence
model reduces the standard deviation of the energy produced and the predicted loads com-
pared to unconstrained turbulence boxes. This project will also aim to analyze estimating
longitudinal turbulence with respect to expected turbine response.
The tower-bottom fore-aft moment extreme load uncertainty was reduced by 61% and 44%
for length scale parameters L = 29.4 m and L = 72 m, respectively, for the optimum con-
figuration, a double-co-rotating pattern with respective sizes equal to 0.87 rotor diameters,
a scanning frequency of 11.7 Hz, and a rotation period of 5.46 seconds. The turbulence
boxes constrained by the cross-pattern pulsed LIDAR configuration led to a 47% and
29% reduction in the uncertainty of the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment extreme
loads. However, the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment channel was not investigated.
The authors note the potential for constraining turbulence from LIDAR for reducing the
uncertainty in load modeling for longitudinal-turbulence-driven turbine loads, including
tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment. The turbulence length scale used for the tur-
bulence box generation influenced the uncertainty also, but differently for different load
channels. However, there is also a consideration of LIDAR volume averaging and its abil-
ity to capture different length-scale turbulence. Most notably, the authors conclude that
the overall achieved reduction in uncertainty did not correlate fully with the proportion of
variance explained by the different scanning patterns, which implies there are more factors
needed to determine the optimal scanning pattern. This means that there is a need to
further study scanning pattern effect on modeled load uncertainty reduction. This project
aims to investigate the influence of scanning pattern on the amount of information from
the LIDAR that can be obtained with regards to the rotor response.
The study performed in [6] builds on the work in [7]. In the paper, a method for prepro-
cessing LIDAR data for generating Kaimal-based constrained turbulence is proposed and
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
7
==PAGE:13==
demonstrated by evaluating the technique in aeroelastic simulations with two differently-
sized rotors for reductions in load uncertainty compared to the unconstrained box. The
paper used a single LIDAR configuration: a numerically simulated four-beam continuous-
wave LIDAR assumed to be mounted at the center of the rotor, for simplicity. Blockage
from blades is also not considered. The comparison between constrained and unconstrained
turbulence boxes was made by using a single Mann turbulence box as “true inflow” for
a desired case and generating 6 constrained Mann turbulence boxes and 6 unconstrained
Mann turbulence boxes. The loads analyses were performed for the DTU 10 MW research
wind turbine, which has a radius of 189 m, and the NREL 5 MW reference wind turbine,
which has a radius of 126 m. However, the LIDAR scanning positions were unchanged
between simulations and were at approximately 29% and 41% of the rotor radius, re-
spectively. As mentioned in [7], a more optimal LIDAR radial scanning location in the
turbulence field is likely closer to 70% of the rotor radius for loads correlation, so these
are sub-optimal locations. This project will target the scanning locations of the numerical
LIDAR towards a more effective rotor radius.
The constrained turbulence boxes showed significant improvement over the unconstrained
turbulence boxes in replicating the loads from the “true inflow” turbulence box, both
time-series loads and damage-equivalent loads used for calculating fatigue. This is due to
the improved rotor-averaged wind speed prediction, which improved the replication of the
controller scheme, which significantly impacts the loads experienced at near-rated wind
speeds and near-cutout wind speeds which were both simulated. The results show that
the improvement was more significant for the NREL 5 MW turbine, which is likely due
to the relatively better LIDAR sampling postions for the applied constraints. The author
notes that improving the LIDAR sampling configuration is a need for future development
that would likely improve the reductions in error further.
Another study investigates the use of LIDARs to direct controller scheduling for reducing
the extreme loads a turbine experiences in operation [5]. The paper focuses on describ-
ing a method for estimating upwind turbulence intensity from LIDAR measurements and
demonstrates a scheduling scheme aimed to reduce the extreme loads in the tower during
severe turbulence conditions, while maintaining power production and load levels during
normal operating conditions. The paper used a numerically simulated 4-beam pulsed LI-
DAR, however, the authors note that there was no implementation of blade impact on
LIDAR availability included. There is also little mention of the LIDAR’s influence on
results. The results from the simulations show that changing the gain in the controller
depending on the turbulence intensity reduced extremes in the tower-bottom fore-aft bend-
ing moment by 34.2%. This simple implementation of feed-forward control shows the high
potential for reducing extreme loads. This project has more ambitious goals of inflow
estimation rather than just identifying periods of high turbulence. However, this is an
early example of using LIDAR-assisted control.
There are several studies investigating configurations of turbine-mounted LIDARs for
real-time inflow estimation. One such paper performed a mathematical optimization and
simulated analysis of the number of LIDAR sample points and their respective locations,
weighing the benefits from the improvement in accuracy of the rotor-effective wind speed
measurement and the additions costs of adding more sensors [4]. The mathematical anal-
ysis of the Mann turbulence box spectral tensor and continuous-wave LIDAR model re-
vealed that there are diminishing returns in adding additional sensors beyond 4 to 6 beams.
However, this metric may change depending on the goals of the measurements.
Additionally, the best focus distance for the 4-beam configuration with a 30-degree half
8
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:14==
opening angle was around 30 m, which the authors attribute to being a cross-section
of the increasing LIDAR probe volume and alignment with the mean wind direction.
However, it should also be noted that the diameter of the turbine in the study is 52
meters, and that with a 30 to 35 meters focal distance with a 30 degree half-opening
angle, the measurement’s radial location is 15 to 17.5 meters from the center of the rotor,
or 58% to 67% of the blade span. The simulation results presented a slightly different
optimal condition, where the focal distance is slightly further away from the rotor and
between 57% and 75% of the blade span radially. These results agree with other papers
concluding the best radial position for measuring the wind speed, and at a high angle,
for lowest-error wind estimation [2], [3], [18]. However, their limitation of scope to rotor
effective wind speed is a lower resolution than the aim of this study.
There has also been a two-part investigation of using LIDAR to estimate the Reynolds
stress tensors of the inflow [2], [3].
The first studies different continuos-wave nacelle-
mounted LIDAR configurations for accuracy in estimating Reynolds stresses with the goal
of better 3-dimensional turbulence model validation for loads simulations. The authors
vary the configurations by the number of beams, half-opening cone angle, and focus dis-
tance. Specifically, a staring LIDAR, multiple-beams in circular patterns with and without
a staring beam, and a SpinnerLidar beam array are compared. The results were compared
to those of a simulated sonic LIDAR for bias and uncertainty.
Another paper investigated differing CW nacelle LIDAR configurations for estimating the
Reynolds stresses of the flow [2]. This was done for the V52 turbine, assuming frozen
turbulence. It was found that a 6-beam configuration was optimal, and also that at least
one beam needed to be at a different opening angle. Additionally, as described in the
paper, wider angles were better: scans made closer to the rotor increased the validity
of frozen turbulence, and also captured wider range of rotor plane projection. Notably,
increasing beams only reduced uncertainty, not error.
A follow-up paper, [3], does a sensitivity study of the ability to estimate the Reynolds
stresses, compared to a sonic LIDAR, using a nacelle-LIDAR with 8 different beam con-
figurations. This was done using both continuous-wave and pulsed LIDARs. Again, the
findings were that the LIDAR with six beams and large opening angles was best suited.
Unanswered question: why pulsed LIDAR bias exists.
One paper investigates two primary questions: for creating Mann turbulence boxes, what
is the best method for scaling turbulence to the desired level given the box’s physical size,
discretization, and wind speed, and what level of box physical resolution is required for
fatigue loads resulting from 10-minute aeroelastic simulations to converge, and how many
simulations are required? [19] The authors conclude using the target spectrum model to
scale the turbulence in order to preserve the turbulence frequency-energy spectrum, and
using a Mann box with grid discretization less than 1.65% in all directions relative to
the rotor diameter being simulated. This project follows those findings in the sizing and
discretization of the Mann turbulence box.
Some common themes across the papers are the impact of the opening angle of the LIDAR,
and the need for assumptions of homogeneous turbulence in the flow empty citation
or linear shear profiles empty citation in addition to discussing the merits of multiple
LIDAR opening angles empty citation in order to overcome the cyclops dilemma. If I
write more text what happens...
However, many of these papers investigate the flow only for small turbines. For larger
turbine inflows, assuming homogeneous turbulence holds less validity. Additionally, shear
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
9
==PAGE:15==
profiles begin to diverge from the log-law region once turbines extend above the atmo-
spheric surface layer, also presenting challenges for establishing validity of these methods
with larger turbines. Most papers looking at nacelle-mounted LIDAR do not mention
rotor blockage as a consideration. As turbines grow in size, the solidity of the rotor at the
hub increases as the blade root diameters increase to account for increasing blade length.
This leads in turn to increased blockage from the blades passing in front of a nacelle-
mounted LIDAR, reducing the availability of data collection for LIDAR-assisted inflow
estimation. This significantly reduces the viability of using nacelle-mounted LIDAR for
inflow estimation with larger turbines. Therefore, a hub-mounted LIDAR is proposed for
developing a LIDAR-assisted control method.
3.2
The proper orthogonal decomposition
The POD is a powerful matrix decomposition when applied to matrix data.
It takes
coupled data samples and decomposes them into a basis of orthogonal modes and related
principle components which correlate to the explained variance of the mode. For a detailed
presentation of POD and its application across research, including fluid dynamics, read
[20]. The application of POD to fluid dynamics to describe turbulence is not new, but
modern computing technology has increased the application abilities [20]. Importantly,
POD is a useful tool for linear stochastic estimation, which this work takes advantage of
for creating a POD basis to reference during the real-time inflow estimation.
However, POD has more traditionally been used for understanding and characterizing
pressure fields and fluid flows rather than for prediction. An early study appliesPOD to a
larger data set than many earlier and contemporary studies [21], where the authors stud-
ied the wind pressure field on a flat building surface from 512 pressure ports. They found
systemic structure using POD in the random field fluctuations, and were able to approx-
imate the pressure field using just the first few of these modes. The authors also write a
detailed discussion of the application of POD to field or simulation data and emphasize
the importance of using mean-centered data for the decomposition, and demonstrate how
more information can be extracted from few modes by using mean-centered data rather
than the raw data. The paper also includes a clear and pedagogical presentation of a
simplified application of POD to show how its first modes follow the direction of highest
variance in the data set using a simple locus.
Two early papers applying POD to wind turbine inflow also evaluated sensitivity in tur-
bine load response and the effect of variance in spectral model parameters used for the
turbulence generation on the decomposition [22], [23]. The first applied POD to a 6-by-6
grid of flow simulations using both the Kaimal spectral model and IEC exponential co-
herence model with the goal of assessing which inflow characteristics drive turbine loads
by performing a sensitivity study of including differing numbers of modes and simulating
the 600 kW National Wind Technology Center’s Advanced Research Turbine response.
However, the authors only considered u-turbulence in their analysis, which has later been
shown to be an incomplete way to treat turbulence using POD and that all three turbu-
lence components should be used in the decomposition [24]. Nevertheless, the findings in
the paper are still useful, and show that flow reconstruction with the first few POD modes
can describe a large fraction of the energy preserved in the longitudinal turbulence. While
higher modes are necessary for the higher frequency turbulence structures, fewer modes
are required for recreated turbine load response, particularly those driven by longitudinal
turbulence.
However, the authors note the limitation of the Kaimal-based spectral model, which limits
the capability to evaluate the v−and w−components of turbulence [22]. They followed
10
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:16==
up the first study with a second evaluating the use of different spectral parameters for
generating turbulence, this time limiting the scope to the IEC exponential coherence
model, which is a stationary flow model [23]. To study the influence of changing input
spectral parameters for the turbulence generation model, the authors estimated the POD
basis of 49 total modes to 3 varying modes and 46 mean modes after finding that all but
the first 3 modes have much lower total energy contribution and also variation in energy
contribution. Therefore, they were able to evaluate the variability in the flow by looking
just at the reconstruction of the first three modes.
A similar study of the spatial distributions of the IEC standard models for generating
turbulent wind for design load cases and comparing between them provides some further
insight on the importance of the model chosen for turbulence generation [25]. The study’s
primary finding is that the Mann turbulence model generates coherent structures that
stretch in the longitudinal direction where the Kaimal spectral model creates structures
that are more random in shape, which leads to their observed differences in the estimated
fatigue life of turbines when using one model or the other. The authors had the same
observation as [22], that the Kaimal model is limited by only having a coherence function
for u-turbulence. Another important finding is that POD finds the coherent structures
in the Mann model and therefore the use of the Mann model is more appropriate for
generating turbulence than the Kaimal spectral model when using POD for analysis.
The majority of POD studies have been performed in Cartesian coordinates, but in certain
cases polar or cylindrical coordinates are more useful, particularly if the sampling of the
data is performed radially, as in [24]. The study investigated the outflow of a jet, specifi-
cally the turbulent region using POD to identify the coherent structures present, for the
purpose of performing a spectral analysis of the highest-energy modes. In this present
work, POD will likewise be performed using cylindrical coordinates due to the sampling
pattern of the pulsed LIDAR which will be spinning with the rotor.
POD has also been applied to compare continuous-wave LIDAR data with an LES simu-
lation for wake model benchmarking [9]. The study compared LIDAR data of the wake
from a nacelle-mounted SpinnerLidar on a 27-meter-diameter turbine with and LES sim-
ulation of the wake using POD to compare the spatial modes between the two cases to
validate the coherent structures generated in the LES simulation. A secondary goal was
to also determine the feasibility of using a nacelle-mounted LIDAR for this purpose. A
significant approximation made in the study was to interpolate the full rosette scan of the
SpinnerLidar into a single plane for the POD using a linear spatial interpolation. The
study concluded that the LIDAR was useful for calculating POD modes to compare with
the LES simulation, but commented that the simulated LIDAR correction was not suﬀi-
cient. A difference with this study is that the paper generated the POD modes directly
from the continuous-wave LIDAR data, where in this case the total number of assumed
LIDAR sample points in each plane of turbulence is much lower and will therefore be used
to constrain the reconstruction of POD modes from a pre-generated global basis.
A good example of an analogous methodology is found in a study using POD as part of a
stochastic estimation method for wind turbine wakes [14]. The method, called predictive
and stochastic reduced-order model, uses a database of LES flow simulations for three
different flow cases characterized by having different values in the parameter space, in this
case the turbine’s thrust coeﬀicient. The proper orthogonal decomposition is then used
to generate the modes for the analysis, however in this application it is applied to all of
the flow cases together, forming what the authors call a global basis set of modes. The
complex cross-spectral density matrix of the modal time series derived from the global
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
11
==PAGE:17==
basis is used to describe the second-order statistics of the flow. The method then makes
predictions by interpolating the cross-spectral density matrix within the parameter space,
namely the thrust coeﬀicient of the upwind turbine, and then generates stochastic time
series. The authors found that the global basis was able to provide close matches with the
cross-spectral density matrix for the predictive case, taking advantage of the recurrence of
dominant coherent structures across different flow cases within the flow in the wind farm
they analyzed. The overall method also performed well, being able to provide LES-fidelity
statistics with much faster prediction computation, given the global basis has already been
created.
The most important development from [14] for the present paper is the idea of formulating
a global basis of POD modes using a set of representative flow cases in order to build
a reduced-order model to eﬀiciently predict a generic flow case. However, the authors
point out that the optimal basis for POD reconstruction is using the data set to predict
itself, and that a global basis will always be sub-optimal compared to this and introduces
additional error besides the error from reconstructing the flow with a smaller number of
modes. However, the focus of the paper is on the predictive reduced-order model, not the
generation of an eﬀicient global modes basis.
A follow-up paper addresses the formation of an eﬀicient global modes basis for the purpose
of using POD in predictive reduced-order models [26]. For a similar wind farm case to study
wind turbine wake inflow, a global basis was constructed iteratively within the 52 flow cases
in the data set. A single flow case was chosen first to create a single-set global basis. This
basis was then used to reconstruct the other 51 flow cases, and a turbulence error metric
was used to quantify the quality of these reconstructions. Then, the data set for which the
worst prediction was made is added to the global basis, and the process is repeated. The
authors compared global bases of 1, 4, and 9 data sets. They found that including more
data sets to generate the global modes reduced the error in the reconstruction of the other
flow cases. This was due to the two primary effects of balancing the global basis on the
extremes of the possible flow cases and the increased number of independent snapshots
from adding additional data sets of the same size. The comparison of the global basis to
the optimal local basis shows that the global basis still creates additional error besides
modal truncation error, but that this error can be reduced by making the global basis
more eﬀicient. For the work in the present paper, this global basis optimization will be
kept in mind for analyzing the basis eﬀiciency. However, since the generation of Mann
turbulence boxes is less computational expensive than LES simulations, there is less of
a need to optimize the basis for a minimum number of data sets included for this work.
Instead, a specified number of data sets will be used to capture the relevant flow cases and
the resulting error from the global basis will be evaluated.
There is one example of research conducted using a coupled POD and linear stochastic
estimation method combined with limited data measurements to obtain real-time esti-
mations of flow velocities [27]. The authors ran an experiment with anemometer probes
measuring the ventilation airflow through a window into a room. They characterized the
inflow by the first two POD modes derived from the full data set, then recreated the flow
with two measurement points and the POD basis. This is an example of analogous re-
search, however applied to a much simpler flow case and with much higher data sampling
capability than is expected of the LIDAR measurements in this work. A key takeaway
from the study for this work is that the number of measurement points available dictates
the maximum number of POD modes that can be used in the real-time reconstruction.
While various research has used proper orthogonal decomposition for turbulent flow analy-
12
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:18==
sis, applied POD to LIDAR measurements, and used coupled methods to perform stochas-
tic and real-time flow estimations and reconstructions, no single piece of research, to the
author’s knowledge, has used all of these methods together for the purpose of real-time
wind turbine inflow estimation.
3.3
Summary
What are the gaps in the research overall? Any themes? What is novel about this work?
Hub-mounted, pulsed LIDAR
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
13
==PAGE:19==
4
Methodology
This section outlines the foundational methods and workflows used for the project. The
workflow of the project is governed by the desire to define a prediction case for turbulence,
define a LIDAR configuration, and test the ability to estimate the turbulence and turbine
response in compared to the original prediction case. Then, the LIDAR can be iterated
and the process repeated to define the limits of the estimation method given the available
LIDAR technology.
Figure 4.1: Simplified project workflow.
The overall procedure of the project, presented in sequential order, is summarized in the
workflow diagram in Figure 4.1. First, the Mann turbulence boxes for the desired analysis
flow cases are generated. The transverse turbulence components are set to 0; only the
longitudinal turbulence is preserved. These turbulence boxes are then used to form the
global POD basis, and it can be an iterative process between these two steps to create a
global basis that is satisfactory. Once a global basis has been created, the relevant pre-
diction seeds can also be generated, also preserving only the longitudinal turbulence. The
prediction seeds should first be run in HAWC2, in order to obtain the rotor azimuth time
series for the algorithm for the numerical hub-mounted LIDAR. Once the rotor azimuth
time series has been obtained, the LIDAR simulation can be generated, specifically with
the implementation and purpose of obtaining the sampling locations and measurements
from the prediction seed.
The numerical LIDAR simulation also performs the interpolation collection algorithm to
form groups of LIDAR measurement values into common longitudinal positions so that
there is more information to perform ROMSU for estimation with more modes. The sam-
pling locations and measurements for the LIDAR simulated are then used in the inflow
estimation procedure, which results in an estimated version of the original Mann turbu-
lence box of the prediction seed. For each time step in the Mann turbulence box, there are
two cases for how the turbulence field is estimated. If there are LIDAR measurements at
14
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:20==
that space-time step, ROMSU is performed using the information available. If there are
no measurements that have been taken or interpolated into a space-time step, then the
estimation is obtained by linearly interpolating between the previous and next ROMSU
estimations. The resulting estimated turbulence box is then used as the turbulence input
for a HAWC2 simulation to compare the turbine response to the reference prediction seed.
The LIDAR version can then be adjusted and the process can be repeated from the LIDAR
simulation step.
4.1
Turbulence generation
There are two general ways of generating a Mann turbulence box with a desired turbulence
variance. The box is given by three different parameters: L, the turbulence length scale
parameter, Γ, a derived eddy lifetime parameter, and αϵ
2
3 , a spectral multiplier for the
inertial subrange. The first method to generate the Mann box with desired variance is
to set standard values for L, Γ, and αϵ
2
3 and generate the turbulence box. Then, the
turbulence in the box is scaled such that the desired variance is reached. However, this
process is not very physical, and so the second method of determining the Mann box
parameters a priori to obtain the desired variance is more desirable, albeit slightly less
convenient. This can be done by first calculating the desired variance in the box based
on the wind speed and turbulence intensity to be modeled. Then, the variance can be
approximately calculated using a ratio of the isotropic turbulence to the turbulence to be
generated by the combination of parameters:
σ = σisotropic/risotropic.
(4.1)
The isotropic turbulence variance can be calculated directly from the Mann turbulence
box parameters,
σisotropic =
αϵ
2
3
55
9
Γ (5/6)
Γ (1/3)π−1/2L−2/3 ,
(4.2)
assuming that the spectral multiplier for the inertial subrange is 1, where Γ (z) is the
generalized factorial function, defined as:
Γ (z) =
∫∞
0
xz−1e−x dx.
(4.3)
The Mann parameters L = 33.6 m and Γ = 3.9 were chosen according to IEC standards for
a standard neutral atmosphere [12]. The parameter αϵ
2
3 was set so that the longitudinal
variance of the full data set, σ1, produced for each wind speed matches the prescribed lon-
gitudinal variance in the normal turbulence model for Category B turbulence, summarized
in Table 4.1 [12]. The physical longitudinal dimension of the turbulence box are given by
the physical length of the flow needed at the desired mean wind speed in order for the
turbulence box to span a distance that equates to 600 seconds. The lateral dimensions
of the box were set to the smallest multiple of 5 greater than 105% of the length of the
diameter of the NREL 5 MW turbine, 126 m [10]. The discretization of the turbulence
box was set according to recommendations based on research of simulation convergence
sensitivity in HAWC2 from the discretization of the turbulence box relative to the rotor’s
physical dimension in [19].
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
15
==PAGE:21==
Table 4.1: Mann turbulence generator input file parameters for desired longitudinal vari-
ance for 11.4 m/s wind speed.
Denotation
Value
Description
-
3
Number of spatial dimensions
-
3
Number of turbulence components to simulate
Nx
8192
Discretization of the longitudinal flow direction
Ny
64
Discretization of the horizontal direction
Nz
64
Discretization of the vertical direction
Lx
68401
Physical length of the longitudinal flow direction [m]
Ly
135
Physical length of the horizontal direction [m]
Lz
135
Physical length of the vertical direction [m]
-
basic
Turbulence generation type
αϵ
2
3
0.1782
Mann turbulence spectral multiplier for inertial subrange
L
33.6
Mann turbulence length scale parameter
Γ
3.9
Mann turbulence derived eddy lifetime parameter
-
1001
Seed number
Table 4.2: Summary of varying parameters for Mann turbulence generation.
Mean wind speed
dx [m]
dy [m]
dz [m]
Lx [m]
αϵ
2
3
11.4 m/s
0.835
2.109
2.109
6,840
0.178
22 m/s
1.670
2.109
2.109
13,200
0.414
4.2
Global modes basis formation
Forming a basis of global POD modes consists of using a set of data to derive the modes
that is representative of the expected flows. The primary advantage of a global basis is
the ability to use a single reference set for modes lookup. A disadvantage of the formation
of a global basis is that it will always be less optimal when used to reconstruct a flow
compared to modes derived from the flow itself. However, the extra error from a global
basis can be quantified and justified to be acceptable. For a detailed presentation of the
formation of a global basis, see [26]. For an example of the use of a global POD basis for
flow prediction, see [14].
For this project, the need to form an optimized global basis in terms of reaching a minimum
possible error with as little data input as possible is less apparent since the generation
and management of Mann turbulence boxes is not computationally expensive. Only the
justification of the use of the global basis is required by demonstrating a convergence of
error introduced by the basis. As was noted in [26], including extra data sets within a
flow set will lead to lower error and eventual error convergence. The desired flow cases for
this project are at near-rated wind speed, 11.4 m/s, and well-above rated wind speed, 22
m/s. The global basis is therefore composed of the first six seeds generated using a Mann
turbulence box generator. The eﬀiciency of the basis is discussed in ??, where a seventh
seed for a 11.4 m/s wind speed has been generated and projected into global basis modes
and its own POD modes for comparison.
1Value changes with desired wind speed.
2Value changes with desired variance level.
16
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:22==
Table 4.3: Summary of Mann-generated turbulence boxes longitudinal turbulence, in ab-
solute values and normalized by the mean wind speed.
Seed number
11.4 m/s case [m/s (-)]
22 m/s case [m/s (-)]
1001
2.04 (0.179)
3.15 (0.143)
1002
1.83 (0.161)
2.84 (0.129)
1003
1.84 (0.161)
2.86 (0.130)
1004
2.20 (0.193)
3.40 (0.155)
1005
2.10 (0.184)
3.25 (0.148)
1006
1.90 (0.167)
2.95 (0.134)
Global basis average
1.99 (0.174)
3.08 (0.140)
1007 (prediction seed)
1.73 (0.152)
2.67 (0.121)
IEC Class B
2.01 (0.176)
3.09 (0.141)
4.3
Proper orthogonal decomposition
The proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) can be understood through comparison to
the singular value decomposition (SVD). The SVD of a data matrix X is the product of
three matrices,
X = UΣV ∗,
(4.4)
where ∗denotes the complex conjugate transpose [28]. Here, X ∈Cn×m has m samples of
n data points. U ∈Cn×n and V ∈Cm×m are unitary matrices with orthonormal columns
and Σ ∈Cn×m is a matrix containing the singular values, which are real and nonnegative,
on the diagonal and zeros off the diagonal [28].
A way to speak illustratively about the SVD for the purposes of this paper is the think of
X exclusively as time-series data representing the turbulence data in a Mann box. If the
Mann box has discretization [Nx, Ny, Nz] and u′, v′, and w′ turbulence are all considered,
then the dimensions of X are n = 3×Ny ×Nz and m = Nx. U then represents the modal
time series normalized by the eigenvalues, or singular values, in Σ, and V contains the
turbulence modes[29].
POD, also known as principal component analysis, uses SVD but involves some additional
pre-processing steps [28], [29]. First the row-wise mean of the data must be computed. Let
us assume that data matrix X is mean-centered data computed from non-mean-centered
data matrix, M. The row-wise mean of M, m, is computed to calculate the mean matrix:
M =


1
...
1

m.
(4.5)
which is then subtracted from M which gives the mean-centered data matrix, X:
X = M −M.
(4.6)
The autocovariance of the mean-centered data matrix is computed:
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
17
==PAGE:23==
C =
1
n −1X∗X.
(4.7)
The principal components can be obtained by computing the eigen-decomposition of C,
CV = V D,
(4.8)
which can be decomposed into:
C = V DV T .
(4.9)
It is important to note that the decomposition of C can be used to show that in fact POD
is just the SVD of the autocovariance matrix of the mean-centered data,
V DV T = XT X =
(
UΣV T )T (
UΣV T )
,
(4.10)
which is equivalent to Equation 4.7 assuming real-valued data in X.
Therefore, the
information obtained the decomposition from POD and SVD can be compared. From
Equation 4.10 it can seen that V is equivalent in both and that the singular values and
principle components are related by:
D = ΣT U T UΣ = Σ2,
(4.11)
because U is unitary and U T U = I. A physical way of thinking about the difference
between D and Σ is that D gives the explained variance in the data set by each of the
modes where Σ gives the standard deviations[28], [29]. This understanding of the principle
components and singular values comes from the fact that the modes are orthogonal to each
other, which allows for the linear addition of variance between subsets of the decomposed
data.
A convenient aspect of POD is the ability to quickly reconstruct time-series of the data
from the decomposition [22], [29]. The modal time series, Z, is computed by:
Z = V T X.
(4.12)
The mean-centered data matrix, X, can then be reconstructed from the modal time series
and modes vector matrix. The reconstruction can be a full reconstruction including all
of the modes, or a partial reconstruction that produces a reduced-order representation of
the original data matrix,
ˆX =
J
∑
j=1
vjZj,
(4.13)
where J < n and V =
{
v1, v2, . . . , vj, . . . , vn
}
[22].
18
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:24==
Table 4.4: Key details of the numerically simulated LIDAR patterns for the project.
Procedure
Rotation with hub
Frequency
Ranges
Radial positions
Pattern 1
In unison
No
13.65 Hz
1
0.8/R
Pattern 2
In unison
Yes
13.65 Hz
1
0.8/R
Pattern 3
In unison
Yes
0.33 Hz
10
[0.63/R, 0.94/R]
Pattern 4
Individually
Yes
2.00 Hz
10
[0.63/R, 0.94/R]
Pattern 5
Individually
Yes
4.00 Hz
10
[0.63/R, 0.94/R]
Figure 4.2: Pattern 4 LIDAR: a full scan cycle, interpolated into the Mann box grid (left)
and a snapshot of two scans interpolated into rigid planes for better use with the ROMSU
method (right).
4.4
Numerical LIDAR simulation
The numerical LIDAR is implemented as a hub-mounted pulsed LIDAR with multiple
patterns investigated. There are five different sampling patterns presented in this project,
detailed in Table 4.4. Actually, each of the sampling patterns has the same beam distribu-
tion: a single staring beam, and five beams with 15-degree half-opening angles arrayed in
an equilateral pentagonal shape, as shown in Figure 4.2. What varies between the patterns
are as follows. Pattern 1 and Pattern 2 sample with all beams in unison at a single range
with a frequency equal to the inverse of the time step in the Mann turbulence boxes used,
but Pattern 1 remains fixed in position, sampling the same points in space constantly,
while Pattern 2 turns with the rotor hub. Pattern 3 samples with all beams in unison
with ten ranges, but at a frequency of 0.33 Hz, compared to Pattern 4, which samples
with a frequency of 2.00 Hz but a single beam at a time with ten ranges, which results in
an equal number of sample points. Pattern 4 is the base LIDAR for this project. Pattern
5 samples with a frequency of 4.00 Hz one beam at a time with ten ranges, resulting in
twice the total number of sample points compared to Pattern 3 and Pattern 4.
The numerical LIDAR used is based on a generic pulsed LIDAR system. Pattern 4, the
base case, has been modeled after this system. However, the numerical modeling of the
LIDARs examined in this project is limited to just the sampling scheme. The LIDARs
modeled make the following assumptions that deviate from a full model of a LIDAR:
• No volume averaging.
The LIDAR measures the turbulence only at exactly the
locations specified.
• Perfect u-turbulence measurement. The LIDAR is capable of perfectly measuring
the longitudinal turbulence when the line-of-sight is not staring directly downwind.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
19
==PAGE:25==
Table 4.5: Generic pulsed LIDAR system parameters.
Characteristic
Value or type
Detection range
100 m to 2000 m
Velocity range
0 to 30 m/s
Accuracy
0.1 m/s
Data rate
2 Hz
Pulse width
500 ns
Doppler calculation
FFT on successive range gates
Range resolution
Adjustable number and size (FFT points) of range gates
• No restriction on range settings. The LIDAR can measure ranges at any distance
relative to each other, with no minimum distance between ranges enforced.
• No included turbine dynamics. The translational and rotational motions of the rotor
hub, which would affect the exact direction of the LIDAR beams when sampling,
has not been considered.
Finally, the LIDAR is interpolated into the Mann box coordinate grid using nearest-
neighbor interpolation, to obtain the measurement point locations and values directly from
the Mann box. This is where the method benefits in accuracy from a finely discretized
Mann box.
4.5
Inflow estimation: Re-Orthogonalization of Modal
Subset for Upscaling
The Re-Orthogonalization of Modal Subset for Upscaling (ROMSU) method allows for
the continuous estimation of the turbulence inflow based on LIDAR measurements. The
method uses the global basis of modes as a reference, and uses the combination of LIDAR
sampling location and measurement value information to update the estimation of the
inflow. Also presented as psuedocode in Algorithm 1, the algorithm uses the measure-
ment locations, {Zl, Yl}, to sub-sample the global modes, V . The algorithm then uses
QR decomposition to orthogonalize the sub-sampled modes, VS, in matrix Q and obtain
information about the linear scaling from the upper diagonal matrix R. Specifically, the
Gram-Schmidt process is used as the calculation method in QR decomposition. The QR
decomposition preserves the values of the first subsampled mode, and then builds a set of
orthogonal modes from the sub-sampled set by making each sub-sampled mode orthogonal
to the set, adding the orthogonal sub-sampled modes one at a time. This allows for the
measurement values from the LIDAR to be projected into this orthogonal subsampled set
of modes, which obtains the modal amplitudes information.
Then, the scaling information in the upper-diagonal R matrix is used to rescale the original
global basis modes, which preserves the orthogonality of the subsampled locations to each
other. This mode fitting results in a preservation of the first mode and increasing error
in each successive mode as a result of the fitting. The inflow turbulence estimation is
then made by the matrix multiplication of the rescaled modes and the calculated modal
amplitudes from the orthogonal subset of the modes.
For LIDAR Pattern 3, Pattern 4, and Pattern 5, the implementation of the ROMSU
method requires interpolation of the predictions in space and time between planes that
have LIDAR measurements from which to rescale the modes and calculate the respective
20
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:26==
Algorithm 1 ROMSU method, for a given LIDAR measurement.
Data: Global POD modes, V , LIDAR measurements and sample locations, U({Zl, Yl})
and {Zl, Yl}
Result: Rescaled modes, VR
VS ←V [{Zl, Yl}]
▷Subsample global modes using measurement locations
Q, R ←QR (Vs)
▷QR decomposition of subsampled modes
Z ←QT U
▷Modal amplitudes from LIDAR measurements
procedure ModeRescaling(V , R)
VR ←V
k ←len (R)
for i in range(k) do
VR[:, i] ←VR[:, i]/R[i, i]
for j in range(i + 1, k) do
VR[:, j] ←VR[:, j] −R[i, j] · VR[:, i]
end for
end for
Return: VR
▷Rescaled global modes
end procedure
modal amplitudes.
This project performs a simple linear interpolation between these
prediction planes, given longitudinal space and time are the same dimension in a Mann
turbulence box following Taylor’s frozen turbulence hypothesis [15].
Additionally, for
the benefit of the method, LIDAR sample points are interpolated longitudinally into the
nearest of predefined planar slices, shown in ??. The original sample points are preserved,
it is just the assumed locations that move.
Algorithm 2 Estimation method.
Data: Global POD modes, V , LIDAR measurements and sample locations for all
simulation time, U({Zl, Yl})(t) and {Zl, Yl}(t)
Result: Estimated turbulence, M
for t in range(time) do
if U({Zl, Yl}) in time step then
M[:, t] ←ROMSU (V , U({Zl, Yl})(t), {Zl, Yl}(t))
else
M[:, t] ←interpolate
(
M[:, tlast exists(U({Zl, Yl}))], M[:, tnext exists(U({Zl, Yl}))]
)
end if
end for
4.6
Mean absolute error and spatial mean absolute error
The primary error metric used for this project is mean absolute error Equation 4.14.
The mean absolute error is a useful metric for making one-to-one comparisons between a
reference case and a test case aiming to replicate the reference case. The mean absolute
error is calculated by taking the average of the absolute error of a given metric,
MAE = |x(t) −x0(t)|,
(4.14)
where xo is reference the turbine response characteristic. This is the way that the mean
absolute error for single-sample channels, such as rotor speed, is calculated. For turbu-
lence, the mean absolute error can be calculated to look at the error change with time,
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
21
==PAGE:27==
or the time-averaged error in space. To differentiate between these two calculations, the
time-averaged spatial error of turbulence will be called mean absolute error also, although
its formula deviates slightly:
{MAEi,j} = {|x(t) −x0(t)|i,j},
(4.15)
where i, j denotes the indices for the location in space of the point. This is the mean
absolute error of turbulence for each point in the analysis plane; the total mean absolute
error, calculated only for turbulence in this project, is the mean of each of the mean
absolute error calculated for each point of the turbulence mean absolute error:
TMAE =
∑
{MAEi,j}.
(4.16)
The spatially-averaged absolute turbulence error with time will be called the spatial mean
absolute error, and is calculated as the mean of the absolute error at the rotor plane for
each point in time:
SMAE(t) = |x −x0|i,j(t).
(4.17)
22
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:28==
5
Results
This chapter discusses the results of the investigation. There will be a focus on the con-
tribution from the first six modes, which is derived from the number of available LIDAR
beams from the assumed LIDAR configuration. An error analysis of the turbulence re-
constructed and estimated will be used, also five sensor channels from HAWC2 aeroelastic
simulations: rotor average wind speed, rotor speed, blade pitch angle, electrical power,
and tower bottom fore aft bending moment.
5.1
Proper orthogonal decomposition of Mann-generated
turbulence
This work’s turbulence estimation method is founded in constructing a turbulence estimate
using as many POD modes as is viable, so it helps to understand what “adding” modes
means first. The proper orthogonal decomposition of turbulence produces an ordered set
of orthonormal mode shapes, which can be used to analyze the dominating features in
the flow. The first few mode shapes visualize the largest coherent flow structures. These
can change depending on the flow being analyzed, whether it is the downstream flow of a
wake or a generic inflow condition [9], [14]. Additionally, it has been shown that the POD
modes are sensitive to the input turbulence data, in this case the turbulence generation
method. For example, the two spectral turbulence generation methods prescribed in the
IEC standards, the Mann model of turbulence and Kaimal spectrum and exponential
coherence model, produce different modes despite the Mann model spectral density being
fitted to the Kaimal spectrum [25]. Since it is not possible to generate an optimal set of
modes for turbine inflow, it is very important that the input data for generating modes
matches the expected inflow cases for the purpose of inflow estimation.
5.1.1
Analysis of the mode shapes
Since POD modes are ordered by magnitude of explained variance, the first modes will
consist of the largest flow structures that account for the highest turbulent kinetic energy.
Therefore, the coherent features shown will be ordered in decreasing size. The first six
POD mode shapes are shown in Figure 5.1 for seed 1007 with a longitudinal variance of
4.15 m/s generated using the Mann turbulence generator.
Mode 1 shows very little amplitude variation, and has just positive amplitude values. This
strongly indicates that Mode 1 tracks the change in the field-average wind speed of the
turbulence box rather than any turbulent feature. Modes 2 and 3 show horizontal turbu-
lence structures which are expected, based previous work showing that largest coherence
of longitudinal turbulence with larger length scales was in the horizontal direction [25].
Modes 4, 5, and 6 show similarly shaped vertical turbulence structures that follow a sine
wave pattern in amplitude and shape. The slightly smaller wave length in mode 6 shows
this the clearest.
The normalized turbulent kinetic energy contribution of the POD modes is shown in
Figure 5.2. The first modes contain the majority of longitudinal variance. Again, this
is expected since the first modes capture the largest turbulence structures which contain
more energy than the smaller energy structures captured in the higher modes. The first six
POD modes for this example Mann turbulence box contain 11.5% of the total turbulent
kinetic energy, out of 4096 modes.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
23
==PAGE:29==
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
-0.02
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.02
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
Figure 5.1: The first six mode shapes of the longitudinal component of Mann-generated
turbulence using seed number 1007. The outline of the NREL 5 MW turbine rotor swept
area is shown in black.
1
1024
2048
3072
4096
Mode number
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
λ
Individual variance contribution
1
1024
2048
3072
4096
Mode number
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
∑λ
i
Cumulative variance contribution
Figure 5.2: Individual and cumulative contributions to total Mann box longitudinal wind
speed variance, λ.
24
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:30==
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
-0.02
-0.01
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
-0.02
-0.01
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
-0.02
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.02
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
Figure 5.3: First six mode shapes of the longitudinal component of the global basis of
Mann-generated turbulence. The outline of the NREL 5 MW turbine rotor swept area is
shown in black.
5.1.2
Global basis of modes
The optimal basis, derived from the flow case being studied, will always provide the
most eﬀicient truncated reconstruction using POD modes. While performing POD on a
turbulence data set is useful for analyzing the characteristics of that data set, it does not
necessarily portray a generalized case. Fitting the mode shapes of one flow case to another
may result in an ineﬀicient reconstruction, losing out on the benefit of using POD in the
first place. However, a so-called global basis can be created to form generalized mode
shapes that can minimize this ineﬀiciency. The first six mode shapes of a global basis are
shown in Figure 5.3. These were generated using twelve Mann turbulence generator seeds:
six with an average longitudinal variance of 3.98 m2/s2 corresponding to 11.4 m/s wind
speed cases and six with an average longitudinal variance of 9.51 m2/s2 corresponding to
22 m/s wind speed cases. By comparison to the optimal basis, the first six modes of the
global basis contribute a cumulative explained turbulent kinetic energy of 9.3%.
MODAL ASSURANCE CRITERION BETWEEN OPTIMAL AND GLOBAL BASIS
The first mode of the global basis matches the first mode of seed 1007, but with a negative
amplitude.
This does not make a difference for the prediction, where the modes are
projected onto the turbulence time series, which gives the appropriate sign with respect
to the sign of the mode amplitude. The second and third modes have switched places,
however.
This is not an unexpected result, but it is a clear example of how a modal
projection into the seed with the global modes will be less eﬀicient than using the modes
generated from the flow case itself.
This is emphasized in Figure 5.4, which shows a
comparison of the individual and cumulative variance contributions of the global basis
modes compared to the modes generated from the optimal basis. Since the global basis
modes are generalized for two differing flow cases, the explained variance between modes
is not as eﬀicient for the same mode truncation rank as for the optimal basis.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
25
==PAGE:31==
1
1024
2048
3072
4096
Mode n mber
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
λ
Individ al variance contrib tion
1
1024
2048
3072
4096
Mode n mber
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
∑λ
i
C m lative variance contrib tion
Global basis
Optimal basis
Figure 5.4: Comparison of individual and cumulative contributions to longitudinal vari-
ance between the global and optimal bases.
5.2
Reconstruction
This section discusses the reconstruction of a Mann box using proper orthogonal decom-
position.
Specifically, it addresses the error related to simplifying the analysis to the
longitudinal component of turbulence only, the error introduced by using the global basis
compared to an optimal basis in reconstruction, the sensitivity of reconstruction accuracy
to the number of modes included, and the sensitivity of the reconstruction accuracy to
the number of LIDAR sampling points.
5.2.1
Using solely longitudinal turbulence
The results discussed in this work are based on analysis of longitudinal turbulence only, and
omit the inclusion of transverse turbulence. This approximation has been made with the
capabilities of LIDAR technology in mind, where a LIDAR scanning from a single point of
origin cannot recreate the 3-dimensional turbulence in the wind. However, the longitudinal
wind component can be more closely approximated from the LIDAR measurement.
To examine the error introduced by omitting transverse turbulence, six aeroelastic simu-
lations have been run using seed 1007 with three cases each at two different wind speeds:
one case with three components of turbulence, one with just longitudinal turbulence, and
one with the transverse components of turbulence being included from seed 1001. These
cases are summarized in Table 5.1. For this approximation, seven HAWC2 channels are
used as indicators for reproduction accuracy: rotor average wind speed, rotor speed, blade
pitch angle, electrical power, tower bottom fore-aft bending moment, rotor thrust, and
rotor azimuthal angle. The abbreviations of HAWC2 channel names are summarized in
Table 5.2
Figure 5.5 shows a summary of the mean absolute error computed for rotor-average wind
speed, rotor speed, blade pitch angle, electrical power, tower-base fore aft bending moment,
and rotor thrust, where each channel’s standard deviation from the base case, for which
all three components of turbulence are included, is used to normalize the error. The rotor
azimuth angle mean absolute error is also included, for reference.
The rotor average wind speed error is negligible, as expected, since it is calculated using
the longitudinal wind speed. The turbine rotor does have a tilt of five degrees, but this
26
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:32==
Table 5.1: Summary of cases for analyzing the inclusion of only longitudinal turbulence.
Case Name
Wind Speed
u-turbulence
v-, w-turbulence
Base case, rated
11.4 m/s
s1007
s1007
u’ only, rated
11.4 m/s
s1007
0
Random v’, w’, rated
11.4 m/s
s1007
s1001
Base case, high
22 m/s
s1007
s1007
u’ only, high
22 m/s
s1007
0
Random v’, w’, high
22 m/s
s1007
s1001
Table 5.2: HAWC2 turbine response channel abbreviations summary.
Abbreviation
Channel name
RAWS
Rotor-average wind speed
RSPD
Rotor speed
BLPA
Blade pitch angke
EPWR
Electrical power
TBFA
Tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment
TROT
Rotor thrust
AZIM
Rotor (blade 1) azimuthal angle
appears to have minimal impact on the rotor average wind speed calculation. The rotor
speed, blade pitch angle, and electrical power each have errors at or below 10% of the
standard deviation, demonstrating that these responses are also dominated by longitudinal
turbulence, with the exception of the rotor speed and electrical power at the high wind
speed. This is due to the extremely low standard deviations in each of these signals from
the constant-power constant-rotor speed controller used.
However, the tower-base fore-aft bending moment has a relatively higher error level by
comparison. The rotor thrust error provides some insight, where the global trends in the
tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment signal match those of rotor thrust. The u′-only, at-
rated wind speed case has a proportionally higher tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment
due to the high rotor azimuth error. This is seen in summary in Figure 5.5 as well as in
the time series in Figure 5.6. This is due to a strong resonance response in the NREL
5 MW turbine model in HAWC2, which can be seen when looking at the power spectral
density of the time series response for each of the cases in ??
It is clear that the effect of having zero or non-matching but similarly scaled v- and w-
turbulence reduces the accuracy of an aeroelastic simulation in comparison to the proper
three components of turbulence for the rotor thrust and tower-bottom bending moment.
Additionally, the small overall rotor speed error for cases that are not well above the
rated wind speed where the rotor speed is generally constant leads to high azimuthal
angle errors, which will exacerbate any turbine load response that is dependent upon
local turbulence characteristics. In this instance, the inclusion of transverse turbulence
that does not match the original case leads to improper rotor thrust and rotor torque
calculations from mismatching inflow angles along the blades.
Interestingly, the rotor
azimuth error is significantly lower for including random but properly scaled transverse
turbulence compared to setting the transverse turbulence to zero.
However, this is a
necessary limitation for this stage of the project considering the LIDAR cyclops problem.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
27
==PAGE:33==
RA
WS
RSPD
BLPA
EPWR
TBFA
TROT
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
MAE/STD [-]
AZIM
0
10
20
30
40
MAE [deg]
u' only
, rated
u' only
, high
Random v', w', rated
Random v', w', high
Figure 5.5: The mean absolute error normalized by the respective standard deviation of
the original turbulence box (left) and the mean absolute error of the rotor azimuth of the
two test cases (right).
Therefore, the reference case for the following reconstruction and prediction analyses will
use the longitudinal turbulence only cases shown here as reference cases.
5.2.2
Modes sensitivity study
The accuracy of the turbulence reconstruction is dependent upon the number of POD
modes included, so it is important to first understand the sensitivity of the accuracy of
the turbulence reconstruction and turbine response to the number of modes included. This
will also help quantify the limitations imposed by the LIDAR system, where the number
of sample points taken at a point in time is equal to the highest number of modes that
can be used for estimating that plane of turbulence.
Can the LIDAR specifications be determined a priori from this sensitivity study?
Turbulence reconstruction
The reconstruction for this sensitivity study was conducted using s1007 projected into the
global basis modes for the 11.4 m/s wind speed case. Figure 5.8 shows the full time series
for seed 1007 with various numbers of POD modes included in the reconstruction of the
rotor average wind speed and mean absolute error of the rotor average wind speed. The
rotor average wind speed is reproduced fairly well with just a few modes included. This
is from the fact that mode 1 tracks the rotor average wind speed in amplitude, looking at
Figure 5.10. The reconstruction with the first two modes has periods with higher relative
error, particularly where the rotor average wind speed is rapidly changing.
The time
period from 150 to 250 seconds has been chosen in Figure 5.9 as a period with high error
sensitivity to total number of contributing modes that will be analyzed in greater detail.
There are two interesting time periods within the shortened analysis time window in
Figure 5.9. The first period from 150 seconds to 180 seconds shows that the reconstruction
with just two modes is significantly worse than the reconstruction with the third mode
also added. The time point at 164.5 seconds is particularly important because it coincides
with both high rotor average wind speed error for including just 2 modes versus more
modes and very low modal amplitudes for modes 2 through 5, as shown in Figure 5.10.
The other time point of interest is at 237 seconds, where there is steady improvement with
the inclusion of additional modes from 2 to 3 to 5 in Figure 5.9 which is also reflected in
Figure 5.10, which shows a staggered modal amplitude contribution in reconstruction for
the addition of each mode from 1 through 5.
Snapshots of the longitudinal turbulence and modal reconstructions have been taken at
28
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:34==
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Tower bottom moment [kNm]
Base case, rated
u' only
, rated
Random v', w', rated
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Mean Absolute Er ror [kNm]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
0
20
40
60
Rotor azimuth er ror [deg]
Figure 5.6: 11.4 m/s case: Tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment time series (top), mean
absolute error (middle), and rotor azimuth error time series (bottom).
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
29
==PAGE:35==
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Tower bottom moment [kNm]
Base case, high
u' only
, high
Random v', w', high
0
5000
10000
15000
Mean Absolute Er ror [kNm]
100
120
140
160
180
200
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
Rotor azimuth er ror [deg]
Figure 5.7: 22 m/s case: Tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment time series (top), mean
absolute error (middle), and rotor azimuth error time series (bottom). The first hundred
seconds of the time series are representative of the full seed, and are shown to make details
visible.
30
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:36==
10
11
12
13
14
Rotor average wind speed [m/s]
Original u'
2 modes
3 modes
5 modes
10 modes
20 modes
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Mean Absolute Er ror [m/s]
Figure 5.8: 11.4 m/s case: Full simulation period of the rotor average wind speed with
various numbers of global basis modes included for turbulence reconstruction of seed 1007.
10
11
12
Rotor average wind speed [m/s]
Original u'
2 modes
3 modes
5 modes
10 modes
20 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Mean Absolute Er ror [m/s]
Figure 5.9: 11.4 m/s case: Selected period of the simulation with large sensitivity in
accuracy to the number of included modes.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
31
==PAGE:37==
Modal amplitude [-]
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
1
2
RAWS - U [m/s]
Figure 5.10: Absolute magnitude of modal amplitudes for the period of high sensitivity
in accuracy to mode number inclusion and the rotor average wind speed deviation. The
drawn red lines show the time points of interest at 164.5 s and 237 s.
164.5 s and 237 s in Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.13. There is a rotor average wind speed
deviation of -1.46 m/s at time point 164.5 s. The full turbulence snapshot in Figure 5.11
shows the field deviation from the rotor average wind speed and small turbulence struc-
tures. Notably, there are no apparent horizontal turbulence structures, which justifies the
very small modal amplitudes for modes 2 and 3 at that point in time, which have horizon-
tal waves in shape (Figure 5.3). There are also no apparent strong diagonal turbulence
shapes or structures, although there could be a pair of diagonals going from top left to
bottom right in the center of the field, one with a positive contribution to wind speed
deviation from the mean and the other with a negative contribution. This shape seems
to correspond most closely with mode shape 5 in Figure 5.3, but the modal amplitude
is still small, and the snapshot of the 5 modes reconstruction does not show a presence
of diagonal structures included compared to the 4 modes reconstruction. This is a point
in time where the turbulence structures are too fine for the first modes representing the
largest flow structures to capture closely.
The snapshot at 237 s in Figure 5.12 shows a case with a similarly large variation of the
rotor average wind speed from the mean wind speed of -2.03 m/s. However, in this case,
there is constant improvement in rotor average wind speed reconstruction going from 2 to
3 to 5 modes, as shown in Figure 5.9. This is supported by the amplitude contribution of
each mode shown in the modal amplitude time series in Figure 5.12, where at 237 seconds
there are sizeable amplitude contributions from, in addition to mode 1, modes 3, 4, and 5.
The modal time series snapshots also show changes in the characteristics reconstructed in
the turbulence as modes 3, 4, and 5 are each added. The third mode captures the general
pattern of horizontal bars of increasing and decreasing turbulence in the full turbulence.
The fourth mode captures the diagonal pattern going from the bottom left to the upper
right, and is able to add the localized area of positive deviation from the mean wind speed
in the upper left and upper right corners. The addition of the fifth mode improves the
magnitude of the turbulence in the upper left corner and starts to be able to build the
diagonal pattern of positive wind speed deviation along the bottom right corner that is
32
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:38==
Full turbulence
1 mode
2 modes
3 modes
4 modes
5 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
Modal amplitude [-]
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
-6.0
-4.5
-3.0
-1.5
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
RAWS - U [m/s]
Figure 5.11: Snapshot at 164.5 s showing the full turbulence and reconstruction of the
full turbulence with up to the first five modes with the outline of the NREL 5 MW rotor
swept area. The rotor average wind speed deviation from the mean is -1.45 m/s.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
33
==PAGE:39==
Full turbulence
1 mode
2 modes
3 modes
4 modes
5 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
Modal amplitude [-]
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
-6.0
-4.5
-3.0
-1.5
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
RAWS - U [m/s]
Figure 5.12: Snapshot at 237 s showing the full turbulence and reconstruction of the full
turbulence with up to the first five modes with the outline of the NREL 5 MW rotor swept
area. The rotor average wind speed deviation from the mean is -2.03 m/s.
missing in the reconstruction with just 4 modes. Despite having a larger rotor average wind
speed deviation from the mean wind speed, the inclusion of 5 modes in the reconstruction
of the turbulence at 237 s has the same error magnitude as the reconstruction at 164.5 s.
Another informative time point to examine a snapshot of the turbulence and mode re-
construction is at 172 s in Figure 5.13. Here, it can be seen that the modal amplitudes
of each of the first 5 modes is significant, even though Figure 5.9 shows that there is not
much improvement in the rotor average wind speed error from adding modes 4 and 5.
The snapshots of turbulence and reconstruction tell a different story. There is a clear
horizontal structure in the turbulence, with a region of high wind speed in the lower half
with a localized pocket of a very high wind speed deviation on the right-hand side, and a
similar but inverted region of low wind speed in the upper half with a localized pocket of
very low wind speed also on the right-hand side. This symmetry is very advantageous for
the first few modes, especially since modes 2 and 3 reconstruct with horizontal turbulence
shapes. There is a small detail that demonstrates the significant improvement in rotor
average wind speed error between the inclusion of 2 and 3 modes in the reconstruction.
The turbulence field has a subtle horizontal line of low wind speed just below the pocket
of high wind speed in the lower half. Mode 2 only captures two horizontal structures,
while mode 3 captures three, which allows for it to spatially compress the lower region
of positive turbulence deviation and add the slim horizontal line of negative turbulence
deviation, all while enhancing the amplitudes of the two largest turbulence structures as
34
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:40==
Full turbulence
1 mode
2 modes
3 modes
4 modes
5 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
Modal amplitude [-]
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
-5.8
-4.3
-2.9
-1.4
0.0
1.4
2.9
4.3
5.8
RAWS - U [m/s]
Figure 5.13: Snapshot at 172 s showing the full turbulence and reconstruction of the full
turbulence with up to the first five modes with the outline of the NREL 5 MW rotor swept
area. The rotor average wind speed deviation from the mean is +0.49 m/s.
compared to reconstruction with just two modes. The addition of modes 4 and 5 lead to
an improved reconstruction of the localized pockets of more extreme turbulence on the
right-hand side. Despite having a lower rotor average wind speed deviation from the mean
wind speed, the reconstruction at 172 s with 2 modes is worse than at 237 s but better
than at 164.5 s. Adding up to 5 modes results in the three time points having similar
reconstruction accuracy, as summarized in Table 5.3.
The ability of the first few POD modes to reconstruct the planar longitudinal turbulence
is heavily dependent upon their ability to characterize the shape of that turbulence, rather
than the magnitude of the rotor average wind speed deviation from the mean wind speed.
Therefore, seemingly similar periods of turbulence may have varying reconstruction accu-
racy due to the details in the structures of that turbulence.
Turbine response
There are two goals for the prediction method: the first is to reconstruct the turbulence as
closely as possible, and the second is to reconstruct the turbulence to a level of accuracy
such that the turbine’s response can be predicted closely. The first goal is able to be
more clearly demonstrated using simple error metrics, while the second relies upon the
modeling of the turbine in the aeroelastic code, HAWC2, which introduces complexity
in tying together the change in turbulence reconstruction accuracy and the change in
the accuracy of the turbine response, according to the aeroelastic code. The response
characteristics that will be examined are the rotor speed, blade pitch angle, electrical
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
35
==PAGE:41==
Table 5.3: Rotor average wind speed reconstruction accuracy at three time snapshots.
Time [s]
164.5
237
172
RAWS - U [m/s]
-1.45
-2.03
+0.49
2 modes MAE [m/s]
0.47
0.30
0.37
3 modes MAE [m/s]
0.03
0.20
0.03
5 modes MAE [m/s]
0.01
0.08
0.09
1.175
1.200
1.225
1.250
1.275
Rotor speed [rad/s]
Original u'
2 modes
3 modes
5 modes
10 modes
20 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Mean Absolute Er ror [rad/s]
Figure 5.14: 11.4 m/s case: Selected period of the simulation with large sensitivity in
accuracy to the number of included modes. The rated rotor speed is 1.267 rad/s.
power, tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment, and rotor thrust.
The time series of the rotor speed response to the original turbulence as well as the
turbulence reconstructed with 2, 3, 5, 10, and 20 modes is shown in Figure 5.14. The
rotor speed is driven primarily by the longitudinal wind speed, and so the high accuracy
in reconstruction with just a small number of modes is apparent, even when focusing on a
section of higher turbulence complexity as has been done. It should be noted that for more
than half of the time series that the rotor speed is controlled at rated speed by the pitch
controller. This aids the calculated accuracy of the reconstruction, which is an expected
result for the prediction cases also, since the purpose of the turbulence estimation is to
assist the controller at rated and above-rated wind speeds.
The electrical power of the turbine is driven by the rotor speed and the aerodynamic
torque. However, since the electrical power is held constant for above-rated wind speeds,
the error in electrical power for much of the time series in Figure 5.15 is due to the
controller for the turbine. However, this magnitude of error is very low compared to the
36
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:42==
3500
4000
4500
5000
Electrical power [kW]
Original u'
2 modes
3 modes
5 modes
10 modes
20 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
800
Mean Absolute Er ror [kW]
Figure 5.15: 11.4 m/s case: Selected period of the simulation with large sensitivity in
accuracy to the number of included modes.
error that comes from the deviation in primarily rotor speed. The reconstruction with 2
modes has a large error also for the period from before 160 s to 164.5 seconds where it
is strongly over-approximating the longitudinal wind speed. When reconstructing with 3
modes or more, there are brief spikes of higher error when the wind speed changes very
quickly across the rated wind speed threshold, as it does at 164.5 s and 203 s.
The blade pitch angle is also driven by longitudinal wind speed and rotor speed. The
blade pitch setting is 0 degrees for below-rated wind speeds and benefits from durations
of the wind time series where the wind speed is below the rated wind speed. However, the
blade pitch angle is particularly sensitive to errors in the reconstruction of the wind speed
right at rated, where the aerodynamic gain of the turbine is the highest and so the blades
must pitch the most for a unit variation in wind speed. This can be seen quite clearly in
Figure 5.16 from 169 s to 178 s, where the 2 modes reconstruction of the rotor average
wind speed is above 11.4 m/s and the actual wind speed is below 11.4 m/s. Another
example is from 220 s to 231 s in the same time series, where there are sharp changes
called for in the blade pitch angle that the reconstructions with fewer modes fail to match,
leading to higher blade pitch angle errors.
The time series for rotor thrust and rotor thrust error is shown in Figure 5.17. The largest
errors in rotor thrust are driven by two mechanisms. The first is the large error from the
reconstruction with 2 modes, where the wind speed reconstruction is too high and lands
at a higher point on the thrust curve than the full u′ which is the large region of error
from before 160 s to 164.5 s. Then, from 164.5 to 176 s, the rotor thrust expected from
the reconstruction with 2 modes is lower than the full u′ case, since the approximated
wind speed is still higher, but now above rated, so resulting in lower thrust. The second
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
37
==PAGE:43==
0
1
2
3
4
5
Blade pitch angle [deg]
Original u'
2 modes
3 modes
5 modes
10 modes
20 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Mean Absolute Er ror [deg]
Figure 5.16: 11.4 m/s case: Selected period of the simulation with large sensitivity in
accuracy to the number of included modes.
large error from reconstruction is due to blade pitch errors, as can be seen throughout but
especially at 176 s, 185 s, 216 s, 224 s, and 233 s.
However, there is a large underlying level of noise in the rotor thrust reconstruction, as can
be seen by the nearly constant level of error for the 20 modes reconstruction, even though
it had very accurate reconstructions of rotor average wind speed and blade pitch angle.
This can be answered by looking at the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment time series
in Figure 5.18 and the frequency response of the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment
in Figure 5.19. The tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment is driven by the rotor thrust,
which can be seen in the similar time series shapes for both the response reconstruction
and the error in reconstruction. The tower bottom moment does see higher oscillation
amplitudes within the signal. The most energetic of these oscillations are captured in
Figure 5.19, which shows that the tower’s first natural fore-aft frequency is being strongly
excited. This will cause large and random variations in the tower response which will
make the signal much harder to replicate, even with turbulence inputs that are very close
to the full u′ case. Additionally, the forcing frequencies of 3P and 6P are causing a strong
response in the tower bending moment. This means that any azimuthal rotor angle error
will lead to increased time series error in the tower bottom bending response.
There is also an increase in the tower bottom moment power spectral density with in-
crease in the number of modes included in the reconstruction in Figure 5.19. This is due
to the higher frequency, smaller-length-scale turbulence that is captured with the inclu-
sion of more modes, which is shown in Figure 5.20. As more modes are included in the
reconstruction, more energy at higher frequencies is included.
38
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:44==
500
600
700
800
Rotor thr ust [kN]
Original u'
2 modes
3 modes
5 modes
10 modes
20 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
50
100
150
Mean Absolute Er ror [kN]
Figure 5.17: 11.4 m/s case: Selected period of the simulation with large sensitivity in
accuracy to the number of included modes.
40000
50000
60000
70000
Tower bottom moment [kNm]
Original u'
2 modes
3 modes
5 modes
10 modes
20 modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
5000
10000
15000
Mean Absolute Er ror [kNm]
Figure 5.18: 11.4 m/s case: Selected period of the simulation with large sensitivity in
accuracy to the number of included modes.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
39
==PAGE:45==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Frequency [Hz]
10
−1
10
1
10
3
10
5
10
7
10
9
Tower bottom moment [kNm
2
 Hz
−1
]
1
st
 Tbfa
3P
6P
Full u'
2 modes
5 modes
20 modes
Figure 5.19: Power spectral density of the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment response
with different numbers of modes included in the reconstructions. There are resonance
responses seen at the 1st tower fore-aft tower natural frequency and the 3P and 6P forcing
frequencies.
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
Frequncy [Hz]
10
−11
10
−8
10
−5
10
−2
10
1
S
1
 [m
2
/s
2
/Hz]
Full u'
1 Mode
2 Modes
3 Modes
4 Modes
5 Modes
Figure 5.20: Mean power spectral density of the longitudinal turbulence reconstruction
with varying numbers of modes included. The hard cutoff in the spectrum at 7 Hz is due
to the time length and discretization of the Mann turbulence box.
40
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:46==
The time-averaged mean absolute error of each of the rotor average wind speed and turbine
response channels is summarized for 11.4 m/s in Figure 5.21 and 22 m/s in Figure 5.22.
The mean absolute error has been normalized by the error of the first mode to show error
convergence with inclusion from the first 20 modes and by the standard deviation to give
a relative scale for each statistic.
For the 11.4 m/s case, the rotor average wind speed line in navy blue gives a global view
in the convergence of the turbulence accuracy to the full longitudinal turbulence. There
is significant improvement in accuracy from the inclusion of the third mode, and a steady
improvement in accuracy until around mode 10, where the addition of more modes leads
to less improvement in reconstruction accuracy of the rotor average wind speed. The sharp
drop with the addition of mode 3 provides evidence that it is an important mode from
the global basis for the reconstruction of the seed, as much as mode 2 is not. This is an
example of ineﬀiciency from the global basis compared to an optimal basis. The rotor
speed, electrical power, and blade pitch angle errors follow directly from the rotor average
wind speed and have very similar error convergence plots, and similar error magnitudes,
especially following the inclusion of mode 3 and mode 12.
The tower bottom fore-aft bending moment starts at a much higher error magnitude
relative to its standard deviation, and also converges more slowly compared to its first
mode error magnitude compared to all of the other channels. Contrary to expectation, it
even has an increase in error with the inclusion of modes 8, 9, and 10 relative to the error
from the inclusion of 7 modes, even as the other channels see decrease in error during these
modes inclusion. It is diﬀicult to determine the source of this increase in error and why it
occurs specifically. The turbine and tower model do exhibit a large response in HAWC2,
which creates a large element of randomness between small variations in the turbulence
input for the tower bottom bending. This is supported by Figure 5.22, which does not
show the same progression of error magnitude with the inclusion of additional modes.
The convergence of error in Figure 5.22 shows similar convergence characteristics for the
rotor average wind speed, blade pitch angle, and rotor speed but different for electrical
power and tower bottom bending compared to ??. The difference in the electrical power
signal is due to the different turbine operating regime. At 22 m/s wind speed, the turbine is
operating at a constant power and does not experience a wind speed below 11.4 m/s in this
turbulence case. Therefore, the difference in electrical power is due to the differing response
of the controller to the slightly different turbulence inputs from the reconstruction. This
explains both the slow convergence in error and the high error relative to the standard
deviation, where the standard deviation is much smaller, summarized in Table 5.4. The
tower bottom bending moment is not quite as different from the 11.4 m/s case as the
electrical power. The convergence in the error relative to the first mode actually follows
a similar trend in magnitude overall, albeit a little less in error reduction in the first few
modes’ addition and without any increase in error with adding additional modes. The error
with respect to the standard deviation also follows a similar convergence but is slightly
higher for the first few modes compared with 11.4 m/s. In this case, the tower-bottom
fore-aft moment, in ??, has large amplitudes in the original u′ case that the reconstructed
turbulence cases do not reproduce. Looking at the power spectral density of the channel
response in ?? shows a very large response at the tower’s first fore-aft natural frequency,
which the reconstruction of turbulence with just 2 or 5 modes does not capture.
The number of modes required for turbulence reconstruction
The modes sensitivity study with aeroelastic simulations shows the variability in response
of the turbine with just small change in the turbulence reconstruction. This information
can also be used to determine the minimum number of modes required in order repro-
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
41
==PAGE:47==
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
MAE/MAE
1
 [-]
Rotor average wind speed
Rotor speed
Blade pitch angle
Electrical power
Tower bottom moment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Number of
 included modes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
MAE/STD [-]
2048 4096
Figure 5.21: 11.4 m/s case: Time-averaged mean absolute error normalized by the error
of the first mode (top) and the standard deviation of the respective channel from the u’
simulation (bottom).
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
MAE/MAE
1
 [-]
Rotor average wind speed
Rotor speed
Blade pitch angle
Electrical power
Tower bottom moment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Number of
 included modes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
MAE/STD [-]
2048 4096
Figure 5.22: 22 m/s case: Time-averaged mean absolute error normalized by the error
of the first mode (top) and the standard deviation of the respective channel from the u’
simulation (bottom).
42
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:48==
Table 5.4: Summary of standard deviations from seed 1007 in HAWC2.
Case
RAWS
RSPD
BLPA
EPWR
TBFA
11.4 m/s
0.86 m/s
0.028 rad/s
1.96 deg
556 kW
6603 kNm
22 m/s
1.57 m/s
0.032 rad/s
1.66 deg
38 kW
7194 kNm
Table 5.5: Description of benchmark statistics reference values for determining reconstruc-
tion accuracy.
Data
Benchmark statistic
Case [m/s]
Reference value
u-turbulence
Standard deviation
11.4
1.73 m/s
22
2.67 m/s
RAWS
Standard deviation
11.4
0.86 m/s
22
1.57 m/s
RSPD
Standard deviation
11.4
0.028 rad/s
22
0.032 rad/s
BLPA
Aerodynamic thrust gain
11.4
1.00 deg
22
1.50 deg
EPWR
2% of rated power
11.4
100 kW
22
100 kW
TBFA
Standard deviation
11.4
6903 kNm
22
7194 kNm
duce the turbulence or turbine response characteristic to a desired level of accuracy. The
conclusions drawn in Table 5.6 can only be extended to standard reconstructions with
full information of the flow field. Performing the mode sub-sampling, orthogonalization of
the sub-sampled modes, and the mode refitting each introduces additional error that will
worsen the results compared to the standard reconstruction.
A benchmark statistic was determined for each of the 6 characteristics of interest in Ta-
ble 5.5. For the data that has two-sided deviation behavior, u-turbulence, rotor average
wind speed, rotor speed, and tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment, the standard devi-
ation was chosen as the benchmark statistic. Standard deviation is not as representative
as a reference value for the blade pitch angle and electrical power since each has one-sided
behavior. The blade pitch angle has a minimum angle setting of 0, so for the 11.4 m/s
case much of the time the blade is not pitching. Therefore, the reference value was based
on an aerodynamic thrust gain parameter, which was specified as the minimum linearized
deviation in pitch angle that would result in an error of one standard deviation of the
rotor thrust for seed 1007. This was chosen since the error in blade pitch angle directly
correlates with the error in the rotor thrust, which in turn is a large contributor to error
in tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment. The electrical power is similarly limited to
the blade pitch angle and also varies at above-rated wind speeds according to the pitch
controller. A benchmark reference of 2% of the rotor’s rated electrical power, 5,000 kW,
was chosen for this data channel.
Table 5.6 is a high-level summary of the turbulence reconstruction accuracy of the global
basis modes for seed 1007 and the impact on the accuracy of various turbine response
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
43
==PAGE:49==
characteristics. The reconstruction of u-turbulence requires just the first mode to achieve a
mean absolute error below the standard deviation of the longitudinal turbulence and rotor
average wind speed, which is equivalent to just improving over estimating the turbulence
as 0 at the mean wind speed. However, mode 1 does considerably better than this, as
shown in Figure 5.21 and Figure 5.22, since it tracks the rotor average wind speed. The
rate of improvement from there is low, since it takes 8 modes total in order for the global
error to be less than just half of the longitudinal variance standard deviation. It takes the
inclusion of many more modes in order to reduce the mean absolute error below 10% of
the longitudinal standard deviation: with 2048 modes included, the mean absolute error
is 8.7% of the longitudinal standard deviation for the 11.4 m/s case.
The turbine response characteristics do not require as much accuracy in the longitudinal
turbulence in order to have low-error time series.
The rotor average wind speed only
requires the first mode in order to have an error of less than half the magnitude of the
rotor average wind speed standard deviation.
It requires just 5 modes and 4 modes,
respectively, for the 11.4 m/s and 22 m/s wind speed cases to achieve an error below 10%
of the standard deviation. The rotor speed error is similarly low, but requires more modes
to achieve below 10% error because the standard deviation is so low. This response is also
partially dependent upon the controller’s protocols. The blade pitch angle is slightly more
diﬀicult to reproduce. The mean absolute error calculation is artificially low compared
to the actual accuracy of the wind speed reconstruction for the 11.4 m/s case since the
blade pitch setting can be 0 degrees for both the reconstruction and the full longitudinal
turbulence even if every other response has higher error. That is why it requires 6 modes
for 22 m/s to achieve less than 50% of the reference pitch value and just 1 mode for 11.4
m/s. 6 modes is a more realistic number for a general above-rated wind speed for the
turbine. The blade pitch setting is also affected by the controller and is responsible for
the higher number of modes required to reach below 10% of the reference pitch value,
especially for the above-rated wind speed case.
Reducing the error of the electrical power below 2% of the turbine’s rated power occurs
with fewer modes at 22 m/s than at 11.4 m/s. This result is expected because at 22
m/s the wind speed remains above rated and so the turbine should have fairly constant
electrical power, not considering the details of the turbulence. However, for the at-rated
wind speed, a higher accuracy of turbulence reconstruction is required for when the wind
speed goes below rated, because that is where the turbine’s power curve is the steepest.
The mean absolute error is still less than 1% of the rated power of the turbine with just
4 modes included for the rated wind speed case. However, the number of modes required
to keep the error below 0.2% of the rated power is greater than 20, which again is related
to the controller’s response.
The turbine tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment has a large standard deviation from
the large tower fore-aft first natural frequency excitation, and so is a low standard to meet.
However, reducing the error to just half of one standard deviation requires 3 modes for
the 11.4 m/s case and 13 modes for the 22 m/s case. This is a large discrepancy that
also matches the pattern from the blade pitch angle response, further evidence of the close
relationship between the two response characteristics. In fact, a further look at the power
spectral density of the 22 m/s case tower bottom fore-aft moment in ?? in ?? reveals that
it has a dynamic response at the first tower fore-aft natural frequency that is two orders
of magnitude larger than for the 11.4 m/s case. The primary difference between the cases
is the increased involvement of the controller: comparing the power spectral density plots
of the two wind speed cases in ?? and ?? in ?? reveals a peak in the 22 m/s case at
the tower’s first fore-aft natural frequency that does not exist in the 11.4 m/s case. This
44
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:50==
Table 5.6: The number of modes included in the turbulence reconstruction to achieve the
reference error threshold.
Data
MAE < Reference
MAE < 50% Reference
MAE < 10% Reference
u-turbulence
1 mode
8 modes
< 2048 modes
1 mode
8 modes
< 2048 modes
RAWS
1 mode
1 mode
5 modes
1 mode
1 mode
4 modes
RSPD
1 mode
1 mode
12 modes
1 mode
1 mode
19 modes
BLPA
1 mode
1 mode
15 modes
1 mode
6 modes
> 20 modes
EPWR
3 modes
4 modes
> 20 modes
1 mode
1 mode
> 20 modes
TBFA
1 mode
3 modes
> 20 modes
1 mode
13 modes
> 20 modes
shows that there is some interaction between the tower’s resonance and the blade pitch
controller’s response that appears to have a small feedback loop. This further supports
the higher standard deviation in the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment despite lower
thrust and shallower thrust curve at the 22 m/s case compared to the 11.4 m/s case.
The results of Table 5.6 can also be used to create a preliminary LIDAR design, considering
the desired magnitude of turbulence reconstruction or turbine response error. The base
case LIDAR being used in this work has six beams total, which allows for reconstruction
with up to six POD modes. With the current turbine model in HAWC2, this would allow
for a mean absolute error of less than 50% of the reference error benchmark in each of the
critical turbine response parameters except for the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment.
With a turbine model that has less interaction between the controller and the first tower
fore-aft bending moment natural frequency, it is plausible that the tower-bottom fore-aft
bending moment would also be able to be reproduced to the same level of accuracy. It is
an expectation that this channel will be continually hard to match during the prediction
phase.
Pushing the LIDAR parameters to reconstruct the turbulence with a mean average error
of less than 10% of the longitudinal standard deviation would require hundreds of sample
points to use hundreds of modes for the reconstruction.
At the present, this is not a
feasible LIDAR design.
Meeting an error magnitude of less than 10% of the turbine
response characteristics is more achievable, requiring just 12 to scores of modes, and is
also more closely aligned with the tangible benefits of being able to estimate the turbulence
with higher accuracy: being able to predict the turbine response and inform a feed-forward
controller. One way this can be achieved is with LIDARs that are capable of this many
scans in a short time period, which are currently exclusively continuous-wave LIDARs that
measure at a single focal distance. Additionally, these LIDARs cannot be mounted onto
a turbine hub at present and are nacelle LIDAR systems which will suffer from LIDAR
availability due to the blade passes. A second way of achieving this is by sampling with a
combination of beam numbers, frequencies, and ranges for a pulsed LIDAR system such
that these points can aggregate in the turbulence box to a suitable number to reconstruct
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
45
==PAGE:51==
or predict the turbulence with more modes. This second method is employed in this case
since the given LIDAR system is a pulsed LIDAR system, and also takes advantage of the
Mann turbulence box assumption of frozen turbulence. In actuality, the correlation with
wind measurements made far upstream with a LIDAR with the wind experienced at the
turbine rotor is low, and lower than LIDAR measurements made closer to the rotor due to
turbulence evolution søren paper saying this. With frozen turbulence, the turbulence
does not evolve, and therefore a measurement made at 200 meters range will be the same
as measuring that point in the wind at 50 meters range later on. While this is not an
accurate physical assumption, it does allow for the prediction method to be tested in an
initial case.
ESTABLISH A “BETTER” LIDAR
5.3
Estimation
expectations, given the reconstruction section
The ROMSU method reshapes the modes, introducing error with each successive mode.
Therefore, there reaches a point in which adding a mode contributes more noise than
information. This affects the results
The key difference between turbulence estimation and reconstruction using POD is the
amount of information available. The reconstruction is created when the flow is projected
into the modes, so having limited information about the flow, just that from the LIDAR
measurements, limits the ability to reconstruct the flow as accurately as possible. The
ROMSU method maximizes the use of the LIDAR measurements, creating a set of rescaled
modes based on the reference set of the global basis and the orthogonalization of the the
LIDAR sample locations in the modes, as shown in Figure 5.23. Sometimes this process
results in the flipping of the sign of modes, which can be seen by the colormap of the mode
profiles for modes 1, 4, 5, and 6. This does not affect the accuracy of the reconstruction
in itself, because the sign directions of the mode shapes gives the sign of the amplitude
when the flow is projected into the modes. The result of the method’s iterative rescaling
from the lowest mode to the highest can also be seen in the progressive divergence of the
rescaled modes from a perfect recreation of the original modes. The first mode is always
preserved perfectly but each successive rescaled mode deviates from the original mode
more and more.
A comparison of the called-for modal amplitudes in Figure 5.24 shows a general trend for
the result of the method. Comparing the modal amplitudes of the full flow, 4096 spatial
points sampled at every updated-turbulence-information time step, projected into the
original modes and the full flow projected into the rescaled modes shows the progressive
deviation of the rescaled mode shapes compared with the original, which results in a
different required amplitude for the optimal reconstruction with that respective mode
shape. A further comparison with the modal amplitudes from a spatial sub-sample of
the flow mimicking a fixed-position 6-beam LIDAR measuring every updated-turbulence-
information time step demonstrates that while the trends of the modal amplitudes are
generally followed, there is considerable noise introduced by having less information about
the flow.
This effect becomes more pronounced with each successive mode: mode six
shows an extremely large magnitude of noise compared to the modal amplitudes from
the full-flow projections. This is a direct result of the method, where mode six is used
to account for information not contained in the first five modes, and ends up becoming
over-fitted in order to reduce the error at the flow sampling points to zero. The additional
contribution of noise to the flow estimation from having limited information about the flow,
46
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:52==
Mode 1
Original modes
Subsampled points
G-S Or thog onalization
Rescaled modes
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
Figure 5.23: Visual depiction of the sub-sampling, re-orthogonalization, and up-scaling of
the first six global basis modes.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
47
==PAGE:53==
from only the LIDAR measurements, introduces additional error to the modal truncation
error. Additionally, the number of modes that can be used in estimation is limited to a
maximum of the number of points available to constrain the estimation, where the noise
of the final modes that can be used in the estimation increases to the point of worsening
the estimation.
5.3.1
Turbulence estimation sensitivity to LIDAR-like sampling
Keeping in mind the limitations on the number of available modes that can be used to
estimate the flow that is restricted by the number of available LIDAR measurements,
an analysis of the sensitivity of the accuracy of turbulence estimation to the LIDAR-like
sampling pattern of the flow is performed. These will be compared to two baselines: full
u-turbulence to calculate error metrics, and a full flow projection into the first six global
basis modes as a comparison case.
Figure 5.25 shows the time series of the wind speed estimation and mean absolute error
of the estimate at a single point in the rotor plane, shown as the small white circle on the
left in the mean absolute error heat maps at the bottom of the figure. In this case, the
sampling points are fixed and are placed as depicted by the small black circles arrayed in
a pentagonal shape with a single circle in the middle. The flow is sampled at every time
point for which the Mann turbulence box updates the turbulence values. The selected
point in space is more challenging than average for the fixed LIDAR sampling locations
case because it is far from where any of the samples are taken. This shows a limitation of
having few fixed sampling locations- the regions of the flow near to wear the measurements
are being taken are far more accurate than those further away, which is seen by the sharp
gradients in the spatial mean absolute error heat maps. It is also noteworthy that there is
little difference in the turbulence estimation accuracy between modes three and five, the
best three modes for estimation for this particular sampling scheme. While the number
of available sampling locations absolutely constrains the maximum number of modes that
can be used in the estimation, it also limits the accuracy contribution of the successive
modes used in the estimation approaching that maximum mode number limit.
The next LIDAR sampling test case in Figure 5.26 shows the results for a the same
sampling geometry as the fixed LIDAR, but this time the angular distribution of the
sampling points changes according to the rotor azimuth angle, simulating a kind of hub-
mounted LIDAR. The sampling frequency is maintained to be at every Mann turbulence
box time step. This results in large-amplitude regular-frequency noise in the turbulence
estimation signal. This noise is directly contributed to by the rotation of the sampling
locations and the modes rescaling at every time step. Figure 5.27 shows very clear peaks
at the 5P and 10P frequencies of the rated rotor speed, corroborating this assertion.
Therefore, with the method involving the rescaling of the modes from differing sample
points from the hub LIDAR’s rotation with the rotor, a high-frequency data collection is
not necessarily beneficial to the accurate estimation of the inflow turbulence. The rotation
of the sampling points does however reduce the sharp error gradients present in Figure 5.25
to the effect of smoothing the error across the rotor plane.
The base case LIDAR is evaluated in Figure 5.28. The base case LIDAR is given by the
maximum capabilities of a given LIDAR, which can have six total beams with up to ten
ranges each, where each beam makes measurements 0.5 Hz apart. Because there are many
time steps in which the LIDAR has not sampled the flow, the prediction is handled by
performing ROMSU on the sample times and interpolating between those results for the
rest. The interpolation windows have been set such that the time and space length for
interpolation is minimized but also so that it is guaranteed to be six LIDAR points in
48
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:54==
−100
0
100
Mode 1
Original modes
Rescaled modes
Rescaled modes, from measurements
−100
0
100
Mode 2
−100
0
100
Mode 3
−100
0
100
Mode 4
−100
0
100
Mode 5
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
−100
0
100
Mode 6
Figure 5.24: Comparison of the modal amplitudes for the full flow projected into the
original global basis modes, the full flow projected into the rescaled modes, and a sub-
sampling of the flow projected into the rescaled modes.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
49
==PAGE:55==
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Wind speed [m/s]
Full u'
5 rescaled modes
4 rescaled modes
3 rescaled modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
2
4
Mean absolute er ror [m/s]
MAE: 5 rescaled modes
MAE: 4 rescaled modes
MAE: 3 rescaled modes
0.0
0.8
1.6
[m/s]
Figure 5.25: Estimation case 1. Fixed LIDAR sample locations, sampling frequency equal
to the time step: turbulence estimation time series and mean absolute error.
50
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:56==
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Wind speed [m/s]
Full u'
5 rescaled modes
4 rescaled modes
3 rescaled modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
2
4
Mean absolute er ror [m/s]
MAE: 5 rescaled modes
MAE: 4 rescaled modes
MAE: 3 rescaled modes
0.0
0.8
1.6
[m/s]
Figure 5.26: Estimation case 2. Rotating LIDAR, sampling frequency equal to the time
step: turbulence estimation time series and mean absolute error.
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
Frequncy [Hz]
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
10
2
S
1
 [m
2
/s
2
/Hz]
5P
10P
Full u'
1 mode
2 modes
3 modes
4 modes
5 modes
Figure 5.27: PSD of the rotating high-freqeuncy LIDAR measurements.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
51
==PAGE:57==
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Wind speed [m/s]
Full u'
5 rescaled modes
4 rescaled modes
3 rescaled modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
2
4
Mean absolute er ror [m/s]
MAE: 5 rescaled modes
MAE: 4 rescaled modes
MAE: 3 rescaled modes
0.0
0.8
1.6
[m/s]
Figure 5.28: Estimation case 4A. Base case LIDAR, 10 ranges per beam, 2 Hz sampling
frequency per beam, one beam at a time: turbulence estimation time series and mean
absolute error.
each time step where ROMSU is performed, in order to be able to estimate with up to six
modes. The base case LIDAR has similar mean absolute error to both the high-frequency
fixed-position LIDAR and the high-frequency rotating LIDAR, further supporting the
assertion that the frequency of sampling is only beneficial up to a certain upper limit.
The the chosen point in space also has relatively lower error compared to the fixed LIDAR
case since the sampling locations have moved in time, and point is not always in a place
where the error is higher due to mode over-fitting. However, the difference in error between
estimation with three, four, or five modes is minimal, and the estimation fails to capture
almost every sharp turbulence characteristic in the shown time series.
Recalling the improvement in the turbulence estimation for three to five modes with
increasing number of LIDAR sample points, an improved LIDAR has been devised to
compare to the base case LIDAR. Since LIDAR scanning distance and angle do not matter
in this implementation due to the neglect of turbulence evolution in the Mann turbulence
box, the neglect of the LIDAR probe volume averaging effect, and the assumption of the
perfect measurement of the longitudinal flow, the improved LIDAR is simply the same
52
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:58==
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Wind speed [m/s]
Full u'
5 rescaled modes
4 rescaled modes
3 rescaled modes
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
2
4
Mean absolute er ror [m/s]
MAE: 5 rescaled modes
MAE: 4 rescaled modes
MAE: 3 rescaled modes
0.0
0.8
1.6
[m/s]
Figure 5.29: Estimation case 5B. Doubled-sampling-frequency LIDAR with interpolation
window size matching the base case, turbulence estimation time series and mean absolute
error.
LIDAR of the base case LIDAR but with double the scanning frequency. This effectively
becomes a study of the sensitivity to the number of measurement points used to perform
ROMSU. When using an interpolation window half the size of the the base case LIDAR,
the result was a high-frequency noise response in the estimation, again showing the limit
on accuracy high frequency sampling has when the sampling locations are constantly
changing. Figure 5.29 shows the results from the improved LIDAR estimation case where
the interpolation window size matches that of the base case, resulting in the same number
of ROMSU calculation time points but with more points interpolated into each time point.
The result is similar characteristic of turbulence estimation but better accuracy overall.
This shows that there is a trade-off point between estimation frequency and interpolation
window size for each LIDAR case that can be optimized.
A summary of the mean absolute turbulence estimation error of the aforementioned cases
and some additional cases for 11.4 m/s is shown in Table 5.8. The bolded values in each
row are the lowest mean absolute error for each prediction case. The full flow projection
summarizes the results when the modes are rescaled at every time step given the full flow
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
53
==PAGE:59==
Table 5.7: Descriptions of estimation case identifiers.
Case identifier
Case description
Estimation case 1
Fixed sampling positions projection, every time step
Estimation case 2
Rotating sampling positions projection, every time step
Estimation case 3
Unison sampling, same total points as base LIDAR
Estimation case 4A
Base LIDAR, minimum feasible interpolation window
Estimation case 4B
Base LIDAR, double interpolation window
Estimation case 5A
Double-frequency LIDAR, half base interpolation window
Estimation case 5B
Double-frequency LIDAR, base LIDAR interpolation window
Table 5.8: Mean absolute error of turbulence estimation, normalized by the longitudinal
turbulence standard deviation, using ROMSU for various LIDAR cases and number of
modes used in the estimation.
11.4 m/s (1.73 m/s)
1 mode
2 modes
3 modes
4 modes
5 modes
6 modes
Full flow projection
0.71
0.64
0.59
0.57
0.55
0.52
Estimation case 1
0.72
0.68
0.67
0.67
0.66
0.82
Estimation case 2
0.72
0.68
0.66
0.67
0.70
0.84
Estimation case 3
0.72
0.67
0.65
0.66
0.69
1.16
Estimation case 4A
0.72
0.67
0.64
0.64
0.65
0.68
Estimation case 4B
0.72
0.66
0.63
0.63
0.63
0.65
Estimation case 5A
0.72
0.66
0.63
0.64
0.64
0.68
Estimation case 5B
0.71
0.65
0.61
0.60
0.59
0.57
information rather than the information limited by the LIDAR sampling, and is included
as a base reference value. Estimation cases 1 and 2 have similar error levels despite the
heavy noise in case 2 from the LIDAR sampling rotation. This further shows that the
number of LIDAR points has a larger impact on the global error. Estimation case 3 has
the same number of sample points as cases 4A and 4B, and gives some insight on the
effect of interpolation on the overall method. The three cases have similar error overall,
showing that minor to moderate interpolation differences have a smaller effect than the
total number of points available to inform the modes rescaling.
Increasing the interpolation window from Case 4A, of 6.8 meters, to 4B, of 13.6 meters,
did not substantially lower the error of the turbulence estimation, showing that there
is a trade-off there between error from interpolation and not having frequent enough
measurements and considering more points to constrain the ROMSU method. However,
cases 5A and 5B have a large difference in error when more modes are used for estimation.
Case 5B had on average approximately 20 points interpolated into a plane to be used for
turbulence estimation. Combined with an interpolation window of just 6.8 meters, this is
a standout LIDAR sampling method compared to the other cases.
The overall trend in the table is that given a base level of LIDAR capability, improvements
in LIDAR sampling result in better turbulence estimations with more modes included.
This is evidenced by the relatively steady error level across all cases for estimation with one
mode and to a slightly less extent two modes. The variance increases with each successive
mode added. Using three modes or four modes for reconstruction when guaranteed six
LIDAR measurements to use for estimation is most consistently resulting in the highest
54
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:60==
Table 5.9: Summary of turbine response analysis cases.
Analysis case name
Description
Original u-turbulence
Mann-generated longitudinal turbulence
Estimation Case 4B
Turbulence estimation with four modes
Estimation Case 5B
Turbulence estimation with six modes
Reconstruction, 6 modes
Truncated reconstruction with six modes
level of accuracy globally, using the mean absolute error. However, if a LIDAR is capable
of producing measurements such as Case 5B, then estimating with six modes becomes
the optimum case, and lower error of predictions of turbine response characteristics, as
shown in Table 5.6, is possible. Maximizing the number of points in space measured by
the LIDAR that can be used for estimation has a direct effect on the accuracy of the
turbulence estimation.
5.3.2
Estimation of turbine response
The estimated turbine response from HAWC2 is analyzed by comparing the two estimation
cases, Estimation case 4B with four modes used for estimation and Estimation case 5B
with six modes used for estimation, with two reference cases, the original u-turbulence
box and a truncated reconstruction with six modes, as summarized in Table 5.9.
Figure 5.30 shows the time series of the rotor average wind speed during the window of
interest. Both LIDAR cases demonstrate noise caused by the changing sampling locations.
However, both do track the rotor average wind speed consistently. Estimation case 5B
performs slightly better than Estimation case 4B at the most challenging sections around
160 seconds and 240 seconds. Neither estimation case follows the rotor average wind speed
as well as the truncated reconstruction, however. Estimation using LIDAR-sampled data
may not have the same accuracy as reconstruction for the same number of modes included.
Figure 5.31 shows the rotor speed time series and absolute error comparing the estimation
cases and reference cases. Interestingly, the rotor speed oscillates with large oscillations
from 220 seconds to 240 seconds. However, the absolute error shows that these oscillations
are not as pronounced as the appear in the time series, since the reference case also has large
changes in the rotor speed at this point in time. The beginning of the time series shows a
severe over-estimation of the rotor speed for both estimation cases that compares to the
same characteristic in the reconstruction case truncated to two modes in Figure 5.14. The
large error in rotor speed will also lead to a larger azimuthal angle error for the estimation
cases compared to the reconstruction case. This suggests that while each estimation case
had the lowest mean absolute error of the turbulence estimation for four modes for Case
4B and six modes for Case 5B, respectively, that the actual characteristic of the turbine
response is more similar to that of a two-modes reconstruction for the rotor speed.
The blade pitch angle response in Figure 5.32 exhibits the same oscillatory behavior as the
rotor speed. This is an effect from the controller trying to keep up with the noisy estimated
rotor average wind speed at above-rated wind speeds on the sharpest part of the pitch
gradient in the pitch control region [10]. The large oscillating pitch angle errors in the
blade pitch angle will lead to amplified oscillations in the tower-bottom fore-aft bending
moment which will lead to higher signal error, which is corroborated in Figure 5.34.
The electrical power signal in Figure 5.33 shows similar characteristics to the rotor speed
in Figure 5.31. Where the estimated wind inflow is too high and the resulting rotor speed
is too high around 160 seconds, the predicted power is as well. Extra noise in the rotor
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
55
==PAGE:61==
10
11
12
Rotor average wind speed [m/s]
Original u'
Estimation case 4B
Estimation case 5B
6 modes reconstr uction
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Absolute Er ror [m/s]
Figure 5.30: 11.4 m/s case: Estimation of the rotor average wind speed with two selected
LIDAR cases and one reconstruction case for comparison.
1.20
1.25
1.30
Rotor speed [rad/s]
Original u'
Estimation case 4B
Estimation case 5B
6 modes reconstr uction
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Absolute Er ror [rad/s]
Figure 5.31: 11.4 m/s case: Rotor speed response to the estimated turbulence for two
LIDAR cases and one reconstruction case for comparison.
56
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:62==
0
1
2
3
4
5
Blade pitch angle [deg]
Original u'
Estimation case 4B
Estimation case 5B
6 modes reconstr uction
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
Absolute Er ror [deg]
Figure 5.32: 11.4 m/s case: Blade pitch angle response to the estimated turbulence for
two LIDAR cases and one reconstruction case for comparison.
average wind speed arpund 210 seconds in Figure 5.30 explains the small spike in error in
power at that point in time. Like the rotor speed, the electrical power time series suggests
that the two estimation cases each have similar accuracy as a truncated reconstruction
with two modes.
The tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment signal remains the turbine response with the
highest error. In Figure 5.34, the two estimation cases have larger error than the truncated
reconstruction with six modes, particularly when their blade pitch angle error is oscillating
around the true signal.
This suggests that while each estimation case had the lowest mean absolute error of the
turbulence estimation for four modes for Case 4B and six modes for Case 5B, respectively,
that the actual characteristic of the turbine response is more similar to that of a two-modes
reconstruction for the rotor speed.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
57
==PAGE:63==
3500
4000
4500
5000
Electrical power [kW]
Original u'
Estimation case 4B
Estimation case 5B
6 modes reconstr uction
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
800
Absolute Er ror [kW]
Figure 5.33: 11.4 m/s case: Electrical power response for the estimated turbulence for two
LIDAR cases and one reconstruction case for comparison.
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Tower bottom moment [kNm]
Original u'
Estimation case 4B
Estimation case 5B
6 modes reconstr uction
160
180
200
220
240
Time [s]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Absolute Er ror [kNm]
Figure 5.34: 11.4 m/s case: Tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment response for two
LIDAR cases and one reconstruction case for comparison.
58
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:64==
Table 5.10: Mean absolute error of estimations of turbulence and turbine response, nor-
malized by the reference values in Table 5.6.
Data
Wind Speed [m/s]
Estimation case 4B
Estimation case 5B
u-turbulence
11.4
0.63
0.57
22
0.64
0.57
RAWS
11.4
0.28
0.23
22
0.98
0.95
RSPD
11.4
0.41
0.35
22
1.30
1.26
BLPA
11.4
0.59
0.43
22
1.06
1.04
EPWR
11.4
1.26
1.15
22
0.55
0.50
TBFA
11.4
0.83
0.76
22
1.76
1.44
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
59
==PAGE:65==
6
Discussion
While this work shows the strong potential for POD to be used with the ROMSU method
to estimate turbulence to a high enough degree to predict turbine response characteristics
to within one standard deviation with modern LIDAR scanning capabilities, there are
some assumptions and limitations throughout the study that should be investigated.
6.1
Turbulence and proper orthogonal decomposition
First and foremost, the use of Mann-generated turbulence boxes by definition introduces
both the benefits and limitations of using Taylor’s frozen turbulence hypothesis. Taylor’s
frozen turbulence hypothesis allows for easy manipulation and sampling of the turbulence
field, since time and longitudinal space are combined into the same dimension. However,
the frozen turbulence hypothesis breaks down at relatively short length scales, although
this of course depends on the nature of the evolution of the turbulence. In this work, the
frozen turbulence assumption was taken full advantage of, and the range of the LIDAR
measurements were not considered to be limiting in the implementation of the numerical
LIDAR.
The use of Mann-generated turbulence boxes appears to limit the effectiveness of using
POD to more eﬀiciently characterize the flow. This is likely due to the way that Mann-
generated turbulence is constructed. This is apparent when comparing the POD modes
of research using POD on Mann-generated turbulence, such as this work and in [25] to
research using POD on LES or LIDAR data, such as in [9], [14], [22]–[24]. The Mann-
generated turbulence appears to have both a common form of mode shapes, comparing
this work with [25], and also that the first modes of Mann-generated turbulence account
for less relative variance in the wind compared to modes generated from LES. While the
ease of generating and manipulating Mann turbulence boxes and the existing integration
with HAWC2 is very convenient, it is likely that the use of Mann turbulence boxes in this
work artificially lowered the ceiling for the estimation capabilities of the ROMSU method
given the low relative variance of the first few modes, in particular the first mode.
A further limitation of this work hindering the eﬀiciency of the POD modes is the ad-
herence to the Cartesian coordinate system. The geometry of the flow case often informs
when it is advantageous to use a Cartesian or polar coordinate system, as in [24]. In this
case, the rotating nature of the hub LIDAR lends to the potential improvement from using
a polar coordinate system. That way, there is likely to be less noise in the rescaling of
the modes since the LIDAR sampling locations will remain at the same radius and just
translate along the rotor azimuth axis. Additionally, the first POD mode with polar co-
ordinates captured comparitively more variance than the first Cartesian mode. This work
was not completed with a polar coordinate system because of the need to interpolate the
turbulence values twice between Cartesian and polar coordinates, since Mann turbulence
boxes use a Cartesian coordinate system.
A critical assumption for the POD modes analysis and turbine response is the use of
longitudinal-only turbulence for the analysis. While the comparisons to the baseline of
the full-resolution, longitudinal-only turbulence provide a discussion of the eﬀiciency of
the POD modes and the capabilities of the ROMSU method, the baseline itself has non-
negligible error from the three components turbulence case, as shown in Figure 5.5. POD is
also better applied to data for three dimensions of turbulence rather than one, as discussed
60
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:66==
in [24]. As Figure 5.5 shows, adding randomly generated turbulence of the correct length
scale and energy content did not significantly alter the turbine response compared to the
complete omission of transverse turbulence.
6.2
Numerical LIDAR modeling
The numerical LIDAR sampling scheme implemented in this work mimics the pattern of
a real hub-mounted LIDAR but with some simplifying assumptions that leave it short
of approaching. The base numerical LIDAR has six different beams, each that can mea-
sure up to ten ranges, and takes 0.5 seconds for a beam to make its measurements and
the system to switch to the next beam, meaning a complete scan with six beams takes
3 seconds in total. However, the extent of the use of the numerical LIDAR is to deter-
mine which measurement points to use in the estimation; none of the other effects of the
LIDAR have been captured. Two important aspects regarding the accuracy of the mea-
surements are the here-neglected volume averaging effect of the LIDAR probe volume and
the rather unrealistic assumption that the LIDAR measures the longitudinal turbulence
exactly. The volume-averaging effect smooths the turbulence measurements, introducing
further error to the turbulence estimation that has not be captured in this work. The
LIDAR’s line-of-sight measurements can be used to calculate the longitudinal turbulence,
but this requires either direct knowledge of the three-dimensional turbulence character-
istics, which is not possible with a single LIDAR, or assumptions about the transverse
components of turbulence.
The reason for this simplification of the LIDAR implementation was to test the sensitivity
of ROMSU to sampling scheme without considering the effects of imperfect measurements
of the turbulence. Yet, only one single scanning order was tested, starting with the staring
beam and then working clockwise facing downwind towards the turbine. With the space-
time distribution of the points having a clear impact in the accuracy of the turbulence
estimation, this is an important factor to consider. The placement of the measurement
ranges was also optimized for the measurement locations relative to the rotor radius. The
ranges measured slightly more than 8 meters apart along the line of sight of the beam,
which is too close for a realistic LIDAR with a probe volume with a length exceeding that
distance. It may be that the base LIDAR is not realistic because of this, but it requires
the determination of the minimum range spacing within a beam.
The last simplifying assumption for the LIDAR is the assumption that it remains fixed
in space staring directly into the wind. In reality, a hub-mounted LIDAR will change in
orientation as the hub of the turbine moves dynamically in response to the turbulence:
translating fore-aft and side-side, and rotating about the yaw and pitch axes.
These
motions will affect the precise location of the LIDAR measurements, but this in itself
contributes to the overall method error to a lesser extent compared to the other LIDAR
assumptions made. The turbine rotor also sits on a tilt angle, 5 degrees for the NREL 5
MW turbine, which causes the scanning locations to have different radial coordinates de-
pending on the azimuth angle of the beam’s scan. This will make the precise optimization
of the beam’s radial scan positions more challenging.
A requirement of the ROMSU method is the need for interpolation, to match the measure-
ment location with a point in the grid for the POD modes. There are multiple options for
interpolation but this work used nearest-neighbor interpolation for simplicity. This is pos-
sible due to the relatively fine discretization of the turbulence data to generate the global
basis of modes. If only a coarse grid of modes is available, then a spatial interpolation
may be more accurate than nearest neighbor.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
61
==PAGE:67==
6.3
Turbine response
Finally, there were some limitations in the analysis of the turbulence reconstruction and
estimation accuracy and the turbine response to the turbulence reconstruction and esti-
mation. The use of the mean absolute error metric for turbulence gives a fast and intuitive
understanding of the global accuracy of reconstructed or estimated turbulence, but is not
optimal for the case of wind turbines. The most important regions of longitudinal tur-
bulence for loads experienced by turbines is from approximately 50% of the rotor radius
to 90% of the rotor radius. This makes this region the priority for maximizing accuracy.
Therefore, an improvement in the process to replicate the turbine response characteris-
tics would come from minimizing the error in the turbulence reconstruction or estimation
combined with a spatial weighting function that gives the importance of a region. Direct
time series comparisons of the turbine response to reconstructed and estimated turbulence
also suffer from rotor azimuth misalignment. The HAWC2 simulations only enforced an
aligned turbine position from the beginning of the simulation, and, to obtain accurate
dynamic response, the position of the rotor azimuth cannot be forcibly updated to match.
This leads to a case where even if the turbulence reconstruction or estimation is accurate,
the turbine may respond differently compared to the original turbulence simulation be-
cause it has a different rotor azimuth angle and is experiencing different pockets of wind
that force it differently. The result is an artificially worsening of the turbine response
replication for reconstructed and estimated turbulence simulations.
This diﬀiculty deriving from the rotor azimuth error is exacerbated by large first tower-
bottom fore-aft harmonic response in the HAWC2 model. The amplified harmonic re-
sponse introduces large randomly occurring dynamics that lead to a relatively large differ-
ence in the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment response compared to the difference in
the turbulence reconstruction or estimation from the actual case. In an actual case, this
error is limited to just the range of the LIDAR measurements, since the rotor controller
can be aware continually of the rotor azimuth angle.
From Søren- look at results and procedures critically from a scientific point of view. From
Jenni- try to anticipate some questions from the sensor and answer the main ones.
62
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:68==
7
Conclusion
This work aimed to use proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) in order to estimate
turbulence in real time using a numerically simulated LIDAR. A reference data set of 12
Mann turbulence boxes of 600 seconds was generated with six boxes with variance for 11.4
m/s and six boxes with variance for 22 m/s to create a global basis of modes as a reference
for the turbulence estimation. The Re-Orthogonalization of Modal Subset for Upscaling
(ROMSU) method was developed to constrain and rescale the modes formed in the global
basis based on the measurement locations of a numerical LIDAR, so the measurement
values could be used to calculate the modal amplitudes of the rescaled modes. Several
variations of a simple numerical hub LIDAR were simulated, with the base case six beams
including one staring LIDAR, ten ranges, and a 2 Hz-per-beam scanning pattern to provide
the measurement points in the turbulence to perform the ROMSU method. All this was
done in order to address the four core research questions for the project:
1. What is sensitivity of turbulence reconstruction accuracy to the number of included
POD modes?
2. What is the sensitivity of rotor speed, blade pitch angle, electrical power, and tower-
bottom fore-aft bending moment reconstruction accuracy to the number of POD
modes in an aeroelastic simulation?
3. How can POD be used for real-time inflow estimation using hub-mounted LIDAR
measurements?
4. How does the LIDAR’s sampling frequency and total sample point number capabil-
ities affect the accuracy of flow estimation?
7.1
Truncated turbulence reconstruction with POD and
turbine response
Mann-generated turbulence is not as eﬀiciently decomposed by POD, and yet the longitu-
dinal turbulence component could be reconstructed to within 50% of a standard deviation
of the longitudinal turbulence with just eight modes. The rotor average wind speed, an
important statistic for generalizing the effect of longitudinal turbulence on turbine re-
sponse, could be reconstructed to within 10% of a standard deviation of the rotor average
wind speed of the full longitudinal turbulence with just five modes. The turbine response
characteristics of the NREL 5 MW turbine considered, rotor speed, blade pitch angle,
electrical power, and tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment, could be reproduced to a
mean absolute error of 50% of their chosen minimum-standard reference values with six
modes or less for all channels except the tower-bottom fore-aft bending moment, which
was affected by strong harmonic response in the first mode for all simulations. Notably,
the mean absolute error of the turbulence reconstruction and turbine response was less
than the minimum-standard reference value for all cases using just a single mode, except
for the 11.4 m/s electrical power case, which required three modes. This shows a high
potential for estimating the upwind turbulence and turbine loads response from using just
a few POD modes, minimizing the required number of LIDAR scanning points needed to
meet the minimum number of modes.
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
63
==PAGE:69==
7.2
Turbulence estimation and turbine response with
ROMSU
The accuracy of turbulence estimation is almost singularly decided by the number of
available measurement points to perform ROMSU, and further by the interpolation of
measurement points together. With the base LIDAR, measuring ten ranges with six to-
tal beams, one at a time, with a frequency of 2 Hz per beam, the optimum turbulence
estimation is made with between three and five modes in this work. This equates to ap-
proximately 10 measurement points in a plane used for ROMSU on average. The mean
absolute error of the estimation with the base LIDAR is 63% of the magnitude of the lon-
gitudinal turbulence. If the sampling frequency doubles, effectively doubling the number
of points available to constrain the ROMSU method, the optimum number of modes for
estimation increases to at least six, were the error magnitude is reduced to 57% of the
longitudinal turbulence.
7.2.1
Real-time estimation capabilities
Limited by the max pitch rate of the NREL 5 MW, which is 3 degrees/second.
The
maximum expected range of turbulence for the analyzed cases is 9 degrees, which means
that the system would need to be able to predict more than 3 seconds upwind.
For
the cutout rotor speed of 25 m/s, this gives a 75 m minimum longitudinal measurement
range. The ROMSU calculation method requires simple matrix multiplication- in a python
notebook environment, this calculation takes 27.1 seconds for 8192 time steps, which
equates to 3.31 ms per calculation.
7.3
Future work and open research questions
Much of the future work stemming from this project derives from the limitations, assump-
tions, and simplifications made. It should be a top priority to repeat this work using LES
data, especially comparing Cartesian-coordinate modes to polar-coordinate modes, to see
if there is improvement in the eﬀiciency of the POD basis and therefore better turbulence
estimation capability. The more explained variance of the flow contained in the first few
modes, the better the turbulence estimation can be. However, this also comes with losing
the benefits of frozen turbulence that were taken advantage of here. In particular, the
eﬀicacy of interpolation and the usable size of interpolation windows will decrease from
the introduction of the evolution of turbulence. More specifically, and optimization of in-
terpolation methods and LIDAR scanning scheme together should be performed to better
inform the current upper capability limit of turbulence estimation with ROMSU. In order
to perform this realistically, the numerical LIDAR should be updated to perform more
realistic simulated measurements, specifically line-of-sight measurement, probe volume av-
eraging, and space between ranges. These numerical LIDAR model updates, together with
the evolution of turbulence, will likely significantly change the results of the sensitivity
study begun in this work, since trade-offs to just maximizing the number of measurement
points will be introduced like range distance and half-opening angle. This is also signifi-
cantly impacted by the necessary inclusion of all three components of turbulence, which
will also need to be studied for the optimization. The optimization of the LIDAR scheme
and interpolation methods together, combined with all of the model updates from this
project, poses to be a potentially large body of work. The trade-off between the error
introduced by interpolation and maximizing the number of useful measurement points for
ROMSU will need to be continuously revisited.
There is also work that needs to be developed in order to implement a finalized ROMSU
method combined with an optimized LIDAR scanning and interpolation scheme for an
actual turbine. The method will need to be adjusted such that the derived information
64
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:70==
is useful for a feed-forward controller. In particular, the implementation will need to be
adjusted such that the controller is aware of the rotor azimuth at all times as it makes
its calculations for the turbulence inflow estimation, something that is quite diﬀicult to
replicate using case comparisons in HAWC2. Another consideration that must be made is
the generation of a global basis of POD modes for a turbine inflow. It is quite likely that
in complex terrain cases, where the development of feed-forward control has potentially
significant benefits in reducing turbine loads, a global basis will need to be generated for
each turbine individually. It should be explored whether this can be done with LES, or
if a measurement campaign is needed. The resolution in space for the global basis also
needs to be maximized in order to minimize interpolation.
There are five research questions that should be answered to further this work and make
progress towards the implementation of a hub-mounted LIDAR system for feed-forward
control:
1. How can a global basis be best generated for a given turbine’s inflow?
2. How accurate is interpolating turbulence across time and space once turbulence evo-
lution is considered, for the purpose of turbulence estimation and predicted turbine
response?
3. What is the optimum combined base LIDAR scanning scheme and interpolation
method for use with ROMSU to minimize turbulence estimation error, once a real-
istic numerical LIDAR is used in conjunction with evolving turbulence?
4. Using the generated global basis and optimum LIDAR scanning scheme-interpolation
method, can the turbulence be estimated to a high enough level of accuracy for
an implemented feed-forward controller to reduce the turbine loads by a margin
that justifies the cost and complexity of using a hub-mounted LIDAR system and
generating a global basis prior?
5. What are the minimum LIDAR specifications that are required for ROMSU in order
to justify the use of the hub-mounted LIDAR?
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
65
==PAGE:71==
Acronyms
DTU Technical University of Denmark.
IEC Internationl Electrotechnical Commission.
LES large eddy simulations.
LIDAR light detection and ranging.
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
POD proper orthogonal decomposition.
ROMSU Re-Orthogonalization of Modal Subset for Upscaling.
SVD singular value decomposition.
66
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
A. ; Peña, C. B. Hasager, M. ; Badger, et al., “General rights Remote Sensing for
Wind Energy,” Tech. Rep., 2015.
[2]
W. Fu, A. Sebastiani, A. Peña, and J. Mann, “Influence of nacelle-lidar scanning
patterns on inflow turbulence characterization,” in Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, vol. 2265, Institute of Physics, Jun. 2022. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/2265/2/
022016.
[3]
W. Fu, A. Sebastiani, A. Peña, and J. Mann, “Dependence of turbulence estimations
on nacelle-lidar scanning strategies,” doi: 10.5194/wes-2022-85. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.5194/wes-2022-85.
[4]
M. Mirzaei and J. Mann, “Lidar configurations for wind turbine control,” in Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 753, Institute of Physics Publishing, Oct. 2016.
doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/753/3/032019.
[5]
D. Schlipf, F. Guo, and S. Raach, “Lidar-based Estimation of Turbulence Intensity
for Controller Scheduling,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1618, IOP
Publishing Ltd, Sep. 2020. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1618/3/032053.
[6]
J. M. Rinker, “Impact of rotor size on aeroelastic uncertainty with lidar-constrained
turbulence,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 2265, Institute of Physics,
Jun. 2022. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/2265/3/032011.
[7]
N. Dimitrov and A. Natarajan, “Application of simulated lidar scanning patterns to
constrained Gaussian turbulence fields for load validation,” Wind Energy, vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 79–95, Jan. 2017, issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.1992.
[8]
E. Simley, N. Angelou, T. Mikkelsen, M. Sjöholm, J. Mann, and L. Y. Pao, “Charac-
terization of wind velocities in the upstream induction zone of a wind turbine using
scanning continuous-wave lidars,” Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy,
vol. 8, no. 1, Jan. 2016, issn: 19417012. doi: 10.1063/1.4940025.
[9]
K. Brown, “Representation of coherent structures and turbulence spectra from a
virtual SpinnerLidar for future LES wake validation,” Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, 2020.
[10]
J. Jonkman, S. Butterfield, W. Musial, and G. Scott, “Definition of a 5-MW Refer-
ence Wind Turbine for Offshore System Development,” Tech. Rep., 2009. [Online].
Available: http://www.osti.gov/bridge.
[11]
J. Berg, M. Kelly, J. Mann, and M. Nielsen, Micrometeorology for Wind Energy
DTU 46100 Autumn 2021, 2021.
[12]
International Electrotechnical Commission., Wind energy generation systems. Part
1 : design requirements, p. 168, isbn: 9782832262535.
[13]
S. B. Pope, Turbulent Flows, 1st ed. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[14]
S. J. Andersen and J. P. Murcia Leon, “Predictive and stochastic reduced-order
modeling of wind turbine wake dynamics,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 7, no. 5,
pp. 2117–2133, Oct. 2022, issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-7-2117-2022.
[15]
J. Mann, “The Spatial Structure of Neutral Atmospheric Surface-Layer Turbulence,”
Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 273, pp. 141–168, 1994, issn: 14697645. doi: 10.
1017/S0022112094001886.
[16]
“data-sheet-WINDFIELD,” Tech. Rep.
[17]
A. Giyanani, M. Sjöholm, G. Rolighed Thorsen, J. Schuhmacher, and J. Gottschall,
“Wind speed reconstruction from three synchronized short-range WindScanner lidars
in a large wind turbine inflow field campaign and the associated uncertainties,” in
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
67
==PAGE:73==
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 2265, Institute of Physics, Jun. 2022.
doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/2265/2/022032.
[18]
F. Guo, J. Mann, A. Peña, D. Schlipf, and P. W. Cheng, “The space-time structure
of turbulence for lidar-assisted wind turbine control,” Renewable Energy, vol. 195,
pp. 293–310, Aug. 2022, issn: 18790682. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2022.05.133.
[19]
J. Liew and G. C. Larsen, “How does the quantity, resolution, and scaling of tur-
bulence boxes affect aeroelastic simulation convergence?” In Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, vol. 2265, Institute of Physics, Jun. 2022. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/2265/3/032049.
[20]
G. Berkooz, P. Holmes, and J. L. Lumley, “THE PROPER ORTHOGONAL DE-
COMPOSITION IN THE ANALYSIS OF TURBULENT FLOWS,” Tech. Rep.,
1993, pp. 539–75. [Online]. Available: www.annualreviews.org.
[21]
Y. Tamura, S. Suganuma, H. Kikuchi, and K. Hibi, “PROPER ORTHOGONAL
DECOMPOSITION OF RANDOM WIND PRESSURE FIELD,” Tech. Rep., 1999.
[Online]. Available: http://www.idealibrary.comon.
[22]
K. Saranyasoontorn and L. Manuel, “Low-dimensional representations of inflow tur-
bulence and wind turbine response using Proper Orthogonal Decomposition,” in
Journal of Solar Energy Engineering, Transactions of the ASME, vol. 127, Nov.
2005, pp. 553–562. doi: 10.1115/1.2037108.
[23]
K. Saranyasoontorn and L. Manuel, “On the propagation of uncertainty in inflow
turbulence to wind turbine loads,” Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial
Aerodynamics, vol. 96, no. 5, pp. 503–523, May 2008, issn: 01676105. doi: 10.1016/
j.jweia.2008.01.005.
[24]
M. O. Iqbal and F. O. Thomas, “Coherent structure in a turbulent jet via a vector im-
plementation of the proper orthogonal decomposition,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
vol. 571, pp. 281–326, Jan. 2007, issn: 14697645. doi: 10.1017/S0022112006003351.
[25]
L. Eliassen and S. Andersen, “Investigating Coherent Structures in the Standard
Turbulence Models using Proper Orthogonal Decomposition,” in Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, vol. 753, Institute of Physics Publishing, Oct. 2016. doi: 10.1088/
1742-6596/753/3/032040.
[26]
J. F. Céspedes, J. Pablo, M. León, S. J. Andersen, and J. Andersen, “Convergence
and eﬀiciency of global bases using proper orthogonal decomposition,” Tech. Rep.
[27]
R. D. Meyer and G. Tan, “Use of proper orthogonal decomposition and linear
stochastic estimation technique to investigate real-time detailed airflows for building
ventilation,” Indoor and Built Environment, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 378–389, 2016, issn:
14230070. doi: 10.1177/1420326X14556845.
[28]
S. L. Brunton and J. N. Kutz, Data-Driven Science and Engineering, 1st. Cambridge
University Press, 2019.
[29]
J. P. Murcia, “Notes on comparing Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and Proper
Orthogonal Decomposition (POD),” 2023.
68
Real-time estimation of wind turbine inflow using a numerical hub-mounted LIDAR and
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
