==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Reinforcement Learning for Optimized nav-
igation of Aerial Robots in confined spaces
Author: Vimal Velusamy Bharathi
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Evangelos Boukas
Co-supervisors: Post Doc. Rasmus Eckholdt Andersen
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Building 326
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The main objective of the thesis was to develop Deep Reinforcement Learning model
trained to perform certain tasks on virtual environment and then deploy the model
on a real drone and be able to perform the task in very similar environment on field in
real-time. The tasks that was initially planned were related to Inspection application
where the drone would fly in an environment with defects and rust. The drone would
use a single camera and record the videos during the inspection task focusing on these
interest areas such as defects and rust. The tasks that needs to be trained helps the
drone to do certain maneuvers during its flight in the inspection sights that could
give the inspection supervisor more insights to the damages in the inspection sight.
The mains tasks for this thesis rested on building a replica of a demo drone and to
train reinforcement models on inspection tasks in virtual Environment. The building
of the drone had various diﬀiculties and hardships which included tasks such as 3-D
printing of parts, setting up the ROS environment, PID tuning for the motors, set-
tings up cameras, test flights, reassembling after crash,etc. Apart from the building
of the physical drone, the main objective was to train reinforcement learning models
to perform certain tasks. The implementation of the source code was necessary to
use frameworks like stablebaselines3, Airsim, Pytorch, OpenCV etc. The training
of the Deep Reinforcement models also needed a virtual environment in which the
agent could be trained. The virtual environment was built using Unreal Engine 4.27.
The stable baselines3 is latest framework that includes set of reliable implementations
of reinforcement learning algorithms in Pytorch. The main reinforcement models fo-
cused on were DQN, A2C and PPO. The thesis mainly focuses on training same tasks
using the above 3 algorithms and comparing the performance of each other.
During my thesis work period the drone has been successfully built and many Deep
Reinforcement Learning models have been trained on the agent in the virtual envi-
ronments. But the training of Reinforcement models consumed lot of time and at
the same time trying to meet the desired performance. There are several parameters
that needed to be played with in order to obtain a better and better results.
Most of competencies and tasks needed to be performed for this thesis were relatively
new to me and had a very steep learning curve. Hence some these tasks were very
time consuming as it had to be learnt and implemented and also included trail and
error scenarios to understand and achieve a certain topic. This led to having tough
time meeting the initial goal to deploy the trained model onto physical drone.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared from the inspiration of inspectrone project which
was carried out in the year 2021. The Inspectrone project is a collaboration between
Force technology and the autonomous systems department at the Technical University
of Denmark. To fulfill the requirements for acquiring a Master’s of Science degree in
Autonomous Systems the thesis will represent a workload of 35 ECTS in the period
spanning from February 2023 to July 2023.
Kongens Lyngby, 21st July 2023
Vimal Velusamy Bharathi
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Prof. Evangelos Boukas and Rasmus Eckholdt Andersen, for
their project idea, and their guidance throughout the project and giving me the
hardware I needed for developing my solutions. I am also grateful for taking me to a
Field trip to test flight and collect data from real ship which gave me a lot of insights
and a good experience.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Inspectrone Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Glossary
5
3
Inspectrone Drone
7
4
Virtual Engine and Simulator
9
4.1
Unreal Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
AirSim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory
15
5.1
Stable Baselines3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1.1
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.1.1
DQN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.1.2
A2C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.1.3
PPO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.2
Algorithmic Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.2.1
Policy Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.2.2
Value Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.2.3
Action Space and Observation Space . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.2.4
Reward Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.2.5
Buffer Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.2.6
Learning Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Training and Results
29
6.1
Training Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.1
DRL Architecture 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.2
DRL Architecture 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Training Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2.1
Training Setup 1: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2.2
Training Setup 2: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2.3
Training Setup 3: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.4
Training Setup 4: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.5
Training Setup 5: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Training Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Conclusion
41
Appendices
43
Appendix A
Drone
45
A.1 All Views
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.2 Drone Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Appendix B
Training Screenshots
47
Bibliography
50
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter will introduce the project, the specific task at hand, its objectives, the
motivation behind this thesis and a short description on how it would work. At the
end of this chapter there will be an outline containing a small description of what
each chapter contains.
1.1
The Inspectrone Project
The Inspectrone project is a project dedicated to creating autonomous unmanned
drones designed specifically for the inspection of confined areas within marine vessels.
This thesis paper will concentrate on the examination of water ballast tanks found
in marine vessels. The primary objective is to achieve a maximum detection rate for
potential faults encountered during inspections. These faults may include corrosion,
damages, and other related issues. The Inspectrone undertaking encompasses numer-
ous sub-projects that have been worked on earlier. My contribution to this is to build
Deep Reinforcement Learning framework for training agents in virtual environment
to do certain inspection tasks. Then in parallel also to work on building a replica of
a Inspectrone drone in order to be able to deploy the Deep Reinforcement model on
to the physical drone.
The main reason for this project is that there have been multiple projects earlier for
the navigation of drones to be able to fly through manholes and be able to maneuver
through the ballast tank. And there is need to detect the corrosion and the damages
during the locomotion of the drone in real-time. Due to the latest advancements in
Deep Reinforcement Learning and its amazing performances in Atari games made it
desirable for this application. Hence using Deep Reinforcement Learning algorithms
to train virtual drone agents to do inspection tasks was the initial idea behind this
thesis project.
1.2
Objectives
The objective of this thesis is to build a replica of a demo drone and to be able to fly it
with the Deep Reinforcement Learning models trained to perform certain inspection
tasks. This thesis served mainly as a good opportunity to learn and implement several
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
task which were new to me and to have a steep learning curve.
The key objectives in bullet point form can be seen after the paragraphs, which will
describe the key objectives.
The first objective was to build replica of demo drone which had plans to be used
for deploying the trained deep Reinforcement Learning models. The drone is also to
be used for other projects which are out of this scope of project. The drone is to
have ARM computer with gpu acceleration, namely a Nvidia Jetson Xavier NX. The
Jetson is a small size computer with gpu acceleration to handle parallel calculations
like graphics, matrices etc, which is ideal for deploying deep reinforcement models.
The second objective is to create a virtual environment using Unreal Engine 4.27
which serves as training grounds for the agents. The unreal engine has a basic Blocks
environment which could be used to run test runs but for the inspection tasks custom
environments have to be created to run training.
The third objective is to develop the source code for Deep Reinforcement Learning
and to use several packages to be able to develop framework to train models to
achieve certain tasks. One of the main package that was used for this task was the
”Stable Baselines3”. Stable Baselines3 (SB3) is a set of reliable implementations of
reinforcement learning algorithms in PyTorch.
1. Building Drone
a) 3D printing of parts
b) Setting up Operating systems and ROS platform on ARM processor
c) Setting up multiple cameras
d) Setting up Flight Controller
e) Interact with drone through QGroundControl to set the parameters
f) Perform PID tuning of the drone
g) Perform test flights to ensure functionality and troubleshooting
2. Virtual Environment
a) Setting up Airsim with Pixhawk
b) Create custom environment with Unreal Engine
3. Deep Reinforcement Learning
a) Develop source code for Deep Reinforcement learning
b) Optimize the reward function and the training procedure
c) Comparison between DRL algorithms DQN, A2C and PPO
d) Evaluate the model performance with the rewards
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Outline
3
1.3
Outline
Introduction: This chapter will mainly deal with the objectives of the project and
give a introduction about the project and what is inside this thesis.
Glossary: This chapter will have a glossary for words and abbreviations used in
this thesis.
Inspectrone Drone: This chapter will show the basic information about the drone
that was built for this project.
Virutal Engine & Simulator: This chapter will talk about the virtual Engine
that was used to create environments that was used as the training grounds and the
simulator that was used as interaction between the drone and the virtual Engine.
Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory:
This chapter introduces all the the-
ory and concepts that lie behind the training performed.
Training and Results: This chapter talks about the training procedure and re-
sults obtained for each training with graphs and explanation.
Conclusion: This chapter talks about the learning obtained from the training and
the best practices and also the potential future work that could be carried out.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Glossary
This section will explain most of the uncommon words used in this thesis.
Name
Description/Explanation
ROS
Robot Operating System is a flexible framework for writing robot
software. It provides libraries and tools to help software develop-
ers create robot applications more easily.
PID tuning
PID tuning is the process of adjusting the Proportional, Integral,
and Derivative gains of a PID controller to achieve desired system
performance and stability. It involves iteratively tuning the gains
based on system response and error characteristics.
Pytorch
PyTorch is a popular open-source deep learning library with GPU
acceleration support.
OpenCV
OpenCV (Open Source Computer Vision) is a widely used open-
source computer vision and image processing library.
Framework
A framework is a pre-established software structure that provides
a foundation for application development and simplifies the devel-
opment process by offering reusable components and conventions.
ARM
ARM (Advanced RISC Machines) is a widely used microprocessor
architecture known for its energy eﬀiciency and versatile applica-
tions in various devices.
Agent
In reinforcement learning, an agent is an autonomous entity that
interacts with an environment, learning from feedback in the form
of rewards or penalties to optimize its decision-making and achieve
specific objectives.
Software-in-loop
Software-in-the-loop (SIL) is a testing and simulation technique
in which software components or algorithms are tested within a
simulated environment or system, enabling rapid development and
validation of software functionalities.
Hardware-in-loop
Hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) is a testing and validation method in
which real hardware components are integrated with a simulation
environment to test and evaluate complex systems or devices.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Glossary
Name
Description/Explanation
TS*
Training Setup
API
API (Application Programming Interface) is a set of defined rules
and protocols that allow different software applications to commu-
nicate and interact with each other, enabling seamless integration
and data exchange.
ROI
Region Of Interest (ROI) in images typically refers to a specific
area or region within an image that is relevant to the learning
task.
RONI
Region Of Non-Interest or the background.
Episode
An episode refers to a single run or sequence of interactions an
agent has with an environment, starting from an initial state and
continuing until a terminal state is reached.
Q-function
In reinforcement learning, the Q-function (or action-value func-
tion) estimates the expected total reward an agent can achieve
from a particular state-action pair in an environment.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Inspectrone Drone
The Inspectrone Drone was built to help perform inspections and collect training
data of ballast tanks on container ships. This was also planned to be used to deploy
trained Deep Reinforcement Models onto the drone to perform real-time inspection
task that will be trained in the virtual environment. The drone was a replica of a
similar demo Inspectrone drone that was built earlier but needed lot of modifications.
One half of the time was spent on building the Inspectrone system facing lot of issues
and diﬀiculties. This time spent was split among tasks such as on building the drone,
Designing parts and 3D printing, setting up Ubuntu and ROS on the ARM processor,
Setting up flight controller, Calibrating, Test flights and troubleshooting, PID tuning
of the motors, Setting up cameras, etc.
The Inspectrone System is built with the following hardware components.Pictures
of all the views of the drone can be seen in Appendix A.1. And a Overview of the
system connections can be seen in Appendix A.2.
• PC: Aaeon PICU-TGU4 & Jetson XavierNX
• Flight Controller: Pixhawk 4 mini (PX4)
• GPS Module: Pixhawk 4 GPS module
• Electronic Speed Control (ESC): Blitz E80 Single CNC ESC
• Power Management Board (PMB): Holybro PM06 v2
• Camera: RealSense T265 & RealSense L515
• Battery: Lithium-ion 6S
• Wifi-module for PC: DWA 181
• Transmitter: Taranis FrSky X9D
• Arduino: DFROBOT Beetle
• LEDs
• LED stepdown: Mean well LDD 700L
• Motors: Xing 3110 900KV
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Inspectrone Drone
Figure 3.1. Inspectrone Drone
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 4
Virtual Engine and
Simulator
4.1
Unreal Engine
In this project, Unreal Engine 4.27 has been used as the virtual environment to build
the environments which are task specific to train virtual agents. Unreal Engine 4.27
was chosen for this project due to its advanced graphics rendering, physics simulation,
and versatile environment creation capabilities.
And as it was the recommended
version to be used that is compatible with the AirSim Simulator which will be seen
in the later section.
The Unreal Engine provides a basic environment called ”Blocks.sh” which can be used
to run simulations. The figure 4.1 shows the default Unreal Environment provided
by Unreal Engine.
Figure 4.1. Default Blocks Environment that comes with the UE 4.27
==PAGE:20==
10
4 Virtual Engine and Simulator
But in certain cases when a custom environment is needed Unreal Engine pro-
vides ”Unreal Engine 4.27 Editor”. Once the environment has been designed, the
Unreal Engine also provides an option to package the created environment. Pack-
aged Unreal Engine environments provide a standalone executable file that can be
easily distributed and run on different machines and operating systems. Packaging
an Unreal Engine environment ensures that it is optimized for performance, taking
advantage of the engine’s rendering capabilities and underlying systems. This opti-
mization leads to improved frame rates, reduced latency, and smoother gameplay,
enhancing the overall experience for both training agents and evaluating their perfor-
mance. Below figure 4.2 and 4.3 shows the custom Unreal Environment designed for
the project.
Figure 4.2. Training Environment 1 - Environment designed for initial training for navi-
gation of drone in straight line and to navigate to desired location
==PAGE:21==
4.2 AirSim
11
Figure 4.3. Training Environment 2 - Environment designed for inspection task for single
and multi agents
4.2
AirSim
AirSim is a simulator for drones, cars and more, built on Unreal Engine. It is open-
source, cross platform, and supports software-in-the-loop simulation with popular
flight controllers such as PX4 & ArduPilot and hardware-in-loop with PX4 for phys-
ically and visually realistic simulations. It is developed as an Unreal plugin that can
simply be dropped into any Unreal environment.
AirSim provides a powerful platform for training deep reinforcement learning (RL)
agents by simulating realistic environments and providing a seamless integration with
RL algorithms.Below is an overview of how AirSim is used in this project for DRL
training.
1. Environment Setup:
To train RL agents using AirSim, we first set up the simulation environment by
configuring the desired vehicles, sensors, and environmental conditions. This
involves selecting the appropriate vehicle model (e.g., car, drone) and defining
the sensor models (e.g., cameras, lidars) that the RL agent will perceive and
interact with during training which is included as ”settings.json” file as shown
in Figure 4.4 and 4.5 . The environment can be customized to simulate specific
scenarios or tasks.
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Virtual Engine and Simulator
Figure 4.4.
Settings.json file showing the vehicle type(”SimMode”) and the simulation
camera mode (”ViewMode”)
Figure 4.5. Settings.json file showing the vehicle specific setting
==PAGE:23==
4.2 AirSim
13
2. Reinforcement Learning Algorithm Integration:
Then we integrate the RL algorithm of choice with AirSim. This involves con-
necting the RL algorithm’s components, such as the policy network, value func-
tion, and exploration strategy, to the AirSim API. The RL algorithm interacts
with the simulation environment through the API, sending commands to control
the vehicle and receiving sensor data as observations.
3. Observation and Action Spaces:
We define the observation space and action space for the RL agent. The ob-
servation space consists of the sensor data provided by AirSim, such as images,
point clouds, or distance measurements. The action space represents the possi-
ble actions that the RL agent can take to control the vehicle, such as steering,
acceleration, or braking.
4. Training Loop:
The RL training process in AirSim typically follows a training loop that repeats
for a specified number of iterations or until the desired performance is achieved.
Within each iteration, the RL agent interacts with the simulation environment,
collecting observations, selecting actions based on its policy, and receiving re-
wards or penalties based on the achieved objectives.
Once the RL agent has been trained in the simulated environment, it can be trans-
ferred to real-world applications. The learned policies can be fine-tuned using real-
world data, a process known as domain adaptation, to make the RL agent adapt to
the differences between simulation and reality.
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Virtual Engine and Simulator
Figure 4.6. Airsim Simulator of drone with multiple camera views (Depth, Segmentation
and Scene)
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 5
Deep Reinforcement
Learning Theory
In this chapter we will see the theory behind Deep Reinforcement Learning models
that is needed for the tasks and the various components that are involved which has
effects on training the DRL models. Here we will mainly focus on Stable Baseline3
which is used as the DRL framework in this thesis.
5.1
Stable Baselines3
Stable Baselines3 is a Python library that provides a collection of state-of-the-art
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for training agents in diverse environments.
Built upon the OpenAI Gym framework, Stable Baselines3 offers a set of reliable and
robust RL algorithms that have been extensively tested and bench marked. The SB3
uses a very simple API, The Figure 5.1 shows that training agents in Stable-Baselines3
takes just a few lines of code, after which the agent can be queried for actions.
The below technical description will delve into the key features, algorithmic com-
ponents, and usage of Stable Baselines3.
1. Key features:
Below are the various features that makes SB3 significant for RL frameworks:
• Compatibility: Stable Baselines3 seamlessly integrates with the OpenAI
Gym environment, making it compatible with a wide variety of simulation
environments and tasks.
• Algorithmic Variety: The library offers a collection of popular RL algo-
rithms, including Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), Deep Q-Networks
(DQN),Asynchronous Actor-Critic(A2C), Soft Actor-Critic (SAC), and more.
This variety allows users to choose the most suitable algorithm for their
specific task or domain.
==PAGE:26==
16
5 Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory
Figure 5.1. Using Stable-Baselines3 to train, save, load, and infer an action from a policy.
• Parallelization: Stable Baselines3 leverages multiprocessing to eﬀiciently
distribute computation across multiple CPU cores and GPUs, enabling
faster training and evaluation of RL agents.
• Model Saving and Loading: The library provides functionality to save and
load trained RL models, allowing users to resume training or deploy agents
in production environments without the need for retraining.
• Extensibility: Stable Baselines3 is designed to be easily extensible, allowing
users to incorporate custom environments, reward functions, and neural
network architectures to suit their specific requirements.
2. Algorithmic Components:
Stable Baselines3 implements RL algorithms that consist of several key compo-
nents:
• Policy Networks: These networks map the agent’s observations to actions.
Stable Baselines3 supports a variety of neural network architectures, in-
cluding feedforward networks, convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), providing flexibility in modeling differ-
ent types of inputs.
• Value Networks: Value networks are used in algorithms such as PPO and
DQN to estimate the expected value or quality of state-action pairs. They
help in evaluating and comparing different action choices during the train-
ing process.
• Memory Buffers: Some algorithms, like DQN, utilize experience replay
buffers to store and sample experiences collected during training. These
buffers enable the RL agent to learn from past experiences by randomly
==PAGE:27==
5.1 Stable Baselines3
17
sampling and replaying them, breaking the correlation between consecutive
samples.
• Exploration Strategies: Stable Baselines3 incorporates various exploration
strategies to encourage the RL agent to explore the environment and dis-
cover new actions.
Examples of such strategies include epsilon-greedy,
Boltzmann exploration, and noise injection.
• Optimization Algorithms: The RL algorithms in Stable Baselines3 employ
optimization algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD), Adam,
or RMSprop, to update the parameters of the policy and value networks
based on the agent’s experience and the defined objective function.
3. Usage:
To use Stable Baselines3, we typically follow a set of common steps:
• Define the Environment: We start by defining the RL environment using
the OpenAI Gym interface. This involves specifying the state and action
spaces, as well as the reward structure and termination conditions.
• Select an Algorithm: We choose the RL algorithm from Stable Baselines3
that best suits the problem domain and requirements. The library provides
a variety of algorithms, each with its own strengths and suitability for
different scenarios.
• Configure Hyperparameters: We configure the hyperparameters of the cho-
sen algorithm, such as learning rates, batch sizes, discount factors, and
exploration parameters. These settings influence the learning process and
agent behavior.
• Train the Agent: We initiate the training process by executing the selected
RL algorithm on the defined environment.
During training, the agent
interacts with the environment, collects experiences, and updates its policy
and value networks based on the chosen optimization algorithm.
• Evaluate and Fine-Tune: Once the agent has been trained, We can evaluate
its performance in the environment and fine-tune the hyperparameters or
algorithms if necessary.
Stable Baselines3 provides tools for visualizing
and analyzing the learning progress and performance metrics.
• Save and Deploy: Finally, We can save the trained RL model for future
use or deploy the agent in real-world applications to perform the desired
tasks in the defined environment.
5.1.1
Models
This thesis focus mainly on using 3 different DRL Algorithms namely DQN, PPO, and
A2C. All the training is run with these 3 models to establish a comparison between
them and to figure out the best Algorithm for the task.
==PAGE:28==
18
5 Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory
5.1.1.1
DQN
DQN, which stands for Deep Q-Network, is a reinforcement learning algorithm that
combines the Q-learning algorithm with deep neural networks. It was introduced
by DeepMind in 2013 and has been widely used for solving complex reinforcement
learning tasks.
DQN is designed to learn optimal policies in environments with large state spaces,
such as high-dimensional sensory inputs (e.g., images) or continuous state spaces. It
overcomes the limitations of traditional tabular Q-learning by utilizing deep neural
networks to approximate the Q-function, which maps states and actions to their
corresponding expected cumulative rewards.
Figure 5.2 shows the DQN Algorithm with Experience Replay,
Figure 5.2. DQN Algorithm
Below is a high-level overview of the DQN algorithm:
1. Experience Replay Memory(D): DQN utilizes an experience replay buffer
to store and sample experiences.
During interactions with the environment,
experiences consisting of (state st, action at, reward rt, next_state st+1, done)
tuples are stored in the replay buffer. This allows the algorithm to break the
sequential correlation of experiences and reduce the bias and variance in the
learning process.
2. Q-Network: DQN uses a deep neural network, known as the Q-network, to
approximate the Q-function. The Q-network takes the current state as input
and outputs the estimated Q-values for all possible actions. The network is
==PAGE:29==
5.1 Stable Baselines3
19
trained to minimize the mean squared error between the predicted Q-values
and the target Q-values.
3. Target Network: DQN employs a separate target network, which is a copy
of the Q-network, to stabilize training.
The target network is updated less
frequently compared to the Q-network, typically after a fixed number of steps.
This helps to mitigate the issues of moving target values during training.
4. Epsilon-Greedy Exploration(ϵ): DQN uses epsilon-greedy exploration to
balance exploration and exploitation. During training, the algorithm selects
actions based on a combination of greedy policy (exploitation) and random
actions (exploration). The exploration rate, epsilon, is typically annealed over
time to prioritize exploitation as the agent learns.
5. Training Procedure: At each time step, the agent selects an action based
on the current state and the epsilon-greedy policy. The action is then executed
in the environment, and the agent receives the next state, reward, and a flag
indicating if the episode is done. The experience tuple is stored in the replay
buffer. After a certain number of steps, a batch of experiences is sampled from
the replay buffer. The Q-network is trained on this batch by minimizing the
loss between the predicted Q-values and the target Q-values.
6. Target Q-Value Computation: The target Q-values are computed using a
variant of the Bellman equation. For the next state, the Q-network predicts the
Q-values, and the maximum Q-value is selected. This value is combined with
the reward to compute the target Q-value for the current state and action.
5.1.1.2
A2C
A2C, which stands for Advantage Actor-Critic, is a synchronous, model-free rein-
forcement learning algorithm. It is a policy optimization method that combines the
advantages of both actor-critic methods and the advantage function.
Figure 5.3 shows the Asynchronous one-step Q-learning - pseudo code for each actor-
learner thread.
Below is a breakdown of A2C Algorithm:
1. Actor-Critic Architecture:
A2C utilizes an actor-critic architecture consist-
ing of two main components: the actor and the critic. The actor is responsible
for selecting actions based on the current policy, while the critic evaluates the
value or advantage of being in a particular state and taking a specific action.
2. Advantage Function:
A key feature of A2C is the use of the advantage
function. The advantage function estimates the advantage of taking a particular
action compared to the average value of all actions in a given state. It helps in
reducing the variance and provides a more stable estimate of the action values.
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory
Figure 5.3. A2C Algorithm
3. Asynchronous Updates: In A2C, multiple parallel environments are used to
collect experience. Each environment interacts with its own copy of the agent
and collects experiences by following the current policy. These experiences are
then used to update the actor and critic networks. This parallelization helps to
improve sample eﬀiciency and accelerate the learning process.
4. Policy Gradient Updates: A2C employs policy gradient updates to improve
the actor’s policy. The objective is to maximize the expected cumulative reward
by adjusting the policy parameters in the direction of higher rewards.
The
gradient of the policy objective is estimated using the advantage function, and
the policy parameters are updated using gradient ascent.
5. Value Function Updates: The critic network is updated to improve the esti-
mation of state values. The critic’s objective is to minimize the mean squared
error between the predicted values and the target values, which are often com-
puted using discounted future rewards. The critic’s updates help in providing
better estimates of the value function, which in turn improves the estimation
of advantages.
6. Entropy Regularization: A2C incorporates entropy regularization to encour-
age exploration. The entropy of the policy distribution measures the random-
ness of the agent’s actions. By including an entropy term in the objective func-
==PAGE:31==
5.1 Stable Baselines3
21
tion, the algorithm encourages exploration by discouraging overly deterministic
policies.
7. Shared Parameters: A2C shares the parameters of the actor and critic net-
works across multiple environments.
This allows the agent to generalize its
knowledge across different states and actions and promotes better learning eﬀi-
ciency.
5.1.1.3
PPO
PPO, which stands for Proximal Policy Optimization, is a model-free reinforcement
learning algorithm used for optimizing policies in reinforcement learning tasks. The
Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm combines ideas from A2C (having multiple
workers) and TRPO (it uses a trust region to improve the actor).
Figure 5.4 shows the PPO algorithm actor-critic style.
Figure 5.4. PPO Algorithm
Below is a overview of PPO Algorithm:
1. Actor-Critic Architecture: PPO is based on the actor-critic architecture,
which consists of two main components: the actor and the critic. The actor
is responsible for selecting actions based on the current policy, while the critic
evaluates the value function or advantage function.
2. Objective Function: PPO optimizes the policy by maximizing an objective
function derived from the advantage function. The objective function combines
two terms: a policy surrogate objective and an entropy regularization term.
3. Policy Surrogate Objective: The policy surrogate objective measures the
similarity between the new policy and the old policy. It aims to ensure that the
new policy does not deviate too far from the old policy during updates. PPO
uses a surrogate objective based on the probability ratio between the new policy
and the old policy, weighted by the advantages of the actions taken.
4. Clipped Surrogate Objective: PPO introduces a clipping mechanism to
limit the deviation between the new policy and the old policy. Instead of directly
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory
maximizing the policy surrogate objective, PPO maximizes a clipped version of
the surrogate objective. This clipping prevents large policy updates that could
lead to instability.
5. Advantage Estimation: PPO estimates advantages using a value function or
an advantage function. The advantages provide information about the quality
of the actions taken relative to the average value of actions in a given state.
Accurate advantage estimation is crucial for effective policy updates.
6. Multiple Epochs and Mini-Batches:
PPO performs multiple iterations
of policy updates using mini-batches of collected data. The collected data is
divided into multiple epochs, and each epoch consists of several mini-batches.
By repeatedly using the collected data, PPO achieves better sample eﬀiciency.
7. Trust Region Constraint: PPO does not rely on a strict trust region con-
straint like its predecessor. Instead, it applies a soft constraint by using the
clipped surrogate objective. The clipping ensures that the policy updates stay
within a certain range, effectively constraining the policy changes.
8. Value Function Optimization: In addition to updating the policy, PPO also
optimizes the value function or advantage function. This helps in improving the
estimation of state values and advantages, which are used in the policy updates.
5.1.2
Algorithmic Components
This section is about the components or parameters that are involved in the DRL
model which contribute to the training of the RL agents. This includes Policy Net-
works, Value Networks, Memory buffers, Exploration Strategies, Learning Rate and
Optimization Algorithms.
5.1.2.1
Policy Networks
Policy networks play a significant role in Stable Baselines3 as they define the behavior
and decision-making process of the reinforcement learning agent. They encapsulate
the policy function, which maps observations from the environment to actions that
the agent should take. Stable Baselines3 provides policy networks for images (Cn-
nPolicies), other type of input features (MlpPolicies) and multiple different inputs
(MultiInputPolicies). In this project, MultiInputPolicies have been used due to mul-
tiple observation being needed for the DRL training of agents. The MultiInputPolicy
network is useful in scenarios where the observations are not limited to a single input,
but rather a combination of different types of data. For example, in this project we
have inputs such as camera images, position and orientation of the agent as well as
the previous observation for LSTM DRL model implementation.
SB3 policy networks are separated into two mains parts (see figure 5.5 ):
==PAGE:33==
5.1 Stable Baselines3
23
• A features extractor (usually shared between actor and critic when applicable,
to save computation) whose role is to extract features (i.e. convert to a feature
vector) from high-dimensional observations, for instance, a CNN that extracts
features from images. This is the ”features_extractor_class” parameter. You
can change the default parameters of that features extractor by passing a ”fea-
tures_extractor_kwarg” parameter.
• A (fully-connected) network that maps the features to actions/value. Its archi-
tecture is controlled by the ”net_arch” parameter.
Figure 5.5. Policy Network
SB3 policies are usually composed of several networks (actor/critic networks +
target networks when applicable) together with the associated optimizers. Each of
these network have a features extractor followed by a fully-connected network.
5.1.2.2
Value Network
The value network is a crucial component of reinforcement learning algorithms that
aims to approximate the value function, which is a mapping from states or state-
action pairs to the expected cumulative rewards. The value function represents the
long-term desirability of being in a particular state or taking a specific action in an
environment.
The value network typically consists of one or more neural network layers, such as
fully connected layers or convolutional layers, that process the input observations or
states of the environment. These layers learn to extract relevant features and repre-
sentations from the raw observations.The output layer of the value network provides
the estimated values for each state or state-action pair. These values are obtained
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory
by passing the processed observations through the network and applying appropriate
activation functions to generate meaningful output.
During the training process, the value network parameters are optimized using back-
propagation. This involves computing the loss between the predicted values and the
actual observed rewards. The loss is then backpropagated through the network, ad-
justing the weights and biases of the network’s layers to minimize the discrepancy
between the predicted and observed values. Common loss functions used for training
the value network include mean squared error (MSE) or Huber loss.
The value network is trained in conjunction with the policy network, which is responsi-
ble for selecting actions based on the estimated values. The policy network’s objective
is often to maximize the expected cumulative rewards, and the value network pro-
vides guidance for making informed decisions. By estimating the values associated
with different states or state-action pairs, the value network helps the policy network
select actions that are expected to lead to higher long-term rewards.
5.1.2.3
Action Space and Observation Space
Stable Baselines3 follows the gym interface, which is a widely used standard for defin-
ing reinforcement learning environments. In this context, the action and observation
spaces are defined using the gym spaces module.
The action space in Stable Baselines3 represents the set of possible actions that an
agent can take in the environment. It is an instance of the gym.spaces module and
can be of different types, including discrete and continuous spaces. The available
action space types include Discrete, MultiDiscrete, Box, MultiBinary, and Tuple.
Figure 5.6. Action Spaces and Observation Spaces
5.1.2.4
Reward Functions
In DRL, the reward function plays a crucial role in defining the objective and guiding
the learning process of reinforcement learning agents. The reward function is a map-
ping that assigns a scalar value to each state-action pair, indicating the desirability
or utility of that particular action in a given state. It encapsulates the task-specific
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Stable Baselines3
25
goals and provides feedback to the agent, allowing it to learn and optimize its decision-
making process.
The main reward function used in during this thesis are mentioned below:
1. R1 :
Goal destination = G
Current position = P
Distance between the goal and current position = D = |G - P|
ifCollision :
Reward = −100 ∗D
done = 1
elseifD < 0.5 :
Reward = 0
done = 1
else :
Reward = −1 ∗D
2. R2 :
Goal destination = G
Current position = P
Distance between the goal and current position = Dt = |G - P|
Previous distance = Dt−1
ifCollision :
Reward = −100
done = 1
elseifD < 0.5 :
Reward = 100
done = 1
else :
ifDt−1 > Dt :
Reward = +1
else :
Reward = −1
3. R3 :(shown in Figure 5.7)
Goal destination = G
Current position = P
Distance between the goal and current position = D = |G - P|
Pixels of Interest(POI) = Total number of pixels in the image that covers the
area of interest.
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Deep Reinforcement Learning Theory
Height , Width of Image = H, W
ifD < 1 :
done = 1
else : Reward = (POI ∗100)/(H ∗W)
done = 0
4. R4 :(shown in Figure 5.8)
Goal destination = G
Current position = P
Distance between the goal and current position = D = |G - P|
Pixels of Interest(POI) = Total number of pixels in the image that covers the
area of interest.
Height , Width of Image = H, W
ifD < 1 :
done = 1
else :
R = (POI ∗100)/(H ∗W)
Reward = R −(100 −R)
done = 0
Figure 5.7. Reward 3 : x = Percentage
of POI, y = Reward
Figure 5.8. Reward 4 : x = Percentage
of POI, y = Reward
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Stable Baselines3
27
5.1.2.5
Buffer Memory
Out of the three algorithms used in this thesis only DQN uses this buffer memory,
often referred to as the replay buffer or experience replay buffer.It serves as a tem-
porary storage that allows the agent to learn from past experiences and make more
eﬀicient use of the available data. The buffer memory is essentially a data structure
that stores tuples of past observations, actions, rewards, next observations, and done
flags. These tuples are collected during the agent’s interaction with the environment.
Each tuple represents a transition from one state to another and provides valuable
information for learning.
During the learning process, the agent samples a batch of transitions from the buffer
memory randomly.
This random sampling helps break any temporal correlations
present in the sequential data, providing a more diverse set of experiences for learning.
By sampling from the buffer, the agent can revisit and learn from past experiences,
which improves sample eﬀiciency and helps stabilize the learning process.
5.1.2.6
Learning Rates
The learning rate in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is a key parameter that
controls how much a model’s weights are updated during training. It affects the speed
and stability of learning, and finding the right value is critical for successful training.
Too high or too low learning rates can lead to convergence issues or slow progress.
Experimentation and monitoring are necessary to determine the optimal learning rate
for a DRL model. In this thesis the optimal learning rate used after multiple trials
was 0.0025 for DQN and 0.00025 for A2C & PPO.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 6
Training and Results
There were several training that have been carried out during the course of this the-
sis. Initially performed simple training with a single agent to perform tasks such as
making the drone travel in a straight line and make drone to reach a certain position
on the environment. These training were initially performed just to play around with
the DRL framework and get a better understanding of the parameters that affect the
training. And later started training with Inspection task training. The task was to
make the drone to focus onto the interest areas such as rust or defect in this case the
yellow spots in the environment when flying in a given trajectory.
6.1
Training Architecture
For the training a DRL training framework had to be built with various python
packages and also to create a environment using the unreal Engine. Two different
training Architectures were built and worked in this thesis. First one is used to run
training on single agent and used in the initial stages of the thesis. And the Second
one is used to run parallel training of multiple agents in the same environment which
enhances the training process.
6.1.1
DRL Architecture 1
The Framework is shown in Figure 6.1 and is explained in detail below:
• Setting up Environment and its variables: The foremost step is calling
the Environment class that is created. This also includes initializing the en-
vironment specific variables. Some of the main variables include step_length,
image_shape, drone, state, action_space, image_request, etc as shown in Fig-
ure 6.2
==PAGE:40==
30
6 Training and Results
Figure 6.1. DRL Architecture 1
Figure 6.2. Environment Initialization
==PAGE:41==
6.1 Training Architecture
31
– step_length here refers to the distance moved by the drone at every step
in the direction of action.
– image_shape refers to the shape of the image that is processed in the
training as seen by the drone which in this case is Scene images.
– drone variable initializes the agent in the simulator with the given ip-
address.
– state variable which is similar to the observation space initializes the shape
and the size of the input variables to the DRL model that are received from
the Airsim simulator. These could be position, collision, images, etc from
the agent in the virtual environment.
– action_space variable refers to the shape and size of the action variable.
In the above example in figure 6.2 it refers to action_space of size 6 and
type discrete. In this case, actions are up, down, left, right, front, back.
– image_request variable refers to the type of image requested from the
drone in the simulator.
• Defining Model and calling Environment: Then the model being used
for training is initialized with the model specific parameters such as env, learn-
ing_rate, batch_size, device, etc.
And the environment initialized above is
called when creating the model.
• Setup_flight: This is where the agents are initialized to fly to a location or
hover at a point before starting the training. This step is run first every episode
when the agent is reset.
• Step: The step block as shown in Figure 6.1 encloses multiple functions which
every every time step during the training.
• Do_action:
This function performs the action that the model predicts to
perform. The action given by the model is one of 6 discrete values which is
converted into drone specific actions such as move up, down, left, right, front
or back using the interpret_action function.
• Get_obs: This step gets the input regarding the status of the drone such
as position, image, collision,etc after the performed action.
This is like the
feedback after every action the model takes. The function transform_obs is
simply some conversions of format of the inputs received.
==PAGE:42==
32
6 Training and Results
• Compute_reward: This step computes the rewards based on the observations
received using get_obs and calculates a reward with the observations returns it
to the model. If the agent reaches the goal the environment is reset otherwise
the loop of training continues.
• Reset: This function resets the environment and enters setup_flight every time
an episode ends.
• Save_model: Once the model learning timestep limit has reached it exits the
training loop and saves the model.
6.1.2
DRL Architecture 2
Figure 6.3. DRL Architecture 2
==PAGE:43==
6.2 Training Setup
33
The Framework as shown in Figure 6.3 was created to run asynchronous parallel
training of multiple agents which learns from ’n’ observations and receive back ’n’
rewards at a given time step. This effectively increases the rate at which the model
learns.This has very similar basic blocks as the previous framework and blocks with
differences are explained below:
• Setting up Environment and its variables: One of the important variable
which was not mentioned in the earlier framework ’num_env’ needs to be set
in this framework. For example, in this thesis ’num_env’ used in the training
is 3 which means the environment runs 3 agents at any given time step.
• Setup_flight(n_vehicles): This function makes the multiple agents(n) to
get to the initial training positions and make them hover before the training
starts.
• Step_async(n actions): This function sends ’n’ different actions to ’n’ agents
by the same model based on what observation each agent sees in the environ-
ment.
• Step_wait: This function encloses multiple functions as shown in Figure 6.3
which are repeated every time step. But one main functionality is that the
step_wait() function waits for ’n’ agents to perform its actions and then move
to next step.
• Get_obs: This function reads ’n’ different observations such as position, im-
ages, collision, orientation, etc. It uses the functions collect_images and trans-
form_obs to collect and modify the images. It uses display_images to display
the images during training for the user.
• Compute_rewards: This function defines the reward function and the frame-
work internally calculates ’n’ rewards. If any of the agent undergoes a collision
or if any of the drone reaches the goal, the done variable is set which resets the
environment.
6.2
Training Setup
During the course of the thesis several training have been performed. The Goal of
the training is to make the drone focus onto area of interest (Yellow spot) when it
navigates from point A to B. The higher percentage of the region of interest the drone
covers with its camera higher the reward it achieves. The different training performed
are mentioned one by one. These training contain different combinations of DRL
models, Reward functions, Observation space, action space and various parameters.
All the training have been performed for 1250 episodes except for training setup 2.
Below the graphs of each training also includes the observation and inference from
the training. The training setup 1 and 3 also contains the evaluation of the trained
==PAGE:44==
34
6 Training and Results
model for 5 episodes. And the training and the evaluation in the Virtual environment
has 3 drones one above the other with almost 1 feet gap between them. Each drone
is invisible to the other drone in simulation. Some of the training Screenshots can be
seen in Appendix B.
6.2.1
Training Setup 1:
Observation Space : Current position and Current Scene(RBG) Image.
Action Space : Discrete (361)
Reward Function : R3
Training Graphs :
Figure 6.4. DQN
Figure 6.5. A2C
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Training Setup
35
Figure 6.6. PPO
Figure 6.7. Evaluation of above models over 5 episodes
The above training is performed with only Current position and the current RGB
image seen by the camera on the drones.
Clearly, The PPO Algorithm seems to
perform well with less variance in the reward and consistent compared to the DQN
and A2C. The reward function R3 is used here which is directly proportional to the
amount of interest area captured. Although PPO model being comparatively better
than the other 2 models it does reach a saturation in learning way quicker and stops
learning more. This is tried to overcome in upcoming training. And the Figure 6.7
shows the Evaluation of the models and shows the PPO performs much better than
the other 2 models.
6.2.2
Training Setup 2:
Observation Space : Current position, Current Scene Images(t), Previous 2 Scene
Images(t-1, t-2).
Action Space : Discrete (8)
Reward Function : R3
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Training and Results
Training Graphs :
Figure 6.8. DQN
Figure 6.9. PPO
The training setup 2 as seen above is an attempt to use frames or images from
previous time steps to train the drones more and make the model keep getting better.
The addition of previous time step data gives the model capacity to have a short
term memory of its transition through the environment which might enhance the
learning progress. And the action state was reduced to 8 which get converted to (45,
90, 180, ...so on till 360 degrees). This allows the models to learn quicker than having
a larger action space. As seen in the above graphs Figure 6.8 and 6.9 the models are
able to achieve a significant reward well above 1000 in just 250 episodes of training.
This shows having a short memory could add benefit to the models and having lesser
action space has made the models learn faster.
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Training Setup
37
6.2.3
Training Setup 3:
Observation Space : Current position(t), Previous positions(t-1, t-2), Current
Scene Images(t), Previous 2 Scene Images(t-1, t-2).
Action Space : Discrete (361)
Reward Function : R3
Training Graphs :
Figure 6.10. DQN
Figure 6.11. A2C
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Training and Results
Figure 6.12. PPO
Figure 6.13. Evaluation of above models over 5 episodes
As seen above, this training setup is similar to TS2 but has a action space of 361
which is significantly bigger than the one earlier and includes previous positions as well.
So the models keep track of previous observations such as Scene(RGB) images as well
as the positions. This is expected to have a much better performance than that of TS1
which only includes current observations. The graphs shown above are comparatively
better compared to the graphs obtained in TS1 with only current observations. This
can be seen in the evaluation table as well as the drones have a slightly higher and
consistent rewards. The graphs also exhibit lesser variance in rewards compared to
TS1. And out of the 3 models PPO seems to perform significantly better.
6.2.4
Training Setup 4:
Observation Space : Current position(t), Previous positions(t-1, t-2), Current
Scene Images(t), Previous 2 Scene Images(t-1, t-2).
Action Space : Discrete (361)
Reward Function : R4
Training Graphs :
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Training Setup
39
Figure 6.14. A2C
Figure 6.15. PPO
This training setup is very similar to the TS3 but the only difference is the re-
ward function. Since the learning of the models from the previous TS3 reaches a
saturation point the reward function was changed which punishes model more when
the percentage of ROI covered is less. The characteristics of this reward function
can be seen in figure 5.8. As seen in the graphs the rewards become very low as
the RONI contributes to the negative reward. This makes the learning in PPO very
slow whereas the A2C is struggling to learn till 1000 episodes of training. The very
slow learning of the PPO model is due to the reason that the ROI covered during an
episode exceed the RONI covered. Hence the model learns very slow. But this could
improve significantly if the model is trained over large number of episodes (say 3000
- 4000 episodes) and the model would be very robust with very minimal error.
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Training and Results
6.2.5
Training Setup 5:
Observation Space : Current position(t), Previous positions(t-1, t-2), Current
Scene Images(t), Previous 2 Scene Images(t-1, t-2), Current Depth Images(t)
Action Space : Discrete (361)
Reward Function : R4
Training Graph :
Figure 6.16. PPO
This training setup is similar to the previous TS4 except that the current depth
image is also included. This is done with the intention to see if it affects the training
graph of the PPO model given another type of useful data. But as seen in the graph
the rewards acquired is lower than the previous case in TS4. This maybe due to the
reason the model has huge amount of input data which significantly affects the policy
network to build correlation between the observations and actions. Hence making the
learning process very slow.
6.3
Training Time
The main time consuming part of the thesis is the time taken to train models. In these
training, the navigation of drone from point A to B through the environment is split
into 56 time steps in order to achieve a smooth learning of the drones with less frame
skipped between two consecutive steps with less variation in the environmentally data
perceived by the drones. Each Episode with a time steps of 56 takes approx. 130
seconds to navigate with running model. Hence running a training for 1000 episode
takes approx. 130000 seconds which equates to approx. 36 hours.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The main objective of this thesis was to build Inspectrone drone and train DRL
models to do certain inspection task. The drone was successfully built with all the
objectives achieved after several test flight and tuning. Infact the drone was used for
a field trip to collect data from ballast tanks on a real ship.
The other objective was the training of DRL models to perform inspection tasks. The
models were trained with different types of observation, reward function and action
spaces as well. As far as the training performed in the thesis PPO has achieved a
better performance of them all. But still there is a huge potential for increase in the
performance of models.
One factor that seems to affect the training is the reward functions. As seen before
the reward function could make models learn quicker or slower. In the case of R4
used for training it was seen that the model was definitely learning but had very
slow learning progress. Hence exploring better reward functions could lead to a very
strong DRL models. One thing to keep in mind is that the reward function should
never be too direct which could make the models learn quicker but will make the
models less robust to different but similar environments.
And when it comes to the environment it might be better to train models in a dy-
namic environment. As in, the environment used in this thesis was static which had
the exact same yellow spot at the same location throughout the training which also
leads to over fitting of the models. This might make the models achieve high rewards
for the same environment but might fails or yield very low rewards in a different
environment.
Another factor that affects the training was the time taken for the training. This
is a huge factor which determines how many models can be trained at a given time.
The DRL framework used in this thesis Stable Baselines3 supports training models
in parallel environments. Hence in future it would be better to run 50 or 100 parallel
environments for training which would significantly increase the amount of learning
that could be achieved in 1000 episodes of training. In this thesis as seen before 3
parallel drones were used for training in the same environment.
Once the models have been trained to achieve desired performance it could be de-
ployed onto real drone. But, Hence the results were not totally accurate and the due
to lack of time it was not possible to fulfill the objective of deploying on the real
drone.
As seen in this thesis, The Inspectrone drone can be trained on Virtual Environment
==PAGE:52==
42
7 Conclusion
to simulate any kind off task and can be deployed on the real drone making it a fully
autonomous inspection system.
==PAGE:53==
Appendices
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX A
Drone
A.1
All Views
Figure A.1. Front View
Figure A.2. Top View
Figure A.3. Bottom View
Figure A.4. Side View
==PAGE:56==
46
Appendix A Drone
A.2
Drone Architecture
Figure A.5. Drone Architecture
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX B
Training Screenshots
Figure B.1
Figure B.2
==PAGE:58==
48
Appendix B Training Screenshots
Figure B.3
Figure B.4
==PAGE:59==
Appendix B Training Screenshots
49
Figure B.5
Figure B.6
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Dong Ki Kim & Tsuhan Chen. Deep Neural Network for Real-Time Autonomous
Indoor Navigation. arXiv:1511.04668
[2]
Xiaogang Ruan, Dingqi Ren, Xiaoqing Zhu, and Jing Huang. Mobile Robot
Navigation based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. IEEE, 2019.
[3]
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov.
Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347
[4]
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis
Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra & Martin Riedmiller. Playing Atari with Deep Re-
inforcement Learning. arXiv:1312.5602
[5]
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Tim
Harley, Timothy P. Lillicrap, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asyn-
chronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1602.01783
[6]
Rasmus Eckholdt Andersen, Marcin Zajaczkowski, Harsh Jaiswal, Jianan Xu,
Wenjie Fan, and Evangelos Boukas. Depth-based Deep Learning for Manhole
Detection in UAV Navigation. IEEE, 2022
[7]
Rasmus Andersen, Lazaros Nalpantidis, Ole Ravn, &Evangelos Boukas. Investi-
gating Deep Learning Architectures towards Autonomous Inspection for Marine
Classification*. IEEE, 2020.
[8]
Rasmus Eckholdt Andersen, and Evangelos Boukas. Probabilistic Inspection us-
ing Deep Probabilistic Segmentation. IEEE, 2022.
[9]
Insik Yoon, Malik Aqeel Anwar, Rajiv V Joshi, Titash Rakshit, and Arijit Ray-
chowdhury. Hierarchical Memory System With STT-MRAM and SRAM to Sup-
port Transfer and Real-Time Reinforcement Learning in Autonomous Drones.in
IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 9,
no. 3, pp. 485-497, Sept. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JETCAS.2019.2932285.
==PAGE:62==
